# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2019
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Albert Francis Zahm, Aërial Navigation
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/60277/60277-h/60277-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Since flyers can be built with approximately the same dynamic
 efficiency for all speeds up to 60 miles an hour, a flyer designed to
 carry a total weight of 745 pounds at 20 miles an hour would require
 only 8 horse power or two thirds of the power necessary for 30 miles an
 hour. At 60 miles 24 horse power would be necessary—twice that required
 to carry the same weight at 30 miles an hour. At 120 miles an hour 60
 to 75 horse power would probably be necessary, and the weight carried
 per horse power would be only 10 or 12 pounds. At such high speed
 the resistance of the operator’s body and the engine is a formidable
 factor, consuming 64 times as much horse power as at 30 miles an hour.
 At speeds below 60 miles an hour this resistance is almost negligible.
It is evident that the limits of speed have not as yet been closely
 approached in the flyers already built, and that in the matter of
 distance, the possibilities are even more encouraging. Even in the
 existing state of the art it is easy to design a practical and durable
 flyer that will carry an operator and supplies of fuel for a flight of
 over 500 miles at a speed of 50 miles an hour.
During the past two years Glenn H. Curtiss, who, more than any other
 experimenter, has been given to developing the aëroplane for various
 uses, has experimented with floats for his biplane that would enable
 it to rise from the surface of the water. Something over a year ago he
 succeeded in developing a speed of about twenty miles an hour on the
 water, but this was insufficient to rise from the surface.
At the beginning of the new year Mr. Curtiss moved to the Pacific Coast
 and set about endeavoring to develop suitable floats which would make
 it possible for his machine to rise from the surface of the water.
 These experiments have been carried on at San Diego, where Mr. Curtiss
 is instructing several naval and military officers in the art of flying.
In his first experiments on the Pacific Coast Mr. Curtiss followed
 the successful experiments of this sort made by M. Henri Fabre at
 Marseilles, France, about a year ago, as far as the design of his
 floats was concerned. He constructed one large float six feet wide,
 five feet from front to rear, and one foot thick at its central point,
 and placed this under the center of the machine. The bottom of this
 float was482 perfectly flat and arranged at an incline of ten or twelve
 degrees. Some distance forward of the main float, at about the position
 of the front wheel in the land machine, another float six feet wide,
 by one foot from front to rear, and six inches deep, was placed; while
 at the extreme front end of the machine, on a special outrigger, was
 mounted a small elevating hydroplane six feet wide by eight inches
 in a fore-and-aft direction, and one and one-half inches thick. This
 hydroplane was fixed at an angle of about twenty-five degrees and was
 intended to lift the front part of the machine. A spray shield was
 fitted back of it, as shown in the diagram, page 333.
The first experiments were made with these new floats on January 26th
 last; and although they made a considerable disturbance in the water,
 especially at low speed, the aviator was enabled to get up a speed on
 the surface of about forty-five miles an hour. He found that at as low
 a rate as ten miles the hydroplanes (which normally were submerged)
 rose to the surface, while as the speed increased only the rear edges
 of the two main planes were required to support the machine. The
 aëroplane readily attained sufficient speed to rise in the air, for
 as the speed increased and the floats emerged from the water, the
 head resistance of the floats diminished and there was only the skin
 friction of the water on a few inches of the rear edge of these floats,
 plus the air resistance, to be overcome.
At the first try-out, while traveling over the water at high speed, Mr.
 Curtiss found himself suddenly nearing the shore, and to avoid running
 aground he turned his horizontal rudder sharply upward, with the
 result that the machine rose from the water with perfect ease. He soon
 alighted again, and in the second flight he made a circle and remained
 in the air a minute and twenty-one seconds.483
 Two other experimental flights were made the first day, and on
 January 27th he made a three-and-one-half-minute flight and stated,
 upon alighting, that he found no difficulty in remaining aloft as long
 as he pleased. The machine showed a speed of fifty miles an hour in the
 air as against forty-five miles an hour when skimming over the surface
 of the water.
Not satisfied with the several floats with which he had attained
 his first success in rising from the water, Mr. Curtiss immediately
 constructed a single float twelve feet long by two feet in width
 and twelve inches deep. This float is built of wood and resembles a
 flat-bottomed boat or scow, the top being covered with canvas to keep
 the water from getting in. Three feet from the front end the bottom
 is curved upward forming a bow the full width of the float, while at
 the same distance from the rear the float slants downward in a similar
 manner.
This single float is placed under the aëroplane in such a position that
 the main weight of the machine and aviator is slightly to the rear of
 the center of the float, which causes the latter to incline upward
 slightly and thus gives the necessary angle for hydroplaning on the
 surface of the water. The weight of this new float is but fifty pounds,
 or less than half as much as that of the two floats that were used
 before.
The paint was barely dry on the new float before Mr. Curtiss had it
 fitted to his machine and gave it a trial. This was done on February
 1st and the trial was thoroughly successful. The machine ran over the
 surface of the water with very much less disturbance than before and
 rose in the air readily. A glance at the photographs showing the new
 and the old floats in action will give one an excellent idea of the
 much less commotion caused by the single 484scow-shaped float. Besides
 being much more compact and creating less disturbance, this float or
 scow can be used for carrying articles or a passenger.
In order to keep the aëroplane from tilting to one side or the other,
 an inclined stick four feet long and three inches wide, to which is
 attached on its upper side an inflated rubber tube, is fastened to the
 front edge of the lower plane at each end. By the use of these props
 the aëroplane does not tip readily when skimming along the surface,
 even though the scow-shaped float used is but two feet in width.
After meeting with success with his new float, Mr. Curtiss, on February
 17th, made more flights with the motor and propeller placed at the
 front of his biplane and with his seat placed at the rear of the main
 planes. The chief of these flights was one which he made from North
 Island, where he is experimenting, over San Diego harbor to the cruiser
 Pennsylvania. He alighted upon the surface close beside the cruiser
 and his aëroplane was hauled up beside the warship and placed on her
 deck.
After a short visit on the cruiser the aviator was again lowered to the
 surface in his machine. A sailor started the engine, and Mr. Curtiss
 flew back to his starting point in short order. The naval authorities
 were greatly pleased with his demonstration and it is probable that the
 Navy Department will purchase one of these machines in the near future
 and continue the instruction of its officers.
After increasing the surface of his biplane Mr. Curtiss, on February
 24th, took up one of his naval pupils, Lieutenant T. G. Ellyson, as
 a passenger. He made a flight of one and one-half miles, rising to a
 height of one hundred feet and flying as slowly as twenty-five miles an
 hour, or as fast as fifty miles an hour, at will. Lieutenant Ellyson
 was seated on the485 pontoon below the aëroplane. He could look down
 in the water and see bottom at a depth of twenty-five feet, and he
 believes submarines can be easily located by flying over the water.
 The slow speed at which it is possible to fly will make the biplane
 especially useful for bomb dropping. As we go to press Mr. Curtiss is
 about to try his machine fitted with wheels and floats as well.
[1] With apologies to the California professor who will ride
 on wings worked by muscular force alone.
[2] Mr. A. Holland Forbes and Mr. Augustus Post, in the
 international balloon race of 1908, used a balloon having too long a
 neck, thus causing such pressure at its top as to burst the bag. A
 dreadful plunge ensued, landing them on a house, but without injury,
 as the netting and collapsed bag dampened their speed of fall. It is
 reported that they crashed through the skylight, and that the lady of
 the house regretted not being there to receive them.
[3] Mechanical Principles of Flight.
[4] The reader may like to know that the basis of so much
 confidence was that ancient Euclidean theorem connecting the surfaces
 and volumes of similar figures with certain powers of their homologous
 linear dimensions.
[5] The writer has made hydrogen-inflated varnish bubbles
 a foot in diameter which ascended swiftly to the ceiling; also,
 air-inflated varnish bubbles a foot and a half in diameter which lasted
 an hour. These, if suitably heated, may be made to ascend; but this
 experiment is more difficult.
[6] Both had studied science in college. Stephen was
 an accomplished architect; Joseph, the author of many important
 inventions, among others the common lamp chimney, the hydraulic press,
 etc.
[7] A long patch on the balloon that can be ripped open for
 the sudden release of gas.
[8] The equator of such a balloon is its horizontal great
 circle.
[9] A similar suggestion was made by Thomas Jefferson in a
 letter to Prof. James Madison, and dated from Paris in 1785: “I went
 some time ago to see a machine which offers something new. A man had
 applied to a light boat a very large screw, the thread of which was
 a thin plate, two feet broad, applied by its edge spirally around a
 small axis. It somewhat resembled a bottle brush, if you will suppose
 the hairs of the bottle brush joining together, and forming a spiral
 plane. This, turned on its axis in the air, carried the vessel across
 the Seine. It is, in fact a screw which takes hold of the air and draws
 itself along by it; losing, indeed, much of its effort by the yielding
 nature of the body it lays hold of to pull itself on by. I think it may
 be applied in the water with much greater effect and to very useful
 purposes. Perhaps it may be used also for the balloon.”
[10] La Navigation Aerienne, Gaston Tissandier.
[11] The motive power equals the product of the speed and
 resistance. But in the assumed case, the speed is doubled and the
 resistance quadrupled; hence, the power required is eightfold.
[12] Santos-Dumont, My Airships.
[13] m3 signifies cubic meters. One cubic meter equals
 35.3166 cubic feet.
[14] Hangar, an airship harbor, or garage.
[15] Aëronat, an airship of the lighter-than-air kind.
[16] Hearne, Airships in Peace and War.
[17] Over Sea by Air-Ship, MacMechen and Dienstbach, The
 Century, May, 1910.
[18] A mathematical argument against this device is presented
 in Appendix I.
[19] It is commonly reported by navigators that the albatross
 “sports in the tempest” on unbeating pinions; but it may be questioned
 whether any bird can make headway against the swiftest winds.
[20] The “drift” and “lift” are the components of surface
 wind-pressure respectively in the direction of flight and at right
 angles to it.
[21] The tandem monoplane, or two lifting planes arranged in
 tandem, was invented by D. S. Brown and exhibited to the Aëronautical
 Society of Great Britain in 1873.
[22] This gasoline aëroplane model was previously tested in
 private many times, both with single surface wings, and with superposed
 surfaces.
[23] Abbe, Helicopters for Aërial Research, Aëronautics,
 Feb. 1909.
[24] L’Empire de l’Air.
[25] Progress in Flying Machines, Chanute.
[26] The air rises with increased temperature, hence with
 increased volume displacement, thus causing the wind in general to have
 a slightly ascending trend.
[27] Aëronautical Annual, 1897.
[28] Ella Tidswell, The Aëronautical Journal, July, 1909.
[29] W. J. S. Lockyer, Nature, August 12, 1897.
[30] Wenham used superposed planes, Stringfellow superposed
 planes trussed by vertical rods and diagonal wires, Phillips,
 Lilienthal and Hargrave superposed arched surfaces.
[31] See Aëronautic Annual, 1896.
[32] Aërial Warfare, Hearne, p. 77.
[33] Published by the American Engineer and Railway Journal.
[34] This kind of automatic stability may be called inherent
 stability.
[35] Models embodying the above devices had been made and
 flown by the writer some years previously; but aside from these it is
 obvious that a Phillips’s aëroplane and other kinds can be effectively
 controlled in flight by the above-proposed three-torque system.
[36] This idea was later materialized in Langley’s gasoline
 biplane.
[37] The means for balancing here suggested in italics was
 claimed some years later in Mr. Hugo Mattullath’s patent application in
 which the inventor had the assistance of the present writer.
[38] A nearly equivalent vertical surface was used in Dr.
 Langley’s large “aërodrome.” It was a wind-vane rudder placed well
 below and to the rear of the centroid, to be used in turning corners.
 The pressure on this rudder would tilt the aëroplane toward the center
 of curvature of the path, and turn it about the vertical axis, but
 would conspire with the centrifugal force. If placed above and forward,
 it would give the desired moments, but oppose the centrifugal force.
[39] He died of apoplexy, January 31, 1902.
[40] The first flights were to be made from the water.
[41] It can be shown that the angle of flight requiring the
 least motive power is that which makes the wing resistance, or drift,
 three fourths of the entire resistance to progression.
[42] Atmospheric Resistance on Even Surfaces, by A. F. Zahm,
 Phil. Soc. Washington.
[43] The term “aërodrome” is now commonly applied to an
 aviation field.
[44] On August 25, 1909, Louis Paulhan, in the aviation
 contest at Rheims, flew 82 miles in 2 hours, 43 minutes and 24 seconds,
 preserving his lateral balance without the aid of torsion-wing
 mechanism and in a turbulent atmosphere.
[45] Aërial Locomotion, A. G. Bell, Washington Academy of
 Science, March 4, 1907.
[46] The Wrights in 1910 adopted the rear horizontal and
 vertical rudder, thus returning to the design of their predecessors.
[47] On July 18, 1905.
[48] These glides were abandoned as too dangerous and
 roundabout, in favor of direct tentative flights with a motor.
[49] Falling weights pulling a cord that accelerates the
 aëroplane at starting.
[50] Present Status of Military Aëronautics, Journal of the
 American Society of American Engineers, December, 1908.
[51] On September 18, 1906, Montgomery received a U. S.
 patent on an aëroplane having curved wings and three-rudder control,
 the Wright brothers having on May 22, 1906, received a patent on an
 aëroplane having normally flat wings and three-rudder control.
[52] The daring aviator escaped without a scratch, but his
 propeller and running gear were damaged slightly.
[53] This was an official record, but Brookins had flown 4939
 feet high, at Indianapolis, on June 17th.
[54] This record was made with an uncalibrated barograph, and
 hence was unofficial and unaccepted as a world’s record.
[55] The present writer, in his paper quoted on page 229,
 pointed out the equilibrative and steadying quality of torsionally
 elastic wings, and some years previously had proved this by gliding
 models having sustainers with flexible rear margins.
[56] The whole water vapor in the atmosphere of our latitude
 in summer is equivalent to about one inch of rainfall.
[57] Computed by W. J. Humphreys for Moore’s Descriptive
 Meteorology.
[58] Ferrel, Popular Treatise on Winds.
[59] Solar radiation received by the earth.
[60] W. J. Humphreys, Astro. Phys. Journ., January, 1909.
[61] An isobar is a line of intersection of an isobaric
 surface with a water level surface at any altitude.
[62] A Popular Treatise on the Winds.
[63] The Conquest of the Air.
[64] By this current John Wise, in 1870, and Walter Wellman,
 in 1910, proposed to voyage across the Atlantic; Wise in a free
 balloon, Wellman in a motor balloon with drag rope. See pp. 74, 75.
[65] It is reported that once during the month of August the
 rainfall totaled thirty-two feet; and it is believed that the annual
 fall exceeds fifty feet.
[66] The “eye” is most noticeable at sea, where the cyclones
 are more symmetrical, and particularly in lower latitudes, where they
 are more concentrated.
[67] The destructive one that visited Galveston in 1900 is a
 well-known example.
[68] Contributions to Meteorology.
[69] Dr. W. Dauberck, Met. Zeitschrift, April, 1866.
[70] Moore’s Meteorology, p. 164.
[71] Von Bezold, on the Thermodynamics of the Atmosphere.
[72] Chanute, Aeronautical Annual, 1897, p. 101.
[73] Nature, April 5, 1883.
[74] Vol des Oiseaux.
[75] Internal Work of the Wind.
[76] Engineering News, December 13, 1890.
[77] Meteorological Journal, November, 1891.
[78] On Atmospheric Movements (Abbe’s translation).
[79] From Scientific American, March 13, 1909, by permission
 of Munn & Co.
[80] For a fuller account of this fine airship see H.
 Peltier’s article in L’Aérophile, December 1, 1910.
[81] This description and the following are from Present
 Status of Military Aëronautics, by Major G. O. Squier.
[82] From Navigating the Air, by permission of Doubleday,
 Page & Co.
[83] From Scientific American of March 4, 1911, by
 permission of Munn & Co.
Transcriber’s Notes:
Redundant title page has been removed.
Blank pages have been removed.
Silently corrected typographical errors.

The purpose of this work is to portray in popular terms the
 substantial progress of aëronautics from its earliest beginning to
 the present time. Beyond the introductory account, little note is
 taken of experiments, however picturesque or clever, which constitute
 no advance in the art, or lead to no useful result. At times some
 minutiæ are presented to complete the story of an important series of
 achievements; but the unproductive efforts of impractical zealots,
 however prominent or widely known in their day, receive scant, if any,
 attention. Failures and tragedies where introduced, are described for
 the lessons involved rather than for any curious interest investing
 them. The griefs and grotesque follies of aëronautic imbeciles form a
 long story, but a futile and unprofitable one, of slight concern in the
 evolutionary history of a veritable science.
A general history of aërial locomotion would naturally be divided
 into four parts, treating respectively of passive balloons, power
 balloons, passive flyers, and power flyers; but in this work a separate
 treatment has not been allotted to passive flyers because of their too
 backward state of development. Passive gliders which maneuver in the
 air merely by virtue of gravitational force, or acquired momentum, are
 familiar enough; but the much more interesting passive flyers of human
 construction, adapted to rise without motive power considerably beyond
 their initial level, or to soar far aloft, and sail long distances by
 virtue of favorable winds, are still in their infancy. It may be hoped,
 however, that the vulture’s art which now is
 vi well nigh overlooked,
 because of the triumphant advance of dynamic flight, will soon receive
 such attention that future treatises may relate human achievements
 in soaring that shall rival the dexterous and marvelous feats of
 the condor and albatross, even as the majestic sweep of the dynamic
 aëroplane now rivals the powerful rowing flight of the strongest birds
 of prey.
Following the story of the evolution of air ships, a brief account
 of the medium they navigate has been added. In particular, the
 circumstances which affect the density and motion of the air have been
 studied; for the density of the air determines the static lift of air
 ships; the density and speed of impact of the air together determine
 the dynamic lift and the resistance to progression; while the velocity
 of the air current conditions the possible speed of travel in any
 direction. It is important, therefore, that the aëronautical student
 should have some acquaintance with the general properties of the air
 which affect its density, and some knowledge of the generation and
 prevalence both of the great currents of the atmosphere, and of the
 local winds and invisible turmoils which so nearly concern the safety
 and effective progress of the aërial navigator.
The French units of measurement have been freely used, as well as the
 English. This seems advisable because the official rules and records
 of international aëronautic events are partly expressed in the metric
 system. Moreover, the navigation of a universal medium seems to call
 for such universal standards. Indeed a peculiar mission of world travel
 is to eliminate provincialism, and to promote universalism of thought,
 of sentiment, and of custom.
In order to lighten the book for the popular reader, some interesting
 historical facts and much important quantitative data are placed in the
 Appendices, where they may be available to the technical or special
 student.
It is a pleasant duty to acknowledge here my obligations to the U.
 S. Signal Corps, the Smithsonian Institution, and the U. S. Weather
 Bureau, for much assistance in collecting
 viithe materials for this work.
 Dr. W. J. Humphreys, of the U. S. Weather Bureau, has very kindly read
 the manuscript for the chapters on the atmosphere.
My thanks are due also to the Scientific American and to
 Aëronautics for the use of photographs for the illustrations, as also
 to the manufacturers of various aircraft, and to Mr. W. J. Hammer, Mr.
 Carl Dientsbach, and Mr. A. S. Levino.
Cosmos Club
 Washington, D. C.,
     January, 1911.
How beautiful! May we hope ever to journey thus, on wings actuated by
 human power? It is an old question, once dear to the philosopher and
 fool alike, but now important mainly to the fool. Or say more kindly it
 is the affair of untechnical inventors—the amateur, the rustic, the man
 of chimerical dreams. For the wise aëronaut now numbers that project
 among the roseate illusions of his youth.[1]
Ovid relates a story, doubtless credible in his day, of a clever
 craftsman who with his son flew bravely aloft, the very first time they
 put on wings. Daedalus, a Greek architect, having fled from Athens for
 murder, went with his son Icarus to the island of Crete, where he built
 the celebrated labyrinth for Minos, the king. He offended that monarch
 and was cast into prison. In order to escape he made wings for himself
 and his son, with which they flew far 4over the sea. But Icarus, in his
 elation, soared too near the sun, ruined his wings, fell into the sea
 and was drowned. For proof of this we have the Icarian Sea, named after
 the unfortunate boy. Also we have Ovid’s charming poem:
6
How tender and apprehensive that gentleman’s farewell, compared with
 the modern vogue in like circumstances! Of the two Americans at Berlin
 who fell four thousand feet in a balloon, it is not recorded that they
 either kissed or wept.[2] But some Teutonic Ovid may yet adorn the tale
 with quaint embellishments.
Taking more serious note of Daedalus, it will be observed that he
 has had few imitators. It is because he never really flew, and no
 one else can fly, in such manner. That is to say, no man can achieve
 practical flight on wings actuated by his own muscular power. It may be
 physically possible for an athlete putting forth herculean energy for
 a few seconds to sustain himself on wings of enormous spread; but in
 every lightest zephyr he would be as helpless as a thistle seed.
The actual area of wing required for a man of given weight and power
 may be roughly estimated; at least its lower limit of size can be
 determined. Lord Rayleigh,[3] on purely theoretical ground, has
 computed that a man operating a screw propeller 280 feet in diameter,
 moving without frictional loss, could sustain his weight for a period
 of eight hours a day at a comfortable rate of work. But that estimate
 does not include the weight of the propeller. By exerting ten times his
 normal power the man could support his weight with a 28-foot propeller.
The physical basis of the computation is the same for every type of
 flyer, whether bird, man, or machine.7 Its weight must be sustained by
 hurling the air downward. The humming bird in its aërial pause, the bee
 floating beside a blossom, rests on a down-driven column of air. The
 home-gliding eagle at dusk may encounter a medium in stillest repose,
 but he leaves behind him a down-flowing wake, viewless, maybe, but none
 the less real. In all cases the downward impulse per second given to
 the air must equal the weight supported by its reaction. If the wings
 be very extensive a proportionate mass of air may be struck down, and
 yield support with so much the less exertion.
Horizontal flight promises little more than direct screw lift, with the
 feeble energy of the human muscle. The best modern aëroplanes carry
 less than 100 pounds per horse power, while an average man must weigh,
 with a light machine, not less than 200 pounds, and must therefore
 exert upwards of two horse power during flight. Such an output of
 energy would exhaust a powerful athlete in a few seconds. Hence from
 every point of view it appears that Daedalean flight, which still has
 its devotees in some form, was and always will be utterly impracticable.
Ruskin finds another objection to the disciples of the winged arm.
 In his disquisition on the equilibrium of angels he complains that
 those of the traditional two-wing type are devoid of gravitational
 balance. Such creatures vex the imagination with apprehensions for
 their stability; hence they cannot be entirely beautiful. The centroid
 of an angel is in the small of its back, whereas the center of wing
 support is well forward; therefore the horizontal poise is absurd and
 unæsthetic. The scientific artist, consequently, views with pain the
 picture of a fair lady floating level through space supported only at
 her front end.
Milton adroitly forestalls this censure. In the8 conception of his
 glorious Raphael, he provides consummately for uniform and adequate
 support:
Leonardo da Vinci, who was a gifted engineer as well as an artist,
 devised a flying gear for man which shows some dynamic improvement over
 the mechanism of the old-time angels, flying gods, and hobgoblins. As
 shown in the accompanying sketch, it provided for gravitational balance
 by use of an expanding tail projecting well to the rear. Moreover, the
 propulsion was to employ both arms and legs. This design is considered
 very remarkable for the time in which it was produced, probably a few
 years before the discovery of America; and yet it is but one of Da
 Vinci’s quaint aëronautical inventions, as will appear later.
A less futile scheme of aviation may be to saddle the birds. If one
 eagle can float a child, a few may possibly carry a man. They are
 physically able; they are inexpensive; they are unwearied, nimble,
 swift. Some harness, some tuition may be required; but these come
 to the industrious. Apparently, such locomotion is a sport worth
 developing; a royal art, if you please; for who would not course the
 sky in a purple palanquin borne by imperial eagles?
Kai Kaoos, the King of Persia, is credited with a9 voyage of this kind,
 as described in the Shah-Nemeh, or King-Book, written in the tenth
 century:
“To the king it became a matter of great concern how he might be
 enabled to ascend the heavens, without 10wings; and for that purpose he
 consulted the astrologers, who presently suggested a way in which his
 desires might be successfully accomplished.
“They contrived to rob an eagle’s nest of its young, which they reared
 with great care, supplying them with invigorating food.
“A frame of aloes-wood was then prepared, and at each of the four
 corners was fixed perpendicularly a javelin surmounted on the point
 with the flesh of a goat. At each corner again one of the eagles was
 bound, and in the middle the king was seated with a goblet of wine
 before him. As soon as the eagles became hungry they endeavored to get
 at the goat’s flesh upon the javelins, and by flapping their wings, and
 flying upwards they quickly raised the throne from the ground. Hunger
 still pressing on them, and still being distant from their prey, they
 ascended higher and higher in the clouds, conveying the astonished king
 far beyond his own country. But after a long and fruitless exertion,
 their strength failed them, and, unable to keep their way, the whole
 fabric came tumbling down from the sky, and fell upon a dreary solitude
 in the Kingdom of Chin, where Kai Kaoos was left a prey to hunger,
 alone, and in utter despair.”
One might prefer a single bird, which could be ridden bareback by a man
 or woman of common equestrian skill. The early philosophers, therefore,
 sought with some care for such a creature. The following is related by
 Bishop Wilkins:
“Cardan and Scaliger doe unanimously affirm, that there is a bird
 amongst the Indians of so great a bignesse, that his beak is often
 used to make a sheath or scabbard for a sword. And Acosta tells us of
 a fowl in Peru called Condores, which will of themselves kill and eat
 up a whole calf at a time. Nor is there any reason why any other body
 may not11 be supported and carried in the air, though it should as much
 exceed the quantity of these fowls as they do the quantity of a flie.
 Marcus Polus mentions a fowl in Madagascar which he cals a Ruck, the
 feathers of whose wings are 12 paces, or threescore foot long, which
 can with as much ease scoop up an elephant as our kites do a mouse.
 If this relation was anything credible, it might serve as an abundant
 proof for the present quaere.”
As the roc has proved a myth, one questions whether a saddle bird
 may not be evolved by judicious breeding. But opposed to this is the
 square-cube law of the Greek geometer, by which a learned geologist
 demonstrated that nature has reached the limit of her resources in the
 production of large flyers, the ostrich, for example, being too bulky
 to navigate at all. As a last resource, then, the human dwarf may
 breed his weight downward to accommodate the bird. Assuredly, the most
 powerful flyer can carry the lightest human dwarf without difficulty.
Such aërial cavalry has been projected occasionally, and if fairly
 developed might have interesting employment. Its military value, to
 say nothing of its civil uses, would be considerable. An aërial scout
 that could hide in a tree top, or small cloud, then flit home with full
 intelligence of the enemy, would be effective and unique. In aggressive
 warfare it would serve the plan of that ingenious Englishman who
 proposes to repel a German invasion by dispatching birds to peck holes
 in the enemy’s war balloons. But here the dwarf might be omitted, if
 the birds were taught to have a definite interest in attacking aërial
 cruisers with their beaks, or with steel-armed spurs like those of the
 Spanish fighting cock, or with talons treated chemically to strike
 fire. Sparrows with sulphur-pointed toes could easily annihilate an
 aërial squadron at all combustible.
12
Recurring to the geologist, it may be added that, having discovered the
 major limit of feathered navigators, he concluded, as a corollary, that
 human flight is forever impossible. That was in the latter eighties.
 In 1901 a versatile astronomer adduced the same law to prove that an
 aëroplane could not be made to carry a man. Presently, learning that
 this had been achieved, he proved, in a second mellifluous paper, that
 an aëroplane could not carry, several men.[4] Having erred twice, he
 wrote a final article announcing that a flyer is fatuous, anyhow,
 because she cannot repair her engines in the sky!
Of the numerous daring and industrious inventors who, during remote
 generations, have launched 13themselves in the air on some species of
 rigid or vibrant wings, a few were men of considerable equipment in
 philosophy, or mechanics, and enjoyed a sufficient measure of success
 to deserve passing notice; though it seems that no man before the
 middle of the eighteenth century made a permanent contribution to the
 real art of mechanical flight, if we except the ingenious suggestive
 devices of Leonardo da Vinci. However skilfully their flying apparatus
 may have been planned, or operated, the results were lost to the world,
 due to inaccurate or inadequate description. Such inventors were J. B.
 Dante, in the fifteenth century, and the Marquis de Bacqueville, in the
 seventeenth. Each of these made one, or more, considerable flights, if
 we may credit the unwavering testimony of their contemporaries; but
 neither has left a sketch of his device, nor a school of followers to
 continue his spectacular practice.
Jean-Baptiste Dante, a shrewd observer and profound mathematician, who
 flourished toward the end of the fifteenth century, a contemporary of
 Da Vinci and Columbus, is reported by the historians of that day to
 have sailed successfully through the air on nonvibrant wings designed
 by himself after a careful study of the great soaring birds. Perching
 above a steep crag on the shore of Lake Trasimene, he set his wings
 to the wind at a nice angle, as one sets the sails of a vessel; then,
 lifted by the swelling breeze, he rose grandly aloft and floated far
 over the waters. Again and again he repeated the experiment, until
 the fame thereof secured for him a request to make the demonstration
 at the marriage fêtes of the illustrious general, Barthelmi Alviano.
 He accepted the invitation, and, starting from the top of the highest
 tower in the city of Perugia, he sailed over the public square,
 and balanced himself for a long time in space, amid the shouts and
 acclamations of the multitude, 14attracted to Perugia by the novelty of
 his performance. But, sad to relate, the very first time he performed
 these wonderful maneuvers above the solid ground instead of the lake,
 one of the levers used to alter the impact angle of his wings gave way,
 disturbing his aërial poise, and causing him to pitch down upon Notre
 Dame church, breaking one of his legs. After this he taught mathematics
 at Venice, where he died of fever at the age of forty years.
In 1742, the Marquis de Bacqueville, at the age of sixty-two years,
 announced that on a certain day he would fly from his house on the
 Seine, traverse the river, and land in the Garden of the Tuileries. A
 great multitude assembled, crowding both shores and the two bridges.
 At the appointed moment the Marquis appeared with his pinions, and
 launched himself from the terrace. He sailed forth in majestic and
 serene poise, on graceful wings not unlike those of the traditional
 angels. He was gliding directly toward the Tuileries, and he enjoyed a
 happy cruise quite to the middle of the river. Then something happened;
 his movements became fitful and uncertain; he plunged downward and
 broke his leg on a laundry boat. The reason for his stopping there can
 only be surmised, for he had nothing to report. He did not quite fulfil
 his program, but he flew nine hundred feet delightfully, and he landed
 without getting wet.
Commentators have marveled as to the nature of the mechanism used by
 Dante and by De Bacqueville. Historians have strongly attested the
 fact of the flights, but have overlooked the means. The inventors must
 have employed aërial gliders of some kind, for adequate motive power
 was not available before the end of the nineteenth century. Even as
 an experiment in gliding, or soaring, the achievement of Dante was
 most daring and wonderful, eclipsing the15 best performances up to the
 twentieth century. It is strange that in that period of science the
 survivor of such an experience, and a college professor, should not
 have left to the world a careful account of such an extraordinary
 performance. The alleged flights, however, were unquestionably
 feasible, even in that remote period, for the construction of an
 aërial glider is a simple task not beyond the capacity of craftsmen
 in the fifteenth century A.D., or even the fifteenth century
 B.C., directed by a skilful designer.
Besides the wing-armed scheme of flight credited to Daedalus, and
 contemplated by Da Vinci, various other plans were evolved in
 succeeding years. Aërial chariots and flying machines were devised for
 the more advantageous use of muscular energy. In all these, of course,
 the passenger could be both power plant and captain of the ship.
One of the earliest authenticated devices of this kind was the
 invention of Blanchard, described by him in the Journal de Paris,
 August 28, 1781, nearly two years before the invention of the hot-air
 balloon, of which he became later an enthusiastic votary. As his device
 is but one of a large number that appeared before the close of the
 nineteenth century, and the advent of light motors, the reader who
 wishes fuller acquaintance with man-driven airships may be referred
 to Mr. Chanute’s book, entitled Progress in Flying-Machines, which
 describes a large variety of such inventions, and discusses the merit
 and weakness of each.
Blanchard prefaces the description of his machine by answering some
 criticisms of his project, apparently ventured by his neighbors. “They
 object to me,” he writes, “that flying is not the business of man, but
 rather of the feathered birds. I reply that feathers are not at all
 necessary to the bird for flight; any fabric suffices. The fly, the
 butterfly, the bat,16 etc., fly without feathers and with fanlike wings
 of material resembling horn. It is, then, neither the material nor
 the form that causes flight, but the volume and the celerity of the
 movement, which should be as lively as possible.
“They object, moreover, that a man is too heavy to lift himself alone
 with wings, much less in a vessel which of itself presents enormous
 weight. I reply that my ship is extremely light; as to the man’s
 weight, I pray that attention be given to that which M. de Buffon says
 in his Histoire Naturelle, on the subject of the condor; this bird,
 though of enormous weight, easily lifts a two-year-old heifer weighing
 at least a hundred pounds, the whole with wings of about thirty to
 thirty-six feet expanse.”
He then describes the vessel as a little ship four feet long by two
 feet wide, having on either side two posts, each supporting a wing ten
 feet long, the whole forming a parasol twenty feet in diameter. The
 construction was illustrated by an engraver, who had seen the vessel
 and was convinced of its practicability. In conclusion, the inventor
 writes that people shall see him cleave the air with more speed than
 the crow, and that without losing his breath, being protected by a
 pointed mask of peculiar construction. But, as he failed to make good
 his promises, he was subjected to ridicule, as well as praise, by the
 local press, one of the caricatures portraying him in the act of making
 an ascension before a concourse of bulging-eyed savants and long-eared
 jackasses, wearing spectacles to accentuate the appearance of wisdom
 and solemnity.
The scientific coterie of Paris were apparently impatient of the
 attention shown Blanchard by the press and people. Accordingly, in May,
 1782, the distinguished astronomer, De Laland, of the French Academy,
 administered a mild rebuke to the editors17 of the Paris Journal.
 “Gentlemen,” he wrote, “you have given so much time to air ships and
 divination rods that one might eventually think that you believe in
 these follies, or that the scientists who coöperate with your journal
 have nothing to say to dispel these absurd pretensions. Permit me,
 therefore, gentlemen, to occupy some lines in your journal to assure
 your readers that if the savants are silent it is only because of their
 contempt.
“It has been demonstrated to be impossible for a man in any manner
 whatever to raise himself, or even to sustain himself, in the air. M.
 Coulomb, of the Academy of Sciences, at one of our meetings a year ago,
 read a paper in which he showed clearly, by calculating the power of
 a man, determined by experiments, that he would require wings two or
 three18 thousand feet long moved three feet per second; hence no one but
 an ignoramus would make an attempt of this kind.”
Not many months after this lofty deliverance, Blanchard took De Lalande
 up in a balloon—“the dead borne by the dumb.”
Coulomb’s calculation that a man’s pinions should be half a mile long
 must have been discouraging to those inventors who believed in him;
 for, granting that such wings could lift a man, who could lift the
 wings? And at that date the steam engine was only beginning to develop;
 the petroleum engine was hardly thought of. No wonder that people
 turned eagerly to the balloon when it finally appeared.
There has been some controversy as to what person first clearly
 conceived a feasible design for a balloon. The conception was
 certainly not new to the world in 1783, when Joseph Montgolfier made
 his classical experiment. Indeed, prior to that date three distinct
 principles of aërial flotation had been entertained by natural
 philosophers; first, that a boat could be so formed of heavy material
 as to ride on the upper surface of the atmosphere, as a metallic vessel
 floats on the water; second, that a closed hull, comprising a partial,
 or complete, vacuum, could be made light enough to rise; third, that
 a bag could be made buoyant by filling it with material lighter than
 air. Of course, it is now clear to men versed in mathematics that only
 the light-gas principle is mechanically applicable. But the vacuum
 principle still has adherents among inventors who are too “practical”
 to understand, or trust, exact computation; and the first principle,
 though now discarded by everyone, was plausible enough, even to
 accomplished scientific men, before the experiments of Torricelli, and
 his invention of the barometer, made in 1643. It may, therefore, be
 interesting to notice some of the19 proposed, or reported, air ships
 based upon these various principles. The following is from Mendoza,
 Viridario, libri III, probl. 47:
“Any brass vessel full of air, which otherwise would sink, is sustained
 on the surface of the water, though naturally of much greater specific
 gravity; consequently a wooden ship, or one of any other material,
 placed on the summit of an aërial superficies and filled with
 elementary fire, will be sustained in that position till the gravity
 of the vessel becomes greater than the sustaining power of the fire it
 contains.”
This is a clear scientific exposition of a plan for navigating the
 atmosphere on its upper surface, assuming a distinct upper surface
 to exist. In commenting on this passage, the Jesuit Schottus, in his
 Magia Universalis, uses an expression which indicates his belief that
 a vessel can be made to float in the air by filling it with ether, or
 the element of fire. He says:
“In such terms has this matter been treated by Mendoza (died 1626); nor
 is there any improbability involved in his view, whether the element
 of fire be placed above the air, or, what is still more credible, the
 ether—that is, the purest air. Although any wood, iron, copper, lead,
 and such like metals are weightier than an equal volume of water, and
 for that reason will sink in water when placed there alone, yet if
 fabricated into hollow shapes, and filled with our impure and heavy
 air, they swim upon waters, and are adapted to the construction of
 ships, and are sustained by water without danger of immersion; thus,
 although these bodies are of greater specific gravity than our air,
 nevertheless, when shaped into a boat and filled with that very light
 material, they can float in the air, and are suitable material for
 the construction of small ships, because20 the entire work composed of
 the little ship and the ether can be made lighter than an equal volume
 of our impure air, even in the highest region.”
As Roger Bacon proposed a similar device in 1542, Mendoza’s was not
 entirely new and may not have been original. Bacon, describing his
 aërial vessel, says: “It must be a large, hollow globe of copper, or
 other suitable metal, wrought extremely thin, in order to have it
 as light as possible. It must then be filled with ‘ethereal air or
 liquid fire,’ and then be launched from some elevated point into the
 atmosphere, where it will float like a vessel on water.”
In the year 1646 another learned Jesuit published a book, Ars Magna
 Lucis et Umbræ in Mundo, in which he relates an episode indicating
 that one of his order had made use of a hot-air balloon to intimidate
 some ignorant pagans. The following demonstration, if reported by a
 modern missionary, would be accepted as a matter of course; why, then,
 should we gravely question the story, since it describes an achievement
 quite possible at the time, assuming that the necessary materials were
 available? And even assuming the report to be fictitious, still it is a
 scientific description of a practicable hot-air balloon, presented and
 credited by a learned scholar and accomplished mathematician more than
 a century before the balloon was publicly exhibited by the illustrious
 Frenchmen. He writes:
“I know that many of our fathers have been rescued from the most
 imminent dangers amongst the barbarians of India by such inventions.
 These were cast into prison, and whilst they continued ignorant of
 any means of effecting their liberation, some one, more cunning than
 the rest, invented an extraordinary machine, and then threatened the
 barbarians, unless they liberated his companions, that they would
 behold in a short time some extraordinary portents,21 and experience
 the visible anger of the Gods. The barbarians laughed at the threat.
 He then had constructed a dragon of the most volatile paper, and in
 this he enclosed a mixture of sulphur, pitch, wax, and so artistically
 prepared all his materials, that, when ignited, it would illumine
 the machine, and exhibit the following legend in their vernacular
 idiom, The Anger of God. The body being formed and the ingredients
 prepared, he then affixed a long tail, and committed the machine to
 the heavens, and, favored by the wind, it soared aloft towards the
 clouds. The spectacle of the dragon so brilliantly lit was terrific.
 The barbarians, beholding the unusual motion of the apparition, were
 smitten with the greatest astonishment, and now, remembering the
 threatened anger of Deity and the words of the father, they were in
 fear of expiating the punishment he had prognosticated for them.
 Therefore, without delay, they threw open the gates, they suffered
 their prisoners to go forth in peace and enjoy their freedom. In the
 meantime the fire seized on the machine and set it in a blaze, and
 with an explosion, which was interpreted as an expiring declaration of
 satisfaction, it, apparently of its own accord, vanished from sight,
 as if it had accomplished its supernatural mission. Thus the fathers,
 through the apprehension which this natural manifestation inspired,
 obtained that which could not be purchased with a large amount of gold.”
Perhaps the reader will permit another anecdote, not entirely for its
 scientific value, but because he may like to compare the attitude of
 people toward aërial navigation in the dark ages with the attitude of
 his neighbors at the opening of the twentieth century. In two histories
 by Jef le Ministre and De Colonia, of the town of Lyons, the following
 account is given:
“Toward the end of Charlemagne’s reign, persons 22who lived near Mount
 Pilate in Switzerland, knowing by what means pretended sorcerers
 traveled through the air, resolved to try the experiment, and compelled
 some poor people to ascend in an aërostal. This descended in the town
 of Lyons, where they were immediately hurried to prison, and the
 mob desired their death as sorcerers. The judges condemned them to
 be burned; but the Bishop Agobard suspended the execution, and sent
 for them to his palace, that he might question them. They answered:
 ‘Qu’ils sont du pays meme, que des personnes de consideration les ont
 forcés de se laisser conduire, leur promettent qu’ils verroient des
 chose merveilleuses; et qu’ils sont veritablement descendu par l’air.’
 Agobard, though he could not believe this fact, gave credence to their
 innocence, and allowed them to escape. On this occasion he wrote a
 work on the superstition of the time, in which he demonstrated the
 impossibility of rising in the air; that it is an error to believe in
 the power of magic; and that it has its existence in the credulity
 solely of the people.”
One of the first men to make an aërial model like a fire balloon was
 the celebrated Brazilian, Bartholomeo-Lourenco de Gusmao, who in his
 day was nicknamed the “flying man,” and who is reported to have made
 a remarkable experiment in aërial locomotion at Lisbon. The following
 account of it is found in a manuscript of Ferreira:
“Gusmao made his experiment on August 8, 1709, in the court of the
 Palace of the Indies, before his majesty and a large and distinguished
 audience, with a globe which lifted itself softly to the height of the
 hall of the Ambassadors, then descended in like manner. It was borne up
 by certain materials which burned and which the inventor himself had
 ignited.”
All the details of this description, which was written 23a generation
 or more before the Montgolfier experiment, suggest at once a hot-air
 balloon. But a note printed in 1774 and cited by Cavallo explains that
 the globes must have been transported by gas. It is certain that early
 in 1709 Gusmao applied to the King for a patent and sole right to some
 such invention, desiring an injunction and severe penalty against
 all infringements. The application sets forth a machine capable of
 journeying through the air faster than over land or sea, competent
 to carry messages five or six hundred miles a day to troops, or the
 most distant countries, and even adequate to explore regions about the
 poles. Quite a modern promoter Señor Gusmao. The King in reply issued
 the following decree:
“Agreeably to the advice of my council, I order the pain of death
 against the transgressor. And in order to encourage the suppliant to
 apply himself with zeal toward improving the machine which is capable
 of producing the effects mentioned by him, I also grant him the first
 Professorship of Mathematics in my University of Coimbra, and the first
 vacancy in my College of Barcelona, with the annual pension of 600,000
 reis during his life.”
The “patent” seemed liberal enough, and yet Gusmao never resumed
 his aërial experiments. He was accused of magic, and may have
 feared persecution on that account; accordingly he engaged in naval
 construction till 1724, when he left Portugal.
The first vacuum balloon was proposed by the Jesuit father, Francis
 Lana, and described in his book Podromo dell’Arte Maestra Brecia,
 which appeared in 1670. Though not a practical project like Gusmao’s,
 it was very ingenious, and marks an interesting phase in the evolution
 of the fundamental idea of the air ship, or “balloon” as it was called
 by the inventor, who then coined the word now in common 24use. Lana
 proposed to use four copper spheres each 25 feet in diameter and
 1/225 inches in wall thickness, quite well exhausted of air, to give
 ascensional force which he computed at 1,200 pounds aggregate for the
 four spheres. From these he would suspend the passengers in a boat
 having a mast and sail to propel the ship in time of favorable wind.
 Having computed the buoyancy according to well-known physical laws, he
 could see no possible objection to his project “unless,” he writes,
 “it be that God would never permit this invention to be practically
 applied, in order to prevent the consequences that would ensue
 therefrom in the civil and political government of men.”
Of recent years inventors having less delicate scruples about
 embarrassing Providence, have revived 25Lana’s project with
 improvements. It has been proposed to replace the sail by a
 motor-driven propeller, and to ensure the hull against collapse from
 the prodigious external air pressure—a ton per square foot—by ample
 internal bracing. Even within the past twelve months this scheme has
 been soberly advocated by several technical journals and by the author
 of an elaborate book on aërial warfare. To a mathematician this is
 amusing, when not too pathetic; for it can be rigorously proved that
 no vacuum balloon of present day material, whatever its design, can
 possibly resist crushing if made light enough to float.
In 1887 Walter Wellman described in the Associated Press a steel
 vacuum balloon 144 feet in diameter and 654 feet long in which a
 Chicago doctor proposed to carry passengers to the North Pole, at
 incredible speed, if they would furnish him $130,000 to meet the
 expenses of construction. “Here is a most excellent opportunity,” wrote
 Wellman, “for all who would like to win fame by being one of the party
 which shall set foot upon that icy ignis fatuus of many nations and
 two centuries.” Two decades later Mr. Wellman organized, after his own
 ideas, an aërial expedition to the North Pole; but he no longer favored
 starting from Chicago in a vacuum balloon with a party of stockholders.
It may be added that the inventor of the great steel vacuum balloon,
 after organizing the Trans-Continental Aërial Navigation Company, and
 failing to raise all of the $130,000, sought aid from the national
 government. Here was an interesting situation; a doctor ignorant
 of mechanics, with the plans for a mammoth and impossible balloon,
 appealing for aid to a congress, supremely shy of air ships, even
 though recommended by its ablest military advisers. But in this case
 there was a capable lobby. The bill26 for this physically impossible
 balloon actually passed the House, and was finally defeated only by
 the timely effort of a few scientific men who, by easy calculation,
 proved the absurdity of the invention. As the reader may like to see a
 mathematical proof of the impossibility of a vacuum balloon, since such
 projects arise frequently, the argument is given in Appendix I.
If desire is sometimes the mother of invention, doubtless the wish to
 “mix with the clouds,” or “as smoke arise,” suggested to man his first
 means of aërial locomotion. Indeed this is openly avowed by Joseph
 Montgolfier. “Smoke rises in the chimney; why not encage this smoke,
 and have an available force.” But before describing his fundamental
 experiments of 1783, let us notice the less conspicuous ones,
 though not less philosophical, of his immediate predecessors in the
 development of aëronautic science.
It has been seen, that many years before 1783, inventors had clearly
 conceived the true principle of the balloon, and would be glad to
 avail themselves of an element of sufficiently low specific gravity
 for aërial flotation. The desired opportunity came when, in 1766,
 Henry Cavendish published his experiments, proving that hydrogen is
 many times lighter than air. Immediately after this, Dr. Black, the
 famous chemist and natural philosopher of Edinburgh, conceived the
 idea that a thin light vessel filled30 with hydrogen should be able to
 float and rise in the atmosphere, ideas that he conveyed to his friends
 and expressed in his lectures a year or two after the appearance of
 Cavendish’s publication. But he contented himself with merely pointing
 the way to an obviously practicable invention, leaving, as a university
 professor should, the development of the scientific idea to inventors
 and constructive engineers.
Intermediate between Dr. Black, the pure scientist, and the Montgolfier
 brothers manufacturers, came Tiberius Cavallo, an Italian philosopher
 living in England, who made the first small hydrogen balloons. In
 a note presented to the Royal Society of London, June 20, 1782, he
 relates experiments that seem to entitle him to all the credit of
 inventing the balloon except success on a practical scale. He made
 hydrogen soap bubbles which rose beautifully in the air, an experiment
 that has been repeated throughout the world in every chemical
 laboratory since his day. He made a variety of gum bubbles and varnish
 bubbles inflated with hydrogen; but curiously enough these failed
 to rise, though it is known that such bubbles can be made to float
 handsomely.[5] He inflated carefully prepared gold-beater skin and
 failed, though gold-beater skin balloons, both large and small, are now
 a marketable commodity. Finally he constructed paper balloons which he
 tried to float by use of hydrogen, but without success, though a year
 later the Montgolfier brothers easily made paper bags arise with hot
 air, and Professor Charles ascended in a large silk balloon inflated
 with hydrogen.
31
The cause of Cavallo’s interesting failures reveals itself in his own
 account of one of his pioneer experiments. In his History and Practice
 of Aërostation, he relates that he constructed, of fine Chinese paper,
 a cylindrical balloon having short conical ends and a calculated
 buoyancy of twenty-five grains, when properly inflated with hydrogen.
 This bag, carefully deflated of air by compression between the hands,
 he suspended above a large bottle connected with it by a glass tube,
 and supplied with materials for generating hydrogen; in this case a
 mixture of dilute sulphuric acid and iron filings. When the hydrogen
 was evolving quite rapidly, he expected to see the paper sac expand
 and fill out with proportionate speed; but to his surprise it remained
 perfectly flat, while the room filled with the strong and disagreeable
 odor of the “inflaminable air.” He then realized that the carefully
 made sac of paper, which could be so easily inflated with air, was very
 permeable to hydrogen, allowing it to escape instantly, as through
 porous cloth, or netting.
Cavallo desisted when the goal was within reach. His plans were
 practicable, but he abandoned them too readily. Why did he not varnish
 his balloon when it leaked? He could thus so easily have inaugurated
 the art of aërial navigation. But after salting the bird’s tail he let
 it escape.
Various accounts have been given of the steps by which the Montgolfiers
 were led to their invention of the balloon. They are said to have
 studied and discussed projects for aërial locomotion a decade before
 hitting upon their first successful device; at one time filling a paper
 bag with smoke ineffectually; again with steam, and again trying, but
 in vain, to employ hydrogen. The following apparently reliable account
 is given by a friend of the Montgolfiers, Baron Gernando, in his
 biographical notice of Joseph32 Montgolfier, having obtained the story
 from the inventor himself.
Joseph Montgolfier found himself at Abignon, and it was at the time
 when the combined armies held the siege of Gibraltar. Alone, in the
 chimney corner, dreaming, as usual, he was contemplating a sort of cut
 that represented the work of the siege; he grew impatient observing
 that one could not reach the body of the place either by land or
 sea. “But could not one arrive there through the air? Smoke rises in
 the chimney; why not store this smoke in such a manner as to form an
 available force?” His mind calculated instantly the weight of a given
 surface of paper, or taffeta; he constructed without delay his little
 balloon, and saw it rise from the floor, to the great surprise of his
 hostess, and with a peculiar joy. He wrote on the spot, to his brother
 then at Annonay: “Prepare immediately a supply of taffeta and cordage,
 and you shall see the most astonishing thing in the world.”
A quainter story is told by Brisson in his Dictionary of Physics. He
 says: “I can only repeat what the citizen Montgolfier himself told me,
 when he came to Paris to announce his discovery; that the citizeness
 Montgolfier having placed a skirt on an open-wicker basket, such as
 women use to dry linen, the skirt was lifted to the ceiling. It is from
 this fact that the citizens Montgolfier started.”
Whatever the preliminaries, the Montgolfier brothers finally made the
 experiment of holding a paper bag over a fire fed with wet straw and
 wool. It is doubtful whether they purposed to fill it with smoke, or
 with hot air or an electrical cloud. They knew that a cloud of some
 kind rises from such a fire, and they wanted to harness it. Their
 first balloon took fire and went up as smoke. But they were rich
 paper manufacturers, and soon had another balloon 33of 700 cubic feet
 capacity. This rose from the fire to a height of 1,000 feet, carrying
 no fuel with it. Thus two practical[6] men had made fire lift a paper
 sac; let the Academy explain how. The baby Aërostation was born.
How fortuitous the primal steps of science! Galvanism from the twitch
 of a frog’s leg; aërostation from the puff of a petticoat! There had
 been no year in thirty centuries when people could not easily have
 built a hot-air balloon. All the materials were available; only a
 little thought was wanting. A simple sketch sent to a Roman tailor,
 or tent-maker, could have furnished a woven bag competent to lift
 passengers from the heart of the Coliseum, to the wonder and delight
 of a hundred thousand spectators. Yet the genius that could design the
 Coliseum, or cover its vast enclosure with canvas, failed to think of
 the magic bag that would have enhanced so much the ingenious shows of
 a show-loving people. That device was an inspiration destined to a
 common Frenchman at no uncommon period of science. The hydrogen balloon
 arrived in the natural and logical order of scientific progression;
 but the hot-air bag might have presented itself at any time since the
 birth of weaving. It was a happy thought, like the ophthalmoscope,
 or jack-knife—quaint modern creations of constant use or comfort to
 mankind.
The public inauguration of aëronautics occurred on June 5, 1783, at
 Annonay, the home of the Montgolfier family, 36 miles from Lyons.
 The states of Vivarais being assembled at that place, were invited
 to witness the ascension. The Deputies and many spectators found in
 the public square an enormous 34bag which, with its frame, weighed 300
 pounds, and would inflate to a ball 35 feet in diameter. When told
 that this huge mass would rise to the clouds they were astonished and
 incredulous. The Montgolfiers, however, lit a fire beneath and let the
 bag speak for itself. It gradually distended, assuming a beautiful
 form, and struggling to free itself from the men who were holding it.
 At a given signal it was released; it ascended rapidly, and in ten
 minutes35 attained a height of 6,000 feet. It drifted a mile and a half
 and sank gently to the ground.
When the French Academy learned of this event they desired to have
 an ascension in Paris, and at once started a public subscription to
 defray the expense of constructing and inflating a balloon. They
 placed the work in charge of the physicist Charles, after inviting the
 Montgolfiers to Paris, and finding they could not come immediately.
 Charles proved more than a substitute; he became a fertile inventor and
 a rival in the new field. Aided by the skill of the Robert brothers, he
 made a silk globe varnished with dissolved rubber, and filled it with
 hydrogen, which is many times lighter than hot air. The operation of
 filling occupied three days, consuming 500 pounds of sulphuric acid and
 half a ton of iron. The globe was 13 feet in diameter, and designated
 a “balloon,” or big ball. This had next to be moved from the place of
 filling, in the Place des Victoires, to the Champ de Mars, two miles
 distant, in order to have space enough to accommodate the increasing
 crowd of spectators. Accordingly, on the 26th it was conveyed thither,
 in the dead of night, preceded by lighted torches, surrounded by a
 cortege, and escorted by foot and horse guards. Impressive and weird,
 indeed, was this nocturnal caravan of troops and towering globe
 advancing slowly through the dark and silent streets. The astonished
 cab drivers knelt humbly, hat in hand, while the procession passed.
The ascent of this, the first hydrogen balloon, was a popular and
 a memorable event. The field was lined with troops. The curious
 spectators had thronged every thoroughfare and darkened every housetop.
 It was an all day festival, inaugurating a peculiarly French science,
 with French animation. The booming of cannon announced to all Paris
 the36 impending flight of the balloon. At five o’clock, in the presence
 of 50,000 spectators, and in a shower of rain, the balloon rose more
 than half a mile and entered the clouds. The people overwhelmed with
 surprise and enthusiasm, stood gazing upward, despite the rain,
 observing every maneuver till the vessel had ascended and faded from
 view.
The landing of this little balloon did not leave it in a condition to
 exhibit proudly to future generations. After drifting three quarters
 of an hour, it fell in a field near Gonesse, a village fifteen miles
 from the place of ascension, apparently ruptured from overdistention.
 The villagers flocked about it with curiosity and trepidation, ignorant
 of its nature, whether of bird kind or monster; and doubtful of its
 origin, whether natural or satanic. They fell upon it with flails and
 pitchforks. When struck it smelt strongly of sulphur, indicating a
 diabolic source. They finally hitched it to the tail of a horse which
 galloping away in terror, badly damaged it.37 Whether this destruction
 was wrought through fear or rustic hilarity, it induced the government
 of France to issue a notice to the public explaining the innocuous
 nature of a simple balloon.
In the meantime Joseph Montgolfier, having reached Paris, had
 constructed a waterproof linen balloon 46 feet in diameter and
 ornamented in oil colors, which was to be publicly launched at
 Versailles. On September 19, 1783, the king and queen, the court and a
 vast throng of people of every rank and age, assembled to witness the
 ascension. Montgolfier explained to them every detail, and finally lit
 the fire, about one o’clock. The great bag gradually expanded, rounding
 out in eleven minutes to a beautiful globular form, tugging upward with
 a force of seven hundred pounds. Beneath was suspended a wicker cage
 containing the first aërial passengers—a sheep, a rooster and a duck.
 The vessel rose majestically above the applauding multitude to a height
 of fourteen hundred feet, and drifted some two miles in eight minutes,
 descending gradually in the wood at Vaucresson. The animals were tipped
 out on landing; but, when found by two game-keepers, they were none the
 worse for their strange journey. The sheep was grazing and the cock
 crowing, says one report, while another relates that the sheep had
 trampled on the rooster and lamed him.
Stephen Montgolfier now wishing to send up human passengers, made a
 balloon of 100,000 cubic feet capacity. It was shaped like a full lemon
 pointing upward, with a cylindrical neck below, 16 feet in diameter.
 Around this neck was a wicker balcony three feet wide, to carry the
 aëronauts, bundles of straw for fuel, pails of water and sponges to
 extinguish incipient conflagrations, here and there in the balloon,
 during a journey. Through stokeholes in38 the side of the neck sheaves
 of straw could be forked to the grate suspended centrally below by
 radial chains. During inflation the base of the balloon rested on a
 platform, and its top was supported by a rope stretched between two
 poles. The vessel when completed, in a garden of the Faubourg St.
 Antoine, was 85 feet high by 48 feet across, and weighed 1,600 pounds.
 About its zone, painted in oil, were elegant decorations; portraits,
 cyphers of the king’s name, fleur-de-lis, with fancy borders below and
 above; while higher still, on the arching dome of the bag, were all the
 signs of the celestial zodiac.
The handsome vessel was now ready; but what daring captain should
 navigate her? King Louis proposed two prisoners who were under sentence
 of death, and had to be killed somehow. But the brave Pilâtre de
 Rozier protested indignantly: “Eh quoi! de vils criminels auraient
 les premiers la gloire de senlever dans les airs! Non, non, cela ne
 sera point.” He stirred up the city, and finally prevailed, through
 the entreaties of the Marquis d’Arlandes, who secured from the king
 permission to accompany his friend.
After some days of preliminary practice in maneuvering the tethered
 balloon, these gentlemen were ready for an aërial voyage. On November
 21, 1783, the balloon was inflated in the garden of La Muette palace,
 and stocked with enough straw for an hour’s journey. When all was ready
 Pilâtre de Rozier and the Marquis d’Arlandes stepped with eager courage
 into the gallery taking opposite sides to ensure proper balance. At two
 o’clock they rose splendidly, amid the acclamations of a vast throng
 of spectators, and at the height of 280 feet, removing their hats,
 saluted the surprised multitude. Encountering a south blowing wind,
 they drifted five miles in some twenty minutes, and landed safely in a39
 field. The apparatus was soon assembled on a cart and returned to the
 Faubourg St. Antoine, where it was originally constructed. The details
 of this first human voyage in a balloon are very interesting and well
 told in a letter written by the Marquis d’Arlande to a member of the
 French Academy.
40“At this time M. Pilâtre said: ‘You do nothing, and we shall not
 mount.’ ‘Pardon me,’ I replied. I threw a truss of straw upon the
 fire, stirring it a little at the same time, and then quickly turned
 my face back again; but I could no longer see La Muette. Astonished,
 I gave a look to the direction of the river.... M. Pilâtre then said,
 ‘See, there is the river, and observe that we descend.’ ‘Well, then,
 my friend, let us increase the fire;’ and we worked away. But instead
 of crossing the river, as our direction seemed to indicate, which
 carried us over the house of the Invalides, we passed along the island
 of Cygnes, reëntered over the principal bed of the river, and advanced
 up it as far as the gate de la Conference. I said to my intrepid
 companion: ‘See, there is the river &c.’ I stirred the fire, and took
 with the fork a truss of straw, which from being too tight, did not
 take fire very easily. I lifted it and shook it in the middle of the
 flame. The next moment I felt as if I were lifted up from under the
 arms, and said to my companion, ‘Now we mount, &c.’ At the same time
 I heard a noise toward the top of the machine, as if it were going to
 burst; I looked, but did not see anything. However, as I was looking
 up, I felt a shock, which was the only one I experienced. The direction
 of the motion was from the upper part downwards. I said then: ‘What
 are you doing? Are you dancing?’ ‘I don’t stir,’ said he. ‘So much the
 better,’ I replied, ‘it is then a new current, which, I hope, will push
 us over the river.’ In fact, I turned myself in order to see where we
 were, and I found myself between l’École Militaire and les Invalides,
 beyond which place we had already gone about 2,500 feet. M. Pilâtre
 said at the same time: ‘We are on the plain.’ ‘Yes,’ said I, ‘and
 we41 advance.’ ‘Work on,’ said he. I then heard another noise in the
 machine, which appeared to be the effect of a rope breaking. This fresh
 admonition made me examine attentively the interior of our habitation.
 I saw that the part of the machine which was turned toward the south
 was full of round holes, many of which were of a considerable size. I
 then said: ‘We must descend,’ and at the same time I took the sponge
 and easily extinguished the fire, which was round some holes that I
 could reach; but leaning on the lower part of the linen, to observe
 whether it adhered firmly to the surrounding circle, I found that the
 linen was easily separated from it, on which I repeated that it was
 necessary to descend. My companion said: ‘We are over Paris.’ ‘Never
 mind that,’ said I, ‘but look if there appears any danger for you on
 your side—are you safe?’ He said: ‘Yes.’ I examined my side, and found
 that there was no danger to apprehend. Farther, I wetted with a sponge
 those cords which were within my reach. They all resisted, except two,
 which gave way. I then said: ‘We may pass over Paris.’ In doing this,
 we approached the tops of houses very sensibly; we increased the fire,
 and rose with the greatest ease. I looked below me, and perfectly
 discovered the Mission Étranger. It seemed as if we were going toward
 Saint-Sulpice, which I could perceive through the aperture of our
 machine. On rising a current of air made us leave this direction, and
 carried us toward the south. I saw on my left a sort of forest, which
 I took to be the Luxembourg; we passed over the Boulevard, and then I
 said: ‘Let us now descend.’ The fire was nearly extinguished; but the
 intrepid M. Pilâtre, who never loses his presence of mind, and who
 went forward, imagining that we were going against the mills that are
 between Petite Gentilly and the Boulevard, admonished me.42 I threw a
 bundle of straw on the fire, and shaking it in order to inflame it more
 easily, we rose, and a new current carried us a little toward our left.
 M. Rozier said again: ‘Take care of the mills’; but as I was looking
 through the aperture of the machine, I could observe more accurately
 that we could not meet with them, and said: ‘We are there.’ The moment
 after, I observed that we went over a piece of water, which I took
 for the river, but after landing, I recollected that it was the piece
 of water, &c. The moment we touched the ground, I raised myself up to
 the gallery and perceived the upper part of the machine to press very
 gently on my head, I pushed it back, and jumped out of the gallery, and
 on turning toward the machine, expected to find it distended, but was
 surprised to find it perfectly emptied and quite flattened, &c.”
While the foregoing experiment was in progress, plans were matured for
 the construction of a hydrogen balloon large enough to support two
 passengers and remain aloft many hours, without the need of carrying
 dangerous fuel. This type of balloon, called a Charlière, after its
 inventor, was destined largely to supersede the hot-air type, known
 as the Montgolfière, and indeed, to replace it entirely for free
 voyages of considerable endurance and for most power voyages. The
 construction after the plan of Professor Charles was delegated to two
 very intelligent mechanics, the Robert brothers who also had succeeded
 in dissolving caoutchouc, and thus producing a very superior balloon
 varnish. The project was first announced in the Journal de Paris of
 the 19th of November 1783. As usual in those days of public enthusiasm,
 a subscription was opened to defray the expenses of the experiment,
 estimated to cost about ten thousand francs.
This balloon was a truly scientific creation, which advanced
 aërostation from tottering infancy almost to full prime. The bag was
 a sphere 27½ feet in diameter made of gores of varnished silk. A net
 covered the upper half and was fastened to a horizontal 44hoop girding
 the middle of the globe, and called the “equator.” From the equator
 depended ropes which supported, just below the spherical bag, a wicker
 boat measuring eight feet by four, covered with painted linen and
 beautifully ornamented. The balloon had at the bottom a silk neck 7
 inches in diameter, to admit the gas during inflation, and at the top,
 a valve which could be opened by means of a cord in the boat to let
 out gas during a voyage, so as to lower the balloon, or to relieve
 excessive pressure. In the boat were carried sand ballast to regulate
 the height of ascension, a barometer to measure the elevation, anchor
 and rope for landing, a thermometer, notebook, provisions, and all the
 paraphernalia of a scientific voyage. Barring the fancy boat, this is
 almost a description of a good modern balloon.
The inflation and ascension occurred in the Garden of the Tuileries,
 where the limp bag was initially suspended from a rope stretched
 between two trees. For three days and nights the hydrogen, drawn from
 twenty barrels containing iron and dilute sulphuric acid, poured upward
 through the silken neck into the distending globe, which swelled in
 volume to 1,400 cubic feet. Finally on a beautiful day, the first of
 December 1783, the Tuileries and all the neighborhood were crowded with
 spectators. A numerous guard of soldiers, stationed about the apparatus
 and grounds, preserved order. The fashion and nobility of Paris were
 there, in ample splendor, attracted by the novelty and importance
 of the experiment, and the fame of the inventor. Shortly before two
 o’clock Professor Charles presented to his friend, Montgolfier, a pilot
 balloon six feet in diameter, saying, “It is your prerogative to blaze
 the way through the sky.” The pilot balloon was released, showing to
 everyone the direction of the aërial 45currents. Charles and Roberts
 stepped into the boat, seated themselves, and quickly rose into the
 sky. The multitude gazed in silent wonder. Presently they observed two
 pennants waving high above them, though the navigators were scarcely
 visible; whereupon they burst forth into wild enthusiasm and thunderous
 applause.
Immediately a cavalcade set out in hot pursuit of the venturesome
 sailors. It was the first chase after an air ship, and a most vigorous
 one. The balloon drifting northwestward at a speed of fifteen miles
 an hour, crossed the Seine, passed over several towns and villages,
 to the great astonishment of the inhabitants, and landed in a field
 near Nesle. Here it was securely held by friendly peasants, to await
 the advent of the official witnesses. Presently these arrived, drew
 up a certificate of descent and signed it. The Duke de Chartres, and
 the Duke de Fitz-James, who had followed less swiftly, now rode up
 and signed the formal document, to the great gratification of the
 aëronauts. The aërial journey had been a most delightful one, lasting
 about two hours and covering nearly thirty miles.
After receiving the felicitations of his friends, Charles determined
 to reascend, in order to obtain further scientific observations. Owing
 to leakage and loss of buoyancy, he must now leave behind his pleasant
 companion. He had proposed replacing with earth, or stones, a part
 of Mr. Robert’s weight, but, finding none at hand, he signaled the
 peasants to let go, whereupon he rose with unusual speed. The remainder
 of this first and very remarkable scientific voyage is well told by the
 navigator himself:
“In twenty minutes I was 1,500 fathoms high; out of sight of all
 terrestrial objects. I had taken the necessary precautions against
 the explosion of46 the globe, and prepared to make the observations
 which I had promised myself. In order to observe the barometer and
 thermometer, placed at the end of the car, without altering the center
 of gravity, I knelt down in the middle, stretching forward my body and
 one leg, holding my watch in my left hand, and my pen and the string
 of the valve in my right, waiting for the event. The globe, which,
 at my setting out, was rather flaccid, swelled insensibly. The air
 escaped in great quantities at the silken tube. I drew the valve from
 time to time, to give it two vents; and I continued to ascend, still
 losing air, which issued out hissing, and became visible, like a warm
 vapor in a cold atmosphere. The reason of this phenomenon is obvious.
 On earth, the thermometer was 47°, or 15° above freezing point; after
 ten minutes’ ascent it was only 21°, or 11° below. The inflammable
 air had not had time to recover the equilibrium of its temperature.
 Its elastic equilibrium being quicker than that of the heat, there
 must escape a greater quantity than that which the external dilatation
 of the air could determine by its least pressure. For myself, though
 exposed to the open air, I passed in ten minutes from the warmth of
 spring to the cold of winter; a sharp dry cold, but not too much
 to be borne. I declare that, in the first moment, I felt nothing
 disagreeable in the sudden change. When the barometer ceased to fall,
 I marked exactly 18 inches 10 lines (20-01 in. English), the mercury
 suffering no sensible oscillation. From this I deduce a height of
 1,524 fathoms (3,100 yards), or thereabouts, till I can be more exact
 in my calculation. In a few minutes more, my fingers were benumbed by
 the cold, so that I could not hold my pen. I was now stationary as to
 the rising and falling, and moved only in an horizontal direction. I
 rose up in the middle of the car to contemplate the47 scene around me.
 At my setting out the sun was set on the valleys; he soon rose for me
 alone, who was the only luminous body in the horizon, and all the rest
 of nature in shade; he, however, presently disappeared, and I had the
 pleasure of seeing him set twice in the same day. I beheld, for a few
 seconds, the circumambient air and the vapors rising from the valleys
 and rivers. The clouds seemed to rise from the earth and collect one
 upon the other, still preserving their usual form, only their color
 was gray and monotonous from the want of light in the atmosphere. The
 moon alone enlightened them, and showed me that I was tacking about
 twice; and I observed certain currents that brought me back again.
 I had several sensible deviations; and observed, with surprise, the
 effects of the wind, and saw the streamers of my banners point upwards.
 This phenomenon was not the effect of the ascent or descent, for then I
 moved horizontally. At that instant I conceived, perhaps a little too
 hastily, the idea of being able to steer one’s course. In the midst
 of my transport I felt a violent pain in my right ear and jaw, which
 I ascribed to the dilatation of the air, in the cellular construction
 of those organs, as much as to the cold of the external air. I was in
 a waistcoat and bareheaded. I immediately put on a woolen cap, yet
 the pain did not go off but as I gradually descended. For seven or
 eight minutes I had ceased to ascend; the condensation of the internal
 inflammable air rather made me descend. I now recollected my promise to
 return in half an hour, and, pulling the string of the valve, I came
 down. The globe was now so much emptied, that it appeared only a half
 globe. I perceived a fine ploughed field near the wood of Tour du Lay,
 and hastened my descent. When I was between twenty or thirty fathoms
 from the earth I threw out hastily48 two or three pounds of ballast,
 and became for a moment stationary, till I descended gently in the
 field, about a league from the place whence I set out. The frequent
 deviations and turnings about make me imagine that the voyage was near
 three leagues, and I was gone about thirty-three minutes. Such is the
 certainty of the combinations of our aërostatic machine, that I might
 have kept in the air at least for twenty-four hours longer.”
Further interesting details of the first balloon experiments at Paris
 are furnished by Dr. Benjamin Franklin, then American Minister to
 France, in his letters written to Sir Joseph Banks, President of
 the Royal Society of London, and presented in Appendix II of this
 book. These quaint and substantial stories are well worth perusal
 as the expressions of a great diplomat and philosopher who, in the
 midst of social and political activities, found time for scientific
 correspondence with his friends in both hemispheres.
Aërial navigation was now become a practical art which should advance
 rapidly in popularity, in both Europe and America. Very soon ascensions
 were made everywhere, for private amusement and for public exhibitions.
 Not a few were made for scientific, for military and for topographical
 purposes; thus giving the art a utilitarian as well as a sporting
 feature. It will be interesting to note some of the more conspicuous
 ascensions, voyages and improvements made in passive balloons
 subsequently to the invention of Montgolfières and Charlières.
The largest hot-air balloon ever constructed, La Flesselle, was
 launched from the suburbs of the city of Lyons on January 19, 1784,
 just two months after the ascent of the first human passengers. It was
 also one of the most troublesome to assemble and keep in repair. Day by
 day, for more than a week, the balloon was inflated for the purpose of
 attaching49 the ropes to support the great gallery. But the wind blew
 dreadfully at times; rain and snow fell on the machine; frost and ice
 covered the huge bag; many rents ensued, demanding frequent repairs.
 On one occasion, when fed too freely with flame from straw sprinkled
 with alcohol, the monstrous ship rose so vigorously as to drag fifty
 men with it some distance along the ground. Finally on the 19th of
 January, when the weather moderated, the operators built small fires
 under the scaffold below the balloon, and thawed away the ice from
 the drenched and frozen bag. Then they stocked its gallery with straw
 and pitchforks, with fire extinguishers, and other provisions for the
 journey. The inflation beginning about noon, occupied but seventeen
 minutes. The balloon swelled out rapidly, with the roaring flames
 ascending inside, and at last stood forth huge and majestic before
 the admiring multitude—a towering thing of magic growth, 100 feet in
 diameter by 130 feet high.
The ascension of this gigantic vessel was immensely spectacular; but
 it was also most adventurous and foolhardy. The great bag, which at
 best was made of poor materials, was in bad repair after its frequent
 inflations. But of the six passengers in the gallery not one could be
 induced to remain behind to lessen the risk to the others. Their pilot,
 M. de Rozier, remonstrated with them; the proprietor M. C. Flesselle
 wished them to cast lots; but no one would abandon the journey. So,
 with fear and reluctance, the pilot ordered the mooring ropes to be
 cut. Just as the ascent began, a seventh passenger, M. Fontaine, sprang
 into the gallery and sailed aloft with the others. By vigorous stoking
 the aërial sailors urged their fiery vessel upward three thousand feet,
 whence, apparently without fear, they waved their hats to the vast
 throng below.
50
The spectators were now in a frenzy of excitement. For more than a week
 they had vacillated between 51hope and disappointment; but now they saw
 the huge ship soaring into the sky, perhaps on her way to destruction.
 They heard the blast of martial music and the booming of mortars. Then
 the accumulated emotion of the multitude burst forth. Exclamations
 of joy, shrieks of fear, thunders of applause resounded above the
 sea of people. Finally the balloon began to burst, a dangerous rent
 running vertically along her side. The machine descended with great
 rapidity, to the alarm of everyone. It is reported that not fewer than
 sixty thousand people ran to the place of landing, with the greatest
 apprehension for the lives of the travelers. But the adventurous men
 stepped forth from the gallery, after a fifteen minutes’ voyage,
 without hurt of any kind, save an insignificant scratch borne by Joseph
 Montgolfier, who on this occasion made his first and last ascension.
 This was also the first and last ascension of that gigantic fire
 balloon; for although it furnished a world of delirious emotion and
 excitement, the trouble of inflating the vessel was too great to be
 repeated.
The crossing of the English Channel by balloon had been contemplated
 many months by various adventurous spirits; and at length, on a fine
 day, the seventh of January, 1785, this feat was attempted by two
 intrepid men, the French aëronaut, M. Blanchard, and an American
 physician, Dr. Jeffries, who had graduated at Harvard in 1763, and
 was practicing medicine in England. Starting from the perpendicular
 cliff at Dover Castle, at one o’clock, they sailed in the direction of
 Calais, having with them only thirty pounds of sand ballast. This was
 too little for so long a voyage; but it would doubtless carry them a
 few miles, in the favorable breeze then blowing. To their surprise,
 the atmosphere seemed to grow lighter as they advanced over the water,
 letting 52them sink too freely. As they approached mid-channel they
 were compelled to discharge all their ballast in order to maintain
 their level. But the balloon still descended, seemingly attracted by
 the water. Then they ejected a parcel of books to gain a moment’s
 relief. When three-fourths across the Channel they sighted the French
 Coast, which now they yearned to see at closer range; for the balloon
 was contracting and sinking rapidly. They threw out from the boat
 everything available, wings, anchors, cords, provisions; yet they saw
 the vessel persistently approaching the sea. Finally they cast off part
 of their clothing, fastened themselves to the cords suspended from
 the balloon-ring, and prepared to cut away the boat. But presently
 approaching the coast near Calais, they began to rise; then ascended
 rapidly, soaring in a magnificent arch above the high grounds. At
 last they descended gradually above the forest of Guines, seized the
 branches of a tree to stop their flight, and at three o’clock were
 happily landed. It was a thrilling voyage of two hours, and made a
 profound impression at the time. As a mark of appreciation the King
 presented Blanchard a sum of 12,000 francs and a pension of 1,200
 francs per year. The people erected a monument on the place of landing
 to commemorate this extraordinary voyage.
This splendid achievement incited two Frenchmen to attempt a counter
 voyage which ended disastrously. On June 15, 1785, Pilâtre de Rozier
 and M. Romain set out from Boulogne on a voyage from France to
 England, in a compound balloon composed of a hydrogen balloon forty
 feet in diameter, below which was suspended a fire balloon ten feet
 in diameter. They hoped by judicious stoking of the lower balloon to
 obviate the sinking tendency suffered by Blanchard and Jeffries. But
 the smaller53 globe proved a fatal auxiliary. Scarcely a quarter of an
 hour after launching, the whole apparatus was aflame at an altitude of
 3,000 feet, and presently fell in charred and hideous fragments upon
 the seashore. M. Romain still showed some signs of life, but Pilâtre
 de Rozier was completely dead and all his bones were broken. They were
 the first martyrs in the cause of the new science. Poor De Rozier
 knew on starting that his apparatus was in bad condition, but he had
 received for the purpose a sum of money from a distinguished patron,
 and therefore felt obliged in honor to attempt the voyage. He was
 twenty-eight years old and engaged to be married to a young lady in the
 convent at Boulogne, who eight days after the catastrophe which robbed
 her of her fiancé, died brokenhearted and in convulsions.
The next important advance in practical ballooning was made by the
 substitution of coal gas for hydrogen. This was England’s contribution
 to an art which previously had not greatly flourished west of the
 Channel. It was a contribution following the natural growth of science;
 for in 1814 coal gas began generally to be used for lighting London,
 and seven years later for inflating balloons. This valuable innovation
 was made by the famous aëronaut, Charles Green, on the occasion of his
 first ascension, made July 19, 1821, the coronation day of George IV.
 The new method largely superseded the old, extending throughout the
 world with the spread of gas lighting; and it gave a powerful stimulus
 to aëronautics by rendering inflation cheap and convenient. Mr. Green
 himself made 526 ascensions during his life, or at the rate of one
 cruise a month for nearly forty-four years. In due time, every country
 had its professional aëronauts, and finally its amateurs, who, forming
 themselves into aëro clubs, devoted themselves to racing in free
 balloons, inflated quite usually from a city gas supply.
In 1836 Mr. Robert Holland organized an expedition designed to test the
 utmost capabilities of the balloon of his day, particularly in points
 of endurance and control. Engaging as pilot the first aëronaut of the
 age, Mr. Charles Green, and employing the largest gas balloon that ever
 had been constructed, 55stocked with provisions enough to last three
 men a fortnight, he invited a third person, Mr. Monck Mason, to join
 them on a cruise from London to wherever the wind would take them, but
 preferably to land near Paris, as the balloon was to be delivered there
 after the voyage.
The vessel selected for that famous cruise was The Great Balloon of
 Nassau, then recently built by Mr. Green and representing all that his
 skill and experience could devise. It was of pear shape, formed56 of
 the finest crimson and white silk, “spun, wove and dyed expressly for
 the purpose,” and comprising when distended a volume of 85,000 cubic
 feet. From its stout balloon-ring six feet in diameter was suspended a
 wicker car measuring nine feet long by four wide, having a seat across
 either end, and a cushioned bottom to serve as a bed, if such should be
 needed. Across the middle of the car was a plank supporting a windlass
 for raising or lowering the guide-rope, that is a heavy rope which
 could be trailed over land, or water, to keep the balloon at a nearly
 constant level without expenditure of ballast, and to check its speed
 on landing. This valuable device invented by Mr. Green in 1820, was
 now to receive adequate trial, which, indeed, formed one of the chief
 purposes of the cruise. Other paraphernalia of the voyage were food
 and drink, warm clothing, lamps, trumpets, telescopes, barometers, a
 quicklime coffee-heater, a grapnel and cable, and a ton of sand ballast
 in bags.
The voyage proved well worthy of the elaborate preparations. At
 one-thirty o’clock on November 7th, the three navigators arose
 from London, in presence of a mighty multitude, and drifted in a
 southeasterly direction traversing the cultivated plains of Kent, and
 in two hours passed the environs of Canterbury. Here they dropped
 a parachute with a letter for the Mayor, which he duly received.
 Continuing their journey they floated leisurely above the tree tops,
 talking to the inhabitants of the country, startling the fleet-winged
 quail, terrifying a colony of rooks, and finally reaching Dover at
 sundown, where they again dropped a letter for the Mayor of the city,
 which also was duly delivered.
Without a moment’s pause they drifted over the Channel into the
 gathering darkness. Before them57 rose a huge wall of vapor and black
 clouds standing on the bosom of the sea; behind them the twinkling
 lights and the music of breakers rolling on a hospitable shore.
 Presently they were immersed in a region of absolute silence and
 impenetrable darkness. At times this deep stratum would slowly
 dissolve, revealing a glimpse of the dusky ocean and a passing ship;
 then some huge wreath of vapor would involve them in bottomless gloom,
 without perspective, without apparent motion, without a sound to cheer
 or mark their dubious course. Now to avoid the risk of settling too
 near the sea, as Blanchard and Jeffries had done, they were preparing
 to let down the guide-rope with floating ballast attached, when
 suddenly they emerged from the pall of darkness, and were greeted by
 the glittering lights of Calais, and the gentle sound of waters dashing
 upon the beach. They had crossed the Channel in one hour, and were
 soaring serenely three thousand feet above the ocean, not having to
 lower the guide-rope to preserve their elevation.
Now came the preparations for a night voyage over an obscurely defined
 land route. A simple rope one thousand feet long without ballast was
 allowed to trail beneath them. A lamp was lit. Coffee was heated by the
 slacking of quicklime. An ample store of viands and wine was spread on
 the board in the middle of the car. The strenuous period of thought and
 labor was past, and now three hungry men sat leisurely at dinner, after
 a fast of twelve long hours. However sparing of bones and bottles,
 which later might serve as ballast, they were not economical of food
 and wine that evening. For the present they had only to live and be
 happy as bachelors. Muffled in soft garments, well fed, abundantly
 served with divine beverages, hot or cold; what finer picture of
 masculine comfort and delight?
58
They were now floating tranquilly in the vast solitude of heaven, over
 a teeming continent mantled in night and mystery. Far along earth’s
 sable surface gleam the scattered fires of many villages; and above
 it the lovelier fires of a moonless sky. Unseen, unsuspected, they
 survey kingdoms and cities, trailing their long rope serpent-like
 over woodland, field and quiet homestead. Now on the horizon before
 them looms a greater fire, like a distant conflagration, widening as
 they approach. Gradually it expands into a model city, shooting out
 long lines of illuminated streets; here the public squares, markets
 and theatres; there the rumbling iron mills with blazing furnaces.
 They are above Liege at her festive hour, murmuring with animation
 and busy life. Again they drift into the dark regions of slumber,
 lapped in silence and deep tranquillity, where the lights of men are
 extinguished, and the stars, redoubling their lustre, gleam whitest
 silver in heaven’s jetty dome. Midnight involves the world; an abyss
 of darkness enfolds it; their solitary lamp seems to melt its way
 through solid space of blackest marble. For hours they undulate over
 the rolling hills, rising and falling a thousand cubits, held always to
 earth by the trailing rope. At times they are so near as to trace the
 landscape dimly; here a white tract covered lightly with snow, here a
 dark valley or forest, here a tortuous river, probably the Rhine, with
 its multitudinous thunder of waters. But in all that weird and obscure
 wandering no joyous note of human or animal life ascends ere dawn to
 cheer their solitary course in the sky.
At last the paling of the morning star, and a faint tingeing of the
 eastern cumuli, announce the expected day. With sudden bound the
 great ship mounts aloft twelve thousand feet, into the glory of the
 blazing sun, new risen among clouds of amber59 and purple. Far below,
 twilight and mist still mantle the half-awakened world, presenting a
 stupendous panorama, vast as an empire. Presently down they plunge into
 the vaporous and obscure atmosphere, drifting carelessly, but soon
 reascending into the splendor of morning. Thus after making the sun
 rise three times and set twice, they float contentedly along the misty
 landscape, marveling what region lies below them, whether a barren
 wilderness, or the abode of civilized life, with human comforts and a
 ready means of transportation. A hot breakfast would be very welcome
 now; for they had accidentally dropped the lime pot and had spent the
 latter half of the night without warm beverage in a region where oil
 and water had frozen.
At length through the clearing vapor they perceive the country well
 tilled and populous; a good place to land to shorten their route to
 Paris, and avoid the wide plains of Poland or Russia. They raise the
 guide-rope, lower the cable and anchor, open the valve, and descend
 in a grassy field near Weilburg, in the Duchy of Nassau. It is now
 seven-thirty o’clock, just eighteen hours since starting; and they
 have traveled five hundred miles, the longest aërial voyage thus
 far recorded. Very soon they are surrounded by a wondering crowd of
 pipe-puffing, shaggy-headed, German peasants, by whose willing aid they
 finally deflate the balloon, pack it in the bottom of the car, and
 mount it on a one-horse cart for Weilburg. Thence the aëronauts, after
 a week of festivities in their honor, and distinguished attentions from
 the highest officials of the town, embarked with their balloon for
 Paris. This famous craft now bore its permanent title; for a few days
 previously the lovely daughter of the Baron de Bibra, with seven other
 young ladies and Mr. Green, had stood within the air-inflated vessel,
 poured a generous libation 60of wine, and christened the hardy cruiser
 The Great Balloon of Nassau.
It was in truth a great balloon in various ways; in solidity and
 strength, in workmanship, in completeness of appointment, in endurance
 and control. Having accomplished that long journey without a sign
 of weakness or defect, it was still in prime condition, proudly
 heading for the farthest verge of Europe. It had not, of course, the
 instrumental equipment of a modern balloon; but it did possess the
 elements essential for a long and hard cruise. Since the day of its
 launching many additions have been added to the art, but these, for
 the most part, are special adjuncts. The more important features of a
 good balloon are practically the same to-day as when they were first
 introduced by Professor Charles and sturdy old Mr. Green.
A still more elaborate and colossal air ship was the Geant,
 constructed in 1863, for A. Nadar of Paris. It was made of a double
 layer of white silk, had a volume of 215,000 cubic feet and a buoyancy
 of 4½ tons. The car was a wicker cabin 13 feet wide by 7 feet high,
 with a wicker balcony round the top so that the roof could be used
 as an observation deck—a delightful place to loll in the starlight,
 or watch the morning sun “flatter the mountain tops with sovereign
 eye.” The closed car comprised two main rooms with a hallway between
 them, one containing the captain’s bed and baggage, the other having
 three superposed berths for passengers. Minor divisions of the car
 were reserved for provisions, a lavatory, photography and a printing
 press, the latter to be used for the dissemination of news from the
 sky, as the navigators floated from state to state. A compensator
 balloon of 3,500 cubic feet, just below the main bag and connected
 with it, received the escaping gas during expansion with increase of
 tempera61ture or altitude, and gave it back on contraction. In fact
 as well as in name, Nadar’s vessel was a giant. Curiously enough, he
 called it the “last balloon,” for he expected to realize enough money
 by exhibiting it, to inaugurate successful flying by means of the
 helicopter, and thus banish ballooning from the world of futile effort
 to the domain of bygone dreams and chimæras.
The first ascension, made on Sunday, October 4, 1863, was one of
 magnificent promise. In the midst of a vast holiday throng on the Champ
 de Mars, the great globe towered aloft nearly two hundred feet, held to
 earth by one hundred men and twice as many62 sand bags. In the car were
 fifteen notable passengers including one lady, the fair young Princess
 de la Tour d’Auvergne, in morning toilet and a pretty hat. “Lachez
 tout!” shouts Captain Nadar, the effervescent photographer of Paris.
 Away they soar, heading for St. Petersburg, with provisions enough to
 sail beyond the polar sea.
The captain was now in supreme control, with the key to the victual
 and liquor room in his pocket, and his twelve commandments duly signed
 by all aboard. They had pledged themselves not to gamble, not to carry
 inflammable materials, not to smoke unduly, not to throw bottles
 overboard, not to quit the balloon without permission, but to descend
 if so ordered, etc. They had sailed at five o’clock in the evening and
 all was going merrily. But presently trouble came. The valve rope gave
 way, the vessel was sailing in the dark, and the Godards declared she
 was drifting to sea, whereas she was drifting in quite the opposite
 direction. To be on the safe side they threw out the anchors by
 permission of the commander. One anchor broke, but the other took hold
 and checked the balloon in spite of the strong wind blowing. At last
 after three violent bumps on the ground they landed near Meaux at nine
 o’clock in the evening, one passenger sustaining a broken knee, the
 others various bruises. It was a grand adventure and all were pleased.
Two weeks later a second voyage was begun in similar style, and again
 from the Champ de Mars, this time in the presence of the King of
 France and the young King George of Greece; but now Nadar took along,
 not the Princess with the pretty hat, but Madame Nadar, his wife. To
 entertain the crowd before starting, thirty-two persons were first sent
 aloft 300 feet and drawn back to earth. Finally at five o’clock Sunday
 evening, October 18th, a party of63 nine passengers soared proudly
 northward, well provisioned as before, and eager for a long voyage.
 They disappeared in the gathering night, leaving their friends much
 concerned for their safety and ultimate destination. At half past eight
 they were over Compiegne, seventy-eight miles away, drifting near the
 ground to say “All goes well” and have the good tidings transmitted
 to Paris. At nine they crossed the Belgian frontier; at midnight they
 were over Holland; at sunrise they skirted the Zuyder Zee and entered
 Hanover; at eight they were coursing headlong toward Nienburg and the
 North Sea in the current of a swift west wind.
They were now in great peril. If they went to sea they might all be
 drowned; if they came to earth at such horizontal speed they should
 be terribly pounded. Choosing the latter evil, they opened the valve
 and threw down the grappling irons. “To the ropes,” shouted the Godard
 brothers. Assembling on deck all clung to the suspension ropes to
 mitigate the shock of landing. Nadar put his arm about his wife to
 protect her. The anchors snatching a tree, uprooted and dragged it
 along; then caught and tore off the roof of a house; threshed into
 a telegraph line pulling down the wires and poles; struck into some
 firmer obstacle and broke off completely, leaving the huge monster
 to sweep unchecked in the violent ground current. Owing to trouble
 with the valve, the gas could not be liberated quickly; the great
 vessel again and again plunged to earth and rebounded high in air,
 its ponderous basket crashing through heavy timber, and breaking
 down whatever opposed its course. For nine miles they pounded over
 the plain by Nienburg toward the sea, dashing into pools, bogs and
 thickets, their limbs sprained or broken, their bodies bruised, their
 faces splashed with mud. Presently through loss of gas the rebounding
 64ceased, the basket dragged along the earth squeezing some of the
 passengers beneath it, and dumping others out on the ground, leaving
 them behind. Those remaining tried to assist Madam Nadar to land, but
 they were tumbled out and she was caught under the basket from which
 she was extricated with much difficulty, when the balloon was finally
 halted. Thus their memorable voyage of seventeen hours, covering 750
 miles, had a terrific, though not fatal ending. One had a broken femur,
 another a dislocated thigh, others numerous scratches and contusions.
 But no complaint was uttered; for the afflictions were regarded as
 natural concomitants to such interesting sport. After some days tender
 nursing by the Germans, and solicitous inquiries from the King of
 Hanover, they returned to Paris; some indeed on their backs, but for
 all that, none the less admired by their countrymen, as survivors of a
 marvelous adventure.
Another valiant English leader in aërostation was James Glaisher,
 member of the British Association for the Advancement of Science.
 As one of a committee of twelve appointed by that body in 1861, to
 explore the higher strata of the atmosphere by means of the balloon,
 he volunteered his services as an observer, when no other capable man
 could offer to do so. With a professional aëronaut, Mr. Coxwell, and a
 new balloon specially constructed for the work, cubing 90,000 feet, he
 made eleven ascensions for the society, four from Wolverhampton, seven
 from Woolwich. Incidentally he made seventeen other ascents of various
 altitude; not at the expense of the committee, but as a scientific
 passenger in public balloon ascents advertised beforehand.
The objects of the enterprise were first to study the physical
 conditions of the atmosphere; secondly to study the effect of the
 higher regions upon the passengers 65themselves, and some pigeons,
 which they carried along; thirdly to make some observations in
 acoustics and magnetism, particularly to determine the period of
 oscillation of a magnet at various altitudes. The specific study of
 the atmosphere itself was to comprise observations at all altitudes,
 of the temperature of the air, its pressure, and percentage of
 moisture; observations of the velocity and direction of the wind,
 the constitution of the clouds, their height, density and depth, the
 constitution and electrical properties of the air. They were also to
 collect samples of the air at different elevations, which later might
 be examined in the laboratory. Thus the voyages were systematically
 planned for scientific research, and were the first thorough attempts
 in England, though similar efforts had been made previously in France.
 It may be added that Glaisher’s observations were the most important
 made during the first century of aëronautics, and may be found fully
 detailed by that hardy investigator himself in the British Association
 Reports for 1862–66.
Mr. Glaisher’s most interesting voyage of that memorable series
 occurred on September 5, 1862. Starting from Wolverhampton at three
 minutes after one o’clock, they soared swiftly upward, passing through
 a cloud eleven hundred feet thick and emerging in a glorious field
 of sunlight with an amethystine sky above and a boundless sea of
 vapor beneath; a sea of rolling hills and mountain chains, with great
 snow-white masses steaming up from their surface. They had left the
 noisy bustle of earth in the comfortable temperature of 59°; in three
 quarters of an hour, they were five miles aloft in a deadly silent
 atmosphere, two degrees below zero, and approaching one third its usual
 density, the balloon neck white with hoar frost, the men gasping for
 breath. Here the observations became increasingly interesting but66
 immensely more difficult. They are graphically told in the following
 extract from Mr. Glaisher’s classical report:
“I asked Mr. Coxwell to help me to read the instruments, as I
 experienced a difficulty in seeing. In consequence, however, of the
 rotatory motion of the balloon, which had continued without ceasing
 since the earth had been left, the valve-line had become twisted, and
 he had to leave the car and mount into the ring above to adjust it.
 At this time I looked at the barometer, and found it to be 10 inches,
 still decreasing fast; its true reading therefore, was 9¾ inches,
 implying a height of 29,000 feet. Shortly afterwards I laid my arm upon
 the table, possessed of its full vigor, and on being desirous of using
 it, I found it powerless; it must have lost its power momentarily. I
 tried to move the other arm, and found it powerless also. I then tried
 to shake myself, and succeeded in shaking my body. I seemed to have no
 limbs. I then looked at the barometer; whilst doing so my head fell on
 my left shoulder. I struggled and shook my body again, but could not
 move my arms. I got my head upright, but for an instant only, when it
 fell on my right shoulder, and then I fell backwards, my back resting
 against the side of the car, and my head on its edge; in this position
 my eyes were directed towards Mr. Coxwell in the ring. When I shook
 my body I seemed to have full power over the muscles of the back and
 considerable power over those of the neck, but none over either my
 arms or my legs; in fact I seemed to have none. As in the case of the
 arms, all muscular power was lost in an instant from my back and neck.
 I dimly saw Mr. Coxwell in the ring and endeavored to speak, but could
 not; when in an instant intense black darkness came, the optic nerve
 finally lost power suddenly. I was still conscious, with as active a
 brain as at the 67present moment whilst writing this. I thought I had
 been seized with asphyxia, and that I should experience no more, as
 death would come, unless we speedily descended; other thoughts were
 actively entering my mind, when I suddenly became unconscious as in
 going to sleep. I cannot tell anything of the sense of hearing; the
 perfect stillness and silence of the regions six miles from the earth
 (and at this time we were between six and seven miles high) is such
 that no sound reaches the ear.
“My last observation was made at 1 h. and 54 m., at 29,000 feet. I
 suppose two or three minutes fully were occupied between my eyes
 becoming insensible to seeing fine divisions, and 1 h. 54 m., and then
 that two or three minutes more passed till I was insensible; therefore
 I think this took place at about 1 h. 56 m. or 1 h. and 57 m. Whilst
 powerless I heard the words, ‘temperature’ and ‘observation,’ and I
 knew Mr. Coxwell was in the car speaking to me, and endeavoring to
 arouse me, therefore consciousness and hearing had returned. I then
 heard him speak more emphatically, but I could not see, speak or move.
 I heard him again say, ‘Do try—now do.’ Then I saw the instruments
 dimly, then Mr. Coxwell, and very shortly saw clearly. I rose in
 my seat and looked round, as though waking from sleep, though not
 refreshed by sleep, and said to Mr. Coxwell, ‘I have been insensible;’
 he said, ‘You have; and I, too, very nearly.’ I then drew up my legs,
 which had been extended before me, and took a pencil in my hand to
 begin observations. Mr. Coxwell told me he had lost the use of his
 hands, which were black, and I poured brandy on them.
“I resumed my observations at 2 h. 7 m., recording the barometer
 reading at 11.53 inches, and temperature −2°. I suppose three or
 four minutes were occupied from the time of my hearing the words68
 ‘temperature’ and ‘observation’ till I began to observe; if so,
 then returning consciousness came at 2 h. and 4 m., and this gives
 seven minutes for total insensibility. I found the water in the
 vessel supplying the wet-bulb thermometer, which I had by frequent
 disturbances kept from freezing, was one solid mass of ice; and it did
 not all melt until after we had been on the ground some time.
“Mr. Coxwell told me that whilst in the ring he felt it piercingly
 cold; that hoar-frost was all round the neck of the balloon. On
 attempting to leave the ring he found his hands frozen, and he had to
 place his arms on the ring and drop down; that he thought for a moment
 I had laid back to rest myself; that he spoke to me without eliciting
 a reply; that he then noticed my legs projected and my arms hung down
 by my side; that my countenance was serene and placid, without the
 earnestness and anxiety he had noticed before going into the ring,
 and then it struck him I was insensible. He wished to approach me,
 but could not, and he felt insensibility coming over himself; that he
 became anxious to open the valve, but in consequence of having lost the
 use of his hands he could not, and ultimately did so by seizing the
 cord with his teeth and dipping his head two or three times until the
 balloon took a decided turn downwards. This act is quite characteristic
 of Mr. Coxwell. I have never yet seen him without a ready means of
 meeting every difficulty, as it has arisen, with a cool self-possession
 that has always left my mind perfectly easy, and given me every
 confidence in his judgment in the management of so large a balloon.
“No inconvenience followed the insensibility; and when we dropped it
 was in a country where no conveyance of any kind could be obtained, so
 that I had to walk between seven or eight miles.
69
“The descent was at first very rapid; we passed downwards three miles
 in nine minutes; the balloon’s career was then checked, and we finally
 descended in the center of a large grass-field belonging to Mr.
 Kersall, at Cold Weston, seven-and-a-half miles from Ludlow.
“I have already said that my last observation was made at a height of
 29,000 feet; at this time (1 h. 45 m.) we were ascending at the rate
 of 1,000 feet per minute; and when I resumed observations we were
 descending at the rate of 2,000 feet per minute. These two positions
 must be connected, taking into account the interval of time between,
 viz. 13 minutes, and on those considerations the balloon must have
 attained the altitude of 36,000 or 37,000 feet. Again, a very delicate
 minimum thermometer read—12, and this would give a height of 37,000
 feet. Mr. Coxwell, on coming from the ring, noticed that the center
 of the aneroid barometer, its blue hand, and a rope attached to the
 car, were all in the same straight line, and this gave a reading of 7
 inches, and leads to the same result. Therefore these independent means
 all lead to about the same elevation, viz. fully SEVEN MILES.
“In this ascent six pigeons were taken up. One was thrown out at the
 height of three miles, when it extended its wings and dropped as a
 piece of paper; a second, at four and five miles, and it fell downward
 as a stone. A fourth was thrown out at four miles on descending. It
 flew in a circle, and shortly alighted on the top of the balloon. The
 two remaining pigeons were brought down to the ground. One was found to
 be dead, and the other, a ‘carrier,’ was still living, but would not
 leave the hand when I attempted to throw it off, till after a quarter
 of an hour it began to peck a piece of ribbon which encircled its neck,
 and was then jerked off the finger, and flew70 with some vigor toward
 Wolverhampton. One of the pigeons returned to Wolverhampton on Sunday
 the 7th, and it is the only one that has been heard of.”
This was the loftiest ascent ever made up to that time; and thus
 Glaisher, or rather Coxwell, who was in the ring above him, could be
 called the “highest man” of the first century of aëronautics. Their
 greatest elevation, however, is now generally estimated at much less
 than seven miles, and probably below six miles, due allowance being
 made for inaccuracies of estimate made by Mr. Glaisher. His results,
 nevertheless, were considered valuable, revealing as they did, that the
 balloon may be used safely up to the neighborhood of five miles; that
 the temperature of the atmosphere does not, as previously supposed,
 decline one degree for each 300 feet of ascent, but often declines
 more rapidly, and sometimes even increases with the elevation for
 considerable stretches; that the moisture percentage is extremely
 slight at an altitude beyond five miles; that at all elevations
 attainable by man the dry- and wet-bulb thermometers can be used
 effectively, etc.
A still loftier ascent was made by Professor Berson of Germany,
 aided by the respiration of oxygen. On July 31, 1901, accompanied by
 Dr. Süring, he ascended from Berlin in the balloon Preussen to an
 elevation of 10,800 meters, which at present constitutes the world’s
 record for altitude. The balloon had a capacity of 300,000 cubic feet,
 and left the ground two thirds filled with hydrogen, and carrying 8,000
 pounds of ballast in the form of sand bags attached to the sides of the
 basket, so that they could be cut loose with the slightest physical
 effort.
The Preussen was one of the largest passive balloons ever
 constructed. In cubic capacity it was comparable with the colossal
 Montgolfière, La Flesselle, already described, and the huge free
 balloon71 Le Geant, constructed by Nadar in 1863. But all were
 eclipsed by the great balloon of Henri Giffard. This latter measured
 450,000 cubic feet, and even to-day ranks as the largest captive
 balloon ever constructed. It was a familiar object at the Paris
 Exposition of 1878, where it was installed by the famous inventor
 Henri Giffard, to give sightseers a bird’s-eye view of Paris. It could
 take up forty persons at one time, or eight more than once ascended in
 Nadar’s Geant.
No serious attempt has been made to surpass the altitude flight of
 Professor Berson and Dr. Süring; for though it is easily possible to
 carry human beings to a greater height than seven miles, the results
 seem hardly to justify the cost. To ascend very much higher would
 require an enormous and costly balloon, and to ensure the comfort
 of the passenger might require an air-tight car, or armor supplied
 continuously with fresh air, or oxygen. Such a suit, or car, however,
 can be made very light, since its pressure must naturally be internal;
 and it would admit of an extremely rapid change of elevation without
 discomfort to the passenger. A steel bottle weighing fifty pounds,
 and filled with compressed air, or oxygen, would supply a passenger
 several hours, and allow him to breathe under normal pressure. The
 total weight of a bottle and air-tight car, or suit, need not exceed
 the weight of a man. Moreover, the ballast could be largely dispensed
 with, thus admitting of a very rapid ascent from the earth. A celluloid
 car would have the advantage of transparency, though it might become
 too brittle at very low temperatures. A suit, or car, with glass
 portholes would serve in lieu of a celluloid car for transparency. The
 usual balloon and basket, carrying a steel bottle, furnishing air at
 normal pressure to a man in a rubberized silk suit is a sufficiently
 simple and72 practicable device; the air entering the suit near his
 mouth and leaving below through a check valve regulated to maintain the
 desired internal pressure. An air-tight silk fabric capable of enduring
 safely a tensile stress of 150 pounds per running inch would answer the
 purposes. But at present there seems to be no incentive to attempt a
 balloon trip exceeding the heights already attained, unless it be that
 of notoriety or sentiment.
The French meteorologists have devised a much simpler and cheaper
 method of exploring the upper atmosphere, by use of small balloons
 carrying recording instruments. An ordinary silk or gold-beater
 skin balloon, partly inflated, ascends to a great height with the
 instruments, drifts away losing gas, and on landing is found by some
 one who returns it according to written directions accompanying the
 craft. Another method, introduced by Professor Assman, is to employ
 closed rubber balloons which at great altitudes burst by the expansion
 of the hydrogen within them, and allow the instruments to descend
 in parachutes softly to the ground. Instrument-carrying balloons of
 the above type are called “sounding balloons,” or balloons sondes,
 whereas if they carry no instruments, but merely show the course of the
 wind, they may be called “pilot balloons.” Such sounding balloons have
 been used to explore the temperature of the atmosphere to an altitude
 of 18 miles.
In the preceding pages some extended balloon voyages have been
 described. These were considered very long in their day, but in recent
 years have been surpassed frequently, first by the professional
 aëronauts, then by the amateurs and members of various aëronautic
 clubs practicing aërostation as a sport, and stimulated by attractive
 prizes. But the man who achieved the longest balloon flight73 during the
 first century of the art, seems to have been Mr. John Wise, America’s
 foremost pioneer balloonist.
Mr. Wise was a rare composite of showman, scientist, sport and
 dare-devil, who during the four decades succeeding his first ascension
 at Philadelphia in 1835, made no fewer than 440 voyages. At first the
 aërial art captivated him by the beauty and sublimity of the natural
 panoramas witnessed from on high; then he amused himself by dropping
 things from the basket and hearing them whistle through space; and
 finally he coquetted with the balloon itself, in various ways to
 observe the result. On one occasion the neck was choked and the
 valve could not be operated, so that when the hydrogen expanded with
 increasing altitude, it overstretched the cover and started a rent in
 the side of the bag. The balloon descended rapidly, but landed without
 injurious shock.
The audacious aëronaut then decided to make an ascension and
 deliberately burst the balloon, by confining the gas in it and throwing
 out ballast. But first he tried the experiment on a dog, taking him up
 4,000 feet, dropping him in a small collapsed balloon and watching him
 settle slowly to earth. Then rising to an altitude of 13,000 feet he
 stood debating whether to follow the example of the dog. The balloon
 quickly ended the question by exploding at the top. The hydrogen rushed
 out with a tempestuous sound, and the great vessel sank swiftly with a
 moaning noise of the wind in her rigging. In a few seconds the bag was
 empty and collapsed on the top of the net thus forming an effective
 parachute. After an exciting fall of more than two miles, Mr. Wise
 landed on a farm, with a lively thump, which overturned the basket, and
 threw him sprawling on the ground. It was fine sport; he decided at
 once74 to advertise a repetition of it, and thus was led by degrees to
 the invention of the ripping panel.[7]
Mr. Wise firmly believed that a steady wind from west to east prevails
 at a height of two miles. He wished to use this for long voyages, and
 even contemplated crossing the Atlantic; for he trusted his varnish to
 hold hydrogen a fortnight if need be. Accordingly in 1873 the New York
 Daily Graphic paid the cost of a balloon to carry him and two others
 on that hazardous voyage. The bag had a capacity of 400,000 cubic feet,
 but was too frail in construction to receive Mr. Wise’s approval, and
 actually burst during inflation when slightly more than three fourths
 full. Fortunately, perhaps, for Mr. Wise, he never had an opportunity
 to attempt the trans-Atlantic voyage; but on one occasion he enjoyed a
 memorable cruise in the great west wind which so took his fancy. Rising
 from St. Louis on June 23, 1859, he sailed northeastwardly for twenty
 hours, and landed at Henderson, N. Y., having traversed a distance of
 809 miles, measured directly. But in attempting another long voyage
 with two companions, in September, 1879, he passed over Lake Michigan,
 where all were drowned.
In recent years Mr. Wise’s long voyage has been exceeded several
 times. In 1897 M. Godard sailed from Leipsic to Wilna, a distance of
 1,032 miles in 24½ hours; but this was not an official flight nor in a
 direct course as the crow flies. In October, 1900, M. Balsan voyaged
 from Vincennes, France, to Rodom, Russia, a distance of 843 miles in
 27 hours and 25 minutes, and De la Vaulx starting from the same point
 landed at Korosticheff, Russia, having traversed 1,193 miles in 35¾
 hours. This latter is the 75longest balloon flight thus far recorded. A
 close second to this record was made by A. R. Hawley in his spherical
 balloon America, aided by Augustus Post, in the Gordon Bennett
 International Balloon Race of 1910. Sailing from St. Louis, October
 17th, they drifted 1,172.9 miles from their starting point, and landed
 in a great forest at Peribonka River, North Lake Chilogoma, Canada,
 where they were lost for several days.
Quite as eventful was the ocean voyage of Walter76 Wellman, who left
 Atlantic City October 15, 1910, for Europe in a motor balloon with a
 drag rope, or equilibrator, voyaged with favorable wind to a point
 140 miles northeast of Nantucket Island, then was driven by adverse
 wind toward Bermuda, and finally rescued by a passing steamer, after
 69 hours in the air and a journey of about one thousand miles. A full
 account of this strange voyage is given in the New York Times of
 October 19, 1910, and in the Scientific American of subsequent date.
The recent advances in aërostation, though not radically changing the
 balloon itself, contribute much to its usefulness and convenience.
 Improvements have occurred in the means of inflation and deflation,
 in devices for making topographical and meteorological observations,
 as also for transmitting and receiving signals. Hydrogen shipped in
 steel tubes is now available for easy and rapid inflation, the process
 of obtaining it on a large scale making it practically as cheap as
 illuminating gas. The ripping panel, invented in 1844 by America’s
 foremost pioneer aëronaut, John Wise, is a simple and an excellent
 practical device. This is a long patch running longitudinally above the
 equator[8] of the balloon, feebly sewed to the envelope, and having a
 cord, called the “ripping cord,” extending down to the car along the
 outside or inside of the bag, so that the pilot on coming to earth
 can let out the gas quickly by tearing a rent in the balloon, thus
 flattening it promptly on the earth’s surface, so as to avoid dragging
 and bumping if any wind prevails. During an ascension the rise or fall
 of the vessel may be instantly noted on the dial of the statoscope,
 the temperature, pressure and moisture of the atmosphere may be read
 on recording instruments, messages may be sent by tele77graph and
 telephone either by wire or through space, and sky or landscape may
 be photographed if there be sufficient light. The bag itself has been
 improved by making it of special fabrics formed of several layers of
 silk, or cotton, with thin layers of rubber vulcanized between them
 to render the cloth impermeable, also the bag, when not designed to
 cleave the wind, is usually given a spherical form which is the figure
 of greatest volume for a given surface, the figure originally used by
 the inventor of the gas balloon; but when designed to be tethered in
 a wind, it is given a longish shape and a tail so that it may ride
 the wind like a kite. This type of balloon, though first proposed by
 Douglass Archibald about 1845, was first made a practical invention by
 Captain von Sigsfeld and Major von Parseval. In a certain sense it is a
 tethered motor-balloon, just as a kite is a tethered aëroplane.
Directly after the first launching of human passengers in a crude
 aërostat, numerous schemes for controlling the course of a balloon were
 evolved. Apparently mere flotation afforded less contentment to the
 early pioneer aëronauts than to the free balloonists of the present
 hour. Many were eager to apply propelling mechanism to their gas bags,
 expecting thus to achieve practical locomotion through the air, even a
 generation before the advent of practical steam navigation. Magnificent
 dreams they had, indeed, but none the less futile. Few suspected the
 enormous power required to propel swift balloons of the very best shape
 and size; still fewer realized the impossibility of driving spherical
 bags at a practicable velocity.
On the other hand, it must be said, to the credit of that era of
 investigators, that certain noted scientists, after computing the power
 required to drive a balloon at high speed, promptly recognized the
 inadequacy to that task, of any motors then available. In conjunction
 with favorable aërial currents something might be effected; that they
 fully grasped; for they knew that the wind frequently has different
 directions at different levels. They believed, therefore, that by
 causing the craft to rise or fall to a suitable stratum, by use of
 various then known devices, it could be made to travel in any direction
 at the will of the pilot. Likewise79 they deemed that the rise and fall
 of a balloon, due to change of buoyancy, could be used to propel it, if
 sails attached to the vessel were set obliquely to the motion, so as to
 receive fair pressure; or if the balloon were made flat, or longish, so
 as to glide horizontally, like a kite or parachute.
Several devices for changing the altitude of the balloon were proposed
 or tried. If the vessel were a Montgolfière, the mere increase or
 lessening of the fire would promptly cause it to rise or fall. If a gas
 bag were employed it could be sent up or down by casting out ballast
 or opening the valve; or again, as proposed by Pilâtre de Roziere, by
 having a Montgolfière underneath the gas balloon, and lifting or
 depressing the whole by altering the intensity of the flame. Finally,
 an air balloon within a gas balloon was proposed by the Roberts, and a
 gas balloon within an air balloon was proposed by General Meusnier, in
 either of which combinations, a change of level could be effected by
 pumping air into, or letting it escape from, the air bag. All of these
 devices can be effected and practically operated by a competent balloon
 maker and pilot; and yet they have not enabled man to realize his dream
 of navigating the air in all directions without motive power.
The first attempts at balloon propulsion could not be seriously
 regarded by trained engineers, even at the inception of aëronautics;
 but still, as infantile steps in the new art, they may deserve passing
 notice.
Blanchard, on March 2, 1784, made the first real effort to steer a
 balloon, using for that purpose a spherical gas bag and car provided
 with aërial oars and a rudder. As he was about to ascend, however,
 from the Champs de Mars, a young officer with drawn sword persisted in
 accompanying the pilot, thus compelling Blanchard to leave his wings
 on earth to allow sufficient buoyancy for himself and his obtrusive
 guest. His first trial was, therefore, frustrated; but subsequent ones
 made with that inadequate contrivance also proved futile under the best
 circumstances; for the scheme was evidently puerile, though tried by
 various grown-up men besides M. Blanchard.
81A no less simple and quaint device for propulsion was that of the
 two physicists, the Abbé Miolan and Janinet. The balloon was a
 Montgolfière with a large hole in one side, through which the hot air
 was to escape with such strong reaction as to drive the bag forward, on
 the principle of a lawn sprinkler, or of Newton’s reaction wagon. The
 projectors failed, however, to make an ascent, and the crowd becoming
 furious destroyed the balloon.
A more reasonable plan for practical navigation was devised and tried
 by the Robert brothers. A melon-shaped balloon, fifty-two feet long by
 thirty-two feet in diameter, was made of silk and inflated with pure
 hydrogen. Beneath was suspended a longish car of light wood covered
 with sky-blue silk. This elegant ship was to be rowed through heaven by
 means of six silken oars actuated by sturdy sailors. A silken rudder
 should guide her at pleasure when the winds were asleep, or softly
 playing in the placid sky. She was a fairy bark, indeed, a soaring
 castle lovely to behold.
After a preliminary trial, accompanied by their patron, the Duke de
 Chartres, they were ready for a substantial journey. On September 19,
 1784, the vessel was inflated and taken to the Garden of the Tuileries,
 in front of the palace, where its cords were held by Marshall Richelieu
 and three other noblemen. At eleven forty-five the two Roberts and
 their brother-in-law arose and drifted beyond the82 horizon on a seven
 hours’ cruise. Before coming to earth, they plied the oars vigorously,
 and described a curve of one kilometer radius, thus deviating 22° from
 the feeble wind then prevailing. In a lighter wind they could deviate
 still more. They considered, therefore, that the experiment was a
 complete success. They had constructed the first elongated balloon,
 and had “solved the problem of aërial navigation.” In very happy mood,
 therefore, they landed at dusk among the delighted inhabitants of
 Artois, where they were graciously met and hospitably entertained by
 the Prince de Ghistelles-Richbourg.
83The Robert brothers were the first to employ in practice an air bag
 inside a gas bag. This was held within the balloon by ropes and
 connected with the outer atmosphere by a tube, the idea being to
 regulate the internal pressure of the balloon by introducing air into,
 or withdrawing it from, the smaller bag. But during an ascension with
 their patron, the Duke de Chartres, they entered a violent eddy which
 tore away the oars and rudder, at the same time agitating the balloon
 so violently that the internal air bag broke its sustaining cords and
 fell upon the bottom of the gas bag, thus throttling the connection
 with the external atmosphere. The vessel rose swiftly and the gas
 expanded dangerously near to the bursting pressure. At a height of
 16,000 feet the Duke de Chartres, perceiving the imminent danger of
 an explosion of the envelope, drew his sword and cut a rent ten feet
 long in its lower part. A part of the gas immediately rushed forth,
 and the balloon sank rapidly, but after the discharge of the ballast,
 landed safely without further mishap. The Duke acted wisely enough,
 but he was afterwards ridiculed for his apparent lack of courage. If
 he had possessed more bravery and less caution he might have allowed
 the balloon to burst and descend as a parachute, thus anticipating the
 spectacular performance of John Wise, in 1838.
Simultaneously other inventors were evolving designs of no less
 importance in the ultimate perfection 84of the dirigible. In a letter
 written to Benjamin Franklin on May 24, 1784, Francis Hopkinson of
 Philadelphia proposed to build a balloon of spindle shape and to drive
 it by means of a wheel-like propeller at the stern, consisting of vanes
 set at an angle to the line of progression, like the common smokejack.
 This proposed craft, the harbinger of the modern screw-driven motor
 balloon, far antedated the screw-driven boat and the submarine torpedo
 which it most resembles.[9]
While Blanchard and other aëronauts were paddling their globose bags
 in search of favorable winds, vainly hoping thereby to direct their
 course in the air, General Meusnier of the French army, and member of
 the Academy of Sciences, made a systematic study of the requirements
 for practical air navigation. After some research on forms suitable
 for aëronautic hulls, he designed a power balloon having a pointed
 car suspended from a bag of goose-egg form, this latter embodying his
 idea of the best shape for a balloon that must cleave the air swiftly
 and resist deformation. The propulsion was to be effected by means of
 three coaxial screw propellers, supported on the rigging between car
 and bag, and actuated by eighty men, for lack of a 85light artificial
 motor. He thus hoped to obtain a moderate velocity which, combined with
 skillfully selected air currents, would enable the ship to reach her
 destination in ordinary weather.
General Meusnier introduced important special features in the design of
 dirigibles for preserving their form and poise. He insisted that the
 bag and boat should be so rigidly connected that one could not swerve
 from alignment and relative position with the other. He also emphasized
 the necessity of preserving the vessel from deformation during flight,
 in order to diminish its resistance. To that end he proposed to provide
 the hull with a double86 envelope, the inner one thin and light but
 impermeable to hydrogen; the outer one strong and air-tight; the space
 between the two envelopes to be pumped full of air under pressure
 sufficient to preserve the form of the bag when beating its way swiftly
 against a buffeting wind. This was an important invention which in
 later years was adopted in many of the most powerful motor balloons—for
 all, indeed, except those of the rigid type. He also proposed the
 use of stabilizing planes to control the poise of the vessel, thus
 anticipating the Lebaudy brothers by more than a century. Like the
 Robert brothers he proposed to raise or lower the vessel in search of
 suitable currents, by altering the quantity of air in the space between
 the inner and outer envelope, by use of hand bellows.
Apparently General Meusnier and his colleagues were endowed with
 constructive genius sufficient to have developed a practical motor
 balloon, had they been able to secure a light engine. Lacking this the
 early aëronauts could do little more than describe their projects, and
 await the growth of the collateral arts and sciences. Accordingly no
 substantial advance in motor balloons beyond Meusnier’s designs was
 effected till after the middle of the nineteenth century; and until
 then the art of aëronautics remained in the hands of showmen. Hundreds
 of projects, indeed, were advanced, some exciting considerable interest
 and expectation, but nevertheless of such paltry value as hardly to
 deserve comment. One notable exception to these was the invention of
 Porter in America.
In 1820 Rufus Porter, a Yankee inventor, and later the original
 founder of the Scientific American, patented an air ship of very
 promising appearance for that early day. Its hull was a long, finely
 tapering symmetrical spindle, suspending a car of87 similar shape by
 means of cords, which were vertical at its middle but more and more
 slanting toward its ends. Midway between the hull and car was a large
 screw propeller actuated by a steam engine in the car. A model of
 this dirigible exhibited in Boston and New York, some years later, is
 reported to have carried its own power, at fair speed, and to have
 obeyed its helm satisfactorily.
The inventor, being too poor to develop his air ship alone, did
 little with the patent during its life; but in 1850 he organized
 a stock company to realize the needed funds. From the sale of 300
 five-dollar shares he expected to raise $1,500, and with this sum
 build an “aëroport,” 150 feet long, capable of carrying five persons
 sixty miles an hour, the whole to be completed in six weeks. Once
 this was in operation he would easily command funds sufficient to
 build a full-sized vessel adapted to regular passenger service. For,
 after careful calculation, he reported that: “It appears certain that
 a safe and durable aërial ship (or aëroport) capable of carrying 150
 passengers at a speed of ninety miles an hour, with more perfect safety
 than either steamboat or railroad cars, may be constructed for $15,000,
 and that the expense of running it would not exceed $25 per day.”
The language and project seem very modern, even at the present
 time, and might well be copied now by a promoter of that identical
 project. But88 it must be observed that the most successful European
 experimenters, after spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on giant
 air ships, have not yet attained one half the speed contemplated by
 that ambitious and chimerical Yankee. The picture was handsome and
 alluring, none the less. It may even be said to excel in outward design
 any of the air-ship plans produced in either hemisphere before the
 middle of the nineteenth century.
In 1850 a clockmaker and skillful workman, Jullien by name, exhibited
 in the Hippodrome, at Paris, a torpedo-shaped model balloon of
 gold-beater’s skin, provided with a screw propeller at either side
 of its bow, and a double rudder at its stern. It measured 23 feet in
 length and weighed 1,100 grammes complete. The propellers were actuated
 by spring power, and proved able to drive the tiny vessel against a
 moderate wind. The most suitable form for the bag was determined by
 towing models through water.
Aërodynamically considered, this tiny motor balloon was by far the best
 in design of any that appeared during the first century of aëronautics.
 It may be regarded as the harbinger of the swiftest modern French
 balloons. It was also an inspiration to Henri Giffard who assisted
 Jullien in constructing his clever model, and shortly afterwards built
 the first dirigible ever driven by a heat engine.
The illustrious Henri Giffard was perhaps the first aëronautical
 engineer adequately endowed and89 circumstanced to realize, on a
 practical scale, General Meusnier’s well pondered and truly scientific
 plans for a motor balloon. He had studied in the college of Bourbon,
 and had worked in the railroad shops of the Paris and St. Germain
 railway. He had further equipped himself by making free balloon
 ascensions, under the auspices of Eugene Godard, for the purpose of
 studying the atmosphere; and by building light engines, one of which
 weighed 100 pounds, and developed three horse power. Finally in 1851 he
 patented an air ship, consisting of an elongated bag and car, propelled
 by a screw driven by a steam engine. He had not the means to build such
 a vessel, but he had the genius and training necessary to construct it,
 and at the same time enough enthusiasm and persuasive power to induce
 his friends, David and Sciama, to loan him the requisite funds.
Giffard’s first dirigible was successful in both design and operation.
 It consisted of a spindle-shaped 90bag covered with a net whose cords
 were drawn down and attached to a horizontal pole, from which the car
 and motor were suspended, and at the end of which was a triangular
 sail serving as a rudder. To guard against fire, the furnace of the
 vertical coke-burning boiler was shielded by wire gauze, like a miner’s
 lamp, and the draft, taken from its top through a downward pointing
 smoke pipe, was ejected below the car by force of exhaust steam, from
 the engine, thus obviating, as Giffard asserted, all danger from the
 use of fire near an inflammable gas. The car hung twenty feet below
 the suspension pole, and carried a three horse-power engine driving a
 three-blade propeller 11 feet in diameter, making 110 turns a minute.
 The motor complete, including the engine and boiler without supplies,
 weighed 110 pounds per horse power. The bag measured 143 feet long, 39
 feet in diameter, and 75,000 cubic feet in volume. Giffard reports of
 his first voyage, made from the Hippodrome in Paris at five fifteen
 o’clock, September 23, 1852, that although he could not sail directly
 against the strong wind then blowing, he could attain a speed of six
 to ten feet per second relatively to the air, and he could easily
 guide the vessel by turning her rudder. He continued his journey till
 nightfall, then made a good landing, near Trappes, and by ten o’clock
 was back in Paris.
This vessel was but a prelude to mightier projects. After some further
 experience with dirigibles of moderate size, Giffard designed a
 colossal air ship calculated for a speed of forty-four miles an hour.
 Its hull was to be of torpedo shape, measuring 2,000 feet in length,
 100 feet in diameter, and 7,000,000 cubic feet in volume. It was a
 most audacious project, one worthy of the genius and energy of that
 illustrious engineer, the most original and91 daring inventor known in
 the aëronautical world during the nineteenth century.
Stimulated by this huge enterprise, Giffard’s first step was to pay his
 debts and make a fortune. He soon acquired a hundred thousand francs
 from the sale of small high-speed engines of his own construction, and
 with this, settled his account with David and Sciama. Next he realized
 several million francs from his world-famous injector, a device by
 which steam flowing from a boiler is made to drive in feed-water
 against the same pressure.
He now made definite plans to build a motor balloon of one and a half
 million cubic feet capacity, driven by a condensing engine drawing
 steam from two boilers, one fired with oil, the other with gas from
 the balloon, so as to keep the vessel from rising with loss of weight.
 His designs were complete, and everything was provided for. He had
 deposited a million francs in the Bank of Paris to defray the estimated
 cost. But, in the words of Tissandier,[10] “above the human will and
 foresight are the fatal laws of destiny to which the strongest must
 submit.” The great inventor was visited with a painful affliction
 of the eyes; his sight waned, unfitting him for work; he became
 disconsolate, pined away with pain and grief, and in 1882 ended his
 life by taking chloroform.
Giffard was succeeded in France, first by Dupuy de Lome; then by
 Gaston Tissandier, well-meaning projectors of steerable balloons, but
 too cautious to effect an important advance in the art. The first of
 these gentlemen, an eminent marine engineer, in 1872, completed a gas
 balloon for the French government, resembling the one designed by
 General Meusnier in 1784, and like that also driven by mus92cular power
 actuating a screw, and kept rigidly inflated by use of an internal
 balloon, or ballonet. The car was suspended from the bag by a close
 fitting cover instead of a net, in order to lessen the resistance, and
 it was kept in alignment by use of crossed suspension cords. A speed
 of but six miles an hour was attained by the industrious work of eight
 men operating an ample screw propeller. A decade later Tissandier, with
 a balloon of like design, but driven by the power of an electric motor
 and bichromate of potash battery, attained a speed of six to eight
 miles an hour.
The two vessels were safe but of no practical value, for lack of
 sufficient power to cope with the wind. Their motors were fundamentally
 unadapted to the purpose of swift propulsion, and incapable of
 development to very great lightness and strength. Furthermore, the
 vessels themselves were unsuitably designed for speed; their shape
 being one of too much resistance, and their dynamic balance93 being
 that of a pendulum, or clumsy parachute, rather than that of a vessel
 adapted to cleave the air with celerity, grace and steadiness. If there
 had been danger of fire from placing the motor and screw near the gas
 bag, that might justify or excuse the clumsiness of design in the craft
 of De Lome and of Gaston Tissandier; but, having perfectly safe motors,
 it is astonishing that they did not place the center of mass and the
 line of thrust more nearly in the line of resistance. This obvious
 requirement was duly recognized by several of their contemporaries,
 notably by Hänlein in Germany, and by Captain Renard of the French War
 Department, and had been observed by Jullien.
Captain Charles Renard proved to be a worthy inheritor of the dreams,
 experience and inventions of the first century of aëronautical
 votaries. He did not, indeed, have the picturesque madness displayed
 by some of his predecessors; he did not project schemes of marvelous
 originality or boldness; but he manifested uncommonly good judgment
 and excellent scientific method in combining the researches and
 contrivances of others with those of himself and his collaborator,
 Captain Krebs. As a consequence they produced the first man-carrying
 dirigible that ever returned against the wind to its starting point,
 and the first aërial vessel whose shape and dynamic adjustment even
 approximated the requirements of steady and swift navigation in a
 surrounding medium presenting various conditions of turbulence or calm.
 Captain Renard had been studying and designing dirigibles since 1878
 in coöperation with Captain La Haye and Colonel Laussedat, president
 of an aëronautic commission appointed by the Minister of War; and had
 endeavored to secure from the latter an appropriation sufficient to
 construct a dirigible; but his request94 was at first denied, owing
 to the waste of funds on similar projects in 1870. However, with the
 help of Gambetta, who promised a sum of $40,000, Renard was enabled to
 proceed. In the meantime he had been made director of the laboratory at
 Chalais Meudon, seconded by Captain Krebs.
These officers first worked out the separate elements in the design of
 their motor balloon before proceeding to build on a practical scale.
 They chose the torpedo form for their gas bag, thereby ensuring in
 the hull itself, projectile stability, and diminution of resistance.
 They placed the car near the envelope, thus minimizing the disturbing
 moment of the screw thrust, and the resistance of the suspension cords.
 They employed an extraordinarily powerful electric motor actuating a
 large screw so as to obtain a strong thrust with the least effort.
 In addition they adopted the best ideas of their predecessors in
 aëronautical design; the internal95 ballonet of Meusnier, and the
 close fitting cover of De Lome, with crossed suspension cords. But
 unfortunately they used an electric motor instead of some light engine.
 Finally, having carefully computed its requisite dimensions, they
 proceeded to construct the elegant air ship, La France, which was
 tested in 1884 and aroused anew the hope of ultimately conquering the
 air.
Further details of this successful ship are of interest. Its hull
 was 165 feet long, 27.5 feet in greatest diameter, at one fourth the
 distance from its front end, and cubed 66,000 feet, thus having a
 buoyancy of two long tons. It was kept rigid under varying conditions,
 by means of a ballonet filled with air driven in by a common fan blower
 coupled to the motor. Beneath the envelope, a long narrow rectangular
 car made of bamboo, covered with silk, was suspended from the cords
 of the balloon cover which embraced the hull throughout nearly its
 entire length. The car was 108 feet long and 6 to 7 feet across,
 carried at its forward end the propeller, at its rear a rectangular
 rudder, and between them the aëronauts and the batteries and electric
 motor. A sliding weight was used to alter the poise of the ship, and a
 guide-rope to soften its descent.
The electric motor and battery which furnished the propulsive power
 were designed expressly for such use, and were considered at the time
 to be remarkably light and effective. The motor, which was designed
 with the assistance of M. Gramme, weighed 220.5 pounds, and developed
 nine horse power. The battery, composed of chlorochromic cells, was the
 result of the researches of Renard himself. Having made a careful study
 of the best geometrical arrangement of the parts of the cell, Renard
 found that this battery would deliver to the shaft one horse power for
 each eighty-eight pounds96 of its weight. Thus the power plant rivaled
 in lightness the steam engine of Giffard, and at the same time was free
 from danger; but apparently it could not be much reduced in weight,
 whereas Giffard’s steam-power plant could be reduced tenfold, as shown
 by Renard’s contemporaries.
The trials of La France in 1884–85 were most successful and
 encouraging; not that they represented or pointed to the complete
 mastery of aërial navigation, but because they so far surpassed all
 previous achievements. The vessel moved through the air as steadily as
 a boat on the water, and obeyed her rudder perfectly, heading against
 the wind, or at any angle to it, or turning entirely about, at the will
 of the aëronauts. On her first voyage from Chalais, August 9, 1884, she
 traversed a distance of four and one half miles in twenty minutes, made
 various evolutions in the air with the greatest ease, and returned to
 her point of departure. The following account of this voyage is given
 by Renard:
“As soon as we had reached the top of the wooded plateaus which
 surround the valley of Chalais, we started the screw, and had the
 satisfaction of seeing the balloon immediately obey it and readily
 follow every turn of the rudder. We felt that we were absolutely
 masters of our own movements, and that we could traverse the atmosphere
 in any direction as easily as a steam launch could make its evolutions
 on a calm lake. After having accomplished our purpose, we turned our
 head toward the point of departure and we soon saw it approaching it.
 The walls of the park of Chalais were passed anew, and our landing
 appeared at our feet, about 1,000 feet below the car. The screw was
 then slowed down, and a pull at the safety-valve started the descent,
 during which, by means of the propeller and rudder, the balloon was
 maintained97 directly over the point where our assistants awaited us.
 Everything occurred according to our plan, and the car was soon resting
 quietly on the lawn.”
Six other similar voyages were made within the two years following,
 and we have as a result, that in five out of the seven trials, the
 balloon returned to its point of departure. Its failure to return in
 the other two trials was due, in the one case, to the breaking down of
 the motor; in the other, to the resistance of a strong wind which made
 it necessary to land at a distance from the starting point. The last of
 these remarkable voyages was performed in presence of the Minister of
 War, on September 23, 1885. The balloon started from Calais and sailed
 against the wind directly to Paris, passed over the fortifications,
 described a graceful curve and returned to its place of departure,
 recording an average speed of 14.5 miles an hour.
The torpedo form of hull, chosen by Renard and Krebs, has two important
 advantages; one is projectile stability, the other is economy of
 propulsive power. Owing to the blunt bow and long tapering stern, the
 center of mass is well forward, while the center of side wind pressure
 is more to the rear. As a consequence, if the vessel should encounter a
 quartering wind-gust, or have her nose slightly turned from the course,
 she would promptly right herself like a dart or an arrow. If on the
 contrary, the hull were a symmetrical spindle, the vessel would move
 forward in unstable equilibrium, and, once slightly diverted from her
 course, would tend to deviate further, like an arrow with unloaded head.
The second advantage mentioned is also worth attention, viz.: that at
 ordinary transportation speeds a longish spindle has less resistance
 with a blunt bow than with a very sharp one. Renard and Krebs did
 not account for this fact; but the present writer,98 by determining
 separately the skin friction and the impactual resistance of the air,
 proved that in sharpening the bow beyond a certain best form, its
 friction increases faster than its head resistance diminishes, the
 most suitable shape being that of a torpedo whose nose has a radius
 of curvature of about two diameters, and its stern a radius of about
 twelve diameters.
While the successors of Giffard in France were thus engaged in
 developing dirigibles driven by muscular or electric power, a few
 German experimenters were applying gas and benzine engines to such
 vessels, with better promise of ultimate practical success and
 usefulness. The first of these was Hänlein, who in 1872 advanced the
 meritorious project of driving a well shaped balloon by means of a gas
 engine taking its fuel from inside the balloon, and making good the
 loss by pumping air into the ballonet. This balloon was of far better
 design for swiftness and kinetic stability than the contemporary one of
 Dupuy de Lome. Its hull was a well pointed cylinder 164 feet long, 30
 feet in diameter and of 85,000 cubic feet capacity, made air-tight by
 a thick coating of rubber inside, and a thin one outside. The car was
 rigidly suspended near the envelope and carried a 6 horse-power Lenoir
 gas engine actuating a large screw. Notwithstanding that the buoyancy
 was small, owing to the use of coal gas, this air ship attained a speed
 of 15 feet per second. By employing hydrogen, a much larger engine
 could have been carried, entailing a much swifter speed. During its
 trial the balloon was kept near the earth’s surface, held loosely by
 ropes in the hands of soldiers. The air ship was remarkably successful
 for that early date, and had the potency of greater achievement
 than its contemporaries in France; but owing to lack of funds its
 capabilities were not fully 99developed. If it had been inflated with
 hydrogen, and propelled by use of gas and petrol, so that the loss
 of weight would compensate for the loss of buoyancy, it might have
 anticipated the speed and endurance of the best air ships built toward
 the close of the nineteenth century, or later.
In 1879, Baumgarten and Wölfert in Germany built a dirigible equipped
 with a Daimler benzine motor, but otherwise not possessing any special
 merit. An ascension was made at Leipsic in 1880, but owing to improper
 load distribution the vessel reared on end and crashed to earth. After
 further experiments, an ascension was made on the Templehofer field,
 near Berlin, in 1897, but this ended disastrously; for the benzine
 vapor ignited; the fire spread to the balloon, and the vessel fell
 flaming to the earth, killing Wölfert and his assistant. Baumgarten had
 died some years before.
In 1897, an aluminum air ship invented by an Austrian engineer, named
 Schwartz, was launched on the Templehofer field. Its hull was of
 cylindrical form with conical ends, made of sheets 0.008 thick, and
 stiffened with an internal frame of aluminum tubes. Being leaky and
 inadequately driven, it voyaged but four miles, drifting with the wind,
 then fell to earth with considerable shock. The pilot, a soldier of the
 Balloon Corps, escaped by jumping, before the vessel struck ground, but
 the frail unbending hull was soon demolished by the buffeting of the
 winds as it lay stranded on the unyielding earth. This was the second
 air ship built after the plans of poor Schwartz, the first having
 collapsed on inflation. He had, however, the credit of being the first
 to drive a rigid air ship with a petrol motor, and thus to inaugurate
 a system of aërial navigation capable of immense development, in
 the hands of sufficient capital and constructive skill. Thus the
 rigid type,100 conceived and crudely tried by Marey Monge and Dupuis
 Delcourt in the early part of the century, began to approach practical
 realization toward the end of the century.
The process of inflating with hydrogen such a rigid hull is
 interesting. Schwartz’s plan, carried out by Captain Von Sigsfeld,
 was to place the hydrogen in one or more sacs inside the hull, thus
 expelling the air and filling the space, then withdrawing the sacs and
 leaving the hydrogen within. A better plan is to have a single sac
 inflated with air just filling the hull like the lining of an egg, then
 to force the gas between the lining and metal wall of the hull, thus
 expelling the air from the sac, which when completely collapsed can be
 removed. Practically the same result can be obtained by use of a thin
 fabric covering one half the inner wall, like the lining of an egg.
 Further provision can easily be made for manipulating the ballonet in
 such a case.
We have now traced the art of balloon guidance and propulsion from its
 earliest inception to the close of the nineteenth century. It was a
 period of extravagant hope and chimerical scheming, but withal a period
 fruitful in devices of fundamental value. The best experiments paid no
 dividends, but they prepared the way for really useful vessels. The
 methods of manipulation and control had been sufficiently developed
 to answer immediate needs. The air ship was at least dirigible, if
 not practical. It kept its shape, obeyed its rudder, rose and fell
 according to the operator’s will. It was, however, a fair-weather
 machine, beautiful in appearance, but helpless in any considerable
 wind. Speed was now the desideratum, and the attainment of this
 involved new difficulties. The storm-proof balloon was still a dream.
Naturally one inquires what velocity makes a dirigible air ship really
 practical, assuming all other requirements satisfied. The minimum
 allowable speed depends largely upon the locality and season. On Long
 Island an assured velocity of forty to fifty miles an hour would
 seem desirable; for there the winds are swift and the water near. In
 Washington, or Berlin, thirty miles an hour is enough, though each
 additional mile per hour must be regarded as a considerable gain on
 a small margin of progress in facing a stiff breeze. Colonel Renard
 has estimated, 102from a study of the wind records near Paris, that a
 dirigible is practically useful in that locality if it can maintain a
 speed of twenty-eight miles an hour for ten or twelve hours; since in
 that case it can maneuver 81 days in 100.
Renard’s own graceful ship attained a speed of but half that much. In
 order, therefore, to give his vessel the desired usefulness its speed
 must be doubled. This would require an eightfold[11] increase of motive
 power without increase of weight. Evidently then the cardinal requisite
 was a light durable motor of extraordinary output. Such motors
 fortunately were now coming into the market, owing to the development
 of gasoline engines for automobile racing.
The year 1898 witnessed the commencement of two famous systems of
 navigation by the lighter than air, one in France, the other in
 Germany, destined quickly to revolutionize the art, and to establish
 it on a practical basis. The leading exponents of these two systems
 were Señor Don Alberto Santos-Dumont, a rich young Brazilian living in
 Paris, and Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin, Germany’s stanch old admiral
 of the air. Both achieved success by applying the gasoline engine to
 the propulsion of elongated balloons, but by very different methods.
 Santos-Dumont, apparently ignoring, or fearing to adopt, the excellent
 hull and car designed and used by Renard, began where Tissandier left
 off, with a symmetrical hull and low-hung car, thus producing a safe
 aërial pendulum, if not a racing machine; then by degrees he gradually
 felt his way to something more efficient. Zeppelin began with a long
 cylindrical hull pointed at the ends, rigidly framed 103like that of
 Schwartz, and supporting its car and propellers well aloft near the
 line of resistance. His was a bold and effective design but difficult
 to execute. Santos-Dumont scored the first success, and startled the
 world by his spectacular flights; but ere long he was surpassed by
 other builders of non-rigid balloons. Zeppelin won his success slowly
 and by heroic perseverance in the face of enormous obstacles, finally
 emerging as the most successful and illustrious figure in the history
 of aëronautics. The achievements of these two pioneers and colleagues
 make the first decade of the twentieth century memorable in the annals
 of aërial navigation.
Santos-Dumont, who spent his early years on his father’s large coffee
 plantation in Brazil, had, during boyhood, dreamed of navigating the
 air, and in 1897, at the age of twenty-four, made in France his first
 ascension in a spherical balloon. While living at Paris during that
 year he gave much time to motorcycling, automobiling and operating
 spherical balloons, of which he possessed two constructed after his own
 ideas; one, the smallest in the world, designed for solitary voyages,
 the other large enough for more than one person, intended for social
 excursions. Thus by way of amusement, and probably by impulse rather
 than deliberate purpose, he was equipping himself to become both the
 designer and the pilot of his future dirigibles.
Having acquired experience and skill in operating both balloons and
 engines, the young enthusiast set about realizing his boyhood dream
 of navigating the air independently of the course of the wind. His
 first dirigible was designed to carry his weight of 110 pounds and a
 3½ horse-power petroleum engine taken from his tricycle, and reduced
 in weight to 66 pounds. The hull was a cylinder of varnished Japanese
 silk, 82½ feet long including its pointed ends,104 11½ feet in diameter
 and 6,354 cubic feet in gas capacity. A ballonet, or air pocket,
 occupied the lower middle of the envelope. The basket for the little
 pilot, engine, and two-blade propeller was suspended far below the
 hull, to which its cords were attached by means of small wooden rods
 inserted into hems along each side of the envelope, for a great part of
 its length. The poise of the vessel was controlled by shifting weights
 fore and aft, while the turning right and left was effected by means
 of a silk rudder stretched over a steel frame. On the whole it was a
 crude and primitive affair, but of considerable interest as the first
 dirigible of a young man destined to give a strong impulse to the
 development of motor balloons of the non-rigid type.
After some preliminary tests, the little air ship and pilot soared away
 from the Zoölogical Garden in Paris, on September 20, 1898, rising in
 the face of a gentle wind, to the wonder and delight of a large crowd
 of witnesses, some of them professional aëronauts and very skeptical
 as to the outcome of this venturesome experiment. The ship maneuvered
 round and round overhead of the applauding throng, steering readily in
 all directions. Then the green navigator ascended a quarter of a mile
 and merrily continued his evolutions in the direction of the Longchamps
 race course. But when he wished to descend he observed the envelope
 contracting in volume, and was appalled to find that he could not
 pump air into the ballonet fast enough to keep the hull distended. It
 became swaybacked, and “all at once began to fold in the middle like a
 pocket-knife; the tension cords became unequal and the balloon envelope
 was on the point of being torn by them.” As he was falling swiftly
 toward the grassy turf at Bagatelle, he called to some boys who were
 flying kites, to grasp his guide-rope and run against the wind.105 They
 understood and ran so swiftly with the canted balloon that it played
 kite, and descended with a moderated fall, landing the frightened
 aëronaut safely on the turf.
Except for the doubling of his long balloon, Santos-Dumont’s first
 voyage was satisfactory, and he returned to Paris elated. He had found
 it easy to steer in all directions. He could change his level hundreds
 of feet without discharge of gas or ballast, by merely canting his
 balloon, and allowing it to run obliquely up or down grade. He had
 stemmed the wind and gone whither he pleased, at such speed as to make
 his clothes flutter. And best of all he had found no danger in using a
 gasoline motor near an inflammable gas bag. The mere buckling of the
 long bag was a trifle, to be remedied by using an air pump adequate to
 maintain the flabby thing well inflated. He felt, therefore, that he
 had the conquest of the air well in hand, and that he was drifting into
 air ship construction as a life work. Small wonder that he continued
 his conquests till he had built, in less than one decade, fourteen
 motor balloons.
Santos-Dumont No. 2 was closely patterned after its predecessor,
 but was a little larger and carried a rotary fan worked by the motor,
 to keep the balloon plump by filling the air pocket, or ballonet. On
 May 11, 1899, an ascension was made from the old starting place, but
 in rainy weather. As the vessel rose its hull contracted faster than
 air could be pumped into the ballonet, the long bag doubled worse than
 before, and dropped into the trees with its chagrined but fearless
 rider.
The No. 3, which followed, was a short, thick vessel, 66 feet long
 by 25 feet in diameter, having in outward appearance the features of
 Dupuy de Lome’s very stable and very slow dirigible. It was apparently
 a safety ship for a scared young man106 who had not yet learned fully to
 appreciate Renard’s elegant design. It served for a few pleasant trips,
 while the inventor was screwing up courage to build another cylindrical
 vessel, and gradually realizing the advantage of an elongated car such
 as Renard had employed in La France. Not only was the hull short
 and thick, but it was further secured from buckling by a horizontal
 stiffening pole placed between it and the basket, and from which the
 latter was hung. After some voyages in No. 3, which the captain found
 very tractable, and probably capable of fifteen miles per hour, he was
 ready to begin a new vessel.
The No. 4 was a compromise between the better features of No. 3
 and its predecessors. The elongated hull and ballonet were resumed,
 and the stiffening pole was elaborated into a longish car resembling
 Renard’s, but of triangular cross section. On this long trussed frame
 were placed the motor, propeller, rudder and the rider in his basket.
 A seven horse-power engine turning, at one hundred revolutions per
 minute, a screw propeller having two blades, each 13 feet across, gave
 a thrust of 66 pounds. Frequent trials of the ship during the summer
 of 1900, in presence of the Exposition crowds, brought the inventor
 into extraordinary prominence, and secured for him the “Encouragement
 Prize” of the Paris Aëro Club, consisting of the yearly interest on
 one hundred thousand francs, this being one of M. Deutsch’s numerous
 foundations for the promotion of aëronautics.
In the spring of 1900, M. Deutsch de la Meurthe had established another
 prize which Santos-Dumont now greatly coveted, and hoped ere long to
 win. This was a cash sum of one hundred thousand francs to be awarded
 by the Scientific Commission of the Aëro Club of France to the first
 dirigible that, between 107May 1 and October 1, 1900, 1901, 1902, 1903,
 1904, should voyage from Saint Cloud to and around the Eiffel tower,
 and return within half an hour. The distance to the tower and back,
 not counting the turn, was nearly seven miles, and the estimated speed
 required to fulfill the conditions for winning the prize, even in calm
 weather, was 15½ miles per hour.
As Santos-Dumont thought his No. 4 scarcely swift enough to win
 the Deutsch prize, he enlarged it by inserting an additional length
 of sixteen feet at its middle, supplied it with a stronger car, and
 applied a larger engine, naming the new vessel so formed, his No.
 5. Its hull was 109 feet long, 17 feet in largest diameter and cubed
 nearly 20,000 feet. A four cylinder air-cooled petroleum motor driving
 a screw propeller having two blades, each 13 feet across, gave a thrust
 of 120 pounds, at 140 revolutions per minute, and produced such draft
 as to give the inventor pneumonia. Among other novelties water ballast
 was used, and piano wires replaced the old-time suspension cords.
The No. 5 proved so powerful and swift that on July 13, 1901,
 Santos-Dumont attempted to win the Deutsch prize. Starting from the
 Aëro Club grounds at Saint-Cloud in presence of official witnesses,
 at half past six in the morning, when the air is usually stillest,
 he turned the Eiffel Tower in the tenth minute, thus gaining twenty
 minutes for the home stretch. But on his return he encountered an
 unexpected head wind, and after a terrific struggle reached the
 timekeepers at Saint-Cloud in the fortieth minute.
To add to the romance of this voyage, the genii of the upper elements
 stopped his motor, shortly after his return, and the bold sailor in his
 shining ship landed in a stately chestnut tree very near the108 house
 of the Princess Isabel, daughter of Dom Pedro. She very thoughtfully
 arranged a breakfast for him and sent it up in a basket, where he was
 at work disengaging the balloon, at the same time inviting him to call
 and relate to her the story of his voyage. A few days later she sent
 him a medal of St. Benedict “that protects against accidents.” He wore
 the medal, and on his very next trial escaped without a scratch from an
 appalling accident which might have terminated fatally. He continued to
 wear the gift of that gracious princess, on a thin gold chain circling
 his wrist, and many a time thereafter endured unscathed the most
 dreadful accidents, as if he possessed a charmed life.
On August 8, 1901, the dauntless aëronaut again sailed for the coveted
 prize, at the same still morning hour, sacred to duels and aërial
 contests. In nine minutes he turned the tower and headed bravely for
 home. But soon a leaky valve let the balloon shrink and the wires
 sag into the whirring propeller, which therefore had to be stopped.
 Santos-Dumont now had the choice of drifting back against the tower
 and destroying his vessel high in air, or of descending at once, by
 allowing the balloon to sink without discharge of ballast. He chose
 the latter course, hoping to land on the Seine embankment; but instead
 his balloon struck the top of the Trocadero hotel, exploded and fell
 in fluttering shreds into the courtyard. Some firemen who had been
 watching the flight from a distance, came with a rope and found
 the long car leaning like a ladder against the wall of the court,
 the balloon shreds hanging from it in graceful folds, and Captain
 Santos-Dumont perched aloft in his wicker basket wearily waiting for
 St. Benedict’s further aid. As usual, he was rescued intact.
On the evening of his fall on the roof of the hotel109 Santos-Dumont
 issued specifications for his famous No. 6, which surpassed
 all its predecessors in safety and speed. It had the shape of an
 elongated ellipsoid with pointed ends, measured 110 feet in length,
 20 feet in major diameter, 22,239 cubic feet in volume, and had an
 absolute ascensional force of 1,518 pounds. It was driven by a twelve
 horse-power four-cylinder water-cooled engine which gave the propeller
 a thrust of 145 pounds. To insure against buckling of the gas bag, an
 air pump connected with the motor, kept the ballonet under constant
 pressure, regulated by an escape valve through which the excess of
 air passed outward. To secure the envelope against rupture, due to
 the expansion of the hydrogen at unusual elevations, a stronger valve
 was used to let the gas escape from the envelope into the atmosphere.
 Thus the air escape valve kept the pressure constant in the partially
 distended ballonet, and consequently also in the surrounding gas
 envelope itself; while the stronger gas valve in the envelope opened
 only in an emergency, when the gas pressure had fully collapsed the
 internal air pocket and was threatening to explode the envelope. With
 all its improvements this new vessel was finished and inflated by
 August 4, being a work of twenty-two days, and after some preliminary
 trials was ready to try for the Deutsch prize.
The day of triumph followed quickly. On October 19, 1901, at 2.45
 P. M., Santos-Dumont again headed for the Eiffel Tower in
 presence of the official witnesses. In spite of a wind of six meters
 per second striking him sidewise, he held his course straight for the
 goal, and turned it in the ninth minute, as in his preceding attempt.
 On the return he had to struggle against a quartering wind and the
 caprice of his motor, which sometimes threatened to stop, and again
 spurted so actively as to turn the ship upward110 at a steep angle.
 The mighty throng below, in the Auteuil race track and the Bois de
 Boulogne, sent up immense applause, then suddenly held its breath in
 alarm, as the vessel pitched violently. But the hardy little rider was
 self-possessed and at home on his vaulting Pegasus. Alert to every
 prank he held his course straight for the timekeepers and passed over
 their heads at exactly twenty-nine and one-half minutes after starting.
His unmercenary disposal of the two rich awards which he had won seemed
 no less commendable than the dauntless industry which achieved such
 rapid success. The Deutsch prize amounting in all to one hundred and
 twenty-five thousand francs he divided into two unequal parts. The
 greater sum of seventy-five thousand francs he gave to the prefect
 of police of Paris, to be used for the deserving poor; the remainder
 he distributed among his employés. The Encouragement Prize of four
 thousand francs a year, mentioned before, he also declined to retain,
 but instead he founded with the money a new prize at the disposal of
 the Aëro Club. As a second reward for his triumphal voyage around the
 Eiffel Tower, he received from the Brazilian government one hundred
 and twenty-five thousand francs and a beautiful gold medal bearing
 appropriate and very complimentary inscriptions.
Now that the stimulus and excitement of striving for the Deutsch prize
 was over, the ardent inventor was free to develop and test his air
 ships in a deliberate and scientific manner. He therefore set about
 building specialized types of motor balloons, and practicing with them
 over all kinds of territory, smooth and rough. Within the next six
 years he constructed eight more air ships making altogether fourteen,
 besides his various free balloons, to say nothing of the aëroplanes and
 hydroplanes which he111 found time to develop. But before indulging in
 these new luxuries he would have more experience with his No. 6.
When the cold weather set in, following his victorious flight about
 the Eiffel Tower, Santos-Dumont went with his No. 6 to Monaco, to
 practice air cruising over the Mediterranean. The Prince of Monaco
 had erected for him an “aërodrome,” or balloon shed, facing the sea
 and very near shore. On pleasant days the daring pilot would cruise
 up and down the bay, not far from shore, trailing his guide-rope over
 the waves with the greatest ease, and to the applause of thousands of
 spectators. But on February 14, 1902, he set forth on a pleasure cruise
 over the bay with insufficient gas pressure, and thus came to grief.
 The bag grew flabby; the hydrogen poured to its higher end; the vessel
 reared up so steeply that the propeller had to be stopped to avoid
 its cutting the envelope. Rather than drift at the mercy of the wind,
 the pilot opened the valve and sank slowly to the water where he was
 rescued by a boat. On the following day the parts of his No. 6 were
 fished out of the sea and sent back to Paris. His few days’ practice
 had taught him the delights of guide-roping over the waters, and his
 accident induced him in future to sew unvarnished silk partitions
 across his balloons, to prevent the hydrogen passing too suddenly from
 one end to the other.
Returning to Paris he built for himself an “aërodrome,” provided
 with great sliding doors like the one at Monaco, and equipped with a
 hydrogen plant, constructive appliances, and everything needed for
 the rapid rebuilding or repair of air ships. It stood in a vacant lot
 surrounded by a high stone wall and was made of posts covered with red
 and white canvas, so that it looked like a great striped tent. Inside,
 the central stalls were 31 feet wide, 165 feet long, and112 44½ feet
 high,[12] the whole enclosure having accommodation for seven dirigibles
 all inflated and ready for instant service. When completed, in the
 spring of 1903, it was at once used to harbor three new air ships.
 These were the No. 7, designed for racing contests; the No. 9,
 called the Runabout, a minim air ship used for calls and short pleasure
 trips; and the No. 10, called the Omnibus, intended for several
 persons, with ample supplies for a considerable journey.
The No. 7, which excelled its predecessors in length and bulk, was
 intended greatly to outstrip the best of them in velocity. The first
 air ship had attained fourteen miles per hour, the No. 6, nearly
 twenty miles an hour in winning the Deutsch prize, and over twenty
 miles per hour on subsequent occasions, though provided with a motor
 rated at only 12 horse power. The new vessel which had little greater
 resistance than No. 6, was to carry four times the internal pressure,
 or about 12 centimeters of water, and to be propelled by an engine of
 60 horse power. The inventor expected therefore to attain a speed of
 between forty and fifty miles per hour. A very lofty expectation for
 that day, and one still unrealized for many years.
The racing air ship, or No. 7, was of cigar form, supporting a long
 car beneath, and generally resembling the No. 6, but slightly more
 tapering. Her length was six times her major diameter, and her volume
 45,000 cubic feet. The envelope was made of two layers of the strongest
 French silk, four times varnished, and was built exceptionally thick
 at the stern, where the differential outward pressure is greatest in
 flight. The propulsion was effected by a 60 horse-power water-cooled
 four-cylinder Clément engine actuating two screw propellers 16½ feet
 in 113diameter, one in front the other at the rear of the car. The poise
 and maneuvering were to be controlled in the usual way, by means of the
 rudder and shifting weight. The inventor seemed not to realize that
 the bow of his vessel was too sharp to cleave the air with minimum
 resistance, though his predecessor, Jullien, in 1850, had discovered
 experimentally that a torpedo form is better for speed than the
 symmetrical spindle form used by Santos-Dumont in his racing vessel. He
 did, however, in time, learn that the torpedo form of hull is better
 for stability of forward motion, and hence adopted that form in his
 little Runabout.
The No. 9 was a thick torpedo-shaped air ship originally cubing only
 7,770 feet, though later enlarged to 9,218 feet. It was so thick as
 to appear nearly egg-shaped. In order to make it respond promptly to
 the rudder Santos-Dumont drove it through the air blunt end foremost,
 but with apparent regrets, thinking that it would cleave the air
 more easily than sharp end foremost. In this he was mistaken; for
 the writer has shown that a body of such shape encounters much more
 resistance—roughly one hundred per cent more—when driven sharp end
 foremost than when driven blunt end forward. This fact furnishes one
 reason why most whales and swift fishes have blunt bows and long
 tapering sterns. However this be, the practical man felt his way to
 success, whether right or wrong in his theory of resistance. When
 actuated by a three horse-power Clément motor, weighing 26½ pounds, the
 little air ship carried its jaunty pilot twelve to fifteen miles an
 hour on many a merry trip about Paris and its environs.
The No. 10, or Omnibus, was a well shaped vessel of nearly eighty
 thousand cubic feet capacity, and amply provided with steering
 devices. Its hull114 tapered slightly from front to rear, terminating
 in projectile-shaped ends, and had a length of nearly six times its
 major diameter. Underneath was suspended a long car provided with
 aëroplane surfaces, in addition to the usual rudder, for controlling
 its movements.
Its arrow-like appearance was suggestive of some of the greatest German
 balloons of the decade. Indeed, the Omnibus, if well powered, might
 have proved a very swift vessel, in addition to a powerful carrier.
 But she was designed merely for easy going passenger service, for the
 purpose of popularizing aëronautics and stimulating its growth.
Santos-Dumont now had three typical air ships, a spacious and well
 equipped “aërodrome,” and ample facilities for advancing the science
 of motor balloons on a moderate scale. He could not, however, maintain
 the ascendency in this branch of science in France; for he encountered
 the rivalry of great wealth employing highly trained engineering and
 constructive talent. He could, however, still promote the art as a
 pioneer and a popularizer. This he continued to do. With his little
 Runabout he would one day guide-rope along the boulevard, another
 day take up a little boy, another day send up a beautiful young lady
 to navigate the air alone for a short distance, another day voyage
 over the military parade grounds and with his revolver fire a salute
 of twenty-one shots to the President of France, and give exhibitions
 to arouse the interest of the War Department. But he could not keep
 pace with the new giants in aëronautics, and he did not attempt
 it. Nor did he ever build a vessel of sufficient power, speed and
 durability to be purchased by the French nation. That honor went to his
 opulent contemporaries who had not failed to take cognizance of his
 contributions to the aërial art.
In 1899 the Lebaudy brothers, wealthy sugar refiners in Paris,
 commissioned their able engineer, Julliot, to make investigations
 and develop plans for a large and swift air ship. This he did with
 the assistance of Surcouf, a well-known manufacturer of balloons at
 Billancourt, Paris. Emulating the example of Santos-Dumont and certain
 German aëronauts in making their plan, they adopted the light petroleum
 engine for motive power, but experimented on a larger scale, thus
 creating a new era in military aëronautics in France. Their first
 vessel was the Jaune whose bag was built at Surcouf’s place, and
 its mechanical part at the Lebaudy Sugar Refinery. When launched,
 in 1902, it so pleased the owners that they determined to continue
 the experiments on a larger scale. Their second air ship, called the
 Lebaudy, after fulfilling various tests, was accepted by the French
 government and formed the beginning of its modern aërial fleet.
Moisson, near Paris, where the balloons were kept, now became quite an
 aëronautical center. Here, under military supervision and the skillful
 management of the aëronaut Juchmes, other dirigibles were built in
 rapid succession. Of these the Patrie was launched in 1906, and the
 République in 1908, both fine swift vessels capable of voyaging many
 hours and carrying many passengers. The Lebaudy vessels were the first
 air ships of the116 “semi-rigid type,” in which the long and flexible
 envelope, or hull, is provided with a rigid keel or floor, from which
 the car is suspended with its machinery and passengers. They are,
 therefore, of unusual interest both for their scientific design and for
 the stimulus they imparted to the growth of aërial fleets. For this
 reason they may well be studied in some detail.
The first Lebaudy air ship, called the Yellow, because of its color,
 had an envelope constructed of a rubber-treated cotton fabric, made in
 Hanover and covered with a yellow coating of lead chromate, to ward off
 the sun’s actinic rays from the rubber, and thus prevent deterioration.
 Her hull, which was cigar shaped and inflated with hydrogen, measured
 183 feet in length, 32 feet in diameter, and 80,000 cubic feet in
 volume. She was propelled by a 40-horse-power Daimler motor actuating
 twin screws, and attained a maximum speed of twenty-six miles an hour.
 During her first year’s service she made many ascensions, returning to
 her starting point twenty-eight times out of twenty-nine. Her longest
 voyage, made at Moisson, June 24, 1904, was sixty-two miles in two
 hours and three quarters, with an average speed of twenty-two miles
 an hours. But in November, 1902, while landing in a high wind at the
 end of her voyage from Paris to Chalais-Meudon, she was wrecked by
 colliding with a tree. Her motor, however, was uninjured, and a new
 envelope was at once prepared.
The second vessel, called the Lebaudy, and brought out in 1904,
 though resembling her predecessor, had a number of improvements in
 detail. Her hull was somewhat larger than the Jaune, and no longer
 pointed at the stern, but rounded off to an ellipsoidal shape, and
 provided, like the rear of an arrow, with guiding, or steadying planes.
 It meas117ured 190 feet in length and 94,000 cubic feet in volume. It
 was provided with two windows for internal inspection, and had an air
 bag of 17,650 cubic feet, divided into three parts. This air bag was
 inflated by a rotary fan near the main body, driven by the motor during
 flight, and by a storage battery when at rest. Suitable horizontal
 and vertical sails were used to steady and guide the vessel; also a
 guide-rope and anchor were carried. The car, suspended by steel ropes,
 ten feet below the hull, carried the passengers and supplies; also
 the motor actuating twin propellers, one on either side. At night an
 abundance of light was available, each passenger carrying a small lamp
 fastened to his clothes, the car itself bearing a powerful acetylene
 projector in its front, and two other lamps of 100 candle power each,
 to illumine the vessel. It was an elaborate affair, costing fifty to
 sixty thousand dollars, and was the outcome of experiments costing ten
 times that sum.
The Lebaudy, with these various improvements, gave much satisfaction
 to her owners, and received favorable recognition from the French War
 Department. During the thirty ascensions and voyages of her first
 year’s service, she proved herself a swift vessel, easy to control,
 very stable, and safe to land on solid ground. The Minister of War,
 who had followed her developments with much interest, appointed a
 commission to test her value for military service, with a view to her
 adoption by the government. The test required that the balloon remain
 in active service three months, always being anchored in the open, and
 that it perform certain prescribed maneuvers and voyages. In one of
 these it sailed with three persons on July 3, 1905, from Moisson to
 Meaux, an air-line distance of 57 miles in two hours and thirty-five
 minutes, at an average speed of 22118 miles an hour, thence to Chalons,
 61 miles in three hours and twenty minutes. Here it was anchored to
 some trees, but presently was caught in a strong wind, lifted high in
 the air, then dashed violently against other trees, with the complete
 destruction of its envelope. Within eleven weeks it was repaired
 in the military riding school at Toul, nearby; then, after some
 evolutions, returned to its harbor at Moisson. Other maneuvers were
 made subsequently, in which five officers were carried at one time,
 and interesting experiments were tried, such as dropping a sand bag
 upon a given spot, photographing fortifications, etc. The Minister of
 War, accompanied by two officers and other passengers, made a trip on
 October 24th, which was the seventy-sixth voyage of this stanch vessel.
 On November 10th, the hard-worked and successful air ship went into
 winter quarters, being now the property of the French government, and
 the first of her modern aërial cruisers.
The Patrie and the République, planned on the general lines
 of the Lebaudy, but in ascending scale of magnitude, were built
 expressly for the French government, and experienced brilliant if
 ill-fated careers. Both vessels had whale-shaped hulls, with rather
 sharp-pointed noses and rounding sterns. The original volume of the
 Patrie was 111,250 cubic feet, which was later increased to 128,910,
 by the insertion of a cylindrical section at the major diameter of the
 hull. The République had a volume of 2,000 cubic feet more than the
 Patrie, and a length of 200 feet, or a little less than the enlarged
 Patrie. She also had a diameter of 35½ feet as against 33¾ in the
 sister vessel. As the technical reader may like more complete details
 of these two noted air ships, a fuller account is given in Appendix III.
The Patrie was a swift and graceful ship which,119 during its brief
 activities in 1906–7, made many remarkable trips at an altitude of
 about half a mile, and frequently maneuvered with the troops. She
 sailed with excellent stability, had a speed of about 28 miles an hour,
 and, with four men, had a radius of action of 280 miles. In November,
 1907, carrying four passengers, she voyaged from Paris to Verdun,
 on the German frontier, where she was to be stationed. In spite of
 a quartering wind, the total distance of 175 miles was traversed in
 seven hours and three quarters, or at an average overground speed of
 25 miles an hour. But while at Verdun, after some maneuvers, she was
 too insecurely anchored to the ground by means of iron stakes. A strong
 wind came, tore out the pickets, and overpowered the soldiers, some
 two hundred in number, who were trying to hold the vessel. As she was
 pulling them along the ground, they were ordered to let go. The huge
 ship bounded high into the air, soared across France, England, Wales,
 and part of Ireland, then far out over the Atlantic where she vanished,
 leaving no trace behind.
The République also had a brilliant but ephemeral career, from July,
 1908, to September, 1909. She surpassed the Patrie not only in bulk
 and buoyancy, but also in power and speed. She had an 80-horse-power
 motor as against the Patrie’s motor of 60 to 70 horse power. She
 could carry eight to nine men, had a speed of about thirty miles an
 hour, and a radius of action of 500 miles. She made a number of long
 flights and manifested satisfactory steadiness and stability. But on
 September 25, 1909, while maneuvering near Paris, one of her propellers
 broke and tore a great gash in her envelope. At once, with outrushing
 gas and collapsing hull, the great ship fell 500 feet crashing to the
 earth, a total wreck, and killing her crew of four officers.
 120 This
 disaster illustrated forcibly the advantage of the cellular system of
 balloon construction, and drew more favorable attention to the rigid
 type of air ship cultivated in Germany.
The famous firm that produced the République brought forth, in
 1909, two other fine vessels patterned after it, the Russie and La
 Liberté, built respectively for Russia and France. The Russie made
 her first voyage on May 29th, ascending 600 feet with eight passengers,
 and maneuvering under perfect control. After her official trial,
 in June, she was sent to St. Petersburg, being the first dirigible
 furnished to a foreign government by a private concern. The Liberté
 was launched the last week in August and, after various practice and
 official tests, was accepted by the French government two months later.
 On a notable voyage, made on September 20th, she sailed ten hours with
 her Panhard motor constantly working.
The escape of the Patrie was a loss keenly felt by the French people,
 but soon compensated by the generosity of M. Deutsch de la Meurthe.
 This liberal patron of aëronautics had a dirigible of excellent design,
 whose hull, based on the plans of Colonel Renard, was contrived and
 built by E. Surcouf, director of the Astra aëronautic establishment,
 along with H. Kapferer, while its other parts were built by Voisin,
 both of Billancourt. In September preceding the accident to the
 Patrie, he had offered the use of his air ship, the Ville de Paris,
 to his government, which accepted the gift with the understanding that
 it was not to be delivered except in case of war or emergency. When,
 therefore, in November, 1907, the disaster occurred to the Patrie,
 M. Deutsch at once placed his dirigible in the hands of the military
 authorities.
122
 The Ville de Paris showed considerable resemblance to her prototype,
 the France of 1884, but differed from that elegant vessel in various
 important features. Her hull was shaped like a wine bottle with its
 thickest end, or bow, brought to a sharp projectile point, and its
 other end furnished, like an arrow, with four fixed guiding surfaces
 to steady its flight. These guiding surfaces were elongated, finlike,
 cylindrical sacs, inflated as shown in the illustration. The hull
 measured 200 feet long, 34½ feet in major diameter, 112,847 cubic feet
 in volume. Heavy bands of canvas with their edges sewed along the
 sides of the balloon served as flaps for the attachment of the cords
 suspending the long car beneath. With this long suspension the weight
 of the car was more evenly distributed over the envelope than in the
 Lebaudy balloons. An interesting improvement in this air ship was the
 stabilizing planes, placed above the car, fore and aft, to lift or
 depress aëroplanelike, thus enabling the pilot to raise or lower the
 vessel, also to alter her trim, or to check her pitching. As might be
 expected, her flight was very steady, but as the motor developed only
 70 to 75 horse power, her velocity did not exceed twenty-five miles per
 hour. In January, 1908, she made a run of 147 miles in seven hours, six
 minutes, with an average speed of 21 miles an hour. Further details of
 construction are given in Appendix III.
We now have had examples of the three leading types of motor balloons;
 the rigid, the semirigid, the flexible. The rigid type, as exemplified
 in the Schwartz and Zeppelin air ships, is characterized by its
 solidly trussed hull of invariable size and form to which all other
 parts are directly attached. The semirigid type, exemplified in the
 Lebaudy vessels, has a flexible hull, generally of woven fabric, with
 a trussed floor or platform for its ventral part, from123 which the car
 is suspended. The flexible type, as seen in the Ville de Paris, the
 France, and its predecessors, consists of a flexible hull entirely
 devoid of stiffening framework, together with a car, usually quite
 long, suspended from the bag directly. These are all of the important
 kinds in use at present. A combination of balloon and aëroplane has
 been tried by Santos-Dumont, Malecot, and others, but thus far has
 not resulted in a very successful and distinct type. Of the many
 powerful, swift, and elegant balloons which sprang into being after
 the success of the Lebaudy vessels, all could be classified under the
 above three types. Neither kind proved preëminently the fittest for
 all service, but the semi-rigid and flexible balloons multiplied most
 rapidly; partly, no doubt, because of their cheapness and convenience
 of management. We may review briefly this new crop of air ships, before
 turning to the novel and huge rigid vessels of Count von Zeppelin.
The Ville de Paris was followed, in 1909, by the Clément-Bayard,
 a slightly larger vessel of very similar pattern, constructed for the
 Russian government for $40,000. It also, like the Ville de Paris,
 was built by the Astra Society. The most striking feature of this new
 balloon was its curious stern with its bulblike steadying surfaces.
 These fin surfaces were not flat, as in the Patrie, nor cylindrical,
 as in the Ville de Paris, but of pear form, with the blunt ends
 pointing rearward and inflated like the rest of the hull. Apparently
 these tail bags were not economical of power, since, as is well
 known, a pear shape encounters greater resistance when moving sharp
 end forward than when moving blunt end forward. However this be, the
 stabilizing force proved very effective. The vessel was driven by a
 Clément-Bayard motor of 100 horse power actuating a wooden screw placed
 in front of the long car,124 as in the France. A speed of 30 miles an
 hour was attainable, and the ship could accommodate eight passengers.
 On one occasion it made a round trip from Sartrouville, traversing 125
 miles at an average speed of 27 miles an hour. It was acquired by the
 Russian government on August 23, 1909, having on that day completed
 its third official test, and satisfied the requirement of rising 1,550
 meters and voyaging two hours at a height of 1,200 meters. Two notable
 incidents of that voyage were that the air ship made a new record for
 altitude, and on landing was caught by a squall which tore it from the
 hands of thirty men, after which, owing to motor failure, it drifted
 freely across country, tripped on a willow, and fell into the Seine,
 whence it was rescued after considerable pains and labor.
Other vessels presently built by the Astra Society may be listed,
 together with their size in cubic meters, as follows: Ville de
 Bordeaux, 3,300 m3;[13] Ville de Nancy, 3,300 m3; Colonel
 Renard, 4,000 m3; España, 4,000 m3; Clément-Bayard II, 6,500
 m3; Transaerienne I, 6,500 m3; Flandre, 6,500 m3 (228,579
 cubic feet). These were among the most noted air ships produced in
 France toward the close of the first decade of the twentieth century.
 On the whole they proved to be swift and stable ships adapted either
 for military use, or for exhibitions and sport, and even for regular
 transportation of passengers.
The Ville de Nancy was one of the conspicuous dirigibles of the
 summer of 1909. It was constructed primarily for use at the Exposition
 at Nancy, and was owned by the Compagnie Générale Transaerienne, an
 aërial passenger transportation 125society organized at Paris, in
 March, 1909, with a capital of one million francs. This society planned
 to inaugurate an aërial line from Paris to Bordeaux, in 1910, equipped
 with other vessels of the Astra construction, more powerful than the
 Ville de Nancy, and capable of transporting a dozen passengers.
The Ville de Nancy was slightly smaller and slightly more powerful
 than the Clément-Bayard I, besides differing in minor details. It
 measured 55 meters in length, 10 meters in greatest diameter, and
 cubed 33,000 meters, as against the 35,000 meters of its predecessor.
 It was driven by a 100-horse-power Bayard-Clément motor actuating a
 Chauvière screw propeller at the front of the car. The car itself was
 made of steel tubes covered with fabric, and near the engine with
 sheet aluminum. The tail bags were an evident improvement on those of
 the previous air ships, being less blunt at the rear, and therefore
 less adapted to generate a retarding suction. They were still rather
 bulbous, however.
This splendid vessel made various interesting voyages during the
 summer of 1909, the first on June 27th, piloted by Surcouf and
 Kapferer, directors of the Astra Society. On July 14th, she maneuvered
 at Longchamps, side by side with the République, thus contrasting
 nicely with the ship designed by Julliot. It was the first time two
 dirigibles navigated together in regular maneuver. The Ville de Nancy
 was naturally the swifter, having greater power and less bulk than
 the other. About the middle of July she sailed from Sartrouville to
 Nancy, where she was to sail about the Exposition grounds and make
 daily excursions, carrying passengers for 100 francs per trip. These
 voyages proved very popular, being the first of their kind,126 and in
 themselves quite attractive. As the vessel was endowed with excellent
 stability and had manifested high speed, she was well suited to be the
 first regular passenger air ship, and the herald of the aërial liners
 projected to cruise between Paris and Bordeaux.
The Colonel Renard was closely patterned after the Ville de Nancy,
 but was larger and more powerful. She measured 212 feet in length,
 140,000 cubic feet in volume and carried an engine of 120 horse power,
 driving a Chauvière propeller. On July 13th she made her first trip,
 cruising one hour with notable facility, then reëntered the hangar[14]
 of the Astra Society, at Beauval near Meaux. Thence, on August 23d, she
 sailed for Rheims to compete in the aëronautical races, arriving after
 a very successful cruise. On August 29th, she circled the ten kilometer
 rectangular course at Betheny, near Rheims, five times in 1 hour, 19
 minutes, 40 seconds, thus winning the Prix des Aëronats,[15] of 10,000
 francs offered for the vessel that should accomplish, in the least
 time, those five rounds, aggregating 50 kilometers. The showing was not
 remarkable, but the vessel could sail much faster in a straightaway
 voyage.
The prize-winning Renard was quickly followed by the España, a
 vessel of the same size and pattern, built for the Spanish government
 by the same capable firm. During October this fine air ship made
 several trial trips, carrying seven men. On November 2d she made
 a splendid official test voyage of five hours, sailing from the
 Astra aërodrome, at Beauval, to Paris and return, a distance of 250
 kilometers in 5 hours and 10 minutes, or at the 127average rate of 31
 miles an hour for the entire course. On November 5th, she started on a
 ten-hour voyage, with five men and fuel for fifteen hours; but after
 five hours, stopped her engine, and came to earth, owing to the bending
 of the main shaft of the motor.
Besides the great auto balloons designed by Julliot and Surcouf, of
 which the République and Colonel Renard are examples, a number of
 convenient cruisers were brought forth in 1909 by the Zodiac Company.
 One of the leading spirits in this enterprise was the famous Count de
 la Vaulx, well known for his auto balloon designs and his long voyages
 in sphericles. The chief merit of these modest air ships, which ranged
 in volume from 25,000 cubic feet upwards, was cheapness and facility of
 demounting and shipment. They were intended to popularize the art among
 the masses, by giving everyone a chance to make a voyage at no great
 expense. Besides their applicability to sport, touring, and public
 uses, some were designed for considerable speed and endurance; which
 qualities, together with their demountability and partial independence
 of hangars, were expected to give them military value. They were of
 the flexible type, so arranged that the various parts were easily
 detachable, so as to be packed for transportation, by wagon or car.
 The smaller ones might be called semi-navigables, since they had the
 organs of a swift motor balloon, but, like the common sphericles,
 could easily be demounted and hauled home—a likely issue on a day of
 any considerable wind. The first one cost $5,000, cubed 25,000 feet
 and, with its 16-horse-power engine, traveled 13 miles per hour. Its
 hull had the form of a whale with docked and rounded tail. From this
 body hung an elongated car with a screw at the rear and elevating
 planes128 in front. Others of similar make, but larger, followed in rapid
 order, their common mission being that advocated by Santos-Dumont, in
 the early part of the decade, when he produced his Runabout and
 Omnibus—to give everybody a ride.
129The Zodiac I was quickly followed by vessels II and III, cubing
 respectively 1,200 and 1,400 meters. The No. II had a speed of
 twenty, or more, miles per hour, and carried two passengers when
 inflated with coal gas, three with hydrogen. The No. III, of torpedo
 form, measured 133 feet long, 28 feet in major diameter, carried four
 persons, and sailed 25 miles an hour with her 40-horse-power Ballot
 engine. On August 29th, piloted by Count de la Vaulx, she competed with
 the Colonel Renard, at Rheims, for the Prix des Aëronats, making
 five rounds of the ten kilometer course in one hour and twenty-five
 minutes, this being at the average speed of 22 miles an hour. On
 October 30th, again piloted by the same renowned aëronaut, she sailed
 from Brussels to Anvers, rounded the lofty Cathedral spire, and
 returned to her aërodrome, traversing a distance of sixty kilometers in
 one hour and twelve minutes, or with an average speed of 31 miles an
 hour, a good showing for so small an air ship.
A very handsome dirigible, named the Belgique, was constructed early
 in 1909, by the skillful aëronautical engineer, Louis Godard, of Paris,
 in collaboration with the prominent Belgian engineer and sportsman,
 Robert Goldschmidt. It was a flexible balloon of elegant torpedo form,
 measuring 175 feet long, 30 feet in major diameter, and 106,000 cubic
 feet in volume. It was propelled by two 60-horse-power Vivinus engines
 actuating two screws, made of fabric stretched over radial sticks,
 and placed at either end of the spindle-shaped car. The control was
 provided for by ample keel surface, an elevating plane in front,
 and ingeniously designed fins on the rear of the hull to steady the
 motion. The entire structure showed much originality and skill. When130
 the dirigible was tested near Brussels, on June 28th, it was piloted
 by Louis Godard, the famous expert in sphericals, accompanied by
 Goldschmidt. Godard’s début in this capacity was reported as excellent.
The Italian government brought forth, in the summer of 1909, a swift
 and elegant auto balloon showing considerable originality of design.
 It has a porpoise-shaped hull of 2,500 cubic meters capacity, divided
 into seven compartments, so as to obviate the accident which wrecked
 the République. An ample keel along the rear bottom, and large
 aëroplane surfaces at the stern, serve to guide and steady the vessel.
 Propelled by twin screws well above a short car, she readily attained
 thirty miles an hour, carrying four persons. On October 31st, starting
 on her seventeenth voyage, she cruised from the aëronautic park, Vigna
 de Vale, near Rome, to Naples and back to Rome by ten o’clock at
 night, having sailed over the edge of the Mediterranean Sea and over
 the French squadron in the bay, remaining fourteen hours in the air
 and traversing 520 kilometers, or 323 miles. It was one of the finest
 voyages of the year. Further details of this Italian military dirigible
 No. I bis, together with illustrations, are given in Aërophile for
 January 15, 1910, together with its prototype the dirigible No. I,
 which maneuvered so successfully in 1908.
England and America all along had pursued an oriental, or
 semicivilized, policy toward the auto balloon, languidly watching
 the progress elsewhere, and hoping some time to enjoy the fruition,
 if not the glory, of the costly and successful experiments made in
 other countries. In 1909, however, the British government appropriated
 nearly $400,000 for aëronautics, and the United States House of
 Representatives voted $500,000, but promptly re131versed its action,
 and gave nothing, though it may be said that even then there was a
 growing sentiment in favor of a more liberal policy. The movement to
 secure the beginning of an aërial fleet in England is summarized in the
 following paragraph.[16]
“The naval authorities were entrusted with the building of a rigid
 ship, whilst to the military department was delegated the work of
 building non-rigid and semi-rigid ships. A national air-ship fund
 was organized by the Morning Post with the object of purchasing
 a French Lebaudy semi-rigid dirigible which would be presented to
 the War Office; whilst Mr. Arthur du Cros and other members of the
 Parliamentary Aërial Committee arranged for a Clément non-rigid air
 ship of new design, to sail from Paris to London, and also to qualify
 for purchase as a unit of the British aërial fleet.”
The non-rigid auto balloon ordered from Clément, and afterwards known
 as the Clément-Bayard II, was the masterpiece of that skilful
 designer, and occupied his best thought and energy for eighteen
 months, aided by his devoted and capable engineer, Sabathier. She
 was completed in the Clément-Bayard factory at Lamotte-Breuil in
 April, 1910, and during the next five months made thirty-two test
 ascensions and practice voyages. In particular she took a conspicuous
 part in the military maneuvers at Picardie during the early half of
 September, where with wonderful precision and airworthiness she made
 forced voyages in fair weather and foul, remaining, when so desired,
 in continuous communication with the land office by means of wireless
 telegraphy. Finally, on a fair day, September 16th, the tried and
 perfected vessel was brought forth from her hangar for the long
 contemplated voyage 132to London, her machinery and rigging in trimmest
 order, and her car furnished with supplies for twenty hours, or thrice
 the anticipated time of transit.
The voyage was a glorious achievement for aëronautics, and for the
 enthusiastic constructor and his devoted aids. Starting at seven
 o’clock in the morning, with seven men aboard, including happy Clément,
 Sabathier, and an English delegate, the whalelike cruiser sailed
 directly to London with admirable regularity, covering the entire
 distance of 242 miles in six hours, or at the rate of forty miles
 an hour, which is better time than could be made by land and water.
 Enthusiastic cheers from the English spectators greeted the arrival of
 this French dirigible, built for the English government. Then quietly
 the English soldiers took the vessel in hand, as if performing a
 familiar duty, and housed her in the Daily Mail hangar, at Wormwood
 Scrubs. Thus simply and without unusual incident terminated the first
 motor-balloon cruise between the two countries, and one of the finest
 voyages in the history of aëronautics.
In outward appearance the Clément-Bayard II closely resembled her
 predecessor, except for the absence of empennage on her envelope. In
 the whalelike elegance of her hull she was, in fact, a reversion to the
 trim and efficient model of Renard’s dirigible of 1884, which in turn
 was a fair copy of Jullien’s model of 1850, all having excellent forms
 for speed and stability. But the new vessel was of greater size and
 power than her predecessor. Her net buoyancy was sufficient to carry
 twenty passengers. Her average speed tested in a round-trip voyage was
 about 50 kilometers or 31 miles per hour when her two motors developed
 200 horse power, and 55 kilometers or 34 miles per hour when 133the
 engines developed their maximum effort of 260 horse power. The details
 of construction were so elaborate and important, and so representative
 of the best aëronautical workmanship of the time that a full account of
 their chief features is presented in Appendix III. In passing it may be
 added that some time before sailing to England the Clément-Bayard II,
 because of her excellent workmanship and maneuvers, received the first
 prize at the review of dirigibles by the French Minister of War.
134
 The dirigible to be purchased with the money secured by the popular
 subscription organized by the Morning Post was ordered from the
 Lebaudy factory at Moisson in July, 1909, to be delivered directly
 through the air to Farnborough before November 6, 1910. This
 stipulation was severe enough, but furthermore the vessel was to
 be a considerable departure from any thus far built at that famous
 factory, and was to be the largest air ship yet constructed in France.
 As usual the general design of the huge balloon was entrusted to the
 distinguished aëronautical engineer, Henri Julliot, and this was a
 certain guarantee of its successful operation.
The general features of this great military dirigible resemble those
 of her prototype, the Patrie, differing chiefly in the shape of her
 hull and the method of stiffening. The hull itself was more longish
 than the Patrie’s, but had the same sharp prow and blunt stern; for
 a blunt stern offers better support to the empennage planes, though
 it increases the resistance more than a tapering stern. The trussed
 framing to stiffen the ship was no longer a platform inserted in the
 base of the hull, but a long trussed beam of cruciform cross section,
 made of steel tubing and suspended intermediately between the hull and
 car.
The hull was of excellent workmanship and bold design. The envelope
 was of rubberized tissue, measured 338 feet in length, 39.4 feet in
 diameter135 and cubed 353,000 feet. Its length was, therefore, 8.5 times
 its diameter, an extraordinary proportion for a balloon of the flexible
 type. The hull was provided with three ballonets, two ripping panels,
 and various valves, as shown in the scale drawing.
136The car, made of steel tubing and large enough for twenty persons,
 carried two Panhard-Levassor motors of 135 horse power each, actuating
 two Chauvière wooden screws, sixteen feet in diameter, placed on either
 side, well outward and upward, the transmission gear permitting either
 engine, or both, to drive the screws at one time. Below the car and
 well forward was a ground keel, or post, on which the whole vessel
 could pivot with the wind, when riding at anchor, while a shorter
 ground post was placed at the rear of the car.
The controlling surfaces were adequate and skillfully arranged. To
 maintain steadiness and directness of flight, fixed empennage planes,
 both horizontal and vertical, were provided, some attached to the stern
 of the hull, others at the rear of the trussed suspension beam. To
 direct the up and down movement, ailerons placed well to the front and
 rear of the long framing, were turned about conjunctively in opposite
 directions, thus causing the vessel to raise or lower her bow. Needless
 to say, all these navigation appliances worked with ample force and
 effectiveness from the beginning of the earliest tests.
After four preliminary ascensions the great air ship started from
 Moisson to her destination at Farnborough, having on board Henri
 Julliot, Louis Capazza, the pilot, Alexander Bannerman, director of
 the aëronautic military school at Aldershot, and five other men. It
 was a triumphant and glorious voyage, one of the most splendid in
 the history of aërostation. Piloted by aid of chart and compass, and
 by signal fires and captive balloons arranged along her route, the
 vessel followed a direct course, without check or hindrance, crossing
 a wide part of137 the English Channel and arriving before the hangar at
 Aldershot, where the British soldiers awaited her, and where she was
 safely landed, having made the whole voyage of 230 miles in 5.5 hours,
 at a level varying between five hundred and two thousand feet. As
 shown by the accompanying map, about one third of the route lay over
 the Channel, or, more accurately, 78 miles, which was traversed in two
 hours. Thus the whole journey was accomplished at an average speed
 of nearly forty-two miles an hour, or in less time than it could be
 effected in any other way than through the air.
138The United States War Department, in 1908, started an aërial squadron
 by purchasing from Thomas S. Baldwin, for $10,000, a tiny air ship of
 the flexible type, a trifle larger than Santos-Dumont’s Runabout, but
 in fact the smallest military dirigible then in existence. It had a
 rubberized gray silk cylindrical hull slightly tapering toward the rear
 and terminating in ogival ends, its length being 96 feet, its major
 diameter 19½ feet. From this was suspended, by means of netting and
 steel cables, a longish car having at the rear a double rudder working
 about a vertical hinge, at the front an elevating plane and an 11-foot
 wooden screw driven by a Curtiss 20-horse-power water-cooled engine.
 With two men aboard, this vessel readily attained over twenty miles an
 hour in a straightaway course, and at times more nearly thirty miles an
 hour. Its total ascensional force was 1,350 pounds, of which 500 were
 available for men, ballast and supplies.
Santos-Dumont’s most strenuous disciples outside of France were found
 among the German military officers. These advocated and promoted both
 the semirigid and the flexible types of auto balloon, with such ability
 as to match the best productions of the foremost French designers.
 The most successful pioneers of these two types in Germany were
 respectively, Major von Gross, commander of the balloon battalion at
 Tegel, near Berlin, and Major Von Parseval of the Bavarian army, and
 director of the Society for the Study of Motor Air Ships.
Beginning in 1907, a number of Gross auto balloons were built in
 succession, for the German Aëronautical Battalion, by Master Engineer
 Basenach, under the supervision of its commander, Major Gross. The
 first was intended only as a model, 139though it was large enough for
 two passengers. It cubed 63,000 feet, but having an engine of hardly
 more than 20 horse power, was necessarily slow. It was succeeded by
 the Gross I, and others, all having rigid ventral parts, like the
 Patrie, but with hulls of rather better form for speed and bulk
 combined, having blunter bow and longer stern.
The second Gross air ship, built in 1908, cubed 176,000 feet, and
 attained a speed of 27 miles per hour, driven by two 75-horse-power
 Daimler motors. On September 11th of that year, with four persons
 aboard, she made a round trip from Berlin lasting 13 hours, covering
 176 miles, and attaining altitudes up to 4,000 feet. This was one of
 the finest voyages known at the time. This air ship was purchased by
 the German government, named Gross I, and sent to Metz. A detailed
 description is given in Appendix III.
The Gross II, brought forth in April, 1909, resembled her predecessor
 in build, but had greater power and speed. Her hull cubed 176,000
 cubic feet, had a blunt bow, full body and sharp stern, was provided
 with horizontal and vertical keels, a sliding weight, and a ballonet
 at either end. She was propelled by two Körting engines of 75 horse
 power each, actuating two three-blade propellers. Under the action of
 her keels and stabilizing planes and rudder, her motion was steady and
 precise. A special feature of this air ship was the wireless telegraph
 equipment by which she could send messages in all directions over a
 range of 300 miles or more. She made many practice voyages during the
 season of 1909, sometimes alone, again in concert with other auto
 balloons and with troops. In August she made a fine voyage of sixteen
 hours, from Tegel to Apolda and return, traversing 470 kilometers.
The above described vessel was followed by140 others, large and small.
 The Gross III measured 70 meters long, cubed 7,500 meters, and was
 propelled by four Körting motors aggregating 300 horse power. This was
 a splendid vessel, and one of extraordinary speed.
Various auto balloons of the Parseval type were designed by Major Von
 Parseval of the Bavarian army, who also was one of the inventors of the
 kite balloon. Satisfactory experiments with his air ship were made as
 early as 1906. These formed the basis of larger vessels, subsequently
 constructed in the same factory of August Riedinger of Augsburg,
 for the Motor Air Ship Study Society, of which Parseval was general
 manager. This society, organized practically at the command of the
 Emperor, purchased the Parseval patents and began the development of
 auto balloons as a business enterprise, soon furnishing a series of its
 flexible air ships to the German army.
After the experiments of 1906, the Parseval air ship was enlarged from
 2,500 to 2,800 cubic meters, its length becoming 52 meters and its
 major diameter 8.7 meters. Its hull was of cylindric form, with rounded
 bow and egg-shaped stern; had two air bags—one fore, the other aft—and
 at the stern carried two fixed horizontal planes and a vertical rudder.
 From this envelope the car, made largely of aluminum, was hung by steel
 cables, and on its bottom had trolley wheels resting on suspension
 cables joining the front and rear parts of the hull. The vessel was
 propelled by a 50-horse-power Mercedes motor actuating a four-blade
 screw propeller 13 feet in diameter, mounted between the car and hull.
 This screw was made of thin steel tubes covered with shirting. Among
 the merits of Parseval’s air ship may be mentioned its lightness and
 demountability, and its kite-like effect on the air, got by canting
 the 141hull while the car, rolling on the suspension cables, allowed
 the screw mounted above it to thrust horizontally. The canting was
 effected by giving one ballonet more air than the other, thus causing
 its end of the hull to sink. The speed was about twenty-five miles per
 hour.
The second Parseval was of greater bulk and power than her
 predecessor. Her hull which was of cylindric form, with round prow
 and pointed stern, measured 190 feet long, 30.5 feet in diameter, and
 113,000 cubic feet in volume. She resembled her predecessor in the
 arrangement of the two ballonets, and in the “loose,” or trolley,
 system of suspension of the car. The propeller was a unique patented
 device of Von Parseval’s. It had four cloth blades so weighted with
 lead as to stand out firmly under centrifugal force, assuming an
 effective shape for propulsion, though limp and deformed when at rest.
 Various interesting evolutions were performed by this vessel in the
 autumn of 1908, including tests imposed by the military authorities,
 as a condition of purchase by the government, one requirement being a
 voyage of one hour at an altitude of 1,500 meters; another requirement
 being a continuous cruise of twelve hours. These tests completed,
 the Motor-Luftschiff-Studien-Gesellschaft sold its proud ship to the
 Vaterland for 210,000 marks.
About the same time the War Department purchased the Gross I, already
 described, and Zeppelin’s third great ship, naming it Zeppelin I.
 Germany thus began her program of developing a great aërial fleet,
 by acquiring three powerful and well tried ships, each capable of
 remaining all day in the air, and having a radius of action of several
 hundred miles. They were frequently called upon to make test voyages in
 all kinds of weather, to maneuver with the troops, to pass in review
 before the Emperor, 142at times conveying prominent officers and members
 of the noblest families, including Prince Henry and the Crown Prince,
 who manifested a fondness for navigating about their newly opened
 empire of the sky. But sometimes the tests were crucial. On September
 11, 1908, both the Gross and Parseval were summoned to Potsdam by
 His Majesty. They set forth from their sheds, at Tegel, in face of a
 strong wind. After journeying some distance they each had to abandon
 the voyage, the Gross returning home, and the Parseval falling to
 the ground owing to an accident.
The third Parseval air ship was brought forth on February 18, 1909, by
 the Luftfahrzeug-Gesellschaft, an aëronautical firm founded by merging
 the Motor-Luftschiff-Studien-Gesellschaft with the A. E. G. This vessel
 closely resembled her predecessor, but possessed greater size, power,
 and perfection of detail. Her hull at first measured 224 feet long,
 47 feet in diameter, and 198,000 cubic feet in volume, but later was
 enlarged to 235,000 cubic feet by increasing its diameter.
Her car, which could accommodate twelve passengers, was framed of steel
 tubing covered with canvas, and was divided into two parts, separated
 by the big gasoline cylinder running athwart ship, the passenger cabin
 being to the fore, the engine room aft. Here were stationed the two
 engines, of 120 horse power each, actuating reversible right and left
 Parseval screws 13 feet in diameter, located to the rear, well aloft
 and outward on either side. In the forepart of the passenger cabin was
 space for the pilot and his navigating appliances; his chart desk, his
 valve controls, his statoscope, manometers, etc.
The great ship with her nine tons burden was to have sailed from
 Bitterfeld to Frankfort, for the Aëronautical Exposition, but owing
 to excessive143 gales, she was sent by rail. Once there, she made many
 excursions, at times carrying passengers at a schedule rate, reported
 to be 200 marks for a voyage of one to two hours. In October she made
 an inter-city excursion covering a distance of nearly 500 miles, during
 which she passed four nights in the open air, finally returning in
 good form to Frankfort. On October 27th she made a farewell tour about
 Frankfort, then voyaged along the Main and down the Rhine valley to
 Cologne, there to participate in the aëronautic military maneuvers,
 together with the Parseval I, the Gross II and the Zeppelin
 II. Having passed creditably through these and other operations in
 the autumn, she was eventually stationed at Tegel, as a part of the
 national fleet.
The fourth Parseval, a smaller vessel, was built for the Deutscher
 Aëro Club early in 1909. Her hull cubed 113,000 feet, and her framing
 was made of the strongest materials, carefully hollowed, to eliminate
 undue weight. At the rear of the car, on either side, were two
 100-horse engines, driving two Parseval propellers at a common speed,
 whether both engines were in operation, or only one. In many respects
 she resembled her immediate predecessors, and her little successor
 Parseval V of 1,200 cubic meters capacity and 30 meters length, built
 for the Imperial Automobile Club.
The maneuvers at Cologne constituted the first grand demonstration of
 the new fleet of military dirigibles, and proved a severe test of the
 powers of the air ships, even when manned by experienced crews and
 commanded by regular military officers. Two companies of the balloon
 corps battalion were in attendance. Large provisions of hydrogen loaded
 on wagons, each carrying 100,000 cubic feet, were kept in readiness to
 be attached to an express train and rushed at the first alarm to any
 balloon in need of144 replenishing. On Sunday, October 31, three of the
 dirigibles representing each type, Zeppelin IV, Parseval I, Gross
 II, left Cologne together, by official order, and returned after
 flights of 7, 10 and 11 hours respectively, covering in the aggregate
 930 miles. Again, leaving Cologne shortly before noon on November 3d,
 they went down the Rhine, simulated a concerted attack on the great
 fortress of Eherenbreitstein, and returned in the evening, each having
 covered 155 miles. And so on for many days they continued to execute
 maneuvers under military orders and in severe forced marches.
Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin, the famous cavalry general of Würtemburg,
 and hero of the Franco-Prussian war, after retiring from the army,
 organized, in 1898, a limited liability company for the purpose of
 developing a new type of dirigible which he had long contemplated.
 It was to be a vessel far larger and swifter than any the world had
 yet seen. In the summer of 1900, after two years of industrious
 experimental research and active construction, he brought forth from
 his floating laboratory on Lake Constance, near Manzell, the first
 of those wonderful air ships which have aroused such expectation and
 enthusiasm in Germany. In outward appearance and in its chief features
 of design it typified the whole series of motor balloons thus far
 developed and navigated by that illustrious inventor. Many valuable
 improvements were added, as a result of trial and the advance of the
 collateral sciences; but the fundamental plans seem to have proved as
 practical as they were bold and original. One by one were surmounted
 the greatest obstacles, physical, financial and finally political; for
 the Prussian Ministry did not favor his project at first, and many
 aëronautical adepts were adverse to it. Those huge ships faced the fury
 of many a tempest; their dauntless builder endured the storm of hostile
 criticism; but in the end, builder and ships alike won the146 plaudits of
 a proud empire and of an astonished world.
Outwardly a Zeppelin balloon may be described as a long cylinder with
 ogival ends and a V-shaped keel running the length of its bottom. From
 afar the cylinder and pointed ends appear circular in cross section,
 but they are sixteen-sided. About one-third the distance from either
 end of the great ship a small boat is suspended from the hull so
 closely that at those places the keel is omitted to make room. These
 two boats are rigidly connected with the hull and support it when the
 vessel rests on, or is towed along the water. Within them are the crew
 and petroleum engines, while above them and outward on each side of
 the hull, and fastened to it by outriggers, are two pairs of screw
 propellers, so placed as to exert their united thrust along the line
 of resistance. In some cases the crew can walk through the V-shaped
 keel from one boat to another, the passageway being illuminated here
 and there, by transparent covering, or windows of celluloid, along the
 sides and floor. Again an observer may climb up through the hull and
 take observations of the sky from above. Telephones, electric bells,
 and speaking tubes serve to transmit intelligence from one part of the
 vessel to another.
The frame of the hull is formed of sixteen longitudinal beams, or
 girders, of trellised metal work running from prow to stern and
 riveted at regular intervals to cross bridges of similar trellised
 metal work, each cross bridge being a sixteen-sided wheel with
 trellised rims strengthened by radial rods running inward to a
 central flange of sheet aluminum. Thus the body of the vessel is
 divided into many compartments, each bounded by two wheels, and the
 surrounding longitudinal beams. Each compartment contains a hydrogen
 balloon, or sac, which 147fairly fills it and exerts a lift against
 the longitudinal beams and against a netting formed of ramie cords
 stretched from wheel to wheel, diagonally between beams at their
 inner corners. Similarly the outward corners of the beams are joined
 by strong diagonal wires for the purpose of rigidity, and the whole
 external frame is covered with a heavy fabric which forms the outer
 skin, or wall of the hull. Between this skin and the hydrogen bags
 are air spaces, as also between bag and bag. Thus the whole vessel is
 buoyed up by numerous thin hydrogen sacs, protected by the frame and
 outer skin from the direct sun, from foul weather, and from external
 shocks. The gas bags are also separated from each other by the bridge
 work and flanges of aluminum.
Obviously there is a material advantage in having many gas cells and
 two propelling plants; for if one fails it may not prevent navigation.
 The tandem arrangement of bags separated by the wheel-like cross
 bridges also allows the balloon to rear any amount without material
 displacement of the gas, or dangerous increase of pressure; for it must
 be remembered that a single hydrogen sac extending the full length of
 an up-ended balloon of such length, would have an outward pressure of
 about thirty pounds per square foot greater at the top than at the
 bottom. The poise of the vessel is maintained by shifting weights, and
 also by use of fins, or rudders, when driving through the air; but
 those arrangements vary in the different machines. So much for the
 general features of these wonderful ships, of which four were built
 during the decade from 1898 to 1908, and several more since that period.
The construction and trial of Count Zeppelin’s first air ship proved a
 formidable task, requiring all his resources of money and mechanical
 skill. As it148 rivaled in size and fluid displacement a large ocean
 liner, it could not well be launched and landed, except on the water.
 It was therefore housed in a wooden shed 472 feet long, floating on 95
 pontoons, and so anchored as to swing freely with the wind and assume
 its direction. This shed, as well as the ship, was very costly, and
 in an unfortunate hour was torn from its moorings by a tempest, which
 did other damage entailing great expense and time for repairs. The
 inventor’s resources were becoming strained; for, as reported, the shed
 cost $50,000, while the first balloon cost more than twice that sum.
Finally, the first launching was officially set for June 30, 1900. The
 lake was thronged with people massed along the shores, and dotting
 its surface with every kind of craft, from the fisherman’s primitive
 boat to the handsomest private yacht, or launch. All day the expectant
 multitude waited, only to learn at dusk, that the inflation was not
 completed. Next day they tarried again till evening, and merely saw
 the raft on which the balloon rested, towed out of the floating house.
 On the third day, July 2d, those who waited were rewarded with an
 interesting spectacle. The long stiff air ship was drawn forth from
 its shed, like a ram rod from a gun. Count Zeppelin, with two men,
 occupied the front boat, while two others took the rear one. After
 careful adjustment the vessel was liberated, at eight o’clock, rose
 slowly and advanced over the water, accompanied by the droning of its
 propellers and the shouts of the delighted spectators, who realized
 that they might be witnessing the commencement of a new epoch in
 aërial navigation. But the voyage was not an unqualified success.
 The controlling mechanism became deranged, the framework was bent,
 and the propellers could not be worked properly. A gentle wind was
 blowing and the vessel drifted149 with it, having an independent speed
 of only thirteen feet per second, at best. At eight-twenty she reached
 Immenstadt and landed on the water, having voyaged three and one half
 miles, and having attained a height of thirteen hundred feet on a part
 of the journey.
At that date the Zeppelin I was by far the largest and most
 elaborate air ship ever constructed. Her hull measured 416 feet long,
 38 feet across, cubed nearly 400,000 feet, weighed 9 tons, and had a
 displacement of 10 tons. The trellised frame was made of aluminum, and
 its body comprised seventeen compartments, of which fifteen were 26
 feet long, and the other two 13 feet long. The outer cover was of linen
 treated with pegamoid and tightly stretched. The hydrogen sacs were of
 thin fabric. The propulsion was effected by two benzine motors, one in
 either boat, which together developed 32 horse power, each driving,
 by means of bevel gears and shafting, a pair of four-blade propellers
 3.77 feet in diameter, at 1,100 revolutions per minute. Steering
 sidewise was effected by means of vertical rudders, while the trim was
 controlled by horizontal rudders at either side of the vessel, as also
 by means of a sliding weight which could be drawn fore and aft by means
 of a winch. Naturally some of these details were superseded ere long by
 better devices suggested by subsequent experience.
On October 17, 1900, Zeppelin I made her second voyage, and with much
 better result. Starting from the same balloon house at Manzell, at
 four-forty-five, she promptly rose a thousand feet, and maneuvered in
 a seven-mile wind, steering in great curves at the will of the pilot.
 At times the speed was nearly twenty miles an hour, as determined by
 continuous observations of the balloon’s position, taken from three
 points of a triangle, together with the150 velocity of the wind on its
 course, duly recorded by an anemometer. Finally a landing on the water
 was made at six o’clock, without mishap.
This last demonstration left the Count triumphant in other respects,
 but without sufficient funds to bring his invention into practical
 use. He must, therefore, look for additional money for the proper
 continuation of his great work. The financial task thus ensuing
 occupied much of his time during the next five years, but he finally
 secured capital enough to continue his experiments and to build a
 second airship. This was completed and ready for trial in the latter
 part of 1905.
Zeppelin II resembled its predecessor in appearance, but embodied
 many improvements suggested by the former trials. Its hull was 414
 feet long, 38 feet in diameter, held 367,000 cubic feet of hydrogen
 in its sixteen gas bags, and weighed with all appliances and cargo,
 about nine tons. It was, therefore, about ten per cent smaller than
 its predecessor; but at the same time it was far better powered than
 the earlier one, and more effectively controlled. Each boat carried
 an 85-horse-power Daimler benzine motor, actuating two enlarged
 propellers. Ample steering surfaces, operated by the helmsman in the
 front boat, served to turn the great ship about either of three axes
 and, at the same time, to displace her bodily up and down in the air,
 either by direct lift or by canting her hull so that her screw thrust
 and the pressure on her sides would produce the desired translation.
Two trials of Zeppelin’s second air ship were made on the Borden-See,
 one on November 30, 1906, the other on January 17, 1907; but both
 met with serious accident. In the first trial the balloon was towed
 by a motor boat some distance, then cut loose in the wind, which
 was carrying it forward faster151 than the boat. But it soon became
 unmanageable and plunged into the water, suffering considerable damage.
 In the second trial it flew for a short time at a speed of thirty
 feet per second, when the engines were developing 36 horse power.
 Some maneuvering was effected in a strong wind, but presently the
 propellers stopped, the vessel dropped to the shore and was anchored on
 the ground. During the night it was so badly damaged by the wind that
 Count Zeppelin ordered it to be taken to pieces to furnish material for
 further construction.
The loss of two mammoth air ships after such brief trial seemed
 enough to appall even a sturdy general of the Prussian army; but
 Count Zeppelin was too resolute to waste time in futile tears and
 hopeless dejection. Strong natures are usually stimulated by disaster,
 and aroused to fuller energy, to grimmer determination, if not to
 desperate hazard. However, not desperation, but buoyant hope and high
 expectation, based on ample experience, were now his ruling motive. Had
 not his ship attained thirty feet per second with less than one fourth
 her motive power? The year began with disaster indeed, but he intended
 it to terminate in glorious victory. And such, indeed, was the happy
 issue.
October, 1907, witnessed the launching of Zeppelin III. She had the
 same length as her immediate predecessor, but she was a luckier vessel
 and better powered. On her official trial she voyaged at the height of
 half a mile, carrying eleven persons sixty-seven miles in two hours
 and seventeen minutes, or at more than twenty-nine miles per hour.
 This was a record velocity exceeding that of the best military balloon
 in France. At times she attained a velocity of fifty feet per second,
 thus considerably outspeeding the swiftest ocean liner. Moreover, her
 stability and steering qualities were152 excellent. With pardonable
 elation, therefore, the illustrious inventor could report to the
 Minister of War the complete success of his experiments. And with good
 reason the German government now granted financial aid to test more
 fully the merits of the rigid system of construction.
With this assistance the industrious aëronaut erected a new floating
 house on the Borden-See at Friedrichshafen, and began the construction
 of a still larger air ship embodying further improvements in various
 details. Zeppelin IV was 446 feet long, 42.5 in diameter, held
 460,000 cubic feet of hydrogen in her sixteen compartments, and had a
 total buoyancy of sixteen tons. She had a surplus buoyancy of over two
 tons, carried a crew of 18 men, and had an estimated range of action
 of eighteen hundred miles. When drawn from her shed in the autumn of
 1907, her great buoyant hull resting lightly on the water supported by
 her two floating cars, she had all the appearance of a royal passenger
 express ready for important service. In general features the vessel
 was like her three predecessors, but in the center of the keel, with
 transparent floors and windowed sides, was a special stateroom designed
 for passengers only. This seemed very suggestive, if not prophetic,
 of the future trend of aërial navigation. Moreover, the mechanism of
 propulsion and control were increased in power and effectiveness.
 In each boat-like car was a 110-horse-power Daimler benzine engine,
 actuating a pair of three-blade propellers about 15 feet in diameter.
 A large vertical rudder, mounted on the extreme end of the stern, and
 supplemented by a pair of smaller vertical rudders at either side of
 the stern, served to steer the vessel right and left. For steering
 up and down, as also for exerting a direct lift up or down, four
 superposed planes like a Venetian blind were placed at either side of
 the153 hull fore and aft, at about the same level as the propellers. In
 addition the hull was provided, like a feathered arrow, with fixed
 fin-like planes at the stern, both vertical and horizontal, for
 securing steadiness of flight.
Several trials of this leviathan were made preliminary to her official
 government test which, if satisfactory, assured her purchase by the
 German government for $500,000. At the builder’s suggestion this test
 should include a voyage of 24 hours duration, a safe descent on land or
 water, an ascent to 4,000 feet, and the fulfillment of various secret
 requirements. In the autumn of 1907 a successful voyage of eight hours
 was easily accomplished. In the early part of the next summer, 1908, a
 series of voyages were made which aroused intense interest throughout
 the civilized world. On June 13th the great ship, starting from her
 harbor at Friedrichshafen, sailed over the Alps to Lucerne, steering
 in among the mountains; here buffeted by eddies, and cross currents,
 there stemming such stiff head winds that her shadow could hardly
 creep forward over the ground, again driving through a dark lowering
 hailstorm which pelted with ominous thunder on her resounding hull; but
 at length reaching Lucerne safely, then returning in triumph to her
 harbor at Friedrichshafen. For twelve hours the stanch vessel endured
 the elements, by no means hospitable, and in that period voyaged 270
 miles at an average speed of 22 miles an hour. It was a record journey
 and a triumph in the art.
The following picturesque account of a flight in Count von Zeppelin’s
 gigantic air ship, written by Emil Sandt, appeared in the Scientific
 American Supplement of August 15, 1908:
“Early in the morning Professor Hergesell, Freiherr von Bassus, Dr.
 Stalberg, Herr Uhland, and154 myself set out in Count Zeppelin’s launch
 for the shed in which the great air ship is housed. When we arrived
 everything was in readiness for us. Count Zeppelin is proud of the fact
 that his colossal craft can be drawn in and out of the shed with very
 little help. In seven minutes the huge gas bag had emerged, and a few
 minutes later we were floating up to the sky. I took my station in the
 central car or cabin, a comfortable room flooded with the yellow light
 that filters through the translucent balloon fabric of which the walls,
 the floor and the ceiling are constituted. Comfortable seats suspended
 from fine chains provide a seating capacity for a dozen passengers.
“For a great portion of their length the walls are provided with
 celluloid panes. The floor is also transparent wherever it is not used
 as a footway. Seated comfortably in the central car, I could look
 down through my knees and see the green earth, water, people, cities
 and castles far below. I could also see birds circling around and
 fluttering anxiously, evidently frightened by the strange giant of the
 air.
“We crossed over to the Ueberlinger See, traversed the intermediate
 neck of land, and turned into the valley of the Rhine at Konstanz.
 Here I left the central car and walked toward the rear car along the
 keelway, which is flanked with balloon cloth, and which is closed at
 the end of the keelway by a celluloid door. I opened the door and
 stepped out on the narrow aluminum gangway, which runs down sharply
 to the rear car. The gangway has no protecting handrail. It is merely
 ribbed to give a better foothold. That apparently flimsy structure
 bridges a chasm of twenty feet between the end of the keelway and the
 car. From below, the passage from the keelway and the car must seem
 perilous155 indeed, but up in the air ship itself no fear is felt. I
 stood on this narrow bridge and gazed on the landscape. To the north
 I could see the Hohendtwiel. Behind us lay the Swabian See glistening
 in the morning’s sun. In the southeast I saw Thurgau wrapped in violet
 light. On the horizon the lofty peak of the Saentis rose broad and
 jagged, capped with ice and snow. Below us writhed the Rhine. I looked
 across at the propellers. Count von Zeppelin had signaled full speed
 ahead. The giant air ship trembled. The propellers seemed like disks,
 revolving with furious speed and yet as transparent as a locust’s
 wings. They gave out a note like that of a deep organ, so loud that the
 human voice, even when lifted to a shriek, could hardly be heard.
“I walked down to the rear car to obtain a better view. Here the
 gigantic craft could be seen in a wonderful perspective. The sensation
 was strange. The giant ship obediently sank and rose. Obediently moved
 to the right or to the left, slavishly following the slightest pressure
 of the human hand. Sometimes its angle was such that the entire fabric
 seemed inclined like a kite. At times the forward car lay below us; at
 times we had to look up at it.
“As we neared the splendid falls of the Rhine at Schaffhausen, the
 Count brought the air ship down, in order to ascertain whether the
 eddies occasioned by the waterfall would have any effect.
“We turned into the Reusstal, but were buffeted by the wind all the way
 up the valley. To the south the sharp jutting peak of Mount Pilatus
 hove in sight. Soon Lucerne appeared, a jewel among cities. The lake
 itself shimmered brightly where it was struck by the sun; its darker
 portions lay like an emerald, held in a setting of heliotrope. It was
 like a melody in colors. Below us in Lucerne itself there was a hubbub
 and a great jubilation. The streets156 were crowded with gayly clad
 people. The roads were a-swarm. Zeppelin guided his air ship down, and
 allowed it to glide full speed over the city at the height of a church
 steeple.
“We traveled over the Vierwaldstaetter See, and crossed to Knessnacht,
 to Zug Lake, and up northward to Zug itself. Then came the most
 difficult task which Professor Hergesell had assigned to the air ship.
 The craft was to carry us straight across to Lake Zurich, through
 a narrow pass where it would be caught in a veritable cyclone. The
 motors groaned and rattled. The propellers howled a deep groaning
 song. The air ship did all that it could. The wind was dead against
 us, traveling with a velocity of nearly thirty-one miles an hour. The
 Count could easily have arisen and escaped the fury of the blast, but
 it was his purpose not to avoid obstacles, but to court them. Whenever
 the great air ship showed signs of swerving, it was brought back to
 its course. Far below us in the valley the sharply marked shadow of
 the air ship, crawling slowly from tree to tree, showed us how hard it
 was struggling. There were minutes when it seemed as if we stood stock
 still, despite the infernal music of the propellers. Gradually the nose
 of the craft was thrust forward; once more the air ship mastered the
 winds. We had forced our way through the pass, and were dashing on at
 full speed. The vast shadow below us traveled with the velocity of a
 bird over the mountain, valleys, cliffs and rocky points, over railway
 embankments and road, over water and land.”
Two attempts were made in July, 1908, to complete the government test;
 but they proved abortive, and in the second one the hull was damaged by
 the wind pushing it sidewise against the shed, as it was being towed
 out by motor boat. This accident caused a delay of two weeks, much
 to the disappointment 157of the expectant populace. As a consequence
 Zeppelin resolved to begin the next attempt unheralded. He had the
 repairs made quickly and all was ready early in August.
On Tuesday, August 4th, at six forty-five in the morning, the great
 twenty-four hour test for the government began, without previous
 announcement, but with fairest prospect of success. Sailing from
 Friedrichshafen, Zeppelin purposed to follow the Rhine as far down
 as Mayence, then return in a direct line to his starting point. All
 went splendidly at first. He passed Constance at seven o’clock in
 the morning, Basle at nine-thirty, Strassburg about noon, then with
 slower speed passed Mannheim at two-fifty and Darmstadt at four-thirty.
 At about six o’clock a descent was made at Oppenheim, eleven and a
 quarter hours after starting. The air ship had voyaged 270 miles at the
 average speed of 22 miles an hour. A wonderful demonstration it was
 for the inhabitants of that historic valley, and a glorious tour for
 the brave old sailor and his crew. Resuming the voyage, Mayence, the
 turning point, was reached at eleven o’clock at night, and the vessel
 was headed for home. But now the engines, being overworked, could
 not maintain the usual speed, which therefore was lowered to twelve
 miles an hour. Next morning at eight o’clock, after Stuttgart had been
 passed, a descent had to be made at the village of Echterdingen, to
 adjust and overhaul the machinery. Ninety-five miles of the return had
 been made in nine hours.
It was most unfortunate that a landing had to be made without a harbor,
 particularly as a gale was in pursuit of the vessel. Ere long she was
 torn from her moorings by a squall, carried into the air, and set on
 fire, probably by an electric discharge. Immediately the great hull was
 enveloped in flame and completely 158destroyed, leaving a tangled network
 of distorted framing. It was a dismal termination to the greatest motor
 balloon voyage in the world’s history up to that date; for the vessel
 had been in the air continuously for twenty and three-fourths hours and
 had traveled 378 miles.
The hardy and venerable hero of so many voyages and long continued
 experiments quite broke down at the sight of his grandest vessel in
 ruin. But an unlooked for and a sudden turn of events brought him the
 greatest triumph in his darkest hour. While the world expressed its
 grief and sympathy his loyal countrymen hastened to his relief in an
 admirable burst of enthusiasm. Within twenty-four hours the government
 had made him a grant of $125,000, and subscriptions offered in all
 parts of Germany brought the sum to over $500,000. By October, 1908,
 the total gift amounted to $1,500,000, which was paid to the Zeppelin
 Air Ship Company, formed for developing and building air ships on a
 large scale. A tract of 300 acres was secured at Friedrichshafen for
 an air ship factory. Here was erected the necessary shops, hydrogen
 plant, balloon harbor, and everything necessary to enable the company
 to construct several mammoth air ships each year. To these new grounds
 the Count’s former interests were gradually conveyed, while his old
 station, with its air ship dock on Lake Constance, was converted into a
 military post by the German government.
After the destruction of Zeppelin IV, its predecessor, the Count’s
 third air ship, was again prepared for service and for new triumphs.
 Her hull was lengthened by the addition of a cylindrical section having
 the length of one compartment, or about 26 feet. This alteration gave
 a considerable increase of net buoyancy with but slight increase of
 resistance. 159The dimensions now were: length 446 feet, diameter 38
 feet, volume 423,768 cubic feet. The gas was contained in sixteen
 sacs, twelve in the cylindrical part and two at each end. The ship
 was propelled by two 85-horse-power engines, supplied with sufficient
 gasoline for a forty-one hour voyage at 25 miles per hour. The loss of
 gas by leakage was less by weight than the loss of fuel. The famous old
 cruiser, thus remodeled, was operated in the autumn of 1908 with her
 usual precision and grace; thus winning new distinction and renown. On
 one occasion she had as passengers the Crown Prince and the Kaiser’s
 brother, Prince Henry. The Emperor himself witnessed the demonstration,
 and decorated the Count, referring to him as “the greatest German of
 the century.” Soon afterward the ship was taken over by the government
 and assigned to the Prussian Battalion of Aëronauts, being christened
 Zeppelin I, since it was the first vessel of the kind taken into the
 military service.
Beginning with March 9, 1909, the military Zeppelin I was kept in
 active operation by the officers, and subjected to a wide variety of
 tests day by day. She was driven through rain and snowstorms, at all
 elevations up to a mile; she was anchored over land and over water,
 sometimes exposed for hours to a gale; she was steered in and out of
 her shed without the aid of her floating raft; she was sent on long
 trips, landed in the open country, by day and by night, and returned to
 harbor in safety. On one occasion she carried twenty-six passengers for
 over an hour and a half; again she made an endurance flight of thirteen
 hours. These maneuvers exhibited for the first time many capabilities
 of the ship, which all along had been stoutly affirmed by the inventor,
 but questioned by his critics.
On April 1, 1909, at four o’clock in the morning,160 the renowned
 Zeppelin I, with the Count as helmsman, started through the rain
 and wind on a voyage from Friedrichshafen to Munich, a hundred miles
 distant. The ship followed the railway as far as Ulm, guided by the
 station lights, which were kept burning all night to mark the route. As
 she approached Munich, at the appointed hour of nine next morning, her
 approach was announced from afar by the droning of her machinery and
 propellers, whereupon she was welcomed by loud music from many bands
 and the joyous ringing of all the bells in the city. The Prince Regent
 of Bavaria and a great throng of applauding citizens awaited her at the
 Teresenhohe park. Presently the swift cruiser approached, sailing over
 the steeple tops like a monstrous arrow. She halted before the Regent
 and dipped her bow three times, in graceful salute. Then she circled
 widely over the city, intending to land at the Oberwiesenfeld Parade
 Grounds, where part of the garrison troops were drawn up to receive
 her. But now, while so near the goal, she found it difficult to stem
 the increasing gale, and unsafe to land; so, with her bow pointed to
 the city, and propellers humming furiously, she gradually yielded to
 the storm, and drifted slowly backward toward the northeast.
The crucial hour had come for this stanch vessel and her audacious
 captain. They wrestled with the storm bravely and obstinately, but
 were beaten back steadily, with no port in view. The Count determined
 to weather the gale till it should spend its fury. He coolly sent an
 aërogram to Munich, saying that all was well and that he might reach
 the city late in the day. Observing a suitable place to land, near
 the village of Loiching, he pointed the prow of his ship downward,
 approached the earth and cast anchor. As the front car touched the
 ground it was grasped by the willing hands of thronging peasants and
 vil161lagers. Presently the ship was taken in charge by a military
 relief party which the Count had hailed on the way, at Guendelkoven,
 and which had hastened to his aid in automobiles. Fifty soldiers, in
 regular shifts, that night held the bow of the vessel by a short leash.
 The anchor was firmly fastened, and additional ropes secured the bow
 to an unwheeled wagon loaded with stones. Thus all night long that
 mighty hull swayed to and fro in the passing storm, securely as a ship
 anchored at sea.
Next morning the vessel was well replenished and headed for home, by
 way of Munich. The return was easy, for the wind had nearly reversed
 its course. Sailing at 32 miles an hour, with a quartering current,
 the stormbeaten ship soon reached Munich, where she was hailed with
 boundless enthusiasm. The Prince Regent entertained the Count during
 his sojourn of three hours, and decorated him with a gold medal. The
 ship then sailed for Friedrichshafen, with the full speed of the wind
 and of her propellers, at one time attaining 68 miles an hour. At
 nightfall she landed gently on the lake near Manzell, having weathered
 that tempestuous voyage without serious mishap.
This was a splendid proof of her stanchness; but a few days later
 she was put through other tests quite as severe, one being a night
 voyage of thirteen and a third hours, after a day of busy maneuvering.
 Following this came her still longer voyage, to Metz, where she was
 stationed as a frontier war vessel, and one of a considerable fleet
 contemplated by the German government.
In the meantime the energetic Count had started his fifth vessel, or
 military Zeppelin II, which now was nearing completion at the works
 of the Zeppelin Air Ship Construction Company. Her hull measured 446
 feet in length, had a diameter of 42½ feet,162 and a volume of over
 half a million cubic feet. It also had a ladder running through one
 of the compartments to a platform on its top. Her motors of 220 horse
 power were taken uninjured from the wreck of the old Zeppelin IV at
 Echterdingen.
Without previous notice this new air ship set forth in a rain on the
 evening of May 29, 1909, headed toward Berlin, having on board the
 Count and seven other men. The purpose of the voyage was merely to
 exercise the ship; not to reach any definite goal; but by mistake she
 was reported on her way to Berlin, so that the Kaiser and his retinue
 waited some hours in vain to receive her. She voyaged bravely past
 Nuremberg and Leipsic to Bitterfeld, within 85 miles of the capital;
 then turned for home, the Count being unaware of the hopes he was
 disappointing. She returned successfully past Weimar and Stuttgart,
 then, near Goeppingen, descended on an open plain to take on gasoline
 from a neighboring petroleum refinery. As they were nearing the ground
 in a heavy rain, Count Zeppelin, who was acting as pilot, suddenly
 beheld, just before them, a half dead pear tree, with gaunt bare limbs.
 He gave a sharp order to starboard the helm; but his aëronaut, worn by
 too long service, thrust the helm to port, and the ship, impelled by a
 sudden gust, plunged head on against the tree. Her prow was wrecked,
 the frame and envelope being wrenched and torn for a distance of 100
 feet.
The disaster seemed complete, but the dauntless Count was equal to the
 emergency. Twenty workmen were summoned from Friedrichshafen, sixty
 miles away, and sped to the rescue in automobiles. Electric wires from
 a nearby plant were stretched to furnish light for night repairs. The
 grounds were guarded by police and troops. The hull was detached from
 the tree; furnished with a temporary163 prow of young firs covered with
 balloon cloth; relieved of the forward motors and other impedimenta;
 furnished with fresh supplies; and, in exactly 28 hours from the
 mishap, was ready for the homeward voyage.
Slowly the crippled air ship sailed for Friedrichshafen, followed by
 the white-haired inventor in an automobile, unmoved and triumphant.
 A mighty shout ascended from the immense crowd of witnesses who had
 assembled from many quarters. All Germany was elated and jubilant. The
 great voyage and the prompt recovery from apparent disaster were a
 triumph of the whole people, for they had helped their hero to build
 this ship, and now participated in his victory over the spite of
 fortune and the elements. The Emperor telegraphed his congratulations,
 affirming his renewed confidence in the rigid system. Without further
 difficulty the vessel reached her port at an easy gait of ten miles an
 hour, thus completing a memorable voyage of seven hundred miles—one of
 the most glorious in the history of aëronautics.
If the citizens of Berlin were disappointed on this occasion,
 they had not long to wait for an aërial visit from the wizard of
 Friedrichshafen. On August 27th, at 4.45 a.m., his crew of
 five men sailed for Berlin via Nuremberg and Leipsic in his sixth air
 ship, his latest and largest, hurriedly finished for the Berlin voyage.
 It cubed 533,000 feet, and was driven by two Daimler engines of 150
 nominal horse power each. In the afternoon they reached Nuremberg,
 circled over the city and landed for the night. Starting at 2.15 next
 morning they battled their way toward Leipsic against a strong wind,
 and at 6.45 p.m. landed for the night at Bitterfeld, where
 they arrived with a broken propeller. Here Count Zeppelin joined
 them. The next morning,164 after a good night’s rest and some repairs,
 they started at half past seven, in a dense fog, which, however, soon
 cleared. Finally they arrived at Berlin at half past twelve o’clock,
 as the people were returning from church. They circled over the city,
 to the delight of the multitude of spectators who thronged the house
 tops, parks, and thoroughfares, finally reaching the parade ground at
 Tegel. Here, after saluting the Emperor, the happy navigator maneuvered
 before the imperial tribune, greeted by the thunderous Hoch! Hoch! of
 a hundred thousand throats, and the ringing of all the church bells of
 the nation’s capital. The venerable Count was graciously received by
 the Emperor and members of the royal family. After spending the day at
 Berlin, the crew sailed for Friedrichshafen, about midnight, where,
 after various accidents and delays, they arrived in safety on September
 6th.
In some respects this was Von Zeppelin’s crowning voyage of the year,
 though effected with a hurriedly finished vessel, not yet thoroughly
 adjusted. In mechanical execution this journey was equaled on many
 other occasions; for those great air ships were kept in active service
 and were everywhere hailed with enthusiasm. Both the Emperor and his
 people were proud to number those grand cruisers among the nation’s
 aërial warships. With general commendation, therefore, was received
 the announcement that four large Zeppelins were ordered for the use
 of the German navy. And not surprising was the announcement that other
 inventors were at work on designs for dirigibles of the rigid type.
 The projects of these new rivals, who began to appear in 1909, are set
 forth in the following account:[17]
165
 drinking. Fortunately also the other gases do not so precipitate, else
 the world might be flooded with liquid nitrogen and oxygen, entailing
 who knows what disastrous consequences.
After this digression on the composition of the atmosphere, we may
 henceforth regard the aërial ocean as a mixture of two substances,
 dry air and water; the first, a permanent gas; the second, a
 variable element, existing at times in either the solid, liquid, or
 vaporous state. For the sake of convenience we may first study the
 dry atmosphere, then the moist. The dynamic properties of the dry
 atmosphere may in large measure be deduced by an application of two
 well-established laws of physics. These will be taken in order.
By careful investigation it has been proved that throughout a
 considerable range of pressure and353 temperature the permanent gases
 very approximately obey the following law; the volume of a permanent
 gas varies directly as its absolute temperature and inversely as its
 pressure. In other words the product of its pressure and volume equals
 the absolute temperature multiplied by a numerical constant. This may
 be expressed algebraically by the following formula:
PV = RT                (1) 
in which P is the pressure and V the volume of a given portion of
 gas at the absolute temperature T, and R is a numerical constant
 for the gas in question.
The value of R in the foregoing equation has been determined
 experimentally for the component gases of the atmosphere, and for dry
 air as a whole. For dry air, which, under such conditions as surround
 the aëronaut, may be treated as a single uniform gas, the equation
 applied to one kilogram gives R = PoVo/To = 29.27, where Po, Vo,
 To, are respectively the pressure, volume and temperature, in the
 metric system, of the one kilogram of air under standard conditions;
 i. e., Po = 10,330 kilograms per square meter, being the normal
 atmospheric pressure; Vo = 1/1.293 cubic meter, being the volume of
 one kilogram of dry air at normal pressure and freezing temperature;
 To = 273° C., being the absolute temperature of freezing. In passing,
 be it said that the absolute temperature is that measured from the
 absolute zero, which on the Centigrade scale is 273° below freezing, on
 the Fahrenheit, 460.6° below freezing.
The second law referred to follows directly from the principle of the
 permanence of mass. It is a general observation in physics that a given
 portion of matter is of constant mass, however its354 pressure, volume,
 temperature and other conditions may vary. In particular, the mass of a
 given portion of matter always equals the product of its mean density
 and volume, since density is defined as the amount of mass in the unit
 volume. Expressing this physical law, or relation algebraically, gives
 ρV = mass = ρo, Vo, in which ρ, V, are the general symbols
 for the density and volume of the given portion of matter under any
 condition, while ρo, Vo, are the specific values of ρ and V
 observed for some one state and circumstance of the substance in
 question. In particular, if the mass of air be unity, we may write:
ρV = 1                (2)
This relation, together with that expressed in equation (1), will
 enable us to deduce many of the properties of dry air and of a dry
 atmosphere.
First let us observe from equation (1) the effect, in turn, of keeping
 constant one of the quantities P, V, T, while the other two vary.
 The equation shows that if the temperature of a gas is kept constant
 the volume is inversely proportional to the temperature. This is called
 the law of Boyle and Mariotte from its two independent discoverers,
 of whom Boyle seems to have been the first. As an example of Boyle’s
 law, if any empty glass, or diving bell, be inverted over water,
 then submerged deeper and deeper, the air within it will shrink with
 increase of pressure, its volume becoming one half when the pressure is
 doubled, one third when the pressure is trebled, etc. In particular, if
 the pressure changes by one unit, the corresponding change of volume
 is 1/P part of that volume. For example, if a captive balloon is
 anchored in air at constant temperature, while the barometric pressure
 changes from 30.0 inches to 30.1 inches, the355 volume of the balloon
 will contract 1/300 part of itself.
Again equation (1) shows that if the pressure of a gas is kept
 constant, the volume is proportional to the absolute temperature. This
 is the law of Charles and Gay Lussac, so called from its discoverers,
 of whom Charles is thought to have been the first. As an example of
 this law, if a captive thin rubber balloon is heated, or cooled, its
 volume will vary directly as its absolute temperature. In particular,
 if the temperature is changed one degree, the volume changes 1/T
 part of itself. For example, if the temperature of a balloon in air of
 constant barometric pressure is heated from 300° C. to 301° C., its
 volume will expand 1/300 part of itself. Historically, be it said, this
 law of Charles and the law of Boyle were discovered separately, then
 combined, giving equation (1).
Still a third, though not independent relation may be read from
 equation (1), thus: when the volume of a gas is kept constant, the
 pressure is proportional to the absolute temperature. In particular, if
 the temperature is changed one degree, the pressure varies accordingly
 by 1/T part of itself. For example, if an air tank or gas tank, in a
 room at 500° F., changes one degree in temperature, its pressure will
 change 1/500 part.
With minute detail these three conclusions from the general equation
 (1) have been set forth and illustrated, because of their practical
 importance. Other valuable results may be obtained by similar
 reasoning. Thus equation (2) may be read; the volume of a unit mass of
 any substance is the reciprocal of its density. Hence, if in the three
 foregoing conclusions, the reciprocal of the density is everywhere
 written for the volume, three new relations will be obtained which
 are of frequent practical use. Two356 of them may be expressed in the
 following important law; the density of a gas varies directly as its
 pressure and inversely as its temperature. Useful applications of this
 law in aëronautics suggest themselves at once.
By means of the various foregoing equations, the value of either one
 of the four quantities P, V, T, ρ, representing respectively
 the pressure, volume, absolute temperature, and the density, may be
 obtained in terms of any two of the others. If then any two of the
 quantities is observed, the others can be at once computed. If, for
 example, the pressure and temperature of dry air be observed at any
 point, its density can be computed from the formulæ, also its volume
 per kilogram weight, and thence its volume for any other weight. It is
 important therefore to be able to measure satisfactorily at least two
 of the four quantities. In usual studies of the atmosphere the pressure
 and temperature are observed directly. The method and instruments
 employed for that purpose are too well known to require description
 here.
In some speculations the pressure and temperature of the atmosphere
 are assumed, and certain interesting conclusions drawn. For instance,
 if the temperature is assumed constant throughout a dry atmosphere,
 the fluid will obey Boyle’s law, and it can be easily shown that the
 height of such a medium is the same whether it comprise much gas or
 little.[58] Again assuming the temperature and pressure constant, the
 height of the normal homogeneous atmosphere can be computed by dividing
 the pressure per square unit by its weight per cubic unit. In this way
 the height of the normal homogeneous atmosphere has been found to be
 about five miles. But these are hypothetical cases, of purely theoretic
 357interest. In practice the temperature may, on the average, be assumed
 to decrease 6° C. for each kilometer of ascent, and the pressures may
 then be computed for various elevations by use of Boyle’s law, as done
 for Table I.
This leads us to a study of the gaseous properties of moist air. By
 moist air is meant a mixture of dry air and aqueous vapor in the form
 of an invisible elastic gas. The definition does not comprise air
 containing visible steam, or mist, or cloud, but clear moist air such
 as one ordinarily breathes. The study of this mixture may be preceded
 by a brief account of the gaseous properties of the vapor alone.
If water in sufficiently small quantity be introduced in a vacuum
 bottle at any ordinary temperature, it will promptly evaporate,
 forming an invisible gas known as aqueous vapor, filling the bottle
 and exerting a uniform pressure on its walls, except for the minute
 difference at top and bottom due to gravity. The vapor weighs 0.622 as
 much as dry air having the same volume, temperature and pressure, or
 quite accurately ⅝ as much. It obeys all the laws given above for
 ordinary gases and dry air. But it has one singularity; at ordinary
 atmospheric temperatures, it cannot be indefinitely compressed
 without condensing to a liquid. In this respect it differs from the
 chief components of the atmosphere, which at ordinary temperatures
 can endure indefinite pressure without liquefaction. The ammonia and
 carbon dioxide in the air can, it is true, be condensed by pressure at
 their usual temperatures, but not by such pressures as occur in the
 free atmosphere, thus still leaving aqueous vapor the one singular
 constituent.
Reverting to the behavior of the water in the assumed vacuum
 bottle at fixed temperature, it may be observed that the pressure
 of the invisible vapor is358 directly proportional to the amount of
 liquid evaporated. In other words, for any fixed temperature the
 vapor pressure is directly proportional to its density. When this
 density reaches a certain definite amount, dependent solely upon the
 temperature, no further evaporation will occur, unless some of the
 vapor condenses. The pressure of saturation for that temperature has
 been reached, and any attempt to increase the pressure, by diminishing
 the volume of the vapor, will cause liquefaction at constant
 temperature.
If, however, the space is not saturated, the mass of vapor present may
 be expressed as a percentage of the amount required for saturation at
 that temperature. This percentage is called the relative humidity. Thus
 if the relative humidity is seventy per cent, the actual mass of water
 vapor present at the observed temperature is seventy per cent of the
 maximum that can exist in the given space, at the given temperature. In
 other words, the relative humidity is the ratio of the actual to the
 possible humidity at a given temperature.
In like manner, for any given vapor pressure there is a definite
 saturation temperature, known as the dew-point. If with constant
 pressure the vapor is given various temperatures higher than the
 dew-point, it will remain gaseous and invisible; but if it falls in
 temperature to the dew-point, liquefaction occurs, and drops of water
 appear on the inner wall of the vessel. Further cooling will entail
 still further liquefaction and reduction of pressure; for the lower
 the temperature the less the possible mass and pressure of saturation.
 But for all temperatures, down to freezing and considerably below,
 some vapor exists, and obeys the same laws as at higher temperatures.
 When, however, saturation occurs below freezing, the vapor may be
 precipitated359 as snow instead of water. This is a familiar phenomenon
 in the free atmosphere.
The actual mass of water vapor present in a cubic unit of space
 is sometimes called the absolute humidity. A formula giving the
 absolute humidity f, in kilograms per cubic meter, for any observed
 temperature t, and vapor pressure e, may be written as follows:
f = 0.00106 e / (1 + 0.00367 t)
in which e is the vapor pressure in millimeters of mercury, and t
 is the common Centigrade reading. As an illustration of the actual
 values of the pressure, temperature and density of saturated water
 vapor, for various conditions, the following table is presented:
Temperature, Pressure and Density of Aqueous Vapor, in Metric
 Measures.
Now by Dalton’s law, each gas or vapor in a mixture of several behaves
 as if it were alone. Thus if the foregoing experiment be conducted in
 a bottle360 containing various gases chemically inert to water, the same
 mass of water will be evaporated, and exert the same uniform pressure,
 in addition to those exerted by the gases. Now the density of each
 gas or vapor present, will equal its mass divided by its volume, and
 the density of the mixture will equal the total mass divided by the
 volume. Furthermore, it is well known that aqueous vapor is less dense
 than dry air at the same temperature and pressure. From this it is at
 once evident that moist air, which is merely a mixture of dry air and
 aqueous vapor, must be lighter than dry air at the same temperature and
 pressure. This is true whether the two fluids compared be in closed
 vessels or in the free atmosphere.
Accordingly in all precise dealing with the free air, whether involving
 its buoyancy, its resistance, its energy or any other mass function,
 its density as affected by the humidity must be taken into account.
 This can be computed from the observed pressure, temperature and
 relative humidity as revealed by well known instruments, the barometer,
 thermometer and hygrometer. Thus from the observed temperature and
 relative humidity, the mass of vapor present per cubic meter is read
 from Table III, the reader, of course, multiplying the given tabulated
 mass by the observed percentage of humidity. To this aqueous mass must
 be added the mass of dry air present. Then the total mass per cubic
 meter is the density.
Various formulæ are available for computing the density of moist
 air from the readings of the three instruments mentioned above.
 Also, tables have been worked out giving the density without further
 calculation. Moreover, the density of free air may be directly
 measured, accurately enough for most purposes, by means of a
 densimeter. A simple formula 361for finding the density of moist air is
 as follows:
ρ = 0.465 (b−e)/T
in which b, e, are the pressures in millimeters mercury
 respectively of the moist air and its vapor, as revealed by the
 barometer and hygrometer.
In practice no great error will be made in assuming the relative
 humidity to be fifty per cent. For the moisture content never exceeds
 five per cent of the mass of the moist air, and hence in assuming a
 fifty per cent relative humidity, when there is actually a maximum
 or minimum humidity, the greatest possible error in estimating the
 moisture content is 2.5 per cent of the mass of moist air. Now if 2.5
 per cent of a mass of air be assumed to be aqueous vapor when all is
 really dry air, or conversely if 2.5 per cent of the whole mass be
 assumed as dry air when it is really aqueous vapor, an error of much
 less than 2.5 per cent is made in estimating the true density. No error
 at all would ensue if both air and vapor were of the same density; but
 since one is ⅝ as heavy as the other, the possible error is ⅜ of
 2.5 per cent, or 0.6 per cent. This is a negligible quantity in all
 mechanical considerations, except where great accuracy is required.
When any gas changes density or volume it also changes temperature,
 unless there be transfer of heat between it and its environment. When
 change of volume occurs without such transfer of heat the expansion,
 or contraction, is called “adiabatic;” when it occurs at constant
 temperature, the expansion is called “isothermal,” the temperature
 being kept uniform by suitable transfer of heat; when it occurs at
 constant pressure it is called “isopiestic.” In either case work may
 be done by the enlarging gas, if it press against a moving piston,
 or yielding362 envelope of some kind; and conversely work may be spent
 on the gas in compressing it either isothermally, adiabatically or
 isopiestically.
If, for example, a balloon rises rapidly its contents will expand
 adiabatically, pushing the envelope out in all directions against the
 static pressure of the embracing atmosphere. Thus it will do work and
 rapidly cool. But if it rapidly sinks, it will contract adiabatically
 and grow warm, owing to the work done by the surrounding air in
 compressing it. A like thing occurs when a great volume of air rises
 or sinks quickly in the free atmosphere. In this case the change of
 temperature is about 6° C. for each kilometer change of level, so long
 as the air remains unsaturated. A familiar example of this effect in
 Nature is manifested when an uprushing column of moist air chills, and
 precipitates moisture, forming a cloud toward its top. Thus a lone
 thundercloud in a clear sky may mark the upper part of such a column,
 or upward vortex in the air. And contrarywise, a descending column may
 absorb its visible moisture, causing it to become clear aqueous vapor,
 and thus vanish from view.
Having thus briefly examined the composition and certain gaseous
 properties of free air, both dry and moist, we may now study the
 atmosphere as a whole. We wish particularly to know of its distribution
 of temperature and pressure; of its general and permanent circulation;
 of its great periodic currents; of its vertical movements, and its
 minor local winds with their pulsations of velocity and direction.
 Fortunately much information is available, due both to governmental
 and private research, though this was collected more for purposes of
 meteorology than of aërial locomotion. Of late, however, attention has
 been given to the aëronautic study of the atmosphere, which will, it is
 hoped, prove valuable to the aërial navigator.
The movements of the atmosphere are due mainly to the sun’s heat and
 to the rotation of the earth. The earth’s internal heat and the moon’s
 attraction are other minor agencies, but these may be neglected by
 comparison. The earth’s rotation also would be ineffectual in modifying
 the aërial movements, except for the coöperation of the sun. Without
 his influence the atmosphere, always stagnant, would simply rotate with
 the globe, at constant angular velocity and uniformly graded density at
 various levels. This evenness of density for any level is broken by the
 solar radiation increasing the temperature 364and moisture, otherwise the
 air would remain practically at a standstill.
Though the moisture by its lesser density causes some lightening of
 the air at fixed temperature, this at most is hardly one per cent, as
 already shown, and on the average is much less. Its effect, therefore,
 is equivalent to less than that caused by a rise of temperature of
 three degrees. But if precipitation occurs, an enormous amount of
 stored sunshine, or latent heat, is liberated and applied to warming
 the associated air. Thus each pound of vapor condensed may, by the
 release of its thermal store, heat more than a ton of air one degree
 in temperature, or more than half a ton of air two degrees, etc.
 The actual number of pounds of air at constant pressure, raised one
 degree Centigrade by the condensation of one pound of vapor at various
 temperatures, is given in the following table:
The sun then is father of the wind. By uneven heating of the atmosphere
 it disturbs the uniform density gradation that would otherwise exist.
 Thus abnormal pressures are generated which disturb the repose of the
 aërial sea, causing the fluid to flow from regions of excessive to
 regions of defective pressure. Hence the study of insolation[59] and
 temperature distribution is fundamental to the science of the winds.
Without detailed study, we may note the aggregate insolation received
 by the earth, at various lati365tudes, and its general effect on
 terrestrial temperature. The sun emits a nearly constant stream of
 radiation, from year to year, which plays continuously upon the earth
 as a whole, with an intensity which varies but slightly from month to
 month, due to the slightly varying distances of the earth from the
 sun. Owing to the sun’s seasonal wandering across the equator, the
 insolation at any latitude varies considerably month by month, and
 the polar regions receive much more light than if no such wandering
 occurred. The total yearly insolation for every 5° of latitude is shown
 in the following table from Hann, in which the unit is the amount that
 the earth would receive in one day at the time of the equinox, if the
 sun were at its mean distance from the earth:
Annual Amounts of Insolation
From this it appears that the equator receives nearly 2.5 times as much
 heat yearly as the poles. Since, moreover, the equator enjoys nearly
 constant insolation, while the polar regions suffer great variations of
 heat, with the varying altitude of the sun, the equatorial atmosphere
 is both much hotter and more equable than the poles, and high latitudes
 generally. 366Thus at the equator the frost level stands constantly
 at 18,000 feet, while in the middle latitudes it varies greatly in
 height from season to season. If, for example, a circle be drawn to
 represent the earth, and above it a line to indicate the mean altitude
 of the frost level in July, the frost line starting at the equator
 at an elevation of 18,000 feet will decline north and south, finally
 touching the earth well toward the frigid zones. The levels for other
 temperatures, above and below freezing, are similarly inclined downward
 from the equator to north and south. Obviously these isothermal
 levels vary with the varying season, and at any fixed time differ on
 different longitudes. On the plane of any given latitude the frost
 line varies much less in altitude, and so for the other isothermals.
 This is particularly true at the poles and equator, and everywhere at
 considerable altitude. If one voyaged around the earth at the equator
 at an elevation of 5,000 feet, he should find the average temperature
 about 65° F. In the temperate zone, following a line of latitude
 at the same height, he should have a lower temperature, but still
 comparatively equable. The average annual temperature of the earth’s
 entire surface is about 60° F.
In practical meteorology the temperature is observed at many points
 simultaneously over a wide stretch of the earth’s surface. These
 are then plotted on a weather chart, and through all points of like
 temperature are drawn lines known as isothermals. These lines not only
 map the earth’s surface into regions of equal temperature, but they
 also show the direction of fall or rise of temperature, and its space
 rate of change. This rate is called the “temperature gradient,” and
 when estimated straight across from isothermal to isothermal, that is
 in the direction of liveliest change of temperature,367 it is the maximum
 gradient. Such a map is very useful in forecasting the weather. It is
 but a particular instance of the more general map conceived by the
 physicist, exhibiting the thermal condition of the entire atmosphere by
 means of a series of equal temperature surfaces one above the other.
 Here, of course, the temperature gradient at any point is the space
 rate of change of temperature in any direction, being zero along the
 isothermal surface and greatest normal to it.
The vertical temperature gradient is of particular interest, since
 it determines the condition of fluid equilibrium at any point in the
 atmosphere when the level surfaces are isothermal. If, for example, a
 balanced balloon or portion of air, on starting upward from any level,
 cools faster than the environing stagnant air, it will become more
 dense, and cease to ascend, in which case the atmospheric equilibrium
 is stable. Again, if the ascending gas or air cools more slowly than
 the surrounding medium, it will become less dense, and so continue
 to ascend, in which case the atmospheric equilibrium at the point
 is unstable. Thirdly, if the rate of cooling be identical for the
 ascending gas and its surrounding medium, the equilibrium is neutral,
 and the motion will be stopped by friction but unaffected by change
 of buoyancy, since no such change can occur. Of these three states of
 equilibrium, the stable is dominant above the cirrus level, while below
 that level each state may be found, at various times, prevailing at
 random in all parts of the world, but more generally the stable and
 neutral states. When the unstable condition occurs at any locality and
 any level, it is usually followed ere long by a commotion or upheaval
 in the atmosphere, until the temperature gradient alters to the neutral
 or stable.
Many observations have been made to determine368 the variation of
 temperature along the verticle in various places and in different
 seasons. From the temperature records obtained in 722 balloon
 ascensions near Paris, France, the mean fall of temperature per 1000
 feet up to 20,000 feet was found to be 2°.4 in winter, 2°.8 in spring,
 2°.6 in summer, 2°.5 in autumn and 2°.6 for the year. Near Berlin 3°.1
 for the year was found from 75 balloon ascensions, the rate being
 nearly the same for the halves of the year. Fig. 44 gives the average
 of 52 winter and 65 summer temperature gradients, taken at about 8 a.m.
 by means of sounding balloons sent up at Munich, Strassburg, Trappe and
 Uccle. It will be noted that in both summer and winter the temperature
 falls rapidly with increase of elevation, up to ten or eleven
 kilometers, but above twelve remains nearly constant for all altitudes.
 The difference in temperature summer and winter is interesting, also in
 its gradual diminution with altitude. Another striking feature is the
 inversion of gradient shown at twelve kilometers elevation, where the
 temperature ceases to diminish, and may even increase with altitude.
 This region is known as the upper inversion level of the atmosphere, as
 distinguished from other levels at or below three kilometers height,
 known as lower inversions, where the temperature gradient is sometimes
 reversed, though not so illustrated in the diagram.
Thus the atmosphere divides into three marked layers. The lower
 layer, three kilometers deep, is the region of turbulence and storm,
 the home of heavy rain clouds, lightning, wind gusts and irregular
 temperatures. The middle layer, some seven kilometers thick, bounded
 top and bottom by the upper and lower inversion levels, is a clear
 region of steady-falling temperature, for the most part frigid—a region
 of far reaching and rapid winds, sweeping369 eastwardly, except near the
 equator, and bearing on their backs the frosty cirrus clouds. The upper
 layer reaching from the cirri to the cosmic void, is always cloudless
 and very frigid, with temperature nearly constant, or maybe slightly
 increasing with elevation.
A striking peculiarity of these three regions is that the lower and
 middle layers may freely intermingle with each other, but never with
 the upper, or370 isothermal layer. Owing to its constant temperature, the
 upper layer floats on its neighbor like oil on water.[60] If a mass of
 dry air were forced up into it from below, with the natural cooling due
 to adiabatic expansion, such mass would be denser than the surrounding
 medium, and hence would promptly sink back to its initial position.
 Thus whatever turmoil may vex the middle or lower region, it can at
 most upheave the floor of the isothermal layer, leaving inviolate the
 crystal depths of the empyrean.
We may now turn to the distribution of barometric pressure in
 the atmosphere and the effect of its variation. In general, the
 distribution is not very uniform, but it can be graphically pictured by
 drawing a series of surfaces connecting all points of equal pressure.
 These are called isobaric surfaces. In a stagnant uniformly heated
 atmosphere, for example, these surfaces would lie one above the other
 parallel to the ocean face; but where turmoil exists, and irregular
 temperature distribution, the isobaric surfaces are bent into hills
 and hollows of varied form. These surfaces not only map the aërial sea
 into regions of equal pressure, but they also show the direction of
 fall or rise of pressure, and its space rate of change. This rate is
 called the “pressure gradient.” When estimated straight across from
 surface to surface, that is, in the direction of the liveliest change
 of pressure, it is the maximum pressure gradient. Along this normal
 direction the air tends to flow with an acceleration proportional to
 the gradient. The velocity thus acquired by any portion of air in
 being pushed along the line of falling pressure, combined with its
 velocity due to other causes, gives its true velocity. A most important
 consideration, 371therefore, in a scientific study of the wind is the
 pressure distribution.
In practical meteorology, observations of the barometric pressure are
 made simultaneously at many points on the earth’s surface, and the
 readings then plotted on a map, after “reduction to sea level.” This
 reduction is made by adding to each barometric reading the weight of a
 column of air between the barometer level and the sea level, according
 to tables prepared for this purpose. Lines called “isobars”[61] are
 then drawn, at regular intervals, through all points of like sea-level
 pressure, the indicated change of pressure between consecutive isobars
 on the U. S. weather map being usually one-tenth of an inch of mercury.
 These exhibit at once, over the entire field of observation, the
 horizontal pressure gradient reduced to sea level, and commonly called
 the “barometric gradient.” In meteorology, the pressure normal to the
 isobar is called the gradient, and is expressed in millimeters of
 mercury per degree of a great circle. On the same weather chart are
 mapped the isothermal lines and wind directions for all the stations
 of the weather service. From these data and the reported moisture
 conditions, the meteorologist forecasts the probable weather some hours
 or days in advance.
No perfectly comprehensive formula can be given for the barometric
 pressure at any place and altitude, but certain general laws may be
 observed. Where, for example, the speed of the air is increased along
 any level of an air stream, the pressure is lessened, and conversely.
 Thus, if the wind blows squarely against the front of an isolated
 house, the speed will be greatly checked at the center front, 372and
 accelerated at both sides and over the roof, thereby increasing the