# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2018
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Émile Zola, The Conquest of Plassans
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/56860/56860-h/56860-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

When they reached Les Tulettes, Marthe hastened towards
the house of her uncle Macquart, followed by the cook, who
had now subsided into silence, contenting herself by shrugging
her shoulders and biting her lips.
'Hallo! is that you?' cried the uncle in great surprise.
'I thought you were in your bed. I heard that you were
very ill. Well, my little dear, you really don't look very strong.
Have you come to ask me for some dinner?'
'I should like to see François, uncle,' said Marthe.
'François?' repeated Macquart, looking her in the face.
'You would like to see François? It is a very kind thought
of yours. The poor fellow has been crying for you a great
deal. I have seen him from the end of my garden knocking
his fist against the walls while he called for you to come to
him. And so it is to see him that you have come, eh? I
really thought that you had forgotten all about him over
yonder.'
Big tears welled into Marthe's eyes.
'It will not be very easy to see him to-day,' Macquart continued.
'It is getting on for four o'clock, and I'm not at all
sure that the manager will give you leave. Mouret hasn't[Pg 295]
been very quiet lately. He smashes everything that he can
lay his hands on, and talks about burning the place down.
Those madmen are not in a pleasant humour every day.'
Marthe trembled as she listened to her uncle; she was
going to question him, but instead of doing so she merely
stretched out her hands supplicatingly.
'I beseech you to help me,' said she. 'I have come on
purpose. It is absolutely necessary that I should speak to
François to-day, at once. You have friends in the asylum,
and you can obtain me admission.'
'No doubt, no doubt,' he replied, without committing
himself further.
He appeared to be in a state of great perplexity, unable to
divine the real cause of Marthe's sudden journey, and revolving
the matter in his own mind from a point of view
known only to himself. He glanced inquisitively at the cook,
who turned her back upon him. At last a slight smile began
to play about his lips.
'Well,' he said, 'since you wish it, I will see what I can
do for you. Only, remember, that if your mother is displeased
about it, you must tell her that I was not able to
dissuade you. I am afraid that you may do yourself harm;
it isn't a pleasant place to visit.'
Rose absolutely declined to accompany them to the asylum.
She had seated herself in front of a fire of vine-stocks, which
was blazing on the great hearth.
'I don't want to have my eyes torn out,' she said snappishly.
'The master isn't over fond of me. I would rather
stop here and warm myself.'
'It would be very good of you if you were to get us some
mulled wine ready,' Macquart whispered in her ear. 'The
wine and sugar are in the cupboard yonder. We shall want
it when we come back.'
Macquart did not take his niece to the principal gate of
the asylum. He went round to the left and inquired at a
little door for warder Alexandre, with whom, on his appearance,
he exchanged a few words in a low voice. Then they
all three silently entered the seemingly interminable corridors.
The warder walked in front.
'I will wait for you here,' said Macquart, coming to a halt
in a little courtyard. 'Alexandre will remain with you.'
'I would rather be left alone,' said Marthe.
'Madame would very quickly have enough of it, if she[Pg 296]
were,' Alexandre replied, with a tranquil smile. 'I'm running
a good deal of risk as it is.'
He took Marthe through another court, and stopped in
front of a little door. As he softly turned the key, he said in
a low voice:
'Don't be afraid. He has been quieter to-day, and they
have been able to take the strait-waistcoat off. If he shows
any violence you must step out backwards, and leave me alone
with him.'
Marthe trembled as she passed through the narrow doorway.
At first she could only see something lying in a heap
against the wall in one of the corners. The daylight was
waning, and the cell was merely lighted by a pale glimmer
which fell from a grated window.
'Well, my fine fellow!' Alexandre exclaimed familiarly,
as he stepped up to Mouret and tapped him on the shoulder; 'I
am bringing you a visitor. I hope you will behave properly.'
Then he returned and leant against the door, keeping his
eyes fixed upon the madman. Mouret slowly rose to his feet.
He did not show the slightest sign of surprise.
'Is it you, my dear?' he said in his quiet voice. 'I was
expecting you; I was getting uneasy about the children.'
Marthe's knees trembled under her, and she looked at
him anxiously, rendered quite speechless by his affectionate
reception. He did not appear changed at all. If anything,
he looked better than he had done before. He was sleek and
plump, and cleanly shaved. His eyes, too, were bright; all
his former little mannerisms had reappeared, and he rubbed
his hands and winked, and stalked about with his old bantering
air.
'I am very well indeed, my dear. We can go back home
together. You have come for me, haven't you? I hope the
garden has been well looked after. The slugs were dreadfully
fond of the lettuces, and the beds were quite eaten up with
them, but I know a way of destroying them. I have some
splendid ideas in my head that I'll tell you of. We are very
comfortably off, and we can afford to pay for our fancies. By
the way, have you seen old Gautier of Saint-Eutrope while
I've been absent? I bought thirty hogsheads of common
wine from him for blending. I must go and see him to-morrow.
You never recollect anything.'
He spoke in a jesting way, and shook his finger at her
playfully.
[Pg 297]
'I'll be bound that I shall find everything in dreadful
disorder,' he continued. 'You never look after anything.
The tools will be all lying about, the cupboard doors will be
open, and Rose will be dirtying the rooms with her broom.
Why hasn't Rose come with you? Ah, what a strange
creature she is! Do you know, she actually wanted to turn
me out of the house one day? Really, she seems to think
that the whole place belongs to her. She goes on in the most
amusing way possible. But you don't tell me anything about
the children. Désirée is still with her nurse, I suppose. We
will go and kiss her and see if she is tired of staying there.
And I want to go to Marseilles as well, for I am a little
uneasy about Octave. The last time I was there I found him
leading a wild life. As for Serge, I have no anxiety about
him; he is almost too quiet and steady. He will sanctify
the whole family. Ah! I quite enjoy talking about the house
and the children.'
He rattled along at great length, inquiring about every tree
in his garden, going into the minutest details of the household
arrangements, and showing an extraordinary memory
of a host of insignificant matters. Marthe was deeply touched
by the gentle affection which he manifested for her. She
thought she could detect a loving delicacy in the care which
he took to say nothing that savoured of reproach, to make no
allusion, however slight, to all that had passed. She felt,
indeed, that she was forgiven, and she vowed that she would
atone for her crime by becoming the submissive servant of
this man who was so sublime in his good nature. Big silent
tears rolled down her cheeks, and her knees bent under her in
her gratitude.
'Take care!' the warder whispered in her ear. 'I don't
like the look of his eyes.'
'But he isn't mad!' she stammered; 'I swear to you
that he isn't mad! I must speak to the manager. I want
to take him away with me at once.'
'Take care!' the warder repeated sharply, pulling her by
her arm.
Mouret had suddenly stopped short in the midst of his
chatter, and was now crouching upon the floor. Then, all at
once, he began to crawl along beside the wall, on his hands
and knees.
'Wow! wow!' he barked in hoarse, prolonged notes.
He gave a spring into the air and fell upon his side.[Pg 298]
Then a dreadful scene ensued. He began to writhe like a
worm, beat his face with his fist, and tore his flesh with his
nails. In a short time he was half naked, his clothes in rags,
and himself bruised and lacerated and groaning.
'Come away, madame, come away!' cried the warder.
Marthe stood rooted to the floor. She recognised in the
scene before her her own writhings at home. It was in that
way that she had thrown herself upon the floor of her bedroom;
it was in that way that she had beaten and torn
herself. She even recognised the very tones of her voice.
Mouret vented the same rattling groan. It was she who had
brought the poor man into this miserable state.
'He is not mad!' she stammered; 'he cannot be mad, it
would be too horrible! I would rather die!'
The warder put his arm round her and pushed her out of
the cell, but she remained leaning against the door on the
other side. She could hear a terrible struggle going on within,
screams like those of a pig being slaughtered; then a dull fall
like that of a bundle of damp linen, and afterwards death-like
silence. When the warder came out of the cell, the night had
nearly fallen. Through the partially open doorway, Marthe
could see nothing.
'Well, upon my word, madame,' cried the warder, 'you
are a very queer person to say that he is not mad. I nearly
left my thumb behind me; he got firmly hold of it between
his teeth. However, he's quieted now for a few hours.'
And as he took her back to her uncle, he continued:
'You've no idea how cunning they all are. They are as
quiet as can be for hours together, and talk to you in quite a
sensible manner; and then, without the least warning, they
fly at your throat. I could see very well that he was up to
some mischief or other just now when he was talking to you
about the children, for there was such a strange look in his
eyes.'
When Marthe got back to Macquart, in the small courtyard,
she exclaimed feverishly in a weak, broken voice:
'He is mad! he is mad!'
'There's no doubt he's mad,' said her uncle with a snigger.
'Why, what did you expect to find? People are not brought
here for nothing. And the place isn't healthy either. If I
were to be shut up there for a couple of hours, I should go
mad myself.'
He was watching her askance, and he noted her nervous[Pg 299]
start and shudder. Then, in his good-natured way, he
said:
'Perhaps you would like to go and see the grandmother?'
Marthe made a gesture of terror, and hid her face in her
hands.
'It would be no trouble to anyone,' he said. 'Alexandre
would be glad to take us. She is over yonder, on that side,
and there is nothing to be afraid of with her. She is perfectly
quiet. She never gives any trouble, does she, Alexandre?
She always remains seated and gazing in front of her. She
hasn't moved for the last dozen years. However, if you'd
rather not see her, we won't go.'[7]
As the warder was taking his leave of them, Macquart
invited him to come and drink a glass of mulled wine, winking
the while in a certain fashion which seemed to induce
Alexandre to accept the invitation. They were obliged to
support Marthe, whose legs sank beneath her at each step.
When they reached the house, they were actually carrying
her. Her face was convulsed, her eyes were staring widely,
and her whole body was rigidly stiffened by one of those
nervous seizures which kept her like a dead woman for hours
at a time.
'There! what did I tell you?' cried Rose, when she saw
them. 'A nice state she's in! How are we to get home, I
should like to know? Good heavens! how can people take
such absurd fancies into their heads? The master ought to
have given her neck a twist, and it would have taught her a
lesson, perhaps.'
'Pooh!' said Macquart; 'I'll lay her down on my bed.
It won't kill us if we have to sit up round the fire all night.'
He drew aside a calico curtain which hung in front of a
recess. Rose proceeded to undress her mistress, growling
as she did so. The only thing they could do, she said, was
to put a hot brick at her feet.
'Now that she's all snug, we'll have a drop to drink,'
resumed Macquart, with his wolfish snigger. 'That wine of
yours smells awfully nice, old lady!'
'I found a lemon on the mantelpiece,' Rose said, 'and I
used it.'
'You did quite right. There is everything here that is[Pg 300]
wanted. When I make a brew, there's nothing missing that
ought to be in the place, I assure you.'
He pulled the table in front of the fire, and then he sat
down between Rose and Alexandre, and poured the hot wine
into some big yellow cups. When he had swallowed a
couple of mouthfuls with great gusto, he smacked his lips and
cried:
'Ah! that's first-rate. You understand how to make it.
It's really better than what I make myself. You must leave
me your recipe.'
Rose, greatly mollified by these compliments, began to
laugh. The vine-wood fire was now a great mass of glowing
embers. The cups were filled again.
'And so,' said Macquart, leaning on his elbows and looking
Rose in the face, 'it was a sudden whim of my niece to come
here?'
'Oh, don't talk about it,' replied the cook; 'it will make me
angry again. Madame is getting as mad as the master. She
can no longer tell who are her friends and who are not. I
believe she had a quarrel with his reverence the Curé before
she set off; I heard them shouting.'
Macquart laughed noisily.
'They used, however, to get on very well together,' said
he.
'Yes, indeed; but nothing lasts long with such a brain as
madame has got. I'll be bound that she's now regretting the
thrashings the master used to give her at nights. We found
his stick in the garden.'
Macquart looked at her more keenly, and, as he drank his
hot wine, he said:
'Perhaps she came to take François back with her.'
'Oh, Heaven forbid!' cried Rose, with an expression of
horror. 'The master would go on finely in the house; he
would kill us all. The idea of his return is one of my greatest
dreads; I'm in a constant worry lest he should make his
escape and get back some night and murder us all. When I
think about it when I'm in bed, I can't go to sleep. I fancy I
can see him stealing in through the window with his hair
bristling and his eyes flaming like matches.'
This made Macquart very merry, and he rapped his cup
on the table.
'It would be very unpleasant,' he said, 'very unpleasant.
I don't suppose he feels very kindly towards you, least of all[Pg 301]
towards the Curé who has stepped into his place. The Curé
would only make a mouthful for him, big as he is, for madmen,
they say, are awfully strong. I say, Alexandre, just imagine
poor François suddenly making his appearance at home! He
would make a pretty clean sweep there, wouldn't he? It
would be a fine sight, eh?'
He cast glances at the warder, who went on quietly drinking
his mulled wine and made no reply beyond nodding his
head assentingly.
'Oh! it's only a fancy; it's all nonsense,' added Macquart,
as he observed Rose's terrified looks.
Just at that moment, Marthe began to struggle violently
behind the calico curtain; and she had to be held for some
minutes in order that she might not fall upon the floor.
When she was again stretched out in corpse-like rigidity, her
uncle came and warmed his legs before the fire, reflecting
and murmuring as if without paying heed to what he
said:
'The little woman isn't very easy to manage, indeed.'
Then he suddenly exclaimed:
'The Rougons, now, what do they say about all this business?
They take the Curé's side, don't they?'
'The master didn't make himself pleasant enough for
them to regret him,' replied Rose. 'There was nothing too
bad for him to say against them.'
'Well, he wasn't far wrong there,' said Macquart. 'The
Rougons are wretched skinflints. Just think that they refused
to buy that cornfield over yonder, a magnificent speculation
which I undertook to manage. Félicité would pull a queer
face if she saw François come back!'
He began to snigger again, and took a turn round the
table. Then, with an expression of determination, he lighted
his pipe.
'We mustn't forget the time, my boy,' he said to Alexandre,
with another wink. 'I will go back with you; Marthe
seems quiet now. Rose will get the table laid by the time
I return. You must be hungry, Rose, eh? As you are
obliged to stay the night here, you shall have a mouthful
with me.'
He went off with the warder, and fully half an hour
elapsed. Rose, who began to tire of being alone, at last
opened the door and went out to the terrace, where she stood
watching the deserted road in the clear night air. As she[Pg 302]
was going back into the house, she fancied she could see two
dark shadows in the middle of a path behind a hedge.
'It looks just like the uncle,' thought she; 'he seems to
be talking to a priest.'
A few minutes later Macquart returned. That blessed
Alexandre, said he, had been chattering to him interminably.
'Wasn't it you who were over there just now with a
priest?' asked Rose.
'I, with a priest!' he cried. 'Why, you must have been
dreaming; there isn't a priest in the neighbourhood.'
He rolled his little glistening eyes. Then, as if rather
uneasy about the lie he had told, he added:
'Well, there is Abbé Fenil, but it's just the same as if he
wasn't here, for he never goes out.'
'Abbé Fenil isn't up to much,' remarked the cook.
This seemed to annoy Macquart.
'Why do you say that? Not up to much, eh? He does
a great deal of good here, and he's a very worthy sort of
fellow. He's worth a whole heap of priests who make a lot
of fuss.'
His irritation, however, promptly disappeared, and he
began to laugh upon observing that Rose was looking at him
in surprise.
'I was only joking, you know,' he said. 'You are quite
right; he's like all the other priests, they are all a set of
hypocrites. I know now who it was that you saw me with.
I met our grocer's wife. She was wearing a black dress, and
you must have mistaken that for a cassock.'
Rose made an omelet, and Macquart placed some cheese
upon the table. They had not finished eating when Marthe
sat up in bed with the astonished look of a person awaking
in a strange place. When she had brushed aside her hair
and recollected where she was, she sprang to the floor and
said she must be off at once. Macquart appeared very much
vexed at her awaking.
'It's quite impossible,' said he, 'for you to go back to
Plassans to-night. You are shivering with fever, and you would
fall ill on the road. Rest here, and we will see about it to-morrow.
To begin with, there is no conveyance.'
'But you can drive me in your trap,' said Marthe.
'No, no; I can't.'
Marthe, who was dressing with feverish haste, thereupon
declared that she would walk to Plassans rather than stay the[Pg 303]
night at Les Tulettes. Her uncle seemed to be thinking.
He had locked the door and slipped the key into his pocket.
He entreated his niece, threatened her, and invented all kinds
of stories to induce her to remain. But she paid no attention
to what he said, and finished by putting on her bonnet.
'You are very much mistaken if you imagine you can persuade
her to give in,' exclaimed Rose, who was quietly finishing
her cheese. 'She would get out through the window first.
You had better put your horse to the trap.'
After a short interval of silence, Macquart, shrugging his
shoulders, angrily exclaimed:
'Well, it makes no difference to me! Let her lay herself
up if she likes! I was only thinking about her own good. Come
along; what will happen will happen. I'll drive you over.'
Marthe had to be carried to the gig; she was trembling
violently with fever. Her uncle threw an old cloak over her
shoulders. Then he gave a cluck with his tongue and set off.
'It's no trouble to me,' he said, 'to go over to Plassans
this evening; on the contrary, indeed, there's always some
amusement to be had there.'
It was about ten o'clock. In the sky, heavy with rain
clouds, there was a ruddy glimmer that cast a feeble light
upon the road. All the way as they drove along Macquart
kept bending forward and glancing at the ditches and the
hedges. When Rose asked him what he was looking for, he
replied that some wolves had come down from the ravines of
La Seille. He had quite recovered his good humour. However,
when they were between two and three miles from
Plassans the rain began to fall. It poured down, cold and
pelting. Then Macquart began to swear, and Rose would
have liked to beat her mistress, who was moaning underneath
the cloak. When at last they reached Plassans the rain had
ceased, and the sky was blue again.
'Are you going to the Rue Balande?' asked Macquart.
'Why, of course,' replied Rose in astonishment.
Macquart thereupon began to explain that as Marthe
seemed to him to be very ill, he had thought it might perhaps
be better to take her to her mother's. After much hesitation,
however, he consented to stop his horse at the Mourets' house.
Marthe had not even thought of bringing a latchkey with
her. Rose, however, fortunately had her own in her pocket,
but when she tried to open the door it would not move. The
Trouches had shot the bolts inside. She rapped upon it[Pg 304]
with her fist, but without rousing any other answer than a
dull echo in the hall.
'It's of no use your giving yourself any further trouble,'
said Macquart with a laugh. 'They won't disturb themselves
to come down. Well, here you are shut out of your own
home. Don't you think now that my first idea was a good
one? We must take the poor child to the Rougons'. She
will be better there than in her own room; I assure you she
will.'
Félicité was overwhelmed with alarm when she saw her
daughter arrive at such a late hour, drenched with rain and
apparently half dead. She put her to bed on the second floor,
set the house in great commotion, and called up all the servants.
When she grew a little calmer, as she sat by Marthe's
bedside, she asked for an explanation.
'What has happened? How is it that you have brought
her to me in such a state as this?'
Then Macquart, with a great show of kindness, told her
about 'the dear child's' expedition. He defended himself,
declared that he had done all that he could to dissuade her
from going to see François, and ended by calling upon Rose
to confirm him, for he saw that Félicité was scanning him
narrowly with her suspicious eyes. Madame Rougon, however,
continued to shake her head.
'It is a very strange story!' she said; 'there is something
more in it than I can understand.'
She knew Macquart, and she guessed that there must be
some rascality in it all from the expression of delight which
she could detect in his eyes.
'You are a strange person,' said he, pretending to get
vexed in order to bring Madame Rougon's scrutiny to an end;
'you are always imagining something extraordinary. I can
only tell you what I know. I love Marthe more than you do,
and I have never done anything that wasn't for her good.
Shall I go for the doctor? I will at once, if you like.'
Madame Rougon watched him closely. She even questioned
Rose at great length, without succeeding, however, in
learning anything further. After all, she seemed glad to have
her daughter with her, and spoke with great bitterness of
people who would leave you to die on your own doorstep
without even taking the trouble to open the door. And
meantime Marthe, with her head thrown back upon her pillow,
was indeed dying.
[Pg 305]
It was perfectly dark in the cell at Les Tulettes. A draught
of cold air awoke Mouret from the cataleptic stupor into which
his violence earlier in the evening had thrown him. He remained
lying against the wall in perfect stillness for a few
moments, his eyes staring widely; then he began to roll his
head gently on the cold stone, wailing like a child just
awakened from sleep. But the current of chill damp air swept
against his legs, and he rose and looked around him to see
whence it came. In front of him he saw the door of his cell
wide open.
'She has left the door open,' said he aloud; 'she will be
expecting me. I must be off.'
He went out, and then came back and felt his clothes after
the manner of a methodical man who is afraid of forgetting
something, and finally he carefully closed the door behind
him. He passed through the first court with an easy unconcerned
gait as though he were merely taking a stroll. As he
was entering the second one, he caught sight of a warder who
seemed to be on the watch. He stopped and deliberated for
a moment. But, the warder having disappeared, he crossed
the court and reached another door, which led to the open
country. He closed it behind him without any appearance of
astonishment or haste.
'She is a good woman all the same,' he murmured. 'She
must have heard me calling her. It must be getting late. I
will go home at once for fear they should feel uneasy.'
He struck out along a path. It seemed quite natural to
him to find himself among the open fields. When he had gone
a hundred yards he had altogether forgotten that Les Tulettes
was behind him, and imagined that he had just left a vine-grower
from whom he had purchased fifty hogsheads of wine.
When he reached a spot where five roads met, he recognised
where he was, and began to laugh as he said to himself:
'What a goose I am! I was going up the hill towards
Saint-Eutrope; it is to the left I must turn. I shall be at
Plassans in a good hour and a half.'
Then he went merrily along the high-road, looking at each
of the mile-stones as at an old acquaintance. He stopped for[Pg 306]
a moment before certain fields and country-houses with an
air of interest. The sky was of an ashy hue, streaked with
broad rosy bands that lighted up the night like dying embers.
Heavy drops of rain began to fall; the wind was blowing
from the east and was full of moisture.
'Hallo!' said Mouret, looking up at the sky uneasily, 'I
mustn't stop loitering. The wind is in the east, and there's
going to be a pretty downpour. I shall never be able to
reach Plassans before it begins; and I'm not well wrapped
up either.'
He gathered round his breast the thick grey woollen waistcoat
which he had torn at Les Tulettes. He had a bad bruise
on his jaw, to which he raised his hand without heeding the
sharp pain which it caused him. The high-road was quite
deserted, and he only met a cart going down a hill at a
leisurely pace. The driver was dozing, and made no response
to his friendly good-night. The rain did not overtake him
till he reached the bridge across the Viorne. It distressed
him very much, and he went to take shelter under the bridge,
grumbling that it was quite impossible to go on through such
weather, that nothing ruined clothes so much as rain, and
that if he had known what was coming he would have
brought an umbrella. He waited patiently for a long half-hour,
amusing himself by listening to the streaming of the
downpour; then, when it was over, he returned to the high-road,
and at last reached Plassans, ever taking the greatest
care to keep himself from getting splashed with mud.
It was nearly midnight, though Mouret calculated that it
could scarcely yet be eight o'clock. He passed through the
deserted streets, feeling quite distressed that he had kept his
wife waiting such a long time.
'She won't be able to understand it,' he thought. 'The
dinner will be quite cold. Ah! I shall get a nice reception
from Rose.'
At last he reached the Rue Balande and stood before his
own door.
'Ah!' he said, 'I have not got my latchkey.'
He did not knock at the door, however. The kitchen
window was quite dark, and the other windows in the front
were equally void of all sign of life. A sense of deep suspicion
then took possession of the madman; with an instinct that
was quite animal-like, he scented danger. He stepped back
into the shadow of the neighbouring houses, and again[Pg 307]
examined the house-front; then he seemed to come to a
decision, and went round into the Impasse des Chevillottes.
But the little door that led into the garden was bolted.
At this, impelled by sudden rage, he threw himself against it
with tremendous force, and the door, rotted by damp, broke
into two pieces. For a moment the violence of the shock
almost stunned Mouret, and rendered him unconscious of
why he had broken down the door, which he tried to mend
again by joining the broken pieces.
'That's a nice thing to have done, when I might so easily
have knocked,' he said with a sudden pang of regret. 'It
will cost me at least thirty francs to get a new door.'
He was now in the garden. As he raised his head and saw
the bedroom on the first floor brightly lighted, he came to the
conclusion that his wife was going to bed. This caused him
great astonishment, and he muttered that he must certainly
have dropped off to sleep under the bridge while he was waiting
for the rain to stop. It must be very late, he thought.
The windows of the neighbouring houses, Monsieur Rastoil's
as well as those of the Sub-Prefecture, were in darkness.
Then he again fixed his eyes upon his own house as he caught
sight of the glow of a lamp on the second floor behind Abbé
Faujas's thick curtains. That glow was like a flaming eye,
and seemed to scorch him. He pressed his brow with his
burning hands, and his head grew dizzy, racked by some
horrible recollection like a vague nightmare, in which nothing
was clearly defined, but which seemed to apply to some long-standing
danger to himself and his family—a danger which
grew and increased in horror, and threatened to swallow up
the house unless he could do something to save it.
'Marthe, Marthe, where are you?' he stammered in an
undertone. 'Come and bring away the children.'
He looked about him for Marthe. He could no longer
recognise the garden. It seemed to him to be larger; to be
empty and grey and like a cemetery. The big box-plants had
vanished, the lettuces were no longer there, the fruit-trees
had disappeared. He turned round again, came back, and
knelt down to see if the slugs had eaten everything up. The
disappearance of the box-plants, the death of their lofty
greenery, caused him an especial pang, as though some of
the actual life of the house had departed. Who was it that
had killed them? What villain had been there uprooting
everything and tearing away even the tufts of violets which[Pg 308]
he had planted at the foot of the terrace? Indignation arose
in him as he contemplated all this ruin.
'Marthe, Marthe, where are you?' he called again.
He looked for her in the little conservatory to the right of
the terrace. It was littered with the dead dry corpses of the
box-plants. They were piled up in bundles amidst the stumps
of the fruit-trees. In one corner was Désirée's bird-cage,
hanging from a nail, with the door broken off and the wire-work
sadly torn. The madman stepped back, overwhelmed
with fear as though he had opened the door of a vault.
Stammering, his throat on fire, he went back to the terrace
and paced up and down before the door and the shuttered
windows. His increasing rage gave his limbs the suppleness
of a wild beast's. He braced himself up and stepped along
noiselessly, trying to find some opening. An air-hole into the
cellar was sufficient for him. He squeezed himself together
and glided inside with the nimbleness of a cat, scraping the
wall with his nails as he went. At last he was in the house.
The cellar door was only latched. He made his way
through the darkness of the hall, groping past the walls with
his hands, and pushing the kitchen door open. Some matches
were on a shelf at the left. He went straight to this shelf,
and struck a light to enable him to get a lamp which stood
upon the mantelpiece without breaking anything. Then he
looked about him. There appeared to have been a big meal
there that evening. The kitchen was in a state of festive
disorder. The table was strewn with dirty plates and dishes
and glasses. There was a litter of pans, still warm, on the
sink and the chairs and the very floor. A coffee-pot that had
been forgotten was also boiling away beside the stove, slightly
tilted like a tipsy man. Mouret put it straight and then
tidily arranged the pans. He smelt them, sniffed at the drops
of liquor that remained in the glasses, and counted the dishes
and plates with growing irritation. This was no longer his
quiet orderly kitchen; it seemed as if a hotelful of food had
been wasted there. All this guzzling disorder reeked of
indigestion.
'Marthe! Marthe!' he again repeated as he returned into
the passage, carrying the lamp as he went; 'answer me, tell
me where they have shut you up. We must be off, we must
be off at once.'
He searched for her in the dining-room. The two cupboards
to the right and left of the stove were open. From a[Pg 309]
burst bag of grey paper on the edge of a shelf some lumps of
sugar had fallen upon the floor. Higher up Mouret could
see a bottle of brandy with the neck broken and plugged with
a piece of rag. Then he got upon a chair to examine the
cupboards. They were half empty. The jars of preserved
fruits had been attacked, the jam-pots had been opened and
the jam tasted, the fruit had been nibbled, the provisions of all
kinds had been gnawed and fouled as though a whole army
of rats had been there. Not being able to find Marthe in the
closets, Mouret searched all over the room, looking behind
the curtains and even underneath the furniture. Fragments
of bone and pieces of broken bread lay about the floor; there
were marks on the table that had been left by sticky glasses.
Then he crossed the hall and went to look for Marthe in
the drawing-room. But, as soon as he opened the door, he
stopped short. This could not really be his own drawing-room.
The bright mauve paper, the red-flowered carpet, the
new easy-chairs covered with cerise damask, filled him with
amazement. He was afraid to enter a room that did not
belong to him, and he closed the door.
'Marthe! Marthe!' he stammered again in accents of
despair.
He went back to the middle of the hall, unable to quiet
the hoarse panting which was swelling in his throat. Where
had he got to, that he could not recognise a single spot?
Who had been transforming his house in such a way? His
recollections were quite confused. He could only recall some
shadows gliding along the hall; two shadows, at first poverty-stricken,
soft-spoken, self-suppressing, then tipsy and disreputable-looking;
two shadows that leered and sniggered. He
raised his lamp, the wick of which was burning smokily,
and thereupon the shadows grew bigger, lengthened upon
the walls, mounted aloft beside the staircase and filled and
preyed upon the whole house. Some horrid filth, some
fermenting putrescence had found its way into the place and
had rotted the woodwork, rusted the iron and split the walls.
Then he seemed to hear the house crumbling like a ceiling
from dampness, and to see it melting like a handful of salt
thrown into a basin of hot water.
But up above there sounded peals of ringing laughter
which made his hair stand on end. He put the lamp down
and went upstairs to look for Marthe. He crept up noiselessly
on his hands and knees with all the nimbleness and[Pg 310]
stealth of a wolf. When he reached the landing of the
first floor, he knelt down in front of the door of the bedroom.
A ray of light streamed from underneath it. Marthe must
be going to bed.
'What a jolly bed this is of theirs!' Olympe was just exclaiming;
'you can quite bury yourself in it, Honoré; I am
right up to my eyes in feathers.'
She laughed and stretched herself and sprang about
amidst the bed-clothes.
'Ever since I've been here,' she continued, 'I've been
longing to sleep in this bed. It made me almost ill wishing
for it. I could never see that lath of a landlady of ours get
into it without feeling a furious desire to throw her on to the
floor and put myself in her place. One gets quite warm
directly. It's just as though I were wrapped in cotton-wool.'
Trouche, who had not yet gone to bed, was examining the
bottles on the dressing-table.
'She has got all kinds of scents,' he said.
'Well, as she isn't here, we may just as well treat ourselves
to the best room!' continued Olympe. 'There's no
danger of her coming back and disturbing us. I have
fastened the doors up. You will be getting cold, Honoré.'
But Trouche now opened the drawers and began groping
about amongst the linen.
'Put this on, it's smothered with lace,' he said, tossing a
night-dress to Olympe. 'I shall wear this red handkerchief
myself.'
Then, as Trouche was at last getting into bed, Olympe
said to him:
'Put the grog on the night-table. We need not get up
and go to the other end of the room for it. There, my dear,
we are like real householders now!'
They lay down side by side, with the eider-down quilt
drawn up to their chins.
'I ate a deuced lot this evening,' said Trouche after a
short pause.
'And drank a lot, too!' added Olympe with a laugh. 'I
feel very cosy and snug. But the tiresome part is that my
mother is always interfering with us. She has been quite
awful to-day. I can't take a single step about the house
without her being at me. There's really no advantage in our
landlady going off if mother means to play the policeman.
She has quite spoilt my day's enjoyment.'
[Pg 311]
'Hasn't the Abbé some idea of going away?' asked Trouche
after another short interval of silence. 'If he is made a
bishop, he will be obliged to leave the house to us.'
'One can't be sure of that,' Olympe petulantly replied. 'I
dare say mother means to keep it. But how jolly we should
be here, all by ourselves! I would make our landlady sleep
upstairs in my brother's room; I'd persuade her that it was
healthier than this. Pass me the glass, Honoré.'
They both took a drink and then covered themselves up
afresh.
'Ah!' said Trouche, 'I'm afraid it won't be so easy to
get rid of them, but we can try, at any rate. I believe the
Abbé would have changed his quarters before if he had not
been afraid that the landlady would have considered herself
deserted and have made a rumpus. I think I'll try to talk
the landlady over. I'll tell her a lot of tales to persuade her
to turn them out.'
He took another drink.
'Oh! leave the matter to me,' replied Olympe; 'I'll get
mother and Ovide turned out, as they've treated us so badly.'
'Well, if you don't succeed,' said Trouche, 'I can easily
concoct some scandal about the Abbé and Madame Mouret;
and then he will be absolutely obliged to shift his quarters.'
Olympe sat up in bed.
'That's a splendid idea,' she said, 'that is! We must set
about it to-morrow. Before a month is over, this room will
be ours. I must really give you a kiss for the idea.'
They then both grew very merry, and began to plan how
they would arrange the room. They would change the place
of the chest of drawers, they said; and they would bring up
a couple of easy-chairs from the drawing-room. However,
their speech was gradually growing huskier, and at last they
became silent.
'There! you're off now!' murmured Olympe, after a
time. 'You're snoring with your eyes open! Well, let me
come to the other side, so that, at any rate, I can finish my
novel. I'm not sleepy, if you are.'
She got up and rolled him like a mere lump towards the
wall, and then began to read. But, before she had finished
a page, she turned her head uneasily towards the door. She
fancied she could hear a strange noise on the landing. At
this she cried petulantly to her husband, giving him a dig in
the ribs with her elbow:
[Pg 312]
'You know very well that I don't like that sort of joke.
Don't play the wolf; anyone would fancy that there was
somebody at the door. Well, go on if it pleases you; you
are very irritating.'
Then she angrily absorbed herself in her book again, after
sucking a slice of lemon left in her glass.
With the same stealthy movements as before, Mouret now
quitted the door of the bedroom, where he had remained
crouching. He climbed to the second floor and knelt before
Abbé Faujas's door, squeezing himself close to the key-hole.
He choked down Marthe's name, that again rose in his throat,
and examined with glistening eye the corners of the priest's
room, to satisfy himself that nobody was shut up there. The
big bare room was in deep shadow; a small lamp which
stood upon the table cast just a circular patch of light upon
the floor, and the Abbé himself, who was writing, seemed
like a big black stain in the midst of that yellow glare. After
he had scrutinised the curtains and the chest of drawers,
Mouret's gaze fell upon the iron bedstead, upon which lay
the priest's hat, looking like the locks of a woman's hair.
There was no doubt that Marthe was there, thought Mouret.
Hadn't the Trouches said that she was to have that room?
But as he continued gazing he saw that the bed was undisturbed,
and looked, with its cold, white coverings, like a
tombstone. His eyes were getting accustomed to the gloom.
However, Abbé Faujas appeared to hear some sound, for he
glanced at the door. When the maniac saw the priest's calm
face his eyes reddened, a slight foam appeared at the corner
of his lips, and it was with difficulty that he suppressed a
shout. At last he went away on his hands and knees again,
down the stairs and along the passages, still repeating in low
tones:
'Marthe! Marthe!'
He searched for her through the whole house; in Rose's
room, which he found empty; in the Trouches' apartments,
which were filled with the spoils of the other rooms; in the
children's old rooms, where he burst into tears as his hands
came across a pair of worn-out boots which had belonged to
Désirée. He went up and down the stairs, clinging on to the
banisters, and gliding along the walls, stealthily exploring
every apartment with the extraordinary dexterity of a
scheming maniac. Soon there was not a single corner of the
place from the cellar to the attic which he had not investigated.[Pg 313]
Marthe was nowhere in the house; nor were the
children there, nor Rose. The house was empty; the house
might crumble to pieces.
Mouret sat down upon the stairs. He choked down the
panting which, in spite of himself, continued to distend his
throat. With his back against the banisters, and his eyes
wide open in the darkness, he sat waiting, absorbed in a scheme
which he was patiently thinking out. His senses became so
acute that he could hear the slightest sounds that arose in
the house. Down below him snored Trouche, while Olympe
turned over the pages of her book with a slight rubbing of her
fingers against the paper. On the second floor Abbé Faujas's
pen made a scratching sound like the crawling of an insect,
while, in the adjoining room, Madame Faujas's heavy
breathing seemed like an accompaniment to that shrill
music. Mouret sat for an hour with his ears sharply strained.
Olympe was the first of the wakeful ones to succumb to sleep.
He could hear her novel fall upon the floor. Then Abbé
Faujas laid down his pen and undressed himself, quietly
gliding about his room in his slippers. He slipped off his
clothes in silence, and did not even make the bed creak as he
got into it. Ah! the house had gone to rest at last. But
the madman could tell from the sound of the Abbé's breathing
that he was yet awake. Gradually that breathing grew fuller,
and at last the whole house slept.
Mouret waited on for another half-hour. He still listened
with strained ears, as though he could hear the four sleepers
descending into deeper and deeper slumber. The house lay
wrapped in darkness and unconsciousness. Then the maniac
rose up and slowly made his way into the passage.
'Marthe isn't here any longer; the house isn't here;
nothing is here,' he murmured.
He opened the door that led into the garden, and went
down to the little conservatory. When he got there he
methodically removed the big dry box-plants, and carried
them upstairs in enormous armfuls, piling them in front of
the doors of the Trouches and the Faujases. He felt, too, a
craving for a bright light, and he went into the kitchen
and lighted all the lamps, which he placed upon the tables in
the various rooms and on the landings, and along the
passages. Then he brought up the rest of the box-plants.
They were soon piled higher than the doors. As he was
making his last journey with them he raised his eyes and[Pg 314]
noticed the windows. Next he went out into the garden
again, took the trunks of the fruit-trees and stacked them up
under the windows, skilfully arranging for little currents of
air which should make them blaze freely. The stack seemed
to him but a small one, however.
'There is nothing left,' he murmured: 'there must be
nothing left.'
Then, as a thought struck him, he went down into the
cellar, and recommenced his journeying backwards and
forwards. He was now carrying up the supply of fuel for the
winter, the coal, the vine-branches, and the wood. The pile
under the windows gradually grew bigger. As he carefully
arranged each bundle of vine-branches, he was thrilled with
livelier satisfaction. He next proceeded to distribute the
fuel through the rooms on the ground-floor, and left a heap
of it in the entrance-hall, and another heap in the kitchen.
Then he piled the furniture atop of the different heaps. An
hour sufficed him to get his work finished. He had taken
his boots off, and had glided about all over the house, with
heavily laden arms, so dexterously that he had not let a
single piece of wood fall roughly to the floor. He seemed
endowed with new life, with extraordinary nimbleness of
motion. As far as this one firmly fixed idea of his went, he
was perfectly in possession of his senses.
When all was ready, he lingered for a moment to enjoy
the sight of his work. He went from pile to pile, took pleasure
in viewing the square-set pyres, and gently rubbed his hands
together with an appearance of extreme satisfaction. As a
few fragments of coal had fallen on the stairs, he ran off to
get a brush, and carefully swept the black dust from the steps.
Then he completed his inspection with the careful precision
of a man who means to do things as they ought to be done.
He gradually became quite excited with satisfaction, and
dropped on to his hands and knees again, and began to hop
about, panting more heavily in his savage joy.
At last he took a vine-branch and set fire to the heaps.
First of all he lighted the pile on the terrace underneath the
windows. Then he leapt back into the house and set fire to
the heaps in the drawing-room and dining-room, and then to
those in the kitchen and the hall. Next he sprang up the
stairs and flung the remains of his blazing brand upon the
piles that lay against the doors of the Trouches and Faujases.
An ever-increasing rage was thrilling him, and the lurid[Pg 315]
blaze of the fire brought his madness to a climax. He twice
came down the stairs with terrific leaps, bounded about
through the thick smoke, fanning the flames with his breath,
and casting handfuls of coal upon them. At the sight of the
flames, already mounting to the ceilings of the rooms, he sat
down every now and then and laughed and clapped his hands
with all his strength.
The house was now roaring like an over-crammed stove.
The flames burst out at all points, at once, with a violence
that split the floors. But the maniac made his way upstairs
again through the sheets of fire, singeing his hair and
blackening his clothes as he went. And he posted himself
on the second-floor, crouching down on his hands and knees
with his growling, beast-like head thrown forward. He was
keeping guard over the landing, and his eyes never quitted
the priest's door.
'Ovide! Ovide!' shrieked a panic-stricken voice.
Madame Faujas's door at the end of the landing was
suddenly opened and the flames swept into her room with the
roar of a tempest. The old woman appeared in the midst
of the fire. Stretching out her arms, she hurled aside the
blazing brands and sprang on to the landing, pulling and
pushing away with her hands and feet the burning heap that
blocked up her son's door, and calling all the while to the
priest despairingly. The maniac crouched still lower down,
his eyes gleaming while he continued to growl.
'Wait for me! Don't get out of the window!' cried
Madame Faujas, striking at her son's door.
She threw her weight against it, and the charred door
yielded easily. She reappeared holding her son in her arms.
He had taken time to put on his cassock, and was choking,
half suffocated by the smoke.
'I am going to carry you, Ovide,' she cried, with energetic
determination; 'Hold well on to my shoulders, and clutch
hold of my hair if you feel you are slipping. Don't trouble,
I'll carry you through it all.'
She hoisted him upon her shoulders as though he were
a child, and this sublime mother, this old peasant woman,
carrying her devotion to death itself, did not so much as
totter beneath the crushing weight of that big swooning,
unresisting body. She extinguished the burning brands with
her naked feet and made a free passage through the flames
by brushing them aside with her open hand so that her son[Pg 316]
might not even be touched by them. But just as she was
about to go downstairs, the maniac, whom she had not
observed, sprang upon the Abbé Faujas and tore him from off
her shoulders. His muttered growl turned into a wild shriek,
while he writhed in a fit at the head of the stairs. He
belaboured the priest, tore him with his nails and strangled
him.
'Marthe! Marthe!' he bellowed.
Then he rolled down the blazing stairs, still with the
priest in his grasp; while Madame Faujas, who had driven
her teeth into his throat, drained his blood. The Trouches
perished in their drunken stupor without a groan; and the
house, gutted and undermined, collapsed in the midst of a
cloud of sparks.
Macquart did not find Porquier at home, and so the doctor
only reached Madame Rougon's at nearly half-past twelve.
The whole house was still in commotion. Rougon himself
was the only one who had not got out of bed. Emotion had
a killing effect upon him, said he. Félicité, who was still
seated in the same armchair by Marthe's bedside, rose to
meet the doctor.
'Oh, my dear doctor, we are so very anxious!' she
murmured. 'The poor child has never stirred since we put
her to bed there. Her hands are already quite cold. I have
kept them in my own, but it has done no good.'
Doctor Porquier scanned Marthe's face, and then, without
making any further examination, he compressed his lips and
made a vague gesture with his hands.
'My dear Madame Rougon,' he said, 'you must summon
up your courage.'
Félicité burst into sobs.
'The end is at hand,' the doctor continued in a lower
voice. 'I have been expecting this sad termination for a
long time past; I must confess so much now. Both of poor
Madame Mouret's lungs are diseased, and in her case phthisis
has been complicated by nervous derangement.'
He took a seat, and a smile played about his lips, the[Pg 317]
smile of the polished doctor who thinks that even in the
presence of death itself suave politeness is demanded of
him.
'Don't give way and make yourself ill, my dear lady. The
catastrophe was inevitable and any little accident might have
hastened it. I should imagine that poor Madame Mouret
must have been subject to coughing when she was very young;
wasn't she? I should say that the germs of the disease
have been spreading within her for a good many years past.
Latterly, and especially within the last three years, phthisis
has been making frightful strides in her. How pious and
devotional she was! I have been quite touched to see her
passing away in such sanctity. Well, well, the decrees of
Providence are inscrutable; science is very often quite
powerless.'
Seeing that Madame Rougon still continued to weep, he
poured out upon her the tenderest consolations, and pressed
her to take a cup of lime-flower water to calm herself.
'Don't distress yourself, I beg you,' he continued. 'I
assure you that she has lost all sense of pain. She will continue
sleeping as tranquilly as she is doing at present, and
will only regain consciousness just before death. I won't
leave you; I will remain here, though my services are quite
unavailing. I shall stay, however, as a friend, my dear lady,
as a friend.'
He settled himself comfortably for the night in an easy
chair. Félicité grew a little calmer. When Doctor Porquier
gave her to understand that Marthe had only a few more
hours to live, she thought of sending for Serge from the
Seminary, which was near at hand. She asked Rose to go
there for him, but the cook at first refused.
'Do you want to kill the poor little fellow as well?' she
exclaimed. 'It would be too great a shock for him to be
called up in the middle of the night to come to see a dead
woman. I won't be his murderer!'
Rose still retained bitter feelings against her mistress.
Ever since the latter had been lying there dying she had paced
round the bed, angrily knocking about the cups and the hot-water
bottles.
'Was there any sense in doing such a thing as madame
did?' she cried. 'She has only herself to blame if she has
got her death by going to see the master. And now everything
is turned topsy-turvy and we are all distracted. No,[Pg 318]
no; I don't approve at all of the little fellow being startled
out of his sleep in such a way.'
In the end, however, she consented to go to the Seminary.
Doctor Porquier had stretched himself out in front of the fire,
and with half-closed eyes continued to address consolatory
words to Madame Rougon. A slight rattling sound began to
be heard in Marthe's chest. Uncle Macquart, who had not
appeared again since he had gone away two good hours
previously, now gently pushed the door open.
'Where have you been?' Félicité asked him, taking him
into a corner of the room.
He told her that he had been to put his horse and trap up
at The Three Pigeons. But his eyes sparkled so vividly, and
there was such a look of diabolical cunning about him, that
she was filled with a thousand suspicions. She forgot her
dying daughter for the moment, for she scented some trickery
which it was imperative for her to get to the bottom of.
'Anyone would imagine that you had been following and
playing the spy upon somebody,' she said, looking at his
muddy trousers. 'You are hiding something from me,
Macquart. It is not right of you. We have always treated
you very well.'
'Oh, very well, indeed!' sniggered Macquart. 'I'm glad
you've told me so. Rougon is a skinflint. He treated me
like the lowest of the low in the matter of that cornfield.
Where is Rougon? Snoozing comfortably in his bed, eh?
It's little he cares for all the trouble one takes about the family.'
The smile which accompanied these last words greatly
disquieted Félicité. She looked him keenly in the face.
'What trouble have you taken for the family?' she asked.
'Do you grudge having brought poor Marthe back from Les
Tulettes? I tell you again that all that business has a very
suspicious look. I have been questioning Rose, and it seems
to me that you wanted to come straight here. It surprises
me that you did not knock more loudly in the Rue
Balande; they would have come and opened the door. I'm
not saying this because I don't want my dear child to be
here; I am glad to think, on the contrary, that she will, at
any rate, die among her own people, and will have only loving
faces about her.'
Macquart seemed greatly surprised at this speech, and
interrupted her by saying with an uneasy manner:
'I thought that you and Abbé Faujas were the best of
friends.'
[Pg 319]
She made no reply, but stepped up to Marthe, whose
breathing was now becoming more difficult. When she left
the bedside again, she saw Macquart pulling one of the
curtains aside and peering out into the dark night, while
rubbing the moist window-pane with his hand.
'Don't go away to-morrow without coming and talking to
me,' she said to him. 'I want to have all this cleared up.'
'Just as you like,' he replied. 'You are very difficult to
please. First you like people, and then you don't like them.
I always keep on in the same regular easy-going way.'
He was evidently very much vexed to find that the
Rougons no longer made common cause with Abbé Faujas.
He tapped the window with the tips of his fingers, and still
kept his eyes on the black night. Just at that moment the
sky was reddened by a sudden glow.
'What is that?' asked Félicité.
Macquart opened the window and looked out.
'It looks like a fire,' he said unconcernedly. 'There is
something burning behind the Sub-Prefecture.'
There were sounds of commotion on the Place. A servant
came into the room with a scared look and told them that
the house of madame's daughter was on fire. It was believed,
he continued, that madame's son-in-law, he whom they had
been obliged to shut up, had been seen walking about the
garden carrying a burning vine-branch. The most unfortunate
part of the matter was that there seemed no hope of
saving the lodgers. Félicité turned sharply round, and
pondered for a minute, keeping her eyes fixed on Macquart.
Then she clearly understood everything.
'You promised me solemnly,' she said in a low voice,
'that you would conduct yourself quietly and decently when
we set you up in your little house at Les Tulettes. You have
everything that you want, and are quite independent. This
is abominable, disgraceful, I tell you! How much did Abbé
Fenil give you to let François escape?'
Macquart was going to break out angrily, but Madame
Rougon made him keep silent. She seemed much more
uneasy about the consequences of the matter than indignant
at the crime itself.
'And what a terrible scandal there will be, if it all comes
out,' she continued. 'Have we ever refused you anything?
We will talk together to-morrow, and we will speak again of
that cornfield about which you are so bitter against us. If[Pg 320]
Rougon were to hear of such a thing as this, he would die of
grief.'
Macquart could not help smiling. Still he defended himself
energetically, and swore that he knew nothing about the
matter, and had had no hand in it. Then, as the sky grew
redder, and Doctor Porquier had already gone downstairs
he left the room, saying, as if he were anxiously curious about
the matter:
'I am going to see what is happening.'
It was Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies who had given the
alarm. There had been an evening party at the Sub-Prefecture,
and he was just going to bed at a few minutes
before one o'clock when he perceived a strange red reflection
upon the ceiling of his bedroom. Going to the window, he
was struck with astonishment at seeing a great fire burning
in the Mourets' garden, while a shadowy form, which he did
not at first recognise, danced about in the midst of the smoke,
brandishing a blazing vine-branch. Almost immediately
afterwards flames burst out from all the openings on the
ground-floor. The sub-prefect hurriedly put on his trousers
again, called his valet, and sent the porter off to summon the
fire-brigade and the authorities. Then, before going to the
scene of the disaster, he finished dressing himself and consulted
his mirror to make sure that his moustache was quite
as it should be. He was the first to arrive in the Rue Balande.
The street was absolutely deserted, save for a couple of cats
which were rushing across it.
'They will let themselves be broiled like cutlets in there!'
thought Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies, astonished at the
quiet, sleepy appearance of the house on the street side, where
as yet there was no sign of the conflagration.
He knocked loudly at the door, but could hear nothing
except the roaring of the fire in the well of the staircase.
Then he knocked at Monsieur Rastoil's door. There piercing
screams were heard, hurried rustlings to and fro, banging of
doors and stifled calls.
'Aurélie, cover up your shoulders!' cried the presiding
judge, who rushed out on to the pathway, followed by
Madame Rastoil and her younger daughter, the one who was
still unmarried. In her hurry, Aurélie had thrown over her
shoulders a cloak of her father's, which left her arms bare.
She turned very red as she caught sight of Monsieur Péqueur
des Saulaies.
[Pg 321]
'What a terrible disaster!' stammered the presiding judge.
'Everything will be burnt down. The wall of my bedroom
is quite hot already. The two houses almost join. Ah! my
dear sub-prefect, I haven't even stopped to remove the time-pieces.
We must organise assistance. We can't stand by
and let all our belongings be destroyed in an hour or two.'
Madame Rastoil, scantily clothed in a dressing-gown, was
bewailing her drawing-room furniture, which she had only
just had newly covered. By this time, however, several
neighbours had appeared at their windows. The presiding
judge summoned them to his assistance, and commenced to
remove his effects from his house. He made the time-pieces
his own particular charge, and brought them out and deposited
them on the pathway opposite. When the easy-chairs from
the drawing-room were carried out, he made his wife and
daughter sit down in them, and the sub-prefect remained by
their side to reassure them.
'Make yourselves easy, ladies,' he said. 'The engine will
be here directly, and then a vigorous attack will be made
upon the fire. I think I may undertake to promise that your
house will be saved.'
All at once the window-panes of the Mourets' house burst,
and the flames broke out from the first floor. The street was
illumined by a bright glow; it was as light as at midday. A
drummer could be heard passing across the Place of the Sub-Prefecture,
some distance off, sounding the alarm. A number
of men ran up, and a chain was formed to pass on the buckets
of water; but there were no buckets; and still the engine did
not arrive. In the midst of the general consternation
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies, without leaving the two
ladies, shouted out orders in a loud voice.
'Leave a free passage! The chain is too closely formed
down there! Keep yourselves two feet apart!'
Then he turned to Aurélie and said in a low voice:
'I am very much surprised that the engine has not arrived
yet. It is a new engine. This will be the first time it has
been used. I sent the porter off immediately, and I told him
also to call at the police-station.'
However, the gendarmes arrived before the end. They kept
back the inquisitive spectators, whose numbers increased, notwithstanding
the lateness of the hour. The sub-prefect himself
went to put the chain in a better order, as it was bulging out
in the middle, through the pushing of some rough fellows who[Pg 322]
had run up from the outskirts of the town. The little bell of
Saint-Saturnin's was sounding the alarm with cracked notes,
and a second drum beat faintly at the bottom of the street
near the Mall. At last the engine arrived with a noisy
clatter. The crowd made way for it, and the fifteen panting
firemen of Plassans came up at a run. However, in spite of
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies's intervention, a quarter of an
hour elapsed before the engine was in working order.
'I tell you that it is the piston that won't work!' cried
the captain angrily to the sub-prefect, who asserted that the
nuts were too tightly screwed.
At last a jet of water shot up, and the crowd gave a sigh
of satisfaction. The house was now blazing from the ground-floor
to the second-floor like a huge torch. The water hissed
as it fell into the burning mass, and the flames, separating
into yellow tongues, seemed to shoot up still higher than
before. Some of the firemen had mounted on to the roof of
the presiding judge's house, and were breaking open the tiles
with their picks to limit the progress of the fire.
'It's all up with the place!' muttered Macquart, who
stood quietly on the pathway with his hands in his pockets,
watching the conflagration with lively interest.
Out in the street a perfect open-air drawing-room had
now been established. The easy-chairs were arranged in a
semicircle, as though to allow their occupants to view the
spectacle at their ease. Madame de Condamin and her
husband had just arrived. They had scarcely got back home
from the Sub-Prefecture, they said, when they had heard the
drum beating the alarm. Monsieur de Bourdeu, Monsieur
Maffre, Doctor Porquier, and Monsieur Delangre, accompanied
by several members of the municipal council, had also
lost no time in hastening to the scene. They all clustered
round poor Madame Rastoil and her daughter, trying to comfort
and console them with sympathetic remarks. After a
time most of them sat down in the easy-chairs, and a general
conversation took place, while the engine snorted away half
a score yards off and the blazing beams crackled.
'Have you got my watch, my dear?' Madame Rastoil
inquired. 'It was on the mantelpiece with the chain.'
'Yes, yes, I have it in my pocket,' replied the president,
trembling with emotion. 'I have got the silver as well. I
wanted to bring everything away, but the firemen wouldn't
let me; they said it was ridiculous.'
[Pg 323]
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies still showed the greatest
calmness and kindly attention.
'I assure you that your house is in no danger at all,' he
remarked. 'The force of the fire is spent now. You may go
and put your silver back in your dining-room.'
But Monsieur Rastoil would not consent to part with his
plate, which he was carrying under his arm, wrapped up in a
newspaper.
'All the doors are open,' he stammered, 'and the house
is full of people that I know nothing about. They have
made a hole in my roof that will cost me a pretty penny to
put right again.'
Madame de Condamin now questioned the sub-prefect.
'Oh! how terrible!' she cried. 'I thought that the
lodgers had had time to escape. Has nothing been seen of
Abbé Faujas?'
'I knocked at the door myself,' said Monsieur Péqueur des
Saulaies, 'but I couldn't make anyone hear. When the firemen
arrived I had the door broken open, and I ordered them
to place the ladders against the windows. But nothing was
of any use. One of our brave gendarmes who ventured into
the hall narrowly escaped being suffocated by the smoke.'
'As Abbé Faujas has been, I suppose! What a horrible
death!' said the fair Octavie, with a shudder.
The ladies and gentlemen looked into one another's faces,
which showed pale in the flickering light of the conflagration.
Doctor Porquier explained to them, however, that death by
fire was probably not so painful as they imagined.
'When the fire once reaches one,' he said in conclusion,
'it can only be a matter of few seconds. Of course, it depends,
to some extent, upon the violence of the conflagration.'
Monsieur de Condamin was counting upon his fingers.
'Even if Madame Mouret is with her parents, as is asserted,
that still leaves four—Abbé Faujas, his mother, his sister, and
his brother-in-law. It's a pretty bad business!'
Just then Madame Rastoil inclined her head towards her
husband's ear. 'Give me my watch,' she whispered. 'I don't
feel easy about it. You are always fidgetting, and you may
sit on it.'
Someone now called out that the wind was carrying the
sparks towards the Sub-Prefecture, and Monsieur Péqueur
des Saulaies immediately sprang up, and, apologising for his
departure, hastened off to guard against this new danger.[Pg 324]
Monsieur Delangre was anxious that a last attempt should be
made to rescue the victims. But the captain of the fire
brigade roughly told him to go up the ladder himself if he
thought such a thing possible; he had never seen such a fire
before, he declared. The devil himself must have lighted it,
for the house was burning like a bundle of chips, at all points
at once. The mayor, followed by some kindly disposed
persons, then went round into the Impasse des Chevillottes.
Perhaps, he said, it would be possible to get to the windows
from the garden side.
'It would be very magnificent if it were not so sad,'
remarked Madame de Condamin, who was now calmer.
The fire was certainly becoming a superb spectacle.
Showers of sparks rushed up in the midst of huge blue
flames; chasms of glowing red showed themselves behind
each of the gaping windows, while the smoke rolled gently
away in a huge purplish cloud, like the smoke from Bengal
lights set burning at some display of fireworks. The ladies
and gentlemen were comfortably seated in their chairs, leaning
on their elbows and stretching out their legs as they
watched the spectacle before them; and whenever there was
a more violent burst of flames than usual, there came an
interval of silence, broken by exclamations. At some distance
off, in the midst of the flickering brilliance which every
now and then lighted up masses of serried heads, there rose
the murmur of the crowd, the sound of gushing water, a
general confused uproar. Ten paces away the engine, with
its regular, snorting breath, continued vomiting streams of
water from its metal throat.
'Look at the third window on the second floor!' suddenly
cried Monsieur Maffre. 'You can see a bed burning quite
distinctly on the left hand. It has yellow curtains, and they
are blazing like so much paper.'
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies now returned at a gentle
trot to reassure the ladies and gentlemen. It had been a false
alarm.
'The sparks,' he said, 'are certainly being carried by the
wind towards the Sub-Prefecture, but they are extinguished
in the air before they reach it. There is no further danger.
They have got the fire well in hand now.'
'But is it known how the fire originated?' asked Madame
de Condamin.
Monsieur de Bourdeu asserted that he had first of all seen[Pg 325]
a dense smoke issuing from the kitchen. Monsieur Maffre
alleged, on the other hand, that the flames had first appeared
in a room on the first floor. But the sub-prefect shook his
head with an air of official prudence, and said in a low voice:
'I am much afraid that malice has had something to do
with the disaster. I have ordered an inquiry to be made.'
Then he went on to tell them that he had seen a man
lighting the fire with a vine-branch.
'Yes, I saw him too,' interrupted Aurélie Rastoil. 'It
was Monsieur Mouret.'
This statement created the greatest astonishment. The
thing seemed impossible. Monsieur Mouret escaping and
burning down his house—what a frightful story! They overwhelmed
Aurélie with questions. She blushed, and her mother
looked at her severely. It was scarcely proper for a young
girl to be constantly looking out of her window at night-time.
'I assure you that I distinctly recognised Monsieur
Mouret,' she continued. 'I had not gone to sleep, and I got
up when I saw a bright light. Monsieur Mouret was dancing
about in the midst of the fire.'
Then the sub-prefect spoke out:
'Mademoiselle is quite correct. I recognise the unhappy
man now. He looked so terrible that I was in doubt as to
who it might be, although his face seemed familiar. Excuse
me; this is a very serious matter, and I must go and give
some orders.'
He went away again, while the company began to discuss
this terrible affair of a landlord burning his lodgers to death.
Monsieur de Bourdeu inveighed hotly against lunatic asylums.
The surveillance exercised in them, he said, was most imperfect.
The truth was that Monsieur de Bourdeu was greatly
afraid lest the prefecture which Abbé Faujas had promised
him should be burnt away in the fire before his eyes.
'Maniacs are extremely revengeful,' said Monsieur de
Condamin, in all simplicity.
This remark seemed to embarrass everyone, and the conversation
dropped. The ladies shuddered slightly, while the
men exchanged peculiar glances. The burning house had
become an object of still greater interest now that they knew
whose hand had set it on fire. They blinked with a thrill of
delicious terror as they gazed upon the glowing pile, and
thought of the drama that had been enacted there.
'If old Mouret is in there, that makes five,' said Monsieur[Pg 326]
de Condamin. Then the ladies hushed him and told him
that he was a cold-blooded, unfeeling man.
The Paloques, meanwhile, had been watching the fire
since its commencement from the window of their dining-room.
They were just above the drawing-room that had
been improvised upon the pathway. The judge's wife at
last went out, and graciously offered shelter and hospitality
to the Rastoil ladies and the friends surrounding them.
'We can see very well from our windows, I assure you,'
she said.
And, as the ladies declined her invitation, she added:
'You will certainly take cold; it is a very sharp night.'
But Madame de Condamin smiled and stretched out her
little feet, which showed from beneath her skirts.
'Oh dear no! we're not at all cold,' she said. 'My feet are
quite toasted. I am very comfortable indeed. Are you cold,
mademoiselle?'
'I am really too warm,' Aurélie replied. 'One could
imagine that it was a summer night. This fire keeps one
quite warm and cosy.'
Everyone declared that it was very pleasant, and so
Madame Paloque determined to remain there with them and
to take a seat in one of the easy-chairs. Monsieur Maffre
had just gone off. He had caught sight, in the midst of the
crowd, of his two sons, accompanied by Guillaume Porquier,
who had all three run up from a house near the ramparts to
see the fire. The magistrate, who was certain that he had
locked his lads up in their bedroom, dragged Alphonse and
Ambroise away by the ears.
'I think we might go off to bed now,' said Monsieur de
Bourdeu, who was gradually growing more cross-grained.
However, Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies had reappeared
again, and showed himself quite indefatigable, though he
never neglected the ladies, in spite of the duties and anxieties
of all kinds with which he was overwhelmed. He sprang
hastily forward to meet Monsieur Delangre, who was just
coming back from the Impasse des Chevillottes. They talked
together in low tones. The mayor had apparently witnessed
some terrible sight, for he kept passing his hand over his
face, as though trying to drive away some awful vision that
was pursuing him. The ladies could only hear him murmuring,
'We arrived too late! It was horrible!' He would
not answer any questions.
[Pg 327]
'Only Bourdeu and Delangre will regret Abbé Faujas,'
Monsieur de Condamin whispered in Madame Paloque's ear.
'They had business on hand with him,' the latter replied
quietly. 'Ah! here is Abbé Bourrette. He is weeping from
genuine sorrow.'
Abbé Bourrette, who had formed part of the chain of men
who passed the buckets on, was sobbing bitterly. The poor
man refused all consolation. He would not sit down, but
remained standing, with anxious, troubled eyes, watching the
last beams burn away. Abbé Surin had also been seen; but
he had disappeared after picking up in the crowd all the
information he could.
'Come along; let us be off to bed,' exclaimed Monsieur
de Bourdeu. 'It is foolish of us to stop here.'
The whole party rose. It was settled that Monsieur
Rastoil and his wife and daughter should spend the night at
the Paloques'. Madame de Condamin gently tapped her
dress, which had got slightly creased, in order to straighten
it. The easy-chairs were pushed out of the way, and the
company lingered yet a few more moments while bidding
each other good-night. The engine was still snorting, and
the fire was dying down amidst dense black smoke. Nothing
was to be heard but the tramping of the diminishing crowd
and the last blows of a fireman's axe striking down a beam.
'It is all over!' thought Macquart, who still kept his
position on the opposite pathway.
He remained there a few moments longer, listening to the
last words which Monsieur de Condamin exchanged in low
tones with Madame Paloque.
'Bah!' said the judge's wife, 'no one will cry for him,
unless it's that big gander Bourrette. He had grown quite
unendurable, and we were nothing but his slaves. His lordship
the Bishop, I dare say, has got a smiling face just now.
Plassans is at last delivered!'
'And the Rougons!' exclaimed Monsieur de Condamin.
'They must be quite delighted.'
'I should think so, indeed. The Rougons must be up in
the heavens. They will inherit the Abbé's conquest. Ah!
they would have paid anyone well who would have run the
risk of setting the house on fire.'
Macquart went away feeling extremely dissatisfied. He
was beginning to fear that he had been duped. The joy of
the Rougons filled him with consternation. The Rougons[Pg 328]
were crafty folks who always played a double game, and
whose opponents were quite certain to end by getting the
worst of the struggle. As Macquart crossed the Place of the
Sub-Prefecture he swore to himself that he would never set
to work in this blind way again.
As he went up to the room where Marthe lay dying he
found Rose sitting on one of the stairs. She was in a fuming
rage.
'No, indeed, I will certainly not stop in the room!' she
cried. 'I won't look on and see such things. Let her die
without me; let her die like a dog! I no longer have any
love for her; I have no love for anyone. To send for the poor
little fellow to kill him! And I consented to go for him! I
shall hate myself for it all my life! He was as white as his
nightshirt, the angel! I was obliged to carry him here from
the Seminary. I thought he was going to give up the ghost
on the way, he cried so. Oh! it's a cruel shame! And there
he has gone into the room now to kiss her! It quite makes
my flesh creep. I wish the whole house would topple down
on our heads and finish us all off at one stroke! I will shut
myself up in some hole somewhere, and live quite alone, and
never see anyone again—never, never! One's whole life
seems made up of things that make one weep and make one
angry!'
Macquart entered the room. Madame Rougon was on her
knees, burying her face in her hands, and Serge, with tears
streaming down his cheeks, was standing by the bedside
supporting the head of the dying woman. She had not yet
regained consciousness. The last flickering flames of the
conflagration cast a ruddy reflection upon the ceiling of the
room.
At last a convulsive tremor shook Marthe's body. She
opened her eyes with an expression of surprise, and sat up
in bed to glance around her. Then she clasped her hands
together with a look of unutterable terror, and died even as
she caught sight of Serge's cassock in the crimson glow.
[1] See Eugène Tenot's 'La Province en Décembre 1851,' Paris, 1865
(pp. 206 et seq., and 260 et seq.). Also Maquan's 'L'Insurrection du
Var,' p. 127.
[2] A glimpse of François Mouret, and Marthe, his wife, is given in
'The Fortune of the Rougons,' pp. 143-4—Ed.
[3] Parish priest.
[4] One of the chief characters of 'The Fortune of the Rougons' and
'Dr. Pascal.'—Ed.
[5] The chief character in 'His Excellency.'
[6] Those proscribed by Louis Napoleon at the Coup d'État of 1851.
[7] 'Aunt Dide's' life and death at Les Tulettes are described in 'Dr.
Pascal.'—Ed.

[Pg ix]
With the end of the century there has come in France a
great revival of the struggle between religion and free thought
which has so long been waged there; and the stupendous effort
put forth by the Roman Catholic Church to annihilate the
Third Republic has placed the country in a condition of unrest
such as it has only known on the eve of its chief Revolutions.
Behind the notorious Dreyfus case, behind the shouts
of 'Long live the army!' and 'Death to the Jews!' behind
all the so-called Nationalism and Militarism, the Church has
been steadily, incessantly working, ever fanning the flames of
discord, ever promoting and fostering coalitions of malcontents,
by whose help it hopes to recover its old-time paramountcy.
Time alone can reveal the outcome of this great effort, this
'forlorn hope' assault upon institutions which have hitherto
kept Catholicism in check and tended so largely to the diffusion
of free thought; but personally I am inclined to think,
with all due allowance for partial successes achieved here and
there, that this Clerical movement, however skilfully engineered
under the cloak of patriotism, and however lavishly
financed by the bulk of the money derived from the Lourdes
'miracles,' over which the Assumptionist Fathers preside,
and the offerings of zealots throughout the country, will
ultimately result in failure, for France is not at heart a
religious country, and when faith has departed from a nation
can it be restored?
The meaning of the Clerical movement to which I have
referred is twofold. In the first place there is the perfectly[Pg x]
natural and legitimate desire of the French Catholics to
recover lost ascendancy; and in the second place there is the
conviction of the Vatican and the French episcopate generally
that France is the only country which under favourable circumstances
might be in a position to restore the temporal
power of the Holy See. In that respect the Pope can hope
for nothing from Spain or Austria or the Catholic States of
Germany. In France rests the sole hope of the Papacy; and
thus on political as well as religious grounds the establishment
of a Catholic régime in place of the present-day free-thought
Republic is the one great dream of those who direct
the fortunes of the Holy Roman and Apostolic Church.
All who know anything of modern history are aware that
in 1849 a French army overthrew the Roman Republic and
reinstated Pius IX. in possession of the so-called patrimony
of St. Peter, and that in after years, until France indeed was
vanquished at Sedan, the presence of French forces alone
enabled the Pope to continue in the exercise of his territorial
sway. Both the Royalist reactionaries who sat in the National
Assembly of the Second Republic, and the Prince-President
of that time, afterwards Napoleon III., lent support to
Pius IX., and in return expected to receive the countenance
and help of the French clergy in their various designs upon
France. But the clergy always seeks its own ends, and more
than once its policy varied, now being in favour of the
Royalists and now in favour of Louis Napoleon, according
as it seemed likely to secure greater benefits from one or the
other.
Even when the contest for supremacy was over, when the
Republic had been murdered at the Coup d'État, and the
hopes of the Count de Chambord had been destroyed by the
triumph of Napoleon the Little, the clergy did not give unqualified
support to the new government. True, on the 1st of
January, 1852, Monseigneur Sibour, Archbishop of Paris,
officiated at a solemn 'Te Deum' at Notre Dame in honour
of the triumph of a bribed and drunken soldiery over the
defenders of the Constitution; but Louis Napoleon had[Pg xi]
scarcely become Emperor before a large section of the clergy
began to protest that the new régime was by no means sufficiently
Clerical. The course adopted in these circumstances
was very characteristic and significant. An education law
had been passed in 1850, giving many privileges and advantages
to the clergy, such indeed as they had not possessed
since the downfall of Charles X. But comparative liberty in
educational matters was more than the French episcopate,
eager for domination as the price of its adhesion to imperialism,
could willingly allow, and before long a celebrated and remarkably
well written newspaper, 'L'Univers,' initiated a
campaign against the Empire, taking as its standpoint that
the Pope was the virtual sovereign of the world, and that
everything must be subservient to the interests of the Roman
Church. Half the French episcopate actively supported the
view which followed, i.e. that the education of the young
ought to be entirely under priestly control, the priests being
the vicars of the Pope, even as he (the Pope) was the vicar of
the Deity. There were some curious and even amusing incidents
in the course of that now forgotten campaign. For
instance, it was actually proposed to abolish the study of the
Greek and Latin classics in France, a suggestion which many
of the Bishops vigorously upheld, though others of a scholarly
turn pleaded plaintively in favour of Horace and a few others,
whose writings, if edited in a Christian spirit, might yet, they
thought, be allowed among young men of proved morality!
With the educational controversy many political matters
soon became blended. The Italian revolutionaries were at
that time doing their utmost to frighten Napoleon III. into
fulfilment of his early promises respecting the liberation of
Italy; and the Vatican, anxious for the maintenance of the
old order of things, since any change must help on its own
fall, made desperate efforts to prevent the interference of
France in Italian affairs, unless indeed it were for the consolidation
of the Papal power. Even as in recent times the
Assumptionist Fathers have intrigued for the overthrow of
the Third Republic, so did the Société de St. Vincent de Paul—which[Pg xii]
nominally was a mere charitable organisation—seek
to turn the Empire into a priestly régime, or in default thereof
to overthrow it. The position of Napoleon III. was the more
difficult since his own wife, the Empress Eugénie, acted as
the Vatican's spy and agent. Matters at last reached such a
pass that the Emperor's Minister, Billault, had on the one
hand to prohibit political allusions in sermons, under pain of
fine and imprisonment, and on the other to break up and
scatter the intriguing religious societies. Nevertheless the
Empire's position remained a difficult one to the very last,
and Napoleon III. was often sorely puzzled how to steer a
safe course between the claims of the Pope and the clergy
and the aspirations of Italy and its well-wishers; to say
nothing of the views of all those who, thinking of France
alone, by no means approved of priestly power in politics.
It is on the state of affairs to which I have alluded, the
hostility of a part of the French clergy to the Empire in its
earlier years, that M. Zola has based his novel, 'The Conquest
of Plassans.' The priests, subservient to the Vatican, lead
the town into a course of opposition against imperial institutions,
and the Government then despatches thither an impecunious
and unscrupulous priest, one Abbé Faujas, for the
purpose of winning it back again. Such tactics were not
infrequently employed at that time. Whilst a part of the
clergy simply followed its own inclinations, others venally
took pay from the Empire to do its dirty work. As often as
not they subsequently betrayed their paymaster, using the
positions into which they were thrust for the satisfaction of
their personal ambition. Still, for a while these needy
hangers-on at the Ministry of Public Worship proved useful
allies, and the Empire was only too ready to employ them.
It will be seen, then, that the theme chosen by M. Zola rests
upon historical fact, and it may be taken that his story embodies
incidents which actually occurred under such conditions
as those that I have described.
The 'Conquest of Plassans' may well be read in conjunction
with 'The Fortune of the Rougons,' M. Zola's earlier[Pg xiii]
work, as the scene in both instances is the same, and certain
personages, such as Félicité Rougon and Antoine Macquart,
figure largely in both books. In the earlier volume we see
the effect of the Coup d'État in the provinces, almost every
incident being based upon historical fact. For instance,
Miette, the heroine of 'The Fortune of the Rougons,' had a
counterpart in Madame Ferrier, that being the real name of
the young woman who, carrying the insurgents' blood-red
banner, was hailed by them as the 'Goddess of Liberty' on
their dramatic march. And in like way the tragic death of
Silvère, linked to another hapless prisoner, was founded by
M. Zola on an incident that followed the rising, as recorded
by an eyewitness.[1] Amidst all the bloodshed, the Rougons,
in M. Zola's narrative, rise to fortune and power, and Plassans
(really Aix-en-Provence) bows down before them. But time
passes, the revolt of the clergy supervenes, by their influence
the town chooses a Royalist Marquis as deputy, and it becomes
necessary to conquer it once again.
Abbé Faujas, by whom this conquest is achieved on behalf
of the Empire, is, I think, a strongly conceived character,
perhaps the most real of all the priests that are scattered
through M. Zola's books. I do not say this because he
happens to be anything but a good man. M. Zola has
sketched more than one good priest in his novels, as, for
instance, Abbé Rose in 'Paris;' but in this one, Faujas, there
is more genuine flesh and blood than in all the others. True,
his colleagues, Bourrette and Fenil, are admirably suggested;
the Bishop, too, an indolent prelate who surrenders the
government of his diocese to his vicar-general, and spends
his time in translating Horace (for he is one of the few who
favour the classics), leaves on one an impression of reality;
yet no other priestly creation of M. Zola's pen can to my
thinking vie with the stern, chaste, authoritative, ambitious[Pg xiv]
Faujas, the man who subdues Plassans, and who wrecks the
home of the Mouret family, with whom he lives.
Leading parts in the story are assigned to Mouret and his
wife Marthe, both of whom are extremely interesting figures.
The genesis of the former's career and fate is contained in
one of M. Zola's short stories, 'Histoire d'un Fou,' which he
contributed to the Paris 'Événement' before he took to book
writing. The idea, so skilfully worked out, is that of a man
who, although perfectly sane, is generally believed to be mad,
and who by force of being thus regarded does ultimately lose
his wits. In Marthe his wife, the grand-daughter of a mad
woman, we find the hereditary flaw turning to hysteria, in a
measure of a religious character, such as subsequently becomes
manifest in her son Serge, the chief character of 'Abbé
Mouret's Transgression,' which work proceeds directly from
'The Conquest of Plassans.'
In the latter book, as in 'The Fortune of the Rougons,'
M. Zola skilfully depicts all the life of a French provincial
town such as it was half a century or so ago, and in this
respect he has simply drawn upon his own recollections of
Aix, where he spent so many years of his boyhood. Much
that he records might be applied to such towns even nowadays,
for electric lighting, and tramcars, and motor-cars, and
increased railway facilities, have made little change in provincial
society. There are still rival salons and coteries and
petty jealousies and vanities all at work; and if new parties
have succeeded old ones, their intrigues have remained of much
the same description as formerly. The many provincials
who in M. Zola's narrative gravitate around the chief
characters are pleasantly and skilfully diversified, and seem
very life-like with their foibles and 'fads' and rivalries and
ambitions. Possibly the most interesting are the Paloques,
husband and wife, whom envy, hatred and all uncharitableness
incessantly consume. Again, Madame Faujas, the priest's
mother, is a finely-drawn character, but perhaps the failings
of her daughter Olympe, and of Trouche, Olympe's husband,
verge slightly upon caricature. As for old Rose, the Mourets'[Pg xv]
servant, though her ways are very amusing, and the part she
plays in the persecution of her master renders her an indispensable
personage in the narrative, it may be pointed out that she
is virtually the same woman who has done duty half a dozen
times in M. Zola's books—for instance, as Martine in 'Dr.
Pascal,' as Véronique in 'The Joy of Life,' and so forth. It
is rather curious, indeed, that M. Zola, so skilful in portraying
diversity of character and disposition among his other
personages, should have clung so pertinaciously to one sole
type of an old servant-woman.
It is not my purpose here to analyse in detail the plot of
'The Conquest of Plassans,' but, having dealt at some length
with the historical incidents on which the work is based, it is
as well that I should point out that politics are not obtruded
upon the reader in M. Zola's pages. Indeed, the book largely
deals with quite another matter, that of 'the priest in the
house,' showing as it does how the Mourets' home was
wrecked by the combined action of the Faujases and the
Trouches. In this connection the dolorous career of the
unhappy Marthe is very vividly pictured. A fairly contented
wife and mother at the outset of the story, she is won over
to religion by Faujas, whose purpose is to utilise her as an
instrument for the furtherance of his political and social
schemes. But religion for her becomes a mysticism full of
unrealisable yearnings, for she expects to taste the joys of
Heaven even upon earth. Carried away by her religious
fervour, she soon neglects her home; and her husband, it
must be admitted, takes anything but the right course to
win her back. She begins to loathe him and to indulge in
an insane passion for the priest by whom she is spurned.
Then hysteria masters her and consumption sets in; and
between them those fell diseases bring her to an early grave.
There are some finely conceived scenes between Marthe and
Faujas; but the climax only comes towards the end of the
volume, when Mouret, the husband who has been driven mad
and shut up in a lunatic asylum, returns home and wreaks the
most terrible vengeance upon those who have wronged him.[Pg xvi]
The pages which deal with the madman's escape and his
horrible revenge are certainly among the most powerful that
M. Zola has ever written, and have been commended for their
effectiveness by several of his leading critics.
E. A. V.
MERTON, SURREY: Sept. 1900.
[Pg 1]
Désirée clapped her hands. She was fourteen years old and
big and strong for her age, but she laughed like a little girl
of five.
'Mother! mother!' she cried, 'look at my doll!'
She showed her mother a strip of rag out of which she
had been trying for the last quarter of an hour to manufacture
a doll by rolling it and tying it at one end with a piece
of string. Marthe raised her eyes from the stockings that
she was darning with as much delicacy of work as though she
were embroidering, and smiled at Désirée.
'Oh! but that's only a baby,' she said; 'you must
make a grown-up doll and it must have a dress, you know,
like a lady.'
She gave the child some clippings of print stuff which she
found in her work-table, and then again devoted all her
attention to her stockings. They were both sitting at one
end of the narrow terrace, the girl on a stool at her mother's
feet. The setting sun of a still warm September evening cast
its calm peaceful rays around them; and the garden below,
which was already growing grey and shadowy, was wrapped
in perfect silence. Outside, not a sound could be heard in
that quiet corner of the town.
They both worked on for ten long minutes without speaking.
Désirée was taking immense pains to make a dress for
her doll. Every few moments Marthe raised her head and
glanced at the child with an expression in which sadness was
mingled with affection. Seeing that the girl's task seemed
too much for her, she at last said:
[Pg 2]
'Give it to me. I will put in the sleeves for you.'
As she took up the doll, two big lads of seventeen and
eighteen came down the steps. They ran to Marthe and
kissed her.
'Don't scold us, mother!' cried Octave gaily. 'I took
Serge to listen to the band. There was such a crowd on the
Cours Sauvaire!'
'I thought you had been kept in at college,' his mother
said, 'or I should have felt very uneasy.'
Désirée, now altogether indifferent to her doll, had thrown
her arms round Serge's neck, saying to him:
'One of my birds has flown away! The blue one, the one
you gave me!'
She was on the point of crying. Her mother, who had
imagined this trouble to be forgotten, vainly tried to divert
her thoughts by showing her the doll. The girl still clung
to her brother's arm and dragged him away with her, while
repeating:
'Come and let us look for it.'
Serge followed her with kindly complaisance and tried to
console her. She led him to a little conservatory, in front
of which there was a cage placed on a stand; and here she
told him how the bird had escaped just as she was opening
the door to prevent it from fighting with a companion.
'Well, there's nothing very surprising in that!' cried
Octave, who had seated himself on the balustrade of the
terrace. 'She is always interfering with them, trying to
find out how they are made and what it is they have in their
throats that makes them sing. The other day she was carrying
them about in her pockets the whole afternoon to keep
them warm.'
'Octave!' said Marthe, in a tone of reproach; 'don't
tease the poor child.'
But Désirée had not heard him; she was explaining to
Serge with much detail how the bird had flown away.
'It just slipped out, you see, like that, and then it flew
over yonder and lighted on Monsieur Rastoil's big pear-tree.
Next it flew off to the plum-tree at the bottom, came back
again and went right over my head into the big trees belonging
to the Sub-Prefecture, and I've never seen it since; no,
never since.'
Her eyes filled with tears.
'Perhaps it will come back again,' Serge ventured to say.
[Pg 3]
'Oh! do you think so? I think I will put the others into
a box, and leave the door of the cage open all night.'
Octave could not restrain his laughter, but Marthe called
to Désirée:
'Come and look here! come and look here!'
Then she gave her the doll. It was a magnificent one
now. It had a stiff dress, a head made of a pad of calico,
and arms of list sewn on at the shoulders. Désirée's eyes
lighted up with sudden joy. She sat down again upon the
stool, and, forgetting all about the bird, began to kiss the doll
and dandle it in her arms with childish delight.
Serge had gone to lean upon the balustrade near his
brother, and Marthe had resumed her darning.
'And so the band has been playing, has it?' she asked.
'It plays every Thursday,' Octave replied. 'You ought
to have come to hear it, mother. All the town was there;
the Rastoil girls, Madame de Condamin, Monsieur Paloque,
the mayor's wife and daughter—why didn't you come too?'
Marthe did not raise her eyes, but softly replied as she
finished darning a hole:
'You know very well, my dears, that I don't care about
going out. I am quite contented here; and then it is necessary
that someone should stay with Désirée.'
Octave opened his lips to reply, but he glanced at his sister
and kept silent. He remained where he was, whistling softly
and raising his eyes now towards the trees of the Sub-Prefecture,
noisy with the twittering of the sparrows which were
preparing to retire for the night—and now towards Monsieur
Rastoil's pear-trees behind which the sun was setting. Serge
had taken a book out of his pocket and was reading it attentively.
Soft silence brooded over the terrace as it lay there in
the yellow light that was gradually growing fainter. Marthe
continued darning, ever and anon glancing at her three
children in the peaceful quiet of the evening.
'Everyone seems to be late to-day,' she said after a time.
'It is nearly six o'clock, and your father hasn't come home
yet. I think he must have gone to Les Tulettes.'
'Oh! then, no wonder he's late!' exclaimed Octave.
'The peasants at Les Tulettes are never in a hurry to let him
go when once they get hold of him. Has he gone there to
buy some wine?'
'I don't know,' Marthe replied. 'He isn't fond, you know,
of talking to me about his business.'
[Pg 4]
Then there was another interval of silence. In the
dining-room, the window of which opened on to the terrace,
old Rose had just begun to lay the table with much angry
clattering of crockery and plate. She seemed to be in a very
bad temper, and banged the chairs about while breaking into
snatches of grumbling and growling. At last she went to
the street door, and, craning out her head, reconnoitred the
square in front of the Sub-Prefecture. After some minutes'
waiting, she came to the terrace-steps and cried:
'Monsieur Mouret isn't coming home to dinner, then?'
'Yes, Rose, wait a little longer,' Marthe replied quietly.
'Everything is getting burned to cinders! There's no
sense in it all. When master goes off on those rounds he
ought to give us notice! Well, it's all the same to me; but
your dinner will be quite uneatable.'
'Ah! do you really think so, Rose?' asked a quiet voice
just behind her. 'We will eat it, notwithstanding.'
It was Mouret who had just arrived.[2] Rose turned
round, looked her master in the face, and seemed on the point
of breaking into some angry exclamation; but at the sight of
his unruffled countenance, in which twinkled an expression of
merry banter, she could not find a word to say, and so she
retired. Mouret made his way to the terrace, where he paced
about without sitting down. He just tapped Désirée lightly
on the cheek with the tips of his fingers, and the girl greeted
him with a responsive smile. Marthe raised her eyes, and
when she had glanced at her husband she began to fold up
her work.
'Aren't you tired?' asked Octave, looking at his father's
boots, which were white with dust.
'Yes, indeed, a little,' Mouret replied, without, however,
saying anything more about the long journey which he had
just made on foot.
Then in the middle of the garden he caught sight of a
spade and a rake, which the children had forgotten there.
'Why are the tools not put away?' he cried. 'I have
spoken about it a hundred times. If it should come on to
rain they would be completely rusted and spoilt.'
He said no more on the subject, but stepped down into the
garden, picked up the spade and rake himself, and put them
carefully away inside the little conservatory. As he came up[Pg 5]
to the terrace again his eyes searched every corner of the
walks to see if things were tidy there.
'Are you learning your lessons?' he asked, as he passed
Serge, who was still poring over his book.
'No, father,' the boy replied; 'this is a book that Abbé
Bourrette has lent me. It is an account of the missions in
China.'
Mouret stopped short in front of his wife.
'By the way,' said he, 'has anyone been here?'
'No, no one, my dear,' replied Marthe with an appearance
of surprise.
He seemed on the point of saying something further, but
appeared to change his mind, and continued pacing up and
down in silence. Then, going to the steps, he cried out:
'Well, Rose, what about this dinner of yours which is
getting burnt to cinders?'
'Oh, indeed! there is nothing ready for you now!'
shouted the cook in an angry voice from the other end of
the passage. 'Everything is cold. You will have to wait,
sir.'
Mouret smiled in silence and winked with his left eye, as
he glanced at his wife and children. He seemed to be very
much amused by Rose's anger. Then he occupied himself
in examining his neighbour's fruit-trees.
'It is surprising what splendid pears Monsieur Rastoil
has got this year,' he remarked.
Marthe, who had appeared a little uneasy for the last few
minutes, seemed as though she wanted to say something. At
last she made up her mind to speak, and timidly inquired:
'Were you expecting someone to-day, my dear?'
'Yes and no,' he replied, beginning to pace the terrace
again.
'Perhaps you have let the second floor?'
'Yes, indeed, I have let it.'
Then, as the silence became a little embarrassing, he
added, in his quiet way:
'This morning, before starting for Les Tulettes, I went
up to see Abbé Bourrette. He was very pressing, and so I
agreed to his proposal. I know it won't please you; but, if
you will only think the matter over for a little, you will see
that you are wrong, my dear. The second floor was of no
use to us, and it was only going to ruin. The fruit that we
store in the rooms there brings on dampness which makes the[Pg 6]
paper fall from the walls. By the way, now that I think of it,
don't forget to remove the fruit the first thing to-morrow.
Our tenant may arrive at any moment.'
'We were so free and comfortable, all alone in our own
house,' Marthe ventured to say, in a low tone.
'Oh, well!' replied Mouret, 'we shan't find a priest in
our way. He will keep to himself, and we shall keep to ourselves.
Those black-gowned gentlemen hide themselves when
they want to swallow even a glass of water. You know that
I'm not very partial to them myself. A set of lazybones for
the most part! And yet what chiefly decided me to let the
floor was that I had found a priest for a tenant. One is quite
sure of one's money with them, and they are so quiet that
one can't even hear them go in and out.'
Marthe still appeared distressed. She looked round her
at the happy home basking in the sun's farewell, at the
garden which was now growing greyer with shadows, and at
her three children. And she thought of all the happiness
which this little spot held for her.
'And do you know anything about this priest?'she asked.
'No; but Abbé Bourrette has taken the floor in his own
name, and that is quite sufficient. Abbé Bourrette is an
honourable man. I know that our tenant is called Faujas,
Abbé Faujas, and that he comes from the diocese of Besançon.
He didn't get on very well with his vicar there, and so he has
been appointed curate here at Saint-Saturnin's. Perhaps he
knows our bishop, Monseigneur Rousselot. But all this is no
business of ours, you know; and it is to Abbé Bourrette that
I am trusting in the whole matter.'
Marthe, however, did not seem to share her husband's
confidence, but continued to stand out against him, a thing
which seldom happened.
'You are right,' she said, after a moment's silence, 'Abbé
Bourrette is a worthy man. But I recollect that when he
came to look at the rooms he told me that he did not know
the name of the person on whose behalf he was commissioned
to rent them. It was one of those commissions which are
undertaken by priests in one town for those in another. I
really think that you ought to write to Besançon and make
some inquiries as to what sort of a person it is that you are
about to introduce into your house.'
Mouret was anxious to avoid losing his temper; he smiled
complacently.
[Pg 7]
'Well, it isn't the devil, anyhow. Why, you're trembling
all over! I didn't think you were so superstitious. You
surely don't believe that priests bring ill luck, as folks say.
Neither, of course, do they bring good luck. They are just
like other men. But, when we get this Abbé here, you'll see
if I'm afraid of his cassock!'
'No, I'm not superstitious; you know that quite well,'
replied Marthe. 'I only feel unhappy about it, that's all.'
He took his stand in front of her, and interrupted her with
a sharp motion of his hand.
'There! there! that will do,' said he. 'I have let the
rooms; don't let us say anything more about the matter.'
Then, in the bantering tones of a bourgeois who thinks he
has done a good stroke of business, he added:
'At any rate one thing is certain, and that is that I am to
get a hundred and fifty francs rent; and we shall have those
additional hundred and fifty francs to spend on the house
every year.'
Marthe bent her head and made no further protestations
except by vaguely swinging her hands and gently closing her
eyes as though to prevent the escape of the tears which were
already swelling beneath her eyelids. Then she cast a furtive
glance at her children, who had not appeared to hear anything
of her discussion with their father. They were, indeed,
accustomed to scenes of this sort in which Mouret, with his
bantering nature, delighted to indulge.
'You can come in now, if you would like something to
eat,' said Rose in her crabby voice, as she came to the
steps.
'Ah, that's right! Come along, children, to your soup!'
cried Mouret gaily, without appearing to retain any trace of
temper.
The whole family rose. But Désirée's grief seemed to revive
at the sight of everyone stirring. She threw her arms round
her father's neck and stammered:
'Oh, papa, one of my birds has flown away!'
'One of your birds, my dear? Well, we'll catch it again.'
Then he began to caress and fondle her, but she insisted
that he, also, should go and look at the cage. When he
brought her back again Marthe and her two sons were
already in the dining-room. The rays of the setting sun,
streaming in through the window, lighted up the porcelain
plates, the children's plated mugs, and the white cloth. The[Pg 8]
room was warm and peaceful with its green background of
garden.
But just as Marthe, upon whom the tranquillity of the
scene had had a soothing effect, was smilingly removing the
cover from the soup-tureen, a noise was heard in the passage.
Then Rose rushed into the room with a scared look and
stammered:
'Monsieur l'Abbé Faujas has come!'
An expression of annoyance passed over Mouret's face. He
had not expected his tenant till the following morning at the
earliest. He was just rising hastily from his seat when Abbé
Faujas himself appeared at the door. He was a tall big man,
with a square face, broad features, and a cadaverous complexion.
Behind him, in the shadow, stood an elderly
woman, who bore an astonishing resemblance to him, only
that she was of smaller build and wore a less refined expression.
When they saw the table laid for a meal, they both
hesitated and stepped back discreetly, though without going
away. The priest's tall black figure contrasted mournfully
with the cheerfulness of the whitewashed walls.
'We must ask your pardon for disturbing you,' he said to
Mouret. 'We have just left Abbé Bourrette's; he, no doubt,
gave you notice of our coming!'
'Not at all!' Mouret exclaimed. 'The Abbé never behaves
like other people. He always seems as though he had
just come down from paradise. Only this morning, sir, he
told me that you would not be here for another couple of
days. Well, we must put you in possession of your rooms all
the same.'
'Well,' he said, with a smile, 'you are a pertinacious man,
my dear Monsieur Faujas, and since I have made you a
promise I will keep it. Six months ago, I confess, I should
have been afraid of stirring up all Plassans against me, but
you have succeeded in making yourself liked, and the ladies
of the town often speak to me about you in very eulogistic
terms. In appointing you Curé of Saint-Saturnin's, I am
only paying the debt which we owe you for the Home of the
Virgin.'
The Bishop had recovered his usual pleasant amiability
and charming manner. Just at this moment Abbé Surin put
his handsome head through the doorway.
'No, my child,' said the Bishop to him, 'I shall not
dictate that letter to you. I have no further need of you, and
you can go.'
'Abbé Fenil is here,' muttered the young priest.
'Oh, very well, let him wait!'
Monseigneur Rousselot winced slightly; but he spoke to
his secretary with an almost ludicrous expression of decision,
and looked at Abbé Faujas with a glance of intelligence.
'See! go out this way,' he said to him, as he opened a
door that was hidden behind a curtain.
He kept the priest standing on the threshold for a moment,
and continued to look at him with a smile on his face.
'Fenil will be furious,' said he; 'but you will promise to
defend me against him if he is too hard upon me! I am
making him your enemy, I warn you of that. I am counting
upon you, too, to prevent the re-election of the Marquis de
Lagrifoul. Ah! it is upon you that I am leaning now, my
dear Monsieur Faujas.'
He waved his white hand to the Abbé, and then returned
with an appearance of perfect unconcern to the warmth of
his study. The priest had remained bowing, feeling surprised
at the quite feminine ease with which the Bishop changed
his master and yielded to the stronger side. And only now
did he begin to feel that Monseigneur Rousselot had been
secretly laughing at him, even as he laughed at Abbé Fenil
in that downy armchair of his where he read his Horace.
About ten o'clock on the following Thursday, just when
the fashionable folks of Plassans were treading on each
other's toes in the Rougons' green drawing-room, Abbé Faujas[Pg 129]
appeared at the door. He looked tall and majestic, there was
a bright colour on his cheeks, and he wore a delicate cassock
that glistened like satin. His face was still grave, though
there was a slight smile upon it, just the pleasant turn of the
lips that was necessary to light up his stern countenance with
a ray of cheerfulness.
'Ah! here is the dear Curé!' Madame de Condamin
gaily exclaimed.
The mistress of the house eagerly hastened up to him;
she grasped one of his hands within both her own, and drew
him into the middle of the room, with wheedling glances and
a gentle swaying of her head.
'This is a surprise! a very pleasant surprise!' she cried.
'It's an age since we have seen you! Is it only when good
fortune visits you that you can remember your friends?'
Abbé Faujas bowed with easy composure. All around
him there was a flattering ovation, a buzzing of enthusiastic
women. Madame Delangre and Madame Rastoil did not
wait till he came up to them, but hastened to congratulate
him upon his appointment, which had been officially
announced that morning. The mayor, the justice of the
peace, and even Monsieur de Bourdeu, all stepped up to him
and shook his hand heartily.
'Ah, he's a fine fellow and will go a long way!' Monsieur
de Condamin murmured into Doctor Porquier's ear. 'I
scented him from the first day I saw him. That grimacing
old Madame Rougon and he tell no end of lies. I have seen
him slipping in here at dusk half a score of times. They
must be mixed up in some queer things together.'
Doctor Porquier was terribly afraid of being compromised
by Monsieur de Condamin, so he hurried away from him, and
came like the others to grasp Abbé Faujas's hand, although
he had never previously spoken to him.
The priest's triumphal entry was the great event of the
evening. He had now seated himself and was hemmed in by
a triple circle of petticoats. He talked with charming good
nature on all sorts of subjects, but avoided replying to any
hints or allusions. When Félicité directly questioned him,
he merely said that he should not occupy the parsonage, as he
preferred remaining in the lodgings where he had found himself
so comfortable for nearly three years. Marthe was present
among the other ladies, and was, as usual, extremely reserved.
She had only just smiled at the Abbé, watching him from a[Pg 130]
distance, and looking the while a little pale and rather
weary and uneasy. When he signified his intention of not
quitting the Rue Balande, she blushed and rose to go into
the small drawing-room as if she felt incommoded by the
heat. Madame Paloque, beside whom Monsieur de Condamin
had seated himself, said to him quite loud enough to
be heard:
'It's very decorous, isn't it? She certainly might refrain
from making assignations with him here, since they have the
whole day to themselves!'
Only Monsieur de Condamin laughed; everyone else
received the sally very coldly. Then Madame Paloque,
recognising that she had made a mistake, tried to turn the
matter off as a joke. Meantime in the corners of the room
the guests were discussing Abbé Fenil. Great curiosity was
manifested as to whether he would put in an appearance.
Monsieur de Bourdeu, who was one of his friends, said with
an air of authority that he was indisposed—a statement
which was received by the company with discreet smiles.
Everyone was quite aware of the revolution that had taken
place at the Bishop's. Abbé Surin gave the ladies some very
interesting details of the terrible scene that had taken place
between his lordship and the grand-vicar. The latter, on
getting the worst of the struggle, had caused it to be reported
that he was confined to his room by an attack of gout. But
the fight was not over, and Abbé Surin hinted that a good
deal more would happen yet, a remark which was whispered
about the room with many little exclamations, shakings of
heads and expressions of surprise and doubt. For the moment,
at any rate, Abbé Faujas was carrying everything before him
and so the fair devotees sunned themselves pleasantly in the
rays of the rising luminary.
About the middle of the evening Abbé Bourrette arrived.
Conversation ceased and people looked at him with curiosity.
They all knew that he had expected to be appointed Curé of
Saint-Saturnin's himself. He had taken over the Abbé
Compan's duties during the latter's long illness, and he had a
lien upon the appointment. He lingered for a moment by
the door, a little out of breath and with blinking eyes, without
being aware of the interest which his appearance excited.
Then, catching sight of Abbé Faujas, he eagerly hastened up
to him, and seizing both his hands with a show of much
pleasure exclaimed:
[Pg 131]
'Ah! my dear friend, let me congratulate you! I have
just come from your rooms, where your mother told me that
you were here. I am delighted to see you.'
Abbé Faujas had risen from his seat, and notwithstanding
his great self-control, he seemed annoyed, taken by surprise,
as it were, by this unexpected display of affection.
'Yes,' he murmured, 'I felt bound to accept his lordship's
offer in spite of my lack of merit. I refused it, indeed, at
first, mentioning the names of several more deserving priests
than myself. I mentioned your own name.'
Abbé Bourrette blinked, and taking Abbé Faujas aside he
said to him in low tones:
'His lordship has told me all about it. Fenil, it seems,
would not hear of me. He would have set the whole diocese
in a blaze if I had been appointed. Those were his very
words. My crime is having closed poor Compan's eyes. He
demanded, as you know, the appointment of Abbé Chardon, a
pious man, no doubt, but not of sufficient reputation. Fenil
counted on reigning at Saint-Saturnin's in his name. It was
then that his lordship determined to give you the place and
checkmate him. I am quite avenged, and I am delighted, my
dear friend. Did you know the full story?'
'No, not in all its details.'
'Well, it is all just as I have told you, I can assure you.
I have the facts from his lordship's own lips. Between ourselves,
he has hinted to me of a very sufficient recompense.
The deputy vicar-general, Abbé Vial, has for a long time been
desirous of settling in Rome, and his place will be vacant, you
understand. But don't say anything about this. I wouldn't
take a big sum of money for my day's work.'
He continued pressing both Abbé Faujas's hands, while his
broad face beamed with satisfaction. The ladies around them
were smiling and looking at them in surprise. But the worthy
man's joy was so frank and unreserved that it communicated
itself to all in the green drawing-room, where the ovation in
the new Curé's honour took a more familiar and affectionate
turn. The ladies grouped themselves together and spoke of
the cathedral organ which wanted repairing, and Madame de
Condamin promised a magnificent altar for the procession on
the approaching festival of Corpus Christi.
Abbé Bourrette was sharing in the general triumph when
Madame Paloque, craning out her hideous face, touched him
on the shoulder and murmured in his ear:
[Pg 132]
'Your reverence won't, I suppose, hear confessions to-morrow
in Saint-Michael's chapel?'
The priest, while taking Abbé Compan's duty, had occupied
the confessional in Saint-Michael's chapel, which was the
largest and most convenient in the church and was specially
reserved for the Curé. He did not at first understand the
force of Madame Paloque's remark, and he looked at her,
again blinking his eyes.
'I ask you,' she continued, 'if you will resume your old
confessional in the chapel of the Holy Angels, to-morrow.'
He turned rather pale and remained silent for a moment
longer. Then he bent his gaze to the floor, and a slight
shiver coursed down his neck, as though he had received a
blow from behind. And, seeing that Madame Paloque was
still there staring at him, he stammered out:
'Certainly; I shall go back to my old confessional. Come
to the chapel of the Holy Angels, the last one on the left, on
the same side as the cloisters. It is very damp, so wrap
yourself up well, dear madame, wrap yourself up well.'
Tears rose to his eyes. He was filled with regretful
longing for that handsome confessional in the chapel of Saint-Michael,
into which the warm sun streamed in the afternoon
just at the time when he heard confessions. Until now he
had felt no sorrow at relinquishing the cathedral to Abbé
Faujas; but this little matter, this removal from one chapel
to another, affected him very painfully; and it seemed to him
that he had missed the goal of his life. Madame Paloque
told him in her loud voice that he appeared to have grown
melancholy all at once, but he protested against this assertion
and tried to smile and look cheerful again. However he left
the drawing-room early in the evening.
Abbé Faujas was one of the last to go. Rougon came up
to him to offer his congratulations and they remained talking
earnestly together on a couch. They spoke of the necessity of
religious feeling in a wisely ordered state. Each lady, on
retiring from the room, made a low bow as she passed in
front of them.
'You know, Monsieur le Curé,' said Félicité graciously,
'that you are my daughter's cavalier.'
The priest rose from his seat. Marthe was waiting for
him at the door. When they got out into the street, they
seemed as if blinded by the darkness, and crossed the Place of
the Sub-Prefecture without exchanging a word; but in the[Pg 133]
Rue Balande, as they stood in front of the house, Marthe
touched the priest's arm at the moment when he was about
to insert the key in the lock.
'I am so very pleased at your success,' she said to him,
in a tone of great emotion. 'Be kind to me to-day, and
grant me the favour which you have hitherto refused. I
assure you that Abbé Bourrette does not understand me. It
is only you who can direct and save me.'
He motioned her away from him, and, when he had opened
the door and lighted the little lamp which Rose had left at the
foot of the staircase, he went upstairs, saying to her gently
as he did so:
'You promised me to be reasonable—well, I will think
over what you have asked. We will talk about it.'
Marthe did not retire to her own room until she had heard
the priest close his door on the upper floor. While she was
undressing and getting into bed she paid no attention whatever
to Mouret, who, half asleep, was retailing to her at great
length some gossip that was being circulated in the town. He
had been to his club, the Commercial Club, a place where he
rarely set foot.
'Abbé Faujas has got the better of Abbé Bourrette,' he
repeated for the tenth time as he slowly rolled his head upon
the pillow. 'Poor Abbé Bourrette! Well, never mind! it's
good fun to see those parsons devouring one another. The
other day when they were hugging each other in the garden—you
remember it, don't you?—anyone would have thought
that they were brothers. Ah! they rob each other even of
their very penitents. But why don't you say anything, my
dear? You don't agree with me, eh? Or is it because you
are going to sleep? Well, well, good-night then, my dear.'
He fell asleep, still muttering disjointed words, while
Marthe, with widely opened eyes, stared up into the air and
followed over the ceiling, faintly illumined by the night-light,
the pattering of the Abbé's slippers while he was retiring to
rest.
At the return of summer Abbé Faujas and his mother again
came downstairs to enjoy the fresh air on the terrace. Mouret
had become very cross-grained. He declined the old lady's[Pg 134]
invitations to play piquet and sat swaying himself about on a
chair. Seeing him yawn, without making any attempt to
conceal how bored he was feeling, Marthe said to him:
'Why don't you go to your club, my dear?'
He now went there more frequently than he had been used
to do. When he returned he found his wife and the Abbé
still in the same place on the terrace, while Madame Faujas,
a few yards away from them, preserved the demeanour of a
blind and dumb guardian.
When anyone in the town spoke to Mouret of the new
Curé he still continued to sound his praises. Faujas, said
he, was decidedly a superior sort of man, and he himself had
never felt any doubt of his great abilities. Madame Paloque
could never succeed in drawing a hostile word from him on
the subject of the priest, in spite of the malicious way in
which she would ask him after his wife in the midst of his
remarks about Abbé Faujas. Old Madame Rougon had no
better success in her attempts to unveil the secret troubles
which she thought she could detect beneath Mouret's outward
show of cheerfulness. She laid all sorts of traps for him as
she watched his face with her sharp shrewd smile; but that
inveterate chatterer, whose tongue was a regular town-crier's
bell, now showed the greatest reserve when any reference was
made to his household.
'So your husband has become reasonable at last?' Félicité
remarked to her daughter one day. 'He leaves you free.'
Marthe looked at her mother with an air of surprise.
'I have always been free,' she said.
'Ah! my dear child, I see that you don't want to say
anything against him. You told me once that he looked very
unfavourably upon Abbé Faujas.'
'Nothing of the kind, I assure you! You must have
imagined it. My husband is upon the best terms with Abbé
Faujas. There is nothing whatever to make them otherwise.'
Marthe was much astonished at the persistence with which
everybody seemed to imagine that her husband and the Abbé
were not good friends. Frequently at the committee-meetings
at the Home of the Virgin the ladies put questions to her
which made her quite impatient. She was really very happy
and contented, and the house in the Rue Balande had never
seemed pleasanter to her than it did now. Abbé Faujas had
given her to understand that he would undertake her spiritual[Pg 135]
direction as soon as he should be of opinion that Abbé Bourrette
was no longer sufficient, and she lived in this hope, her
mind full of simple joy, like a girl who is promised some
pretty religious pictures if she keeps good. Every now and
then indeed she felt as though she were becoming a child
again; she experienced a freshness of feeling and child-like
impulses that filled her with gentle emotion. One day, in
the spring-time, as Mouret was pruning his tall box plants,
he found her sitting at the bottom of the garden beneath the
young shoots of the arbour with her eyes streaming with
tears.
'What is the matter, my dear?' he asked anxiously.
'Nothing,' she said, with a smile, 'nothing at all, really;
I am very happy, very.'
He shrugged his shoulders, and went on delicately cutting
the box plants into an even line. He took considerable pride
in having the neatest trimmed hedges in the neighbourhood.
Marthe had wiped her eyes, but she soon began to weep again,
feeling a choking heart-rending sensation at the scent of the
severed verdure. She was forty years old now, and it was for
her past-away youth that she was weeping.
Since his appointment as Curé of Saint-Saturnin's, Abbé
Faujas had shown a dignity which seemed to increase his
stature. He carried his breviary and his hat with an air
of authority, which he had exhibited at the cathedral
in such wise as to ensure himself the respect of the clergy.
Abbé Fenil, having sustained another defeat on two or three
matters of detail, now seemed to have left his adversary free
to do as he pleased. Abbé Faujas, however, was not foolish
enough to make any indiscreet use of his triumph, but showed
himself extremely supple. He was quite conscious that
Plassans was still far from being his; and so, though he
stopped every now and then in the street to shake hands with
Monsieur Delangre, he merely exchanged passing salutations
with Monsieur de Bourdeu, Monsieur Maffre, and the other
guests of Monsieur Rastoil. A large section of society in the
town still looked upon him with suspicion. They found fault
with him for the want of frankness in his political opinions.
In their estimation he ought to explain himself, declare himself
in favour of one party or another. But the Abbé only
smiled and said that he belonged to 'the honest men's party,'
a reply which spared him a more explicit declaration. Moreover
he showed no haste or anxiety, but continued to keep[Pg 136]
aloof till the drawing-rooms should open their doors to him of
their own accord.
'No, my friend, not now; later on we will see about it,'
he said to Abbé Bourrette, who had been pressing him to pay
a visit to Monsieur Rastoil.
He was known to have refused two invitations to the Sub-Prefecture,
and the Mourets were still the only people with
whom he continued intimate. There he was, as it were, occupying
a post of observation between two hostile camps. On
Tuesdays, when the two sets of guests assembled in the
gardens on his right and left, he took up his position at his
window and watched the sunset in the distance behind the
forests of the Seille, and then, before withdrawing, he lowered
his eyes and replied with as much amiability to the bows of
Monsieur Rastoil's guests as to those of the Sub-Prefect's.
His intercourse with his neighbours as yet went no further
than this.
On Tuesday, however, he went down into the garden. He
was quite at home now in Mouret's grounds and no longer
confined himself to pacing up and down beneath the arbour
as he read his breviary. All the walks and beds seemed to
belong to him; his cassock glided blackly past all the greenery.
On that particular Tuesday, as he made a tour of the garden,
he caught sight of Monsieur Maffre and Madame Rastoil
below him and bowed to them; and then as he passed below
the terrace of the Sub-Prefecture, he saw Monsieur de Condamin
leaning there in company with Doctor Porquier. After
an exchange of salutations, the priest was turning along the
path, when the doctor called to him.
'Just a word, your reverence, I beg.'
Then he asked him at what time he could see him the
following day. This was the first occasion on which any
one of the two sets of guests had spoken to the priest from
one garden to the other. The doctor was in great trouble
however. His scamp of a son had been caught in a
gambling den behind the gaol in company with other
worthless characters. The most distressing part of the matter
was that Guillaume was accused of being the leader of the
band, and of having led Monsieur Maffre's sons, much
younger than himself, astray.
'Pooh!' said Monsieur de Condamin with his sceptical
laugh; 'young men must sow their wild oats. What a fuss
about nothing! Here's the whole town in a state of perturbation[Pg 137]
because some young fellows have been caught
playing baccarat and there happened to be a lady with them!'
The doctor seemed very much shocked at this.
'I want to ask your advice,' he said, addressing himself to
the priest. 'Monsieur Maffre came to my house boiling over
with anger, and assailed me with the bitterest reproaches,
crying out that it was all my fault, as I had brought my son
up badly. I am extremely distressed and troubled about it.
Monsieur Maffre ought to know me better. I have sixty years
of stainless life behind me.'
He went on wailing, dwelling upon the sacrifices that he
had made for his son and expressing his fears that he would
lose his practice in consequence of the young man's misconduct.
Abbé Faujas, standing in the middle of the path, raised
his head and gravely listened.
'I shall be only too glad if I can be of any service to you,'
he said kindly. 'I will see Monsieur Maffre and will let him
understand that his natural indignation has carried him too
far. I will go at once and ask him to appoint a meeting with
me for to-morrow. He is over there, on the other side.'
The Abbé crossed the garden and went towards Monsieur
Maffre, who was still there with Madame Rastoil. When the
justice of the peace found that the priest desired an interview
with him, he would not hear of his taking any trouble about
it, but put himself at his disposition, saying that he would do
himself the honour of calling upon him the next day.
'Ah! Monsieur le Curé,' Madame Rastoil then remarked,
'let me compliment you upon your sermon last Sunday. All
the ladies were much affected by it, I assure you.'
The Abbé bowed and crossed the garden again in order to
reassure Doctor Porquier. Then he continued slowly pacing
about the walks till nightfall, without taking part in any
further conversations, but ever hearing the merriment of the
groups of guests on his right hand and his left.
When Monsieur Maffre appeared the next day, Abbé Faujas
was watching a couple of men who were at work repairing the
fountain in the garden. He had expressed a desire to see the
fountain play again, for the empty basin, said he, had such a
melancholy appearance. At first Mouret had not seemed
very willing to have anything done, alleging the probability
of accidents with Désirée, but Marthe had prevailed upon him
to let the repairs be executed upon the understanding that
the basin should be protected by a railing.
[Pg 138]
'Monsieur le Curé,' said Rose, 'the justice of the peace
wishes to see you.'
Abbé Faujas hastened indoors. He wanted to take Monsieur
Maffre up to his own room on the second floor, but Rose
had already opened the drawing-room door.
'Go in,' she said; 'aren't you at home here? It is useless
to make the justice go up two flights of stairs. If you
had only told me this morning, I would have given the room
a dusting.'
As she closed the door upon the Abbé and the magistrate,
after opening the shutters, Mouret called her into the dining-room.
'That's right, Rose,' he cried, 'you had better give my
dinner to your priest this evening, and if he hasn't got sufficient
blankets of his own upstairs you can take mine off my
bed.'
The cook exchanged a meaning glance with Marthe, who
was working by the window, waiting till the sunshine should
leave the terrace. Then, shrugging her shoulders, she said:
'Ah! sir, you have never had a charitable heart!'
She took herself off, while Marthe continued sewing without
raising her head. For the last few days she had, with
feverish energy, again applied herself to her needlework. She
was embroidering an altar-frontal as a gift for the cathedral.
The ladies were desirous of giving a complete set of altar furniture.
Madame Rastoil and Madame Delangre had undertaken
to present the candlesticks, and Madame de Condamin had
ordered a magnificent silver crucifix from Paris.
Meantime, in the drawing-room, Abbé Faujas was gently
remonstrating with Monsieur Maffre, telling him that Doctor
Porquier was a religious man and a person of the highest
integrity, and that no one could be more pained than he by
his son's deplorable conduct. The magistrate listened with a
sanctimonious air, and his heavy features and big prominent
eyes assumed quite an ecstatic expression at certain pious
remarks which the priest uttered in a very moving manner.
He allowed that he had been rather too hasty, and declared
that he was willing to make every apology as his reverence
thought he had been in the wrong.
'You must send your own sons to me,' said the priest,
'and I will talk to them.'
Monsieur Maffre shook his head with a slight sneering
laugh.
[Pg 139]
'Oh! you needn't be afraid about them, Monsieur le Curé.
The young scamps won't play any more tricks. They have
been locked up in their rooms for the last three days with
nothing but bread and water. If I had had a stick in my
hand when I found out what they had been doing, I should
have broken it across their backs.'
The Abbé looked at him and recollected how Mouret had
accused him of having killed his wife by harshness and
avarice; then, with a gesture of protest, he added:
'No, no; that is not the way to treat young men. Your
elder son, Ambroise, is twenty years old and the younger
is nearly eighteen, isn't he? They are no longer children,
remember. You must allow them some amusements.'
The magistrate remained silent with surprise.
'Then you would let them go on smoking and allow them
to frequent cafés?' he said, presently.
'Well,' replied the priest, with a smile. 'I think that
young men should be allowed to meet together to talk and
smoke their cigarettes and even to play a game of billiards or
chess. They will give themselves every license if you show
no tolerance. Only remember that it is not to every café that
I should be willing for them to go. I should like to see a
special one provided for them, a sort of club, as I have seen
done in several towns.'
Then he unfolded a complete scheme for such a club.
Monsieur Maffre gradually seemed to appreciate it. He
nodded his head as he said:
'Capital, capital! It would be a worthy pendant to the
Home of the Virgin. Really, Monsieur le Curé, we must put
such a splendid idea as this into execution.'
'Well, then,' the priest concluded, as he accompanied Monsieur
Maffre to the door, 'since you approve of the plan, just
advocate it among your friends. I will see Monsieur Delangre,
and speak to him about it. We might meet in the cathedral
on Sunday after vespers and come to some decision.'
On the Sunday, Monsieur Maffre brought Monsieur Rastoil
with him. They found Abbé Faujas and Monsieur Delangre
in a little room adjoining the sacristy. The gentlemen displayed
great enthusiasm in favour of the priest's idea, and the
institution of a young men's club was agreed upon in principle.
There was considerable discussion, however, as to
what it should be called. Monsieur Maffre was strongly
desirous that it should be known as the Guild of Jesus.
[Pg 140]
'Oh, no! no!' the priest impatiently cried at last. 'You
would get scarcely anyone to join, and the few members
would only be jeered at. There must be no attempt to tack
religion on to the business; indeed, I intend that we should
leave religion outside its doors altogether. All we want to do
is to win the young people over to our side by providing them
with some innocent recreation; that is all.'
The justice of the peace gazed at the priest with such
an expression of astonishment and anxiety that Monsieur
Delangre was obliged to bend his head to conceal a smile,
while he slyly pulled the Abbé's cassock. Then the priest
went on in a calmer voice:
'I am sure, gentlemen, that you do not feel any distrust
of me, and I ask you to leave the management of the matter
in my hands. I propose to adopt some very simple name,
such a one, for instance, as the Young Men's Club, which
fully expresses all that is required.'
Monsieur Rastoil and Monsieur Maffre bowed, although
this title seemed to them a little weak. They next spoke of
nominating the Curé as president of a provisional committee.
'I fancy,' said Monsieur Delangre, glancing at the priest,
'that this suggestion will scarcely meet with his reverence's
approbation.'
'Oh dear, no!' the Abbé exclaimed, slightly shrugging his
shoulders. 'My cassock would frighten the timid and lukewarm
away. We should only get the pious young people, and
it is not for them that we are going to found our club. What
we want is to gather in the wanderers; to win converts, in a
word; isn't that so?'
'Clearly,' replied the presiding judge.
'Very well, then, it will be better for us to keep ourselves
in the background, myself especially. What I propose is this:
your son, Monsieur Rastoil, and yours, Monsieur Delangre,
will alone come forward. It must appear as if they themselves
had formed the idea of this club. Send them to me in
the morning, and I will talk the matter over at length with
them. I already have a suitable building in my mind and
a code of rules quite prepared. Your two sons, Monsieur
Maffre, will naturally be enrolled at the head of the list of
members.'
The presiding judge seemed flattered at the part assigned
to his son; and so matters were arranged in this way, notwithstanding
the resistance of the justice of the peace, who[Pg 141]
had hoped to win some personal distinction from the founding
of the club. The next day Séverin Rastoil and Lucien
Delangre put themselves in communication with Abbé Faujas.
Séverin was a tall young man of five-and-twenty, with a badly
shaped skull and a dull brain, who had just been called to the
bar, thanks to the position which his father held. The latter
was anxiously dreaming of making him a public prosecutor's
assessor, despairing of his ever succeeding in winning any
practice for himself. Lucien, on the other hand, was short
and sharp-eyed, had a crafty mind, and pleaded with all the
coolness of an old practitioner, although he was a year
younger than Séverin. The 'Plassans Gazette' spoke of him
as a future light of the bar. It was more particularly to him
that the Abbé gave the minutest instructions as to his scheme.
As for young Rastoil he simply went fussing about, bursting
with importance. In three weeks the Young Men's Club was
founded and opened.
There was at that time beneath the church of the Minimes,
situated at the end of the Cours Sauvaire, a number of very
large rooms and an old monastery refectory, which were no
longer put to any use. This was the place that Abbé Faujas
had thought of for the club, and the clergy of the parish very
willingly allowed him to use the rooms. One morning, when
the provisional committee of the Young Men's Club had set
workmen going in this cellar-like place, the citizens of
Plassans were quite astounded to see what appeared to be a
café being fitted up under the church. Five days afterwards
there was no longer any room for doubt on the point. The
place was certainly going to be a café. Divans were being
brought thither, with marble-topped tables, chairs, two billiard-tables,
and even three crates of crockery and glass. An
entrance was contrived at the end of the building, as far as
possible from the doorway of the church, and great crimson
curtains, genuine restaurant-curtains, were hung behind the
glass panes. You descended five stone steps, and on opening
the door found yourself in a large hall; to the right of which
there was a smaller one and a reading-room, while in a
square room at the far end were placed the two billiard-tables.
They were exactly beneath the high altar.
'Well, my poor boys,' said Guillaume Porquier one day to
Monsieur Maffre's two sons, whom he had met on the Cours,
'so they are going to make you serve at mass between your
games at bézique.'
[Pg 142]
However, Ambroise and Alphonse besought him not to
speak to them in public, as their father had threatened to
send them to sea if they continued to associate with him.
When the first astonishment was over, the Young Men's
Club proved a great success. Monseigneur Rousselot accepted
the honorary presidency, and even visited it in person one
evening, attended by his secretary, Abbé Surin. Each of
them drank a glass of currant-syrup in the smaller room, and
the glass which his lordship used was preserved with great
respect upon a sideboard. The Bishop's visit is still talked of
with much emotion at Plassans, and it brought about the
adherence of all the fashionable young men of the town. It
was soon considered very bad style not to belong to the
Young Men's Club.
Guillaume Porquier, however, used to prowl about the
entrance, sniggering like a young wolf who dreams of making
his way into a sheep-fold. Notwithstanding all the fear they
had of their father, Monsieur Maffre's sons quite worshipped
this shameless young man who regaled them with stories of
Paris, and entertained them at secret little parties in the
suburbs. They had got into the habit of meeting him regularly
every Saturday evening at nine o'clock near a certain
seat on the Mall. They slipped away from the club and sat
gossiping till eleven, concealed beneath the dark shade of the
plane-trees. On these occasions Guillaume always twitted
them about the evenings they spent underneath the church
of the Minimes.
'It is very kind of you,' he, would say, 'to let yourselves
be led by the nose. The verger gives you glasses of sugar
and water as though he were administering the communion
to you, doesn't he?'
'Nothing of the sort! you are quite mistaken, I assure
you,' Ambroise exclaimed. 'You might fancy you were in
the Café du Cours, or the Café de France, or the Café des
Voyageurs. We drink beer, or punch, or madeira, whatever
we like, whatever is drunk in other places.'
Guillaume continued jeering however.
'Well, I shouldn't like to go drinking their dirty stuff,' he
said. 'I should be afraid that they had mixed some drug
with it to make me go to confession. I suppose you amuse
yourselves by playing at hot-cockles and puss-in-the-corner!'
The young Maffres gaily laughed at his pleasantries, but
they took care to undeceive him. They told him that even[Pg 143]
cards were allowed, and that there was no flavour of a church
about the place at all. The club was extremely pleasant,
there were very comfortable couches, and mirrors all over.
'Well,' said Guillaume, 'you'll never make me believe
that you can't hear the organ when there is an evening
service at the church. It would make me swallow my coffee
the wrong way only to know that there was a baptism, or a
marriage, or a funeral going on over my cup.'
'Well, there's something in that,' Alphonse allowed.
'Only the other day, while I was playing at billiards with
Séverin in the day-time, we could distinctly hear a funeral
going on. It was the funeral of the butcher's little girl, the
butcher at the corner of the Rue de la Banne. That fellow
Séverin is a big jackass, he tried to frighten me by telling me
that the whole funeral would fall through on our heads.'
'Ah well! it must be a very pleasant place, that club of
yours!' cried Guillaume. 'I wouldn't set foot in it for all
the money in the world! I'd as soon go and drink my coffee
in a sacristy.'
The truth of the matter was that Guillaume felt very
much vexed that he did not belong to the Young Men's Club.
His father had forbidden him to offer himself for election,
fearing that he would be rejected. At last, however, the young
man grew so annoyed about the matter that he sent in an
application to be allowed to join the club, without mentioning
what he had done to his people. The question was a very
serious one. The committee which elected the members then
comprised the young Maffres amongst its number, and Lucien
Delangre was its president and Séverin Rastoil its secretary.
These young men felt terribly embarrassed. While they did
not dare to grant Guillaume's application, they were unwilling
to do anything to hurt the feelings of Doctor Porquier, so
worthy and irreproachable a person, one, too, who was so completely
trusted by all the fashionable ladies. At last Ambroise
and Alphonse begged Guillaume not to press his application,
giving him to understand that he had no chance of being
admitted.
'You are a couple of pitiful poltroons!' he replied to them.
'Do you suppose that I care a fig about joining your brotherhood?
I was only amusing myself. I wanted to see if you
would have the courage to vote against me. I shall have a
good laugh when those hypocrites bang the door in my face.[Pg 144]
As for you, my good little boys, you can go and amuse yourselves
where you like; I shall never speak to you again.'
The young Maffres, in great consternation, then besought
Lucien Delangre to try to arrange matters in such a way as
would prevent any unpleasantness. Lucien submitted the
difficulty to his usual adviser, Abbé Faujas, for whom he had
conceived a genuine disciple's admiration. The Abbé came
to the Young Men's Club every afternoon from five o'clock
till six. He walked through the big room with a pleasant
smile, nodding and sometimes stopping for a few minutes at
one of the tables to chat with some of the young men. However,
he never accepted anything to drink, not even a glass of
water. Afterwards he passed into the reading-room, and,
taking a seat at the long table covered with a green cloth,
he attentively pored over the newspapers which the club
received, the Legitimist organs of Paris and the neighbouring
departments. Occasionally he made a rapid note in a little
pocket-book. Then he went quietly away, again smiling at
the members who were present, and shaking hands with them.
On some occasions, however, he remained for a longer time
to watch a game at chess, or chat merrily about all kinds of
matters. The young men, who were extremely fond of him,
used to say that when he talked no one would take him for a
priest.
When the mayor's son told him of the embarrassment
which Guillaume's application had caused the committee,
Abbé Faujas promised to arrange the affair; and next morning
he went to see Doctor Porquier, to whom he related
everything. The doctor was aghast. His son, he cried, was
determined to kill him with distress by dishonouring his grey
hairs. What could be done now? Even if the application
were withdrawn, the shame and disgrace would be none the
less. The priest then advised him to send Guillaume away
for two or three months to an estate which he possessed a
few leagues from Plassans, and undertook to charge himself
with the further conduct of the affair. As soon as Guillaume
had left the town, the committee postponed the consideration
of his application, saying that there was no occasion for haste
in the matter, as the applicant was absent and that a decision
could be taken later on.
Doctor Porquier heard of this solution from Lucien
Delangre one afternoon when he was in the garden of the
Sub-Prefecture. He immediately hastened to the terrace. It[Pg 145]
was the hour when Abbé Faujas read his breviary. Doctor
Porquier caught sight of him under the Mourets' arbour.
'Ah, Monsieur le Curé!' he cried, 'how can I thank you?
I should like very much to shake hands with you.'
'The wall is rather high,' said the priest, looking at it
with a smile.
But Doctor Porquier was an effusive individual who did
not allow himself to be discouraged by obstacles.
'Wait a moment!' he cried. 'If you will allow me,
Monsieur le Curé, I will come round.'
Then he disappeared. The Abbé, still smiling, slowly
bent his steps towards the little door which opened into the
Impasse des Chevillottes. The doctor was already gently
knocking at it.
'Ah! this door is nailed up,' said the priest. 'One of
the nails is broken though. If I had any sort of a tool, there
would be no difficulty in getting the other one out.'
He glanced round him and caught sight of a spade. Then,
after he had drawn back the bolts with a slight effort, he
opened the door, and stepped out into the alley, where Doctor
Porquier overwhelmed him with thanks and compliments. As
they walked along, talking, Monsieur Maffre, who happened
at the time to be in Monsieur Rastoil's garden, opened a little
door that was hidden away behind the presiding judge's
waterfall. The gentlemen were much amused to find themselves
all three in this deserted little lane.
They remained there for a few moments, and, as they
took leave of the Abbé, the magistrate and the doctor poked
their heads inside the Mourets' garden, looking about them
with curiosity.
Mouret, however, who was putting stakes to his tomatoes,
raised his head and caught sight of them. He was fairly
lost in astonishment.
'Hallo! so they've made their way in here!' he muttered.
'The Curé now only has to bring in both gangs!'
Serge was now nineteen years of age. He occupied a small
room on the second floor, opposite the priest's, and there led
an almost cloistered life, spending much time in reading.
[Pg 146]
'I shall have to throw those old books of yours into the
fire,' Mouret said to him angrily. 'You'll end by making
yourself ill and having to take to your bed.'
The young man was, indeed, of such a nervous temperament,
that the slightest imprudence made him poorly, as
though he were a young girl, and thus he was frequently
confined to his room for two or three days together. At these
times Rose inundated him with herb tea, and whenever
Mouret went upstairs to shake him up a little, as he called it,
the cook, if she happened to be there, would turn her master
out of the room, crying out at him:
'Leave the poor dear alone! Can't you see that you are
killing him with your rough ways? It isn't after you that he
takes: he is the very image of his mother; and you'll never
be able to understand either the one or the other of them.'
Serge smiled. After he had left college his father, seeing
him so delicate, had hesitated to send him to Paris to read
for the bar there. He would not hear, however, of a provincial
faculty; Paris, he felt sure, was necessary for a young
man who wanted to climb to a high position. He tried,
indeed, to instil ambitious ideas into the lad, telling him that
many with much weaker wits than his own, his cousins, the
Rougons, for instance, had attained to great distinction.
Every time that the young man seemed to grow more robust,
his father settled that he should leave home early the following
month; but his trunk was never packed, for Serge was
always catching a fresh cold, and then his departure would be
again postponed.
On each of these occasions Marthe contented herself with
saying in her gentle, indifferent way:
'He isn't twenty yet. It's really not prudent to send so
young a lad to Paris; and, besides, he isn't wasting his time
here; you even think that he studies too much.'
Serge used to accompany his mother to mass. He was
very piously minded, very gentle and grave. Doctor Porquier
had recommended him to take a good deal of exercise, and he
had become enthusiastically fond of botany, going off on long
rambles to collect specimens which he spent his afternoons in
drying, mounting, classifying and naming. It was about this
time that he struck up a great friendship with Abbé Faujas.
The Abbé himself had botanised in earlier days, and he gave
Serge much practical advice for which the young man was
very grateful. They also lent each other books, and one day[Pg 147]
they went off together to try to discover a certain plant which
the priest said he thought would be found in the neighbourhood.
When Serge was ill, his neighbour came to see him
every morning, and sat and talked for a long while at his
bedside. At other times, when the young man was well, it
was he who went and knocked at Abbé Faujas's door, as soon
as he heard him stirring in his room. They were only
separated by a narrow landing, and they ended by almost
living together.
In spite of Marthe's unruffled tranquillity and Rose's
angry glances, Mouret still often indulged in bursts of anger.
'What can the young scamp be after up there?' he would
growl. 'Whole days pass without my catching more than a
glimpse of him. He never seems to stir from the Abbé; they
are always talking together in some corner or other. He shall
be off to Paris at once. He's as strong as a Turk. All those
ailments of his are mere shams, excuses to get himself petted
and coddled. You needn't both of you look at me in that
way; I don't mean to let the priest make a hypocrite of the
boy.'
Then he began to keep a watch over his son, and when he
thought that he was in Faujas's room he called for him
angrily.
'I would rather he went to the bad!' he cried one day in
a fit of rage.
'Oh, sir!' said Rose, 'it is abominable to say such
things.'
'Well, indeed I would! And I'll put him in the way
myself one of these days, if you irritate me much more with
these parsons of yours!'
Serge naturally joined the Young Men's Club, though he
went there but little, preferring the solitude of his own room.
If it had not been for Abbé Faujas, whom he sometimes met
there, he would probably never have set foot in the place.
The Abbé taught him to play chess in the reading-room.
Mouret, on learning that the lad met the priest at the café,
swore that he would pack him off by the train on the following
Monday. His luggage was indeed got ready, and quite
seriously this time, but Serge, who had gone out to spend a
last day in the open country, returned home drenched to the
skin by a sudden downpour of rain. He was obliged to go to
bed, shivering with fever. For three weeks he hung between
life and death; and then his convalescence lasted for two[Pg 148]
long months. At the beginning of it he was so weak that he
lay with his head on the pillow and his arms stretched over
the sheets, as motionless as if he were simply a wax figure.
'It is your fault, sir!' cried the cook to Mouret. 'You
will have it on your conscience if the boy dies.'
While his son continued in danger, Mouret wandered
silently about the house, plunged in gloomy melancholy, his
eyes red with crying. He seldom went upstairs, but paced
up and down the passage to intercept the doctor as he went
away. When he was told that Serge was at length out of
danger, he glided quietly into the lad's room and offered his
help. But Rose turned him away. They had no occasion
for him, she said, and the boy was not yet strong enough to
bear his roughness. He had much better go and attend to
his business instead of getting in the way there. Mouret
then remained in complete loneliness downstairs, more
melancholy and unoccupied than ever. He felt no inclination
for anything, said he. As he went along the passage, he
often heard on the second floor the voice of Abbé Faujas, who
spent whole afternoons by Serge's bedside, now that he was
growing better.
'How is he to-day, Monsieur l'Abbé?' Mouret asked the
priest timidly, as he met the latter going down into the
garden.
'Oh, fairly well; but it will be a long convalescence, and
very great care will be required.'
The priest tranquilly read his breviary, while the father,
with a pair of shears in his hand, followed him up and down
the garden walks, trying to renew the conversation and to
get more detailed information about his boy. As his son's
convalescence progressed, he remarked that the priest scarcely
ever left Serge's room. He had gone upstairs several times
in the women's absence, and he had always found the Abbé
at the young man's bedside, talking softly to him, and rendering
him all kinds of little services, sweetening his drink,
straightening his bed-clothes, or getting him anything he
happened to want. There was a hushed murmur throughout
the house, a solemn calm which gave quite a conventual
character to the second floor. Mouret seemed to smell
incense, and could almost fancy sometimes, as he heard a
muttering of voices, that they were saying mass upstairs.
'What can they be doing?' he wondered. 'The youngster
is out of danger now; they can't be giving him extreme
unction.'
[Pg 149]
Serge himself caused him much disquiet. He looked like
a girl as he lay in bed in his white night-dress. His eyes
seemed to have grown larger; there was a soft ecstatic smile
upon his lips, which still played there even amidst his keenest
pangs of suffering. Mouret no longer ventured to say anything
about Paris; his dear sick boy seemed too girlish and
tender for such a journey.
One afternoon he went upstairs, carefully hushing the
sound of his steps. The door was ajar, and he saw Serge
sitting in an easy chair in the sunshine. The young fellow
was weeping with his eyes turned upward, and his mother
stood sobbing in front of him. They both turned as they
heard the door open, but they did not wipe away their tears.
As soon as Mouret entered the room, the invalid said to him
in his feeble voice:
'I have a favour to ask you, father. Mother says that
you will be angry and will refuse me permission, though it
would fill me with joy—I want to enter the Seminary.'
He clasped his hands together with a sort of feverish
devotion.
'You! you!' exclaimed Mouret.
He looked at Marthe, who turned away her head. Then
saying nothing further, he walked to the window, returned,
and sat down mechanically by the bedside, as though overwhelmed
by the blow.
'Father,' resumed Serge, after a long silence, 'in my
nearness to death I have seen God, and I have sworn to be
His. I assure you that all my happiness is centred in that.
Believe me that it is so, and do not cause me grief.'
Mouret, looking very mournful, with his eyes lowered, still
kept silence. At last, with an expression of utter hopelessness,
he murmured:
'If I had the least particle of courage, I should wrap a
couple of shirts in a handkerchief and go away.'
Then he rose from his seat, went to the window and
drummed on the panes with his fingers; and when Serge
again began to implore him, he said very quietly:
'Very well, my boy; be a priest.'
Immediately afterwards he left the room.
The next day, without the least warning to anyone, he
set off for Marseilles, where he spent a week with his son
Octave. But he came back looking careworn and aged.
Octave had afforded him very little consolation. He had[Pg 150]
found the young man leading a fast life, overwhelmed with
debts and in all sorts of scrapes. However, Mouret did not
say a word about these matters. He began to lead a perfectly
sedentary existence, and no longer made any of those good
strokes of business, those fortunate purchases of standing
crops, in which he had formerly taken such pride. Rose
noticed that he maintained almost unbroken silence, and that
he even avoided saluting Abbé Faujas.
'Do you know that you are not very polite?' she boldly
said to him one day. 'His reverence the Curé has just gone
past, and you turned your back upon him. If you behave in
this way because of the boy, you are under a great mistake.
The Curé was quite against his going to the Seminary, and I
often heard him talking to him against it. This house is
getting a very cheerful place, indeed, now! You never speak
a word, even to madame, and when you have your meals, anyone
would think that it was a funeral that was going on. For
my part, sir, I'm beginning to feel that I've had quite enough
of it.'
Mouret went out of the room, but the cook followed him
into the garden.
'Haven't you every reason to be happy, now that your son
is on his feet again? He ate a cutlet yesterday, the darling,
and with such a good appetite too. But you care nothing
about that, do you? What you want is to make a pagan of
him like yourself. Ah! you stand in great need of some one
to pray for you. But God Almighty wishes to save us all.
If I were you I should weep with joy, to think that that poor
little dear was going to pray for me. But you are made of
stone, sir! And how sweet he will look too, the darling, in
his cassock!'
Mouret thereupon went up to the first floor, and shut himself
up in a room which he called his study, a big bare room,
furnished only with a table and a couple of chairs. This
room became his refuge whenever the cook worried him.
When he grew weary of staying there, he went down again
into the garden, upon which he expended greater care than
ever. Marthe no longer seemed to be conscious of her
husband's displeasure. Sometimes he kept silent for a week,
but she was in no way disquieted or distressed by it. Every
day she withdrew more and more from her surroundings, and
she even began to fancy, now that the house seemed so quiet
and peaceable and she had ceased to hear Mouret scolding,[Pg 151]
that he had grown more reasonable and had discovered for
himself, as she had done, some little nook of happiness. This
thought tranquillised her and induced her to plunge more
deeply into her dreamy life. When her husband looked at
her with his blurred eyes, scarcely recognising in her the wife
of other days, she only smiled at him and did not notice the
tears which were welling beneath his eyelids.
On the day when Serge, now completely restored to health,
entered the Seminary, Mouret remained at home alone with
Désirée. He now frequently looked after her; for this big
'innocent' girl, who was nearly sixteen, might have fallen
into the basin of the fountain or have set the house on fire
with matches just like a child of six. When Marthe returned
home, she found the doors open and the rooms empty. The
house seemed quite deserted. She went on to the terrace,
and there, at the end of one of the walks, she saw her husband
playing with his daughter. He was sitting on the gravel, and
with a little wooden scoop was gravely filling a cart which
Désirée was pulling along with a piece of string.
'Gee up! gee up!' cried the girl.
'Wait a little,' said her father patiently, 'it is not full
yet. As you are the horse, you must wait till the cart is
full.'
Then she stamped her feet like an impatient horse, and, at
last, not being able to stand still any longer, she set off with
a loud burst of laughter. The cart fell over and lost its load.
When she had dragged it round the garden, she came back to
her father crying:
'Fill it again! Fill it again!'
Mouret loaded it again with the little scoop. For a moment
Marthe remained upon the terrace watching them, full
of uneasy emotion. The open doors, the sight of the man
playing with the child, the empty deserted house all touched
her with sadness, though she was not clearly conscious of the
feelings at work in her. She went upstairs to take off her
things, on hearing Rose, who also had just returned, exclaim
from the terrace steps:
'Good gracious! how silly the master is!'
His friends, the retired traders with whom he took a turn
or two every day on the promenade in the Cours Sauvaire,
declared that he was a little 'touched.' During the last few
months his hair had grizzled, he had begun to get shaky on
his legs, and was no longer the biting jeerer, feared by the[Pg 152]
whole town. For a little time it was thought that he had
been venturing upon some risky speculations and had been
overcome by a heavy loss of money.
Madame Paloque, as she leaned over the window-rail of
her dining-room which overlooked the Rue Balande, said
every time she saw him, that he was certainly going to the
bad. And if, a few moments later, she happened to catch
sight of Abbé Faujas passing along the street, she took a
delight in exclaiming—the more especially if she had visitors
with her:
'Just look at his reverence the Curé! Isn't he growing
sleek? If he eats out of the same dish as Mouret, he can
leave him nothing but the bones.'
Then she laughed, as did those who heard her. Abbé
Faujas was, indeed, becoming quite an imposing object; he
now always wore black gloves and a shimmering cassock. A
peculiar smile played about his face, a sort of ironical twist of
his lips, when Madame de Condamin complimented him upon
his appearance. The ladies liked to see him nicely and comfortably
dressed; though the priest himself would probably
have preferred fighting his way with bare arms and clenched
fists, and never a thought about what he wore. Whenever
he appeared to grow neglectful of his appearance, the slightest
hint of reproach from old Madame Rougon sufficed to cure
him, and he hurried off to buy silk stockings and a new
hat and girdle. He was frequently requiring new clothes,
for his big frame seemed to wear out his garments very
quickly.
Since the foundation of the Home of the Virgin, all the
women had been on his side; and defended him against the
malicious stories which were still occasionally repeated, though
no one was able to get at their origin. Now and then they
found him a little blunt, but this roughness of his by no
means offended them, least of all in the confessional, where
they rather liked to feel his iron hand pressing down their
necks.
'He gave me such a scolding yesterday, my dear,' said
Madame de Condamin to Marthe one day. 'I believe he
would have struck me if there had not been the partition
between us. He is not always very easy to get on with!'
She laughed gently and seemed to enjoy the recollection
of this scene with her spiritual director. Madame de Condamin
had observed Marthe turn pale whenever she made her[Pg 153]
certain confidences as to Abbé Faujas's manner of hearing
confessions; and divining her jealousy, she took a mischievous
delight in tormenting her, with which object she gave her
many further private details.
When Abbé Faujas had founded the Young Men's Club,
he there became quite sociable and gay; in fact he seemed to
have undergone a transformation. Thanks to his will power
he moulded his stern nature like wax. He allowed the part
which he had taken in the founding of the club to be made
public, and he became the friend of all the young men in the
town, keeping a strict watch over his manners, for he well
knew that young men just fresh from college had not the
same taste for roughness of speech and demeanour as the
women had. He one day narrowly escaped losing his temper
with young Rastoil, whose ears he threatened to pull, over a
disagreement about the club management; but with surprising
command over himself, he put out his hand to him
almost immediately afterwards, humbling himself and winning
over to his side all who were present by his gracious
apologies to 'that big fool Séverin,' as the other was called.
However, although the Abbé had conquered the women
and the young men, he still remained on a footing of mere
formal politeness with the fathers and husbands. The grave
gentlemen continued to distrust him as they saw that he still
refrained from identifying himself with any political party.
At the Sub-Prefecture Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies discussed
him with much animation, while Monsieur Delangre,
without definitely defending him, said with a sharp smile that
they ought to wait before judging him. At the Rastoils' he
had become a source of much tribulation to the Presiding
Judge, whom Séverin and his mother never ceased wearying
with their constant eulogies of the priest.
'Well! well! let him have every good quality under the
sun!' cried the unhappy man. 'I won't dispute one of them,
only leave me at peace. I asked him to dinner, but he
wouldn't come. I can't go and drag him here by force!'
'No, but, my dear,' said Madame Rastoil, 'when you meet
him you scarcely bow to him. It's that, I dare say, that has
made him rather cold.'
'Of course it is,' interposed Séverin; 'he sees very well
that you are not as polite to him as you ought to be.'
Monsieur Rastoil shrugged his shoulders. When Monsieur
de Bourdeu was there, the pair of them accused Abbé Faujas[Pg 154]
of leanings towards the Sub-Prefecture, though Madame
Rastoil directed their attention to the fact that he never dined
there, and had never even set foot in the house.
'Oh, don't imagine that I accuse him of being a Bonapartist,'
said the president. 'I only remarked that he had
leanings that way; that was all. He has had communications
with Monsieur Delangre.'
'Well! and so have you!' cried Séverin; 'you have had
communications with the mayor! They are absolutely necessary
under certain circumstances. Tell the truth and say you
detest Abbé Faujas; it would be much more straightforward.'
For whole days at a time the Rastoils sulked with one
another. Abbé Fenil came to see them very rarely now,
excusing himself upon the ground that he was kept at home
by his gout; but twice, when he had been forced to express
an opinion on the Curé of Saint-Saturnin's, he had said a
few words in his praise. Abbé Surin and Abbé Bourrette, as
well as Monsieur Maffre, held the same views as the mistress
of the house concerning the Curé, and the opposition to him
came only from Monsieur Rastoil, backed up by Monsieur
de Bourdeu, both of whom gravely declared that they could
not compromise their political positions by receiving a man
who concealed his views.
Séverin, however, now began to knock at the door in the
Impasse des Chevillottes whenever he wanted to say anything
to the priest, and gradually the little lane became a sort of
neutral ground. Doctor Porquier, who had been the first to
avail himself of it, young Delangre, and the magistrate, all
came thither to talk to Abbé Faujas. Sometimes the little
doors of both the gardens, as well as the cart-entrance to the
Sub-Prefecture, were kept open for a whole afternoon, while
the Abbé leant against the wall, smiling and shaking hands
with those members of the two groups who wished to have a
word with him. Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies, however,
carefully refrained from leaving the garden of the Sub-Prefecture;
and Monsieur Rastoil and Monsieur de Bourdeu,
equally persistent, remained seated beneath the trees in front
of the former's waterfall. It was very seldom that the priest's
little court invaded the Mourets' arbour. Now and then a
head just peeped inside, took a hasty glance around, and then
quickly disappeared.
Abbé Faujas now seemed to trouble about nothing. At
the most he glanced with an expression of disquietude at the[Pg 155]
Tronches' windows, through which Olympe's eyes were constantly
glistening. The Trouches kept themselves in ambush
there behind the red curtains, full of an envious desire to
come down like the Abbé and eat the fruit, and talk to the
fashionable folks. They tapped on the shutters, leant out
of the window for a moment, and then withdrew, infuriated
by the authoritative glances of the priest. Soon afterwards,
however, they would return with stealthy steps, press their
pale faces to one of the panes, and keep watch over his every
movement, quite tortured to see him enjoying that paradise
which was forbidden to them.
'It is really abominable!' Olympe exclaimed one day to
her husband. 'He would lock us up in a cupboard, if he could,
so as to deprive us of every atom of enjoyment. We'll go
down if you like, and we'll see what he says.'
Trouche had just returned from his office. He put on a
clean collar and dusted his boots, anxious to make himself as
neat as possible. Olympe put on a light dress, and then they
both boldly came downstairs into the garden, walking slowly
alongside the tall box plants, and stopping in front of the
flower-beds.
At that moment Abbé Faujas happened to have his back
turned towards them. He was standing at the little door
that opened into the lane talking to Monsieur Maffre. When
he heard the Trouches' steps grating upon the gravel, they
were close behind him under the arbour. He turned round,
and stopped short in the middle of a sentence, quite astounded
at seeing them there. Monsieur Maffre, who did not know
them, was looking at them with curiosity.
'A beautiful day, isn't it, gentlemen?' said Olympe, who
had turned pale beneath her brother's gaze.
The Abbé abruptly dragged the justice of the peace into
the lane; where he quickly got rid of him.
'He is furious!' murmured Olympe. 'Well, so much the
worse; we had better stay where we are now. If we go back
upstairs, he will think we are afraid of him. I've had quite
enough of this kind of thing, and you will see what I will say
to him.'
She made Trouche seat himself on one of the chairs which
Rose had brought out a short time previously, and when the
Abbé returned he found them tranquilly settled there. He
fastened the bolts of the little door, glanced quickly around
to assure himself that the trees screened them from observation,[Pg 156]
and then came up close to the Trouches, saying in a
muffled voice:
'You forget our agreement. You undertook to remain in
your own rooms.'
'It was too hot up there,' Olympe replied. 'We are not
committing any crime by coming down here to get a little
fresh air.'
The priest was on the point of exploding, but his sister,
still quite pale from the effort she had made in resisting him,
added in a peculiar tone:
'Don't make a noise, now! There are some people over
there, and you might do yourself harm.'
Then both the Trouches laughed slightly. The Abbé fixed
his eyes upon them with a terrible expression, but without
speaking.
'Sit down,' said Olympe. 'You want an explanation,
don't you? Well, you shall have one. We are tired of
imprisoning ourselves. You are living here in clover; the
house seems to belong to you, and so does the garden. So
much the better, indeed; we are delighted to see how well
things appear to be going with you, but you mustn't treat us
as dirt beneath your feet. You have never thought of bringing
me up a single bunch of grapes; you have given us the most
wretched of the rooms; you hide us away and are ashamed
of us; you shut us up as though we had the plague. You
must understand that it can't go on any longer!'
'I am not the master here,' replied Abbé Faujas. 'You
must address yourselves to Monsieur Mouret if you want to
strip his garden.'
The Trouches exchanged a fresh smile.
'We don't want to pry into your affairs,' Olympe continued.
'We know what we know, and that is sufficient for
us. But all this proves what a bad heart you have. Do you
think that if we were in your position we shouldn't invite you
to come and take your share in the good things that were
going?'
'What is it that you want me to do?' demanded the Abbé.
'Do you suppose that I am rolling in wealth? You know
what sort of a room I occupy myself; it is more scantily
furnished than your own. The house isn't mine, and I can't
give it you.'
Olympe shrugged her shoulders. She silenced her husband
who was beginning to speak, and then calmly continued:
[Pg 157]
'Everyone has his own ideas of life. If you had millions
you wouldn't buy a strip of carpet for your bedside; you
would spend them all in some foolish scheme or other. We,
on the other hand, like to be comfortable. Dare you say that
if you had a fancy for the handsomest furniture in the house
and for the linen and food and anything else it contains, you
couldn't have them this very evening? Well, in such
circumstances a good brother would think of his relations,
and wouldn't leave them in wretchedness and squalor as you
leave us!'
Abbé Faujas looked keenly at the Trouches. They were
both swaying backwards and forwards on their chairs.
'You are a pair of ungrateful people,' he said after a
moment's silence. 'I have already done a great deal for you.
You have me to thank for the food that you eat now. I
still have letters of yours, Olympe, letters in which you
beseech me to rescue you from your misery by bringing you
over to Plassans. Now that you are here and your livelihood
is assured, you break out into fresh demands.'
'Stuff!' Trouche impudently interrupted. 'You sent for
us here because you wanted us. I have learned to my cost
not to believe in anyone's fine talk. I have allowed my wife
to speak, but women can never come to the point. In two
words, my good friend, you are making a mistake in keeping
us cooped up like dogs, who are only brought out in the hour
of danger. We are getting weary of it, and we shall perhaps
end by doing something foolish. Confound it all! give us a
little liberty. Since the house isn't yours and you despise all
luxury, what harm can it do you if we make ourselves comfortable?
We shan't eat the walls!'
'Of course!' exclaimed Olympe, 'it's only natural that
we should rebel against being constantly locked up. We
will take care to do nothing to prejudice you. You know
that my husband only requires the least sign from you. Go
your own way, and you may depend upon us; but let us go
ours. Is that understood, eh?'
Abbé Faujas had bent his head; he remained silent for
a moment, and then, raising his eyes, and avoiding a direct
reply, he said:
'Listen to what I say. If ever you do anything to hamper
me, I swear to you that I will send you away to starve in a
garret on the straw.'
Then he went back into the house, leaving them under[Pg 158]
the arbour. From that time the Trouches went down into
the garden almost every day, but they conducted themselves
with considerable discretion, and refrained from going there
at the times when the priest was talking with the guests from
the neighbouring gardens.
The following week Olympe complained so much of the
room she was occupying that Marthe kindly offered her
Serge's, which was now at liberty. The Trouches then kept
both rooms. They slept in the young man's old bedchamber,
from which not a single article of furniture had been removed,
and turned the other apartment into a sort of drawing-room,
for which Rose found them some old velvet-covered
furniture in the lumber-room. Olympe, in great delight,
ordered a rose-coloured dressing-gown from the best maker
in Plassans.
Mouret, who had forgotten that Marthe had asked his
permission to let the Trouches have Serge's room, was quite
surprised to find them there one evening. He had gone up
to look for a knife which he thought his son must have left
in one of the drawers, and, as he entered the room, he saw
Trouche trimming with this very knife a switch which he had
just cut from one of the pear-trees in the garden. Thereupon
he apologised and went downstairs.
During the public procession on the Feast of Corpus Christi,
when Monseigneur Rousselot came down the steps of the
magnificent altar, set up through the generosity of Madame
de Condamin on the Place of the Sub-Prefecture, close to the
very door of the small house she occupied, it was noticed
with much surprise by the spectators that the Bishop abruptly
turned his back upon Abbé Faujas.
'Ah! has there been some disagreement between them!'
exclaimed Madame Rougon, who was looking out of her
drawing-room window.
'Didn't you know about it?' asked Madame Paloque, who
was leaning over by the old lady's side. 'It has been the talk
of the town since yesterday. Abbé Fenil has been restored
to favour.'
[Pg 159]
Monsieur de Condamin, who was standing behind the
ladies, began to laugh. He had made his escape from his
own house, saying that it smelt like a church.
'Do you attach any importance to such trifles?' said he.
'The Bishop is merely an old weathercock, turning one way
or the other according as Faujas or Fenil blows against
him; to-day it is one of them, to-morrow it will be the other.
They have quarrelled and made it up again half a score times
already. Before three days are over, you will see that Faujas
will be the pet again.'
'I don't believe it,' exclaimed Madame Paloque; 'it is
serious this time. It seems that Abbé Faujas has caused
his lordship a great deal of worry. It appears that he formerly
preached some sermons which excited great displeasure at
Rome. I can't explain the matter quite clearly, but I know
that the Bishop has received reproachful letters from Rome,
in which he is recommended to be on his guard. It is said
that Abbé Faujas is simply a political agent.'
'Who says so?' asked Madame Rougon, blinking her
eyes as though to see the procession, which was then passing
through the Rue de la Banne, more distinctly.
'I heard it said, but I really don't remember by whom,'
the judge's wife replied carelessly.
Then she retired, saying that one would be able to get a
better view from the side-window. Monsieur de Condamin,
however, took the vacant place by Madame Rougon, and
whispered in the old lady's ear:
'I have already twice seen her going to Abbé Fenil's.
They have some plot or other in hand, I'm sure. Abbé
Faujas must have trodden somehow or other on that viper of
a woman, and she's trying to bite him. If she were not so
ugly I would do her the service of telling her that her husband
will never be presiding judge.'
'Why? I don't understand,' murmured the old lady,
with a guileless expression.
Monsieur de Condamin looked at her curiously, and then
began to smile.
The last two gendarmes in the procession had just disappeared
round the corner of the Cours Sauvaire, and the few
guests whom Madame Rougon had invited to witness the
blessing of the altar returned into the drawing-room, where
they chatted for a moment about the Bishop's graciousness
and the new banners of the different congregations, and[Pg 160]
especially the one belonging to the girls of the Home of the
Virgin, which had attracted much attention. The ladies
were loud in their praises, and Abbé Faujas's name was
mentioned every moment in the most eulogistic terms.
'He is clearly a saint!' sniggered Madame Paloque to
Monsieur de Condamin, who had taken a seat near her.
Then, bending forward towards him, she added:
'I could not speak openly before Madame Rougon, you
know, but there is a great deal of talk about Abbé Faujas
and Madame Mouret. I dare say those unpleasant reports
have reached the Bishop's ears.'
'Madame Mouret is a charming woman, and extremely
winning notwithstanding her forty years,' was all that
Monsieur de Condamin said in reply.
'Oh, yes! she is very charming, very charming, indeed,'
murmured Madame Paloque, whose face turned quite green
with spleen.
'Extremely charming,' persisted the conservator of rivers
and forests. 'She is at the age of genuine passion and great
happiness. You ladies are given to judging each other
unfavourably.'
Thereupon he left the drawing-room, chuckling over
Madame Paloque's suppressed rage.
The town was now indeed taking an absorbing interest in
the continual struggle that went on between Abbé Faujas
and Abbé Fenil for influence over the Bishop. It was a
ceaseless combat, like the struggles of a couple of buxom
housekeepers for the affection of an old dotard. The Bishop
smiled knowingly; he had discovered how to maintain a
kind of equilibrium between these opposing forces which he
pitted one against the other, amused at seeing them overthrown
in turn, and securing peace for himself by accepting
the services of the one who temporarily gained the upper
hand. To the dreadful stories which were told him to the
detriment of his favourites, he paid but little attention, for
he knew that the rival Abbés were capable of accusing each
other of murder.
'They are getting worse, my child,' the Bishop said, in
one of his expansive moments to Abbé Surin. 'I fancy that
in the end Paris will carry the day, and Rome will get the
worst of it; but I am not quite sure, and I shall leave them
to wear each other out. When one has made an end of the
other, things will be settled——By the way, just read me[Pg 161]
the third Ode of Horace; I'm afraid I've translated one of
the lines rather badly.'
On the Tuesday after the public procession the weather
was lovely. Laughter was heard both in the garden of the
Rastoils and in that of the Sub-Prefect, and numerous guests
were sitting under the trees. Abbé Faujas read his breviary
in the Mourets' garden after his usual custom, while slowly
walking up and down beside the tall hedges of box. For
some days past he had kept the little door that led to the
lane bolted; he was indeed coquetting with his neighbours
and keeping aloof, in order that he might make them more
anxious to see him. Possibly too he had noticed a slight
coldness in their manner after his last misunderstanding
with the Bishop, and the abominable reports that his enemies
had circulated against him.
About five o'clock, just as the sun was sinking, Abbé
Surin proposed a game of shuttlecock to Monsieur Rastoil's
daughters. He was very clever at it himself; and, notwithstanding
the approach of their thirtieth year, both Angéline
and Aurélie were immensely fond of games. When the
servant brought the battledores, Abbé Surin, looking about
him for a shady spot, for the garden was still bright with the
last rays of the sun, was struck with an idea of which the
young ladies cordially approved.
'Shall we go and play in the Impasse des Chevillottes?'
he asked. 'We shall be shaded by the chestnut-trees there,
and have more room.'
They left the garden and started a most delightful game
in the lane. The two girls began, and Angéline was the first
who failed to keep the shuttlecock going. Abbé Surin, who
took her place, handed his battledore with professional skill
and ease. Having tucked his cassock between his legs, he
sprang backwards and forwards and sideways without cessation.
His battledore caught the shuttlecock as it reached the
ground and sent it flying, now to a surprising height, and now
straight ahead like a bullet; and at times made it describe
the most graceful curves. As a rule he preferred to be pitted
against poor players, who, as they struck the shuttlecock at
random, or, to use his own phrase, without any rhythm,
brought all the skilful agility of his own play into exercise.
Mademoiselle Aurélie, however, played a fair game. She
vented a little cry like a swallow's every time she struck a
blow with the battledore, and she laughed distractedly when the[Pg 162]
shuttlecock alighted on the young Abbé's nose. Gathering
up her skirts, she waited for its return, or leaped backward
with a great rustling of petticoats when he vengefully gave it
a smarter blow than usual. At last the shuttlecock fell into
her hair, and she almost toppled over upon her back. This
greatly amused them all. Angéline now took her sister's
place; and every time that Abbé Faujas raised his eyes from
his breviary as he paced the Mourets' garden, he saw the
white feathers of the shuttlecock skimming above the wall
like a big butterfly.
'Are you there, your reverence?' all at once cried
Angéline, at the little door. 'Our shuttlecock has fallen into
your garden.'
The Abbé picked up the shuttlecock, which had dropped
at his feet, and made up his mind to open the door.
'Oh, thank you! your reverence,' said Aurélie, who had
already taken the battledore. 'Only Angéline would ever
make such a stroke. The other day when papa was watching
us she sent the shuttlecock right against his ear with such a
bang that he was quite deaf till the next day.'
There was more laughter at this; and Abbé Surin, as rosy
as a girl, delicately dabbed his brow with a handkerchief of
fine texture. He pushed his fair hair behind his ears, and
stood there with glistening eyes and flexible figure, using his
battledore as a fan. In the excitement of the game his bands
had got slightly displaced.
'Monsieur le Curé,' said he, as he took up his position
again, 'you shall be umpire.'
Abbé Faujas, holding his breviary under his arm and
smiling paternally, stood on the threshold of the little doorway.
Through the cart-entrance of the Sub-Prefecture, which
was half open, he could see Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies
seated in front of the cascade amidst his friends. The priest
looked straight in front of him, however, and counted the
points of the game, while complimenting Abbé Surin and
consoling the young ladies.
'I tell you what, Péqueur,' said Monsieur de Condamin,
in a whisper, in the sub-prefect's ear, 'you make a mistake in
not inviting that little Abbé to your parties. He is a great
favourite with the ladies, and he looks as though he could
waltz to perfection.'
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies, who was talking to Monsieur
Delangre with much animation, did not however appear[Pg 163]
to hear the other, but went on with his conversation with the
mayor.
'Really, my dear sir,' he said, 'I don't know where you
see all the merits that you profess to find in him. On the
contrary, indeed, Abbé Faujas appears to me to be of very
doubtful character. There is considerable suspicion attached
to his past career, and strange things are said about him here.
I really don't see why I should go down on my knees to this
priest, especially as the clergy of Plassans are hostile to us.
I should gain no advantage by doing so.'
Monsieur Delangre and Monsieur de Condamin exchanged
glances of intelligence, and then, by way of reply, nodded their
heads.
'None, whatever,' continued the sub-prefect. 'It is no
use pretending to look mysterious; I may tell you that I have
myself written to Paris. I was a good deal bothered, and I
wanted to be quite certain about this Faujas, whom you seem
to look upon as a sort of prince in disguise. Well! do you
know what reply I got? They told me that they did not know
him and could tell me nothing about him, and that I must carefully
avoid mixing myself up with clerical matters. They are
grumpy enough in Paris as it is, since the election of that
jackass Lagrifoul, and I have to be prudent, you understand.'
The mayor exchanged another glance with the conservator
of rivers and forests. He even slightly shrugged his shoulders
before the correctly twirled moustaches of Monsieur Péqueur
des Saulaies.
'Just listen to me,' he said to him after a moment's
silence; 'you would like to be a prefect, wouldn't you?'
The sub-prefect smiled as he rocked himself in his chair.
'Well, then, go at once, and shake hands with Abbé
Faujas, who is waiting for you down there, while he is
watching them play at shuttlecock.'
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies was silent with astonishment.
He seemed quite puzzled, turned towards Monsieur
de Condamin, and asked, with some show of uneasiness:
'Is that your advice also?'
'Certainly; go and offer him your hand,' replied the
conservator of rivers and forests.
Then, with a slight touch of irony, he added:
'Consult my wife, if you like; I know you have perfect
confidence in her.'
Madame de Condamin was just approaching them. She[Pg 164]
was wearing a lovely pink and pearl-grey dress. When they
spoke to her of the Abbé she said graciously to the sub-prefect:
'It is very wrong of you to neglect your religious duties;
one never sees you at church except perhaps when there is
some official ceremony. It really distresses me very much,
and I must try to convert you. What sort of opinion do you
expect people will have of the government you represent, if
they see you are not on the side of religion?—Leave us,
gentlemen; I am going to confess Monsieur Péqueur.'
She took a seat, smiling playfully.
'Octavie,' said the sub-prefect, in an undertone, when they
were alone together, 'don't make fun of me. You weren't a
very pious person in the Rue du Helder in Paris. It's all I
can do to keep from laughing when I see you worshipping in
Saint-Saturnin's.'
'You are too flippant, my friend,' she replied, 'and your
flippancy will play you a bad turn one of these days. Seriously,
you quite distress me. I gave you credit for having more
intelligence. Are you so blind that you cannot see that you
are tottering in your position? Let me tell you that it is only
from fear of alarming the Legitimists at Plassans that you
haven't already been recalled. If the Legitimists saw a new
sub-prefect arriving here, they would take alarm, whereas so
long as you remain here they will continue quietly sleeping,
feeling certain of victory at the next election. All this is not
very flattering for you; I am aware of that, and the more so
as I know positively that the authorities are acting without
taking you into their confidence. Listen to me, my friend;
I tell you that you are ruined if you don't divine certain
things.'
He looked at her with unfeigned alarm.
'Has "the great man" been writing to you?' he asked,
referring to a personage whom they thus designated between
themselves.
'No; he has broken entirely with me. I am not a fool,
and I saw, before he did, the necessity of the separation.
And I have nothing at all to complain of. He has shown me
the greatest kindness. He found me a husband and gave me
some excellent advice, which has proved extremely useful to
me. But I have retained friends in Paris; and I swear to
you that you have only just got time left to cling on to the
branches if you don't want to fall. Don't be a pagan any[Pg 165]
longer, but go and offer your hand to Abbé Faujas. You will
understand why later on, even if you can't guess it to-day.'
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies lowered his eyes and seemed
a little humiliated by the lesson he was receiving. He was
very conceited, and, showing his white teeth, he tried to
re-assert himself by murmuring tenderly:
'Ah! if you had only been willing, Octavie, we might have
governed Plassans between us. I asked you to resume that
delightful life—'
'Really now, you are a great idiot!' she interrupted in a
tone of vexation. 'You annoy me with your "Octavie." I am
Madame de Condamin to everyone, my friend. Can't you
understand anything? I have an income of thirty thousand
francs; I am queen of a whole Sub-Prefecture; I go everywhere;
I am respected everywhere, bowed to and liked.
What in the world should I do with you? You would only
inconvenience me. I am a respectable woman, my friend.'
She rose from her seat and walked towards Doctor Porquier,
who, according to his custom, had come to spend an
hour in the garden chatting to his fair patients, after a round
of visits.
'Oh, doctor!' she exclaimed, with one of her pretty grimaces,
'I have got such a headache. It pains me just here,
under the left eyebrow.'
'That is the side of the heart, madame,' said the doctor,
gallantly.
Madame de Condamin smiled and did not carry the consultation
any further. Madame Paloque, who was present,
bent, however, towards her husband, whom she brought with
her every time she came, in order that she might recommend
him to the sub-prefect's influence, and whispered in his ear:
'That's the only way Porquier has of curing them.'
When Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies had joined Monsieur
de Condamin and Monsieur Delangre he manœuvred
cleverly in such wise as to draw them towards the gateway.
When he was within a few yards of it, he stopped and
appeared to be interested in the game of shuttlecock which
was still going on in the lane. Abbé Surin, with his hair
blown about by the wind, the sleeves of his cassock rolled up,
and his slender, white, womanly wrists displayed, had just
stepped backwards, putting some twenty yards between himself
and Mademoiselle Aurélie. He felt that he was being
watched, and he quite surpassed himself. Mademoiselle[Pg 166]
Aurélie was also playing extremely well, spurred on, as it
were, by the skill of her partner. Thus the shuttlecock
described long gentle curves with such regularity that it
seemed to light of its own accord upon the battledores, going
from one to the other player without either of them having to
stir from their places. Abbé Surin, inclined slightly backwards,
displayed his well-shaped bust to advantage.
'Excellent! excellent!' cried the sub-prefect. 'Ah!
Monsieur l'Abbé, I must compliment you upon your skill.'
Then, turning towards Madame de Condamin, Doctor
Porquier and the Paloques, he exclaimed:
'I've really never seen anything like it before. You will
allow us to admire your play, I hope, Monsieur l'Abbé?'
The whole set of the Sub-Prefecture now formed into a
group at the far end of the lane. Abbé Faujas had not
moved from the position he had taken up. Having acknowledged
with a nod the salutations of Monsieur Delangre and
Monsieur de Condamin, he went on counting the points of
the game. When Aurélie at last missed the shuttlecock, he
said good-naturedly:
'That makes you three hundred and ten points, for the
distance was altered; your sister has only forty-seven.'
However, while he appeared to follow the flight of the
shuttlecock with all-absorbing interest, he every now and then
glanced at the door of the Rastoils' garden, which still remained
open. Monsieur Maffre was as yet the only person
who had shown himself there; but at last a voice called from
inside the garden:
'What is amusing them so much out there?' It was
Monsieur Rastoil, who was chatting with Monsieur de
Bourdeu beside the rustic table, that asked the question.
'His lordship's secretary is playing at shuttlecock,' Monsieur
Maffre replied. 'He is making some wonderful strokes
and everybody is watching him. His reverence the Curé is
there, and seems quite amazed.'
Monsieur de Bourdeu took a big pinch of snuff as he
exclaimed:
'Ah! Monsieur l'Abbé Faujas is there, is he?'
He glanced at Monsieur Rastoil, and they both seemed ill
at ease.
'I have heard,' remarked the presiding judge, 'that the
Curé has been restored to the Bishop's favour.'
'Yes, indeed; this very morning,' said Monsieur Maffre.[Pg 167]
'There has been a complete reconciliation, and I have heard
some touching particulars about it. His lordship shed tears.
Ah, there can be no doubt that Abbé Fenil has cause for
self-reproach.'
'I thought that you were the grand-vicar's friend,' observed
Monsieur de Bourdeu.
'So I am, but I am also the Curé's friend,' replied the
justice of the peace. 'Thank goodness! he is a man of
sufficient piety to be able to despise all the calumnies of
his enemies. They haven't even hesitated to question his
morality! It is disgraceful!'
The ex-prefect again glanced at the presiding judge with
a singular expression.
'And they've tried to compromise him in political matters,'
continued Monsieur Maffre. 'They said that he had come
here to overturn everything, to bestow places right and left
and bring about the triumph of the Paris clique. Why, if he
had been the chief of a band of brigands folks couldn't have
said worse things about him than they have done. A pack of
lies, all of them!'
Monsieur de Bourdeu was drawing a face on the gravel of
the walk with the tip of his walking-stick.
'Yes,' he said, carelessly, 'I have heard these things mentioned.
But it is very unlikely that a minister of religion
would allow himself to play such a part; and besides, to the
honour of Plassans, I think it may be said that he would have
failed completely. There is no one here who could be bought.'
'Oh! it's all stuff and nonsense, that!' cried the presiding
judge, shrugging his shoulders. 'A town can't be
turned inside out like an old coat. Paris may send us as
many spies and agents as she likes, but Plassans will always
keep Legitimist. Look at that little Péqueur now! We've
only made a single mouthful of him! Folks must be very
stupid to believe in mysterious personages running about the
provinces offering places and appointments. I should be very
curious to see one of those gentlemen.'
He seemed to be getting a little angry, and Monsieur
Maffre, with some show of uneasiness, appeared to think it
necessary to defend himself.
'Pardon me,' he exclaimed. 'I have never asserted that
Abbé Faujas was a Bonapartist agent; on the contrary, I
have always considered the accusation a most absurd one.'
'Oh! it's not a question of Abbé Faujas. My remarks[Pg 168]
are quite general. People don't sell themselves in that way!
Abbé Faujas is above all suspicion.'
There was an interval of silence. Monsieur de Bourdeu
finished the face he was drawing on the gravel by adding a
long pointed beard to it.
'Abbé Faujas has no political views,' he at last said in
his dry voice.
'Evidently,' replied Monsieur Rastoil; 'we found fault
with him for his indifference, but now I approve of it. With
all this gossip in the air, it would have had a prejudicial
effect upon religion. You know as well as I do, Bourdeu,
that he can't be accused of the slightest suspicious step. He
has never been seen at the Sub-Prefecture, has he? He kept
with great propriety in his fitting place. If he were a Bonapartist,
he wouldn't be likely to conceal it, would he?'
'Certainly not.'
'Then, too, he leads a most exemplary life. My wife and
my son have told me things about him which have affected
me very much.'
The merriment in the little lane was now louder than
ever. Abbé Faujas could be heard complimenting Mademoiselle
Aurélie on some wonderful stroke of her battledore.
Monsieur Rastoil, who had checked himself for a moment,
continued, with a smile:
'Just listen to them! What can they find in it to amuse
them so much? It makes one quite long to be young again!'
Then, in a more serious tone, he added:
'Yes, my wife and my son have made me feel a strong
liking for Abbé Faujas; and we are very sorry that his discreet
reserve keeps him from joining our circle.'
As Monsieur Bourdeu nodded his head approvingly, shouts
of applause were heard in the alley. There was a perfect
uproar of hand-clapping, laughter and shouts, as though some
troop of school-boys had just rushed out to play. Monsieur
Rastoil rose from his rustic chair.
'Good gracious!' he said, with a smile; 'let us go and
see what they are up to. My legs are beginning to feel a
little cramped.'
The others followed him, and they all three went and
stood by the little door. It was the first time that the presiding
judge and the ex-prefect had ventured so far. When
they saw the group formed by the sub-prefect's guests at the
end of the lane, their faces assumed a serious expression.[Pg 169]
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies, for his part, drew himself up
and put on an official attitude. Madame de Condamin went
flitting to and fro along the lane laughing and smiling and
filling the place with the rustle of her pink and grey dress.
The two sets of guests kept glancing at one another, neither
being willing to retire, while Abbé Faujas still maintained his
position between them at Mouret's door, quietly enjoying
himself without seeming in the least degree conscious of the
delicacy of the situation.
All the spectators held their breath; for Abbé Surin, seeing
that their number had increased, was desirous of winning
their applause by a last exhibition of skill. He brought all
his science into play, created difficulties for himself on purpose
to overcome them, turned round and struck at the
shuttlecock without looking at it, but seemingly divining its
position, and thus sending it back over his head to Mademoiselle
Aurélie with mathematical precision. He was very
much flushed and was perspiring freely. He had thrown his
hat off, and his bands were now hanging over his right
shoulder. But he was the victor, and he looked as he always
did, amiable and charming. The two groups of guests
lingered there admiring him, and Madame de Condamin had
to repress the applause, which burst out prematurely and
inopportunely, by shaking her lace handkerchief. Then the
young Abbé, introducing still further refinements into his
play, began to skip about first to right and then to left, each
time receiving the shuttlecock in a fresh position. This was
the grand final flourish. He accelerated the rapidity of his
play, and at last, just as he was jumping aside, his foot
slipped and he nearly fell upon the bosom of Madame de
Condamin, who had stretched out her arms with a little cry.
The spectators, thinking he was hurt, rushed up, but the
Abbé, who was pressing the ground with his hands and knees,
sprang up again by a strong effort, and sent the shuttlecock,
which had not yet fallen, spinning back to Mademoiselle
Aurélie. Then, flourishing his battledore, he triumphed.
'Bravo! bravo!' cried Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies,
stepping up to him.
'Bravo! it was a magnificent stroke!' exclaimed Monsieur
Rastoil, who also came up.
The game was interrupted, for the two sets of guests had
now invaded the lane, and were mingled with each other,
crowding around Abbé Surin, who leant, quite out of breath,[Pg 170]
against the wall by Abbé Faujas's side. Everybody began
talking at once.
'I was afraid that he had split his skull,' said Doctor
Porquier to Monsieur Maffre, in a voice full of emotion.
'Yes, these games generally have a bad ending,' remarked
Monsieur de Bourdeu, addressing himself to Monsieur Delangre
and the Paloques, while he received a shake of the
hand from Monsieur de Condamin, whom he always tried to
avoid in the streets, so that he might not have to bow to
him.
Madame de Condamin went from the sub-prefect to the
presiding judge, bringing them face to face, and exclaiming:
'But really, I am more upset than he is! I thought that
we were going to fall together. There is a big stone there;
did you notice it?'
'Yes, I see it there,' said Monsieur Rastoil; 'it must have
caught against his heel.'
'Was it this round stone, do you think?' asked Monsieur
Péqueur des Saulaies, picking up a pebble.
They had never spoken to each other before, except at
official ceremonies. Now, however, they began to examine
the stone, and passed it from one to the other, remarking that
it was very sharp, and must have cut the Abbé's shoe.
Madame de Condamin stood smiling between them, and
assured them that she was beginning to feel better.
'Oh! the Abbé is feeling ill!' suddenly cried Monsieur
Rastoil's daughters.
Abbé Surin had, indeed, turned very pale at hearing of
the danger he had run. He was reeling with faintness, when
Abbé Faujas, who had kept aloof, took him in his powerful
arms, and carried him into Mouret's garden, where he seated
him upon a chair. The two sets of guests soon swarmed
into the arbour, where the young Abbé completely fainted
away.
'Get some water and some vinegar, Rose!' cried Abbé
Faujas, running towards the steps.
Mouret, who was in the dining-room, came to the window,
but, on seeing all those people in his garden, he recoiled as
though he were struck with fear, and kept himself out of
sight. Rose soon came up with a collection of drugs, muttering,
as she hastened along:
'If only madame were here! But she has gone to
the Seminary to see the lad. I am all alone, and I can't do[Pg 171]
impossibilities, can I? The master won't stir an inch; anybody
might die for all he cared. There he is in the dining-room,
hiding himself! He would let you die, before he would
get you even a glass of water.'
By the time she had got through this grumble, she had
reached Abbé Surin, who was lying in a swoon. 'Oh! the
cherub!' she exclaimed, overcome with womanly pity.
The young Abbé, with his closed eyes and his pale brow
wreathed with long, fair hair, looked like one of the sweet-faced
martyrs that one sees expiring in sacred pictures. The
elder of the Rastoil girls was supporting his head, which lay
back, allowing his delicate, white neck to be seen. They were
all in great excitement over him. Madame de Condamin
gently dabbed his brow with a rag soaked in vinegar and
water, and the others stood anxiously looking at her. At last
the young Abbé opened his eyes, but closed them again
immediately. He had two more swoons before he recovered.
'You have given me a terrible fright!' at last said
Doctor Porquier, who had kept his hand fast in his own.
Abbé Surin, still sitting on the chair, stammered out confused
thanks, and assured them all that it was a mere nothing.
Then he saw that his cassock had been unbuttoned, and he
smiled as he buttoned it and readjusted his bands. To prove
that he was all right again, when the company advised him
to keep quiet, he went back to the lane with the Rastoil girls
in order to finish the game.
'You have a very nice place here,' said Monsieur Rastoil
to Abbé Faujas, whose side he had not quitted.
'The air on this slope is delightful,' added Monsieur
Péqueur des Saulaies, in his charming manner.
Then both sets of guests began looking with curiosity at
Mouret's house.
'Perhaps the ladies and gentlemen would like to stay in
the garden a little while,' exclaimed Rose; 'I will go and get
some chairs.'
She made three journeys in quest of them, in spite of the
protestations of the company. Then, after glancing at each
other for a moment, the two sets of guests felt constrained
by courtesy to seat themselves. The sub-prefect installed
himself on Abbé Faujas's right hand, while the presiding
judge took a chair on his left, and a friendly conversation at
once began.
'You are a very quiet neighbour, Monsieur le Curé,' said[Pg 172]
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies very graciously; 'you can't
imagine what pleasure it gives me to see you every day at the
same hour in this little paradise. It seems to bring me a
feeling of restfulness, after all the noise and worry I have.'
'A pleasant neighbour is a very rare thing,' observed
Monsieur Rastoil.
'Quite true,' said Monsieur de Bourdeu. 'But his
reverence seems to have filled this spot with the peaceful
tranquillity of a cloister.'
While the Abbé was smiling and acknowledging these
complimentary remarks, Monsieur de Condamin, who had
not yet seated himself, stooped and whispered in Monsieur
Delangre's ear:
'There's Rastoil, hoping to get that lout of a son of his
made assessor to the public prosecutor.'
Monsieur Delangre, however, gave him an angry glance,
trembling at the thought that this incorrigible chatterer
might spoil everything. But this did not prevent the conservator
of rivers and forests from adding:
'And Bourdeu, too, is flattering himself that he has already
won back his prefecture.'
Meantime, Madame de Condamin had caused a great
sensation by saying, in a meaning way:
'What I like about this garden is the tender charm it
seems to possess, which makes it a nook apart from all the
cares and wretchedness of the world. It is a spot where even
Cain and Abel might have become reconciled.'
She emphasized her last words and gave two glances, one
to the right and the other to the left, towards the neighbouring
gardens. Monsieur Maffre and Doctor Porquier nodded
approvingly; while the Paloques looked at each other inquisitively,
feeling uneasy and fearing to compromise themselves
should they open their mouths.
At the end of a quarter of an hour Monsieur Rastoil rose
from his seat.
'My wife will be wondering where we have got to,' said
he.
And thereupon the whole company rose, feeling somewhat
embarrassed as to the manner of their leave-taking. But
Abbé Faujas spread out his hands and said, with the
pleasantest possible smile:
'My paradise is always open to you.'
The presiding judge then promised to come and see the[Pg 173]
Curé every now and then, and the sub-prefect, with more
effusiveness, declared that he would do the same. For another
five minutes they all lingered there, exchanging compliments,
while, out in the lane, the laughter of the Rastoil girls and
Abbé Surin was again heard. A fresh game was going on
with all the animation of the previous one, and the shuttlecock
could be seen passing backwards and forwards in its
regular flight above the garden wall.
One Friday, as Madame Paloque was entering Saint-Saturnin's,
she was greatly surprised to see Marthe kneeling
in front of Saint-Michael's chapel. The Abbé Faujas was
hearing confessions.
'Ah!' she muttered, 'has she succeeded in touching the
Abbé's heart? I must wait a little while and watch. It
would be very fine if Madame de Condamin were to come.'
She took a chair a little in the rear, and, half kneeling,
covered her face with her hands as though she was absorbed
in earnest prayer; but she held her fingers apart so that she
might glance between them. The church was very gloomy.
Marthe, with her head bent over her prayer-book, looked as
though she were asleep. Her figure snowed blackly against
a white pillar. Only her shoulders, heaving with deep-drawn
sighs, seemed to be alive. She was, indeed, so profoundly
overcome with emotion that she was constantly allowing her
turn to be taken by some other of Abbé Faujas's penitents.
The Abbé waited for a few moments, and then, seemingly a
little impatient, he began tapping the woodwork of the confessional.
Thereupon one of the women who were waiting,
seeing that Marthe showed no sign of moving, decided to take
her place. The chapel gradually grew empty, and Marthe still
remained motionless as if in ecstasy.
'She seems in a terrible state,' thought Madame Paloque.
'It is really quite indecent to make such an exhibition of
one's self in church. Ah! here comes Madame de Condamin!'
Madame de Condamin was indeed just entering the
church. She stopped for a moment before the holy-water[Pg 174]
basin, removed her glove, and crossed herself with a pretty
gesture. Her silk dress made a murmuring sound as she
passed along the narrow space between the chairs. As she
knelt down, she filled the lofty vault with a rustling of skirts.
She had her usual affable expression, and smiled through the
gloom. Soon she and Marthe were the only two penitents
left. The priest grew more and more impatient, and tapped
yet more loudly upon the woodwork of the confessional.
'It is your turn, madame; I am the last,' Madame de
Condamin whispered politely, bending towards Marthe, whom
she had not recognised.
Marthe raised her face, pinched and pale from her extreme
emotion, and did not appear to understand. It was as though
she were awakening from some ecstatic trance, and her eyelids
trembled.
'Come, ladies, come!' exclaimed Abbé Faujas, who had
now half-opened the door of the confessional.
Madame de Condamin smilingly rose to obey the priest's
summons; but Marthe, recognising her, hastened into the
chapel, to fall again upon her knees, however, a few paces
away from the confessional-box.
Madame Paloque felt much amused. She hoped that the
two ladies would seize each other by the hair. Marthe could
hear all that was said, for Madame de Condamin had a clear
flute-like voice. She dallied over the recital of her sins, and
quite animated the confessional with her pretty gossiping
ways. Once she even vented a little muffled laugh, at the
sound of which Marthe raised her pain-racked face. Soon
afterwards Madame de Condamin finished her confession, and
rose as if to retire, but she quickly stepped back and commenced
talking afresh, this time merely bending her head
without kneeling down.
'That she-devil is making sport of Madame Mouret and
the Abbé,' thought the judge's wife to herself. 'It's all put
on, is this.'
At last Madame de Condamin really withdrew. Marthe
watched her as if waiting till she disappeared. Then she
went forward, leant against the confessional-box, and fell
heavily on her knees. Madame Paloque had slipped a little
nearer and was craning out her head, but she could only see
the penitent's dark dress spread out around her. For nearly
half an hour there was not the slightest movement. Now and
then she thought she could detect some smothered sobs in the[Pg 175]
throbbing silence, which was also broken at times by a creak
from the confessional-box. She began to feel a little weary
of her watching, for all she would be able to do now would be
to stare at Marthe as she left the chapel.
Abbé Faujas was the first to leave, closing the door of the
confessional-box with an appearance of annoyance. Madame
Mouret lingered there for a long time, bent and motionless.
When she at last went away, her face covered with her
veil, she seemed quite broken down, and even forgot to cross
herself.
'There has been a row; the Abbé hasn't made himself
pleasant,' thought Madame Paloque. Then she followed
Marthe as far as the Place de l'Archevêché, where she stopped
and seemed to hesitate for a moment. At last, having glanced
cautiously around to make sure that nobody was watching her,
she stealthily slipped into the house where Abbé Fenil resided,
at one of the corners of the Place.
Marthe now almost lived at Saint-Saturnin's. She carried
out her religious duties with the greatest fervour. Even Abbé
Faujas often had to remonstrate with her about her excessive
zeal. He only allowed her to communicate once a month,
fixed the hours which she should devote to pious exercises,
and insisted that she should not entirely shut herself up in
religious practices. She for a long time requested him to let
her attend a low mass every morning before he would accede
to her desire. One day, when she told him that she had lain
for a whole hour on the cold floor of her room to punish
herself for some fault she had committed, he was very angry
with her, and declared that her confessor alone had the right
to inflict penance. He treated her throughout very sternly,
and threatened to send her back to Abbé Bourrette if she did
not absolutely follow his directions.
'I was wrong to take you at all,' he often said; 'I do not
like disobedient souls.'
She felt a pleasure in his harshness. That iron hand
which bent her, and which held her back upon the edge
of the adoration in the depths of which she would have
liked to annihilate herself, thrilled her with ever-renewed
desire. She remained like a neophyte, making but little
advance in her journey of love, being constantly pulled up,
and vaguely divining some yet greater bliss beyond. The
sense of deep restfulness which she had first experienced in
the church, that forgetfulness of herself and the outside[Pg 176]
world, now changed, however, into positive actual happiness.
It was the happiness for which she had been vaguely longing
since her girlhood, and which she was now, at forty years of
age, at last finding; a happiness which sufficed her, which
compensated her for all the past-away years, and made her
egotistical, absorbed in the new sensations that she felt
within her like sweet caresses.
'Be kind to me,' she murmured to Abbé Faujas, 'be kind
to me, for I stand in need of great kindness.'
And when he did show her kindness, she could have gone
down upon her knees and thanked him. At these times he
unbent, spoke to her in a fatherly way, and pointed out to
her that her imagination was too excited and feverish. God,
said he, did not like to be worshipped in that way, in wild
impulses. She smiled, looking quite pretty and young again
with her blushing face, and promised to restrain herself in
the future. But sometimes she experienced paroxysms of
devotion, which cast her upon the flag-stones in some dark
corner, where, almost grovelling, she stammered out burning
words. Even her power of speech then died away, and she
continued her prayers in feeling only, with a yearning of her
whole being, an appeal for that divine kiss which seemed
ever hovering about her brow without pressing it.
At home Marthe became querulous, she who till now had
been indifferent and listless, quite happy so long as her
husband left her at peace. Now, however, that he had begun
to spend all his time in the house, had lost his old spirit of
raillery, and had grown mopish and melancholy, she grew
impatient with him.
'He is always hanging about us,' she said to the cook
one day.
'Oh, he does it out of pure maliciousness,' replied Rose.
'He isn't a good man at heart. I haven't found that out to-day
for the first time. He has only put on that woebegone
look, he who is so fond of hearing his tongue wag, in order
to try to make us pity him. He's really bursting with
anger, but he won't show it, because he thinks that if he
looks wretched we shall be sorry for him and do just what he
wants. You are quite right, madame, not to let yourself be
influenced by all those grimaces and pretences.'
Mouret kept a hold upon the women with his purse. He
did not care to wrangle and argue with them, for fear of
making his life still less comfortable than it already was;[Pg 177]
but, though he no longer grumbled and meddled and interfered,
he showed his displeasure by refusing a single extra
crown piece to either Marthe or Rose. He gave the latter a
hundred francs a month for the purchase of provisions; wine,
oil, and preserves were in the house. The cook was obliged
to make the sum stated last her till the end of the month,
even if she had to pay for something out of her own pocket.
As for Marthe, she had absolutely nothing; her husband
never even gave her a sou, and she was compelled to appeal
to Rose, and ask her to try to save ten francs out of the
monthly allowance. She often found herself without a pair
of boots to put on, and was obliged to borrow from her
mother the money she needed to buy either a dress or a hat.
'But Mouret must surely be going mad!' Madame
Rougon cried. 'You can't go naked! I will speak to him
about it.'
'I beg you to do nothing of the kind, mother,' Marthe
said. 'He detests you, and he would treat me even worse
than he does already if he knew that I talked of these matters
to you.'
She began to cry as she added:
'I have shielded him for a long time, but I really can't
keep silent any longer. You remember that he was once
most unwilling for me even to set foot in the street; he kept
me shut up, and treated me like a mere chattel. Now he
behaves so unkindly because he sees that I have escaped
from him, and that I won't submit any longer to be a mere
servant. He is a man utterly without religion, selfish and
bad-hearted.'
'He doesn't strike you, does he?'
'No; but it will come to that. At present he contents
himself with refusing me everything. I have not bought any
chemises for the last five years, and yesterday I showed him
those I have. They are quite worn out, so patched and
mended that I am ashamed of wearing them. He looked at
them and examined them and said that they would do
perfectly well till next year. I haven't a single centime of my
own. The other day I had to borrow two sous from Rose to
buy some thread to sew up my gloves, which were splitting
all over.'
She gave her mother many other details of the straits to
which she was reduced—how she had to make laces for
her boots out of blackened string, how she had to wash her[Pg 178]
ribbons in tea to make her hat look a little fresher, and how
she had to smear the threadbare folds of her only silk dress
with ink to conceal the signs of wear. Madame Rougon expressed
great pity for her, and advised her to rebel. Mouret
was a monster, said she. Rose asserted that he carried his
avarice so far as to count the pears in the store-room and the
lumps of sugar in the cupboard, while he also kept a close
eye on the preserves, and ate himself all the remnants of the
loaves.
It was a source of especial distress to Marthe that she was
not able to contribute to the offertories at Saint-Saturnin's.
She used to conceal ten-sou pieces in scraps of paper and
carefully preserve them for high mass on Sundays. When
the lady patronesses of the Home of the Virgin made some
offering to the cathedral, such as a pyx, or a silver cross, or a
banner, she felt quite ashamed, and kept out of the way,
affecting ignorance of their intentions. The ladies felt much
pity for her. She would have robbed her husband if she
could have found the key of his desk, so keenly was she
tortured at being able to do nothing for the honour of the
church to which she was so passionately attached. She felt
all the jealousy of a deceived woman when Abbé Faujas used
a chalice which had been presented by Madame de Condamin;
whereas on the days when he said mass in front of the altar
cloth which she herself had embroidered she was filled with
fervent joy, and said her prayers with ecstatic thrills, as
though some part of herself lay beneath the priest's extended
hands. She would have liked to have had a whole chapel of
her own; and even dreamt of expending a fortune upon one,
and of shutting herself up in it and receiving the Deity alone
by herself at her own altar.
Rose, of whom she made a confidant, had recourse to all
sorts of plans to obtain money for her. That year she
secretly gathered the finest fruit in the garden and sold it,
and she also disposed of a lot of old furniture that was stowed
away in an attic, managing her sales so well that she succeeded
in getting together a sum of three hundred francs,
which she handed to Marthe with great triumph. The latter
kissed the old cook.
'Oh! how good you are!' she said to her, affectionately.
'Are you quite sure that he knows nothing about what you
have done? I saw the other day, in the Rue des Orfèvres,
two little cruets of chased silver, such dear little things; they[Pg 179]
are marked two hundred francs. Now, you'll do me a little
favour, won't you? I don't want to go and buy them myself,
because someone would certainly see me going into the shop.
Tell your sister to go and get them. She can bring them
here after dark, and can give them to you through the kitchen
window.'
This purchase of the cruets seemed like a clandestine
intrigue to Marthe, and thrilled her with the sweetest pleasure.
For three days she kept the cruets at the bottom of a chest,
hidden away beneath layers of linen; and when she gave
them to Abbé Faujas in the sacristy of Saint-Saturnin's she
trembled so much that she could scarcely speak. The Abbé
scolded her in a kindly fashion. He was not fond of presents,
and spoke of money with the disdain of a strong-minded
man who only cares for power and authority. During his
earlier years of poverty, even at times when he and his
mother had no food beyond bread and water, he had never
thought of borrowing even a ten-franc piece from the
Mourets.
Marthe found a safe hiding-place for the hundred francs
which were still left her. She also was becoming a little
miserly; and she schemed how she should best expend this
money, making some fresh plan every morning. While she
was still in a state of hesitation, Rose told her that Madame
Trouche wished to see her privately. Olympe, who used to
spend hours in the kitchen, had become Rose's intimate
friend, and often borrowed a couple of francs of her to save
herself from going upstairs at times when she said that she
had forgotten to bring down her purse.
'Go upstairs and see her there,' said the cook; 'you will
be better able to talk there. They are good sort of people,
and they are very fond of his reverence. They have had a lot
of trouble. Madame Olympe has quite made my heart ache
with all the things she has told me.'
When Marthe went upstairs she found Olympe in tears.
They, the Trouches, were too soft-hearted, said she, and their
kindness was always being abused. Then she entered upon
an explanation of their affairs at Besançon, where the rascality
of a partner had saddled them with a heavy burden of debt.
To make matters worse, their creditors were getting angry,
and she had just received an insulting letter, the writer of
which threatened to communicate with the Mayor and the
Bishop of Plassans.
[Pg 180]
'I don't mind what happens to me,' she sobbed, 'but I
would give my head to save my brother from being compromised.
He has already done too much for us, and I don't
want to speak to him on the matter, for he is not rich, and
he would only distress himself to no purpose. Good heavens!
what can I do to keep that man from writing? My brother
would die of shame if such a letter were sent to the Mayor
and the Bishop. Yes, I know him well; he would die of
shame!'
Tears rushed to Marthe's eyes. She was quite pale, and
fervently pressed Olympe's hands. Then, without the latter
having preferred any request, she offered her the hundred
francs she had.
'It is very little, I know; but perhaps it might be
sufficient to avert the danger,' she said with an expression of
great anxiety.
'A hundred francs, a hundred francs!' exclaimed Olympe.
'Oh, no! he would never be satisfied with a hundred francs.'
Marthe lost all hope. She swore that she had not a
centime more. She so far forgot herself as to speak of the
cruets. If she had not bought them she would have been
able to give three hundred francs. Madame Trouche's eyes
sparkled.
'Three hundred francs, that is just what he demands,'
she said. 'Ah! you would have rendered my brother a much
greater service by not giving him that present, which, by the
way, will have to remain in the church. What a number of
beautiful things the ladies of Besançon presented to him!
But he isn't a bit the better off for them to-day! Don't
give him anything more; it is really nothing but robbery!
Consult me about what you do; there is so much hidden
misery—No! a hundred francs will certainly not be sufficient!'
At the end of half an hour spent in lamentation, however,
she accepted the hundred francs when she saw that Marthe
really had no more.
'I will send them so as to pacify the man a little,' she
said, 'but he won't leave us at peace long. Whatever you
do, I beg of you not to mention anything about it to my
brother. It would nearly kill him. And I think it would
be better, too, if my husband knew nothing of what has
passed between us; he is so proud that he would be sure to
be doing something rash to be able to acquit himself of our[Pg 181]
obligation to you. We women can understand each other,
you know.'
This loan was a source of much pleasure to Marthe, who
henceforth had a fresh care, that of warding off from Abbé
Faujas the danger that threatened him without his being
aware of it. She frequently went upstairs to the Trouches'
rooms and stayed there for hours, discussing with Olympe
the best means of discharging the debts. The latter had
told her that a good many promissory notes had been endorsed
by the priest, and that there would be a terrible scandal if
they should ever be sent to any bailiff in Plassans to be
protested. The sum total of their liabilities was so great,
she said, that for a long time she refused to disclose it, only
weeping the more bitterly when Marthe pressed her. One
day, however, she mentioned the sum of twenty thousand
francs. Marthe was quite frozen upon hearing this. She
would never be able to procure anything like twenty thousand
francs, and thought that she would certainly have to wait for
Mouret's death before she could hope to have any such sum
at her disposal.
'I say twenty thousand francs in all,' Olympe hastily
added, disquieted by Marthe's grave appearance: 'but we
should be quite satisfied if we were able to pay by small
instalments spread over half a score of years. The creditors
would wait for any length of time, if they were only sure of
getting their instalments regularly. It is a great pity that
we can't find anyone who has sufficient confidence in us to
make the small necessary advances.'
This matter became an habitual topic of conversation.
Olympe also frequently spoke of Abbé Faujas, whom she
seemed almost to worship. She gave Marthe all kinds of
private details about the priest: such as, for instance, that
he could not bear anything that tickled him, that he could
sleep on his left side, and that he had a strawberry-mark on
his right shoulder, which turned red in May like the natural
fruit. Marthe smiled and never tired of hearing of these
little matters; and she questioned the young woman about
her childhood and that of her brother. When the subject
of the money cropped up she seemed painfully overcome by
her inability to do anything, and she even complained bitterly
of Mouret, to whom Olympe, emboldened by Marthe's
language, now always referred in her presence as the 'old
miser.' Sometimes when Trouche returned from his office[Pg 182]
he found the two women still talking together, but at his
appearance they checked themselves and changed the subject.
Trouche conducted himself in the most satisfactory way, and
the lady patronesses of the Home of the Virgin were highly
pleased with him. He was never seen in any of the cafés in
the town.
In order to be able to render some assistance to Olympe,
who sometimes talked about throwing herself out of the
window, Marthe made Rose take all the useless old odds and
ends that were lying about the house to a second-hand dealer
at the market. At first the two women were a little timid
about the matter, and only disposed of broken-down chairs
and tables when Mouret was out of the way, but afterwards
they began to lay hands upon more important articles, and
sold ornaments, pieces of china, and anything else they could
remove without its absence appearing too conspicuous. They
were slipping down a fatal incline, and would have ended
by carting off all the furniture in the house and leaving
nothing but the bare walls, if Mouret had not one day
charged Rose with thieving and threatened to send for the
police.
'What, sir! A thief! I!' she cried. 'Just because you
happened to see me selling one of madame's rings. Be careful
of what you are saying! The ring was mine; madame gave
it to me. Madame isn't such a mean wretch as you are.
You ought to be ashamed of yourself for leaving your wife
without a sou! She hasn't even a pair of shoes to put on!
The other day I had to pay the milkman myself! Yes, I
did sell the ring, and what of that? Isn't madame's ring
her own? She is obliged to turn it into money, since you
won't give her any. If I were she, I would sell the whole
house! The whole house, do you hear? It distresses me
beyond everything to see her going about as naked as Saint
John the Baptist!'
Mouret now began to keep a close watch at all times.
He locked up the cupboards and drawers, and kept the keys
in his own possession. Whenever Rose went out he would
look at her hands distrustfully, and even feel at her pockets if
he saw any suspicious swelling beneath her skirt. He brought
certain articles back from the second-hand dealer's and
restored them to their places, dusting and wiping them
ostentatiously in Marthe's presence in order to remind her of
what he called Rose's thefts. He never directly accused his[Pg 183]
wife. There was a cut-glass water-bottle which he turned
into a special instrument of torture. Rose, having sold it for
twenty sous, had pretended to Mouret that it was broken.
But now he made her bring it and put it on the table at every
meal. One day, at lunch, she quite lost her temper over it,
and purposely let it fall.
'There, sir, it's really broken this time, isn't it?' she
cried, laughing in his face.
As he threatened to dismiss her, she exclaimed:
'You had better! I've been in your service for five-and-twenty
years. If I went madame would go with me!'
Marthe, reduced to extremities and egged on by Rose and
Olympe, at last rebelled. She was desperately in want of five
hundred francs. For the last week Olympe had been crying
and sobbing, asserting that if she could not get five hundred
francs by the end of the month one of the bills which had
been endorsed by Abbé Faujas would be published in one of
the Plassans newspapers. The threatened publication of
this bill, this terrible threat which she did not quite understand,
threw Marthe into a state of dreadful alarm, and she
resolved to dare everything. In the evening, as they were
going to bed, she asked Mouret for the five hundred francs,
and when he looked at her in amazement she began to
speak of the fifteen years which she had spent behind a
counter at Marseilles, with a pen behind her ear like a clerk.
'We made the money together,' she said; 'and it belongs
to us both. I want five hundred francs.'
Mouret thereupon broke his long maintained silence in
the most violent fashion, and all his old raillery burst forth
again.
'Five hundred francs!' he cried. 'Do you want them
for your priest? I play the simpleton now and keep my
peace for fear I might say too much; but you must not
imagine that you can go on for ever making a fool of me!
Five hundred francs! Why not say the whole house? The
whole house certainly does seem to belong to him! He
wants some money, does he? And he has told you to ask
me for it? I might be among a lot of robbers in a wood
instead of being in my own home! I shall have my very
handkerchief stolen out of my pocket before long! I'll be
bound that if I were to go and search his room I should find
his drawers full of my property. There are seven pairs
of my socks missing, four or five shirts, and three pairs[Pg 184]
of pants. I was going over the things yesterday. Everything
I have is disappearing, and I shan't have anything left
very soon! No, not a single sou will I give you, not a single
sou!'
'I want five hundred francs; half of the money belongs
to me,' Marthe tranquilly replied.
For a whole hour Mouret stormed and fumed and repeated
the same reproaches. His wife was no longer the same, he
said. He did not know her now. Before the priest's arrival,
she had loved him and obeyed him and looked after the house.
Those who set her to act in opposition to him must be very
wicked persons. Then his voice grew thick, and he let himself
fall into a chair, broken down and as weak as a child.
'Give me the key of your desk!' said Marthe.
He got up from his chair and gathered his strength together
for a last cry of protest.
'You want to strip me of everything, eh? to leave your
children with nothing but straw for a bed? You won't even
leave us a loaf of bread? Well! well! clear out everything,
and send for Rose to fill her apron! There's the key!'
He threw the key at Marthe and she placed it under her
pillow. She was quite pale after this quarrel, the first violent
quarrel that she had ever had with her husband. She got
into bed, but Mouret passed the night in an easy-chair. Towards
morning Marthe heard him sobbing. She would then
have given him back the key, if he had not wildly rushed into
the garden, though it was still pitch dark.
Peace again seemed to be re-established between them.
The key of the desk remained hanging upon a nail near the
mirror. Marthe, who was quite unaccustomed to the sight
of large sums, felt a sort of fear of the money. She was very
bashful and shamefaced at first whenever she went to open
the drawer in which Mouret always kept some ten thousand
francs in cash to pay for his purchases of wine. She strictly
confined herself to taking only what was necessary. Olympe,
too, gave her the most excellent advice, and told her that now
she had the key she ought to be careful and economical; and,
indeed, seeing the trembling nervousness which she exhibited
at the sight of the hoard of money, she ceased for some time
to speak to her of the Besançon debts.
Mouret meantime relapsed into his former moody silence.
Serge's admission to the Seminary had been another severe
blow to him. His friends of the Cours Sauvaire, the retired[Pg 185]
traders who promenaded there regularly between four o'clock
and six, began to feel very uneasy about him, when they saw
him arrive with his arms swaying about and his face wearing
a stupefied expression. He hardly made any reply to their
remarks and seemed a prey to some incurable disease.
'He's breaking up; he's breaking up,' they murmured to
each other; 'and he's only forty-four; it's scarcely credible.
He will end by having softening of the brain.'
Mouret no longer seemed to hear the malicious allusions
which were made before him. If he was questioned directly
about Abbé Faujas, he coloured slightly as he replied that the
priest was an excellent tenant and paid his rent with great
punctuality. When his back was turned, the retired shopkeepers
grinned as they sat and basked in the sun on one of
the seats on the Cours.
'Well, after all, he is only getting what he deserves,' said
a retired almond-dealer. 'You remember how hotly he stood
up for the priest, how he sang his praises in the four corners
of Plassans; but when one talks to him on that subject now
rather an odd expression comes over his face.'
These worthy gentlemen then regaled themselves with
certain scandalous stories which they whispered into each
other's ears, passing them on in this way from one end of the
bench to the other.
'Well,' said a master-tanner in a half whisper, 'there
isn't much pluck about Mouret; if I were in his place I would
soon show the priest the door.'
Thereupon they all repeated that Mouret was certainly a
very timid fellow, he who had formerly jeered so much at
those husbands who allowed their wives to lead them by the
nose.
These stories, however, in spite of the persistence with
which certain persons kept them afloat, never got beyond a
particular set of idle gossiping people, and the reason which
the Curé himself gave for not taking up his residence at the
parsonage, namely, his liking for the Mourets' beautiful garden,
where he could read his breviary in such perfect peace,
was generally accepted as the true one. His great piety, his
ascetic life and his contempt for all the frivolities and coquetries
which other priests allowed themselves placed him beyond
suspicion. The members of the Young Men's Club accused
Abbé Fenil of trying to ruin him. All the new part of the
town was on his side, and it was only the Saint-Marc quarter[Pg 186]
that was against him, its aristocratic inhabitants treating him
with great reserve whenever they met him in Monseigneur
Rousselot's saloons. However, in spite of his popularity, he
shook his head when old Madame Rougon told him that he
might now dare everything.
'Nothing is quite safe and solid yet,' he said. 'I am not
sure of anyone. The least touch might bring the whole
edifice toppling down.'
Marthe had been causing him anxiety for some time past.
He felt that he was incapable of calming the fever of
devotion which was raging within her. She escaped his
control and disobeyed him, and advanced further than he
wished her to do. He was afraid lest this woman, this much-respected
patroness, who was so useful, might yet bring about
his ruin. There was a fire burning within her which seemed
to discolour her flesh, and redden her eyes and make them
heavy. It was like an ever-growing disease, an infatuation
of her whole being, that was gradually weakening her heart
and brain. She often seemed to lapse into some ecstatic
trance, her hands were shaken by a nervous trembling, and a
dry cough occasionally shook her from head to foot without
consciousness apparently on her part of how it was rending
her. The Curé then showed himself sterner to her than
before, tried to crush the passion which was dawning within
her, and even forbade her to come to Saint-Saturnin's.
'The church is very cold,' he said, 'and you cough so
much there. I don't want you to do anything to make yourself
worse.'
She protested that there was nothing the matter with her
beyond a slight irritation of the throat, but at last she yielded
and accepted his prohibition as a well-deserved punishment
which closed the doors of heaven upon her. She wept,
believed that she was damned, and dragged herself listlessly
through the blank weary days; and then, in spite of herself,
like a woman returning to some forbidden love, when Friday
came she humbly glided into Saint-Michael's chapel and laid
her burning brow against the woodwork of the confessional-box.
She did not speak a word, but simply knelt there, completely
crushed, quite overwhelmed. At this Abbé Faujas,
who was greatly irritated, treated her as harshly as though
she was some unworthy woman, and hastily ordered her away.
Then she left the church, feeling happy and consoled.
The priest was afraid of the effect of the gloomy darkness[Pg 187]
of Saint-Michael's chapel. He spoke upon the subject to
Doctor Porquier, who persuaded Marthe to go to confession
at the little oratory of the Home of the Virgin in the suburb.
Abbé Faujas promised to be there to hear her every other
Saturday. This oratory, which had been established in a
large whitewashed room with four big windows, was bright
and cheerful, and would, he thought, have a calming effect
upon the excited imagination of his penitent. There, he
thought, he would be able to bring her under control, reduce
her to obedience, without possible fear of any scandal. As
a guard against all calumnious gossip, he asked his mother to
accompany Marthe, and while he confessed the latter Madame
Faujas remained outside the door. As the old lady did not
like to waste her time, she used to take her knitting with her
and work away at a stocking.
'My dear child,' she often said to Marthe, as they were returning
together to the Rue Balande, 'I could hear very well
what Ovide was saying to you to-day. You don't seem to be
able to please him. You can't care for him. Ah! I wish I
were in your place to be able to kiss his feet! I shall grow
to hate you, if you go on causing him nothing but annoyance.'
Marthe bent her head. She felt deep shame in Madame
Faujas's presence. She did not like her, she felt jealous of
her at finding her always coming between herself and the
priest. The old lady's dark eyes, too, troubled her when they
constantly bent upon her, full as they seemed of strange and
disquieting thoughts.
Marthe's weak state of health sufficed to account for
her meetings with Abbé Faujas at the oratory of the Home
of the Virgin. Doctor Porquier stated that she went there
simply in obedience to his orders, and the promenaders on the
Cours were vastly amused by this saying of the doctor's.
'Well, all the same,' remarked Madame Paloque to her
husband one day, as she watched Marthe going down to the
Rue Balande, accompanied by Madame Faujas, 'I should
like to be in some corner and watch the vicar and his sweetheart.
It is very amusing to hear her talk of her bad cold!
As though a bad cold was any reason why one shouldn't make
one's confession in church! I have had colds, but I never
made them an excuse for shutting myself up in a little chapel
with a priest.'
'It is very wrong of you to interfere in Abbé Faujas's[Pg 188]
affairs,' the judge replied to his wife. 'I have been spoken
to about him. He is a man with whom we must keep on
good terms, and you will prevent us from doing so; you are
too spiteful.'
'Stuff!' she retorted angrily; 'they have trampled me
under foot and I will let them know who I am! Your Abbé
Faujas is a big imbecile! Don't you suppose that Abbé Fenil
would be very grateful to me if I could catch the vicar and
his sweetheart? Ah! he would give a great deal to have a
scandal like that! Just you leave me alone; you don't
understand anything about such matters.'
A fortnight later, Madame Paloque watched Marthe go out
on the Saturday. She was standing ready dressed, hiding
her hideous face behind her curtains, but keeping watch over
the street through a hole in the muslin. When the two
women disappeared round the corner of the Rue Taravelle,
she sniggered, and leisurely drawing on her gloves went quietly
on to the Place of the Sub-Prefecture, and walked slowly
round it. As she passed in front of Madame de Condamin's
little house, she thought for a moment of going in and taking
her with her, but she reflected that the other might, perhaps,
have some scruples. And, all considered, it was better she
should be without witnesses, and manage the business by
herself.
'I have given them time,' she thought, after a quarter of
an hour's promenade. 'I think I may present myself now.'
Thereupon she quickened her pace. She frequently went
to the Home of the Virgin to discuss the accounts with
Trouche, but that day, instead of repairing to the secretary's
office, she went straight along the corridor towards the
oratory. Madame Faujas was quietly knitting on a chair in
front of the door.
The judge's wife had foreseen that obstacle, and went
straight on to the door with the hasty manner of a person
who has important business on hand. But before she could
reach out her hand to turn the handle the old lady had
risen from her chair and pushed her aside with extraordinary
energy.
'Where are you going?' she asked in her blunt peasant-woman's
tones.
'I am going where I have business,' Madame Paloque
replied, her arm smarting and her face convulsed with anger.
'You are an insolent, brutish woman! Let me pass! I am[Pg 189]
the treasurer of the Home of the Virgin, and I have a right
to go anywhere here I want.'
Madame Faujas, who stood leaning against the door,
straightened her spectacles upon her nose, and with unruffled
tranquillity resumed her knitting.
'Well,' she said bluntly, 'you can't go in there.'
'Can't, indeed! And may I ask why?'
'Because I don't wish that you should.'
The judge's wife felt that her plan was frustrated, and she
almost choked with spleen and anger. She was positively
frightful to look at as she gasped and stammered:
'I don't know who you are, and I don't know what you are
doing here. If I were to call out, I could have you arrested,
for you have struck me. There must be some great wickedness
going on at the other side of that door for you to have
been put there to keep people from entering. I belong to the
house, I tell you! Let me pass, or I shall call for help.'
'Call for anyone you like,' replied the old lady, shrugging
her shoulders. 'I have told you that you shall not go in,
that I won't let you. How am I to know that you belong to
the house? But it makes no difference whether you do or you
don't. No one can go in. I won't let them.'
Thereupon Madame Paloque lost all control of herself,
raised her voice, and shrieked out:
'I have no occasion to go in now! I have learnt quite
sufficient! You are Abbé Faujas's mother, are you not?
This is a very decent and pretty part for you to be playing!
I wouldn't enter the room now; I wouldn't mix myself up
with all this wickedness!'
Madame Faujas laid her knitting upon the chair, and,
bending slightly forward, gazed with glistening eyes through
her spectacles at Madame Paloque, holding her hands the
while a little in front of her, as though she were about to
spring upon the angry woman and silence her. She was,
indeed, going to throw herself forward, when the door suddenly
opened and Abbé Faujas appeared on the threshold.
He was in his surplice and looked very stern.
'Well, mother,' he asked, 'what is going on here?'
The old lady bent her head, and stepped back like a dog
that is taking its place at its master's heels.
'Ah! is it you, dear Madame Paloque?' the Curé continued;
'do you want to speak to me?'
By a supreme effort of will, the judge's wife forced her[Pg 190]
face into a smile. She answered the priest in a tone that was
terrible in its amiability and mingled irony.
'Ah! you were inside were you, your reverence? If I
had known that, I would not have insisted upon entering.
But I want to see the altar-cloth, which must, I think, be
getting into a bad condition. I am a careful superintendent
here, you know, and I keep an eye upon all these little details.
But, of course, if you are engaged in the oratory, I wouldn't
think of disturbing you. Pray go on with what you are
doing; the house is yours. If madame had only just dropped
me a word, I would have left her quietly to continue guarding
you from being disturbed.'
Madame Faujas allowed a growl to escape her, but a
glance from her son reduced her to silence.
'Come in, I beg you,' he said; 'you won't disturb me in
the least. I was confessing Madame Mouret, who is not very
well. Come in, by all means. The altar-cloth might very
well be changed, I think.'
'Oh, no! I will come some other time,' Madame Paloque
replied. 'I am quite distressed to have interrupted you.
Pray go on, your reverence, pray go on!'
Notwithstanding her protestations, however, she entered
the room. While she was examining the altar-cloth with
Marthe, the priest began to chide his mother in a low voice:
'Why did you prevent her coming in, mother? I never
told you to allow no one to enter.'
She gazed straight in front of her with her obstinate
determined glance. 'She would have had to walk over my
body before she got inside,' she muttered.
'But why?'
'Because——. Listen to me, Ovide; don't be angry;
you know that it pains me to see you angry. You told me to
accompany our landlady here, didn't you? Well, I thought
you wanted me to stop inquisitive people's curiosity. So I
took my seat out here, and no one should have entered, be
sure of that.'
But the priest caught hold of his mother's hands and
shook her, exclaiming:
'Why, mother, you couldn't have supposed——'
'I suppose nothing,' she replied, with sublime indifference.
'You are free to do whatever pleases you. You are my child;
I would steal for you, I would.'
The priest was no longer listening to her. He had let[Pg 191]
her hands drop, and, as he gazed at her, he seemed to be lost
in reflections, which made his face look sterner and more
austere than ever.
'No, never!' he exclaimed with lofty pride. 'You are
greatly mistaken, mother. It is only the chaste who are
powerful.'
At seventeen years of age, Désirée still retained the child-like
laugh of an 'innocent.' She was now a fine, tall girl,
plump and well-developed, with the arms and shoulders of a
full-grown woman. She grew like a healthy plant, happy in
her growth, and quite untouched by the unhappiness which
was wrecking and saddening the house.
'Why do you never laugh?' she cried to her father one
day. 'Come and have a game at skipping! It's such fun!'
She had taken possession of one of the garden-beds, which
she dug, planted with vegetables, and carefully watered. The
hard work delighted her. Then she desired to have some
fowls, which devoured her vegetables and which she scolded
with motherly tenderness. With these occupations of hers,
gardening and fowl-keeping, she made herself dreadfully
dirty.
'She's perfectly filthy!' cried Rose. 'I won't have her
coming into my kitchen any more; she dirties everything!
It is no use your trying to keep her neatly dressed, madame.
If I were you I should just let her mess about as she likes.'
Marthe, now ever preoccupied, no longer took care even
that Désirée should change her under-linen regularly. The
girl sometimes wore the same chemise for three weeks
together; her stockings fell over her shoes, which were sadly
worn down at the heels, and her tattered skirts hung about her
like a beggar's rags. Mouret was one day obliged to take up a
needle himself, for the girl's dress was torn behind from top
to bottom. She, however, laughed gleefully at her nakedness,
at her hair that fell over her shoulders, and at her black
hands and dirty face.
Marthe came to feel a sort of disgust of her. When she
returned home from mass, still retaining in her hair the[Pg 192]
vague perfume of the church, she quite shuddered at the
strong scent of earth which exhaled from her daughter. She
sent her into the garden again immediately lunch was
over. She could not bear to have her near her, distressed,
disquieted as she was by the girl's robust vigour and clear
laugh, which seemed to find amusement in everything.
'Oh, dear! how wearisome the child is!' she murmured
sometimes, with an air of nerveless lassitude.
As Mouret heard her complain, he exclaimed in an impulse
of anger:
'If she's in your way, we will turn her out of the house, as
we have done the other two.'
'Indeed, I should be very glad if she were to go away,'
Marthe answered unhesitatingly.
One afternoon, about the end of the summer, Mouret was
alarmed at no longer being able to hear Désirée, who, a few
minutes previously, had been making a tremendous noise at
the bottom of the garden. He ran to see what had happened
to her, and found her lying on the ground. She had fallen
from a ladder on to which she had climbed to gather some
figs: fortunately the box-plants had broken the force of her
fall. Mouret, in a great fright, lifted her up in his arms and
called for assistance. He thought she was dead; but she
quickly came to herself, declared that she was none the worse
for the accident, and wanted to climb the ladder again.
Marthe, however, had meantime come into the garden.
When she heard Désirée laugh she seemed quite annoyed.
'That child will kill me one of these days,' she exclaimed.
'She doesn't know what to invent to alarm me. I'm
sure that she threw herself down on purpose. I can't
endure it any longer. I shall shut myself up in my own
room, or go out in the morning and not return till evening.
Yes, you may laugh, you great goose! To think that I am
the mother of such a ninny! You are making me pay for it
very dearly!'
'Yes, that she is!' cried Rose, who had run down from
the kitchen; 'she's a great burden, and, unfortunately, there's
no chance of our ever being able to get her married.'
Mouret looked at them and listened with a pang at the
heart. He said nothing, but stayed with the girl at the
bottom of the garden, and there they remained chatting
affectionately till nightfall. The next day, Marthe and Rose
were away from the house the whole morning. They went[Pg 193]
to hear mass at a chapel, a league from Plassans, dedicated
to Saint-Januarius, whither all the pious folks of the town
made a pilgrimage on that particular day. When they
returned, the cook hastily served up a cold lunch. Marthe
went on eating for a few minutes before she noticed that her
daughter was not at table.
'Isn't Désirée hungry?' she asked. 'Why hasn't she
come to lunch?'
'Désirée is no longer here,' answered Mouret, who left
his food almost untouched upon his plate; 'I took her this
morning to her nurse at Saint-Eutrope.'
Marthe laid down her fork, and turned a little pale,
seeming both surprised and hurt.
'You might have consulted me,' she said.
Her husband, without making any direct reply, continued:
'She is all right with her nurse. The good woman is very
fond of her, and will look well after her, and the child will no
longer be in your way, and everyone will be happy.'
Then, as his wife said nothing, he added:
'If the house is not yet sufficiently quiet for you, just tell
me, and I will go away myself.'
She half rose from her seat, and a light glistened in her
eyes. Mouret had wounded her so cruelly that she stretched
out her hand as though she were going to throw the water-bottle
at his head. In her long-submissive nature angry
promptings were now being fanned into life, and she was
growing to hate this man who was ever prowling round her.
She made a show of eating again, but she said nothing
further about her daughter. Mouret had folded his napkin,
and remained sitting in front of her, listening to the sound
of her fork, and casting lingering glances round the dining-room,
which had once been so merry with the chatter of the
children, but was now so empty and mournful. The room
seemed to him to be quite chilly, and tears were mounting to
his eyes when Marthe called to Rose to bring in the dessert.
'You must be very hungry, I should think, madame,' said
the cook, as she put a plateful of fruit upon the table. 'We
had quite a long walk; and if the master, instead of playing
the pagan, had come with us, he would not have left you to
eat the mutton all by yourself.'
Then she changed the plates, without pausing in her
chatter.
[Pg 194]
'It is very pretty is that chapel of Saint-Januarius, but it
is too small. Did you see that the ladies who came late were
obliged to kneel down outside on the grass, in the open air?
I can't understand why Madame de Condamin came in a
carriage. There's no merit in making the pilgrimage if you
come like that. We spent a delightful morning, didn't we,
madame?'
'Yes, a very delightful morning,' Marthe replied. 'Abbé
Mousseau, who preached, was very affecting.'
When Rose in her turn noticed Désirée's absence and
learnt of the girl's departure, she exclaimed:
'Well, really, it was a very good idea of the master's!
She was always walking off with my saucepans to water her
plants. We shall be able to have a little peace now.'
'Yes, indeed,' said Marthe, who was cutting a pear.
Mouret was almost choking. He rose and left the dining-room
without paying any attention to Rose, who cried out to
him that the coffee would be ready directly. Marthe, now left
alone in the room, quietly finished her pear.
Just as the cook was bringing the coffee, Madame Faujas
came downstairs.
'Go in,' Rose said to her; 'you will be company for
madame, and you can have the master's coffee, for he has
just rushed off like a madman.'
The old lady sat down in Mouret's place.
'I thought you did not take coffee,' she remarked as she
put some sugar into her cup.
'No, indeed, she didn't do so when the master kept the
purse,' interposed Rose. 'But madame would be very silly
now to deny herself what she likes.'
They talked for a good hour together, and Marthe ended
by relating all her troubles to Madame Faujas, telling her how
her husband had just inflicted a most painful scene upon her
on account of her daughter, whom he had removed to her
nurse's in a sudden pet. She defended herself, and told
Madame Faujas that she was really very fond of the girl, and
should go to fetch her back before long.
'Well, she was rather noisy,' Madame Faujas remarked.
'I have often pitied you. My son was thinking about giving
up going into the garden to read his breviary. She almost
distracted him with the noise she made.'
From that day forward Marthe and Mouret took their
meals in silence. The autumn was very damp, and the[Pg 195]
dining-room looked intensely melancholy with only two covers
laid, one at each end of the big table. The corners were
dark, and a chill seemed to fall from the ceiling. As Rose
would say, it looked as though a funeral were going on.
'Well, indeed,' she often exclaimed, as she brought the
plates into the room, 'you couldn't make much less noise,
sir, however you tried! There isn't much danger of your
wearing the skin of your tongue off! Do try to be a little
livelier, sir! You look as though you were following a corpse
to the grave!—You will end by making madame quite ill. It
is bad for the health to eat without speaking.'
When the first frosts came, Rose, who sought in every
way to oblige Madame Faujas, offered her the use of her
cooking-stove. The old lady had begun by bringing down
kettles to get her water boiled, as she had no fire, she
said, and the Abbé was in a hurry to shave. Then she
borrowed some flat-irons, begged the use of some saucepans,
asked for the loan of the dutch-oven to cook some
mutton, and finally, in the end, as she had no conveniently
arranged fireplace upstairs, she accepted Rose's repeated
offers, and the cook lighted her a fire of vine branches, big
enough to roast a whole sheep, in the kitchen.
'Don't show any diffidence about it,' she said, as she
herself turned the leg of mutton round; 'the kitchener is a
large one, isn't it? and big enough for us both. I don't know
how you've been able to do your cooking upstairs as long as
you have, with only that wretched iron stove there. I should
have been afraid of falling down in an apoplectic fit myself.
Monsieur Mouret ought to know better than to let a set of
rooms without any kitchen. You must be very enduring kind
of people, and very easily satisfied.'
Thus Madame Faujas gradually began to cook her lunch
and dinner in the Mourets' kitchen. On the first few occasions
she provided her own coal and oil and spices. But afterwards,
when she forgot to bring any article with her, Rose would not
allow her to go upstairs for it, but insisted upon supplying the
deficiency from the house stores.
'Oh, there's some butter there! The little bit which you
will take with the tip of your knife won't ruin us. You
know very well that everything here is at your service.
Madame would be quite angry with me if I didn't make you
at home here.'
A close intimacy now sprang up between Rose and[Pg 196]
Madame Faujas. The cook was delighted to have some one
always at hand who was willing to listen to her while she
stirred her sauces. She got on extremely well with the
priest's mother, whose print dresses and rough face and
unpolished demeanour put her almost on a footing of equality.
They sat chatting together for hours before the fireplace, and
Madame Faujas soon gained complete sway in the kitchen,
though she still maintained her impenetrable attitude, and
only said what she chose to say, while contriving to worm
out all that she wanted to know. She settled the Mourets'
dinner, tasted the dishes which she had arranged they should
have, and Rose herself often made savoury little luxuries for
the Abbé's delectation, such as sugared apples or rice-cakes or
fritters. The provisions of the two establishments often got
mixed together, mistakes were made with the different pans,
the two dinners being so intermingled that Rose would cry
out with a laugh:
'Tell me, madame, are these poached eggs yours? Really,
I don't know. Upon my word, it would be much better if you
were all to dine together!'
It was on All Saints Day that Abbé Faujas lunched for
the first time in the Mourets' dining-room. He was in a great
hurry, as he had to return to Saint-Saturnin's at once, and
so, to give him as much time as possible, Marthe asked him
to sit down at their table, saying that it would save his
mother from climbing a couple of flights of stairs. A week
later it had become a regular thing; the Faujases came
downstairs at every meal and took their seats at table, just as
if they were entering a restaurant. For the first few days
their provisions were cooked and served separately, but Rose
declared this was a very silly arrangement, that she could
easily cook for four persons, and that she would arrange it all
with Madame Faujas.
'Pray don't thank me,' she said to the Abbé and his
mother; 'it is a kindness on your part to come down and
keep madame company. You will cheer her up a little. I
scarcely dare go into the dining-room now; it is just like
going into the chamber of death. It quite frightens me, it
feels so desolate. If the master chooses to go on sulking, he
will have to do so all by himself.'
They kept up a roaring fire, the room was very warm, and
the winter proved a delightful one. Rose had never before
taken such pains to lay the tablecloth nicely. She placed his[Pg 197]
reverence's chair near the stove, so that he might have his
back to the fire. She paid particular attention to his glass
and his knife and fork, she took care that whenever the
slightest stain made its appearance upon the cloth it should
not be put on his side, and she paid him numberless other
delicate little attentions.
When she had prepared any dish of which he was particularly
fond, she gave him notice so that he might reserve
himself for it; though sometimes, on the other hand, she
made a surprise of it for him, and brought it into the room
under a cover, smiling at the inquisitive glances directed
towards it, and exclaiming with an air of triumph:
'This is for his reverence! It is a wild-duck stuffed with
olives, just what he is so fond of. Give his reverence the
breast, madame. I cooked it specially for him.'
Marthe carved the duck, and with beseeching looks pressed
the choicest morsels upon the Abbé. She always helped him
the first, and searched the dish for him, while Rose bent over
her and pointed out what she thought the best parts. They
occasionally even had little disputes as to the superiority of
this or that part of a fowl or rabbit. Then, too, Rose used to
push an embroidered hassock under the priest's feet, while
Marthe insisted that he should always have his bottle of
Bordeaux and his roll, specially ordering one of the latter for
him from the baker every day.
'We can never do too much for you,' said Rose, when the
Abbé expressed his thanks. 'Who should be well looked
after, if it isn't good kind hearts like yours? Don't you
trouble about it, the Lord will pay your debt for you.'
Madame Faujas smiled at all these flattering civilities as
she sat at table opposite her son. She was beginning to feel
quite fond of Marthe and Rose. She considered their adoration
only natural, and thought it a great happiness for them
to be allowed to cast themselves in this way at the feet of
her idol. It was really she with her square head and peasant
manner who presided over the table, eating slowly but plentifully,
noticing everything that happened without once setting
down her fork, and taking care that Marthe should play the
part of servant to her son, at whom she was constantly
gazing with an expression of content. She never opened her
lips except to make known in as few words as possible
the Abbé's various tastes or to over-rule the polite refusals
in which he still occasionally indulged. Sometimes she[Pg 198]
shrugged her shoulders and pushed him with her foot.
Wasn't everything on the table at his service? He might
eat the whole contents of the dish, if he liked, and the others
would be quite happy to nibble their dry bread and look at
him.
Abbé Faujas himself, however, seemed quite indifferent to
all the tender care which was lavished upon him. Of a very
frugal disposition and a quick eater, his mind always occupied
with other matters, he was frequently quite unconscious
of the dainties which were specially reserved for him. He
had yielded to his mother's entreaties in consenting to join
the Mourets, but the only satisfaction he experienced in the
dining-room on the ground-floor was the pleasure of being set
entirely free from the everyday cares of life. He manifested
unruffled serenity, gradually grew accustomed to seeing his
least wish anticipated and fulfilled, and ceased to manifest any
surprise or express any thanks, lording it haughtily between
the mistress of the house and the cook, who kept anxious
watch over the slightest motions of his stern face.
Mouret sat opposite his wife, quite forgotten and unnoticed.
He let his hands rest upon the edge of the table, and waited,
like a child, till Marthe should be willing to attend to him.
She helped him the last, scantily, and to whatever might
happen to be left. Rose stood behind her and warned her
whenever by mistake she was going to give her husband some
of the more delicate morsels in the dish.
'No, no; not that. The master likes the head, you know.
He enjoys sucking the little bones.'
Mouret, snubbed and slighted, ate his food with a sort of
shame, as though he was subsisting unworthily on other
people's bounty. He could see Madame Faujas watching him
keenly as he cut his bread. He kept his eyes fixed on the
bottle for a whole minute, full of doubtful hesitation, before
he dare venture to help himself to wine. Once he made a
mistake and took a little of the priest's choice Bordeaux.
There was a tremendous fuss made about it, and for a whole
month afterwards Rose reproached him for those few drops
of wine. Whenever she made any sweet dish, she would say:
'I don't want the master to have any of that. He never
thinks anything I make nice. He once told me that an
omelet I had made was burnt, and then I said, "They shall be
burnt altogether for you." Don't give any of it to the master,
I beg you, madame.'
[Pg 199]
She also did all she could to worry and upset him. She
gave him cracked plates, contrived that one of the table legs
should come between his own, left shreds of the glass-cloth
clinging to his glass, and placed the bread and wine and salt
as far from him as possible. Mouret was the only one in the
family who liked mustard, and he used to go himself to the
grocers and buy canisters of it, which the cook promptly
caused to disappear, saying that they 'stank so.' The deprivation
of mustard spoilt his enjoyment of his meals. But
what made him still more miserable, and robbed him of all
appetite, was his expulsion from his own seat, which he had
always previously occupied, in front of the window, which was
now given to the priest, as being the pleasantest in the room.
Mouret had to sit with his face towards the door, and he felt
as though he were eating amongst strangers, now that he
could not at each mouthful cast a glance at his fruit-trees.
Marthe was not so bitter against him as Rose was. She
treated him at first like a poor relation, whose presence is
just tolerated, and then gradually grew to ignore him, scarcely
ever addressing a remark to him, and acting as though Abbé
Faujas alone had the right to give orders in the house.
Mouret, however, showed no inclination to rebel. He occasionally
exchanged a few polite phrases with the priest,
though he generally ate in perfect silence, and only replied to
the cook's attacks by looking at her. He always finished
before any of the others, folded up his napkin tidily, and
then left the room, frequently before the dessert was placed
upon the table.
Rose alleged that he was bursting with anger, and when
she gossiped in the kitchen with Madame Faujas she discussed
his conduct freely.
'I know him very well; I've never been afraid of him.
Before you came madame used to tremble before him, for he
was always scolding and blustering and trying to appear very
terrible. He used to worry our lives out of us, always poking
about, never finding anything right, and trying to show us
that he was master. Now he is as docile as a lamb, isn't he?
It's just because madame has asserted herself. Ah! if he
weren't a coward, and weren't afraid of what might happen,
you would hear a pretty row. But he is afraid of your son;
yes, he is afraid of his reverence the Curé. Anyone would
say, to look at him, that he lost his senses every now and[Pg 200]
then. But after all, as long as he doesn't bother us any
longer, he is welcome to act as he pleases; isn't he, madame?'
Madame Faujas replied that Monsieur Mouret seemed to
her to be a very worthy man, and that his only fault was his
lack of religion. But he would certainly adopt a better mode
of life in time, she said. The old lady was gradually making
herself mistress of the whole of the ground floor, going from
kitchen to dining-room as she pleased, and ever bustling
about in the hall and passages. When Mouret met her he
used to recall the day when the Faujases first arrived; when,
wearing that shabby black dress of hers, she had tenaciously
clung to her basket with both hands and poked her head inquisitively
into each room, with all the unruffled serenity of a
person inspecting some property for sale.
Since the Faujases had begun to take their meals downstairs
the Trouches were left in possession of the second floor.
They made a great deal of noise, and the constant moving of
furniture, the stamping of feet and the violent banging of doors,
were heard by those downstairs. Madame Faujas would then
uneasily raise her head in the midst of her gossiping in the
kitchen. Rose, for the sake of putting her at her ease, used
to say that poor Madame Trouche suffered a great deal of
pain. One night the Abbé, who had not yet gone to bed,
heard a strange commotion on the stairs. He left his room
with his candle in his hand, and saw Trouche, disgracefully
drunk, climbing up the stairs on his knees. He seized the sot
in his strong arms and threw him into his room. Olympe
was in bed there, quietly reading a novel and sipping a
glass of spirits and water that stood on a little table at the
bedside.
'Listen to me,' said Abbé Faujas, livid with rage; 'you
will pack up your things in the morning and take yourselves
off!'
'Why? What for?' asked Olympe, quite calmly; 'we
are very comfortable here.'
The priest sternly interrupted her.
'Hold your tongue! You are a wretched woman! You
have never tried to do anything but injure me. Our mother
was right; I ought never to have rescued you from your state
of wretchedness. I've just had to pick your husband up on
the stairs. It is disgraceful. Think of the scandal there
would be if he were to be seen in this state. You will go away
in the morning.'
[Pg 201]
Olympe sat up to sip her grog.