# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2016
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche, Human All-Too-Human, Part 1
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/51935/51935-h/51935-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

High Politics and Their Detriments.—Just as a nation does not suffer
the greatest losses that war and readiness for war involve through
the expenses of the war, or the stoppage of trade and traffic, or
through the maintenance of a standing army,—however great these
losses may now be, when eight European States expend yearly the sum
of five milliards of marks thereon,—but owing to the fact that
year after year its ablest, strongest, and most industrious men are
withdrawn in extraordinary numbers from their proper occupations and
callings to be turned into soldiers: in the same way, a nation that
sets about practising high politics and securing a decisive voice
among the great Powers does not suffer its greatest losses where
they are usually supposed to be. In fact, from this time onward it
constantly sacrifices a number of its most conspicuous talents upon
the "Altar of the Fatherland" or of national ambition, whilst formerly
other spheres of activity were open to those talents which are now
swallowed up by politics. But apart from these public hecatombs, and
in reality much more horrible, there is a drama which is constantly
being performed simultaneously in a hundred thousand acts; every able,
industrious, intellectually striving man of a nation that thus covets
political laurels, is[Pg 354] swayed by this covetousness, and no longer
belongs entirely to himself alone as he did formerly; the new daily
questions and cares of the public welfare devour a daily tribute of
the intellectual and emotional capital of every citizen; the sum of
all these sacrifices and losses of, individual energy and labour is
so enormous, that the political growth of a nation almost necessarily
entails an intellectual impoverishment and lassitude, a diminished
capacity for the performance of works that require great concentration
and specialisation. The question may finally be asked: "Does it then
pay, all this bloom and magnificence of the total (which indeed only
manifests itself as the fear of the new Colossus in other nations, and
as the compulsory favouring by them of national trade and commerce)
when all the nobler, finer, and more intellectual plants and products,
in which its soil was hitherto so rich, must be sacrificed to this
coarse and opalescent flower of the nation?"[2]
482.
Repeated Once More.—Public opinion—private laziness.
[1] This aphorism may have been suggested by Nietzsche's
observing the behaviour of his great contemporary, Bismarck, towards
the dynasty.—J.M.K.
[2] This is once more an allusion to modern Germany.—J.M.K.
[Pg 355]
483.
The Enemies of Truth.—Convictions are more dangerous enemies of truth
than lies.
484.
A Topsy-turvy World.—We criticise a thinker more severely when he puts
an unpleasant statement before us; and yet it would be more reasonable
to do so when we find his statement pleasant.
485.
Decided Character.—A man far oftener appears to have a decided
character from persistently following his temperament than from
persistently following his principles.
486.
The One Thing Needful.—One thing a man must have: either a naturally
light disposition or a disposition lightened by art and knowledge.
[Pg 356]
487.
The Passion For Things.—Whoever sets his passion on things (sciences,
arts, the common weal, the interests of culture) withdraws much fervour
from his passion for persons (even when they are the representatives
of those things; as statesmen, philosophers, and artists are the
representatives of their creations).
488.
Calmness in Action.—As a cascade in its descent becomes more
deliberate and suspended, so the great man of action usually acts with
more calmness than his strong passions previous to action would lead
one to expect.
489.
Not Too Deep.—Persons who grasp a matter in all its depth seldom
remain permanently true to it. They have just brought the depth up into
the light, and there is always much evil to be seen there.
490.
The Illusion of Idealists.—All idealists imagine that the cause which
they serve is essentially better than all other causes, and will not
believe that if their cause is really to flourish it requires precisely
the same evil-smelling manure which all other human undertakings have
need of.
[Pg 357]
491.
Self-observation.—Man is exceedingly well protected from himself and
guarded against his self-exploring and self-besieging; as a rule he can
perceive nothing of himself but his outworks. The actual fortress is
inaccessible, and even invisible, to him, unless friends and enemies
become traitors and lead him inside by secret paths.
492.
The Right Calling.—Men can seldom hold on to a calling unless they
believe or persuade themselves that it is really more important than
any other. Women are the same with their lovers.
493.
Nobility of Disposition.—Nobility of disposition consists largely in
good-nature and absence of distrust, and therefore contains precisely
that upon which money-grabbing and successful men take a pleasure in
walking with superiority and scorn.
494.
Goal and Path.—Many are obstinate with regard to the once-chosen path,
few with regard to the goal.
495.
The Offensiveness in an Individual Way of Life.—All specially
individual lines of conduct excite irritation against him who adopts
them; people feel themselves reduced to the[Pg 358] level of commonplace
creatures by the extraordinary treatment he bestows on himself.
496.
The Privilege of Greatness.—It is the privilege of greatness to confer
intense happiness with insignificant gifts.
497.
Unintentionally Noble.—A person behaves with unintentional nobleness
when he has accustomed himself to seek naught from others and always to
give to them.
498.
A Condition of Heroism.—When a person wishes to become a hero, the
serpent must previously have become a dragon, otherwise he lacks his
proper enemy.
499.
Friends.—Fellowship in joy, and, not sympathy in sorrow, makes people
friends.
500.
Making Use of Ebb and Flow.—For the purpose of knowledge we must know
how to make use of the inward current which draws us towards a thing,
and also of the current which after a time draws us away from it.
[Pg 359]
501.
Joy in Itself.—"Joy in the Thing" people say; but in reality it is joy
in itself by means of the thing.
502.
The Unassuming Man.—He who is unassuming towards persons manifests his
presumption all the more with regard to things (town, State, society,
time, humanity). That is his revenge.
503.
Envy and Jealousy.—Envy and jealousy are the pudenda of the human
soul. The comparison may perhaps be carried further.
504.
The Noblest Hypocrite.—It is a very noble hypocrisy not to talk of
one's self at all.
505.
Vexation.—Vexation is a physical disease, which is not by any means
cured when its cause is subsequently removed.
506.
The Champions of Truth.—Truth does not find fewest champions when it
is dangerous to speak it, but when it is dull.
[Pg 360]
507.
More Troublesome Even Than Enemies.—Persons of whose sympathetic
attitude we are not, in all circumstances, convinced, while for
some reason or other (gratitude, for instance) we are obliged to
maintain the appearance of unqualified sympathy with them, trouble our
imagination far more than our enemies do.
508.
Free Nature.—We are so fond of being out among Nature, because it has
no opinions about us.
509.
Each Superior in One Thing.—In civilised intercourse every one feels
himself superior to all others in at least one thing; kindly feelings
generally are based thereon, inasmuch as every one can, in certain
circumstances, render help, and is therefore entitled to accept help
without shame.
510.
Consolatory Arguments.—In the case of a death we mostly use
consolatory arguments not so much to alleviate the grief as to make
excuses for feeling so easily consoled.
511.
Persons Loyal to Their Convictions.—Whoever is very busy retains his
general views and opinions almost unchanged. So also does[Pg 361] every one
who labours in the service of an idea; he will nevermore examine the
idea itself, he no longer has any time to do so; indeed, it is against
his interests to consider it as still admitting of discussion.
512.
Morality and Quantity.—The higher morality of one man as compared
with that of another, often lies merely in the fact that his aims are
quantitively greater. The other, living in a circumscribed sphere, is
dragged down by petty occupations.
513.
"The Life" As the Proceeds of Life.—A man may stretch himself out ever
so far with his knowledge; he may seem to himself ever so objective,
but eventually he realises nothing therefrom but his own biography.
514.
Iron Necessity.—Iron necessity is a thing which has been found, in the
course of history, to be neither iron nor necessary.
515.
From Experience.—The unreasonableness of a thing is no argument
against its existence, but rather a condition thereof.
516.
Truth.—Nobody dies nowadays of fatal truths, there are too many
antidotes to them.
[Pg 362]
517.
A Fundamental Insight.—There is no pre-established harmony between the
promotion of truth and the welfare of mankind.
518.
Man's Lot.—He who thinks most deeply knows that he is always in the
wrong, however he may act and decide.
519.
Truth As Circe.—Error has made animals into men; is truth perhaps
capable of making man into an animal again?
520.
The Danger of Our Culture.—We belong to a period of which the culture
is in danger of being destroyed by the appliances of culture.
521.
Greatness Means Leading the Way.—No stream is large and copious of
itself, but becomes great by receiving and leading on so many tributary
streams. It is so, also, with all intellectual greatnesses. It is only
a question of some one indicating the direction to be followed by so
many affluents; not whether he was richly or poorly gifted originally.
[Pg 363]
522.
A Feeble Conscience.—People who talk about their importance to mankind
have a feeble conscience for common bourgeois rectitude, keeping of
contracts, promises, etc.
523.
Desiring to Be Loved.—The demand to be loved is the greatest of
presumptions.
524.
Contempt For Men.—The most unequivocal sign of contempt for man is
to regard everybody merely as a means to one's own ends, or of no
account whatever.
525.
Partisans Through Contradiction.—Whoever has driven men to fury
against himself has also gained a party in his favour.
526.
Forgetting Experiences.—Whoever thinks much and to good purpose
easily forgets his own experiences, but not the thoughts which these
experiences have called forth.
527.
Sticking to an Opinion.—One person sticks to an opinion because he
takes pride in having acquired it himself,—another sticks to it
because he has learnt it with difficulty and is[Pg 364] proud of having
understood it; both of them, therefore, out of vanity.
528.
Avoiding the Light.—Good deeds avoid the light just as anxiously as
evil deeds; the latter fear that pain will result from publicity (as
punishment), the former fear that pleasure will vanish with publicity
(the pure pleasure per se, which ceases as soon as satisfaction of
vanity is added to it).
529.
The Length of the Day.—When one has much to put into them, a day has a
hundred pockets.
530.
The Genius of Tyranny.—When an invincible desire to obtain tyrannical
power has been awakened in the soul, and constantly keeps up its
fervour, even a very mediocre talent (in politicians, artists, etc.)
gradually becomes an almost irresistible natural force.
531.
The Enemy's Life.—He who lives by fighting with an enemy has an
interest in the preservation of the enemy's life.[1]
[Pg 365]
532.
More Important.—Unexplained, obscure matters are regarded as more
important than explained, clear ones.
533.
Valuation of Services Rendered.—We estimate services rendered to
us according to the value set on them by those who render them, not
according to the value they have for us.
534.
Unhappiness.—The distinction associated with unhappiness (as if it
were a sign of stupidity, unambitiousness, or commonplaceness to feel
happy) is so great that when any one says to us, "How happy you are!"
we usually protest.
535.
Imagination in Anguish.—When one is afraid of anything, one's
imagination plays the part of that evil spirit which springs on one's
back just when one has the heaviest load to bear.
536.
The Value of Insipid Opponents.—We sometimes remain faithful to a
cause merely because its opponents never cease to be insipid.
537.
The Value of a Profession.—A profession makes us thoughtless; that
is its greatest blessing.[Pg 366] For it is a bulwark behind which we are
permitted to withdraw when commonplace doubts and cares assail us.
538.
Talent.—Many a man's talent appears less than it is, because he has
always set himself too heavy tasks.
539.
Youth.—Youth is an unpleasant period; for then it is not possible or
not prudent to be productive in any sense whatsoever.
540.
Too Great Aims.—Whoever aims publicly at great things and at length
perceives secretly that he is too weak to achieve them, has usually
also insufficient strength to renounce his aims publicly, and then
inevitably becomes a hypocrite.
541.
In the Current.—Mighty waters sweep many stones and shrubs away with
them; mighty spirits many foolish and confused minds.
542.
The Dangers of Intellectual Emancipation.—In a seriously intended
intellectual emancipation a person's mute passions and cravings also
hope to find their advantage.
[Pg 367]
543.
The Incarnation of the Mind.—When any one thinks much and to good
purpose, not only his face but also his body acquires a sage look.
544.
Seeing Badly and Hearing Badly.—The man who sees little always sees
less than there is to see; the man who hears badly always hears
something more than there is to hear.
545.
Self-enjoyment in Vanity.—The vain man does not wish so much to be
prominent as to feel himself prominent; he therefore disdains none of
the expedients for self-deception and self-out-witting. It is not the
opinion of others that he sets his heart on, but his opinion of their
opinion
546.
Exceptionally Vain.—He who is usually self-sufficient becomes
exceptionally vain, and keenly alive to fame and praise when he is
physically ill. The more he loses himself the more he has to endeavour
to regain his position by means of the opinion of others.
547.
The "Witty."—Those who seek wit do not possess it.
[Pg 368]
548.
A Hint to the Heads of Parties.—When one can make people publicly
support a cause they have also generally been brought to the point of
inwardly declaring themselves in its favour, because they wish to be
regarded as consistent.
549.
Contempt.—Man is more sensitive to the contempt of others than to
self-contempt.
550.
The Tie of Gratitude.—There are servile souls who carry so far their
sense of obligation for benefits received that they strangle themselves
with the tie of gratitude.
551.
The Prophet's Knack.—In predicting beforehand the procedure of
ordinary individuals, it must be taken for granted that they always
make use of the smallest intellectual expenditure in freeing themselves
from disagreeable situations.
552.
Man's Sole Right.—He who swerves from the traditional is a victim of
the unusual; he who keeps to the traditional is its slave. The man is
ruined in either case.
[Pg 369]
553.
Below the Beast.—When a man roars with laughter he surpasses all the
animals by his vulgarity.
554.
Partial Knowledge.—He who speaks a foreign language imperfectly has
more enjoyment therein than he who speaks it well. The enjoyment is
with the partially initiated.
555.
Dangerous Helpfulness.—There are people who wish to make human life
harder for no other reason than to be able afterwards to offer men
their life-alleviating recipes—their Christianity, for example.
556.
Industriousness and Conscientiousness.—Industriousness and
conscientiousness are often antagonists, owing to the fact that
industriousness wants to pluck the fruit sour from the tree while
conscientiousness wants to let it hang too long, until it falls and is
bruised.
557.
Casting Suspicion.—We endeavour to cast suspicion on persons whom we
cannot endure.
[Pg 370]
558.
The Conditions Are Lacking.—Many people wait all their lives for the
opportunity to be good in their own way.
559.
Lack of Friends.—Lack of friends leads to the inference that a person
is envious or presumptuous. Many a man owes his friends merely to the
fortunate circumstance that he has no occasion for envy.
560.
Danger in Manifoldness.—With one talent more we often stand less
firmly than with one less; just as a table stands better on three feet
than on four.
561.
An Exemplar For Others.—Whoever wants to set a good example must add a
grain of folly to his virtue; people then imitate their exemplar and at
the same time raise themselves above him, a thing they love to do.
562.
Being a Target.—The bad things others say about us are often not
really aimed at us, but are the manifestations of spite or ill-humour
occasioned by quite different causes.
[Pg 371]
563.
Easily Resigned.—We suffer but little on account of ungratified wishes
if we have exercised our imagination in distorting the past.
564.
In Danger.—One is in greatest danger of being run over when one has
just got out of the way of a carriage.
565.
The Role According to the Voice.—Whoever is obliged to speak louder
than he naturally does (say, to a partially deaf person or before a
large audience), usually exaggerates what he has to communicate. Many
a one becomes a conspirator, malevolent gossip, or intriguer, merely
because his voice is best suited for whispering.
566.
Love and Hatred.—Love and hatred are not blind, but are dazzled by the
fire which they carry about with them.
567.
Advantageously Persecuted.—People who cannot make their merits
perfectly obvious to the world endeavour to awaken a strong hostility
against themselves. They have then the consolation of thinking that
this hostility stands between their merits and the acknowledgment
thereof—-[Pg 372] and that many others think the same thing, which is very
advantageous for their recognition.
568.
Confession.—We forget our fault when we have confessed it to another
person, but he does not generally forget it.
569.
Self-sufficiency.—The Golden Fleece of self-sufficiency is a
protection against blows, but not against needle-pricks.
570.
Shadows in the Flame.—The flame is not so bright to itself as to those
whom it illuminates,—so also the wise man.
571.
Our Own Opinions.—The first opinion that occurs to us when we are
suddenly asked about anything is not usually our own, but only the
current opinion belonging to our caste, position, or family; our own
opinions seldom float on the surface.
572.
The Origin of Courage.—The ordinary man is as courageous and
invulnerable as a hero when he does not see the danger, when he has no
eyes for it. Reversely, the hero has his one vulnerable spot upon the
back, where he has no eyes.
[Pg 373]
573.
The Danger in the Physician.—One must be born for one's physician,
otherwise one comes to grief through him.
574.
Marvellous Vanity.—Whoever has courageously prophesied the weather
three times and has been successful in his hits, acquires a certain
amount of inward confidence in his prophetic gift. We give credence to
the marvellous and irrational when it flatters our self-esteem.
575.
A Profession.—A profession is the backbone of life.
576.
The Danger of Personal Influence.—Whoever feels that he exercises a
great inward influence over another person must give him a perfectly
free rein, must, in fact, welcome and even induce occasional
opposition, otherwise he will inevitably make an enemy.
577.
Recognition of the Heir.—Whoever has founded something great in an
unselfish spirit is careful to rear heirs for his work. It is the sign
of a tyrannical and ignoble nature to see opponents in all possible
heirs, and to live in a state of self-defence against them.
[Pg 374]
578.
Partial Knowledge.—Partial knowledge is more triumphant than complete
knowledge; it takes things to be simpler than they are, and so makes
its theory more popular and convincing.
579.
Unsuitable For a Party-man.—Whoever thinks much is unsuitable for a
party-man; his thinking leads him too quickly beyond the party.
580.
A Bad Memory.—The advantage of a bad memory is that one enjoys several
times the same good things for the first time.
581.
Self-affliction.—Want of consideration is often the sign of a
discordant inner nature, which craves for stupefaction.
582.
Martyrs.—The disciples of a martyr suffer more than the martyr.
583.
Arrears of Vanity.—The vanity of many people who have no occasion to
be vain is the inveterate habit, still surviving from the time when
people had no right to the belief in[Pg 375] themselves and only begged it in
small sums from others.
584.
Punctum Saliens of Passion.—A person falling into a rage or into a
violent passion of love reaches a point when the soul is full like a
hogshead, but nevertheless a drop of water has still to be added, the
good will for the passion (which is also generally called the evil
will). This item only is necessary, and then the hogshead overflows.
585.
A Gloomy Thought.—It is with men as with the charcoal fires in the
forest. It is only when young men have cooled down and have got
charred, like these piles, that they become useful. As long as they
fume and smoke they are perhaps more interesting, but they are useless
and too often uncomfortable. Humanity ruthlessly uses every individual
as material for the heating of its great machines; but what then is the
purpose of the machines, when all individuals (that is, the human race)
are useful only to maintain them? Machines that are ends in themselves:
is that the umana commedia?
586.
The Hour-hand of Life.—Life consists of rare single moments of the
greatest importance, and of countless intervals during which, at best,
the phantoms of those moments hover around us. Love, the Spring, every
fine melody, the mountains,[Pg 376] the moon, the sea—all speak but once
fully to the heart, if, indeed, they ever do quite attain to speech.
For many people have not those moments at all, and are themselves
intervals and pauses in the symphony of actual life.
587.
Attack Or Compromise.—We often make the mistake of showing violent
enmity towards a tendency, party, or period, because we happen only
to get a sight of its most exposed side, its stuntedness, or the
inevitable "faults of its virtues,"—perhaps because we ourselves have
taken a prominent part in them. We then turn our backs on them and
seek a diametrically opposite course; but the better way would be to
seek out their strong good sides, or to develop them in ourselves. To
be sure, a keener glance and a better will are needed to improve the
becoming and the imperfect than are required to see through it in its
imperfection and to deny it.
588.
Modesty.—There is true modesty (that is the knowledge that we are
not the works we create); and it is especially becoming in a great
mind, because such a mind can well grasp the thought of absolute
irresponsibility (even for the good it creates). People do not hate
a great man's presumptuousness in so far as he feels his strength,
but because he wishes to prove it by injuring[Pg 377] others, by dominating
them, and seeing how long they will stand it. This, as a rule, is even
a proof of the absence of a secure sense of power, and makes people
doubt his greatness. We must therefore beware of presumption from the
stand-point of wisdom.
589.
The Day's First Thought.—The best way to begin a day well is to think,
on awakening, whether we cannot give pleasure during the day to at
least one person. If this could become a substitute for the religious
habit of prayer our fellow-men would benefit by the change.
590.
Presumption As the Last Consolation.—When we so interpret a
misfortune, an intellectual defect, or a disease that we see therein
our predestined fate, our trial, or the mysterious punishment of our
former misdeeds, we thereby make our nature interesting and exalt
ourselves in imagination above our fellows. The proud sinner is a
well-known figure in all religious sects.
591.
The Vegetation of Happiness.—Close beside the world's woe, and
often upon its volcanic soil, man has laid out his little garden of
happiness. Whether one regard life with the eyes of him who only seeks
knowledge therefrom, or of him who submits and is resigned, or of him
who[Pg 378] rejoices over surmounted difficulties—everywhere one will find
some happiness springing up beside the evil—and in fact always the
more happiness the more volcanic the soil has been,—only it would be
absurd to say that suffering itself is justified by this happiness.
592.
The Path of Our Ancestors.—It is sensible when a person develops still
further in himself the talent upon which his father or grandfather
spent much trouble, and does not shift to something entirely new;
otherwise he deprives himself of the possibility of attaining
perfection in any one craft. That is why the proverb says, "Which road
shouldst thou ride?—That of thine ancestors."
593.
Vanity and Ambition As Educators.—As long as a person has not become
an instrument of general utility, ambition may torment him; if,
however, that point has been reached, if he necessarily works like a
machine for the good of all, then vanity may result; it will humanise
him in small matters and make him more sociable, endurable, and
considerate, when ambition has completed the coarser work of making him
useful.
594.
Philosophical Novices.—Immediately we have comprehended the wisdom of
a philosopher, we go through the streets with a feeling as if we[Pg 379] had
been re-created and had become great men; for we encounter only those
who are ignorant of this wisdom, and have therefore to deliver new and
unknown verdicts concerning everything. Because we now recognise a
law-book we think we must also comport ourselves as judges.
595.
Pleasing by Displeasing.—People who prefer to attract attention, and
thereby to displease, desire the same thing as those who neither wish
to please nor to attract attention, only they seek it more ardently and
indirectly by means of a step by which they apparently move away from
their goal. They desire influence and power, and therefore show their
superiority, even to such an extent that it becomes disagreeable; for
they know that he who has finally attained power, pleases in almost all
he says and does, and that even when he displeases he still seems to
please. The free spirit also, and in like manner the believer, desire
power, in order some day to please thereby; when, on account of their
doctrine, evil fate, persecution, dungeon, or execution threaten them,
they rejoice in the thought that their teaching will thus be engraved
and branded on the heart of mankind; though its effect is remote they
accept their fate as a painful but powerful means of still attaining to
power.
596.
casus Belli and the Like.—The prince who, for his determination
to make war against[Pg 380] his neighbour, invents a casus belli, is like
a father who foists on his child a mother who is henceforth to be
regarded as such. And are not almost all publicly avowed motives of
action just such spurious mothers?
597.
Passion and Right.—Nobody talks more passionately of his rights than
he who, in the depths of his soul, is doubtful about them. By getting
passion on his side he seeks to confound his understanding and its
doubts,—he thus obtains a good conscience, and along with it success
with his fellow-men.
598.
The Trick of the Resigning One.—He who protests against marriage,
after the manner of Catholic priests, will conceive of it in its
lowest and vulgarest form. In the same way he who disavows the honour
of his contemporaries will have a mean opinion of it; he can thus
dispense with it and struggle against it more easily. Moreover, he
who denies himself much in great matters will readily indulge himself
in small things. It might be possible that he who is superior to the
approbation of his contemporaries would nevertheless not deny himself
the gratification of small vanities.
599.
The Years of Presumption.—The proper period of presumption in gifted
people is between their twenty-sixth and thirtieth years; it is the
time of early ripeness, with a large residue of[Pg 381] sourness. On the
ground of what we feel within ourselves we demand honour and humility
from men who see little or nothing of it, and because this tribute
is not immediately forthcoming we revenge ourselves by the look, the
gesture of arrogance, and the tone of voice, which a keen ear and
eye recognise in every product of those years, whether it be poetry,
philosophy, or pictures and music. Older men of experience smile
thereat, and think with emotion of those beautiful years in which one
resents the fate of being so much and seeming so little. Later on
one really seems more,—but one has lost the good belief in being
much,—unless one remain for life an incorrigible fool of vanity.
600.
Deceptive and Yet Defensible.—Just as in order to pass by an abyss or
to cross a deep stream on a plank we require a railing, not to hold
fast by,—for it would instantly break down with us,—but to give
the notion of security to the eye, so in youth we require persons
who unconsciously render us the service of that railing. It is true
they would not help us if we really wished to lean upon them in great
danger, but they afford the tranquillising sensation of protection
close to one (for instance, fathers, teachers, friends, as all three
usually are).
601.
Learning to Love.—One must learn to love, one must learn to be kind,
and this from[Pg 382] childhood onwards; when education and chance give us no
opportunity for the exercise of these feelings our soul becomes dried
up, and even incapable of understanding the fine devices of loving men.
In the same way hatred must be learnt and fostered, when one wants to
become a proficient hater,—otherwise the germ of it will gradually die
out.
602.
Ruin As Ornament.—Persons who pass through numerous mental phases
retain certain sentiments and habits of their earlier states, which
then project like a piece of inexplicable antiquity and grey stonework
into their new thought and action, often to the embellishment of the
whole surroundings.
603.
Love and Honour.—Love desires, fear avoids. That is why one cannot
be both loved and honoured by the same person, at least not at the
same time.[2] For he who honours recognises power,—that is to say, he
fears it, he is in a state of reverential fear (Ehr-furcht) But love
recognises no power, nothing that divides, detaches, superordinates,
or subordinates. Because it does not honour them, ambitious people
secretly or openly resent being loved.
[Pg 383]
604.
A Prejudice in Favour of Cold Natures.—People who quickly take fire
grow cold quickly, and therefore are, on the whole, unreliable. For
those, therefore, who are always cold, or pretend to be so, there
is the favourable prejudice that they are particularly trustworthy,
reliable persons; they are confounded with those who take fire slowly
and retain it long.
605.
The Danger in Free Opinions.—Frivolous occupation with free opinions
has a charm, like a kind of itching; if one yields to it further,
one begins to chafe the places; until at last an open, painful wound
results; that is to say, until the free opinion begins to disturb and
torment us in our position in life and in our human relations.
606.
Desire For Sore Affliction.—When passion is over it leaves behind an
obscure longing for it, and even in disappearing it casts a seductive
glance at us. It must have afforded a kind of pleasure to have
been beaten with this scourge. Compared with it, the more moderate
sensations appear insipid; we still prefer, apparently, the more
violent displeasure to languid delight.
[Pg 384]
607.
Dissatisfaction With Others and With the World.—When, as so frequently
happens, we vent our dissatisfaction on others when we are really
dissatisfied with ourselves, we are in fact attempting to mystify and
deceive our judgment; we desire to find a motive a posteriori for
this dissatisfaction, in the mistakes or deficiencies of others, and
so lose sight of ourselves. Strictly religious people, who have been
relentless judges of themselves, have at the same time spoken most ill
of humanity generally; there has never been a saint who reserved sin
for himself and virture for others, any more than a man who, according
to Buddha's rule, hides his good qualities from people and only shows
his bad ones.
608.
Confusion of Cause and Effect.—Unconsciously we seek the principles
and opinions which are suited to our temperament, so that at last it
seems as if these principles and opinions had formed our character
and given it support and stability, whereas exactly the contrary has
taken place. Our thoughts and judgments are, apparently, to be taken
subsequently as the causes of our nature, but as a matter of fact our
nature is the cause of our so thinking and judging. And what induces
us to play this almost unconscious comedy? Inertness and convenience,
and to a large extent also the vain desire to be regarded as thoroughly
consistent and[Pg 385] homogeneous in nature and thought; for this wins
respect and gives confidence and power.
609.
Age in Relation to Truth.—Young people love what is interesting and
exceptional, indifferent whether it is truth or falsehood. Riper minds
love what is interesting and extraordinary when it is truth. Matured
minds, finally, love truth even in those in whom it appears plain and
simple and is found tiresome by ordinary people, because they have
observed that truth is in the habit of giving utterance to its highest
intellectual verities with all the appearance of simplicity.
610.
Men As Bad Poets.—Just as bad poets seek a thought to fit the rhyme
in the second half of the verse, so men in the second half of life,
having become more scrupulous, are in the habit of seeking pursuits,
positions, and conditions which suit those of their earlier life, so
that outwardly all sounds well, but their life is no longer ruled and
continuously determined anew by a powerful thought: in place thereof
there is merely the intention of finding a rhyme.
611.
Ennui and Play.—Necessity compels us to work, with the product of
which the necessity is appeased; the ever new awakening of necessity,[Pg 386]
however, accustoms us to work. But in the intervals in which necessity
is appeased and asleep, as it were, we are attacked by ennui. What is
this? In a word it is the habituation to work, which now makes itself
felt as a new and additional necessity; it will be all the stronger the
more a person has been accustomed to work, perhaps, even, the more a
person has suffered from necessities. In order to escape ennui, a man
either works beyond the extent of his former necessities, or he invents
play, that is to say, work that is only intended to appease the general
necessity for work. He who has become satiated with play, and has no
new necessities impelling him to work, is sometimes attacked by the
longing for a third state, which is related to play as gliding is to
dancing, as dancing is to walking, a blessed, tranquil movement; it is
the artists' and philosophers' vision of happiness.
612.
Lessons from Pictures.—If we look at a series of pictures of
ourselves, from the time of later childhood to the time of mature
manhood, we discover with pleased surprise that the man bears more
resemblance to the child than to the youth: that probably, therefore,
in accordance with this fact, there has been in the interval a
temporary alienation of the fundamental character, over which the
collected, concentrated force of the man has again become master. With
this observation this other is also in accordance, namely, that[Pg 387] all
strong influences of passions, teachers, and political events, which
in our youthful years draw us hither and thither, seem later on to be
referred back again to a fixed standard; of course they still continue
to exist and operate within us, but our fundamental sentiments and
opinions have now the upper hand, and use their influence perhaps as a
source of strength, but are no longer merely regulative, as was perhaps
the case in our twenties. Thus even the thoughts and sentiments of the
man appear more in accordance with those of his childish years,—and
this objective fact expresses itself in the above-mentioned subjective
fact.
613.
The Tone of Voice of Different Ages.—The tone in which youths speak,
praise, blame, and versify, displeases an older person because it is
too loud, and yet at the same time dull and confused like a sound in
a vault, which acquires such a loud ring owing to the emptiness; for
most of the thought of youths does not gush forth out of the fulness
of their own nature, but is the accord and the echo of what has been
thought, said, praised or blamed around them. As their sentiments,
however (their inclinations and aversions), resound much more forcibly
than the reasons thereof, there is heard, whenever they divulge these
sentiments, the dull, clanging tone which is a sign of the absence
or scarcity of reasons. The tone of riper age is rigorous, abruptly
concise, moderately loud, but, like[Pg 388] everything distinctly articulated,
is heard very far off. Old age, finally, often brings a certain
mildness and consideration into the tone of the voice, and as it were,
sweetens it; in many cases, to be sure it also sours it.
614.
The Atavist and the Forerunner.—The man of unpleasant character,
full of distrust, envious of the success of fellow-competitors and
neighbours, violent and enraged at divergent opinions, shows that he
belongs to an earlier grade of culture, and is, therefore, an atavism;
for the way in which he behaves to people was right and suitable only
for an age of club-law; he is an atavist. The man of a different
character, rich in sympathy, winning friends everywhere, finding all
that is growing and becoming amiable, rejoicing at the honours and
successes of others and claiming no privilege of solely knowing the
truth, but full of a modest distrust,—he is a forerunner who presses
upward towards a higher human culture. The man of unpleasant character
dates from the times when the rude basis of human intercourse had
yet to be laid, the other lives on the upper floor of the edifice of
culture, removed as far as possible from the howling and raging wild
beast imprisoned in the cellars.
615.
Consolation For Hypochondriacs.—When a great thinker is temporarily
subjected to hypochondriacal self-torture he can say to himself, by[Pg 389]
way of consolation: "It is thine own great strength on which this
parasite feeds and grows; if thy strength were smaller thou wouldst
have less to suffer." The statesman may say just the same thing when
jealousy and vengeful feeling, or, in a word, the tone of the bellum
omnium contra omnes, for which, as the representative of a nation, he
must necessarily have a great capacity, occasionally intrudes into his
personal relations and makes his life hard.
616.
Estranged from the Present.—There are great advantages in estranging
one's self for once to a large extent from one's age, and being as
it were driven back from its shores into the ocean of past views of
things. Looking thence towards the coast one commands a view, perhaps
for the first time, of its aggregate formation, and when one again
approaches the land one has the advantage of understanding it better,
on the whole, than those who have never left it.
617.
Sowing and Reaping on the Field of Personal Defects.—Men like Rousseau
understand how to use their weaknesses, defects, and vices as manure
for their talent. When Rousseau bewails the corruption and degeneration
of society as the evil results of culture, there is a personal
experience at the bottom of it, the bitterness which gives sharpness to
his general condemnation and poisons[Pg 390] the arrows with which he shoots;
he unburdens himself first as an individual, and thinks of getting a
remedy which, while benefiting society directly, will also benefit
himself indirectly by means of society.
618.
Philosophically Minded.—We usually endeavour to acquire one
attitude of mind, one set of opinions for all situations and events
of life—it is mostly called being philosophically minded. But for
the acquisition of knowledge it may be of greater importance not to
make ourselves thus uniform, but to hearken to the low voice of the
different situations in life; these bring their own opinions with
them. We thus take an intelligent interest in the life and nature of
many persons by not treating ourselves as rigid, persistent single
individuals.
619.
In the Fire of Contempt.—It is a fresh step towards independence when
one first dares to give utterance to opinions which it is considered as
disgraceful for a person to entertain; even friends and acquaintances
are then accustomed to grow anxious. The gifted nature must also pass
through this fire; it afterwards belongs far more to itself.
620.
Self-sacrifice.—In the event of choice, a great sacrifice is preferred
to a small one, because we compensate ourselves for the great sacrifice
by[Pg 391] self-admiration, which is not possible in the case of a small one.
621.
Love As an Artifice.—Whoever really wishes to become acquainted
with something new (whether it be a person, an event, or a book),
does well to take up the matter with all possible love, and to avert
his eye quickly from all that seems hostile, objectionable, and false
therein,—in fact to forget such things; so that, for instance, he
gives the author of a book the best start possible, and straightway,
just as in a race, longs with beating heart that he may reach the goal.
In this manner one penetrates to the heart of the new thing, to its
moving point, and this is called becoming acquainted with it. This
stage having been arrived at, the understanding afterwards makes its
restrictions; the over-estimation and the temporary suspension of the
critical pendulum were only artifices to lure forth the soul of the
matter.
622.
Thinking Too Well and Too Ill of the World.—Whether we think too
well or too ill of things, we always have the advantage of deriving
therefrom a greater pleasure, for with a too good preconception we
usually put more sweetness into things (experiences) than they actually
contain. A too bad preconception causes a pleasant disappointment, the
pleasantness that lay in the things themselves is increased by the
pleasantness of the[Pg 392] surprise. A gloomy temperament, however, will have
the reverse experience in both cases.
623.
Profound People.—Those whose strength lies in the deepening of
impressions—they are usually called profound people—are relatively
self-possessed and decided in all sudden emergencies, for in the first
moment the impression is still shallow, it only then becomes deep.
Long foreseen, long expected events or persons, however, excite such
natures most, and make them almost incapable of eventually having
presence of mind on the arrival thereof.
624.
Intercourse With the Higher Self.—Every one has his good day, when
he finds his higher self; and true humanity demands that a person
shall be estimated according to this state and not according to his
work-days of constraint and bondage. A painter, for instance, should be
appraised and honoured according to the most exalted vision he could
see and represent. But men themselves commune very differently with
this their higher self, and are frequently their own playactors, in so
far as they repeatedly imitate what they are in those moments. Some
stand in awe and humility before their ideal, and would fain deny it;
they are afraid of their higher self because, when it speaks, it speaks
pretentiously. Besides, it has a ghost-like freedom of coming and
staying away just as it pleases; on that account it[Pg 393] is often called a
gift of the gods, while in fact everything else is a gift of the gods
(of chance); this, however, is the man himself.
625.
Lonely People.—Some people are so much accustomed to being alone
in self-communion that they do not at all compare themselves with
others, but spin out their soliloquising life in a quiet, happy mood,
conversing pleasantly, and even hilariously, with themselves. If,
however, they are brought to the point of comparing themselves with
others, they are inclined to a brooding under-estimation of their own
worth, so that they have first to be compelled by others to form once
more a good and just opinion of themselves, and even from this acquired
opinion they will always want to subtract and abate something. We must
not, therefore, grudge certain persons their loneliness or foolishly
commiserate them on that account, as is so often done.
626.
Without Melody.—There are persons to whom a constant repose in
themselves and the harmonious ordering of all their capacities is
so natural that every definite activity is repugnant to them. They
resemble music which consists of nothing but prolonged, harmonious
accords, without even the tendency to an organised and animated melody
showing itself. All external movement serves only to restore to the
boat its equilibrium[Pg 394] on the sea of harmonious euphony. Modern men
usually become excessively impatient when they meet such natures, who
will never be anything in the world, only it is not allowable to say
of them that they are nothing. But in certain moods the sight of them
raises the unusual question: "Why should there be melody at all? Why
should it not suffice us when life mirrors itself peacefully in a deep
lake?" The Middle Ages were richer in such natures than our times. How
seldom one now meets with any one who can live on so peacefully and
happily with himself even in the midst of the crowd, saying to himself,
like Goethe, "The best thing of all is the deep calm in which I live
and grow in opposition to the world, and gain what it cannot take away
from me with fire and sword."
627.
To Live and Experience.—If we observe how some people can deal with
their experiences—their unimportant, everyday experiences—so that
these become soil which yields fruit thrice a year; whilst others—and
how many!—are driven through the surf of the most exciting adventures,
the most diversified movements of times and peoples, and yet always
remain light, always remain on the surface, like cork; we are finally
tempted to divide mankind into a minority (minimality) of those who
know how to make much out of little, and a majority of those who
know how to make little out of much; indeed, we even meet with the
counter-sorcerers who, instead[Pg 395] of making the world out of nothing,
make a nothing out of the world.
628.
Seriousness in Play.—-In Genoa one evening, in the twilight, I heard
from a tower a long chiming of bells; it was never like to end, and
sounded as if insatiable above the noise of the streets, out into the
evening sky and sea-air, so thrilling, and at the same time so childish
and so sad. I then remembered the words of Plato, and suddenly felt the
force of them in my heart: "Human matters, one and all, are not worthy
of great seriousness; nevertheless ..."
629.
Conviction and Justice.—The requirement that a person must afterwards,
when cool and sober, stand by what he says, promises, and resolves
during passion, is one of the heaviest burdens that weigh upon mankind.
To have to acknowledge for all future time the consequences of anger,
of fiery revenge, of enthusiastic devotion, may lead to a bitterness
against these feelings proportionate to the idolatry with which they
are idolised, especially by artists. These cultivate to its full extent
the esteem of the passions, and have always done so; to be sure, they
also glorify the terrible satisfaction of the passions which a person
affords himself, the outbreaks of vengeance, with death, mutilation, or
voluntary banishment in their train, and the resignation of the broken
heart.[Pg 396] In any case they keep alive curiosity about the passions; it is
as if they said: "Without passions you have no experience whatever."
Because we have sworn fidelity (perhaps even to a purely fictitious
being, such as a god), because we have surrendered our heart to a
prince, a party, a woman, a priestly order, an artist, or a thinker,
in a state of infatuated delusion that threw a charm over us and made
those beings appear worthy of all veneration, and every sacrifice—are
we, therefore, firmly and inevitably bound? Or did we not, after all,
deceive ourselves then? Was there not a hypothetical promise, under the
tacit presupposition that those beings to whom we consecrated ourselves
were really the beings they seemed to be in our imagination? Are we
under obligation to be faithful to our errors, even with the knowledge
that by this fidelity we shall cause injury to our higher selves? No,
there is no law, no obligation of that sort; we must become traitors,
we must act unfaithfully and abandon our ideals again and again. We
cannot advance from one period of life into another without causing
these pains of treachery and also suffering from them. Might it be
necessary to guard against the ebullitions of our feelings in order
to escape these pains? Would not the world then become too arid, too
ghost-like for us? Rather will we ask ourselves whether these pains
are necessary on a change of convictions, or whether they do not
depend on a mistaken opinion and estimate. Why do we admire a person
who remains true to his convictions and despise him who changes them?
I fear[Pg 397] the answer must be, "because every one takes for granted that
such a change is caused only by motives of more general utility or of
personal trouble." That is to say, we believe at bottom that nobody
alters his opinions as long as they are advantageous to him, or at
least as long as they do not cause him any harm. If it is so, however,
it furnishes a bad proof of the intellectual significance of all
convictions. Let us once examine how convictions arise, and let us see
whether their importance is not greatly over-estimated; it will thereby
be seen that the change of convictions also is in all circumstances
judged according to a false standard, that we have hitherto been
accustomed to suffer too much from this change.
630.
Conviction is belief in the possession of absolute truth on any matter
of knowledge. This belief takes it for granted, therefore, that there
are absolute truths; also, that perfect methods have been found for
attaining to them; and finally, that every one who has convictions
makes use of these perfect methods. All three notions show at once that
the man of convictions is not the man of scientific thought; he seems
to us still in the age of theoretical innocence, and is practically
a child, however grown-up he may be. Whole centuries, however, have
been lived under the influence of those childlike presuppositions, and
out of them have flowed the mightiest sources of human strength. The
countless numbers who[Pg 398] sacrificed themselves for their convictions
believed they were doing it for the sake of absolute truth. They were
all wrong, however; probably no one has ever sacrificed himself for
Truth; at least, the dogmatic expression of the faith of any such
person has been unscientific or only partly scientific. But really,
people wanted to carry their point because they believed that they
must be in the right. To allow their belief to be wrested from
them probably meant calling in question their eternal salvation. In
an affair of such extreme importance the "will" was too audibly the
prompter of the intellect. The presupposition of every believer of
every shade of belief has been that he could not be confuted; if the
counter-arguments happened to be very strong, it always remained for
him to decry intellect generally, and, perhaps, even to set up the
"credo quia absurdum est" as the standard of extreme fanaticism. It
is not the struggle of opinions that has made history so turbulent; but
the struggle of belief in opinions,—that is to say, of convictions.
If all those who thought so highly of their convictions, who made
sacrifices of all kinds for them, and spared neither honour, body,
nor life in their service, had only devoted half of their energy to
examining their right to adhere to this or that conviction and by what
road they arrived at it, how peaceable would the history of mankind now
appear! How much more knowledge would there be! All the cruel scenes
in connection with the persecution of heretics of all kinds would have
been avoided, for two reasons: firstly, because the inquisitors would
above all have[Pg 399] inquired of themselves, and would have recognised
the presumption of defending absolute truth; and secondly, because
the heretics themselves would, after examination, have taken no more
interest in such badly established doctrines as those of all religious
sectarians and "orthodox" believers.
631.
From the ages in which it was customary to believe in the possession
of absolute truth, people have inherited a profound dislike of all
sceptical and relative attitudes with regard to questions of knowledge;
they mostly prefer to acquiesce, for good or evil, in the convictions
of those in authority (fathers, friends, teachers, princes), and they
have a kind of remorse of conscience when they do not do so. This
tendency is quite comprehensible, and its results furnish no ground
for condemnation of the course of the development of human reason.
The scientific spirit in man, however, has gradually to bring to
maturity the virtue of cautious forbearance, the wise moderation,
which is better known in practical than in theoretical life, and
which, for instance, Goethe has represented in "Antonio," as an object
of provocation for all Tassos,—that is to say, for unscientific and
at the same time inactive natures. The man of convictions has in
himself the right not to comprehend the man of cautious thought, the
theoretical Antonio; the scientific man, on the other hand, has no
right to blame the former on that account, he takes no notice thereof,
and[Pg 400] knows, moreover, that in certain cases the former will yet cling
to him, as Tasso finally clung to Antonio.
632.
He who has not passed through different phases of conviction, but
sticks to the faith in whose net he was first caught, is, under
all circumstances, just on account of this unchangeableness, a
representative of atavistic culture; in accordance with this lack
of culture (which always presupposes plasticity for culture), he
is severe, unintelligent, unteachable, without liberality, an ever
suspicious person, an unscrupulous person who has recourse to all
expedients for enforcing his opinions because he cannot conceive that
there must be other opinions; he is, in such respects, perhaps a
source of strength, and even wholesome in cultures that have become
too emancipated and languid, but only because he strongly incites to
opposition: for thereby the delicate organisation of the new culture,
which is forced to struggle with him, becomes strong itself.
633.
In essential respects we are still the same men as those of the time
of the Reformation; how could it be otherwise? But the fact that we
no longer allow ourselves certain means for promoting the triumph
of our opinions distinguishes us from that age, and proves that we
belong to a higher culture. He who still combats and overthrows
opinions with calumnies and outbursts[Pg 401] of rage, after the manner of
the Reformation men, obviously betrays the fact that he would have
burnt his adversaries had he lived in other times, and that he would
have resorted to all the methods of the Inquisition if he had been
an opponent of the Reformation. The Inquisition was rational at that
time; for it represented nothing else than the universal application of
martial law, which had to be proclaimed throughout the entire domain
of the Church, and which, like all martial law, gave a right to the
extremest methods, under the presupposition, of course, (which we now
no longer share with those people), that the Church possessed truth
and had to preserve it at all costs, and at any sacrifice, for the
salvation of mankind. Now, however, one does not so readily concede to
any one that he possesses the truth; strict methods of investigation
have diffused enough of distrust and precaution, so that every one who
violently advocates opinions in word and deed is looked upon as an
enemy of our modern culture, or, at least, as an atavist. As a matter
of fact the pathos that man possesses truth is now of very little
consequence in comparison with the certainly milder and less noisy
pathos of the search for truth, which is never weary of learning afresh
and examining anew.
634.
Moreover, the methodical search for truth is itself the outcome of
those ages in which convictions were at war with each other. If the[Pg 402]
individual had not cared about his "truth," that is to say, about
carrying his point, there would have been no method of investigation;
thus, however, by the eternal struggle of the claims of different
individuals to absolute truth, people went on step by step to find
irrefragable principles according to which the rights of the claims
could be tested and the dispute settled. At first people decided
according to authorities; later on they criticised one another's ways
and means of finding the presumed truth; in the interval there was a
period when people deduced the consequences of the adverse theory, and
perhaps found them to be productive of injury and unhappiness; from
which it was then to be inferred by every one that the conviction of
the adversary involved an error. The personal struggle of the thinker
at last so sharpened his methods that real truths could be discovered,
and the mistakes of former methods exposed before the eyes of all.
635.
On the whole, scientific methods are at least as important results
of investigation as any other results, for the scientific spirit is
based upon a knowledge of method, and if the methods were lost, all
the results of science could not prevent the renewed prevalence of
superstition and absurdity. Clever people may learn as much as
they like of the results of science, but one still notices in their
conversation, and especially in the hypotheses they make, that they
lack the[Pg 403] scientific spirit; they have not the instinctive distrust of
the devious courses of thinking which, in consequence of long training,
has taken root in the soul of every scientific man. It is enough for
them to find any kind of hypothesis on a subject, they are then all
on fire for it, and imagine the matter is thereby settled. To have
an opinion is with them equivalent to immediately becoming fanatical
for it, and finally taking it to heart as a conviction. In the case
of an unexplained matter they become heated for the first idea that
comes into their head which has any resemblance to an explanation—a
course from which the worst results constantly follow, especially in
the field of politics. On that account everybody should nowadays have
become thoroughly acquainted with at least one science, for then
surely he knows what is meant by method, and how necessary is the
extremest carefulness. To women in particular this advice is to be
given at present; as to those who are irretrievably the victims of all
hypotheses, especially when these have the appearance of being witty,
attractive, enlivening, and invigorating. Indeed, on close inspection
one sees that by far the greater number of educated people still desire
convictions from a thinker and nothing but convictions, and that
only a small minority want certainty. The former want to be forcibly
carried away in order thereby to obtain an increase of strength; the
latter few have the real interest which disregards personal advantages
and the increase of strength also. The former class, who[Pg 404] greatly
predominate, are always reckoned upon when the thinker comports himself
and labels himself as a genius, and thus views himself as a higher
being to whom authority belongs. In so far as genius of this kind
upholds the ardour of convictions, and arouses distrust of the cautious
and modest spirit of science, it is an enemy of truth, however much it
may think itself the wooer thereof.
636.
There is, certainly, also an entirely different species of genius, that
of justice; and I cannot make up my mind to estimate it lower than any
kind of philosophical, political, or artistic genius. Its peculiarity
is to go, with heartfelt aversion, out of the way of everything that
blinds and confuses people's judgment of things; it is consequently
an adversary of convictions, for it wants to give their own to all,
whether they be living or dead, real or imaginary—and for that purpose
it must know thoroughly; it therefore places everything in the best
light and goes around it with careful eyes. Finally, it will even give
to its adversary the blind or short-sighted "conviction" (as men call
it,—among women it is called "faith"), what is due to conviction—for
the sake of truth.
637.
Opinions evolve out of passions; indolence of intellect allows those
to congeal into convictions. He, however, who is conscious of himself
as a free, restless, lively spirit can prevent this[Pg 405] congelation by
constant change; and if he is altogether a thinking snowball, he will
not have opinions in his head at all, but only certainties and properly
estimated probabilities. But we, who are of a mixed nature, alternately
inspired with ardour and chilled through and through by the intellect,
want to kneel before justice, as the only goddess we acknowledge. The
fire in us generally makes us unjust, and impure in the eyes of our
goddess; in this condition we are not permitted to take her hand, and
the serious smile of her approval never rests upon us. We reverence
her as the veiled Isis of our life; with shame we offer her our pain
as penance and sacrifice when the fire threatens to burn and consume
us. It is the intellect that saves us from being utterly burnt and
reduced to ashes; it occasionally drags us away from the sacrificial
altar of justice or enwraps us in a garment of asbestos. Liberated from
the fire, and impelled by the intellect, we then pass from opinion to
opinion, through the change of parties, as noble betrayers of all
things that can in any way be betrayed—and nevertheless without a
feeling of guilt.
638.
The Wanderer.—He who has attained intellectual emancipation to any
extent cannot, for a long time, regard himself otherwise than as
a wanderer on the face of the earth—and not even as a traveller
towards a final goal, for there is no such thing. But he certainly
wants to observe and[Pg 406] keep his eyes open to whatever actually happens
in the world; therefore he cannot attach his heart too firmly to
anything individual; he must have in himself something wandering that
takes pleasure in change and transitoriness. To be sure such a man will
have bad nights, when he is weary and finds the gates of the town that
should offer him rest closed; perhaps he may also find that, as in
the East, the desert reaches to the gates, that wild beasts howl far
and near, that a strong wind arises, and that robbers take away his
beasts of burden. Then the dreadful night closes over him like a second
desert upon the desert, and his heart grows weary of wandering. Then
when the morning sun rises upon him, glowing like a Deity of anger,
when the town is opened, he sees perhaps in the faces of the dwellers
therein still more desert, uncleanliness, deceit, and insecurity than
outside the gates—and the day is almost worse than the night. Thus
it may occasionally happen to the wanderer; but then there come as,
compensation the delightful mornings of other lands and days, when
already in the grey of the dawn he sees the throng of muses dancing
by, close to him, in the mist of the mountain; when afterwards, in
the symmetry of his ante-meridian soul, he strolls silently under
the trees, out of whose crests and leafy hiding-places all manner of
good and bright things are flung to him, the gifts of all the free
spirits who are at home in mountains, forests, and solitudes, and who,
like himself, alternately merry and thoughtful, are wanderers and
philosophers. Born[Pg 407] of the secrets of the early dawn, they ponder the
question how the day, between the hours of ten and twelve, can have
such a pure, transparent, and gloriously cheerful countenance: they
seek the ante-meridian philosophy.
[1] This is why Nietzsche pointed out later on that he had an
interest in the preservation of Christianity, and that he was sure his
teaching would not undermine this faith—just as little as anarchists
have undermined kings; but have left them seated all the more firmly on
their thrones.—J.M.K.
[2] Women never understand this.—J.M.K.
[Pg 408]
AMONG FRIENDS.
(Translated by T. COMMON.)

Nice, when mute we lie a-dreaming,
Nicer still when we are laughing,
'Neath the sky heaven's chariot speeding,
On the moss the book a-reading,
Sweetly loud with friends all laughing
Joyous, with white teeth a-gleaming.
Do I well, we're mute and humble;
Do I ill—we'll laugh exceeding;
Make it worse and worse, unheeding,
Worse proceeding, more laughs needing,
Till into the grave we stumble.
Friends! Yea! so shall it obtain?
Amen! Till we meet again.


II.

No excuses need be started!
Give, ye glad ones, open hearted,
To this foolish book before you
Ear and heart and lodging meet;
Trust me, 'twas not meant to bore you,
Though of folly I may treat!
What I find, seek, and am needing,
Was it e'er in book for reading?
Honour now fools in my name,
Learn from out this book by reading
How "our sense" from reason came.
Thus, my friends, shall it obtain?
Amen! Till we meet again.

[Pg vii]
Nietzsche's essay, Richard Wagner in Bayreuth, appeared in 1876,
and his next publication was his present work, which was issued in
1878. A comparison of the books will show that the two years of
meditation intervening had brought about a great change in Nietzsche's
views, his style of expressing them, and the form in which they
were cast. The Dionysian, overflowing with life, gives way to an
Apollonian thinker with a touch of pessimism. The long essay form is
abandoned, and instead we have a series of aphorisms, some tinged with
melancholy, others with satire, several, especially towards the end,
with Nietzschian wit at its best, and a few at the beginning so very
abstruse as to require careful study.
Since the Bayreuth festivals of 1876, Nietzsche had gradually come to
see Wagner as he really was. The ideal musician that Nietzsche had
pictured in his own mind turned out to be nothing more than a rather
dilettante philosopher, an opportunistic decadent with a suspicious
tendency towards Christianity. The young philosopher thereupon
proceeded to shake off the influence which the musician had exercised
upon him. He was successful in doing so, but not without a[Pg viii] struggle,
just as he had formerly shaken off the influence of Schopenhauer.
Hence he writes in his autobiography:[1] "Human, all-too-Human, is
the monument of a crisis. It is entitled: 'A book for free spirits,'
and almost every line in it represents a victory—in its pages I freed
myself from everything foreign to my real nature. Idealism is foreign
to me: the title says, 'Where you see ideal things, I see things
which are only—human alas! all-too-human!' I know man better—the
term 'free spirit' must here be understood in no other sense than this:
a freed man, who has once more taken possession of himself."
The form of this book will be better understood when it is remembered
that at this period Nietzsche was beginning to suffer from stomach
trouble and headaches. As a cure for his complaints, he spent his time
in travel when he could get a few weeks' respite from his duties at
Basel University; and it was in the course of his solitary walks and
hill-climbing tours that the majority of these thoughts occurred to
him and were jotted down there and then. A few of them, however, date
further back, as he tells us in the preface to the second part of this
work. Many of them, he says, occupied his mind even before he published
his first book, The Birth of Tragedy and several others, as we learn
from his notebooks and posthumous writings, date from the period of the
Thoughts out of Season.
It must be clearly understood, however, that[Pg ix] Nietzsche's disease must
not be looked upon in the same way as that of an ordinary man. People
are inclined to regard a sick man as rancorous; but any one who rights
with and conquers his disease, and even exploits it, as Nietzsche did,
benefits thereby to an extraordinary degree. In the first place, he has
passed through several stages of human psychology with which a healthy
man is entirely unacquainted; e.g. he has learnt by introspection
the spiteful and revengeful spirit of the sick man and his religion.
Secondly, in his moments of freedom from pain and gloom his thoughts
will be all the more brilliant.
In support of this last statement, one instance may be selected out of
hundreds that could be adduced. Heinrich Heine spent the greater part
of his life in exile from his native country, tortured by headaches,
and finally dying in a foreign land as the result of a spinal disease.
His splendid works were composed in his moments of respite from
illness, and during the last years of his life, when his health was
at its worst, he gave to the world his famous Romancero. We would
likewise do well to recollect Goethe's saying:

Zart Gedicht, wie Regenbogen,
Wird nur auf dunkelm Grund gezogen.[2]

Thus neither the form of this book—so startling at first to those who
have been brought up in the traditions of our own school—nor the[Pg x]
treat all men as equals, and proclaim the establishment of equal rights:
so far a socialistic mode of thought which is based on
justice is possible; but, as has been said, only within
the ranks of the governing classes, which in this case
practises justice with sacrifices and abnegations. On
the other hand, to demand equality of rights, as do the
Socialists of the subject caste, is by no means the outcome
of justice, but of covetousness. If you expose bloody pieces
of flesh to a beast, and then withdraw them again until
it finally begins to roar, do you think that the roaring
implies justice?
Theologians on the other hand, as may be expected, will find no such
ready help in their difficulties from Nietzsche. They must, on the
contrary, be on their guard against so alert an adversary—a duty
which they are apparently not going to shirk; for theologians are
amongst the most ardent students of Nietzsche in this country. Their
attention may therefore be drawn to aphorism 630 of this book, dealing
with convictions and their origin, which will no doubt be successfully
refuted by the defenders of the true faith. In fact, there is not a
single paragraph in the book that does not deserve careful study by all
serious thinkers.
On the whole, however, this is a calm book, and those who are
accustomed to Nietzsche the out-spoken Immoralist, may be somewhat
astonished at the calm tone of the present volume. The explanation is
that Nietzsche was now just beginning to walk on his own philosophical
path. His life-long aim, the uplifting of the type man, was still in
view, but the way leading towards it was once more uncertain. Hence the
peculiarly calm, even[Pg xi] melancholic, and what Nietzsche himself would
call Apollonian, tinge of many of these aphorisms, so different from
the style of his earlier and later writings. For this very reason,
however, the book may appeal all the more to English readers, who are
of course more Apollonian than Dionysian. Nietzsche is feeling his way,
and these aphorisms represent his first steps. As such—besides having
a high intrinsic value of themselves—they are enormous aids to the
study of his character and temperament.
J. M. KENNEDY.
[1] Ecce Homo, p. 75.
[2] "Tender poetry, like rainbows, can appear only on a dark
and sombre background."—J.M.K.
[Pg xii][Pg 1]
1.
I have been told frequently, and always with great surprise, that there
is something common and distinctive in all my writings, from the Birth
of Tragedy to the latest published Prelude to a Philosophy of the
Future. They all contain, I have been told, snares and nets for unwary
birds, and an almost perpetual unconscious demand for the inversion
of customary valuations and valued customs. What? Everything
only—human-all-too-human? People lay down my writings with this sigh,
not without a certain dread and distrust of morality itself, indeed
almost tempted and encouraged to become advocates of the worst
things: as being perhaps only the best disparaged? My writings have
been called a school of suspicion and especially of disdain, more
happily, also, a school of courage and even of audacity. Indeed, I
myself do not think that any one has ever looked at the world with such
a profound suspicion; and not only as occasional Devil's Advocate, but
equally also, to speak theologically, as enemy and impeacher of God;
and he who realises something of the consequences involved,[Pg 2] in every
profound suspicion, something of the chills and anxieties of loneliness
to which every uncompromising difference of outlook condemns him
who is affected therewith, will also understand how often I sought
shelter in some kind of reverence or hostility, or scientificality
or levity or stupidity, in order to recover from myself, and, as it
were, to obtain temporary self-forgetfulness; also why, when I did not
find what I needed, I was obliged to manufacture it, to counterfeit
and to imagine it in a suitable manner (and what else have poets ever
done? And for what purpose has all the art in the world existed?).
What I always required most, however, for my cure and self-recovery,
was the belief that I was not isolated in such circumstances, that I
did not see in an isolated manner—a magic suspicion of relationship
and similarity to others in outlook and desire, a repose in the
confidence of friendship, a blindness in both parties without suspicion
or note of interrogation, an enjoyment of foregrounds, and surfaces
of the near and the nearest, of all that has colour, epidermis, and
outside appearance. Perhaps I might be reproached in this respect
for much "art" and fine false coinage; for instance, for voluntarily
and knowingly shutting my eyes to Schopenhauer's blind will to
morality at a time when I had become sufficiently clear-sighted about
morality; also for deceiving myself about Richard Wagner's incurable
romanticism, as if it were a beginning and not an end; also about
the Greeks, also about the Germans and their future—and there would
still probably be quite a long list of such alsos? Supposing[Pg 3] however,
that this were all true and that I were reproached with good reason,
what do you know, what could you know as to how much artifice of
self-preservation, how much rationality and higher protection there is
in such self-deception,—and how much falseness I still require in
order to allow myself again and again the luxury of my sincerity?
... In short, I still live; and life, in spite of ourselves, is not
devised by morality; it demands illusion, it lives by illusion
... but——There! I am already beginning again and doing what I have
always done, old immoralist and bird-catcher that I am,—I am talking
un-morally, ultra-morally, "beyond good and evil"?...
2.
Thus then, when I found it necessary, I invented once on a time the
"free spirits," to whom this discouragingly encouraging book with
the title Human, all-too-Human, is dedicated. There are no such
"free spirits" nor have there been such, but, as already said, I then
required them for company to keep me cheerful in the midst of evils
(sickness, loneliness, foreignness,—acedia, inactivity) as brave
companions and ghosts with whom I could laugh and gossip when so
inclined and send to the devil when they became bores,—as compensation
for the lack of friends. That such free spirits will be possible some
day, that our Europe will have such bold and cheerful wights amongst
her sons of to-morrow and the day after to-morrow,[Pg 4] as the shadows of
a hermit's phantasmagoria—I should be the last to doubt thereof.
Already I see them coming, slowly, slowly; and perhaps I am doing
something to hasten their coming when I describe in advance under what
auspices I see them originate, and upon what paths I see them come.
3.
One may suppose that a spirit in which the type "free spirit" is to
become fully mature and sweet, has had its decisive event in a great
emancipation, and that it was all the more fettered previously and
apparently bound for ever to its corner and pillar. What is it that
binds most strongly? What cords are almost unrendable? In men of a
lofty and select type it will be their duties; the reverence which is
suitable to youth, respect and tenderness for all that is time-honoured
and worthy, gratitude to the land which bore them, to the hand which
led them, to the sanctuary where they learnt to adore,—their most
exalted moments themselves will bind them most effectively, will lay
upon them the most enduring obligations. For those who are thus bound
the great emancipation comes suddenly, like an earthquake; the young
soul is all at once convulsed, unloosened and extricated—it does not
itself know what is happening. An impulsion and-compulsion sway and
over-master it like a command; a will and a wish awaken, to go forth
on their course, anywhere, at any cost; a violent, dangerous curiosity
about an undiscovered world flames and flares in every sense. "Better
to[Pg 5] die than live here"—says the imperious voice and seduction, and
this "here," this "at home" is all that the soul has hitherto loved! A
sudden fear and suspicion of that which it loved, a flash of disdain
for what was called its "duty," a rebellious, arbitrary, volcanically
throbbing longing for travel, foreignness, estrangement, coldness,
disenchantment, glaciation, a hatred of love, perhaps a sacrilegious
clutch and look backwards, to where it hitherto adored and loved,
perhaps a glow of shame at what it was just doing, and at the same
time a rejoicing that it was doing it, an intoxicated, internal,
exulting thrill which betrays a triumph—a triumph? Over what? Over
whom? An enigmatical, questionable, doubtful triumph, but the first
triumph nevertheless;—such evil and painful incidents belong to the
history of the great emancipation. It is, at the same time, a disease
which may destroy the man, this first outbreak of power and will to
self-decision, self-valuation, this will to free will; and how much
disease is manifested in the wild attempts and eccentricities by which
the liberated and emancipated one now seeks to demonstrate his mastery
over things! He roves about raging with unsatisfied longing; whatever
he captures has to suffer for the dangerous tension of his pride;
he tears to pieces whatever attracts him. With a malicious laugh he
twirls round whatever he finds veiled or guarded by a sense of shame;
he tries how these things look when turned upside down. It is a matter
of arbitrariness with him, and pleasure in arbitrariness, if he now
perhaps bestow his favour on what[Pg 6] had hitherto a bad repute,—if he
inquisitively and temptingly haunt what is specially forbidden. In the
background of his activities and wanderings —for he is restless and
aimless in his course as in a desert—stands the note of interrogation
of an increasingly dangerous curiosity. "Cannot all valuations be
reversed? And is good perhaps evil? And God only an invention and
artifice of the devil? Is everything, perhaps, radically false? And
if we are the deceived, are we not thereby also deceivers? Must we
not also be deceivers?"—Such thoughts lead and mislead him more and
more, onward and away. Solitude encircles and engirdles him, always
more threatening, more throttling, more heart-oppressing, that terrible
goddess and mater sæva cupidinum—but who knows nowadays what
solitude is?...
4.
From this morbid solitariness, from the desert of such years of
experiment, it is still a long way to the copious, overflowing safety
and soundness which does not care to dispense with disease itself as
an instrument and angling-hook of knowledge;—to that mature freedom
of spirit which is equally self-control and discipline of the heart,
and gives access to many and opposed modes of thought;—to that inward
comprehensiveness and daintiness of superabundance, which excludes any
danger of the spirit's becoming enamoured and lost in its own paths,
and[Pg 7] lying intoxicated in some corner or other; to that excess of
plastic, healing, formative, and restorative powers, which is exactly
the sign of splendid health, that excess which gives the free spirit
the dangerous prerogative of being entitled to live by experiments
and offer itself to adventure; the free spirit's prerogative of
mastership! Long years of convalescence may lie in between, years full
of many-coloured, painfully-enchanting magical transformations, curbed
and led by a tough will to health, which often dares to dress and
disguise itself as actual health. There is a middle condition therein,
which a man of such a fate never calls to mind later on without
emotion; a pale, delicate light and a sunshine-happiness are peculiar
to him, a feeling of bird-like freedom, prospect, and haughtiness, a
tertium quid in which curiosity and gentle disdain are combined. A
"free spirit"—this cool expression does good in every condition, it
almost warms. One no longer lives, in the fetters of love and hatred,
without Yea, without Nay, voluntarily near, voluntarily distant,
preferring to escape, to turn aside, to flutter forth, to fly up and
away; one is fastidious like every one who has once seen an immense
variety beneath him,—and one has become the opposite of those who
trouble themselves about things which do not concern them. In fact, it
is nothing but things which now concern the free spirit,—and how many
things!—which no longer trouble him!
[Pg 8]
5.
A step further towards recovery, and the free spirit again draws
near to life; slowly, it is true, and almost stubbornly, almost
distrustfully. Again it grows warmer around him, and, as it were,
yellower; feeling and sympathy gain depth,. thawing winds of every
kind pass lightly over him. He almost feels as if his eyes were now
first opened to what is near. He marvels and is still; where has
he been? The near and nearest things, how changed they appear to
him! What a bloom and magic they have acquired meanwhile! He looks
back gratefully,—grateful to his wandering, his austerity and
self-estrangement, his far-sightedness and his bird-like flights
in cold heights. What a good thing that he did not always stay "at
home," "by himself," like a sensitive, stupid tenderling. He has been
beside himself, there is no doubt. He now sees himself for the first
time,—and what surprises he feels thereby! What thrills unexperienced
hitherto! What joy even in the weariness, in the old illness, in the
relapses of the convalescent! How he likes to sit still and suffer, to
practise patience, to lie in the sun! Who is as familiar as he with the
joy of winter, with the patch of sunshine upon the wall! They are the
most grateful animals in the world, and also the most unassuming, these
lizards of convalescents with their faces half-turned towards life once
more:—there are those amongst them who never let a day pass without
hanging a little hymn of praise on its trailing fringe. And, speaking
seriously, it[Pg 9] is a radical cure for all pessimism (the well-known
disease of old idealists and falsehood-mongers) to become ill after
the manner of these free spirits, to remain ill a good while, and then
grow well (I mean "better") for a still longer period. It is wisdom,
practical wisdom, to prescribe even health for one's self for a long
time only in small doses.
6.
About this time it may at last happen, under the sudden illuminations
of still disturbed and changing health, that the enigma of that great
emancipation begins to reveal itself to the free, and ever freer,
spirit,—that enigma which had hitherto lain obscure, questionable,
and almost intangible, in his memory. If for a long time he scarcely
dared to ask himself, "Why so apart? So alone? denying everything that
I revered? denying reverence itself? Why this hatred, this suspicion,
this severity towards my own virtues?"—he now dares and asks the
questions aloud, and already hears something like an answer to them—
"Thou shouldst become master over thyself and master also of thine own
virtues. Formerly they were thy masters; but they are only entitled
to be thy tools amongst other tools. Thou shouldst obtain power over
thy pro and contra, and learn how to put them forth and withdraw them
again in accordance with thy higher purpose. Thou shouldst learn how
to take the proper perspective of every valuation—the shifting,
distortion, and apparent teleology of the horizons and everything[Pg 10] that
belongs to perspective; also the amount of stupidity which opposite
values involve, and all the intellectual loss with which every pro
and every contra has to be paid for. Thou shouldst learn how much
necessary injustice there is in every for and against, injustice
as inseparable from life, and life itself as conditioned by the
perspective and its injustice. Above all thou shouldst see clearly
where the injustice is always greatest:—namely, where life has
developed most punily, restrictedly, necessitously, and incipiently,
and yet cannot help regarding itself as the purpose and standard of
things, and for the sake of self-preservation, secretly, basely, and
continuously wasting away and calling in question the higher, greater,
and richer,—thou shouldst see clearly the problem of gradation of
rank, and how power and right and amplitude of perspective grow up
together. Thou shouldst——" But enough; the free spirit knows
henceforth which "thou shalt" he has obeyed, and also what he can now
do, what he only now—may do....
7.
Thus doth the free spirit answer himself with regard to the riddle of
emancipation, and ends therewith, while he generalises his case, in
order thus to decide with regard to his experience. "As it has happened
to me," he says to himself, "so must it happen to every one in whom
a mission seeks to embody itself and to 'come into the world.'" The
secret power and necessity of this mission will operate in and upon
the destined individuals like[Pg 11] an unconscious pregnancy,—long before
they have had the mission itself in view and have known its name. Our
destiny rules over us, even when we are not yet aware of it; it is
the future that makes laws for our to-day. Granted that it is the
problem of the gradations of rank, of which we may say that it is
our problem, we free spirits; now only in the midday of our life do
we first understand what preparations, detours, tests, experiments,
and disguises the problem needed, before it was permitted to rise
before us, and how we had first to experience the most manifold and
opposing conditions of distress and happiness in soul and body, as
adventurers and circumnavigators of the inner world called "man," as
surveyors of all the "higher" and the "one-above-another," also called
"man"—penetrating everywhere, almost without fear, rejecting nothing,
losing nothing, tasting everything, cleansing everything from all that
is accidental, and, as it were, sifting it out—until at last we could
say, we free spirits, "Here—a new problem! Here a long ladder,
the rungs of which we ourselves have sat upon and mounted,—which we
ourselves at some time have been! Here a higher place, a lower place,
an under-us, an immeasurably long order, a hierarchy which we see;
here—our problem!"
8.
No psychologist or augur will be in doubt for a moment as to what stage
of the development just described the following book belongs (or is
assigned[Pg 12] to). But where are these psychologists nowadays? In France,
certainly; perhaps in Russia; assuredly not in Germany. Reasons are
not lacking why the present-day Germans could still even count this
as an honour to them—bad enough, surely, for one who in this respect
is un-German in disposition and constitution! This German book,
which has been able to find readers in a wide circle of countries
and nations—it has been about ten years going its rounds—and must
understand some sort of music and piping art, by means of which
even coy foreign ears are seduced into listening,—it is precisely
in Germany that this book has been most negligently read, and worst
listened to; what is the reason?" It demands too much, "I have been
told," it appeals to men free from the pressure of coarse duties, it
wants refined and fastidious senses, it needs superfluity—superfluity
of time, of clearness of sky and heart, of otium in the boldest
sense of the term:—purely good things, which we Germans of to-day do
not possess and therefore cannot give." After such a polite answer
my philosophy advises me to be silent and not to question further;
besides, in certain cases, as the proverb points out, one only
remains a philosopher by being—silent.[1]
NICE, Spring 1886.
[1] An allusion to the mediæval Latin distich:


O si tacuisses,
Philosophus mansisses.—J.M.K.
[Pg 13]
1.
Chemistry of Ideas and Sensations.—Philosophical problems adopt in
almost all matters the same form of question as they did two thousand
years ago; how can anything spring from its opposite? for instance,
reason out of unreason, the sentient out of the dead, logic out of
unlogic, disinterested contemplation out of covetous willing, life for
others out of egoism, truth out of error? Metaphysical philosophy has
helped itself over those difficulties hitherto by denying the origin of
one thing in another, and assuming a miraculous origin for more highly
valued things, immediately out of the kernel and essence of the "thing
in itself." Historical philosophy, on the contrary, which is no longer
to be thought of as separate from physical science, the youngest of all
philosophical methods, has ascertained in single cases (and presumably
this will happen in everything)[Pg 14] that there are no opposites except in
the usual exaggeration of the popular or metaphysical point of view,
and that an error of reason lies at the bottom of the opposition:
according to this explanation, strictly understood, there is neither
an unegoistical action nor an entirely disinterested point of view,
they are both only sublimations in which the fundamental element
appears almost evaporated, and is only to be discovered by the closest
observation. All that we require, and which can only be given us by the
present advance of the single sciences, is a chemistry of the moral,
religious, æsthetic ideas and sentiments, as also of those emotions
which we experience in ourselves both in the great and in the small
phases of social and intellectual intercourse, and even in solitude;
but what if this chemistry should result in the fact that also in this
case the most beautiful colours have been obtained from base, even
despised materials? Would many be inclined to pursue such examinations?
Humanity likes to put all questions as to origin and beginning out
of its mind; must one not be almost dehumanised to feel a contrary
tendency in one's self?
2.
Inherited Faults of Philosophers.—All philosophers have the common
fault that they start from man in his present state and hope to attain
their end by an analysis of him. Unconsciously they look upon "man"
as an cetema Veritas, as a thing unchangeable in all commotion, as
a sure[Pg 15] standard of things. But everything that the philosopher says
about man is really nothing more than testimony about the man of a
very limited space of time. A lack of the historical sense is the
hereditary fault of all philosophers; many, indeed, unconsciously
mistake the very latest variety of man, such as has arisen under the
influence of certain religions, certain political events, for the
permanent form from which one must set out. They will not learn that
man has developed, that his faculty of knowledge has developed also;
whilst for some of them the entire world is spun out of this faculty
of knowledge. Now everything essential in human development happened
in pre-historic times, long before those four thousand years which we
know something of; man may not have changed much during this time. But
the philosopher sees "instincts" in the present man and takes it for
granted that this is one of the unalterable facts of mankind, and,
consequently, can furnish a key to the understanding of the world; the
entire teleology is so constructed that man of the last four thousand
years is spoken of as an eternal being, towards which all things in
the world have from the beginning a natural direction. But everything
has evolved; there are no eternal facts, as there are likewise no
absolute truths. Therefore, historical philosophising is henceforth
necessary, and with it the virtue of diffidence.
3.
Appreciation of Unpretentious Truths.—It is a mark of a higher
culture to value the[Pg 16] little unpretentious truths, which have been
found by means of strict method, more highly than the joy-diffusing
and dazzling errors which spring from metaphysical and artistic times
and peoples. First of all one has scorn on the lips for the former,
as if here nothing could have equal privileges with anything else,
so unassuming, simple, bashful, apparently discouraging are they,
so beautiful, stately, intoxicating, perhaps even animating, are
the others. But the hardly attained, the certain, the lasting, and
therefore of great consequence for all wider knowledge, is still
the higher; to keep one's self to that is manly and shows bravery,
simplicity, and forbearance. Gradually not only single individuals
but the whole of mankind will be raised to this manliness, when
it has at last accustomed itself to the higher appreciation of
durable, lasting knowledge, and has lost all belief in inspiration
and the miraculous communication of truths. Respecters of forms,
certainly, with their standard of the beautiful and noble, will first
of all have good reasons for mockery, as soon as the appreciation of
unpretentious truths, and the scientific spirit, begin to obtain the
mastery; but only because their eye has either not yet recognised the
charm of the simplest form, or because men educated in that spirit
are not yet completely and inwardly saturated by it, so that they
still thoughtlessly imitate old forms (and badly enough, as one does
who no longer cares much about the matter). Formerly the spirit was
not occupied with strict thought, its earnestness then lay in the
spinning out of symbols and forms. This is[Pg 17] changed; that earnestness
in the symbolical has become the mark of a lower culture. As our arts
themselves grow evermore intellectual, our senses more spiritual, and
as, for instance, people now judge concerning what sounds well to the
senses quite differently from how they did a hundred years ago, so the
forms of our life grow ever more spiritual, to the eye of older ages
perhaps uglier, but only because it is incapable of perceiving how
the kingdom of the inward, spiritual beauty constantly grows deeper
and wider, and to what extent the inner intellectual look may be of
more importance to us all than the most beautiful bodily frame and the
noblest architectural structure.
4.
Astrology and the Like.—It is probable that the objects of religious,
moral, æsthetic and logical sentiment likewise belong only to the
surface of things, while man willingly believes that here, at least,
he has touched the heart of the world; he deceives himself, because
those things enrapture him so profoundly, and make him so profoundly
unhappy, and he therefore shows the same pride here as in astrology.
For astrology believes that the firmament moves round the destiny of
man; the moral man, however, takes it for granted that what he has
essentially at heart must also be the essence and heart of things.
5.
Misunderstanding of Dreams.—In the ages of a rude and primitive
civilisation man believed[Pg 18] that in dreams he became acquainted with
a second actual world; herein lies the origin of all metaphysics.
Without dreams there could have been found no reason for a division of
the world. The distinction, too, between soul and body is connected
with the most ancient comprehension of dreams, also the supposition of
an imaginary soul-body, therefore the origin of all belief in spirits,
and probably also the belief in gods. "The dead continues to live,
for he appears to the living in a dream": thus men reasoned of old
for thousands and thousands of years.
6.
The Scientific Spirit Partially But Not Wholly Powerful.—The
smallest subdivisions of science taken separately are dealt with
purely in relation to themselves,—the general, great sciences, on the
contrary, regarded as a whole, call up the question—certainly a very
non-objective one—"Wherefore? To what end?" It is this utilitarian
consideration which causes them to be dealt with less impersonally
when taken as a whole than when considered in their various parts.
In philosophy, above all, as the apex of the entire, pyramid of
science, the question as to the utility of knowledge is involuntarily
brought forward, and every philosophy has the unconscious intention of
ascribing to it the greatest usefulness. For this reason there is so
much high-flying metaphysics in all philosophies and such a shyness of
the apparently unimportant solutions of physics; for[Pg 19] the importance
of knowledge for life must appear as great as possible. Here is the
antagonism between the separate provinces of science and philosophy.
The latter desires, what art does, to give the greatest possible depth
and meaning to life and actions; in the former one seeks knowledge and
nothing further, whatever may emerge thereby. So far there has been no
philosopher in whose hands philosophy has not grown into an apology
for knowledge; on this point, at least, every one is an optimist, that
the greatest usefulness must be ascribed to knowledge. They are all
tyrannised over by logic, and this is optimism—in its essence.
7.
The Kill-joy in Science.—Philosophy separated from science when it
asked the question, "Which is the knowledge of the world and of life
which enables man to live most happily?" This happened in the Socratic
schools; the veins of scientific investigation were bound up by the
point of view of happiness,—and are so still.
8.
Pneumatic Explanation of Nature.—Metaphysics explains the writing of
Nature, so to speak, pneumatically, as the Church and her learned men
formerly did with the Bible. A great deal of understanding is required
to apply to Nature the same method of strict interpretation as the
philologists have now established for all books[Pg 20] with the intention
of clearly understanding what the text means, but not suspecting a
double sense or even taking it for granted. Just, however, as with
regard to books, the bad art of interpretation is by no means overcome,
and in the most cultivated society one still constantly comes across
the remains of allegorical and mystic interpretation, so it is also
with regard to Nature, indeed it is even much worse.
9.
The Metaphysical World.—It is true that there might be a
metaphysical world; the absolute possibility of it is hardly to be
disputed. We look at everything through the human head and cannot cut
this head off; while the question remains, What would be left of the
world if it had been cut off? This is a purely scientific problem,
and one not very likely to trouble mankind; but everything which
has hitherto made metaphysical suppositions valuable, terrible,
delightful for man, what has produced them, is passion, error, and
self-deception; the very worst methods of knowledge, not the best,
have taught belief therein. When these methods have been discovered as
the foundation of all existing religions and metaphysics, they have
been refuted. Then there still always remains that possibility; but
there is nothing to be done with it, much less is it possible to let
happiness, salvation, and life depend on the spider-thread of such a
possibility. For nothing could be said of the metaphysical world but
that it would be a different condition, a condition[Pg 21] inaccessible and
incomprehensible to us; it would be a thing of negative qualities.
Were the existence of such a world ever so well proved, the fact would
nevertheless remain that it would be precisely the most irrelevant
of all forms of knowledge: more irrelevant than the knowledge of the
chemical analysis of water to the sailor in danger in a storm.
10.
The Harmlessness of Metaphysics in the Future.—Directly the origins
of religion, art, and morals have been so described that one can
perfectly explain them without having recourse to metaphysical concepts
at the beginning and in the course of the path, the strongest interest
in the purely theoretical problem of the "thing-in-itself" and the
"phenomenon" ceases. For however it may be here, with religion, art,
and morals we do not touch the "essence of the world in itself"; we are
in the domain of representation, no "intuition" can carry us further.
With the greatest calmness we shall leave the question as to how our
own conception of the world can differ so widely from the revealed
essence of the world, to physiology and the history of the evolution of
organisms and ideas.
11.
Language As a Presumptive Science.—The importance of language for
the development of culture lies in the fact that in language man has[Pg 22]
placed a world of his own beside the other, a position which he deemed
so fixed that he might therefrom lift the rest of the world off its
hinges, and make himself master of it. Inasmuch as man has believed in
the ideas and names of things as æternæ veritates for a great length
of time, he has acquired that pride by which he has raised himself
above the animal; he really thought that in language he possessed
the knowledge of the world. The maker of language was not modest
enough to think that he only gave designations to things, he believed
rather that with his words he expressed the widest knowledge of the
things; in reality language is the first step in the endeavour after
science. Here also it is belief in ascertained truth, from which the
mightiest sources of strength have flowed. Much later—only now—it
is dawning upon men that they have propagated a tremendous error in
their belief in language. Fortunately it is now too late to reverse
the development of reason, which is founded upon that belief. Logic,
also, is founded upon suppositions to which nothing in the actual
world corresponds,—for instance, on the supposition of the equality
of things, and the identity of the same thing at different points of
time,—but that particular science arose out of the contrary belief
(that such things really existed in the actual world). It is the same
with mathematics, which would certainly not have arisen if it had been
known from the beginning that in Nature there are no exactly straight
lines, no real circle, no absolute standard of size.
[Pg 23]
12.
Dream and Culture.—The function of the brain which is most influenced
by sleep is the memory; not that it entirely ceases; but it is brought
back to a condition of imperfection, such as everyone may have
experienced in pre-historic times, whether asleep or awake. Arbitrary
and confused as it is, it constantly confounds things on the ground
of the most fleeting resemblances; but with the same arbitrariness
and confusion the ancients invented their mythologies, and even at
the present day travellers are accustomed to remark how prone the
savage is to forgetfulness, how, after a short tension of memory, his
mind begins to sway here and there from sheer weariness and gives
forth lies and nonsense. But in dreams we all resemble the savage;
bad recognition and erroneous comparisons are the reasons of the
bad conclusions, of which we are guilty in dreams: so that, when we
clearly recollect what we have dreamt, we are alarmed at ourselves at
harbouring so much foolishness within us. The perfect distinctness of
all dream-representations, which pre-suppose absolute faith in their
reality, recall the conditions that appertain, to primitive man,
in whom hallucination was extraordinarily frequent, and sometimes
simultaneously seized entire communities, entire nations. Therefore, in
sleep and in dreams we once more carry out the task of early humanity.
[Pg 24]
13.
The Logic of Dreams.—In sleep our nervous system is perpetually
excited by numerous inner occurrences; nearly all the organs are
disjointed and in a state of activity, the blood runs its turbulent
course, the position of the sleeper causes pressure on certain limbs,
his coverings influence his sensations in various ways, the stomach
digests and by its movements it disturbs other organs, the intestines
writhe, the position of the head occasions unaccustomed play of
muscles, the feet, unshod, not pressing upon the floor with the soles,
occasion the feeling of the unaccustomed just as does the different
clothing of the whole body: all this, according to its daily change
and extent, excites by its extraordinariness the entire system to the
very functions of the brain, and thus there are a hundred occasions
for the spirit to be surprised and to seek for the reasons of this
excitation;—the dream, however, is the seeking and representing of
the causes of those excited sensations,—that is, of the supposed
causes. A person who, for instance, binds his feet with two straps
will perhaps dream that two serpents are coiling round his feet; this
is first hypothesis, then a belief, with an accompanying mental
picture and interpretation—" These serpents must be the causa of
those sensations which I, the sleeper, experience,"—so decides the
mind of the sleeper. The immediate past, so disclosed, becomes to him
the present through his excited imagination. Thus every one knows
from experience how quickly the[Pg 25] dreamer weaves into his dream a
loud sound that he hears, such as the ringing of bells or the firing
of cannon, that is to say, explains it from afterwards so that he
first thinks he experiences the producing circumstances and then
that sound. But how does it happen that the mind of the dreamer is
always so mistaken, while the same mind when awake is accustomed to be
so temperate, careful, and sceptical with regard to its hypotheses?
so that the first random hypothesis for the explanation of a feeling
suffices for him to believe immediately in its truth? (For in dreaming
we believe in the dream as if it were a reality, i.e. we think our
hypothesis completely proved.) I hold, that as man now still reasons in
dreams, so men reasoned also when awake through thousands of years;
the first causa which occurred to the mind to explain anything that
required an explanation, was sufficient and stood for truth. (Thus,
according to travellers' tales, savages still do to this very day.)
This ancient element in human nature still manifests itself in our
dreams, for it is the foundation upon which the higher reason has
developed and still develops in every individual; the dream carries
us back into remote conditions of human culture, and provides a ready
means of understanding them better. Dream-thinking is now so easy to
us because during immense periods of human development we have been
so well drilled in this form of fantastic and cheap explanation,
by means of the first agreeable notions. In so far, dreaming is a
recreation for the brain, which by day has to[Pg 26] satisfy the stern
demands of thought, as they are laid down by the higher culture. We
can at once discern an allied process even in our awakened state, as
the door and ante-room of the dream. If we shut our eyes, the brain
produces a number of impressions of light and colour, probably as a
kind of after-play and echo of all those effects of light which crowd
in upon it by day. Now, however, the understanding, together with
the imagination, instantly works up this play of colour, shapeless
in itself, into definite figures, forms, landscapes, and animated
groups. The actual accompanying process thereby is again a kind of
conclusion from the effect to the cause: since the mind asks, "Whence
come these impressions of light and colour?" it supposes those figures
and forms as causes; it takes them for the origin of those colours and
lights, because in the daytime, with open eyes, it is accustomed to
find a producing cause for every colour, every effect of light. Here,
therefore, the imagination constantly places pictures before the mind,
since it supports itself on the visual impressions of the day in their
production, and the dream-imagination does just the same thing,—that
is, the supposed cause is deduced from the effect and represented after
the effect; all this happens with extraordinary rapidity, so that here,
as with the conjuror, a confusion of judgment may arise and a sequence
may look like something simultaneous, or even like a reversed sequence.
From these circumstances we may gather how lately the more acute
logical thinking, the strict discrimination of cause and effect has[Pg 27]
been developed, when our reasoning and understanding faculties still
involuntarily hark back to those primitive forms of deduction, and
when we pass about half our life in this condition. The poet, too, and
the artist assign causes for their moods and conditions which are by
no means the true ones; in this they recall an older humanity and can
assist us to the understanding of it.
14.
Co-echoing.—All stronger moods bring with them a co-echoing of
kindred sensations and moods, they grub up the memory, so to speak.
Along with them something within us remembers and becomes conscious
of similar conditions and their origin. Thus there are formed quick
habitual connections of feelings and thoughts, which eventually, when
they follow each other with lightning speed, are no longer felt as
complexes but as unities. In this sense one speaks of the moral
feeling, of the religious feeling, as if they were absolute unities: in
reality they are streams with a hundred sources and tributaries. Here
also, as so often happens, the unity of the word is no security for the
unity of the thing.
15.
No Internal and External in the World.—As Democritus transferred the
concepts "above" and "below" to endless space where they have no sense,
so philosophers in[Pg 28] general have transferred the concepts "Internal"
and "External" to the essence and appearance of the world; they think
that with deep feelings one can penetrate deeply into the internal and
approach the heart of Nature. But these feelings are only deep in so
far as along with them, barely noticeable, certain complicated groups
of thoughts, which we call deep, are regularly excited; a feeling
is deep because we think that the accompanying thought is deep. But
the "deep" thought can nevertheless be very far from the truth, as,
for instance, every metaphysical one; if one take away from the deep
feeling the commingled elements of thought, then the strong feeling
remains, and this guarantees nothing for knowledge but itself, just
as strong faith proves only its strength and not the truth of what is
believed in.
16.
Phenomenon and Thing-in-itself.—Philosophers are in the habit of
setting themselves before life and experience—before that which they
call the world of appearance—as before a picture that is once for
all unrolled and exhibits unchangeably fixed the same process,—this
process, they think, must be rightly interpreted in order to come to
a conclusion about the being that produced the picture: about the
thing-in-itself, therefore, which is always accustomed to be regarded
as sufficient ground for the world of phenomenon. On the other hand,
since one always makes the idea of the metaphysical stand definitely
as that of th[Pg 29]e unconditioned, consequently also unconditioning, one
must directly disown all connection between the unconditioned (the
metaphysical world) and the world which is known to us; so that the
thing-in-itself should most certainly not appear in the phenomenon,
and every conclusion from the former as regards the latter is to be
rejected. Both sides overlook the fact that that picture—that which
we now call human life and experience—has gradually evolved,—nay,
is still in the full process of evolving,—and therefore should not
be regarded as a fixed magnitude from which a conclusion about its
originator might be deduced (the sufficing cause) or even merely
neglected. It is because for thousands of years we have looked into
the world with moral, æsthetic, and religious pretensions, with blind
inclination, passion, or fear, and have surfeited ourselves in the
vices of illogical thought, that this world has gradually become so
marvellously motley, terrible, full of meaning and of soul, it has
acquired colour—but we were the colourists; the human intellect,
on the basis of human needs, of human emotions, has caused this
"phenomenon" to appear and has carried its erroneous fundamental
conceptions into things. Late, very late, it takes to thinking, and
now the world of experience and the thing-in-itself seem to it so
extraordinarily different and separated, that it gives up drawing
conclusions from the former to the latter—or in a terribly mysterious
manner demands the renunciation of our intellect, of our personal
will, in order thereby to reach the essential, that one may become
essential. Again,[Pg 30] others have collected all the characteristic
features of our world of phenomenon,—that is, the idea of the world
spun out of intellectual errors and inherited by us,—and instead of
accusing the intellect as the offenders, they have laid the blame on
the nature of things as being the cause of the hard fact of this very
sinister character of the world, and have preached the deliverance
from Being. With all these conceptions the constant and laborious
process of science (which at last celebrates its greatest triumph in a
history of the origin of thought) becomes completed in various ways,
the result of which might perhaps run as follows:—"That which we now
call the world is the result of a mass of errors and fantasies which
arose gradually in the general development of organic being, which
are inter-grown with each other, and are now inherited by us as the
accumulated treasure of all the past,—as a treasure, for the value of
our humanity depends upon it. From this world of representation strict
science is really only able to liberate us to a very slight extent—as
it is also not at all desirable—inasmuch as it cannot essentially
break the power of primitive habits of feeling; but it can gradually
elucidate the history of the rise of that world as representation,—and
lift us, at least for moments, above and beyond the whole process.
Perhaps we shall then recognise that the thing in itself is worth a
Homeric laugh; that it seemed so much, indeed everything, and is
really empty, namely, empty of meaning."
[Pg 31]
17.
Metaphysical Explanations.—The young man values metaphysical
explanations, because they show him something highly significant
in things which he found unpleasant or despicable, and if he is
dissatisfied with himself, the feeling becomes lighter when he
recognises the innermost world-puzzle or world-misery in that which he
so strongly disapproves of in himself. To feel himself less responsible
and at the same time to find things more interesting—that seems to
him a double benefit for which he has to thank metaphysics. Later on,
certainly, he gets distrustful of the whole metaphysical method of
explanation; then perhaps it grows clear to him that those results can
be obtained equally well and more scientifically in another way: that
physical and historical explanations produce the feeling of personal
relief to at least the same extent, and that the interest in life and
its problems is perhaps still more aroused thereby.
18.
Fundamental Questions of Metaphysics.—When the history of the rise
of thought comes to be written, a new light will be thrown on the
following statement of a distinguished logician:—"The primordial
general law of the cognisant subject consists in the inner necessity
of recognising every object in itself in its own nature, as a thing
identical with itself, consequently self-existing[Pg 32] and at bottom
remaining ever the same and unchangeable: in short, in recognising
everything as a substance." Even this law, which is here called
"primordial," has evolved: it will some day be shown how gradually this
tendency arises in the lower organisms, how the feeble mole-eyes of
their organisations at first see only the same thing,—;how then, when
the various awakenings of pleasure and displeasure become noticeable,
various substances are gradually distinguished, but each with one
attribute, i.e. one single relation to such an organism. The first
step in logic is the judgment,—the nature of which, according to the
decision of the best logicians, consists in belief. At the bottom of
all belief lies the sensation of the pleasant or the painful in
relation to the sentient subject. A new third sensation as the result
of two previous single sensations is the judgment in its simplest
form. We organic beings have originally no interest in anything but
its relation to us in connection with pleasure and pain. Between
the moments (the states of feeling) when we become conscious of
this connection, lie moments of rest, of non-feeling; the world and
everything is then without interest for us, we notice no change in it
(as even now a deeply interested person does not notice when any one
passes him). To the plant, things are as a rule tranquil and eternal,
everything like itself. From the period of the lower organisms man
has inherited the belief that similar things exist (this theory
is only contradicted by the matured experience of the most advanced
science). The primordial belief of[Pg 33] everything organic from the
beginning is perhaps even this, that all the rest of the world is one
and immovable. The point furthest removed from those early beginnings
of logic is the idea of Causality,—indeed we still really think
that all sensations and activities are acts of the free will; when the
sentient individual contemplates himself, he regards every sensation,
every alteration as something isolated, that is to say, unconditioned
and disconnected,—it rises up in us without connection with anything
foregoing or following. We are hungry, but do not originally think that
the organism must be nourished; the feeling seems to make itself felt
without cause and purpose, it isolates itself and regards itself as
arbitrary. Therefore, belief in the freedom of the will is an original
error of everything organic, as old as the existence of the awakenings
of logic in it; the belief in unconditioned substances and similar
things is equally a primordial as well as an old error of everything
organic. But inasmuch as all metaphysics has concerned itself chiefly
with substance and the freedom of will, it may be designated as the
science which treats of the fundamental errors of mankind, but treats
of them as if they were fundamental truths.
19.
Number.—The discovery of the laws of numbers is made upon the ground
of the original, already prevailing error, that there are many similar
things (but in reality there is nothing similar), at least,[Pg 34] that there
are things (but there is no "thing"). The supposition of plurality
always presumes that there is something which appears frequently,—but
here already error reigns, already we imagine beings, unities,
which do not exist. Our sensations of space and time are false, for
they lead—examined in sequence—to logical contradictions. In all
scientific determinations we always reckon inevitably with certain
false quantities, but as these quantities are at least constant, as,
for instance, our sensation of time and space, the conclusions of
science have still perfect accuracy and certainty in their connection
with one another; one may continue to build upon them—until that final
limit where the erroneous original suppositions, those constant faults,
come into conflict with the conclusions, for instance in the doctrine
of atoms. There still we always feel ourselves compelled to the
acceptance of a "thing" or material "sub-stratum" that is moved, whilst
the whole scientific procedure has pursued the very task of resolving
everything substantial (material) into motion; here, too, we still
separate with our sensation the mover and the moved and cannot get
out of this circle, because the belief in things has from immemorial
times been bound up with our being. When Kant says, "The understanding
does not derive its laws from Nature, but dictates them to her," it is
perfectly true with regard to the idea of Nature which we are compelled
to associate with her (Nature = World as representation, that is to
say as error), but which is the summing up of a number of errors of
the understanding. The laws[Pg 35] of numbers are entirely inapplicable to a
world which is not our representation—these laws obtain only in the
human world.
20.
A Few Steps Back.—A degree of culture, and assuredly a very high one,
is attained when man rises above superstitious and religious notions
and fears, and, for instance, no longer believes in guardian angels or
in original sin, and has also ceased to talk of the salvation of his
soul,—if he has attained to this degree of freedom, he has still also
to overcome metaphysics with the greatest exertion of his intelligence.
Then, however, a retrogressive movement is necessary; he must
understand the historical justification as well as the psychological in
such representations, he must recognise how the greatest advancement
of humanity has come therefrom, and how, without such a retrocursive
movement, we should have been robbed of the best products of hitherto
existing mankind. With regard to philosophical metaphysics, I always
see increasing numbers who have attained to the negative goal (that
all positive metaphysics is error), but as yet few who climb a few
rungs backwards; one ought to look out, perhaps, over the last steps of
the ladder, but not try to stand upon them. The most enlightened only
succeed so far as to free themselves from metaphysics and look back
upon it with superiority, while it is necessary here, too, as in the
hippodrome, to turn round the end of the course.
[Pg 36]
21.
Conjectural Victory of Scepticism.—For once let the sceptical
starting-point be accepted,—granted that there were no other
metaphysical world, and all explanations drawn from metaphysics about
the only world we know were useless to us, in what light should we
then look upon men and things? We can think this out for ourselves, it
is useful, even though the question whether anything metaphysical has
been scientifically proved by Kant and Schopenhauer were altogether set
aside. For it is quite possible, according to historical probability,
that some time or other man, as a general rule, may grow sceptical;
the question will then be this: What form will human society take under
the influence of such a mode of thought? Perhaps the scientific proof
of some metaphysical world or other is already so difficult that
mankind will never get rid of a certain distrust of it. And when there
is distrust of metaphysics, there are on the whole the same results as
if it had been directly refuted and could no longer be believed in.
The historical question with regard to an unmetaphysical frame of mind
in mankind remains the same in both cases.
22.
Unbelief in the "monumentum Ære Perennius".—An actual drawback
which accompanies the cessation of metaphysical views lies in the fact
that the individual looks upon his short span[Pg 37] of life too exclusively
and receives no stronger incentives to build durable institutions
intended to last for centuries,—he himself wishes to pluck the fruit
from the tree which he plants, and therefore he no longer plants those
trees which require regular care for centuries, and which are destined
to afford shade to a long series of generations. For metaphysical
views furnish the belief that in them the last conclusive foundation
has been given, upon which henceforth all the future of mankind is
compelled to settle down and establish itself; the individual furthers
his salvation, when, for instance, he founds a church or convent, he
thinks it will be reckoned to him and recompensed to him in the eternal
life of the soul, it is work for the soul's eternal salvation. Can
science also arouse such faith in its results? As a matter of fact, it
needs doubt and distrust as its most faithful auxiliaries; nevertheless
in the course of time, the sum of inviolable truths—those, namely,
which have weathered all the storms of scepticism, and all destructive
analysis—may have become so great (in the regimen of health, for
instance), that one may determine to found thereupon "eternal" works.
For the present the contrast between our excited ephemeral existence
and the long-winded repose of metaphysical ages still operates too
strongly, because the two ages still stand too closely together;
the individual man himself now goes through too many inward and
outward developments for him to venture to arrange his own lifetime
permanently, and once and for all. An entirely modern man, for
instance, who is going[Pg 38] to build himself a house, has a feeling as if
he were going to immure himself alive in a mausoleum.
23.
The Age of Comparison.—The less men are fettered by tradition, the
greater becomes the inward activity of their motives; the greater,
again, in proportion thereto, the outward restlessness, the confused
flux of mankind, the polyphony of strivings. For whom is there still an
absolute compulsion to bind himself and his descendants to one place?
For whom is there still anything strictly compulsory? As all styles of
arts are imitated simultaneously, so also are all grades and kinds of
morality, of customs, of cultures. Such an age obtains its importance
because in it the various views of the world, customs, and cultures can
be compared and experienced simultaneously,—which was formerly not
possible with the always localised sway of every culture, corresponding
to the rooting of all artistic styles in place and time. An increased
æsthetic feeling will now at last decide amongst so many forms
presenting themselves for comparison; it will allow the greater number,
that is to say all those rejected by it, to die out. In the same way
a selection amongst the forms and customs of the higher moralities is
taking place, of which the aim can be nothing else than the downfall of
the lower moralities. It is the age of comparison! That is its pride,
but more justly also its grief. Let us not be afraid of this grief!
Rather will we comprehend[Pg 39] as adequately as possible the task our age
sets us: posterity will bless us for doing so,—a posterity which knows
itself to be as much above the terminated original national cultures as
above the culture of comparison, but which looks back with gratitude on
both kinds of culture as upon antiquities worthy of veneration.
24.
The Possibility of Progress.—When a scholar of the ancient culture
forswears the company of men who believe in progress, he does quite
right. For the greatness and goodness of ancient culture lie behind
it, and historical education compels one to admit that they can never
be fresh again; an unbearable stupidity or an equally insufferable
fanaticism would be necessary to deny this. But men can consciously
resolve to develop themselves towards a new culture; whilst formerly
they only developed unconsciously and by chance, they can now create
better conditions for the rise of human beings, for their nourishment,
education and instruction; they can administer the earth economically
as a whole, and can generally weigh and restrain the powers of man.
This new, conscious culture kills the old, which, regarded as a whole,
has led an unconscious animal and plant life; it also kills distrust
in progress,—progress is possible. I must say that it is over-hasty
and almost nonsensical to believe that progress must necessarily
follow; but how could one deny that it is possible? On the[Pg 40] other hand,
progress in the sense and on the path of the old culture is not even
thinkable. Even if romantic fantasy has also constantly used the word
"progress" to denote its aims (for instance, circumscribed primitive
national cultures), it borrows the picture of it in any case from the
past; its thoughts and ideas on this subject are entirely without
originality.
25.
Private and Œcumenical Morality.—Since the belief has ceased that
a God directs in general the fate of the world and, in spite of all
apparent crookedness in the path of humanity, leads it on gloriously,
men themselves must set themselves œcumenical aims embracing the
whole earth. The older morality, especially that of Kant, required
from the individual actions which were desired from all men,—that was
a delightfully naïve thing, as if each one knew off-hand what course
of action was beneficial to the whole of humanity, and consequently
which actions in general were desirable; it is a theory like that
of free trade, taking for granted that the general harmony must
result of itself according to innate laws of amelioration. Perhaps a
future contemplation of the needs of humanity will show that it is
by no means desirable that all men should act alike; in the interest
of œcumenical aims it might rather be that for whole sections of
mankind, special, and perhaps under certain circumstances even evil,
tasks would have to be set. In[Pg 41] any case, if mankind is not to destroy
itself by such a conscious universal rule, there must previously be
found, as a scientific standard for œcumenical aims, a knowledge of
the conditions of culture superior to what has hitherto been attained.
Herein lies the enormous task of the great minds of the next century.
26.
Reaction As Progress.—Now and again there appear rugged, powerful,
impetuous, but nevertheless backward-lagging minds which conjure up
once more a past phase of mankind; they serve to prove that the new
tendencies against which they are working are not yet sufficiently
strong, that they still lack something, otherwise they would show
better opposition to those exorcisers. Thus, for example, Luther's
Reformation bears witness to the fact that in his century all the
movements of the freedom of the spirit were still uncertain, tender,
and youthful; science could not yet lift up its head. Indeed the whole
Renaissance seems like an early spring which is almost snowed under
again. But in this century also, Schopenhauer's Metaphysics showed
that even now the scientific spirit is not yet strong enough; thus the
whole mediæval Christian view of the world and human feeling could
celebrate its resurrection in Schopenhauer's doctrine, in spite of
the long achieved destruction of all Christian dogmas. There is much
science in his doctrine, but it does not dominate it: it is rather
the old well-known "metaphysical requirement" that[Pg 42] does so. It is
certainly one of the greatest and quite invaluable advantages which
we gain from Schopenhauer, that he occasionally forces our sensations
back into older, mightier modes of contemplating the world and man, to
which no other path would so easily lead us. The gain to history and
justice is very great,—I do not think that any one would so easily
succeed now in doing justice to Christianity and its Asiatic relations
without Schopenhauer's assistance, which is specially impossible
from the basis of still existing Christianity. Only after this great
success of justice, only after we have corrected so essential a point
as the historical mode of contemplation which the age of enlightenment
brought with it, may we again bear onward the banner of enlightenment,
the banner with the three names, Petrarch, Erasmus, Voltaire. We have
turned reaction into progress.
27.
A Substitute For Religion.—It is believed that something good
is said of philosophy when it is put forward as a substitute for
religion for the people. As a matter of fact, in the spiritual economy
there is need, at times, of an intermediary order of thought: the
transition from religion to scientific contemplation is a violent,
dangerous leap, which is not to be recommended. To this extent the
recommendation is justifiable. But one should eventually learn that
the needs which have been satisfied by religion and are now to be
satisfied by philosophy are not unchangeable;[Pg 43] these themselves can be
weakened and eradicated. Think, for instance, of the Christian's
distress of soul, his sighing over inward corruption, his anxiety
for salvation,—all notions which originate only in errors of reason
and deserve not satisfaction but destruction. A philosophy can serve
either to satisfy those needs or to set them aside; for they are
acquired, temporally limited needs, which are based upon suppositions
contradictory to those of science. Here, in order to make a transition,
art is far rather to be employed to relieve the mind overburdened
with emotions; for those notions receive much less support from it than
from a metaphysical philosophy. It is easier, then, to pass over from
art to a really liberating philosophical science.
28.
Ill-famed Words.—Away with those wearisomely hackneyed terms
Optimism and Pessimism! For the occasion for using them becomes less
and less from day to day; only the chatterboxes still find them so
absolutely necessary. For why in all the world should any one wish to
be an optimist unless he had a God to defend who must have created
the best of worlds if he himself be goodness and perfection,—what
thinker, however, still needs the hypothesis of a God? But every
occasion for a pessimistic confession of faith is also lacking when
one has no interest in being annoyed at the advocates of God (the
theologians, or the theologising philosophers), and in energetically
defending the opposite view, that evil reigns, that pain is greater[Pg 44]
than pleasure, that the world is a bungled piece of work, the
manifestation of an ill-will to life. But who still bothers about the
theologians now—except the theologians? Apart from all theology and
its contentions, it is quite clear that the world is not good and not
bad (to say nothing of its being the best or the worst), and that the
terms "good" and "bad" have only significance with respect to man, and
indeed, perhaps, they are not justified even here in the way they are
usually employed; in any case we must get rid of both the calumniating
and the glorifying conception of the world.
29.
Intoxicated by the Scent of the Blossoms.—It is supposed that the ship
of humanity has always a deeper draught, the heavier it is laden; it is
believed that the deeper a man thinks, the more delicately he feels,
the higher he values himself, the greater his distance from the other
animals,—the more he appears as a genius amongst the animals,—all
the nearer will he approach the real essence of the world and its
knowledge; this he actually does too, through science, but he means
to do so still more through his religions and arts. These certainly
are blossoms of the world, but by no means any nearer to the root of
the world than the stalk; it is not possible to understand the nature
of things better through them, although almost every one believes he
can. Error has made man so deep, sensitive, and inventive that he has
put forth such[Pg 45] blossoms as religions and arts. Pure knowledge could
not have been capable of it. Whoever were to unveil for us the essence
of the world would give us all the most disagreeable disillusionment.
Not the world as thing-in-itself, but the world as representation (as
error) is so full of meaning, so deep, so wonderful, bearing happiness
and unhappiness in its bosom. This result leads to a philosophy of the
logical denial of the world, which, however, can be combined with a
practical world-affirming just as well as with its opposite.
30.
Bad Habits in Reasoning.—The usual false conclusions of mankind are
these: a thing exists, therefore it has a right to exist. Here there
is inference from the ability to live to its suitability; from its
suitability to its rightfulness. Then: an opinion brings happiness;
therefore it is the true opinion. Its effect is good; therefore it is
itself good and true. To the effect is here assigned the predicate
beneficent, good, in the sense of the useful, and the cause is then
furnished with the same predicate good, but here in the sense of the
logically valid. The inversion of the sentences would read thus: an
affair cannot be carried through, or maintained, therefore it is
wrong; an opinion causes pain or excites, therefore it is false. The
free spirit who learns only too often the faultiness of this mode
of reasoning, and has to suffer from its consequences, frequently
gives way to the temptation to draw the very opposite[Pg 46] conclusions,
which, in general, are naturally just as false: an affair cannot be
carried through, therefore it is good; an opinion is distressing and
disturbing, therefore it is true.
31.
The Illogical Necessary.—One of those things that may drive a thinker
into despair is the recognition of the fact that the illogical is
necessary for man, and that out of the illogical comes much that is
good. It is so firmly rooted in the passions, in language, in art,
in religion, and generally in everything that gives value to life,
that it cannot be withdrawn without thereby hopelessly injuring these
beautiful things. It is only the all-too-naïve people who can believe
that the nature of man can be changed into a purely logical one; but
if there were degrees of proximity to this goal, how many things would
not have to be lost on this course! Even the most rational man has need
of nature again from time to time, i.e. his illogical fundamental
attitude towards all things.
32.
Injustice Necessary.—All judgments on the value of life are
illogically developed, and therefore unjust. The inexactitude of
the judgment lies, firstly, in the manner in which the material is
presented, namely very imperfectly; secondly, in the manner in which
the conclusion is formed out of it; and thirdly, in the fact that every
separate[Pg 47] element of the material is again the result of vitiated
recognition, and this, too, of necessity. For instance, no experience
of an individual, however near he may stand to us, can be perfect, so
that we could have a logical right to make a complete estimate of him;
all estimates are rash, and must be so. Finally, the standard by which
we measure, our nature, is not of unalterable dimensions,—we have
moods and vacillations, and yet we should have to recognise ourselves
as a fixed standard in order to estimate correctly the relation of any
thing whatever to ourselves. From this it will, perhaps, follow that
we should make no judgments at all; if one could only live without
making estimations, without having likes and dislikes! For all dislike
is connected with an estimation, as well as all inclination. An
impulse towards or away from anything without a feeling that something
advantageous is desired, something injurious avoided, an impulse
without any kind of conscious valuation of the worth of the aim does
not exist in man. We are from the beginning illogical, and therefore
unjust beings, and can recognise this; it is one of the greatest and
most inexplicable discords of existence.
33.
Error About Life Necessary For Life.—Every belief in the value and
worthiness of life is based on vitiated thought; it is only possible
through the fact that sympathy for the general life and suffering of
mankind is very weakly developed[Pg 48] in the individual. Even the rarer
people who think outside themselves do not contemplate this general
life, but only a limited part of it. If one understands how to direct
one's attention chiefly to the exceptions,—I mean to the highly gifted
and the rich souls,—if one regards the production of these as the aim
of the whole world-development and rejoices in its operation, then
one may believe in the value of life, because one thereby overlooks
the other men—one consequently thinks fallaciously. So too, when
one directs one's attention to all mankind, but only considers one
species of impulses in them, the less egoistical ones, and excuses
them with regard to the other instincts, one may then again entertain
hopes of mankind in general and believe so far in the value of life,
consequently in this case also through fallaciousness of thought. Let
one, however, behave in this or that manner: with such behaviour one
is an exception amongst men. Now, most people bear life without any
considerable grumbling, and consequently believe in the value of
existence, but precisely because each one is solely self-seeking and
self-affirming, and does not step out of himself like those exceptions;
everything extra-personal is imperceptible to them, or at most seems
only a faint shadow. Therefore on this alone is based the value of
life for the ordinary everyday man, that he regards himself as more
important than the world. The great lack of imagination from which
he suffers is the reason why he cannot enter into the feelings of
other beings, and therefore sympathises as little as possible with[Pg 49]
their fate and suffering. He, on the other hand, who really could
sympathise therewith, would have to despair of the value of life; were
he to succeed in comprehending and feeling in himself the general
consciousness of mankind, he would collapse with a curse on existence;
for mankind as a whole has no goals, consequently man, in considering
his whole course, cannot find in it his comfort and support, but his
despair. If, in all that he does, he considers the final aimlessness
of man, his own activity assumes in his eyes the character of
wastefulness. But to feel one's self just as much wasted as humanity
(and not only as an individual) as we see the single blossom of nature
wasted, is a feeling above all other feelings. But who is capable
of it? Assuredly only a poet, and poets always know how to console
themselves.
34.
For Tranquillity.—But does not our philosophy thus become a tragedy?
Does not truth become hostile to life, to improvement? A question seems
to weigh upon our tongue and yet hesitate to make itself heard: whether
one can consciously remain in untruthfulness? or, supposing one were
obliged to do this, would not death be preferable? For there is no
longer any "must"; morality, in so far as it had any "must" or "shalt",
has been destroyed by our mode of contemplation, just as religion has
been destroyed. Knowledge can only allow pleasure and pain, benefit and
injury to subsist as motives; but how will these[Pg 50] motives agree with
the sense of truth? They also contain errors (for, as already said,
inclination and aversion, and their very incorrect determinations,
practically regulate our pleasure and pain). The whole of human life
is deeply immersed in untruthfulness; the individual cannot draw it
up out of this well, without thereby taking a deep dislike to his
whole past, without finding his present motives—those of honour,
for instance—inconsistent, and without opposing scorn and disdain
to the passions which conduce to happiness in the future. Is it true
that there remains but one sole way of thinking which brings after it
despair as a personal experience, as a theoretical result, a philosophy
of dissolution, disintegration, and self-destruction? I believe that
the decision with regard to the after-effects of the knowledge will
be given through the temperament of a man; I could imagine another
after-effect, just as well as that one described, which is possible in
certain natures, by means of which a life would arise much simpler,
freer from emotions than is the present one, so that though at first,
indeed, the old motives of passionate desire might still have strength
from old hereditary habit, they would gradually become weaker under
the influence—of purifying knowledge. One would live at last amongst
men, and with one's self as with Nature, without praise, reproach,
or agitation, feasting one's eyes, as if it were a play, upon much
of which one was formerly afraid. One would be free from the emphasis,
and would no longer feel the goading, of the thought that one is not
only nature or more than nature. Certainly, as already remarked, a[Pg 51]
good temperament would be necessary for this, an even, mild, and
naturally joyous soul, a disposition which would not always need to be
on its guard against spite and sudden outbreaks, and would not convey
in its utterances anything of a grumbling or sudden nature,—those
well-known vexatious qualities of old dogs and men who have been long
chained up. On the contrary, a man from whom the ordinary fetters of
life have so far fallen that he continues to live only for the sake of
ever better knowledge must be able to renounce without envy and regret:
much, indeed almost everything that is precious to other men, he must
regard as the all-sufficing and the most desirable condition; the
free, fearless soaring over men, customs, laws, and the traditional
valuations of things. The joy of this condition he imparts willingly,
and he has perhaps nothing else to impart,—wherein, to be sure,
there is more privation and renunciation. If, nevertheless, more is
demanded from him, he will point with a friendly shake of his head to
his brother, the free man of action, and will perhaps not conceal a
little derision, for as regards this "freedom" it is a very peculiar
case.
[Pg 52][Pg 53]
35.
Advantages of Psychological Observation.—That reflection on the human,
all-too-human—or, according to the learned expression, psychological
observation—is one of the means by which one may lighten the burden
of life, that exercise in this art produces presence of mind in
difficult circumstances, in the midst of tiresome surroundings, even
that from the most thorny and unpleasant periods of one's own life
one may gather maxims and thereby feel a little better: all this
was believed, was known in former centuries. Why was it forgotten
by our century, when in Germany at least, even in all Europe, the
poverty of psychological observation betrays itself by many signs? Not
exactly in novels, tales, and philosophical treatises,—they are the
work of exceptional individuals,—rather in the judgments on public
events and personalities; but above all there is a lack of the art of
psychological analysis and summing-up in every rank of society, in
which a great deal is talked about men, but nothing about man. Why
do we allow the richest and most harmless[Pg 54] subject of conversation to
escape us? Why are not the great masters of psychological maxims more
read? For, without any exaggeration, the educated man in Europe who has
read La Rochefoucauld and his kindred in mind and art, is rarely found,
and still more rare is he who knows them and does not blame them. It
is probable, however, that even this exceptional reader will find much
less pleasure in them than the form of this artist should afford him;
for even the clearest head is not capable of rightly estimating the
art of shaping and polishing maxims unless he has really been brought
up to it and has competed in it. Without this practical teaching one
deems this shaping and polishing to be easier than it is; one has not
a sufficient perception of fitness and charm. For this reason the
present readers of maxims find in them a comparatively small pleasure,
hardly a mouthful of pleasantness, so that they resemble the people who
generally look at cameos, who praise because they cannot love, and are
very ready to admire, but still more ready to run away.
36.
Objection.—Or should there be a counter-reckoning to that theory
that places psychological observation amongst the means of charming,
curing, and relieving existence? Should one have sufficiently convinced
one's self of the unpleasant consequences of this art to divert from
it designedly the attention of him who is educating himself in it? As
a matter of fact, a certain blind belief in the[Pg 55] goodness of human
nature, an innate aversion to the analysis of human actions, a kind
of shame-facedness with respect to the nakedness of the soul may
really be more desirable for the general well-being of a man than that
quality, useful in isolated cases, of psychological sharp-sightedness;
and perhaps the belief in goodness, in virtuous men and deeds, in an
abundance of impersonal goodwill in the world, has made men better
inasmuch as it has made them less distrustful. When one imitates
Plutarch's heroes with enthusiasm, and turns with disgust from a
suspicious examination of the motives for their actions, it is not
truth which benefits thereby, but the welfare of human society; the
psychological mistake and, generally speaking, the insensibility
on this matter helps humanity forwards, while the recognition of
truth gains more through the stimulating power of hypothesis than La
Rochefoucauld has said in his preface to the first edition of his
"Sentences et maximes morales." ... "Ce que le monde nomme vertu n'est
d'ordinaire qu'un fantôme formé par nos passions, à qui on donne un
nom honnête pour faire impunément ce qu'on veut." La Rochefoucauld
and those other French masters of soul-examination who have lately
been joined by a German, the author of Psychological Observations[1]
resemble good marksmen who again and again hit the bull's-eye; but it
is the bull's-eye of human nature. Their art arouses astonishment; but
in the end a spectator who is not led by the spirit of science,[Pg 56] but
by humane intentions, will probably execrate an art which appears to
implant in the soul the sense of the disparagement and suspicion of
mankind.
37.
Nevertheless.—However it may be with reckoning and counter-reckoning,
in the present condition of philosophy the awakening of moral
observation is necessary. Humanity can no longer be spared the cruel
sight of the psychological dissecting-table with its knives and
forceps. For here rules that science which inquires into the origin and
history of the so-called moral sentiments, and which, in its progress,
has to draw up and solve complicated sociological problems:—the older
philosophy knows the latter one not at all, and has always avoided the
examination of the origin and history of moral sentiments on any feeble
pretext. With what consequences it is now very easy to see, after
it has been shown by many examples how the mistakes of the greatest
philosophers generally have their starting-point in a wrong explanation
of certain human actions and sensations, just as on the ground of an
erroneous analysis—for instance, that of the so-called unselfish
actions a false ethic is built up; then, to harmonise with this again,
religion and mythological confusion are brought in to assist, and
finally the shades of these dismal spirits fall also over physics and
the general mode of regarding the world. If it is certain, however,
that superficiality in psychological[Pg 57] observation has laid, and still
lays, the most dangerous snares for human judgments and conclusions,
then there is need now of that endurance of work which does not grow
weary of piling stone upon stone, pebble on pebble; there is need of
courage not to be ashamed of such humble work and to turn a deaf ear
to scorn. And this is also true,—numberless single observations on
the human and all-too-human have first been discovered, and given
utterance to, in circles of society which were accustomed to offer
sacrifice therewith to a clever desire to please, and not to scientific
knowledge,—and the odour of that old home of the moral maxim, a very
seductive odour, has attached itself almost inseparably to the whole
species, so that on its account the scientific man involuntarily
betrays a certain distrust of this species and its earnestness. But
it is sufficient to point to the consequences, for already it begins
to be seen what results of a serious kind spring from the ground of
psychological observation. What, after all, is the principal axiom
to which the boldest and coldest thinker, the author of the book
On the Origin of Moral Sensations[2] has attained by means of his
incisive and decisive analyses of human actions? "The moral man," he
says, "is no nearer to the intelligible (metaphysical) world than
is the physical man." This theory, hardened and sharpened under the
hammer-blow of historical knowledge, may some time or other, perhaps
in[Pg 58] some future period, serve as the axe which is applied to the root
of the "metaphysical need" of man,—whether more as a blessing than
a curse to the general welfare it is not easy to say, but in any case
as a theory with the most important consequences, at once fruitful and
terrible, and looking into the world with that Janus-face which all
great knowledge possesses.
38.
How Far Useful.—It must remain for ever undecided whether
psychological observation is advantageous or disadvantageous to
man; but it is certain that it is necessary, because science cannot
do without it. Science, however, has no consideration for ultimate
purposes, any more than Nature has, but just as the latter occasionally
achieves things of the greatest suitableness without intending to do
so, so also true science, as the imitator of nature in ideas, will
occasionally and in many ways further the usefulness and welfare of
man,—but also without intending to do so.
But whoever feels too chilled by the breath of such a reflection has
perhaps too little fire in himself; let him look around him meanwhile
and he will become aware of illnesses which have need of ice-poultices,
and of men who are so "kneaded together" of heat and spirit that
they can hardly find an atmosphere that is cold and biting enough.
Moreover, as individuals and nations that are too serious have need of
frivolities, as others too[Pg 59] mobile and excitable have need occasionally
of heavily oppressing burdens for the sake of their health, should not
we, the more intellectual people of this age, that grows visibly more
and more inflamed, seize all quenching and cooling means that exist, in
order that we may at least remain as constant, harmless, and moderate
as we still are, and thus, perhaps, serve some time or other as mirror
and self-contemplation for this age?
39.
The Fable of Intelligible Freedom.—The history of the sentiments by
means of which we make a person responsible consists of the following
principal phases. First, all single actions are called good or bad
without any regard to their motives, but only on account of the useful
or injurious consequences which result for the community. But soon the
origin of these distinctions is forgotten, and it is deemed that the
qualities "good" or "bad" are contained in the action itself without
regard to its consequences, by the same error according to which
language describes the stone as hard, the tree as green,—with which,
in short, the result is regarded as the cause. Then the goodness or
badness is implanted in the motive, and the action in itself is looked
upon as morally ambiguous. Mankind even goes further, and applies
the predicate good or bad no longer to single motives, but to the
whole nature of an individual, out of whom the motive grows as the
plant grows out of the earth. Thus, in turn, man[Pg 60] is made responsible
for his operations, then for his actions, then for his motives, and
finally for his nature. Eventually it is discovered that even this
nature cannot be responsible, inasmuch as it is an absolutely necessary
consequence concreted out of the elements and influences of past and
present things,—that man, therefore, cannot be made responsible for
anything, neither for his nature, nor his motives, nor his actions, nor
his effects. It has therewith come to be recognised that the history
of moral valuations is at the same time the history of an error, the
error of responsibility, which is based upon the error of the freedom
of will. Schopenhauer thus decided against it: because certain actions
bring ill humour ("consciousness of guilt") in their train, there
must be a responsibility; for there would be no reason for this ill
humour if not only all human actions were not done of necessity,—which
is actually the case and also the belief of this philosopher,—but
man himself from the same necessity is precisely the being that
he is—which Schopenhauer denies. From the fact of that ill humour
Schopenhauer thinks he can prove a liberty which man must somehow
have had, not with regard to actions, but with regard to nature;
liberty, therefore, to be thus or otherwise, not to act thus or
otherwise. From the esse, the sphere of freedom and responsibility,
there results, in his opinion, the operari, the sphere of strict
causality, necessity, and irresponsibility. This ill humour is
apparently directed to the operari,—in so far it is erroneous,—but
in reality it is directed to the esse, which is the deed of a free
will, the[Pg 61] fundamental cause of the existence of an individual, man
becomes that which he wishes to be, his will is anterior to his
existence. Here the mistaken conclusion is drawn that from the fact
of the ill humour, the justification, the reasonable admissableness
of this ill humour is presupposed; and starting from this mistaken
conclusion, Schopenhauer arrives at his fantastic sequence of the
so-called intelligible freedom. But the ill humour after the deed is
not necessarily reasonable, indeed it is assuredly not reasonable, for
it is based upon the erroneous presumption that the action need not
have inevitably followed. Therefore, it is only because man believes
himself to be free, not because he is free, that he experiences remorse
and pricks of conscience. Moreover, this ill humour is a habit that can
be broken off; in many people it is entirely absent in connection with
actions where others experience it. It is a very changeable thing, and
one which is connected with the development of customs and culture,
and probably only existing during a comparatively short period of the
world's history. Nobody is responsible for his actions, nobody for his
nature; to judge is identical with being unjust. This also applies when
an individual judges himself. The theory is as clear as sunlight, and
yet every one prefers to go back into the shadow and the untruth, for
fear of the consequences.
40.
The Super-animal.—The beast in us wishes to be deceived; morality is
a lie of necessity in[Pg 62] order that we may not be torn in pieces by it.
Without the errors which lie in the assumption of morality, man would
have remained an animal. Thus, however, he has considered himself as
something higher and has laid strict laws upon himself. Therefore he
hates the grades which have remained nearer to animalness, whereby the
former scorn of the slave, as a not-yet-man, is to be explained as a
fact.
41.
The Unchangeable Character.—That the character is unchangeable is
not true in a strict sense; this favourite theory means, rather, that
during the short lifetime of an individual the new influencing motives
cannot penetrate deeply enough to destroy the ingrained marks of many
thousands of years. But if one were to imagine a man of eighty thousand
years, one would have in him an absolutely changeable character, so
that a number of different individuals would gradually develop out
of him. The shortness of human life misleads us into forming many
erroneous ideas about the qualities of man.
42.
The Order of Possessions and Morality.—The once-accepted hierarchy
of possessions, according as this or the other is coveted by a lower,
higher, or highest egoism, now decides what is moral or immoral. To
prefer a lesser good (for instance, the gratification of the senses)[Pg 63]
to a more highly valued good (for instance, health) is accounted
immoral, and also to prefer luxury to liberty. The hierarchy of
possessions, however, is not fixed and equal at all times; if any one
prefers vengeance to justice he is moral according to the standard of
an earlier civilisation, but immoral according to the present one. To
be "immoral," therefore, denotes that an individual has not felt, or
not felt sufficiently strongly, the higher, finer, spiritual motives
which have come in with a new culture; it marks one who has remained
behind, but only according to the difference of degrees. The order of
possessions itself is not raised and lowered according to a moral
point of view; but each time that it is fixed it supplies the decision
as to whether an action is moral or immoral.
43.
Cruel People As Those Who Have Remained Behind.—People who are
cruel nowadays must be accounted for by us as the grades of earlier
civilisations which have survived; here are exposed those deeper
formations in the mountain of humanity which usually remain concealed.
They are backward people whose brains, through all manner of accidents
in the course of inheritance, have not been developed in so delicate
and manifold a way. They show us what we all were and horrify us, but
they themselves are as little responsible as is a block of granite for
being granite. There must, too, be grooves and twists in our brains
which answer to[Pg 64] that condition of mind, as in the form of certain
human organs there are supposed to be traces of a fish-state. But these
grooves and twists are no longer the bed through which the stream of
our sensation flows.
44.
Gratitude and Revenge.—The reason why the powerful man is grateful
is this: his benefactor, through the benefit he confers, has mistaken
and intruded into the sphere of the powerful man,—now the latter,
in return, penetrates into the sphere of the benefactor by the act of
gratitude. It is a milder form of revenge. Without the satisfaction of
gratitude, the powerful man would have shown himself powerless, and
would have been reckoned as such ever after. Therefore every society of
the good, which originally meant the powerful, places gratitude amongst
the first duties.—Swift propounded the maxim that men were grateful in
the same proportion as they were revengeful.
45.
The Twofold Early History of Good and Evil.—The conception of good
and evil has a twofold early history, namely, once in the soul of
the ruling tribes and castes. Whoever has the power of returning
good for good, evil for evil, and really practises requital, and who
is, therefore, grateful and revengeful, is called good; whoever is
powerless, and unable to requite, is reckoned as bad. As a good man one
is reckoned among the[Pg 65] "good," a community which has common feelings
because the single individuals are bound to one another by the sense
of requital. As a bad man one belongs to the "bad," to a party of
subordinate, powerless people who have no common feeling. The good are
a caste, the bad are a mass like dust. Good and bad have for a long
time meant the same thing as noble and base, master and slave. On the
other hand, the enemy is not looked upon as evil, he can requite. In
Homer the Trojan and the Greek are both good. It is not the one who
injures us, but the one who is despicable, who is called bad. Good is
inherited in the community of the good; it is impossible that a bad man
could spring from such good soil. If, nevertheless, one of the good
ones does something which is unworthy of the good, refuge is sought in
excuses; the guilt is thrown upon a god, for instance; it is said that
he has struck the good man with blindness and madness.—
Then in the soul of the oppressed and powerless. Here every other
man is looked upon as hostile, inconsiderate, rapacious, cruel,
cunning, be he noble or base; evil is the distinguishing word for man,
even for every conceivable living creature, e.g. for a god; human,
divine, is the same thing as devilish, evil. The signs of goodness,
helpfulness, pity, are looked upon with fear as spite, the prelude to
a terrible result, stupefaction and out-witting,—in short, as refined
malice. With such a disposition in the individual a community could
hardly exist, or at most it could exist only in its crudest form, so
that in all places where this[Pg 66] conception of good and evil obtains,
the downfall of the single individuals, of their tribes and races, is
at hand.—Our present civilisation has grown up on the soil of the
ruling tribes and castes.
46.
Sympathy Stronger Than Suffering.—There are cases when sympathy is
stronger than actual suffering. For instance, we are more pained when
one of our friends is guilty of something shameful than when we do
it ourselves. For one thing, we have more faith in the purity of his
character than he has himself; then our love for him, probably on
account of this very faith, is stronger than his love for himself. And
even if his egoism suffers more thereby than our egoism, inasmuch as it
has to bear more of the bad consequences of his fault, the un-egoistic
in us—this word is not to be taken too seriously, but only as a
modification of the expression—is more deeply wounded by his guilt
than is the un-egoistic in him.
47.
Hypochondria.—There are people who become hypochondriacal through
their sympathy and concern for another person; the kind of sympathy
which results therefrom is nothing but a disease. Thus there is
also a Christian hypochondria, which afflicts those solitary,
religiously-minded people who keep constantly before their eyes the
sufferings and death of Christ.
[Pg 67]
48.
Economy of Goodness.—Goodness and love, as the most healing herbs and
powers in human intercourse, are such costly discoveries that one would
wish as much economy as possible to be exercised in the employment of
these balsamic means; but this is impossible. The economy of goodness
is the dream of the most daring Utopians.
49.
Goodwill.—Amongst the small, but countlessly frequent and therefore
very effective, things to which science should pay more attention than
to the great, rare things, is to be reckoned goodwill; I mean that
exhibition of a friendly disposition in intercourse, that smiling
eye, that clasp of the hand, that cheerfulness with which almost all
human actions are usually accompanied. Every teacher, every official,
adds this to whatever is his duty; it is the perpetual occupation
of humanity, and at the same time the waves of its light, in which
everything grows; in the narrowest circle, namely, within the family,
life blooms and flourishes only through that goodwill. Kindliness,
friendliness, the courtesy of the heart, are ever-flowing streams of
un-egoistic impulses, and have given far more powerful assistance to
culture than even those much more famous demonstrations which are
called pity, mercy, and self-sacrifice. But they are thought little
of, and, as a matter of fact, there is not much that is un-egoistic[Pg 68]
in them. The sum of these small doses is nevertheless mighty, their
united force is amongst the strongest forces. Thus one finds much more
happiness in the world than sad eyes see, if one only reckons rightly,
and does not forget all those moments of comfort in which every day is
rich, even in the most harried of human lives.
50.
The Wish to Arouse Pity.—In the most remarkable passage of his
auto—portrait (first printed in 1658), La Rochefoucauld assuredly
hits the nail on the head when he warns all sensible people against
pity, when he advises them to leave that to those orders of the people
who have need of passion (because it is not ruled by reason), and to
reach the point of helping the suffering and acting energetically in an
accident; while pity, according to his (and Plato's) judgment, weakens
the soul. Certainly we should exhibit pity, but take good care not
to feel it, for the unfortunate are so stupid that to them the
exhibition of pity is the greatest good in the world. One can, perhaps,
give a more forcible warning against this feeling of pity if one looks
upon that need of the unfortunate not exactly as stupidity and lack of
intellect, a kind of mental derangement which misfortune brings with
it (and as such, indeed, La Rochefoucauld appears to regard it), but
as something quite different and more serious. Observe children, who
cry and scream in order to be pitied, and therefore wait[Pg 69] for the
moment when they will be noticed; live in intercourse with the sick and
mentally oppressed, and ask yourself whether that ready complaining and
whimpering, that making a show of misfortune, does not, at bottom, aim
at making the spectators miserable; the pity which the spectators
then exhibit is in so far a consolation for the weak and suffering in
that the latter recognise therein that they possess still one power,
in spite of their weakness, the power of giving pain. The unfortunate
derives a sort of pleasure from this feeling of superiority, of which
the exhibition of pity makes him conscious; his imagination is exalted,
he is still powerful enough to give the world pain. Thus the thirst for
pity is the thirst for self-gratification, and that, moreover, at the
expense of his fellow-men; it shows man in the whole inconsiderateness
of his own dear self, but not exactly in his "stupidity," as La
Rochefoucauld thinks. In society-talk three-fourths of all questions
asked and of all answers given are intended to cause the interlocutor
a little pain; for this reason so many people pine for company; it
enables them to feel their power. There is a powerful charm of life
in such countless but very small doses in which malice makes itself
felt, just as goodwill, spread in the same way throughout the world, is
the ever-ready means of healing. But are there many honest people who
will admit that it is pleasing to give pain? that one not infrequently
amuses one's self—and amuses one's self very well—in causing
mortifications to others, at least in thought, and firing off at them
the[Pg 70] grape-shot of petty malice? Most people are too dishonest, and a
few are too good, to know anything of this pudendum these will always
deny that Prosper Mérimée is right when he says, "Sachez aussi qu'il
n'y a rien de plus commun que de faire le mal pour le plaisir de le
faire."
51.
How Appearance Becomes Actuality.—The actor finally reaches such a
point that even in the deepest sorrow he cannot cease from thinking
about the impression made by his own person and the general scenic
effect; for instance, even at the funeral of his child, he will weep
over his own sorrow and its expression like one of his own audience.
The hypocrite, who always plays one and the same part, ceases at
last to be a hypocrite; for instance, priests, who as young men are
generally conscious or unconscious hypocrites, become at last natural,
and are then really without any affectation, just priests; or if the
father does not succeed so far, perhaps the son does, who makes use
of his father's progress and inherits his habits. If any one long and
obstinately desires to appear something, he finds it difficult at
last to be anything else. The profession of almost every individual,
even of the artist, begins with hypocrisy, with an imitating from
without, with a copying of the effective. He who always wears the
mask of a friendly expression must eventually obtain a power over
well-meaning dispositions without which the expression of friendliness
is not to be[Pg 71] compelled,—and finally, these, again, obtain a power
over him, he is well-meaning.
52.
The Point of Honour in Deception.—In all great deceivers one thing
is noteworthy, to which they owe their power. In the actual act of
deception, with all their preparations, the dreadful voice, expression,
and mien, in the midst of their effective scenery they are overcome
by their belief in themselves it is this, then, which speaks so
wonderfully and persuasively to the spectators. The founders of
religions are distinguished from those great deceivers in that they
never awake from their condition of self-deception; or at times, but
very rarely, they have an enlightened moment when doubt overpowers
them; they generally console themselves, however, by ascribing these
enlightened moments to the influence of the Evil One. There must
be self-deception in order that this and that may produce great
effects. For men believe in the truth of everything that is visibly,
strongly believed in.
53.
The Nominal Degrees of Truth.—One of the commonest mistakes is this:
because some one is truthful and honest towards us, he must speak the
truth. Thus the child believes in its parents' judgment, the Christian
in the assertions of the Founder of the Church. In the same way men
refuse to admit that all those things which men defended in former ages
with the sacrifice of[Pg 72] life and happiness were nothing but errors; it
is even said, perhaps, that they were degrees of the truth. But what
is really meant is that when a man has honestly believed in something,
and has fought and died for his faith, it would really be too unjust
if he had only been inspired by an error. Such a thing seems a
contradiction of eternal justice; therefore the heart of sensitive man
ever enunciates against his head the axiom: between moral action and
intellectual insight there must absolutely be a necessary connection.
It is unfortunately otherwise; for there is no eternal justice.
54.
Falsehood.—Why do people mostly speak the truth in daily
life?—Assuredly not because a god has forbidden falsehood. But,
firstly, because it is more convenient, as falsehood requires
invention, deceit, and memory. (As Swift says, he who tells a lie is
not sensible how great a task he undertakes; for in order to uphold
one lie he must invent twenty others.) Therefore, because it is
advantageous in upright circumstances to say straight out, "I want
this, I have done that," and so on; because, in other words, the path
of compulsion and authority is surer than that of cunning. But if a
child has been brought up in complicated domestic circumstances, he
employs falsehood, naturally and unconsciously says whatever best suits
his interests; a sense of truth and a hatred of falsehood are quite
foreign and unknown to him, and so he lies in all innocence.
[Pg 73]
55.
Throwing Suspicion on Morality For Faith's Sake.—No power can be
maintained when it is only represented by hypocrites; no matter how
many "worldly" elements the Catholic Church possesses, its strength
lies in those still numerous priestly natures who render life hard
and full of meaning for themselves, and whose glance and worn bodies
speak of nocturnal vigils, hunger, burning prayers, and perhaps even of
scourging; these move men and inspire them with fear. What if it were
necessary to live thus? This is the terrible question which their
aspect brings to the lips. Whilst they spread this doubt they always
uprear another pillar of their power; even the free-thinker does not
dare to withstand such unselfishness with hard words of truth, and to
say, "Thyself deceived, deceive not others!" Only the difference of
views divides them from him, certainly no difference of goodness or
badness; but men generally treat unjustly that which they do not like.
Thus we speak of the cunning and the infamous art of the Jesuits, but
overlook the self-control which every individual Jesuit practises, and
the fact that the lightened manner of life preached by Jesuit books
is by no means for their benefit, but for that of the laity. We may
even ask whether, with precisely similar tactics and organisation,
we enlightened ones would make equally good tools, equally admirable
through self-conquest, indefatigableness, and renunciation.
[Pg 74]
56.
Victory of Knowledge Over Radical Evil.—It is of great advantage to
him who desires to be wise to have witnessed for a time the spectacle
of a thoroughly evil and degenerate man; it is false, like the contrary
spectacle, but for whole long periods it held the mastery, and its
roots have even extended and ramified themselves to us and our world.
In order to understand ourselves we must understand it but then, in
order to mount higher we must rise above it. We recognise, then, that
there exist no sins in the metaphysical sense; but, in the same sense,
also no virtues; we recognise that the entire domain of ethical ideas
is perpetually tottering, that there are higher and deeper conceptions
of good and evil, of moral and immoral. He who does not desire much
more from things than a knowledge of them easily makes peace with his
soul, and will make a mistake (or commit a sin, as the world calls
it) at the most from ignorance, but hardly from covetousness. He will
no longer wish to excommunicate and exterminate desires; but his
only, his wholly dominating ambition, to know as well as possible
at all times, will make him cool and will soften all the savageness
in his disposition. Moreover, he has been freed from a number of
tormenting conceptions, he has no more feeling at the mention of the
words "punishments of hell," "sinfulness," "incapacity for good," he
recognises in them only the vanishing shadow-pictures of false views of
the world and of life.
[Pg 75]
57.
Morality As the Self-disintegration of Man.—A good author, who
really has his heart in his work, wishes that some one could come
and annihilate him by representing the same thing in a clearer way
and answering without more ado the problems therein proposed. The
loving girl wishes she could prove the self-sacrificing faithfulness
of her love by the unfaithfulness of her beloved. The soldier hopes
to die on the field of battle for his victorious fatherland; for his
loftiest desires triumph in the victory of his country. The mother
gives to the child that of which she deprives herself—sleep, the best
food, sometimes her health and fortune. But are all these un-egoistic
conditions? Are these deeds of morality miracles, because, to use
Schopenhauer's expression, they are "impossible and yet performed"? Is
it not clear that in all four cases the individual loves something
of himself, a thought, a desire, a production, better than anything
else of himself; that he therefore divides his nature and to one part
sacrifices all the rest? Is it something entirely different when an
obstinate man says, "I would rather be shot than move a step out of
my way for this man"? The desire for something (wish, inclination,
longing) is present in all the instances mentioned; to give way to it,
with all its consequences, is certainly not "un-egoistic."—In ethics
man does not consider himself as Individuum but as dividuum.
[Pg 76]
58.
What One May Promise.—One may promise actions, but no sentiments, for
these are involuntary. Whoever promises to love or hate a person, or be
faithful to him for ever, promises something which is not within his
power; he can certainly promise such actions as are usually the results
of love, hate, or fidelity, but which may also spring from other
motives; for many ways and motives lead to one and the same action.
The promise to love some one for ever is, therefore, really: So long
as I love you I will act towards you in a loving way; if I cease to
love you, you will still receive the same treatment from me, although
inspired by other motives, so that our fellow-men will still be deluded
into the belief that our love is unchanged and ever the same. One
promises, therefore, the continuation of the semblance of love, when,
without self-deception, one speaks vows of eternal love.
59.
Intellect and Morality.—One must have a good memory to be able to keep
a given promise. One must have a strong power of imagination to be
able to feel pity. So closely is morality bound to the goodness of the
intellect.
60.
TO WISH FOR REVENGE AND TO TAKE REVENGE.—To have a revengeful thought
and to[Pg 77] carry it into effect is to have a violent attack of fever,
which passes off, however,—but to have a revengeful thought without
the strength and courage to carry it out is a chronic disease, a
poisoning of body and soul which we have to bear about with us.
Morality, which only takes intentions into account, considers the
two cases as equal; usually the former case is regarded as the worse
(because of the evil consequences which may perhaps result from the
deed of revenge). Both estimates are short-sighted.
61.
The Power of Waiting.—Waiting is so difficult that even great poets
have not disdained to take incapability of waiting as the motive for
their works. Thus Shakespeare in Othello or Sophocles in Ajax, to whom
suicide, had he been able to let his feelings cool down for one day,
would no longer have seemed necessary, as the oracle intimated; he
would probably have snapped his fingers at the terrible whisperings
of wounded vanity, and said to himself, "Who has not already, in
my circumstances, mistaken a fool for a hero? Is it something so
very extraordinary?" On the contrary, it is something very commonly
human; Ajax might allow himself that consolation. Passion will not
wait; the tragedy in the lives of great men frequently lies not in
their conflict with the times and the baseness of their fellow-men,
but in their incapacity of postponing their work for a year or two;
they cannot wait. In all duels advising[Pg 78] friends have one thing to
decide, namely whether the parties concerned can still wait awhile;
if this is not the case, then a duel is advisable, inasmuch as each
of the two says, "Either I continue to live and that other man must
die immediately, or vice versa." In such case waiting would mean a
prolonged suffering of the terrible martyrdom of wounded honour in the
face of the insulter, and this may entail more suffering than life is
worth.
62.
Revelling in Vengeance.—Coarser individuals who feel themselves
insulted, make out the insult to be as great as possible, and relate
the affair in greatly exaggerated language, in order to be able to
revel thoroughly in the rarely awakened feelings of hatred and revenge.
63.
The Value of Disparagement.—In order to maintain their self-respect
in their own eyes and a certain thoroughness of action, not a few men,
perhaps even the majority, find it absolutely necessary to run down and
disparage all their acquaintances. But as mean natures are numerous,
and since it is very important whether they possess that thoroughness
or lose it, hence——
64.
The Man in a Passion.—We must beware of one who is in a passion
against us as of one who[Pg 79] has once sought our life; for the fact that
we still live is due to the absence of power to kill,—if looks would
suffice, we should have been dead long ago. It is a piece of rough
civilisation to force some one into silence by the exhibition of
physical savageness and the inspiring of fear. That cold glance which
exalted persons employ towards their servants is also a relic of that
caste division between man and man, a piece of rough antiquity; women,
the preservers of ancient things, have also faithfully retained this
survival of an ancient habit.
65.
Whither Honesty Can Lead.—Somebody had the bad habit of occasionally
talking quite frankly about the motives of his actions, which were as
good and as bad as the motives of most men. He first gave offence,
then aroused suspicion, was then gradually excluded from society and
declared a social outlaw, until at last justice remembered such an
abandoned creature, on occasions when it would otherwise have had no
eyes, or would have closed them. The lack of power to hold his tongue
concerning the common secret, and the irresponsible tendency to see
what no one wishes to see—himself—brought him to a prison and an
early death.
66.
Punishable, But Never Punished.—Our crime against criminals lies in
the fact that we treat them like rascals.
[Pg 80]
67.
Sancta Simplicitas OF VIRTUE.—Every virtue has its privileges; for
example, that of contributing its own little faggot to the scaffold of
every condemned man.
68.
Morality and Consequences.—It is not only the spectators of a deed
who frequently judge of its morality or immorality according to its
consequences, but the doer of the deed himself does so. For the motives
and intentions are seldom sufficiently clear and simple, and sometimes
memory itself seems clouded by the consequences of the deed, so that
one ascribes the deed to false motives or looks upon unessential
motives as essential. Success often gives an action the whole honest
glamour of a good conscience; failure casts the shadow of remorse
over the most estimable deed. Hence arises the well-known practice
of the politician, who thinks, "Only grant me success, with that I
bring all honest souls over to my side and make myself honest in my
own eyes." In the same way success must replace a better argument.
Many educated people still believe that the triumph of Christianity
over Greek philosophy is a proof of the greater truthfulness of
the former,—although in this case it is only the coarser and more
powerful that has triumphed over the more spiritual and delicate.
Which[Pg 81] possesses the greater truth may be seen from the fact that the
awakening sciences have agreed with Epicurus' philosophy on point after
point, but on point after point have rejected Christianity.
69.
Love and Justice.—Why do we over-estimate love to the disadvantage
of justice, and say the most beautiful things about it, as if it were
something very much higher than the latter? Is it not visibly more
stupid than justice? Certainly, but precisely for that reason all the
pleasanter for every one. It is blind, and possesses an abundant
cornucopia, out of which it distributes its gifts to all, even if they
do not deserve them, even if they express no thanks for them. It is as
impartial as the rain, which, according to the Bible and experience,
makes not only the unjust, but also occasionally the just wet through
to the skin.
70.
Execution.—How is it that every execution offends us more than does a
murder? It is the coldness of the judges, the painful preparations, the
conviction that a human being is here being used as a warning to scare
others. For the guilt is not punished, even if it existed—it lies with
educators, parents, surroundings, in ourselves, not in the murderer—I
mean the determining circumstances.
[Pg 82]
71.
Hope.—Pandora brought the box of ills and opened it. It was the gift
of the gods to men, outwardly a beautiful and seductive gift, and
called the Casket of Happiness. Out of it flew all the evils, living
winged creatures, thence they now circulate and do men injury day and
night. One single evil had not yet escaped from the box, and by the
will of Zeus Pandora closed the lid and it remained within. Now for
ever man has the casket of happiness in his house and thinks he holds a
great treasure; it is at his disposal, he stretches out his hand for it
whenever he desires; for he does not know the box which Pandora brought
was the casket of evil, and he believes the ill which remains within to
be the greatest blessing,—it is hope. Zeus did not wish man, however
much he might be tormented by the other evils, to fling away his life,
but to go on letting himself be tormented again and again. Therefore he
gives man hope,—in reality it is the worst of all evils, because it
prolongs the torments of man.
72.
The Degree of Moral Inflammability Unknown.—According to whether we
have or have not had certain disturbing views and impressions—for
instance, an unjustly executed, killed, or martered father; a faithless
wife; a cruel hostile attack—it depends whether our passions reach
fever heat and influence our whole[Pg 83] life or not. No one knows to
what he may be driven by circumstances, pity, or indignation; he
does not know the degree of his own inflammability. Miserable little
circumstances make us miserable; it is generally not the quantity of
experiences, but their quality, on which lower and higher man depends,
in good and evil.
73.
The Martyr in Spite of Himself.—There was a man belonging to a party
who was too nervous and cowardly ever to contradict his comrades; they
made use of him for everything, they demanded everything from him,
because he was more afraid of the bad opinion of his companions than
of death itself; his was a miserable, feeble soul. They recognised
this, and on the ground of these qualities they made a hero of him, and
finally even a martyr. Although the coward inwardly always said No,
with his lips he always said Yes, even on the scaffold, when he was
about to die for the opinions of his party; for beside him stood one of
his old companions, who so tyrannised over him by word and look that
he really suffered death in the most respectable manner, and has ever
since been celebrated as a martyr and a great character.
74.
I the Every-day Standard.—One will seldom go wrong if one attributes
extreme actions to vanity, average ones to habit, and petty ones to
fear.
[Pg 84]
75.
Misunderstanding Concerning Virtue.—Whoever has known immorality
in connection with pleasure, as is the case with a man who has a
pleasure-seeking youth behind him, imagines that virtue must be
connected with absence of pleasure.—Whoever, on the contrary, has been
much plagued by his passions and vices, longs to find in virtue peace
and the soul's happiness. Hence it is possible for two virtuous persons
not to understand each other at all.
76.
The Ascetic.—The ascetic makes a necessity of virtue.
77.
Transferring Honour from the Person to the Thing.—Deeds of love and
sacrifice for the benefit of one's neighbour are generally honoured,
wherever they are manifested. Thereby we multiply the valuation of
things which are thus loved, or for which we sacrifice ourselves,
although perhaps they are not worth much in themselves. A brave army is
convinced of the cause for which it fights.
78.
Ambition a Substitute For the Moral Sense.—The moral sense must not be
lacking in those natures which have no ambition. The[Pg 85] ambitious manage
without it, with almost the same results. For this reason the sons of
unpretentious, unambitious families, when once they lose the moral
sense, generally degenerate very quickly into complete scamps.
79.
Vanity Enriches.—How poor would be the human mind without vanity!
Thus, however, it resembles a well-stocked and constantly replenished
bazaar which attracts buyers of every kind. There they can find almost
everything, obtain almost everything, provided that they bring the
right sort of coin, namely admiration.
80.
Old Age and Death.—Apart from the commands of religion, the question
may well be asked, Why is it more worthy for an old man who feels his
powers decline, to await his slow exhaustion and extinction than with
full consciousness to set a limit to his life? Suicide in this case is
a perfectly natural, obvious action, which should justly arouse respect
as a triumph of reason, and did arouse it in those times when the heads
of Greek philosophy and the sturdiest patriots used to seek death
through suicide. The seeking, on the contrary, to prolong existence
from day to day, with anxious consultation of doctors and painful mode
of living, without the power of drawing nearer to the actual aim of
life, is far less worthy. Religion is rich in excuses to reply to the
demand for[Pg 86] suicide, and thus it ingratiates itself with those who wish
to cling to life.
81.
Errors of the Sufferer and the Doer.—When a rich man deprives a poor
man of a possession (for instance, a prince taking the sweetheart of
a plebeian), an error arises in the mind of the poor man; he thinks
that the rich man must be utterly infamous to take away from him the
little that he has. But the rich man does not estimate so highly the
value of a single possession, because he is accustomed to have many;
hence he cannot imagine himself in the poor man's place, and does not
commit nearly so great a wrong as the latter supposes. They each have a
mistaken idea of the other. The injustice of the powerful, which, more
than anything else, rouses indignation in history, is by no means so
great as it appears. Alone the mere inherited consciousness of being a
higher creation, with higher claims, produces a cold temperament, and
leaves the conscience quiet; we all of us feel no injustice when the
difference is very great between ourselves and another creature, and
kill a fly, for instance, without any pricks of conscience. Therefore
it was no sign of badness in Xerxes (whom even all Greeks describe
as superlatively noble) when he took a son away from his father and
had him cut in pieces, because he had expressed a nervous, ominous
distrust of the whole campaign; in this case the individual is put out
of the way like an unpleasant insect; he[Pg 87] is too lowly to be allowed
any longer to cause annoyance to a ruler of the world. Yes, every
cruel man is not so cruel as the ill-treated one imagines the idea of
pain is not the same as its endurance. It is the same thing in the
case of unjust judges, of the journalist who leads public opinion
astray by small dishonesties. In all these cases cause and effect are
surrounded by entirely different groups of feelings and thoughts; yet
one unconsciously takes it for granted that doer and sufferer think and
feel alike, and according to this supposition we measure the guilt of
the one by the pain of the other.
82.
The Skin of the Soul.—As the bones, flesh, entrails, and blood-vessels
are enclosed within a skin, which makes the aspect of man endurable, so
the emotions and passions of the soul are enwrapped with vanity,—it is
the skin of the soul.
83.
The Sleep of Virtue.—When virtue has slept, it will arise again all
the fresher.
84.
The Refinement of Shame.—People are not ashamed to think something
foul, but they are ashamed when they think these foul thoughts are
attributed to them.
[Pg 88]
85.
Malice Is Rare.—Most people are far too much occupied with themselves
to be malicious.
86.
The Tongue in the Balance.—We praise or blame according as the one or
the other affords more opportunity for exhibiting our power of judgment.
87.
St. Luke Xviii. 14, Improved.—He that humbleth himself wishes to be
exalted.
88.
The Prevention of Suicide.—There is a certain right by which we may
deprive a man of life, but none by which we may deprive him of death;
this is mere cruelty.
89.
Vanity.—We care for the good opinion of men, firstly because they are
useful to us, and then because we wish to please them (children their
parents, pupils their teachers, and well-meaning people generally their
fellow-men). Only where the good opinion of men is of importance to
some one, apart from the advantage thereof or his wish to please, can
we speak of vanity. In[Pg 89] this case the man wishes to please himself,
but at the expense of his fellow-men, either by misleading them into
holding a false opinion about him, or by aiming at a degree of "good
opinion" which must be painful to every one else (by arousing envy).
The individual usually wishes to corroborate the opinion he holds of
himself by the opinion of others, and to strengthen it in his own
eyes; but the strong habit of authority—a habit as old as man himself
—induces many to support by authority their belief in themselves: that
is to say, they accept it first from others; they trust the judgment
of others more than their own. The interest in himself, the wish to
please himself, attains to such a height in a vain man that he misleads
others into having a false, all too elevated estimation of him, and yet
nevertheless sets store by their authority,—thus causing an error and
yet believing in it. It must be confessed, therefore, that vain people
do not wish to please others so much as themselves, and that they go
so far therein as to neglect their advantage, for they often endeavour
to prejudice their fellow-men unfavourably, inimicably, enviously,
consequently injuriously against themselves, merely in order to have
pleasure in themselves, personal pleasure.
90.
The Limits of Human Love.—A man who has declared that another is an
idiot and a bad companion, is angry when the latter eventually proves
himself to be otherwise.
[Pg 90]
91.
Moralité Larmoyante.—What a great deal of pleasure morality gives!
Only think what a sea of pleasant tears has been shed over descriptions
of noble and unselfish deeds! This charm of life would vanish if the
belief in absolute irresponsibility were to obtain supremacy.
92.
The Origin of Justice.—Justice (equity) has, its origin amongst powers
which are fairly equal, as Thucydides (in the terrible dialogue between
the Athenian and Melian ambassadors) rightly comprehended: that is to
say, where there is no clearly recognisable supremacy, and where a
conflict would be useless and would injure both sides, there arises the
thought of coming to an understanding and settling the opposing claims;
the character of exchange is the primary character of justice. Each
party satisfies the other, as each obtains what he values more than the
other. Each one receives that which he desires, as his own henceforth,
and whatever is desired is received in return. Justice, therefore,
is recompense and exchange based on the hypothesis of a fairly equal
degree of power,—thus, originally, revenge belongs to the province
of justice, it is an exchange. Also gratitude.—Justice naturally is
based on the point of view of a judicious self-preservation, on the
egoism, therefore, of that reflection, "Why should I injure myself
uselessly and perhaps not attain[Pg 91] my aim after all?" So much about the
origin of justice. Because man, according to his intellectual custom,
has forgotten the original purpose of so-called just and reasonable
actions, and particularly because for hundreds of years children have
been taught to admire and imitate such actions, the idea has gradually
arisen that such an action is un-egoistic; upon this idea, however, is
based the high estimation in which it is held: which, moreover, like
all valuations, is constantly growing, for something that is valued
highly is striven after, imitated, multiplied, and increases, because
the value of the output of toil and enthusiasm of each individual is
added to the value of the thing itself. How little moral would the
world look without this forgetfulness! A poet might say that God had
placed forgetfulness as door-keeper in the temple of human dignity.
93.
The Right of the Weaker.—When any one submits under certain
conditions to a greater power, as a besieged town for instance, the
counter-condition is that one can destroy one's self, burn the town,
and so cause the mighty one a great loss. Therefore there is a kind of
equalisation here, on the basis of which rights may be determined.
The enemy has his advantage in maintaining it. In so far there are
also rights between slaves and masters, that is, precisely so far as
the possession of the slave is useful and important to his master. The
right originally[Pg 92] extends so far as one appears to be valuable to
the other, essentially unlosable, unconquerable, and so forth. In so
far the weaker one also has rights, but lesser ones. Hence the famous
unusquisque tantum juris habet, quantum potentia valet (or more
exactly, quantum potentia valere creditur).
94.
The Three Phases of Hitherto Existing Morality.—It is the first
sign that the animal has become man when its actions no longer have
regard only to momentary welfare, but to what is enduring, when it
grows useful and practical; there the free rule of reason first
breaks out. A still higher step is reached when he acts according to
the principle of honour by this means he brings himself into order,
submits to common feelings, and that exalts him still higher over
the phase in which he was led only by the idea of usefulness from a
personal point of view; he respects and wishes to be respected, i.e.
he understands usefulness as dependent upon what he thinks of others
and what others think of him. Eventually he acts, on the highest step
of the hitherto existing—morality, according to his standard of
things and men; he himself decides for himself and others what is
honourable, what is useful; he has become the law-giver of opinions,
in accordance with the ever more highly developed idea of what is
useful and honourable. Knowledge enables him to place that which is
most useful, that is to say the general, enduring usefulness, above the
personal,[Pg 93] the honourable recognition of general, enduring validity
above the momentary; he lives and acts as a collective individual.
95.
The Morality of the Mature Individual.—The impersonal has hitherto
been looked upon as the actual distinguishing mark of moral action; and
it has been pointed out that in the beginning it was in consideration
of the common good that all impersonal actions were praised and
distinguished. Is not an important change in these views impending,
now when it is more and more recognised that it is precisely in the
most personal possible considerations that the common good is the
greatest, so that a strictly personal action now best illustrates
the present idea of morality, as utility for the mass? To make a
whole personality out of ourselves, and in all that we do to keep
that personality's highest good in view, carries us further than
those sympathetic emotions and actions for the benefit of others. We
all still suffer, certainly, from the too small consideration of the
personal in us; it is badly developed,—let us admit it; rather has
our mind been forcibly drawn away from it and offered as a sacrifice
to the State, to science, or to those who stand in need of help, as if
it were the bad part which must be sacrificed. We are still willing to
work for our fellow-men, but only so far as we find our own greatest
advantage in this work, no more and no less. It is only a question of
what we[Pg 94] understand as our advantage; the unripe, undeveloped, crude
individual will understand it in the crudest way.
96.
Custom and Morality.—To be moral, correct, and virtuous is to be
obedient to an old-established law and custom. Whether we submit
with difficulty or willingly is immaterial, enough that we do so. He
is called "good" who, as if naturally, after long precedent, easily
and willingly, therefore, does what is right, according to whatever
this may be (as, for instance, taking revenge, if to take revenge be
considered as right, as amongst the ancient Greeks). He is called
good because he is good "for something"; but as goodwill, pity,
consideration, moderation, and such like, have come, with the change
in manners, to be looked upon as "good for something," as useful, the
good-natured and helpful have, later on, come to be distinguished
specially as "good." (In the beginning other and more important kinds
of usefulness stood in the foreground.) To be evil is to be "not
moral" (immoral), to be immoral is to be in opposition to tradition,
however sensible or stupid it may be; injury to the community (the
"neighbour" being understood thereby) has, however, been looked upon
by the social laws of all different ages as being eminently the actual
"immorality," so that now at the word "evil" we immediately think of
voluntary injury to one's neighbour. The fundamental antithesis which
has taught man the distinction between moral and immoral, between[Pg 95] good
and evil, is not the "egoistic" and "un-egoistic," but the being bound
to the tradition, law, and solution thereof. How the tradition has
arisen is immaterial, at all events without regard to good and evil
or any immanent categorical imperative, but above all for the purpose
of preserving a community, a generation, an association, a people;
every superstitious custom that has arisen on account of some falsely
explained accident, creates a tradition, which it is moral to follow;
to separate one's self from it is dangerous, but more dangerous for the
community than for the individual (because the Godhead punishes the
community for every outrage and every violation of its rights, and the
individual only in proportion). Now every tradition grows continually
more venerable, the farther off lies its origin, the more this is
lost sight of; the veneration paid it accumulates from generation to
generation, the tradition at last becomes holy and excites awe; and
thus in any case the morality of piety is a much older morality than
that which requires un-egoistic actions.
97.
Pleasure in Traditional Custom.—An important species of pleasure,
and therewith the source of morality, arises out of habit. Man does
what is habitual to him more easily, better, and therefore more
willingly; he feels a pleasure therein, and knows from experience
that the habitual has been tested, and is therefore useful; a custom
that we can live with is proved to be wholesome and advantageous in
contrast[Pg 96] to all new and not yet tested experiments. According to
this, morality is the union of the pleasant and the useful; moreover,
it requires no reflection. As soon as man can use compulsion, he uses
it to introduce and enforce his customs; for in his eyes they are
proved as the wisdom of life. In the same way a company of individuals
compels each single one to adopt the same customs. Here the inference
is wrong; because we feel at ease with a morality, or at least
because we are able to carry on existence with it, therefore this
morality is necessary, for it seems to be the only possibility of
feeling at ease; the ease of life seems to grow out of it alone. This
comprehension of the habitual as a necessity of existence is pursued
even to the smallest details of custom,—as insight into genuine
causality is very small with lower peoples and civilisations, they
take precautions with superstitious fear that everything should go in
its same groove; even where custom is difficult, hard, and burdensome,
it is preserved on account of its apparent highest usefulness. It is
not known that the same degree of well-being can also exist with other
customs, and that even higher degrees may be attained. We become aware,
however, that all customs, even the hardest, grow pleasanter and milder
with time, and that the severest way of life may become a habit and
therefore a pleasure.
98.
Pleasure and Social Instinct.—Out of his relations with other men, man
obtains a new[Pg 97] species of pleasure in addition to those pleasurable
sensations which he derives from himself; whereby he greatly increases
the scope of enjoyment. Perhaps he has already taken too many of the
pleasures of this sphere from animals, which visibly feel pleasure
when they play with each other, especially the mother with her young.
Then consider the sexual relations, which make almost every female
interesting to a male with regard to pleasure, and vice versa. The
feeling of pleasure on the basis of human relations generally makes
man better; joy in common, pleasure enjoyed together is increased, it
gives the individual security, makes him good-tempered, and dispels
mistrust and envy, for we feel ourselves at ease and see others at
ease. Similar manifestations of pleasure awaken the idea of the same
sensations, the feeling of being like something; a like effect is
produced by common sufferings, the same bad weather, dangers, enemies.
Upon this foundation is based the oldest alliance, the object of which
is the mutual obviating and averting of a threatening danger for the
benefit of each individual. And thus the social instinct grows out of
pleasure.
99.
The Innocent Side of So-called Evil Actions.—All "evil" actions are
prompted by the instinct of preservation, or, more exactly, by the
desire for pleasure and the avoidance of pain on the part of the
individual; thus prompted, but not evil. "To cause pain per se" does
not exist,[Pg 98] except in the brains of philosophers, neither does "to give
pleasure per se" (pity in Schopenhauer's meaning). In the social
condition before the State we kill the creature, be it ape or man,
who tries to take from us the fruit of a tree when we are hungry and
approach the tree, as we should still do with animals in inhospitable
countries. The evil actions which now most rouse our indignation, are
based upon the error that he who causes them has a free will, that he
had the option, therefore, of not doing us this injury. This belief in
option arouses hatred, desire for revenge, spite, and the deterioration
of the whole imagination, while we are much less angry with an animal
because we consider it irresponsible. To do injury, not from the
instinct of preservation, but as requital, is the consequence of a
false judgment and therefore equally innocent. The individual can in
the condition which lies before the State, act sternly and cruelly
towards other creatures for the purpose of terrifying, to establish
his existence firmly by such terrifying proofs of his power. Thus
act the violent, the mighty, the original founders of States, who
subdue the weaker to themselves. They have the right to do so, such
as the State still takes for itself; or rather, there is no right
that can hinder this. The ground for all-morality can only be made
ready when a stronger individual or a collective individual, for
instance society or the State, subdues the single individuals,.draws
them out of their singleness, and forms them into an association..
Compulsion precedes morality, indeed morality itself is compulsion
for a time, to[Pg 99] which one submits for the avoidance of pain. Later on
it becomes custom,—later still, free obedience, and finally almost
instinct,—then, like everything long accustomed and natural, it is
connected with pleasure—and is henceforth called virtue.
100.
Shame.—Shame exists everywhere where there is a "mystery"; this,
however, is a religious idea, which was widely extended in the older
times of human civilisation. Everywhere were found bounded domains
to which access was forbidden by divine right, except under certain
conditions ; at first locally, as, for example, certain spots that
ought not to be trodden by the feet of the uninitiated, in the
neighbourhood of which these latter experienced horror and fear.
This feeling was a good deal carried over into other relations, for
instance, the sex relations, which, as a privilege and ἃδoυτον of
riper years, had to be withheld from the knowledge of the young for
their advantage, relations for the protection and sanctification of
which many gods were invented and were set up as guardians in the
nuptial chamber. (In Turkish this room is on this account called harem,
"sanctuary," and is distinguished with the same name, therefore, that
is used for the entrance courts of the mosques.) Thus the kingdom is as
a centre from which radiate power and glory, to the subjects a mystery
full of secrecy and shame, of which many after-effects may still be
felt among nations which[Pg 100] otherwise do not by any means belong to the
bashful type. Similarly, the whole world of inner conditions, the
so-called "soul," is still a mystery for all who are not philosophers,
after it has been looked upon for endless ages as of divine origin and
as worthy of divine intercourse; according to this it is an ἃδoυτον
and arouses shame.
101.
Judge Not.—In considering earlier periods, care must be taken not
to fall into unjust abuse. The injustice in slavery, the cruelty in
the suppression of persons and nations, is not to be measured by our
standard. For the instinct of justice was not then so far developed.
Who dares to reproach the Genevese Calvin with the burning of the
physician Servet? It was an action following and resulting from his
convictions, and in the same way the Inquisition had a good right;
only the ruling views were false, and produced a result which seems
hard to us because those views have now grown strange to us. Besides,
what is the burning of a single individual compared with eternal
pains of hell for almost all! And yet this idea was universal at that
time, without essentially injuring by its dreadfulness the conception
of a God. With us, too, political sectarians are hardly and cruelly
treated, but because one is accustomed to believe in the necessity of
the State, the cruelty is not so deeply felt here as it is where we
repudiate the views. Cruelty to animals in children and Italians is[Pg 101]
due to ignorance, i.e. the animal, through the interests of Church
teaching, has been placed too far behind man. Much that is dreadful and
inhuman in history, much that one hardly likes to believe, is mitigated
by the reflection that the one who commands and the one who carries
out are different persons,—the former does not behold the right and
therefore does not experience the strong impression on the imagination;
the latter obeys a superior and therefore feels no responsibility. Most
princes and military heads, through lack of imagination, easily appear
hard and cruel without really being so. Egoism is not evil, because
the idea of the "neighbour"—the word is of Christian origin and does
not represent the truth—is very weak in us; and we feel ourselves
almost as free and irresponsible towards him as towards plants and
stones. We have yet to learn that others suffer, and this can never
be completely learnt.
102.
"Man Always Acts Rightly."—We do not complain of nature as immoral
because it sends a thunderstorm and makes us wet,—why do we call those
who injure us immoral? Because in the latter case we take for granted
a free will functioning voluntarily; in the former we see necessity.
But this distinction is an error. Thus we do not call even intentional
injury immoral in all circumstances; for instance, we kill a fly
unhesitatingly and intentionally, only because its[Pg 102] buzzing annoys us;
we punish a criminal intentionally and hurt him in order to protect
ourselves and society. In the first case it is the individual who, in
order to preserve himself, or even to protect himself from worry, does
intentional injury; in the second case it is the State. All morals
allow intentional injury in the case of necessity, that is, when
it is a matter of self-preservation! But these two points of view
suffice to explain all evil actions committed by men against men, we
are desirous of obtaining pleasure or avoiding pain; in any case it is
always a question of self-preservation. Socrates and Plato are right:
whatever man does he always does well, that is, he does that which
seems to him good (useful) according to the degree of his intellect,
the particular standard of his reasonableness.
103.
The Harmlessness of Malice.—The aim of malice is not the suffering
of others in itself, but our own enjoyment; for instance, as the
feeling of revenge, or stronger nervous excitement. All teasing,
even, shows the pleasure it gives to exercise our power on others and
bring it to an enjoyable feeling of preponderance. Is it immoral to
taste pleasure at the expense of another's pain? Is malicious joy[3]
devilish, as Schopenhauer says? We give ourselves pleasure in[Pg 103] nature
by breaking off twigs, loosening stones, fighting with wild animals,
and do this in order to become thereby conscious of our strength. Is
the knowledge, therefore, that another suffers through us, the same
thing concerning which we otherwise feel irresponsible, supposed to
make us immoral? But if we did not know this we would not thereby have
the enjoyment of our own superiority, which can only manifest itself
by the suffering of others, for instance in teasing. All pleasure
per se is neither good nor evil; whence should come the decision
that in order to have pleasure ourselves we may not cause displeasure
to others? From the point of view of usefulness alone, that is, out
of consideration for the consequences, for possible displeasure,
when the injured one or the replacing State gives the expectation of
resentment and revenge: this only can have been the original reason
for denying ourselves such actions. Pity aims just as little at
the pleasure of others as malice at the pain of others per se. For
it contains at least two (perhaps many more) elements of a personal
pleasure, and is so far self-gratification; in the first place as the
pleasure of emotion, which is the kind of pity that exists in tragedy,
and then, when it impels to action, as the pleasure of satisfaction
in the exercise of power. If, besides this, a suffering person is
very dear to us, we lift a sorrow from ourselves by the exercise of
sympathetic actions. Except by a few philosophers, pity has always been
placed very low in the scale of moral feelings, and rightly so.
[Pg 104]
104.
Self-defence.—If self-defence is allowed to pass as moral, then almost
all manifestations of the so-called immoral egoism must also stand;
men injure, rob, or kill in order to preserve or defend themselves,
to prevent personal injury; they lie where cunning and dissimulation
are the right means of self-preservation. Intentional injury, when
our existence or safety (preservation of our comfort) is concerned, is
conceded to be moral; the State itself injures, according to this point
of view, when it punishes. In unintentional injury, of course, there
can be nothing immoral, that is ruled by chance. Is there, then, a kind
of intentional injury where our existence or the preservation of our
comfort is not concerned? Is there an injuring out of pure malice,
for instance in cruelty? If one does not know how much an action hurts,
it is no deed of malice; thus the child is not malicious towards the
animal, not evil; he examines and destroys it like a toy. But do we
ever know entirely how an action hurts another? As far as our nervous
system extends we protect ourselves from pain; if it extended farther,
to our fellow-men, namely, we should do no one an injury (except in
such cases as we injure ourselves, where we cut ourselves for the
sake of cure, tire and exert ourselves for the sake of health). We
conclude by analogy that something hurts somebody, and through memory
and the strength of imagination we may suffer from it[Pg 105] ourselves. But
still what a difference there is between toothache and the pain (pity)
that the sight of toothache calls forth! Therefore, in injury out of
so-called malice the degree of pain produced is always unknown to
us; but inasmuch as there is pleasure in the action (the feeling of
one's own power, one's own strong excitement), the action is committed,
in order to preserve the comfort of the individual, and is regarded,
therefore, from a similar point of view as defence and falsehood in
necessity. No life without pleasure; the struggle for pleasure is the
struggle for life. Whether the individual so fights this fight that
men call him good, or so that they call him evil, is determined by the
measure and the constitution of his intellect.
105.
Recompensing Justice.—Whoever has completely comprehended the doctrine
of absolute irresponsibility can no longer include the so-called
punishing and recompensing justice in the idea of justice, should this
consist of giving to each man his due. For he who is punished does
not deserve the punishment, he is only used as a means of henceforth
warning away from certain actions; equally so, he who is rewarded
does not merit this reward, he could not act otherwise than he did.
Therefore the reward is meant only as an encouragement to him and
others, to provide a motive for subsequent actions; words of praise are
flung to the runners on the course, not to the[Pg 106] one who has reached
the goal. Neither punishment nor reward is anything that comes to one
as one's own; they are given from motives of usefulness, without one
having a right to claim them. Hence we must say, "The wise man gives
no reward because the deed has been well done," just as we have said,
"The wise man does not punish because evil has been committed, but in
order that evil shall not be committed." If punishment and reward no
longer existed, then the strongest motives which deter men from certain
actions and impel them to certain other actions, would also no longer
exist; the needs of mankind require their continuance; and inasmuch as
punishment and reward, blame and praise, work most sensibly on vanity,
the same need requires the continuance of vanity.
106.
At the Waterfall.—In looking at a water-fall we imagine that there is
freedom of will and fancy in the countless turnings, twistings, and
breakings of the waves; but everything is compulsory, every movement
can be mathematically calculated. So it is also with human actions;
one would have to be able to calculate every single action beforehand
if one were all-knowing; equally so all progress of knowledge, every
error, all malice. The one who acts certainly labours under the
illusion of voluntariness; if the world's wheel were to stand still
for a moment and an all-knowing, calculating reason were there to make
use of this[Pg 107] pause, it could foretell the future of every creature to
the remotest times, and mark out every track upon which that wheel
would continue to roll. The delusion of the acting agent about himself,
the supposition of a free will, belongs to this mechanism which still
remains to be calculated.
107.
Irresponsibility and Innocence.—The complete irresponsibility of
man for his actions and his nature is the bitterest drop which he
who understands must swallow if he was accustomed to see the patent
of nobility of his humanity in responsibility and duty. All his
valuations, distinctions, disinclinations, are thereby deprived of
value and become false,—his deepest feeling for the sufferer and
the hero was based on an error; he may no longer either praise or
blame, for it is absurd to praise and blame nature and necessity. In
the same way as he loves a fine work of art, but does not praise it,
because it can do nothing for itself; in the same way as he regards
plants, so must he regard his own actions and those of mankind. He can
admire strength, beauty, abundance, in themselves; but must find no
merit therein,—the chemical progress and the strife of the elements,
the torments of the sick person who thirsts after recovery, are all
equally as little merits as those struggles of the soul and states of
distress in which we are torn hither and thither by different impulses
until we finally decide[Pg 108] for the strongest—as we say (but in reality
it is the strongest motive which decides for us). All these motives,
however, whatever fine names we may give them, have all grown out of
the same root, in which we believe the evil poisons to be situated;
between good and evil actions there is no difference of species, but
at most of degree. Good actions are sublimated evil ones; evil actions
are vulgarised and stupefied good ones. The single longing of the
individual for self-gratification (together with the fear of losing it)
satisfies itself in all circumstances: man may act as he can, that is
as he must, be it in deeds of vanity, revenge, pleasure, usefulness,
malice, cunning; be it in deeds of sacrifice, of pity, of knowledge.
The degrees of the power of judgment determine whither any one lets
himself be drawn through this longing; to every society, to every
individual, a scale of possessions is continually present, according to
which he determines his actions and judges those of others. But this
standard changes constantly; many actions are called evil and are only
stupid, because the degree of intelligence which decided for them was
very low. In a certain sense, even, all actions are still stupid;
for the highest degree of human intelligence which can now be attained
will assuredly be yet surpassed, and then, in a retrospect, all our
actions and judgments will appear as limited and hasty as the actions
and judgments of primitive wild peoples now appear limited and hasty to
us. To recognise all this may be deeply painful, but consolation comes
after; such pains are the pangs of birth. The[Pg 109] butterfly wants to break
through its chrysalis: it rends and tears it, and is then blinded and
confused by the unaccustomed light, the kingdom of liberty. In such
people as are capable of such sadness—and how few are!—the first
experiment made is to see whether mankind can change itself from a
moral into a wise mankind. The sun of a new gospel throws its rays
upon the highest point in the soul of each single individual, then
the mists gather thicker than ever, and the brightest light and the
dreariest shadow lie side by side. Everything is necessity—so says the
new knowledge, and this knowledge itself is necessity. Everything is
innocence, and knowledge is the road to insight into this innocence.
Are pleasure, egoism, vanity necessary for the production of the
moral phenomena and their highest result, the sense for truth and
justice in knowledge; were error and the confusion of the imagination
the only means through which mankind could raise itself gradually to
this degree of self-enlightenment and self-liberation—who would dare
to undervalue these means? Who would dare to be sad if he perceived the
goal to which those roads led? Everything in the domain of morality
has evolved, is changeable, unstable, everything is dissolved, it is
true; but everything is also streaming towards one goal. Even if
the inherited habit of erroneous valuation, love and hatred, continue
to reign in us, yet under the influence of growing knowledge it will
become weaker; a new habit, that of comprehension, of not loving, not
hating, of overlooking, is gradually implanting itself in us upon[Pg 110] the
same ground, and in thousands of years will perhaps be powerful enough
to give humanity the strength to produce wise, innocent (consciously
innocent) men, as it now produces unwise, guilt-conscious men,—that
is the necessary preliminary step, not its opposite.
[1] Dr. Paul Rée.—J.M.K.
[2] Dr. Paul Rée.—J.M.K.
[3] This is the untranslatable word Schadenfreude, which
means joy at the misfortune of others.—J.M.K.
[Pg 111]
108.
The Double Fight Against Evil.—When misfortune overtakes us we can
either pass over I it so lightly that its cause is removed, or so
that the result which it has on our temperament is altered, through a
changing, therefore, of the evil into a good, the utility of which is
perhaps not visible until later on. Religion and art (also metaphysical
philosophy) work upon the changing of the temperament, partly through
the changing of our judgment on events (for instance, with the help
of the phrase "whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth"), partly through
the awakening of a pleasure in pain, in emotion generally (whence
the tragic art takes its starting-point). The more a man is inclined
to twist and arrange meanings the less he will grasp the causes of
evil and disperse them; the momentary mitigation and influence of
a narcotic, as for example in toothache, suffices him even in more
serious sufferings. The more the dominion of creeds and all arts
dispense with narcotics, the more strictly men attend to the actual
removing of the evil, which is certainly[Pg 112] bad for writers of tragedy;
for the material for tragedy is growing scarcer because the domain of
pitiless, inexorable fate is growing ever narrower,—but worse still
for the priests, for they have hitherto lived on the narcotisation of
human woes.
109.
Sorrow Is Knowledge.—How greatly we should like to exchange the
false assertions of the priests, that there is a god who desires good
from us, a guardian and witness of every action, every moment, every
thought, who loves us and seeks our welfare in all misfortune,—how
greatly we would like to exchange these ideas for truths which would be
just as healing, pacifying and beneficial as those errors! But there
are no such truths; at most philosophy can oppose to them metaphysical
appearances (at bottom also untruths). The tragedy consists in the fact
that we cannot believe those dogmas of religion and metaphysics,
if we have strict methods of truth in heart and brain: on the other
hand, mankind has, through development, become so delicate, irritable
and suffering, that it has need of the highest means of healing and
consolation; whence also the danger arises that man would bleed to
death from recognised truth, or, more correctly, from discovered error.
Byron has expressed this in the immortal lines:—

Sorrow is knowledge: they who know the most
Must mourn the deepest o'er the fatal truth,
The Tree of Knowledge is not that of Life.
[Pg 113]
For such troubles there is no better help than to recall the stately
levity of Horace, at least for the worst hours and eclipses of the
soul, and to say with him:

... quid æternis minorem
consiliis animum fatigas?
cur non sub alta vel platano vel hac
pinu jacentes.[1]

But assuredly frivolity or melancholy of every degree is better than
a romantic retrospection and desertion of the flag, an approach to
Christianity in any form; for according to the present condition of
knowledge it is absolutely impossible to approach it without hopelessly
soiling our intellectual conscience and giving ourselves away to
ourselves and others. Those pains may be unpleasant enough, but we
cannot become leaders and educators of mankind without pain; and woe
to him who would wish to attempt this and no longer have that clear
conscience!
110.
The Truth in Religion.—In the period of rationalism justice was not
done to the importance of religion, of that there is no doubt, but
equally there is no doubt that in the reaction that followed this
rationalism justice was far overstepped; for religions were treated
lovingly,[Pg 114] even amorously, and, for instance, a deeper, even the
very deepest, understanding of the world was ascribed to them; which
science has only to strip of its dogmatic garment in order to possess
the "truth" in unmythical form. Religions should, therefore,—this
was the opinion of all opposers of rationalism,—sensu allegorico,
with all consideration for the understanding of the masses, give
utterance to that ancient wisdom which is wisdom itself, inasmuch
as all true science of later times has always led up to it instead
of away from it, so that between the oldest wisdom of mankind and
all later harmonies similarity of discernment and a progress of
knowledge—in case one should wish to speak of such a thing—rests
not upon the nature but upon the way of communicating it. This whole
conception of religion and science is thoroughly erroneous, and none
would still dare to profess it if Schopenhauer's eloquence had not
taken it under its protection; this resonant eloquence which, however,
only reached its hearers a generation later. As surely as from
Schopenhauer's religious-moral interpretations of men and the world
much may be gained for the understanding of the Christian and other
religions, so surely also is he mistaken about the value of religion
for knowledge. Therein he himself was only a too docile pupil of the
scientific teachers of his time, who all worshipped romanticism and had
forsworn the spirit of enlightenment; had he been born in our present
age he could not possibly have talked about the sensus allegoricus
of religion; he would much rather have given[Pg 115] honour to truth, as he
used to do, with the words, "no religion, direct or indirect, either
as dogma or as allegory, has ever contained a truth." For each has
been born of fear and necessity, through the byways of reason did it
slip into existence; once, perhaps, when imperilled by science, some
philosophic doctrine has lied itself into its system in order that
it may be found there later, but this is a theological trick of the
time when a religion already doubts itself. These tricks of theology
(which certainly were practised in the early days of Christianity,
as the religion of a scholarly period steeped in philosophy) have
led to that superstition of the sensus allegoricus, but yet more
the habits of the philosophers (especially the half-natures, the
poetical philosophers and the philosophising artists), to treat all the
sensations which they discovered in themselves as the fundamental
nature of man in general, and hence to allow their own religious
feelings an important influence in the building up of their systems.
As philosophers frequently philosophised under the custom of religious
habits, or at least under the anciently inherited power of that
"metaphysical need," they developed doctrinal opinions which really
bore a great resemblance to the Jewish or Christian or Indian religious
views,—a resemblance, namely, such as children usually bear to their
mothers, only that in this case the fathers were not clear about that
motherhood, as happens sometimes,—but in their innocence romanced
about a family likeness between all religion and science. In reality,
between religions and real science there[Pg 116] exists neither relationship
nor friendship, nor even enmity; they live on different planets. Every
philosophy which shows a religious comet's tail shining in the darkness
of its last prospects makes all the science it contains suspicious; all
this is presumably also religion, even though in the guise of science.
Moreover, if all nations were to agree about certain religious matters,
for instance the existence of a God (which, it may be remarked, is not
the case with regard to this point), this would only be an argument
against those affirmed matters, for instance the existence of a God;
the consensus gentium and hominum in general can only take place in
case of a huge folly. On the other hand, there is no consensus omnium
sapientium, with regard to any single thing, with that exception
mentioned in Goethe's lines:

"Alle die Weisesten aller der Zeiten
Lächeln und winken und stimmen mit ein:
Thöricht, auf Bess'rung der Thoren zu harren!
Kinder der Klugheit, o habet die Narren
Eben zum Narren auch, wie sich's gehört!"[2]

Spoken without verse and rhyme and applied to our case, the consensus
sapientium consists in this: that the consensus gentium counts as a
folly.
[Pg 117]
111.
The Origin of the Religious Cult.—If we go back to the times in
which the religious life flourished to the greatest extent, we find a
fundamental conviction, which we now no longer share, and whereby the
doors leading to a religious life are closed to us once for all,—it
concerns Nature and intercourse with her. In those times people knew
nothing of natural laws; neither for earth nor for heaven is there a
"must"; a season, the sunshine, the rain may come or may not come. In
short, every idea of natural causality is lacking. When one rows, it
is not the rowing that moves the boat, but rowing is only a magical
ceremony by which one compels a dæmon to move the boat. All maladies,
even death itself, are the result of magical influences. Illness
and death never happen naturally; the whole conception of "natural
sequence" is lacking,—it dawned first amongst the older Greeks, that
is, in a very late phase of humanity, in the conception of Moira,
enthroned above the gods. When a man shoots with a bow, there is still
always present an irrational hand and strength; if the wells suddenly
dry up, men think first of subterranean dæmons and their tricks; it
must be the arrow of a god beneath whose invisible blow a man suddenly
sinks down. In India (says Lubbock) a carpenter is accustomed to offer
sacrifice to his hammer, his hatchet, and the rest of his tools; in
the same way a Brahmin treats the pen with which he writes, a soldier
the weapons he requires in the field of[Pg 118] battle, a mason his trowel, a
labourer his plough. In the imagination of religious people all nature
is a summary of the actions of conscious and voluntary creatures,
an enormous complex of arbitrariness. No conclusion may be drawn
with regard to everything that is outside of us, that anything will
be so and so, must be so and so; the approximately sure, reliable
are we,—man is the rule, nature is irregularity,—this theory
contains the fundamental conviction which obtains in rude, religiously
productive primitive civilisations. We latter-day men feel just
the contrary,—the richer man now feels himself inwardly, the more
polyphonous is the music and the noise of his soul the more powerfully
the symmetry of nature works upon him; we all recognise with Goethe
the great means in nature for the appeasing of the modern soul; we
listen to the pendulum swing of this greatest of clocks with a longing
for rest, for home and tranquillity, as if we could absorb this
symmetry into ourselves and could only thereby arrive at the enjoyment
of ourselves. Formerly it was otherwise; if we consider the rude,
early condition of nations, or contemplate present-day savages' at
close quarters, we find them most strongly influenced by law and by
tradition: the individual is almost automatically bound to them, and
moves with the uniformity of a pendulum. To him Nature—uncomprehended,
terrible, mysterious Nature—must appear as the sphere of liberty,
of voluntariness, of the higher power, even as a superhuman degree
of existence, as God. In those times and conditions, however,[Pg 119] every
individual felt that his existence, his happiness, and that of the
family and the State, and the success of all undertakings, depended
on those spontaneities of nature; certain natural events must appear
at the right time, others be absent at the right time. How can one
have any influence on these terrible unknown things, how can one
bind the sphere of liberty? Thus he asks himself, thus he inquires
anxiously;—is there, then, no means of making those powers as regular
through tradition and law as you are yourself? The aim of those who
believe in magic and miracles is to impose a law on nature,—and,
briefly, the religious cult is a result of this aim. The problem which
those people have set themselves is closely related to this: how can
the weaker race dictate laws to the stronger, rule it, and guide
its actions (in relation to the weaker)? One would first remember the
most harmless sort of compulsion, that compulsion which one exercises
when one has gained any one's affection. By imploring and praying, by
submission, by the obligation of regular taxes and gifts, by flattering
glorifications, it is also possible to exercise an influence upon the
powers of nature, inasmuch as one gains the affections; love binds and
becomes bound. Then one can make compacts by which one is mutually
bound to a certain behaviour, where one gives pledges and exchanges
vows. But far more important is a species of more forcible compulsion,
by magic and witchcraft. As with the sorcerer's help man is able to
injure a more powerful enemy and keep him in fear, as the love-charm
works at[Pg 120] a distance, so the weaker man believes he can influence the
mightier spirits of nature. The principal thing in all witchcraft
is that we must get into our possession something that belongs to
some one, hair, nails, food from their table, even their portrait,
their name. With such apparatus we can then practise sorcery; for the
fundamental rule is, to everything spiritual there belongs something
corporeal; with the help of this we are able to bind the spirit, to
injure it, and destroy it; the corporeal furnishes the handles with
which we can grasp the spiritual. As man controls man, so he controls
some natural spirit or other; for this has also its corporeal part
by which it may be grasped. The tree and, compared with it, the seed
from which it sprang,—this enigmatical contrast seems to prove that
the same spirit embodied itself in both forms, now small, now large.
A stone that begins to roll suddenly is the body in which a spirit
operates; if there is an enormous rock lying on a lonely heath it seems
impossible to conceive human strength sufficient to have brought it
there, consequently the stone must have moved there by itself, that
is, it must be possessed by a spirit. Everything that has a body is
susceptible to witchcraft, therefore also the natural spirits. If a god
is bound to his image we can use the most direct compulsion against him
(through refusal of sacrificial food, scourging, binding in fetters,
and so on). In order to obtain by force the missing favour of their
god the lower classes in China wind cords round the image of the one
who has left them in the lurch,[Pg 121] pull it down and drag it through the
streets in the dust and the dirt: "You dog of a spirit," they say, "we
gave you a magnificent temple to live in, we gilded you prettily, we
fed you well, we offered you sacrifice, and yet you are so ungrateful."
Similar forcible measures against pictures of the Saints and Virgin
when they refused to do their duty in pestilence or drought, have
been witnessed even during the present century in Catholic countries.
Through all these magic relations to nature, countless ceremonies
have been called into life; and at last, when the confusion has
grown too great, an endeavour has been made to order and systematise
them, in order that the favourable course of the whole progress of
nature, i.e. of the great succession of the seasons, may seem to
be guaranteed by a corresponding course of a system of procedure.
The essence of the religious cult is to determine and confine nature
to human advantage, to impress it with a legality, therefore, which
it did not originally possess; while at the present time we wish to
recognise the legality of nature in order to adapt ourselves to it.
In short, then, the religious cult is based upon the representations
of sorcery between man and man,—and the sorcerer is older than the
priest. But it is likewise based upon other and nobler representations;
it premises the sympathetic relation of man to man, the presence of
goodwill, gratitude, the hearing of pleaders, of treaties between
enemies, the granting of pledges, and the claim to the protection of
property. In very low stages of[Pg 122] civilisation man does not stand in the
relation of a helpless slave to nature, he is not necessarily its
involuntary, bondsman. In the Greek grade of religion, particularly
in relation to the Olympian gods, there may even be imagined a common
life between two castes, a nobler and more powerful one, and one less
noble; but in their origin both belong to each other somehow, and
are of one kind; they need not be ashamed of each other. That is the
nobility of the Greek religion.
112.
At the Sight of Certain Antique Sacrificial Implements.—The fact of
how many feelings are lost to us may be seen, for instance, in the
mingling of the droll, even of the obscene, with the religious
feeling. The sensation of the possibility of this mixture vanishes, we
only comprehend historically that it existed in the feasts of Demeter
and Dionysus, in the Christian Easter-plays and Mysteries. But we also
know that which is noble in alliance with burlesque and such like, the
touching mingled with the laughable, which perhaps a later age will not
be able to understand.
113.
Christianity As Antiquity.—When on a Sunday morning we hear the old
bells ring out, we ask ourselves, "Is it possible! This is done on
account of a Jew crucified two thousand years ago who said he was the
Son of God. The proof of such an assertion is wanting." Certainly in
our[Pg 123] times the Christian religion is an antiquity that dates from
very early ages, and the fact that its assertions are still believed,
when otherwise all claims are subjected to such strict examination,
is perhaps the oldest part of this heritage. A God who creates a son
from a mortal woman; a sage who requires that man should no longer
work, no longer judge, but should pay attention to the signs of the
approaching end of the world; a justice that accepts an innocent being
as a substitute in sacrifice; one who commands his disciples to drink
his blood; prayers for miraculous intervention; sins committed against
a God and atoned for through a God; the fear of a future to which death
is the portal; the form of the cross in an age which no longer knows
the signification and the shame of the cross,[3] how terrible all this
appears to us, as if risen from the grave of the ancient past! Is it
credible that such things are still believed?
114.
What Is Un-greek in Christianity.—The Greeks did not regard the
Homeric gods as raised above them like masters, nor themselves as
being under them like servants, as the Jews did. They only saw, as
in a mirror, the most perfect examples of their own caste; an ideal,
therefore, and not an opposite of their own nature. There is a feeling[Pg 124]
of relationship, a mutual interest arises, a kind of symmachy. Man
thinks highly of himself when he gives himself such gods, and places
himself in a relation like that of the lower nobility towards the
higher; while the Italian nations hold a genuine peasant-faith, with
perpetual fear of evil and mischievous powers and tormenting spirits.
Wherever the Olympian gods retreated into the background, Greek life
was more sombre and more anxious. Christianity, on the contrary,
oppressed man and crushed him utterly, sinking him as if in deep mire;
then into the feeling of absolute depravity it suddenly threw the light
of divine mercy, so that the surprised man, dazzled by forgiveness,
gave a cry of joy and for a moment believed that he bore all heaven
within himself. All psychological feelings of Christianity work upon
this unhealthy excess of sentiment, and upon the deep corruption of
head and heart it necessitates; it desires to destroy, break, stupefy,
confuse,—only one thing it does not desire, namely moderation, and
therefore it is in the deepest sense barbaric, Asiatic, ignoble and
un-Greek.
115.
To Be Religious With Advantage.—There are sober and industrious people
on whom religion is embroidered like a hem of higher humanity; these
do well to remain religious, it beautifies them. All people who do
not understand some kind of trade in weapons—tongue and pen included
as weapons—become servile; for such the Christian[Pg 125] religion is very
useful, for then servility assumes the appearance of Christian virtues
and is surprisingly beautified. People to whom their daily life appears
too empty and monotonous easily grow religious; this is comprehensible
and excusable, only they have no right to demand religious sentiments
from those whose daily life is not empty and monotonous.[4]
116.
The Commonplace Christian.—If Christianity were right, with its
theories of an avenging God, of general sinfulness, of redemption, and
the danger of eternal damnation, it would be a sign of weak intellect
and lack of character not to become a priest, apostle or hermit,
and to work only with fear and trembling for one's own salvation; it
would be senseless thus to neglect eternal benefits for temporary
comfort. Taking it for granted that there is belief, the commonplace
Christian is a miserable figure, a man that really cannot add two and
two together, and who, moreover, just because of his mental incapacity
for responsibility, did not deserve to be so severely punished as
Christianity has decreed.
117.
Of the Wisdom of Christianity.—It is a clever stroke on the part
of Christianity to teach[Pg 126] the utter unworthiness, sinfulness, and
despicableness of mankind so loudly that the disdain of their
fellow-men is no longer possible. "He may sin as much as he likes, he
is not essentially different from me,—it is I who am unworthy and
despicable in every way," says the Christian to himself. But even
this feeling has lost its sharpest sting, because the Christian no
longer believes in his individual despicableness; he is bad as men are
generally, and comforts himself a little with the axiom, "We are all of
one kind."
118.
Change of Front.—As soon as a religion triumphs it has for its enemies
all those who would have been its first disciples.
119.
The Fate of Christianity.—Christianity arose for the purpose of
lightening the heart; but now it must first make the heart heavy in
order afterwards to lighten it. Consequently it will perish.
120.
The Proof of Pleasure.—The agreeable opinion is accepted as
true,—this is the proof of the pleasure (or, as the Church says, the
proof of the strength), of which all religions are so proud when they
ought to be ashamed of it. If Faith did not make blessed it would not
be believed in; of how little value must it be, then!
[Pg 127]
121.
A Dangerous Game.—Whoever now allows scope to his religious feelings
must also let them increase, he cannot do otherwise. His nature then
gradually changes; it favours whatever is connected with and near to
the religious element, the whole extent of judgment and feeling becomes
clouded, overcast with religious shadows. Sensation cannot stand still;
one must therefore take care.
122.
The Blind Disciples.—So long as one knows well the strength and
weakness of one's doctrine, one's art, one's religion, its power
is still small. The disciple and apostle who has no eyes for the
weaknesses of the doctrine, the religion, and so forth, dazzled by the
aspect of the master and by his reverence for him, has on that account
usually more power than the master himself. Without blind disciples the
influence of a man and his work has never yet become great. To help a
doctrine to victory often means only so to mix it with stupidity that
the weight of the latter carries off also the victory for the former.
123.
Church Disestablishment.—There is not enough religion in the world
even to destroy religions.
[Pg 128]
124.
The Sinlessness of Man.—If it is understood how "sin came into the
world," namely through errors of reason by which men held each other,
even the single individual held himself, to be much blacker and much
worse than was actually the case, the whole sensation will be much
lightened, and man and the world will appear in a blaze of innocence
which it will do one good to contemplate. In the midst of nature man
is always the child per se. This child sometimes has a heavy and
terrifying dream, but when it opens its eyes it always finds itself
back again in Paradise.
125.
The Irreligiousness of Artists.—Homer is so much at home amongst
his gods, and is so familiar with them as a poet, that he must have
been deeply irreligious; that which the popular faith gave him—a
meagre, rude, partly terrible superstition—he treated as freely as
the sculptor does his clay, with the same unconcern, therefore, which
Æschylus and Aristophanes possessed, and by which in later times the
great artists of the Renaissance distinguished themselves, as also did
Shakespeare and Goethe.
126.
The Art and Power of False Interpretations.—All the visions, terrors,
torpors,[Pg 129] and ecstasies of saints are well-known forms of disease,
which are only, by reason of deep-rooted religious and psychological
errors, differently explained by him, namely not as diseases. Thus,
perhaps, the Daimonion of Socrates was only an affection of the
ear, which he, in accordance with his ruling moral mode of thought,
expounded differently from what would be the case now. It is the same
thing with the madness and ravings of the prophets and soothsayers; it
is always the degree of knowledge, fantasy, effort, morality in the
head and heart of the interpreters which has made so much of it.
For the greatest achievements of the people who are called geniuses and
saints it is necessary that they should secure interpreters by force,
who misunderstand them for the good of mankind.
127.
The Veneration of Insanity.—Because it was remarked that excitement
frequently made the mind clearer and produced happy inspirations it was
believed that the happiest inspirations and suggestions were called
forth by the greatest excitement; and so the insane were revered as
wise and oracular. This is based on a false conclusion.
128.
The Promises of Science.—The aim of modern science is: as little
pain as possible, as long a life as possible,—a kind of eternal
blessedness,[Pg 130] therefore; but certainly a very modest one as compared
with the promises of religions.
129.
Forbidden Generosity.—There is not sufficient love and goodness in the
world to permit us to give some of it away to imaginary beings.
130.
The Continuance of the Religious Cult in the Feelings.—The Roman
Catholic Church, and before that all antique cults, dominated the
entire range of means by which man was put into unaccustomed moods
and rendered incapable of the cold calculation of judgment or the
clear thinking of reason. A church quivering with deep tones; the
dull, regular, arresting appeals of a priestly throng, unconsciously
communicates its tension to the congregation and makes it listen almost
fearfully, as if a miracle were in preparation; the influence of the
architecture, which, as the dwelling of a Godhead, extends into the
uncertain and makes its apparition to be feared in all its sombre
spaces,—who would wish to bring such things back to mankind if the
necessary suppositions are no longer believed? But the results of all
this are not lost, nevertheless; the inner world of noble, emotional,
deeply contrite dispositions, full of presentiments, blessed with hope,
is inborn in mankind mainly through this cult; what exists of it now in
the[Pg 131] soul was then cultivated on a large scale as it germinated, grew
up and blossomed.
131.
THE PAINFUL CONSEQUENCES OF RELIGION.—However much we may think we
have weaned ourselves from religion, it has nevertheless not been done
so thoroughly as to deprive us of pleasure in encountering religious
sensations and moods in music, for instance; and if a philosophy shows
us the justification of metaphysical hopes and the deep peace of
soul to be thence acquired, and speaks, for instance, of the "whole,
certain gospel in the gaze of Raphael's Madonnas," we receive such
statements and expositions particularly warmly; here the philosopher
finds it easier to prove; that which he desires to give corresponds
to a heart that desires to receive. Hence it may be observed how the
less thoughtful free spirits really only take offence at the dogmas,
but are well acquainted with the charm of religious sensations; they
are sorry to lose hold of the latter for the sake of the former.
Scientific philosophy must be very careful not to smuggle in errors on
the ground of that need,—a need which has grown up and is consequently
temporary,—even logicians speak of "presentiments" of truth in
ethics and in art (for instance, of the suspicion that "the nature
of things is one"), which should be forbidden to them Between the
carefully established truths and such "presaged" things there remains
the[Pg 132] unbridgable chasm that those are due to intellect and these to
requirement Hunger does not prove that food exists to satisfy it, but
that it desires food. To "presage" does not mean the acknowledgment of
the existence of a thing in any one degree, but its possibility, in so
far as it is desired or feared; "presage" does not advance one step
into the land of certainty. We believe involuntarily that the portions
of a philosophy which are tinged with religion are better proved than
others; but actually it is the contrary, but we have the inward desire
that it may be so, that that which makes blessed, therefore, may be
also the true. This desire misleads us to accept bad reasons for good
ones.
132.
Of the Christian Need of Redemption.—With careful reflection it
must be possible to obtain an explanation free from mythology of
that process in the soul of a Christian which is called the need of
redemption, consequently a purely psychological explanation. Up to the
present, the psychological explanations of religious conditions and
processes have certainly been held in some disrepute, inasmuch as a
theology which called itself free carried on its unprofitable practice
in this domain; for here from the beginning (as the mind of its
founder, Schleiermacher, gives us reason to suppose) the preservation
of the Christian religion and the continuance of Christian theology
was kept in view; a[Pg 133] theology which was to find a new anchorage in
the psychological analyses of religious "facts," and above all a new
occupation. Unconcerned about such predecessors we hazard the following
interpretation of the phenomenon in question. Man is conscious of
certain actions which stand far down in the customary rank of actions;
he even discovers in himself a tendency towards similar actions, a
tendency which appears to him almost as unchangeable as his whole
nature. How willingly would he try himself in that other species of
actions which in the general valuation are recognised as the loftiest
and highest, how gladly would he feel himself to be full of the good
consciousness which should follow an unselfish mode of thought! But
unfortunately he stops short at this wish, and the discontent at not
being able to satisfy it is added to all the other discontents which
his lot in life or the consequences of those above-mentioned evil
actions have aroused in him; so that a deep ill-humour is the result,
with the search for a physician who could remove this and all its
causes. This condition would not be felt so bitterly if man would only
compare himself frankly with other men,—then he would have no reason
for being dissatisfied with himself to a particular extent, he would
only bear his share of the common burden of human dissatisfaction and
imperfection. But he compares himself with a being who is said to be
capable only of those actions which are called un-egoistic, and to
live in the perpetual consciousness of an[Pg 134] unselfish mode of thought,
i.e. with God; it is because he gazes into this clear mirror that his
image appears to him so dark, so unusually warped. Then he is alarmed
by the thought of that same creature, in so far as it floats before his
imagination as a retributive justice; in all possible small and great
events he thinks he recognises its anger and menaces, that he even
feels its scourge-strokes as judge and executioner. Who will help him
in this danger, which, by the prospect of an immeasurable duration of
punishment, exceeds in horror all the other terrors of the idea?
133.
Before we examine the further consequences of this mental state, let
us acknowledge that it is not through his "guilt" and "sin" that man
has got into this condition, but through a series of errors of reason;
that it was the fault of the mirror if his image appeared so dark and
hateful to him, and that that mirror was his work, the very imperfect
work of human imagination and power of judgment. In the first place,
a nature that is only capable of purely un-egoistic actions is more
fabulous than the phœnix; it cannot even be clearly imagined, just
because, when closely examined, the whole idea "un-egoistic action"
vanishes into air. No man ever did a thing which was done only
for others and without any personal motive; how should he be able
to do anything which had no relation[Pg 135] to himself, and therefore
without inward obligation (which must always have its foundation in
a personal need)? How could the ego act without ego A God who,
on the contrary, is all love, as such a one is often represented,
would not be capable of a single un-egoistic action, whereby one is
reminded of a saying of Lichtenberg's which is certainly taken from
a lower sphere: "We cannot possibly feel for others, as the saying
is; we feel only for ourselves. This sounds hard, but it is not so
really if it be rightly understood. We do not love father or mother
or wife or child, but the pleasant sensations they cause us;" or, as
Rochefoucauld says: "Si on croit aimer sa maîtresse pour l'amour
d'elle, on est bien trompé." To know the reason why actions of love
are valued more than others, not on account of their nature, namely,
but of their usefulness, we should compare the examinations already
mentioned, On the Origin of Moral Sentiments. But should a man desire
to be entirely like that God of Love, to do and wish everything for
others and nothing for himself, the latter is impossible for the reason
that he must do very much for himself to be able to do something
for the love of others. Then it is taken for granted that the other
is sufficiently egoistic to accept that sacrifice again and again,
that living for him,—so that the people of love and sacrifice have an
interest in the continuance of those who are loveless and incapable
of sacrifice, and, in order to exist, the highest morality would be
obliged positively[Pg 136] to compel the existence of un-morality (whereby
it would certainly annihilate itself). Further: the conception of a
God disturbs and humbles so long as it is believed in; but as to how
it arose there can no longer be any doubt in the present state of the
science of comparative ethnology; and with a comprehension of this
origin all belief falls to the ground. The Christian who compares his
nature with God's is like Don Quixote, who under-valued his own bravery
because his head was full of the marvellous deeds of the heroes of
the chivalric; romances,—the standard of measurement in both cases
belongs to the domain of fable. But if the idea of God is removed, so
is also the feeling of "sin" as a trespass against divine laws, as a
stain in a creature vowed to God. Then, perhaps, there still remains
that dejection which is intergrown and connected with the fear of the
punishment of worldly justice or of the scorn of men; the dejection of
the pricks of conscience, the sharpest thorn in the consciousness of
sin, is always removed if we recognise that though by our own deed we
have sinned against human descent, human laws and ordinances, still
that we have not imperilled the "eternal salvation of the Soul" and its
relation to the Godhead. And if man succeeds in gaining philosophic
conviction of the absolute necessity of all actions and their entire
irresponsibility, and absorbing this into his flesh and blood, even
those remains of the pricks of conscience vanish.
[Pg 137]
134.
Now if the Christian, as we have said, has fallen into the way of
self-contempt in consequence of certain errors through a false,
unscientific interpretation of his actions and sensations, he must
notice with great surprise how that state of contempt, the pricks of
conscience and displeasure generally, does not endure, how sometimes
there come hours when all this is wafted away from his soul and he
feels himself once more free and courageous. In truth, the pleasure in
himself, the comfort of his own strength, together with the necessary
weakening through time of every deep emotion, has usually been
victorious; man loves himself once again, he feels it,—but precisely
this new love, this self-esteem, seems to him incredible, he can only
see in it the wholly undeserved descent of a stream of mercy from on
high. If he formerly believed that in every event he could recognise
warnings, menaces, punishments, and every kind of manifestation of
divine anger, he now finds divine goodness in all his experiences,
—this event appears to him to be full of love, that one a helpful
hint, a third, and, indeed, his whole happy mood, a proof that God is
merciful. As formerly, in his state of pain, he interpreted his actions
falsely, so now he misinterprets his experiences; his mood of comfort
he believes to be the working of a power operating outside of himself,
the love with which he really loves himself seems to him to be divine
love; that which he[Pg 138] calls mercy, and the prologue to redemption, is
actually self-forgiveness, self-redemption.
135.
Therefore: A certain false psychology, a certain kind of imaginative
interpretation of motives and experiences, is the necessary preliminary
for one to become a Christian and to feel the need of redemption. When
this error of reason and imagination is recognised, one ceases to be a
Christian.
136.
Of Christian Asceticism and Holiness.—As greatly as isolated thinkers
have endeavoured to depict as a miracle the rare manifestations of
morality, which are generally called asceticism and holiness, miracles
which it would be almost an outrage and sacrilege to explain by the
light of common sense, as strong also is the inclination towards
this outrage. A mighty impulse of nature has at all times led to a
protest against those manifestations; science, in so far as it is
an imitation of nature, at least allows itself to rise against the
supposed inexplicableness and unapproachableness of these objections.
So far it has certainly not succeeded: those appearances are still
unexplained, to the great joy of the above-mentioned worshippers of the
morally marvellous. For, speaking generally, the unexplained must
be absolutely inexplicable, the inexplicable absolutely unnatural,
supernatural, wonderful,—thus runs the demand in the souls of[Pg 139] all
religious and metaphysical people (also of artists, if they should
happen to be thinkers at the same time); whilst the scientist sees
in this demand the "evil principle" in itself. The general, first
probability upon which one lights in the contemplation of holiness
and asceticism is this, that their nature is a complicated one,
for almost everywhere, within the physical world as well as in the
moral, the apparently marvellous has been successfully traced back to
the complicated, the many-conditioned. Let us venture, therefore, to
isolate separate impulses from the soul of saints and ascetics, and
finally to imagine them as intergrown.
137.
There is a defiance of self, to the sublimest manifestation of which
belong many forms of asceticism. Certain individuals have such great
need of exercising their power and love of ruling that, in default of
other objects, or because they have never succeeded otherwise, they
finally ex-cogitate the idea of tyrannising over certain parts of their
own nature, portions or degrees of themselves. Thus many a thinker
confesses to views which evidently do not serve either to increase
or improve his reputation; many a one deliberately calls down the
scorn of others when by keeping silence he could easily have remained
respected; others contradict former opinions and do not hesitate to
be called inconsistent—on the contrary, they strive after this, and
behave like reckless[Pg 140] riders who like a horse best when it has grown
wild, unmanageable, and covered with sweat. Thus man climbs dangerous
paths up the highest mountains in order that he may laugh to scorn his
own fear and his trembling knees; thus the philosopher owns to views
on asceticism, humility, holiness, in the brightness of which his own
picture shows to the worst possible disadvantage. This crushing of
one's self, this scorn of one's own nature, this spernere se sperm,
of which religion has made so much, is really a very high degree of
vanity. The whole moral of the Sermon on the Mount belongs here;
man takes a genuine delight in doing violence to himself by these
exaggerated claims, and afterwards idolising these tyrannical demands
of his soul. In every ascetic morality man worships one part of himself
as a God, and is obliged, therefore, to diabolise the other parts.
138.
Man is not equally moral at all hours, this is well known. If his
morality is judged to be the capability for great self-sacrificing
resolutions and self-denial (which, when continuous and grown habitual,
are called holiness), he is most moral in the passions; the higher
emotion provides him with entirely new motives, of which he, sober
and cold as usual, perhaps does not even believe himself capable. How
does this happen? Probably because of the proximity of everything
great and highly exciting; if man is once wrought up[Pg 141] to a state of
extraordinary suspense, he is as capable of carrying out a terrible
revenge as of a terrible crushing of his need for revenge. Under the
influence of powerful emotion, he desires in any case the great, the
powerful, the immense; and if he happens to notice that the sacrifice
of himself satisfies him as well as, or better than, the sacrifice
of others, he chooses that. Actually, therefore, he only cares about
discharging his emotion; in order to ease his tension he seizes the
enemy's spears and buries them in his breast. That there was something
great in self-denial and not in revenge had to be taught to mankind by
long habit; a Godhead that sacrificed itself was the strongest, most
effective symbol of this kind of greatness. As the conquest of the most
difficult enemy, the sudden mastering of an affection—thus this denial
appears; and so far it passes for the summit of morality. In reality
it is a question of the confusion of one idea with another, while the
temperament maintains an equal height, an equal level. Temperate men
who are resting from their passions no longer understand the morality
of those moments; but the general admiration of those who had the same
experiences upholds them; pride is their consolation when affection
and the understanding of their deed vanish. Therefore, at bottom even
those actions of self-denial are not moral, inasmuch as they are not
done strictly with regard to others; rather the other only provides
the highly-strung temperament with an opportunity of relieving itself
through that denial.
[Pg 142]
139.
In many respects the ascetic seeks to make life easy for himself,
usually by complete subordination to a strange will or a comprehensive
law and ritual; something like the way a Brahmin leaves nothing
whatever to his own decision but refers every moment to holy precepts.
This submission is a powerful means of attaining self-mastery: man
is occupied and is therefore not bored, and yet has no incitement to
self-will or passion; after a completed deed there is no feeling of
responsibility and with it no tortures of remorse. We have renounced
our own will once and for ever, and this is easier than only renouncing
it occasionally; as it is also easier to give up a desire entirely than
to keep it within bounds. When we remember the present relation of
man to the State, we find that, even here, unconditional obedience is
more convenient than conditional. The saint, therefore, makes his life
easier by absolute renunciation of his personality, and we are mistaken
if in that phenomenon we admire the loftiest heroism of morality.
In any case it is more difficult to carry one's personality through
without vacillation and unclearness than to liberate one's self from it
in the above-mentioned manner; moreover, it requires far more spirit
and consideration.
140.
After having found in many of the less easily explicable actions
manifestations of that pleasure[Pg 143] in emotion per se, I should like
to recognise also in self-contempt, which is one of the signs of
holiness, and likewise in the deeds of self-torture (through hunger and
scourging, mutilation of limbs, feigning of madness) a means by which
those natures fight against the general weariness of their life-will
(their nerves); they employ the most painful irritants and cruelties
in order to emerge for a time, at all events, from that dulness and
boredom into which they so frequently sink through their great mental
indolence and that submission to a strange will already described.
141.
The commonest means which the ascetic and saint employs to render
life still endurable and amusing consists in occasional warfare with
alternate victory and defeat. For this he requires an opponent, and
finds it in the so-called "inward enemy." He principally makes use
of his inclination to vanity, love of honour and rule, and of his
sensual desires, that he may be permitted to regard his life as a
perpetual battle and himself as a battlefield upon which good and evil
spirits strive with alternating success. It is well known that sensual
imagination is moderated, indeed almost dispelled, by regular sexual
intercourse, whereas, on the contrary, it is rendered unfettered and
wild by abstinence or irregularity. The imagination of many Christian
saints was filthy to an extraordinary degree; by virtue of those
theories that these desires were actual demons raging within[Pg 144] them
they did not feel themselves to be too responsible; to this feeling
we owe the very instructive frankness of their self-confessions. It
was to their interest that this strife should always be maintained in
one degree or another, because, as we have already said, their empty
life was thereby entertained. But in order that the strife might
seem sufficiently important and arouse the enduring sympathy and
admiration of non-saints, it was necessary that sensuality should be
ever more reviled and branded, the danger of eternal damnation was so
tightly bound up with these things that it is highly probable that for
whole centuries Christians generated children with a bad conscience,
wherewith humanity has certainly suffered a great injury. And yet here
truth is all topsy-turvy, which is particularly unsuitable for truth.
Certainly Christianity had said that every man is conceived and born
in sin, and in the insupportable superlative-Christianity of Calderon
this thought again appears, tied up and twisted, as the most distorted
paradox there is, in the well-known lines—

"The greatest sin of man
Is that he was ever born."

In all pessimistic religions the act of generation was looked upon as
evil in itself. This is by no means the verdict of all mankind, not
even of all pessimists. For instance, Empedocles saw in all erotic
things nothing shameful, diabolical, or, sinful; but rather, in the
great plain of disaster he saw only one hopeful and redeeming figure,
that[Pg 145] of Aphrodite; she appeared to him as a guarantee that the strife
should not endure eternally, but that the sceptre should one day be
given over to a gentler dæmon. The actual Christian pessimists had,
as has been said, an interest in the dominance of a diverse opinion;
for the solitude and spiritual wilderness of their lives they required
an ever living enemy, and a generally recognised enemy, through whose
fighting and overcoming they could constantly represent themselves to
the non-saints as incomprehensible, half—supernatural beings. But when
at last this enemy took to flight for ever in consequence of their
mode of life and their impaired health, they immediately understood
how to populate their interior with new dæmons. The rising and falling
of the scales of pride and humility sustained their brooding minds as
well as the alternations of desire and peace of soul. At that time
psychology served not only to cast suspicion upon everything human, but
to oppress, to scourge, to crucify; people wished to find themselves
as bad and wicked as possible, they sought anxiety for the salvation
of their souls, despair of their own strength. Everything natural with
which man has connected the idea of evil and sin (as, for instance,
he is still accustomed to do with regard to the erotic) troubles and
clouds the imagination, causes a frightened glance, makes man quarrel
with himself and uncertain and distrustful of himself. Even his dreams
have the flavour of a restless conscience. And yet in the reality
of things this suffering from what is natural is entirely without
foundation, it is only the[Pg 146] consequence of opinions about things. It
is easily seen how men grow worse by considering the inevitably-natural
as bad, and afterwards always feeling themselves made thus. It is the
trump-card of religion and metaphysics, which wish to have man evil and
sinful by nature, to cast suspicion on nature and thus really to make
him bad, for he learns to feel himself evil since he cannot divest
himself of the clothing of nature. After living for long a natural
life, he gradually comes to feel himself weighed down by such a burden
of sin that supernatural powers are necessary to lift this burden, and
therewith arises the so-called need of redemption, which corresponds to
no real but only to an imaginary sinfulness. If we survey the separate
moral demands of the earliest times of Christianity it will everywhere
be found that requirements are exaggerated in order that man cannot
satisfy them; the intention is not that he should become more moral,
but that he should feel himself as sinful as possible. If man had not
found this feeling agreeable—why would he have thought out such an
idea and stuck to it so long? As in the antique world an immeasurable
power of intellect and inventiveness was expended in multiplying the
pleasure of life by festive cults, so also in the age of Christianity
an immeasurable amount of intellect has been sacrificed to another
endeavour,—man must by all means be made to feel himself sinful and
thereby be excited, enlivened, en-souled. To excite, enliven, en-soul
at all costs—is not that the watchword of a relaxed, over-ripe,
over-cultured age? The range[Pg 147] of all natural sensations had been gone
over a hundred times, the soul had grown weary, whereupon the saint
and the ascetic invented a new species of stimulants for life. They
presented themselves before the public eye, not exactly as an example
for the many, but as a terrible and yet ravishing spectacle, which took
place on that border-land between world and over-world, wherein at that
time all people believed they saw now rays of heavenly light and now
unholy tongues of flame glowing in the depths. The saint's eye, fixed
upon the terrible meaning of this short earthly life, upon the nearness
of the last decision concerning endless new spans of existence, this
burning eye in a half-wasted body made men of the old world tremble to
their very depths; to gaze, to turn shudderingly away, to feel anew the
attraction of the spectacle and to give way to it, to drink deep of it
till the soul quivered with fire and ague,—that was the last pleasure
that antiquity invented after it had grown blunted even at the sight
of beast-baitings and human combats.
142.
Now to sum up. That condition of soul in which the saint or embryo
saint rejoiced, was composed of elements which we all know well,
only that under the influence of other than religious conceptions
they exhibit themselves in other colours and are then accustomed to
encounter man's blame as fully as, with that decoration of religion
and the ultimate meaning[Pg 148] of existence, they may reckon on receiving
admiration and even worship,—might reckon, at least, in former ages.
Sometimes the saint practises that defiance of himself which is a
near relative of domination at any cost and gives a feeling of power
even to the most lonely; sometimes his swollen sensibility leaps from
the desire to let his passions have full play into the desire to
overthrow them like wild horses under the mighty pressure of a proud
spirit; sometimes he desires a complete cessation of all disturbing,
tormenting, irritating sensations, a waking sleep, a lasting rest in
the lap of a dull, animal, and plant-like indolence; sometimes he seeks
strife and arouses it within himself, because boredom has shown him its
yawning countenance. He scourges his self-adoration with self-contempt
and cruelty, he rejoices in the wild tumult of his desires and the
sharp pain of sin, even in the idea of being lost; he understands how
to lay a trap for his emotions, for instance even for his keen love
of ruling, so that he sinks into the most utter abasement and his
tormented soul is thrown out of joint by this contrast; and finally,
if he longs for visions, conversations with the dead or with divine
beings, it is at bottom a rare kind of delight that he covets, perhaps
that delight in which all others are united. Novalis, an authority on
questions of holiness through experience and instinct, tells the whole
secret with naïve joy: "It is strange enough that the association of
lust, religion, and cruelty did not long ago[Pg 149] draw men's attention to
their close relationship and common tendency."
143.
That which gives the saint his historical value is not the thing he
is, but the thing he represents in the eyes of the unsaintly. It
was through the fact that errors were made about him, that the state
of his soul was falsely interpreted, that men separated themselves
from him as much as possible, as from something incomparable and
strangely superhuman, that he acquired the extraordinary power which
he exercised over the imagination of whole nations and whole ages. He
did not know himself; he himself interpreted the writing of his moods,
inclinations, and actions according to an art of interpretation which
was as exaggerated and artificial as the spiritual interpretation
of the Bible. The distorted and diseased in his nature, with its
combination of intellectual poverty, evil knowledge, ruined health, and
over-excited nerves, remained hidden from his own sight as well as from
that of his spectators. He was not a particularly good man, and still
less was he a particularly wise one; but he represented something
that exceeded the human standard in goodness and wisdom. The belief in
him supported the belief in the divine and miraculous, in a religious
meaning of all existence, in an impending day of judgment. In the
evening glory of the world's sunset, which glowed over[Pg 150] the Christian
nations, the shadowy form of the saint grew to vast dimensions, it grew
to such a height that even in our own age, which no longer believes in
God, there are still thinkers who believe in the saint.
144.
It need not be said that to this description of the saint which has
been made from an average of the whole species, there may be opposed
many a description which could give a more agreeable impression.
Certain exceptions stand out from among this species, it may be through
great mildness and philanthropy, it may be through the magic of unusual
energy; others are attractive in the highest degree, because certain
wild ravings have poured streams of light on their whole being, as is
the case, for instance, with the famous founder of Christianity, who
thought he was the Son of God and therefore felt himself sinless—so
that through this idea—which we must not judge too hardly because the
whole antique world swarms with sons of God—he reached that same goal,
that feeling of complete sinlessness, complete irresponsibility, which
every one can now acquire by means of science. Neither have I mentioned
the Indian saints, who stand midway between the Christian saint and the
Greek philosopher, and in so far represent no pure type. Knowledge,
science—such as existed then—the uplifting above other men through
logical[Pg 151] discipline and training of thought, were as much fostered by
the Buddhists as distinguishing signs of holiness as the same qualities
in the Christian world are repressed and branded as signs of unholiness.
[1] Why harass with eternal designs a mind too weak to compass
them? Why do we not, as we lie beneath a lofty plane-tree or this pine
[drink while we may]? HOR., Odes III. ii. 11-14.—J.M.K.
[2]
"All greatest sages of all latest ages
Will chuckle and slily agree,
'Tis folly to wait till a fool's empty pate
Has learnt to be knowing and free:
So children of wisdom, make use of the fools
And use them whenever you can as your tools."—J.M.K.
[3] It may be remembered that the cross was the gallows of the
ancient world.—J.M.K.
[4] This may give us one of the reasons for the religiosity
still happily prevailing in England and the United States.—J.M.K.
[Pg 152][Pg 153]
145.
The Perfect Should Not Have Grown.—With regard to everything that is
perfect we are accustomed to omit the question as to how perfection has
been acquired, and we only rejoice in the present as if it had sprung
out of the ground by magic. Probably with regard to this matter we are
still under the effects of an ancient mythological feeling. It still
almost seems to us (in such a Greek temple, for instance, as that of
Pæstum) as if one morning a god in sport had built his dwelling of such
enormous masses, at other times it seems as if his spirit had suddenly
entered into a stone and now desired to speak through it. The artist
knows that his work is only fully effective if it arouses the belief
in an improvisation, in a marvellous instantaneousness of origin; and
thus he assists this illusion and introduces into art those elements
of inspired unrest, of blindly groping disorder, of listening dreaming
at the beginning of creation, as a means of deception, in order so to
influence the soul of the spectator or hearer that it may[Pg 154] believe in
the sudden appearance of the perfect. It is the business of the science
of art to contradict this illusion most decidedly, and to show up the
mistakes and pampering of the intellect, by means of which it falls
into the artist's trap.
146.
The Artist's Sense of Truth.—With regard to recognition of truths, the
artist has a weaker morality than the thinker; he will on no account
let himself be deprived of brilliant and profound interpretations
of life, and defends himself against temperate and simple methods
and results. He is apparently fighting for the higher worthiness
and meaning of mankind; in reality he will not renounce the most
effective suppositions for his art, the fantastical, mythical,
uncertain, extreme, the sense of the symbolical, the over-valuation
of personality, the belief that genius is something miraculous,—he
considers, therefore, the continuance of his art of creation as more
important than the scientific devotion to truth in every shape, however
simple this may appear.
147.
Art As Raiser of the Dead.—Art also fulfils the task of preservation
and even of brightening up extinguished and faded memories; when it
accomplishes this task it weaves a rope round the ages and causes
their spirits to return. It is, certainly, only a phantom-life that
results[Pg 155] therefrom, as out of graves, or like the return in dreams of
our beloved dead, but for some moments, at least, the old sensation
lives again and the heart beats to an almost forgotten time. Hence,
for the sake of the general usefulness of art, the artist himself must
be excused if he does not stand in the front rank of the enlightenment
and progressive civilisation of humanity; all his life long he has
remained a child or a youth, and has stood still at the point where he
was overcome by his artistic impulse; the feelings of the first years
of life, however, are acknowledged to be nearer to those of earlier
times than to those of the present century. Unconsciously it becomes
his mission to make mankind more childlike; this is his glory and his
limitation.
148.
Poets As the Lighteners of Life.—Poets, inasmuch as they desire to
lighten the life of man, either divert his gaze from the wearisome
present, or assist the present to acquire new colours by means of a
life which they cause to shine out of the past. To be able to do this,
they must in many respects themselves be beings who are turned towards
the past, so that they can be used as bridges to far distant times
and ideas, to dying or dead religions and cultures. Actually they
are always and of necessity epigoni. There are, however, certain
drawbacks to their means of lightening life,—they appease and heal
only temporarily,[Pg 156] only for the moment; they even prevent men from
labouring towards a genuine improvement in their conditions, inasmuch
as they remove and apply palliatives to precisely that passion of
discontent that induces to action.
149.
The Slow Arrow of Beauty.—The noblest kind of beauty is that which
does not transport us suddenly, which does not make stormy and
intoxicating impressions (such a kind easily arouses disgust), but
that which slowly filter into our minds, which we take away with us
almost unnoticed, and which we encounter again in our dreams; but
which, however, after having long lain modestly on our hearts, takes
entire possession of us, fills our eyes with tears and our hearts with
longing. What is it that we long for at the sight of beauty? We long to
be beautiful, we fancy it must bring much happiness with it. But that
is a mistake.
150.
The Animation of Art.—Art raises its head where creeds relax. It takes
over many feelings and moods engendered by religion, lays them to its
heart, and itself becomes deeper, more full of soul, so that it is
capable of transmitting exultation and enthusiasm, which it previously
was not able to do. The abundance of religious feelings which have
grown into a stream are[Pg 157] always breaking forth again and desire to
conquer new kingdoms, but the growing enlightenment has shaken the
dogmas of religion and inspired a deep mistrust,—thus the feeling,
thrust by enlightenment out of the religious sphere, throws itself upon
art, in a few cases into political life, even straight into science.
Everywhere where human endeavour wears a loftier, gloomier aspect, it
may be assumed that the fear of spirits, incense, and church-shadows
have remained attached to it.
151.
How Rhythm Beautifies.—Rhythm casts a veil over reality; it causes
various artificialities of speech and obscurities of thought; by the
shadow it throws upon thought it sometimes conceals it, and sometimes
brings it into prominence. As shadow is necessary to beauty, so the
"dull" is necessary to lucidity. Art makes the aspect of life endurable
by throwing lover it the veil of obscure thought.
152.
The Art of the Ugly Soul.—Art is confined within too narrow limits if
it be required that only the orderly, respectable, well-behaved soul
should be allowed to express itself therein. As in the plastic arts, so
also in music and poetry: there is an art of the ugly soul side by side
with the art of the beautiful soul; and the mightiest effects of art,
the crushing of souls,[Pg 158] moving of stones and humanising of beasts, have
perhaps been best achieved precisely by that art.
153.
Art Makes Heavy the Heart of the Thinker.—How strong metaphysical
need is and how difficult nature renders our departure from it may be
seen from the fact that even in the free spirit, when he has cast off
everything metaphysical, the loftiest effects of art can easily produce
a resounding of the long silent, even broken, metaphysical string,—it
may be, for instance, that at a passage in Beethoven's Ninth Symphony
he feels himself floating above the earth in a starry dome with the
dream of immortality in his heart; all the stars seem to shine round
him, and the earth to sink farther and farther away.—If he becomes
conscious of this state, he feels a deep pain at his heart, and sighs
for the man who will lead back to him his lost darling, be it called
religion or metaphysics. In such moments his intellectual character is
put to the test.
154.
Playing With Life.—The lightness and frivolity of the Homeric
imagination was necessary to calm and occasionally to raise the
immoderately passionate temperament and acute intellect of the Greeks.
If their intellect speaks, how harsh and cruel does life then appear!
They do not deceive themselves, but they intentionally weave lies
round[Pg 159] life. Simonides advised his countrymen to look upon life as
a game; earnestness was too well-known to them as pain (the gods so
gladly hear the misery of mankind made the theme of song), and they
knew that through art alone misery might be turned into pleasure. As
a punishment for this insight, however, they were so plagued with the
love of romancing that it was difficult for them in everyday life to
keep themselves free from falsehood and deceit; for all poetic nations
have such a love of falsehood, and yet are innocent withal. Probably
this occasionally drove the neighbouring nations to desperation.
155.
The Belief in Inspiration.—It is to the interest of the artist that
there should be a belief in sudden suggestions, so-called inspirations;
as if the idea of a work of art, of poetry, the fundamental thought of
a philosophy shone down from heaven like a ray of grace. In reality
the imagination of the good artist or thinker constantly produces
good, mediocre, and bad, but his judgment, most clear and practised,
rejects and chooses and joins together, just as we now learn from
Beethoven's notebooks that he gradually composed the most beautiful
melodies, and in a manner selected them, from many different attempts.
He who makes less severe distinctions, and willingly abandons himself
to imitative memories, may under certain circumstances become a great
improvisatore; but artistic improvisation[Pg 160] ranks low in comparison with
serious and laboriously chosen artistic thoughts. All great men were
great workers, unwearied not only in invention but also in rejection,
reviewing, transforming, and arranging.
156.
Inspiration Again.—If the productive power has been suspended for a
length of time, and has been hindered in its outflow by some obstacle,
there comes at last such a sudden out-pouring, as if an immediate
inspiration were taking place without previous inward working,
consequently a miracle. This constitutes the familiar deception, in
the continuance of which, as we have said, the interest of all artists
is rather too much concerned. The capital has only accumulated, it
has not suddenly fallen down from heaven. Moreover, such apparent
inspirations are seen elsewhere, for instance in the realm of goodness,
of virtue and of vice.
157.
The Suffering of Genius and Its Value.—The artistic genius desires
to give pleasure, but if his mind is on a very high plane he does not
easily find any one to share his pleasure; he offers entertainment
but nobody accepts it. This gives him, in certain circumstances, a
comically touching pathos; for he has really no right to force pleasure
on men. He pipes, but none will dance: can that be tragic? Perhaps.—As
compensation for this deprivation, however, he finds more pleasure in[Pg 161]
creating than the rest of mankind experiences in all other species
of activity. His sufferings are considered as exaggerated, because
the sound of his complaints is louder and his tongue more eloquent;
and yet sometimes his sufferings are really very great; but only