# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2010
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, The Dramatic Works of G. E. Lessing
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/33435/33435-h/33435-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

And must the feeling of every person wait for the decision of
a painter? To a cloister with him who would learn from us what is beautiful! But
this much I must own to you, as a painter, Prince. It is one of the greatest
delights of my life that Emilia Galotti has sat to me. This head, this
countenance, this forehead, these eyes, this nose, this mouth, this chin, this
neck, this bosom, this shape, this whole form, are from the present time forward
my only model of female beauty. The original picture for which she sat, is in
the possession of her absent father. But this copy----
Well, Conti--is not surely bespoke already?
Is for you, Prince, if it affords you any pleasure.
Pleasure! (smiling.) How can I do better than make your
model of female beauty my own? There, take back that other portrait, and order a
frame for it.
Good.
As rich and splendid as the carver can possibly make it. It
shall be placed in the gallery. But this must remain here. A study need not be
treated with so much ceremony; one does not hang it up for display. It should
always be at hand. I thank you, Conti, cordially. And as I said before, the arts
shall never starve in my dominions, as long as I have bread. Send to my
treasurer, Conti, and let him pay your own price for both pictures; as much as
you please, Conti.
I must begin to fear, Prince, that you mean to reward me for
something else besides my art?
Oh the jealousy of an artist! No, no! But remember, Conti, as
much as you please.   (Exit 
Conti.)
The Prince.
Yes, as much as he pleases. (Turning to the picture.)
Thou art mine, too cheap at any price. Oh, thou enchanting work of art! Do I
then possess thee? But who shall possess thyself, thou still more beautiful
masterpiece of nature? Claim what you will, honest old mother; ask what you
will, morose old father. Demand any price. Yet, dear enchantress, I should be
far more happy to buy thee from thyself! This eye! how full of love and modesty!
This mouth! when it speaks, when it smiles! This mouth!--Some one comes.--I am
still too jealous of thee. (Turning the picture to the wall.) It is
Marinelli. I wish I had not sent for him! What a morning might I have had!
Marinelli, The 
Prince.
Your Highness will pardon me; I was not prepared for so early
a summons.
I felt an inclination to drive out, the morning was so fine.
But now it is almost over, and my inclination has subsided. (After a short
pause). Any news, Marinelli?
Nothing of importance that I know. The Countess Orsina arrived
in town yesterday.
Yes, here lies her morning salutation (pointing to the
letter), or whatever it may be. I am not inquisitive about it. Have you seen
her?
Am I not unfortunately her confidant? But if ever I am so
again with a lady who takes it into her head to love you desperately, Prince,
may I----
No rash vows, Marinelli.
Indeed, Prince! Is it possible? The Countess, then, is not so
utterly mistaken.
Quite mistaken, certainly. My approaching union with the
Princess of Massa compels me in the first place to break off all such
connections.
If that were all, the Countess would doubtless know as well
how to submit to her fate, as the Prince to his.
My fate is harder far than hers. My heart is sacrificed to a
miserable political consideration. She has but to take back hers, and need not
bestow it against her inclination.
Take it back! "Why take it back," asks the Countess, "for a
wife, whom policy and not love attaches to the Prince?" With a wife of that kind
the mistress may still hold her place. It is not, therefore, for a wife that she
dreads being sacrificed, but----
Perhaps another mistress. What then? would you make a crime of
that, Marinelli?
I, Prince? Oh, confound me not with the foolish woman whose
cause I advocate--from pity! For yesterday I own she greatly moved me. She
wished not to mention her attachment to you, and strove to appear cold and
tranquil. But in the midst of the most indifferent topics, some expression, some
allusion, escaped her, which betrayed her tortured heart. With the most cheerful
demeanour she said the most melancholy things, and on the other hand uttered the
most laughable jests with an air of deep distress. She has taken to books for
refuge, which I fear will be her ruin.
Yes, for books gave the first blow to her poor understanding.
And, Marinelli, you will scarcely employ for the purpose of renewing my
attachment, that which was the chief cause of our separation. If love renders
her foolish, she would sooner or later have become so, even without such
influence. But enough of her! To something else. Is there nothing new in town?
Next to nothing; for that Count Appiani will be married to-day
is little better than nothing.
Count Appiani! To whom? I have not heard that he is engaged.
The affair has been kept a profound secret. And indeed, there
was not much to create a sensation. You will smile, Prince; but it ever happens
so with sentimental youths! Love always plays the worst of tricks. A girl
without fortune or rank has managed to catch him in her snares, without any
trouble, but with a little display of virtue, sensibility, wit, and so forth.
The man who can wholly resign himself to the impressions which
innocence and beauty make upon him is, in my opinion, rather to be envied than
derided. And what is the name of the happy fair one? For though I well know,
Marinelli, that you and Appiani dislike each other, he is nevertheless a very
worthy young man, a handsome man, a rich man, and an honourable man. I should
like to be able to attach him to myself.
If it be not too late; for, as far as I can learn, it is not
his intention to seek his fortune at court. He will retire with his spouse to
his native valleys of Piedmont, and indulge himself in hunting chamois or
training marmots upon the Alps. What can he do better? Here his prospects are
blighted by the connection he has formed. The first circles are closed against
him.
The first circles! What are they worth, mere resorts of
ceremony, restraint, ennui, and poverty? But how call you the fair being who is
the cause of all these wondrous sacrifices?
A certain--Emilia Galotti?
What! Marinelli! a certain----
Emilia Calotti.
Emilia Galotti? Never!----
Assuredly, your Highness.
But no, I say. It is not, and it cannot be! You mistake the
name. The family of Galotti is numerous. It may be a Galotti, but not Emilia
Galotti!
Emilia--Emilia Galotti.
There must be another who bears the same names. You said,
however, a certain Emilia Galotti,--a certain one. Of the real Emilia, none but
a fool could so speak.
Your Highness is excited. Do you know this Emilia?
It is my place to question, not yours, Marinelli. Is she the
daughter of Colonel Galotti, who resides at Sabionetta?
The same.
Who lives here in Guastalla with her mother.
The same.
Near the church of All-Saints.
The same.
In a word (turning hastily to the portrait, and giving it
to 
Marinelli)--there! is it this Emilia Galotti? Pronounce again those damning
words, "the same," and plunge a dagger in my heart.
The same.
Traitor! This? this Emilia Galotti--will to-day be----
The Countess Appiani. (The Prince seizes the
portrait from the hands of Marinelli, and flings it aside.)--The
marriage will be celebrated privately at her father's villa, in Sabionetta.
About noon the mother and daughter, the Count, and perhaps a few friends, will
leave town together.
Then I am lost, and care no more for life.
What thus affects your Highness?
Traitor! what affects me thus? Yes, in truth, I love her! I
adore her! You may, perhaps, know it, may even long have known it; all of you
who desire that I should wear for ever the ignominious fetters of the proud
Orsina. That you, Marinelli, who have so often assured me of your sincere
friendship--but a Prince has no friend, can have no friend--that you should act
so treacherously, so deceitfully, as to conceal till this moment the peril which
threatened my love.--Oh, if ever I forgive you this, let no sin of mine be
pardoned!
I could scarcely find words, Prince, to express my
astonishment--even if you gave me the opportunity. You love Emilia Galotti?
Hear, then, my oath in reply to yours. If I have ever known or suspected this
attachment in the slightest degree, may the angels and saints abandon me! I
repeat the same imprecation for Orsina. Her suspicions were directed to a wholly
different quarter.
Pardon me, then, Marinelli (throwing himself into his arms),
and pity me.
Well, yes, Prince. There see the consequence of your reserve.
"A prince has no friends." And why? Because he will have none. To-day you honour
us with your confidence, entrust to us your most secret wishes, open your whole
soul to us--and to-morrow we are as perfect strangers to you, as if you had
never exchanged a word with us.
Alas, Marinelli, how could I entrust a secret to you which I
would scarcely confess to myself?
And, which you have, therefore, of course, not confessed to
the author of your uneasiness?
To her!--All my endeavours have been fruitless to speak with
her a second time.
And the first time----
I spoke to her;--Oh, my brain is turned, and must I continue
this conversation longer? You behold me at the mercy of the waves, and why
inquire how all this has happened? Save me if you can, and then question me.
Save you! Is there much to save? What your Highness has not
confessed to Emilia Galotti, you will confess to the Countess Appiani. Goods
which cannot be obtained in their primitive perfection, must be bought at second
hand, and are often, on that account, bought at a cheaper rate.
Be serious, Marinelli, or----
To be sure, such articles are generally so much the worse----
For shame, Marinelli.
And the Count intends to leave this country too. Well, we must
devise some scheme----
And what scheme? My best and dearest Marinelli, contrive
something for me. What would you do, were you in my situation?
Above all things, I should regard a trifle as a trifle--and
say to myself that I would not be what I am for nothing--your Highness!
Delude me not with a power of which I can, on this occasion,
make no use. To-day, said you?--This very day?
To-day it is to take place;--but it is only things which have
taken place that cannot be recalled. (After a short pause.) Prince, will
you let me act as I please? Will you approve all I do?
Anything, Marinelli, which can avert this blow.
Then let us lose no time. You must not remain in town, but go
to your palace at Dosalo. The road to Sabionetta passes it. Should I not succeed
in removing the Count, I think--yes, yes, he will be caught in that snare
without doubt. You wish to send an ambassador to Massa respecting your marriage.
Let the Count be ambassador, and order him to depart this very day.
Excellent!--Bring him to my palace.--Haste, haste!--I will
leave town instantly. (Exit Marinelli.)
Instantly, instantly. Where is it? (Turns to the portrait)
On the ground! That was too bad. (Takes it up) But look! And yet I will
look at thee no more now. Why should I plunge the arrow deeper into the wound? (Lays
it on the table). I have suffered and sighed long enough--longer than I
ought, but done nothing, and my listless inactivity had nearly ruined all.--And
may not all yet be lost? May not Marinelli fail? Why should I rely on him
alone?--It occurs to me that at this hour (looks at his watch) at this
very hour, the pious girl daily attends mass at the church of the Dominicans.
How, if I attempted to address her there? But to-day--the day of her
marriage--her heart will be occupied with other things than mass. Yet, who
knows?--'tis but a step--(rings, and whilst he hastily arranges the papers on
the table)--

Enter Servant.
My carriage!--Have none of the council arrived?
Camillo Rota waits without.
Admit him. (Exit Servant). But he must not attempt to
detain me long. Not now--another time, I will attend to his scrupulous
investigations----There was a petition of one Emilia Bruneschi--here it is--but,
good Bruneschi, if your intercessor----
Enter Camillo Rota.
Come, Rota, come. There lie the papers which I have opened this morning--not
very consoling--you will see what is to be done. Take them with you.
I will attend to them.
Here is a petition from one Emilia Galot--I mean Bruneschi. I
have already signed my consent to it--but yet the request is no trifle. You may
defer the execution of it--or not--as you please.
Not as I please, your Highness.
What more is there--anything to sign?
Sentence of death for your Highness's signature.
With all my heart!--Where is it? Quick!
I said a death--warrant.
I understood you plain enough. It might have been done by
this. I am in haste.
I really believe I have not brought it. I beg your Highness's
forgiveness. It can be deferred till to-morrow.
Be it so. Just collect these papers together. I must away. The
rest to-morrow, Rota.
"With all my heart!"--A death-warrant, with all my heart! I
would not have let him sign at such a moment, had the criminal murdered my own
son.--"With all my heart!" "With all my heart"--The cruel words pierce my very
soul.    (Exit.)
Claudia Galotti, Pirro.
Who dismounted just now in the court-yard? Pirro.
My master, madam.
My husband? Is it possible?
Here he comes.
So unexpectedly? (hastens towards him). My dearest
lord!
Odoardo, and the foregoing.
Good morning, my love. Does not my arrival surprise you?
Most agreeably. But is it intended as no more than a surprise?
No more. Be not alarmed. The happiness of to-day awakened me
early. The morning was so fine, and the ride so short, I fancied you would be so
busy here to-day, and thought you might perhaps forget something: in a word, I
am come to see you, and shall return immediately. Where is Emilia? Occupied with
her dress, I have no doubt?
With her soul. She is gone to hear mass. "I have need," she
said, "to-day more than at any other time to implore a blessing from above;"
then leaving all else she took her veil, and disappeared.
Alone!
It is but a few steps----
One incautious step often leads to mischief.
Be not angry; but come in and rest a moment, and, if you
please, take some refreshment.
Well, well, as you like. But she ought not to have gone alone.
Stay here, Pirro, in the antechamber, and excuse me to all
visitors. (Exeunt Odoardo and Claudia.)
Pirro, and afterwards 
Angelo.
All inquisitive visitors. How I have been questioned! Who
comes here? (Enter Angelo, in a short mantle, with which he conceals
his face.)
Pirro! Pirro!
An acquaintance, it seems. (Angelo throws back the mantle).
Heavens! Angelo. You!
Yes, Angelo, as you perceive. I have been wandering long
enough round the house, in order to speak to you. One word with you----
And dare you again appear in public? Don't you know that, in
consequence of your last murder, you are declared an outlaw, a price has been
put upon your head?
You don't intend to claim it, I presume?
What do you want? I implore you not to involve me in
misfortune.
In this way, you mean? (Showing a purse). Take it; it
belongs to you.
To me?
Have you forgotten? The German gentleman, your last master----
Hush!
----Whom you led into our clutches on the road to Pisa----
If any one should overhear us!
----Had the kindness, you know, to bequeath us a valuable
ring. Do you not remember? It was so valuable that we could not immediately
convert it into money without suspicion. At length, however, I succeeded. I
received a hundred pistoles for it, and this is your share. Take it.
No, no! You may keep it.
Well, with all my heart! If you don't care at what price you
put your head in the market.
Give it me, then (takes it). And now, what do you want?
for I suppose you did not come in search of me merely for that purpose.
It seems to you not very credible. Rascal! what do you think
of us? That we are capable of withholding any man's earnings? That may be the
way with honest people; but we don't follow their fashions. Farewell! (Affects
to be going, but turns at the door). One question I must ask. Old Galotti
has just come hurriedly into town quite alone. What does he want?
Nothing, merely a ride. His daughter is to be married this
evening, at his country house, whence he has come to Count Appiani. He awaits
the moment with impatience.
Then he will return soon?
So soon, that if you remain any longer he will discover you.
But you surely have no thoughts of attacking him. Take care. He is a man----
Don't I know him? Have I not served under him in the army; but
nevertheless if one could only get much from him! At what time do the young
people follow him?
Towards noon.
With many attendants?
A single carriage will contain the party--the mother, the
daughter, and the count. A few friends from Sabionetta attend as witnesses.
And the servants?
Only two besides myself. I shall ride before.
Good. Another question. Is the carriage Galotti's or the
Count's?
The Count's.
That is unlucky. There is another outrider, besides a
courageous driver. However----
I am amazed. What do you intend? The few ornaments which the
bride has will scarcely reward your trouble.
Then the bride herself shall be the reward.
And you mean that I should be your accomplice in this crime?
You ride before! Then ride, ride, and take no trouble about
the matter.
Never!
What?--I believe the fellow means to play the
conscientious--you rascal! I think you know me. If you utter a syllable--if
every circumstance be not as you have described it----
But, Angelo, for Heaven's sake----
Do what you cannot avoid. (Exit.)
Ha! let the devil hold thee by a single hair, and thou art his
for ever! Wretch that I am!
Odoardo and 
Claudia Galotti, Pirro.
She stays too long.
One moment more, Odoardo. It would distress her to miss seeing
you.
I must wait upon the Count, too. How eager am I to call this
worthy man my son! His conduct enchants me, and, above everything, his
resolution to pass his days in his native valleys.
My heart almost breaks when I think of it. Must we so entirely
lose our dear and only child!
Can you think you have lost her, when you know she is in the
arms of an affectionate husband? Does not her happiness make your delight? You
almost make me again suspect that your motive for remaining with her in town,
far from an affectionate husband and father, was the bustle and the dissipation
of the world, and proximity of the court, rather than the necessity of giving
our daughter a proper education.
How unjust, Odoardo! But to-day, I may be allowed to speak
somewhat in favour of town and court, though both are so hateful to your strict
virtue; for here alone could love have united a couple formed for each other;
here alone could the Count have found our Emilia, and he has found her.
That I allow. But were you right, good Claudia, because the
result has been fortunate? It is well that this court education has ended so
happily. Let us not affect to be wise, when we have only been fortunate. It is
well that it has ended so happily. They who were destined for each other have
found each other. Now let them go where peace and innocence invite them. Why
should the Count remain here? To cringe--to fawn--to flatter--to supplant the
Marinellis--to make a fortune which he does not want--to obtain a dignity, which
he does not value?--Pirro!
Sir!
Lead my horse to the Count's door. I'll follow you anon, and
mount it there. (Exit Pirro).--Why should the Count serve here, when he
may command elsewhere? Besides, you do not consider, Claudia, that, by his union
with my daughter, he is utterly ruined with the Prince? The Prince hates me----
Less, perhaps, than you fear.
Fear! Should I fear anything so contemptible?
Why, have I not already told you that the Prince has seen our
daughter?
The Prince! Where?
At the last assembly of the Chancellor Grimaldi, which he
honoured with his presence. He conducted himself so graciously towards her----
Graciously?
Yes. He conversed with her for some time.
Conversed with her?
Appeared to be so delighted with her cheerfulness and good
sense----
Delighted?
Spoke of her elegance and beauty, in terms of such
admiration----
Admiration? And all this you relate to me in a tone of
rapture. Oh, Claudia! vain, foolish mother!
Why so?
Well, well. This, too, has ended happily.--Ha! when I
think----That were exactly the point where a wound would be to me most
deadly.--A libertine, who admires, and seduces----Claudia! Claudia! The very
thought rouses my fury. You ought to have mentioned this to me immediately.--But
to-day I would not willingly say anything to vex you. And I should (as she
takes him by the hand), were I to stay longer. Therefore, let me begone. God
be with you, Claudia; follow me in safety. (Exit.)
Claudia, Galotti.
What a man! What rigid virtue--if virtue that should be
called, to which everything seems suspicious and culpable. If this be a
knowledge of mankind, who would not wish to remain in ignorance? Why does Emilia
stay so long?----He dislikes the father--consequently, if he admire the
daughter, he must mean to bring disgrace upon him!
Emilia and 
Claudia Galotti.
Heaven be praised! I am now in safety. Or has he even followed
me hither? (Throwing back her veil and espying her mother). Has he, my
mother, has he?--No, thank Heaven.
What has happened to you, my daughter?
Nothing--nothing.
And yet you look wildly round, and tremble in every limb!
What have I had to hear?--And where have I been forced to hear
it?
I thought you were at church.
I was. But what are churches and altars to the vicious?--Oh,
my mother! (Throws herself into Claudia's arms.)
Speak, my daughter, and remove my fears. What evil can have
happened to you in so holy a place?
Never should my devotion have been more fervent and sincere
than on this day. Never was it less what it ought to have been.
Emilia we are all human. The faculty of praying fervently is
not always in our power; but, in the eye of Heaven, the wish to pray is accepted
as prayer.
And our wish to sin as sin.
That my Emilia never wished.
No, my mother. The grace of Heaven has preserved me from
falling so low. But, alas! that the vice of others should render us accomplices
in vice against our will!
Compose yourself.--Collect your thoughts as well as you can.
Tell me at once what has happened to you.
I had just sunk upon my knees, further from the altar than
usual--for I arrived too late. I had just begun to raise my thoughts towards
Heaven--when some person placed himself behind me--so close behind me! I could
neither move forwards nor aside, however much I desired it, in my fear lest the
devotion of my neighbour might interrupt my prayers. Devotion was the worst
thing which I suspected. But it was not long before I heard a deep sigh close to
my ear, and not the name of a saint;--no--the name--do not be angry, dear
mother--the name of your daughter.--My own name! Oh, that a peal of thunder had
at that moment made me deaf to the rest. The voice spoke of beauty and of
love--complained that this day, which crowned my happiness (if such should prove
the case) sealed his misery for ever. He conjured me--all this I was obliged to
hear, but I did not look round. I wished to seem as if I was not listening. What
more could I do? Nothing but pray that my guardian angel would strike me with
deafness--even with eternal deafness. This was my prayer--the only prayer which
I could utter. At length it was time to rise; the service came to an end. I
trembled at the idea of being obliged to turn round--trembled at the idea of
beholding him whose impiety had so much shocked me--and when I turned--when I
beheld him----
Whom, my daughter?
Guess, dear mother, guess: I thought I should have sunk into
the earth. Himself!
Whom do you mean?
The Prince!
The Prince! Blest be your father's impatience! He was here
just now, and would not stay till you returned.
My father here--and not stay till I returned!
If, in the midst of your confusion, you had told him too.
Well, dear mother--could he have found anything in my conduct
deserving of censure?
No--as little as in mine. And yet, yet--you do not know your
father. When enraged, he would have mistaken the innocent for the guilty--in his
anger he would have fancied me the cause of what I could neither prevent nor
foresee. But proceed, my daughter, proceed. When you recognised the Prince, I
trust that you were sufficiently composed to convince him by your looks, of the
contempt which he deserved.
That I was not. After the glance by which I recognised him, I
had not courage to cast a second. I fled.
And the Prince followed you?
I did not know it till I had reached the porch, where I felt
my hand seized--by him. Shame compelled me to stop; as an effort to extricate
myself would have attracted the attention of every one who was passing. This was
the only reflection of which I was capable, or which I at present remember. He
spoke, and I replied--but what he said, or what I replied, I know not.--Should I
recollect it, my dear mother, you shall hear it. At present I remember nothing
further. My senses had forsaken me.--In vain do I endeavour to recollect how I
got away from him, and escaped from the porch. I found myself in the street--I
heard his steps behind me--I heard him follow me into the house, and pursue me
up the stairs----
Fear has its peculiar faculty, my daughter. Never shall I
forget the look with which you rushed into this room!--No. He dared not follow
you so far.--Heavens! had your father known this!--How angry was he when I
merely told him that the Prince had lately beheld you with admiration! Be at
ease, however, my dear girl. Fancy what has happened to be a mere dream. The
result will be less, even, than a dream. You will be assured to-day from all
similar designs.
No, mother! The Count must know it--to him I must relate it.
Not for the world. Wherefore? Why? Do you wish to make him
uneasy without a cause? And granting that he may not become so at present--know,
my child, the poison which does not operate immediately, is not on that account
less dangerous. That which has no effect upon the lover, may produce a serious
one upon the husband. The lover might even be flattered at winning the prize
from so great a rival; but when he has won it--alas, my dear Emilia, the lover
often becomes quite another being. Heaven preserve you from such experience!
You know, dear mother, how willingly I ever submit to your
superior judgment. But should he learn from another that the Prince spoke to me
to-day, would not my silence sooner or later increase his uneasiness?--I think
it would be better not to conceal anything from him.
Weakness--a fond weakness. No, on no account, my daughter!
Tell him nothing. Let him observe nothing.
I submit. I have no will, dear mother, opposed to yours. Ah! (sighing
deeply), I shall soon be well again. What a silly, timid thing I am! am I
not, mother? I might have conducted myself otherwise, and should, perhaps, have
compromised myself just a little.
I would not say this, my daughter, till your own good sense
had spoken, which I was sure would be as soon as your alarm was at an end. The
Prince is a gallant. You are too little used to the unmeaning language of
gallantry. In your mind a civility becomes an emotion--a compliment, a
declaration--an idea, a wish--a wish, a design. A mere nothing, in this
language, sounds like everything, while everything is in reality nothing.
Dear mother, my terror cannot but appear ridiculous to myself
now. But my kind Appiani shall know nothing of it. He might, perhaps, think me
more vain than virtuous----Ah! there he comes himself. That is his step.
Enter Appiani, in deep
meditation. His eyes are cast down, and he approaches without observing 
Claudia and Emilia, till the latter
runs towards him.
Ha! My dearest! I did not expect to find you in the ante-room.
I wish you to be cheerful, even where you do not expect to see
me. Why so grave and solemn? Should not this day inspire joyful emotions?
It is of greater value to me than my whole life; but it teems
with so much bliss for me--perhaps it is this very bliss which makes me so
grave--so solemn, as you express it (espies Claudia). Ha! You too here,
dear madam. This day I hope to address you by a more familiar name.
Which will be my greatest pride.--How happy you are, Emilia!
Why would not your father share our delight?
But a few minutes have elapsed since I tore myself from his
arms--or rather he from mine.--What a man your father is, my Emilia! A pattern
of every manly virtue! With what sentiments does his presence inspire my soul!
Never is my resolution to continue just and good, so firm as when I see or think
of him. And by what, but by fulfilling this resolution, can I make myself worthy
of the honour to be called his son--to become your husband, dear Emilia?
And he would not wait for me!
Because, in my opinion, this brief interview with his Emilia
would have distressed him too much, too deeply affected his soul.
He expected to find you busy with your bridal ornaments, and
heard----
What I have learnt from him with the tenderest admiration.
Right, my Emilia. I shall be blessed with a pious wife--and one who is not proud
of her piety.
But let us not, whilst we attend to one subject, forget
another. It is high time, Emilia. Go!
Go! Why?
Surely, my lord, you would not lead her to the altar in her
present attire.
In truth, I was not, till you spoke, aware of that. Who can
behold Emilia, and take heed of her dress? Yet why should I not lead her to the
altar thus?
No, dear Count, not exactly thus; yet in a dress not much more
gay. In a moment I shall be ready. I do not mean to wear those costly jewels,
which were the last present of your prodigal generosity, no, nor anything suited
to such jewels. Oh, I could quarrel with those jewels were they not your
present--for thrice I've dreamt----
Indeed! I know nothing of that.
That while I wore them, every diamond changed suddenly to a
pearl--and pearls, you know, dear mother, signify tears.
Child, the interpretation is more visionary than the dream.
Were you not always more fond of pearls than diamonds?
I assuredly, dear mother--assuredly----
Signify tears!
How! Does that affect you? You?
It does, though I ought to be ashamed that such is the case;
yet when the fancy is once disposed to sad impressions----
But why should yours be so? Guess the subject of my thoughts.
What did I wear, and how did I look when I first attracted your attention? Do
you remember?
Remember! I never see you in idea but in that dress, and I see
you so, even when you are not thus attired.
I mean to wear one of the same colour and form--flowing and
loose.
Excellent!
And my hair----
In its own dark beauty, in curls formed by the hand of nature.
Not forgetting the rose. Right! Have a little patience, and
you shall see me thus. (Exit.)
Count Appiani, Claudia Galotti.
"Pearls signify tears!"--a little patience! Yes! if we could
but defy time! If a minute on the clock were not sometimes an age within us!
Emilia's remark was no less just than quick, Count. You are
to-day more grave than usual. And yet you are but a step from the object of your
wishes. Do you repent that you have attained the wished-for goal?
How could you, dear mother, suspect this of your son? But it
is true. I am to-day unusually dejected and gloomy. All that I have seen, heard
or dreamt, has preached since yesterday, and before yesterday this doctrine to
me--to be but one step from the goal, and not to have attained it, is in reality
the same. This one idea engrosses all my thoughts. What can it mean? I
understand it not.
You make me uneasy, Count.
One thought succeeds another. I am vexed--angry with my
friends and with myself.
Why so?
My friends absolutely require, that, before I solemnize my
marriage, I should acquaint the Prince with my intentions. They allow I am not
bound to do this, but maintain that respect towards him demands it; and I have
been weak enough to consent. I have already ordered my carriage for the purpose.
To wait upon the Prince!
Pirro, afterwards 
Marinelli, Count Appiani, Claudia.
Enter Pirro.
My lady, the Marquis Marinelli is at the door, and inquires
for the Count.
For me!
Here his lordship comes. (Opens the door and exit.)

Enter Marinelli.
I ask pardon, madam. My lord Count, I called at your house,
and was informed that I should find you here. I have important business with
you. Once more pardon, madam. It will occupy but a few minutes.
I will not impede it. (Curtseys and exit.)
Marinelli, Appiani.
Now, my lord?
I come from his Highness.
What are his commands?
I am proud to be the bearer of this distinguished favour; and
if Count Appiani will not wilfully misunderstand one of his most devoted
friends----
Proceed, I pray, without more ceremony.
I will. The Prince is obliged to send an ambassador
immediately to the Duke of Massa respecting his marriage with the Princess his
daughter. He was long undetermined whom to appoint, till his choice at last has
fallen upon you, my lord.
Upon me?
Yes--and if friendship may be allowed to boast, I was
instrumental----
Truly I am at a loss for thanks. I had long renounced the hope
of being noticed by the Prince.
I am sure he only waited for a proper opportunity, and if the
present mission be not sufficiently worthy of Count Appiani, I own my friendship
has been too precipitate.
Friendship, friendship! every third word. With whom am I
speaking? The Marquis Marinelli's friendship I never dreamt of gaining.
I acknowledge my fault, Count Appiani, my unpardonable fault
in wishing to be your friend without your permission. But what of that? The
favour of his Highness, and the dignity he offers, remain the same. I do not
doubt you will accept them with pleasure.
Undoubtedly.
Come, then, with me.
Whither?
To the Prince's palace at Dosalo. All is ready. You must
depart to-day.
What say you? To-day?
Yes. Rather now than an hour hence. The business presses.
Indeed! Then I am sorry I must decline the honour which the
Prince intended to confer upon me.
How?
I cannot depart to-day,--nor to-morrow--nor the next day.
You are jesting, Count.
With you?
Incomparable! If with the Prince, the joke is so much the
merrier.--You cannot?
No, my lord, no--and I trust that the Prince himself will
think my excuse sufficient.
I am eager to hear it.
Oh, it is a mere trifle. I mean to be married to-day.
Indeed!--and what then?
And what then?--Your question shows a cursed simplicity!
There are examples, Count, of marriages having been deferred.
I do not mean to infer that the delay was pleasant to the bride and bridegroom.
To them it was, no doubt, a trial, yet the sovereign's command----
Sovereign's command? A sovereign of my own option, I am not so
strictly bound to obey. I admit that you owe the Prince absolute obedience, but
not I. I came to his court a volunteer. I wished to enjoy the honour of serving
him, but not of being his slave. I am the vassal of a greater sovereign.
Greater or smaller, a monarch is a monarch.
Idle controversy! Enough! Tell the Prince what you have heard.
Tell him I am sorry I cannot accept the honour, as I to-day intend to solemnize
an union which will consummate my happiness.
Will you not at the same time inform him with whom?
With Emilia Galotti.
The daughter of this family?
Yes.
Humph!
What do you mean?
I mean that there would be the less difficulty in deferring
the ceremony till your return.
The ceremony?
Yes. The worthy parents will not think much about it.
The worthy parents?
And Emilia will remain faithful to you, of course.
Of course?----You are an impertinent ape, with your "of
course."
This to me, Count?
Why not?
Heaven and hell! You shall hear from me.
Pshaw! The ape is malicious, but----
Death and damnation!--Count, I demand satisfaction.
You shall have it.
----And would insist upon it instantly--but that I should not
like to spoil the day for the loving bridegroom.
Good--natured creature!--(seizes his arm). I own an
embassy to Massa does not suit me, but still I have time enough to take a walk
with you. Come.
Patience, my lord, patience! (Exit.)
Appiani, Claudia.
Go, worthless wretch----Ha! that does me good. My blood
circulates----I feel different and all the better.
Heavens! My lord--I overheard an angry altercation. Your cheek
is flushed. What has happened?
Nothing, Madam, nothing. The chamberlain Marinelli has
conferred a favour on me. He has saved me a visit to the Prince.
Indeed!
We can therefore leave town earlier. I go to give orders to my
people, and shall return immediately. Emilia will, in the meantime, get ready.
May I feel quite at ease, my lord?
Perfectly so, dear Madam. (Exeunt severally.)
Scene, an apartment in the Prince's
country palace.
Enter Prince and 
Marinelli.
In vain. He refused the proffered honour with the greatest
contempt.
This ends all hope, then. Things take their course,
According to all appearances.
I relied so firmly on your project--but who knows how
ridiculously you acted? I ought to have recollected that though a blockhead's
counsel may be good, it requires a clever man to execute it.
A pretty reward, this!
Why should you be rewarded?
For having risked my life on the venture. Finding that neither
raillery nor reason could induce the Count to sacrifice his love to honour, I
tried to rouse his anger. I said things to him which made him forget himself. He
used insulting expressions, and I demanded satisfaction--yes, satisfaction on
the spot. One of us must fall, thought I. Should it be his fate, the field is
ours--should it be mine--why, he must fly, and the Prince will at least gain
time.
Did you act thus, Marinelli?
Yes; he, who is ready to sacrifice his life for princes, ought
to learn beforehand how grateful they are likely to be.
And the Count? Report says that he is not the man to wait till
satisfaction is a second time demanded.
No doubt, in ordinary cases. Who can blame him? He said that
he had then something of greater consequence than a duel to occupy his thoughts,
and put me off till a week after his marriage.
With Emilia Galotti. The idea drives me to
distraction----Thus, then, the affair ended, and now you come hither to boast
that you risked your life in my behalf--sacrificed yourself for me.
What more, my lord, would you have had me do?
More? As if you had done anything!
May I be allowed to ask what your Highness has done for
yourself? You were so fortunate as to see her at church. What is the result of
your conference?
You have curiosity enough--but I will satisfy it. All happened
as I wished. You need take no further trouble, my most serviceable friend. She
met my proposal more than half way. I ought to have taken her with me instantly.
(In a cold and commanding tone.) Now you have heard what you wished to
know, and may depart.
And may depart! Yes, yes. Thus the song ends, and so 'twould
be were I to attempt the impossible. The impossible, did I say? No. Impossible
it is not--only a daring attempt. Had we the girl in our power, I would answer
for it that no marriage should take place.
Ay--you would answer for anything. I suppose, for instance,
you would like to take a troop of my guards, lie in ambush by the highway, fall
to the number of fifty upon one carriage, and bear the girl in triumph to me.
A girl has been carried off before now by force, though there
has been no appearance of force in the transaction.----
If you were able to do this, you would not talk so much about
it.
----But I cannot be answerable for the consequences.
Unforeseen accidents may happen.
Is it my custom to make people answerable for what they cannot
help?
Therefore your Highness will--(a pistol is fired at a
distance). Ha! What was that? Did not my ears deceive me? Did not your
Highness also hear a shot. And hark! Another!
What means this? What is the matter?
How if I were more active than you deemed me?
More active! Explain, then----
In short, what I mentioned is now taking place.
Is it possible?
But forget not, Prince, what you just now promised. You pledge
your word that----
The necessary precautions I hope have been taken.
Yes, as carefully as possible. The execution of my plan is
entrusted to people on whom I can rely. The road, as you know, runs close by
your park fence. There the carriage will be attacked by a party, apparently to
rob the travellers. Another band (one of whom is my trusty servant) will rush
from the park as if to assist those who are attacked. During the sham battle
between the two parties, my servant will seize Emilia, as if to rescue her, and
bring her through the park into the palace. This is the plan. What says your
Highness now?
You surprise me beyond measure. A fearful anxiety comes o'er
me. (Marinelli walks to the window.) What are you looking at?
That must be the scene of action--yes, and see, some one in a
mask has just leapt over the fence--doubtless to acquaint me with the result.
Withdraw awhile, your Highness.
Ah, Marinelli----
Well--now, doubtless, I have done too much--as I before had
done too little.
Not so--not so--yet I cannot perceive----
Perceive?--It is best done at one blow. Withdraw quickly. You
must not be seen here.
(Exit Prince.)
Marinelli and presently 
Angelo.
The carriage is returning slowly to town. So slowly? and at
each door a servant? These appearances do not please me; they show the plot has
only half succeeded. They are driving some wounded person carefully, and he is
not dead. The fellow in the mask comes nearer. 'Tis Angelo himself--foolhardy!
But he knows the windings of this place. He beckons to me--he must know that he
has succeeded.--Ha! ha! Count Appiani. You, who refused an embassy to Massa,
have been obliged to go a longer journey. Who taught you to recognize apes so
well? 'Tis true, they are malicious (walks towards the door). Well,
Angelo?
Enter Angelo, with his mash
in his hand.
Be ready, my lord. She will be here directly.
How did you succeed in other respects?
As you wished, I have no doubt.
How is it with the Count?
So, so. But he must have had some suspicions, for he was not
quite unprepared.
Quick, tell me--is he dead?
I am sorry for him, poor man.
There! Take that for thy compassion (gives him a purse).
And our poor Nicolo too, he has shared the same luck.
What! Loss on both sides?
Yes. I could cry for the honest lad's fate; though I come in
for another quarter of this purse by it; for I am his heir, since I avenged him.
This is a law among us, and as good a law, methinks, as ever was made for the
support of friendship and fidelity. This Nicolo, my lord----
No more of your Nicolo! The Count----
Zounds! The Count finished him, and I finished the Count. He
fell, and though he might be alive when they put him into the coach, I'll answer
for it that he will never come alive out of it.
Were you but sure of this, Angelo----
I'll forfeit your custom, if it be not true. Have you any
further commands? For I have a long journey. We must be across the frontier
before sunset.
Go, then.
Should anything else occur in my way, you know where to
inquire for me. What any other can venture to do will be no magic for me, and my
terms are lower than any other's. (Exit.)
'Tis well--yet not so well as it might have been. Shame on
thee, Angelo, to be such a niggard! Surely the Count was worthy of a second
shot. Now, he may die in agony; poor Count! Shame, Angelo! It was a cruel and
bungling piece of work. The Prince must not know what has happened. He himself
must discover how advantageous this death is to him. Death! What would I not
give to be certain of it!
The Prince, Marinelli.
Here she comes up the avenue. She flies before the servants.
Fear gives wings to her feet. She must not suspect our design. She thinks she is
escaping from robbers. How long will her mistake last?
At least we have her here.
But will not her mother come in search of her? Will not the
Count follow her? What can we do then? How can I keep her from them?
To all this I confess I can make no reply. But we must see.
Compose yourself, Prince. This first step was, at all events, necessary.
How so, if we are obliged to recede?
But perhaps we need not. There are a thousand things on which
we may make further steps. Have you forgotten the chief one?
How can I have forgotten that of which I never thought? What
mean you by the chief one?
The art of pleasing and persuading--which in a prince who
loves can never fail.
Can never fail! True, except when it is most needed. I have
already made a poor attempt in this art to-day. All my flattery, all my
entreaties could not extract one word from her. Mute, trembling, and abashed,
she stood before me like a criminal who fears the judge's fatal sentence. Her
terror was infectious. I trembled also and concluded by imploring her
forgiveness. Scarcely dare I speak to her again--and, at all events, I dare not
be present when she arrives. You, Marinelli, must receive her. I will listen to
your conversation, and join you when I am more collected.
Marinelli, presently his servant 
Battista, and Emilia.
If she did not see him fall--and of course she could not, as
she fled instantly But she comes, and I too do not wish to be the first to meet
her eye (withdraws to a corner of the apartment).
Enter Battista and 
Emilia.
This way--this way--dear lady.
Oh! I thank you, my friend--I thank you. But, Heavens! Where
am I? Quite alone, too! Where are my mother, and the Count? They are surely
coming? Are they not close behind me?
I suppose so.
You suppose so? Are you not certain? Have you not seen them?
Were not pistols fired behind us?
Pistols? Was it so?
Surely. Oh, Heavens! and the Count or my mother is shot.
I'll go in search of them instantly.
Not without me! I'll go with you! I must go with you. Come, my
friend.
Ha! fair lady! What misfortune, or rather what good
fortune--what fortunate misfortune has procured us the honour----
How!--You here, my lord!--This then is doubtless your house.
Pardon my intrusion. We have been attacked by robbers. Some good people came to
our assistance,--and this honest man took me out of the carriage and conducted
me hither. But I am alarmed to find that I alone am rescued. My mother must be
still in danger. I heard pistols fired behind us. Perhaps she is dead,--and yet
I live. Pardon me. I must away, I must return to the place, which I ought not to
have left.
Compose yourself, dear lady. All is well. The beloved persons,
for whom you feel this tender anxiety, will soon be here.--Run, Battista; they
may perhaps not know where the lady is. See whether you can find them in any of
the lodges, and conduct them hither instantly.
(Exit Battista.)
Are you sure they are all safe? Has nothing happened to
them?--Oh, what a day of terrors has this been to me! But I ought not to remain
here; I should hasten to meet them.
Why so, dear lady? You are already breathless and exhausted.
Compose yourself, and condescend to step into this room, where you will find
better accommodation than here. I feel certain that the Prince has already found
your gracious mother, and is escorting her hither.
Who do you say?
Our gracious Prince himself.
The Prince!
He flew to your assistance at the first intelligence. He is
highly incensed that such a crime should have been committed so near to his
villa, nay, almost before his eyes. He has sent in search of the villains, and
if they be seized, their punishment will be most severe.
The Prince!--Where am I then?
At Dosalo, the Prince's villa.
How strange!--And you think he will soon arrive?--But with my
mother too?
Here he is, already.
The Prince, Emilia, and 
Marinellies.
Where is she? Where is she?--We have sought you everywhere,
dear lady.--You are well, I hope? Now, all is well. The Count and your
mother----
Oh, your Highness! Where are they? Where is my mother?
Not far off, close at hand.
Heavens! In what a situation shall I perhaps find one or other
of them! For your Highness conceals from me--I perceive----
I conceal nothing, be assured. Lean on my arm, and accompany
me to them without fear.
But--if they be not wounded--if my suspicions be not true--why
are they not already here?
Hasten then, that all these sad apprehensions may at once be
banished.
What shall I do? (wrings her hands).
How, dear lady! Can you harbour any suspicion against me?
On my knees I entreat you----
I am quite ashamed.--Yes, Emilia, I deserve this mute
reproach. My conduct this morning cannot be justified, or even excused. Pardon
my weakness: I ought not to have made you uneasy by an avowal, from which I
could expect no advantage. I was amply punished by the speechless agitation with
which you listened to it, or rather did not listen to it. And if I might be
allowed to think this accident the signal of more favourable fortune--the most
wondrous respite of my final sentence--this accident, which allows me to behold
and speak to you again before my hopes for ever vanish--this accident, which
gives me an opportunity of imploring your forgiveness--yet will I--do not
tremble--yet will I rely only and entirely on your looks. Not a sigh, not a
syllable shall offend you. Only wound me not with suspicions--do not for a
moment doubt the unbounded influence which you possess over me--only imagine not
that you need any protection against me. And now come--come where delights more
in harmony with your feelings, await you. (Leads her away, not without
opposition.) Follow us, Marinelli.
(Exeunt Prince and Emilia.)
Follow us! That means of course--Follow us not. And why should
I follow them? He will now find how far he can proceed with her, without
witnesses. All that I have to do is to prevent intrusion. From the Count I no
longer expect it--but from her mother. Wonderful, indeed, would it be, were she
to have departed quietly, leaving her daughter unprotected. Well, Battista, what
now?
Battista and 
Marinelli.
The mother, my lord chamberlain----
As I suspected. Where is she?
She will be here immediately, unless you prevent it. When you
ordered me to pretend to look for her, I felt little inclination to do so. But
in the distance I heard her shrieks. She is in search of her daughter, and will
discover the whole plot. All the people who inhabit this retired spot have
gathered round her, and each vies with his neighbour to show her the way.
Whether she has been told that you are here, or that the Prince is here, I know
not. What is to be done?
Let us see (considering). Refuse her admittance when
she knows that her daughter is here? That will not do. She will certainly open
her eyes when she finds her lambkin in the clutches of the wolf. Eyes! They
would be of little consequence; but Heaven have mercy on our ears! Well, well. A
woman's lungs are not inexhaustible. She will be silent, when she can shriek no
longer. Besides, the mother it is whom we should gain over to our side--and if I
be a judge of mothers--to be a sort of prince's step--mother would flatter most
of them. Let her come, Battista, let her come.
Hark, my lord!
Emilia! Emilia! My child! Where are you?
Go, Battista, and use your endeavours to dismiss her
inquisitive companions.
Claudia, Battista, Marinelli.
As Battista is going, 
Claudia meets him.
Ha! You took her out of the carriage. You led her away. I know
you again. Where is she? Speak, wretch.
Are these your thanks?
Oh, if you merit thanks (in a mild tone), forgive me,
worthy man. Where is she? Let me no longer be deprived of her. Where is she?
She could not be more safe, were she in heaven.--My master,
here, will conduct you to her. (Observes that some people are beginning to
follow Claudia.) Back there! Begone! (Exit, driving them away.)
Claudia, Marinelli.
Your master? (espies Marinelli, and starts). Ha!
Is this your
master? You here, Sir--and my daughter here--and you--you will conduct me
to her?
With great pleasure, madam.
Hold! It just occurs to me. It was you, I think, who visited
Count Appiani this morning at my house,--whom I left alone with him,--and with
whom he afterwards had a quarrel?
A quarrel? That I did not know. We had a trifling dispute
respecting affairs of state.
And your name is Marinelli?
The Marquis Marinelli.
True. Hear, then, Marquis Marinelli. Your name, accompanied
with a curse----but no--I will not wrong the noble man--the curse was inferred
by myself--your name was the last word uttered by the dying Count.
The dying Count? Count Appiani?----You hear, Madam, what most
surprises me in this your strange address--the dying Count?--What else you mean
to imply, I know not.
Marinelli was the last word uttered by the dying Count.--Do
you understand me now? I myself did not at first understand it, though it was
spoken in a tone--a tone which I still hear. Where were my senses that I could
not understand it instantly?
Well, Madam, I was always the Count's friend--his intimate
friend. If, therefore, he pronounced my name at the hour of death----
In that tone!--I cannot imitate--I cannot describe it--but it
signified----everything. What! Were we attacked by robbers? No--by assassins--by
hired assassins: and Marinelli was the last word uttered by the dying Count, in
such a tone----
In such a tone? Did any one ever hear that a tone of voice
used in a moment of terror could be a ground of accusation against an honest
man?
Oh that I could appear before a tribunal of justice, and
imitate that tone? Yet, wretch that I am! I forget my daughter. Where is
she--dead too? Was it my daughter's fault that Appiani was thy enemy?
I revere the mother's fears, and therefore pardon you.--Come,
Madam. Your daughter is in an adjoining room, and I hope her alarms are by this
time at an end. With the tenderest solicitude is the Prince himself employed in
comforting her.
Who?
The Prince.
The Prince! Do you really say the Prince--our Prince?
Who else should it be?
Wretched mother that I am!--And her father, her father! He
will curse the day of her birth. He will curse me.
For Heaven's sake, Madam, what possesses you?
It is clear. To-day--at church--before the eyes of the
All-pure--in the presence of the Eternal, this scheme of villainy began. (To
Marinelli.) Murderer! Mean, cowardly murderer! Thou wast not bold enough to meet
him face to face, but base enough to bribe assassins that another might be
gratified. Thou scum of murderers! honourable murderers would not endure thee in
their company. Why may I not spit all my gall, all my rancour into thy face,
thou panderer?
You rave, good woman. Moderate your voice, at any rate, and
remember where you are.
Where I am! Remember where I am! What cares the lioness, when
robbed of her young, in whose forest she roars?
Ha! My mother! I hear my mother's voice.
Her voice? 'Tis she! She has heard me. Where are you, my
child?--I come, I come (rushes into the room, followed by Marinelli).
The Prince and 
Marinelli.
Come, Marinelli, I must collect myself--I look to you for
explanation.
Oh! maternal anger! Ha! ha! ha!
You laugh?
Had you, Prince, but seen her frantic conduct in this room!
You heard how she screamed; yet how tame she became as soon as she beheld you!
Ha! ha! Yes--I never yet knew the mother who scratched a prince's eyes out,
because he thought her daughter handsome.
You are a poor observer. The daughter fell senseless into her
mother's arms. This made the mother forget her rage. It was her daughter, not
me, whom she spared, when, in a low voice, she uttered--what I myself had rather
not have heard--had rather not have understood.
What means your Highness?
Why this dissimulation? Answer me. Is it true or false?
And if it were true!
If it were! It is, then--he is dead (in a threatening tone).
Marinelli! Marinelli!
Well?
By the God of justice I swear that I am innocent of this
blood. Had you previously told me that the Count's life must be sacrificed--God
is my witness I would as soon have consented to lose my own.
Had I previously told you! As if the Count's death was part of
my plan! I charged Angelo that on his soul he should take care that no person
suffered injury; and this, too, would have been the case, had not the Count
begun the fray, and shot the first assailant on the spot.
Indeed! he ought to have understood the joke better.
So that Angelo was enraged, and instantly avenged his
comrade's death----
Well, that is certainly very natural.
I have reproved him for it.
Reproved him! How good--natured! Advise him never to appear
again in my dominions; for my reproof might not be found so good-natured.
Just as I foresaw! I and Angelo.--Design and accident; all the
same.--It was, however, agreed, and indeed promised, that I should not be
answerable for any accidents which might happen.
Might happen, say you, or must?
Still better! Yet one word, your Highness, before you say in
harsh phrase what you think of me. The Count's death was far from being a matter
of indifference to me. I had challenged him. He left the world without giving me
satisfaction, and my honour, consequently, remains tarnished. Allowing,
therefore, what under other circumstances I deserved the suspicion you allude
to, can I in this? (with assumed anger.) He who can so suspect me----
Well, well!
Oh that he were still alive! I would give all that I
possess--(with bitterness)--even the favour of my Prince--even that
treasure, invaluable and never to be trifled with, would I give.
Well, well! I understand you. His death was accidental, merely
accidental--you assure me that it was so, and I believe it. But will any one
else believe it? Will Emilia--her mother--the world?
Scarcely.
What, then, will they believe? You shrug your shoulders. They
will suppose Angelo the tool and me the prime mover.
Probable enough!
Me! me, myself!--or from this hour I must resign all hopes of
Emilia.
Which you must also have done, had the Count lived.
Marinelli!--(checking his warmth)--But you shall not
rouse my anger. Be it so. It is so. You mean to imply that the Count's death is
fortunate for me;--the best thing which could have happened--the only
circumstance which could bring my passion to a happy issue--and, therefore, no
matter how it happened. A Count more or less in the world is of little
consequence. Am I right?--I am not alarmed at a little crime; but it must be a
secret little crime, a serviceable little crime. But ours has not been either
secret or serviceable. It has opened a passage only to close it again. Every one
will lay it to our door. And, after all, we have not perpetrated it at all. This
can only be the result of your wise and wonderful management.
If your Highness have it so----
Why not?--I want an explanation----
I am accused of more than I deserve.
I want an explanation.
Well then, what error in my plans has attached such obvious
suspicion to the Prince? The fault lies in the master-stroke which your Highness
so graciously put to my plans----
I?
Allow me to say that the step which you took at church this
morning--with whatever circumspection it was done, or however inevitable it
might be--was not part of my programme.
How did that injure it?
Not indeed the whole plan, but its opportuneness.
Do I understand you?
To speak more intelligibly. When I undertook the business,
Emilia knew nothing of the Prince's attachment. Her mother just as little. How
if I formed my foundation upon this circumstance, and in the meantime the Prince
was undermining my edifice?
Damnation!
How, if he himself betrayed his intentions?
Cursed interposition!
For had he not so behaved himself I should like to know what
part of my plan could have raised the least suspicion in the mind of the mother
or the daughter?
You are right.
And therein I certainly am very wrong.--Pardon me.
Battista, The Prince, Marinelli.
Enter BATTISTA (hastily).
The Countess is arrived.
The Countess? What Countess?
Orsina!
Orsina? Marinelli!
I am as much astonished as yourself.
Go--run--Battista. She must not alight. I am not here--not
here to her. She must return this instant. Go, go. (Exit Battista). What
does the silly woman want? How dares she take this liberty? How could she know
that we were here? Is she come as a spy? Can she have heard anything? Oh,
Marinelli, speak, answer me. Is the man offended, who vows he is my
friend--offended by a paltry altercation? Shall I beg pardon?
Prince, as soon as you recover yourself, I am yours again,
with my whole soul. The arrival of Orsina is as much an enigma to me as to you.
But she will not be denied. What will you do?
I will not speak to her. I will withdraw.
Right! Do so instantly; I will receive her.
But merely to dismiss her. No more. We have other business to
perform.
Not so, not so. Our other things are done. Summon up
resolution and all deficiencies will be supplied. But do I not hear her? Hasten,
Prince. In that room (pointing to an adjoining apartment, to which the
Prince
retires)--you may, if you please, listen to our conversation. She comes,
I fear, at an unpropitious moment for her.
The Countess Orsina, Marinelli.
What means this? No one comes to meet me, but a shameless
servant, who endeavours to obstruct my entrance. Surely I am at Dosalo, where,
on former occasions, an army of attendants rushed to receive me--where love and
ecstasy awaited me. Yes. The place is the same, but----Ha! you here, Marinelli?
I am glad the Prince has brought you with him. Yet, no. My business with his
Highness must be transacted with himself only. Where is he?
The Prince, Countess?
Who else?
You suppose that he is here, then,--or know it, perhaps. He,
however, does not expect a visit from your ladyship.
Indeed! He has not then received my letter this morning.
Your letter? But--yes. I remember he mentioned that he had
received one.
Well? Did I not in that letter request he would meet me here
to-day? I own he did not think proper to return a written answer; but I learnt
that an hour afterwards he drove from town to Dosalo. This I thought a
sufficient answer, and therefore I have come.
A strange accident!
Accident! It was an agreement--at least as good as an
agreement. On my part, the letter--on his, the deed. How you stand staring,
Marquis! What surprises you?
You seemed resolved yesterday never to appear before the
Prince again.
Night is a good councillor. Where is he? Where is he?
Doubtless in the chamber, whence sighs and sobs were issuing as I passed. I
wished to enter, but the impertinent servant would not let me pass.
Dearest Countess----
I heard a woman's shriek. What means this, Marinelli? Tell
me--if I be your dearest Countess--tell me. A curse on these court slaves! Their
tales! their lies! But what matters it whether you choose to tell me or not? I
will see for myself.
Whither would you go?
Where I ought to have gone long since. Is it proper, think
you, that I should waste any time in idle conversation with you in the
ante-chamber, when the Prince expects me in the saloon?
You are mistaken, Countess. The Prince does not expect you
here. He cannot--will not see you.
And yet is here, in consequence of my letter.
Not in consequence of your letter.
He received it, you say.
Yes, but he did not read it.
Not read it! (Less violently.) Not read it! (Sorrowfully,
and wiping away a tear.) Not even read it!
From preoccupation, I am certain, not contempt.
Contempt! Who thought of such a thing? To whom do you use the
term? Marinelli, your comfort is impertinent. Contempt! Contempt! To me! (In
a milder tone.) It is true that he no longer loves me. That is certain. And
in place of love something else has filled his soul. It is natural. But why
should this be contempt? Indifference would be enough. Would it not, Marinelli?
Certainly, certainly.
Certainly! What an oracle, who can be made to say what one
pleases! Indifference in the place of love!--That means nothing in the place of
something. For learn, thou mimicking court-parrot, learn from a woman, that
indifference is but an empty word, a mere sound which means nothing. The mind
can only be indifferent to objects of which it does not think; to things which
for itself have no existence. Only indifferent for a thing that is nothing--that
is as much as saying not indifferent. Is that meaning beyond thee, man?
Alas! how prophetic were my fears?
What do you mutter?
Mere admiration! Who does not know, Countess, that you are a
philosopher?
Am I not? True; I am a philosopher. But have I now shown it;
ah, shame! If I have shown it, and have often done so, it were no wonder if the
Prince despised me. How can man love a creature which, in spite of him, will 
think? A woman who thinks is as silly as a man who uses paint. She ought to
laugh--do nothing but laugh, that the mighty lords of the creation may be kept
in good humour--What makes me laugh now, Marinelli? Why, the accidental
circumstance that I should have written to the Prince to come hither--that he
should not have read my letter and nevertheless have come. Ha! ha! ha! 'Tis an
odd accident, very pleasant and amusing. Why don't you laugh, Marinelli? The
mighty lords of the creation may laugh, though we poor creatures dare not think.
(In a serious and commanding tone.) Then laugh, you!
Presently, Countess, presently.
Blockhead! while you speak the proper moment is for ever past.
No. Do not laugh--for mark me, Marinelli, (with emotion) that which makes
me laugh, has, like every thing in the world, its serious side. Accident! Could
it be accidental that the Prince, who little thought that he would see me here,
must see me?--Accident! Believe me, Marinelli, the word accident is blasphemy.
Nothing under the sun is accidental, and least of all this, of which the purpose
is so evident.--Almighty and all--bounteous Providence, pardon me that I joined
this poor weak sinner in giving the name of accident to what so plainly is Thy
work--yes, Thy immediate work. (In a hasty tone to Marinelli.) Dare not
again to lead me thus astray from truth.
This is going too far (aside)--But, Countess----
Peace with your but--that word demands reflection,
and--my head, my head!--(Puts her hand to her forehead)--Contrive that I
may speak to the Prince immediately, or I shall soon want strength to do so. You
see, Marinelli, that I must speak to him--that I am resolved to speak to him.
The Prince, Orsina, Marinelli.
I must come to his assistance.
Ha! There he is.
Ha! The fair Countess, as I live. How sorry I am, Madam, that
I can to-day so ill avail myself of the honour of your visit. I am engaged. I am
not alone. Another time, dear Countess, another time. At present stay no
longer--no longer, I beg. And you, Marinelli--I want you. (Exit.)
Orsina, Marinelli.
Your ladyship has now heard, from himself, what you would not
believe from my lips, have you not?
Have I? Have, I indeed?
Most certainly.
"I am engaged, I am not alone." Is this all the excuse I am
worth? For whose dismissal would not these words serve? For every importunate,
for every beggar. Could he not frame one little falsehood for me? Engaged! With
what? Not alone! Who can be with him? Marinelli, dear Marinelli, be
compassionate--tell me a falsehood on your own account. What can a falsehood
cost you? What has he to do? Who is with him? Tell me, tell me. Say anything
which first occurs to you, and I will go.
On this condition, I may tell her part of the truth.
Quick, Marinelli, and I will go. He said, "Another time, dear
Countess!" Did he not? That he may keep his promise--that he may have no pretext
to break it--quick, then, Marinelli,--tell me a falsehood, and I will go.
The Prince, dear Countess, is really not alone. There are
persons with him, whom he cannot leave for a moment--persons, who have just
escaped imminent danger. Count Appiani----
Is with him! What a pity that I know this to be false! Quick,
another! for Count Appiani, if you do not know it, has just been assassinated by
robbers. I met the carriage, with his body in it, as I came from town. Or did I
not? Was it a dream?
Alas, it was not a dream. But they who accompanied the Count
were fortunately rescued, and are now in this palace; namely, a lady to whom he
was betrothed, and whom, with her mother, he was conducting to Sabionetta, to
celebrate his nuptials.
They are with the Prince! A lady and her mother! Is the lady
handsome?
The Prince is extremely sorry for her situation.
That he would be, I hope, even if she were hideous--for her
fate is dreadful. Poor girl! at the moment he was to become thine for ever, he
was torn for ever from thee. Who is she? Do I know her? I have of late been so
much out of town, that I am ignorant of every thing.
It is Emilia Galotti.
What? Emilia Galotti? Oh, Marinelli, let me not mistake this
lie for truth.
Why?
Emilia Galotti?
Yes. Whom you can scarcely know.
I do know her--though our acquaintance only began to-day.
Emilia Galotti! Answer me seriously. Is Emilia Galotti the unfortunate lady whom
the Prince is consoling?
Can I have disclosed too much?
And Count Appiani was her destined bridegroom--Count Appiani,
who was shot to-day?
Exactly.
Bravo! Bravo! Bravo!
What now?
I could kiss the devil that tempted him to do it.
Whom? Tempted? To do what?
Yes, I could kiss--him--even wert thou that devil, Marinelli.
Countess!
Come hither. Look at me--steadfastly--eye to eye.
Well?
Know you not my thoughts?
How can I?
Have you no concern in it?
In what?
Swear. No, do not swear, for that might be another crime. But
yes--swear. One sin more or less is of no consequence to a man who is already
damned. Have you no concern in it?
You alarm me, Countess.
Indeed! Now, Marinelli--has your good heart no suspicion?
Suspicion? Of what?
'Tis well. Then I will entrust you with a secret--a secret,
which will make each hair upon your head stand on end. But here, so near the
door, some one might overhear us. Come here--(puts her finger to her mouth)--mark
me, it is a secret--a profound secret. (Places her mouth to his ear, as if
about to whisper, and shouts as loudly as she can) The Prince is a murderer!
Countess! Countess! Have you lost your senses?
Senses? Ha! ha! ha! (laughing loudly). I have very
seldom, if ever, been so satisfied with my understanding as I am at this moment.
Depend upon it, Marinelli--but it is between ourselves--(in a low voice)--the
Prince is a murderer--the murderer of Count Appiani. The Count was assassinated,
not by robbers, but by the Prince's myrmidons, by the Prince himself.
How can so horrid a suspicion fall from your lips, or enter
your imagination?
How? Very naturally. This Emilia Galotti, who is now in the
palace, and whose bridegroom--was thus trundled head over heels out of the
world--this Emilia Galotti did the Prince to-day accost in the Church of the
Dominicans, and held a lengthy conversation with her. That I know, for my spies
not only saw it, but heard what he said. Now, sir, have I lost my senses?
Methinks I connect the attendant circumstances very tolerably together. Or has
all this happened, too, by accident? If so, Marinelli, you have as little idea
of the wickedness of man as you have of prevision.
Countess, you would talk your life into danger----
Were I to mention this to others? So much the better! So much
the better! To-morrow I will repeat it aloud in the market-place--and, if any
one contradict me--if any one contradict me, he was the murderer's accomplice.
Farewell. (As she is going, she meets Odoardo entering hastily.)
Odoardo, Orsina, Marinelli.
Pardon me, gracious lady----
I can grant no pardon here, for I can take no offence. You
must apply to this gentleman (pointing to Marinelli).
The father! This completes the business.
Pardon a father, sir, who is in the greatest embarrassment,
for entering unannounced.
Father!--(turning round again)--Of Emilia, no doubt!
Ha! Thou art welcome.
A servant came in haste to tell me that my family was in
danger near here. I flew hither, he mentioned, and found that Count Appiani has
been wounded--and carried back to town--and that my wife and daughter have found
refuge in the palace. Where are they, sir, where are they?
Be calm, Colonel. Your wife and daughter have sustained no
injury save from terror. They are both well. The Prince is with them. I will
immediately announce you.
Why announce? merely announce me?
For reasons--on account of--on account of--you know, sir, that
you are not upon the most friendly terms with the Prince. Gracious as may be his
conduct towards your wife and daughter--they are ladies--will your unexpected
appearance be welcome to him?
You are right, my lord, you are right.
But, Countess, may I not first have the honour of handing you
to your carriage?
By no means.
Allow me to perform my duty.
Softly!--I excuse you, Marquis. Why do such as you ever
consider mere politeness a duty, and neglect as unimportant what is really an
essential duty? To announce this worthy man immediately is your duty.
Have you forgotten what the Prince himself commanded?
Let him come, and repeat his commands. I shall expect him.
I am obliged to leave you, Colonel, with a lady whose
intellect--you understand me, I mention this that you may know in what way to
treat her remarks, which are sometimes singular. It were better not to enter
into conversation with her.
Very well. Only make haste, my lord.
(Exit Marinelli.)
Orsina, Odoardo.
ORSINA (after a pause, during which she has surveyed Odoardo with a
look of compassion, while he has cast towards her a glance of curiosity).
Alas! What did he say to you, unfortunate man?
Unfortunate!
Truth it certainly was not--at least, not one of those sad
truths which await you.
Which await me? Do I, then, not know enough? Madam--but
proceed, proceed.
You know nothing?
Nothing.
Worthy father! What would I give that you were my father!
Pardon me. The unfortunate so willingly associate together. I would faithfully
share your sorrows--and your anger.
Sorrows and anger? Madam--but I forget--go on.
Should she even be your only daughter--your only child--but it
matters not. An unfortunate child is ever an only one.
Unfortunate?--Madam! But why do I attend to her? And yet, by
Heaven, no lunatic speaks thus.
Lunatic? That, then, was the secret which he told you of me.
Well, well. It is perhaps not one of his greatest falsehoods. I feel that I am
something like one; and believe me, sir, they who, under certain circumstances,
do not lose their intellect, have none to lose.
What must I think?
Treat me not with contempt, old man. You possess strong sense.
I know it by your resolute and reverend mien. You also possess sound judgment,
yet I need but speak one word, and both these qualities are fled for ever.
Oh, Madam, they will have fled before you speak that word,
unless you pronounce it soon. Speak, I conjure you; or it is not true that you
are one of that good class of lunatics who claim our pity and respect; you are
naught else than a common fool. You cannot have what you never possessed.
Mark my words, then. What do you know, who fancy that you know
enough? That Appiani is wounded? Wounded only? He is dead.
Dead? Dead? Woman, you abide not by your promise. You said you
would rob me of my reason, but you break my heart.
Thus much by the way. Now, let me proceed. The bridegroom is
dead, and the bride, your daughter, worse than dead.
Worse? Worse than dead? Say that she too is dead--for I know
but one thing worse.
She is not dead; no, good father, she is alive, and will now
just begin to live indeed; the finest, merriest fool's paradise of a life--as
long as it lasts.
Say the word, Madam! The single word, which is to deprive me
of my reason! Out with it! Distil not thus your poison drop by drop. That single
word at once!
You yourself shall put the letters of it together. This
morning the Prince spoke to your daughter at church; this afternoon he has her
at his----his summer-palace.
Spoke to her at church? The Prince to my daughter?
With such familiarity and such fervour. Their agreement was
about no trifling matter; and if they did agree, all the better: all the better
if your daughter made this her voluntary asylum. You understand--and in that
case this is no forcible seduction, but only a trifling--trifling assassination.
Calumny! Infamous calumny! I know my daughter. If there be
murder here, there is seduction also, (Looks wildly round, stamping and
foaming.) Now, Claudia! Now, fond mother! Have we not lived to see a day of
joy? Oh, the gracious Prince! Oh, the mighty honour!
Have I roused thee, old man?
Here I stand before the robber's cave. (Throws his coat
back on both sides, and perceives he has no weapon.) 'Tis a marvel that, in
my haste, I have not forgotten my hands too. (Feeling in all his pockets.)
Nothing, nothing.
Ha! I understand, and can assist you. I have brought one. (Produces
a dagger.) There! Take it, take it quickly, ere any one observes us. I have
something else, too--poison--but that is for women, not for men. Take this (forcing
the dagger upon him), take it.
I thank thee. Dear child, whosoever again asserts thou art a
lunatic, he shall answer it to me.
Conceal it, instantly. (Odoardo hides the dagger.) The
opportunity for using it is denied to me. You will not fail to find one, and you
will seize the first that comes, if you are a man. I am but a woman, yet I came
hither resolute. We, old man, can trust each other, for we are both injured, and
by the same seducer. Oh, if you knew how preposterously, how inexpressibly, how
incomprehensibly, I have been injured by him, you would almost forget his
conduct towards yourself. Do you know me? I am Orsina, the deluded, forsaken
Orsina--perhaps forsaken only for your daughter. But how is she to blame? Soon
she also will be forsaken; then another, another, and another. Ha! (As if in
rapture) What a celestial thought! When all who have been victims of his
arts shall form a band, and we shall be converted into Mćnads, into furies; what
transport will it be to tear him piecemeal, limb from limb, to wallow through
his entrails, and wrench from its seat the traitor's heart--that heart which he
promised to bestow on each, and gave to none. Ha! that indeed will be a glorious
revelry!
Claudia, Odoardo, Orsina.
Enter Claudia.
I was right. Our protector, our deliverer! Are you really
here? Do I indeed behold you, Odoardo? From their whisper and their manner I
knew it was the case. What shall I say to you, if you are still ignorant? What
shall I say to you if you already know everything? But we are innocent. I am
innocent. Your daughter is innocent. Innocent; wholly innocent.
'Tis well. Be calm, and answer me.--(To Orsina)--Not
that I doubt your information, Madam. Is the Count dead?
He is.
Is it true that the Prince spoke this morning to Emilia, at
the church?
It is; but if you knew how much she was alarmed--with what
terror she rushed home.
Now, was my information false?
I would not that it were! For worlds I would not that it were!
Am I a lunatic?
Oh!--nor as yet am I.
You commanded me to be calm, and I obeyed--My dear husband,
may I--may I entreat----
What do you mean? Am I not calm? Who can be calmer than I? (Putting
restraint upon himself.) Does Emilia know that Appiani is dead?
She cannot know it, but I fear that she suspects it, because
he does not appear.
And she weeps and sobs.
No more. That is over, like her nature, which you know. She is
the most timid, yet the most resolute of her sex; incapable of governing her
first emotions, but upon the least reflection calm and prepared for all. She
keeps the Prince at a distance--she speaks to him in a tone----Let us, dear
Odoardo, depart immediately.
I came on horseback hither. What is to be done? You, Madam,
will probably return to town?
Immediately.
May I request you to take my wife with you.
With pleasure.
Claudia, this is the Countess Orsina, a lady of sound sense,
my friend and benefactress. Accompany her to town, and send our carriage hither
instantly. Emilia must not return to Guastalla. She shall go with me.
But--if only--I am unwilling to part from the child.
Is not her father here? I shall be admitted at last. Do not
delay! Come, my lady. (Apart to her.) You shall hear from me.--Come,
Claudia. (Exeunt.)
The Prince, Marinelli.
From this window your Highness may observe him. He is walking
to and fro under the arcade. Now he turns this way. He comes; no, he turns
again. He has not yet altogether made up his mind; but is much calmer, or at
least appears so. To us this is unimportant. He will scarcely dare utter the
suspicions which these women have expressed! Battista says that he desired his
wife to send the carriage hither as soon as she should reach the town, for he
came hither on horseback. Mark my words. When he appears before your Highness,
he will humbly return thanks for the gracious protection which you were pleased
to afford to his family, will recommend himself and his daughter to your further
favour, quietly take her to town, and with perfect submission await the further
interest which your Highness may think proper to take in the welfare of his
child.
But should he not be so resigned--and I scarcely think he
will, I know him too well to expect it--he may, perhaps, conceal his suspicions,
and suppress his indignation; but instead of conducting Emilia to town, he may
take her away and keep her with himself, or place her in some cloister beyond my
dominions. What then?
Love's fears are farsighted. But he will not.
But, if he were to do it, what would the death of the
unfortunate Count avail us?
Why this gloomy supposition? "Forward!" shouts the victor, and
asks not who falls near him--friend or foe. Yet if the old churl should act as
you fear, prince--(After some consideration) I have it. His wish shall
prove the end of his success. I'll mar his plan. But we must not lose sight of
him. (Walks again to the window.) He had almost surprised us. He comes.
Let us withdraw awhile, and in the meanwhile, Prince, you shall hear how we can
elude the evil you apprehend.
But, Marinelli----
The most innocent thing in the world. (Exeunt.)
Still no one here? 'Tis well. They allow me time to get still
cooler. A lucky chance. Nothing is more unseemly than a hoary-headed man
transported with the rage of youth. So I have often thought, yet I have suffered
myself to be aroused----by whom? By a woman whom jealousy had driven to
distraction. What has injured virtue to do with the revenge of vice? I have but
to save the former. And thy cause, my son--my son----I could never weep, and
will not learn the lesson now. There is another, who will avenge thy cause.
Sufficient for me that thy murderer shall not enjoy the fruit of his crime. May
this torment him more than even the crime itself; and when at length loathsome
satiety shall drive him from one excess to another, may the recollection of
having failed in this poison the enjoyment of all! In every dream may the bride
appear to him, led to his bedside by the murdered bridegroom; and when, in spite
of this, he stretches forth his sinful arms to seize the prize, may he suddenly
hear the derisive laughter of hell echo in his ears, and so awake.
Marinelli, Odoardo.
We have been looking for you, Sir.
Has my daughter been here?
No; the Prince.
I beg his pardon. I have been conducting the Countess to her
carriage.
Indeed.
A good lady!
And where is your lady?
She accompanied the Countess that she might send my carriage
hither. I would request the Prince to let me stay with my daughter till it
arrives.
Why this ceremony? The Prince would have felt pleasure in
conducting your daughter and her mother to town.
My daughter at least would have been obliged to decline that
honour.
Why so?
She will not go to Guastalla again.
Indeed! Why not?
Count Appiani is dead.
For that very reason----
She must go with me.
With you?
With me.--I tell you the Count is dead--though she may not
know it. What therefore has she to do in Guastalla? She must go with me.
The future residence of the lady must certainly depend upon
her father--but at present----
Well? What?
At present, sir, you will, I hope, allow her to be conveyed to
Guastalla.
My daughter, conveyed to Guastalla? Why so?
Why! Consider----
Consider! consider! consider that there is nothing to
consider. She must and shall go with me.
We need have no contention on the subject, sir. I may be
mistaken. What I think necessary may not be so. The Prince is the best
judge--he, therefore, will decide. I go to bring him to you.
Odoardo.
How? Never! Prescribe to me whether she shall go! Withhold her
from me! Who will do this?--Who dares attempt it?--He, who dares here do
anything he pleases?----'Tis well, 'tis well. Then shall he see how much I, too,
dare, and whether I have not already dared. Short-sighted voluptuary! I defy
thee.--He who regards no law is as independent as he who is subject to no law.
Knowest thou not this? Come on, come on----But what am I saying? My temper once
more overpowers my reason. What do I want? I should first know why I rave. What
will not a courtier assert? Better had I allowed him to proceed. I should have
heard his pretext for conveying my daughter to Guastalla, and I could have
prepared a proper reply. But can I need a reply!--Should one fail
me--should----I hear footsteps. I will be calm.
The Prince, Marinelli, Odoardo.
My dear worthy Galotti.--Was such an accident necessary to
bring you to your Prince? Nothing less would have sufficed--but I do not mean to
reproach you.
Your Highness, I have ever thought it unbecoming to press into
the presence of my Prince. He will send for those whom he wants. Even now I ask
your pardon----
Would that many, whom I know, possessed this modest
pride!--But to the subject. You are, doubtless, anxious to see your daughter.
She is again alarmed on account of her dear mother's sudden departure. And why
should she have departed? I only waited till the terrors of the lovely Emilia
were completely removed, and then I should have conveyed both the ladies in
triumph to town. Your arrival has diminished by half the pleasure of this
triumph; but I will not entirely resign it.
Your Highness honours me too much. Allow me to spare my
unfortunate child the various mortifications, which friendship and enmity,
compassion and malicious pleasure, prepare for her in town.
Of the sweet comforts, which the friendly and compassionate
bestow, it would be cruelty to deprive her; but against all the mortifications
of enmity and malice, believe me, I will guard her, dear Galotti.
Prince, paternal love is jealous of its duties. I think I know
what alone suits my daughter in her present situation. Retirement from the
world--a cloister as soon as possible.
A cloister?
Till then, let her weep under the protection of her father.
Shall so much beauty wither in a cloister?----Should one
disappointed hope embitter one against the world?--But as you please. No one has
a right to dictate to a parent. Take your daughter wherever you think proper,
Galotti.
Do you hear, my lord?
Nay, if you call upon me to speak----
By no means, by no means.
What has happened between you two?
Nothing, your Highness, nothing. We were only settling which
of us had been deceived in your Highness.
How so?--Speak, Marinelli.
I am sorry to interfere with the condescension of my Prince,
but friendship commands that I should make an appeal to him as judge.
What friendship?
Your Highness knows how sincerely I was attached to Count
Appiani--how our souls were interwoven----
Does his Highness know that? Then you are indeed the only one
who does know it.
Appointed his avenger by himself----
You?
Ask your wife. The name of Marinelli was the last word of the
dying Count, and was uttered in such a tone----Oh may that dreadful tone sound
in my ears for ever, if I do not strain every nerve to discover and to punish
his murderers!
Rely upon my utmost aid.
And upon my most fervent wishes. All this is well. But what
further?
That I, too, want to know, Marinelli.
It is suspected that the Count was not attacked by robbers----
Indeed!
But that a rival hired assassins to despatch him.
Indeed! A rival?
Exactly.
Well then--May damnation overtake the vile assassin!
A rival--a favoured rival too.
How? Favoured? What say you?
Nothing but what fame reports.
Favoured? favoured by my daughter?
Certainly not. That cannot be. Were you to say it I would
contradict it. But, on this account, your Highness, though no prejudice, however
well-grounded, can be of any weight in the scale of justice, it will,
nevertheless, be absolutely necessary that the unfortunate lady should be
examined.
True--undoubtedly.
And where can this be done but in Guastalla?
There you are right, Marinelli, there you are right.--This
alters the affair, dear Galotti. Is it not so. You yourself must see----
Yes! I see----what I see. O God! O God!
What now? What is the matter?
I am only angry with myself for not having foreseen what I now
perceive. Well, then--she shall return to Guastalla. I will take her to her
mother, and till she has been acquitted, after the most rigid examination, I
myself will not leave Guastalla. For who knows--(with a bitter smile of irony)--who
knows whether the court of justice may not think it necessary to examine me?
It is very possible. In such cases justice rather does too
much than too little. I therefore even fear----
What? What do you fear?
That the mother and daughter will not, at present, be suffered
to confer together.
Not confer together?
It will be necessary to keep mother and daughter apart.
To keep mother and daughter apart?
The mother, the daughter, and the father. The forms of the
court absolutely enjoin this caution; and I assure your Highness that it pains
me that I must enforce the necessity of at least placing Emilia in strict
security.
In strict security!--Oh, Prince, Prince!--Butyes--right!--of
course, of course! In strict security! Is it not so, Prince? Oh! justice! oh
justice is a fine thing! Excellent! (Hastily puts his hand into the pocket in
which he had concealed the dagger.)
Compose yourself, dear Galotti.
There spoke his guardian angel.
You are mistaken. You do not understand him. You think,
perhaps, by security is meant a prison and a dungeon.
Let me think so, and I shall be at ease.
Not a word of imprisonment, Marinelli. The rigour of the law
may easily be combined with the respect due to unblemished virtue. If Emilia
must be placed in proper custody, I know the most proper situation for her--my
chancellor's house. No opposition, Marinelli. Thither I will myself convey her,
and place her under the protection of one of the worthiest of ladies, who shall
be answerable for her safety. You go too far, Marinelli, you go too far, if you
require more. Of course, Galotti, you know my chancellor Grimaldi and his wife?
Undoubtedly I do. I also know the amiable daughters of this
noble pair. Who does not know them? (To Marinelli).--No, my lord--do not
agree to this. If my daughter must be confined, she ought to be confined in the
deepest dungeon. Insist upon it, I beseech you. Fool that I was to make any
request. Yes, the good Sybil was right. "They, who under certain circumstances,
do not lose their intellect, have none to lose."
I do not understand you. Dear Galotti, what can I do more? Be
satisfied, I beseech you. She shall be conveyed to the chancellor's house. I
myself will convey her thither; and if she be not there treated with the utmost
respect, my word is of no value. But fear nothing; it is settled. You, Galotti,
may do as you think proper. You may follow us to Guastalla, or return to
Sabionetta, as you please. It would be ridiculous to dictate any conduct to you.
And now, farewell for the present, dear Galotti.--Come, Marinelli. It grows
late.
--How! May I not even see my daughter, then? May I not even
see her here? I submit to everything--I approve of everything. A chancellor's
house is, of course, a sanctuary of virtue. Take my daughter thither, I beseech
your Highness--nowhere but thither. Yet I would willingly have some previous
conversation with her. She is still ignorant of the Count's death, and will be
unable to understand why she is separated from her parents. That I may apprise
her gently of the one, and console her for this parting----I must see her,
Prince, I must see her.
Come, then, with us.
Surely the daughter can come to her father. Let us have a
short conversation here, without witnesses. Send her hither, I beg your
Highness.
That, too, shall be done. Oh, Galotti, if you would be my
friend, my guide, my father!
(Exeunt Prince and Marinelli).
Odoardo.
Why not? Most willingly. Ha! ha! ha! (Looks wildly around.)
Who laughed? By Heaven I believe it was myself. 'Tis well. I will be merry. The
game is near an end. Thus must it be, or thus. But--(pauses)--how if she
were in league with him? How if this were the usual deception? How if she were
not worthy of what I am about to do for her? (Pauses again.) And what am
I about to do for her? Have I a heart to name it even to myself? A thought comes
to me--a thought which can be but a thought. Horrible!--I will go. I will not
wait until she comes. (Raises his eyes towards Heaven.) If she be
innocent, let Him who plunged her into this abyss, extricate her from it. He
needs not my hand. I will away. (As he is going he espies Emilia.) Ha!
'Tis too late. My hand is required--He requires it.
Emilia, Odoardo.
Enter Emilia.
How! Ton here, my father? And you alone--without the
Count--without my mother? So uneasy, too, my father?
And you so much at ease, my daughter?
Why should I not be so, my father? Either all is lost, or
nothing. To be able to be at ease, and to be obliged to be at ease, do they not
come to the same thing!
But what do you suppose to be the case?
That all is lost--therefore that we must be at ease, my
father.
And you are at ease, because necessity requires it? Who are
you? A girl; my daughter? Then should the man and the father be ashamed of you.
But let me hear. What mean you when you say that all is lost?--that Count
Appiani is dead?
And why is he dead? Why? Ha! It is, then, true, my father--the
horrible tale is true which I read in my mother's tearful and wild looks. Where
is my mother? Where has she gone?
She is gone before us--if we could but follow her.
Oh, the sooner the better. For if the Count be dead--if he was
doomed to die on that account--Ha! Why do we stay here? Let us fly, my father.
Fly! Where is the necessity? You are in the hands of your
ravisher, and will there remain.
I remain in his hands?
And alone--without your mother--without me.
I remain alone in his hands? Never, my father--or you are not
my father. I remain alone in his hands? 'Tis well. Leave me, leave me. I will
see who can detain me--who can compel me. What human being can compel another?
I thought, my child, you were tranquil.
I am so. But what do you call tranquillity?--To lay my hands
in my lap, and patiently bear what cannot be borne, and suffer what should be
suffered.
Ha! If such be thy thoughts, come to my arms, my daughter. I
have ever said, that Nature, when forming woman, wished to form her
master-piece. She erred in that the clay she chose was too plastic. In every
other respect man is inferior to woman. Ha! If this be thy composure, I
recognize my daughter again. Come to my arms. Now, mark me. Under the pretence
of legal examination, the Prince--tears thee (the hellish fool's play!) tears
thee from our arms, and places thee under the protection of Grimaldi.
Tears me from your arms? Takes me--would tear me--take
me--would--would----As if we ourselves had no will, father.
So incensed was I, that I was on the point of drawing forth
this dagger (produces it), and plunging it into the hearts of both the
villains.
Heaven forbid it! my father. This life is all the wicked can
enjoy. Give me, give me the dagger.
Child, it is no bodkin.
If it were, it would serve as a dagger. 'Twere the same.
What! Is it come to that? Not yet, not yet. Reflect. You have
but one life to lose, Emilia.
And but one innocence.
Which is proof against all force.
But not against all seduction. Force! Force! What is that? Who
may not defy force? What you call force is nothing. Seduction is the only real
force. I have blood, my father, as youthful and as warm as that of others. I
have senses too. I cannot pledge myself: I guarantee nothing. I know the house
of Grimaldi. It is a house of revelry--a single hour spent in that society,
under the protection of my mother, created such a tumult in my soul, that all
the rigid exercises of religion could scarcely quell it in whole weeks.
Religion! And what religion? To avoid no worse snares thousands have leapt into
the waves, and now are saints. Give me the dagger, then, my father, give it to
me.
And didst thou but know who armed me with this dagger----
That matters not. An unknown friend is not the less a friend.
Give me the dagger, father, I beseech you.
And if I were to give it you?--what then? There! (He
presents it)
And there! (She seizes it with ardour, and is about to stab
herself when Odoardo wrests it from her.)
See how rash----No; it is not for thy hand.
Tis true; then with this bodkin will I! (she searches for
one in her hair, and feels the rose in her head). Art thou still there?
Down, down! thou shouldst not deck the head of one, such as my father wishes me
to be!
Oh! my daughter!
Oh, my father! if I understand you. But no, you will not do
it, or why so long delayed. (In a bitter tone, while she plucks the leaves of
the rose.) In former days there was a father, who, to save his daughter from
disgrace plunged the first deadly weapon which he saw, into his daughter's
heart--and thereby gave her life, a second time. But those were deeds of ancient
times. Such fathers exist not now.
They do, they do, my daughter (stabs her). God of
heaven! What have I done? (supports her in his arms as she sinks.)
Broken a rose before the storm had robbed it of its bloom. Oh,
let me kiss this kind parental hand.
The Prince, Marinelli, Odoardo, Emilia.
What means this? Is Emilia not well?
Very well, very well.
What do I see? Oh, horror!
I am lost!
Cruel father, what hast thou done.
Broken a rose before the storm had robbed it of its bloom.
Said you not so, my daughter?
Not you, my father. I, I myself----
Not thou my daughter--not thou! Quit not this world with
falsehood on thy lips. Not thou, my daughter--thy father, thy unfortunate
father.
Ah!--My father----(Dies in his arms. He lays her gently on
the floor.)
Ascend on high! There, Prince! Does she still charm you? Does
she still rouse your appetites?--here, weltering in her blood--which cries for
vengeance against you. (After a pause.) Doubtless you wait to see the end
of this. You expect, perhaps, that I shall turn the steel against myself, and
finish the deed like some wretched tragedy. You are mistaken. There! (Throws
the dagger at his feet.) There lies the blood-stained witness of my crime. I
go to deliver myself into the hands of justice. I go to meet you as my judge:
then I shall meet you in another world, before the Judge of all. (Exit.)
Here! Raise her. How! Dost thou hesitate? Wretch! Villain! (Tears
the dagger from his grasp.) No. Thy blood shall not be mixed with such as
this. Go: hide thyself for ever. Begone, I say. Oh God! Oh God! Is it not enough
for the misery of many that monarchs are men? Must devils in disguise become
their friends?
The well-known Goetze Controversy is to be thanked for the
appearance of this, the longest, and in many respects the most important of
Lessing's dramatic works. It was written in 1778-9, in reply to some of the
theological censures of the Hamburg pastor. In 1783, it was first acted at
Berlin, but it met with little success there or elsewhere, until in 1801, when
it was introduced on the Weimar stage, by Schiller and Goethe.
Sultan Saladin.
Sittah, his Sister.
Nathan, a rich Jew of Jerusalem.
Recha, his adopted Daughter.
Daja, a Christian woman living in the Jew's house as
Recha's companion.
A young Knight Templar.
A Dervise.
The Patriarch of Jerusalem.
A Friar.
An Emir and several of Saladin's Mamelukes.
The scene is in Jerusalem.
"Introite, nam et heic Dii sunt."
Apud Gellium.
Nathan, returning from a journey; 
Daja, meeting him.
'Tis he! 'Tis Nathan! endless thanks to Heaven
That you at last are happily returned.
Yes, Daja! thanks to Heaven! But why at last?
Was it my purpose--was it in my power
To come back sooner? Babylon from here,
As I was forced to take my devious way,
Is a long journey of two hundred leagues;
And gathering in one's debts is not--at best,
A task that expedites a traveller's steps.
O Nathan! what a dire calamity
Had, in your absence, nigh befallen us!
Your house----
Took fire. I have already heard.
God grant I may have learnt the whole that chanced!
Chance saved it, or it had been burnt to ashes.
Then, Daja! we had built another house,
And a far better----
True--ay, true! but Recha
Was on the point of perishing amid
The flames----
Of perishing? Who saidst thou? Recha?
I had not heard of that. I should not then
Have needed any house. What! on the point
Of perishing? Nay, nay; perchance she's dead--
Is burnt alive. Speak, speak the dreadful truth.
Kill me, but do not agonize me thus.
Tell me at once she's dead.
And if she were
Could you expect to hear it from these lips?
Why then alarm me? Recha! O my Recha!
Your Recha? Yours?
And can it ever be
That I shall cease to call this child my own?
Is all you have yours by an equal title?
Nought by a better. What I else enjoy
Are Fortune's gifts, or Nature's. This alone--
This treasure do I owe to virtue.
Nathan!
How dearly must I pay for all your goodness!
If goodness practised for an end like yours
Deserves the name.
An end like mine! What mean you?
My conscience----
Daja, let me tell you first----
I say my conscience----
Oh, the gorgeous robe
That I have bought for you in Babylon!
Costly it is and rare. For Recha's self
I have not bought a richer.
What of that?
My conscience can be silent now no more.
I long to witness your delight, to see
The bracelets, earrings, and the golden chain
Which I selected at Damascus for you.
'Tis always so, you surfeit me with gifts.
Accept them freely, as they are bestowed,
And silence!
Silence! Yes. But who can doubt
That you are generosity itself?
And yet----
I'm but a Jew! Daja, confess
That I have guessed your thought.
You know my thoughts
Far better.
Well, be silent!
I am dumb.
And henceforth all the evil that may spring
From this, which I cannot avert, nor change,
Fall on your head.
Let it all fall on me!
But where is Recha? What detains her thus?
Are you deceiving me? Can she have heard
That I am here?

 DAJA.
Yourself must answer that.
Terror still palpitates through every nerve,
And fancy mingles fire with all her thoughts.
In sleep her soul's awake; but when awake,
Is wrapt in slumber. Less than mortal now,
And now far more than angel, she appears.
Poor child! how frail a thing is human nature!
She lay this morning with her eyelids closed--
One would have thought her dead--when suddenly
She started from her couch, and cried, "Hark, hark!
Here come my father's camels, and I hear
His own sweet voice again!" With that, her eyes
Once more she opened, and her arms' support
Withdrawn, her head droop'd softly on her pillow.
Quickly I hastened forth, and now behold,
I find you here. But marvel not at this.
Has not her every thought been long engrossed
With dreams of you and him?
Of him! What him?
Of him who from the flames preserved her life.
And who was he? Where is he? Name the man
Who saved my Recha?
A young Templar he!
Brought hither captive lately, and restored
To freedom by the Sultan.
How? A Templar?
A captive, too, and pardoned by the Sultan?
Could not my Recha's life have been preserved
By some less wondrous miracle? O God!
But for this stranger's help, who risked afresh
The life so unexpectedly restored,
Recha had surely perished.
Where is he?
Where is this noble youth? Where is he, Daja?
Oh, lead me to his feet! But you already
Have surely lavished on him all the wealth
That I had left behind; have given him all--
And promised more, much more.
How could we, Nathan?
Why not?
He came we know not whence, he went
We know not whither. To the house a stranger,
And guided by his ear alone, he rushed
With fearless daring through the smoke and flame,
His mantle spread before him, till he reached
The spot whence issued piercing screams for help.
We thought him lost; when, bursting through the fire,
He stood before us, bearing in his arms
Her almost lifeless form. Unmoved and cold,
Deaf to our cries of thanks, he left his prize,
Passed through the wondering crowd, and disappeared.
But not for ever, Daja, I would hope.
For some days after, 'neath yon spreading palms,
Which wave above our blest Redeemer's grave,
We saw him pacing thoughtful to and fro.
With transport I approached to speak my thanks.
I pleaded, begged, entreated that for once,
Once only, he would see the grateful maid,
Who longed to shed at her preserver's feet
Her tears of gratitude.
Well?
All in vain!
Deaf to my warmest prayers, he poured on me
Such bitter taunts----
That you withdrew dismayed.
Far otherwise. I sought to meet him daily,
And daily heard his harsh insulting words.
Much have I borne, and would have borne still more;
But lately he has ceased his lonely walk
Beneath the spreading palms that shade the grave
Of Him who rose from death; and no man knows
Where he may now be found. You seem surprised.
I was considering how such a scene
Must work upon a mind like Recha's. Scorned
By one whom she can never cease to prize;
Repelled by one who still attracts her to him.
Her head and heart at strife! And long, full long
The contest may endure, without the power
To say if anger or regret shall triumph.
Should neither prove the victor, Fancy then
May mingle in the fray, and turn her brain.
Then Passion will assume fair Reason's garb,
And Reason act like Passion. Fatal change!
Such, doubtless, if I know my Recha well,
Must be her fate; her mind is now unhinged.
But her illusions are so sweet and holy.
But yet she raves!
The thought she clings to most,
Is that the Templar was no earthly form,
But her blest guardian angel, such as she
From childhood fancied hovering o'er her path;
Who from his veiling cloud, amid the fire
Rushed to her aid in her preserver's form.
You smile incredulous. Who knows the truth?
Permit her to indulge the fond deceit,
Which Christian, Jew, and Mussulman alike
Agree to own. The illusion is so sweet!
I love it too. But go, good Daja! go,
See what she does--if I can speak with her.
This guardian angel, wilful and untamed,
I'll then seek out--and if he still is pleased
To sojourn here a while with us--or still
Is pleased to play the knight so boorishly,
I'll doubtless find him out and bring him here.
You are too daring, Nathan.
Trust me, Daja!
If fond delusion yield to sweeter truth--
For human beings ever to their kind
Are dearer after all than angels are--
You will not censure me, when you perceive
Our lov'd enthusiast's mind again restored.
You are so good, and so discerning, Nathan!
But see, behold! Yes, here she comes herself.
Recha, Nathan, 
and Daja.
And is it you! your very self, my father?
I thought you had but sent your voice before you,
Where are you lingering still? What mountains, streams,
Or deserts now divide us? Here we are
Once more together, face to face, and yet
You do not hasten to embrace your Recha!
Poor Recha! she was almost burnt alive!
Yet she escaped----But do not, do not shudder.
It were a dreadful death to die by fire!
My child! my darling child!
Your journey lay
Across the Tigris, Jordan, and Euphrates,
And many other rivers. 'Till that fire
I trembled for your safety, but since then
Methinks it were a blessed, happy thing
To die by water. But you are not drowned,
Nor am I burnt alive. We will rejoice,
And thank our God, who bore you on the wings
Of unseen angels o'er the treacherous streams,
And bade my angel bear me visibly
On his white pinion through the raging flames.
On his white pinion! Ha! I see; she means
The broad white fluttering mantle of the Templar.
Yes, visibly he bore me through the flames,
O'ershadowed by his wings. Thus, face to face,
I have beheld an angel--my own angel.
Recha were worthy of so blest a sight.
And would not see in him a fairer form
Than he would see in her.
Whom would you flatter--
The angel, dearest father, or yourself?
And yet methinks, dear Recha, if a man--
Just such a man as Nature daily fashions--
Had rendered you this service, he had been
A very angel to you.
But he was
No angel of that stamp, but true and real.
And have I not full often heard you say
'Tis possible that angels may exist?
And how God still works miracles for those
Who love Him? And I love Him dearly, father.
And He loves you; and 'tis for such as you
That He from all eternity has wrought
Such ceaseless wonders daily.
How I love
To hear you thus discourse!
Well, though it sound
A thing but natural and common-place
That you should by a Templar have been saved,
Is it the less a miracle for that?
The greatest of all miracles seems this:
That real wonders, genuine miracles,
Can seem and grow so commonplace to us.
Without this universal miracle,
Those others would scarce strike a thinking man,
Awaking wonder but in children's minds,
Who love to stare at strange, unusual things,
And hunt for novelty.
Why will you thus
With airy subtleties perplex her mind,
Already overheated?
Silence, Daja!
And was it then no miracle that Recha
Should be indebted for her life to one
Whom no small miracle preserved himself?
Who ever heard before, that Saladin
Pardoned a Templar? that a Templar asked it--
Hoped it--or for his ransom offered more
Than his own sword--belt, or at most his dagger?
That argues for me, father! All this proves
That my preserver was no Templar knight,
But only seemed so. If no captive Templar
Has e'er come hither but to meet his death,
And through Jerus'lem cannot wander free,
How could I find one, in the night, to save me?
Ingenious, truly! Daja, you must speak.
Doubtless, you know still more about this knight;
For 'twas from you I learnt he was a prisoner.
'Tis but report indeed, but it is said
That Saladin gave freedom to the knight,
Moved by the likeness which his features bore
To a lost brother whom he dearly loved,
Though since his disappearance twenty years
Have now elapsed. He fell I know not where,
And e'en his very name's a mystery.
But the whole tale sounds so incredible,
It may be mere invention, pure romance.
And why incredible? Would you reject
This story, Daja, as so oft is done,
To fix on something more incredible,
And credit that? Why should not Saladin,
To whom his race are all so dear, have loved
In early youth a brother now no more?
Since when have features ceased to be alike?
Is an impression lost because 'tis old?
Will the same cause not work a like effect?
What, then, is so incredible? My Daja,
This can to you be no great miracle;
Or does a wonder only claim belief
When it proceeds from you?
You mock me, Nathan!
Nay, 'tis the very tone you use yourself.
And yet, dear Recha, your escape from death
Remains no less a miracle
Of Him who turns the proud resolves of kings
To mockery, or guides them to their end
By the most slender threads.
O father, father!
My error is not wilful, if I err.
No, I have ever found you glad to learn.
See, then, a forehead vaulted thus or thus,
A nose of such a shape, and brows that shade
The eye with straighter or with sharper curve,
A spot, a mole, a wrinkle, or a line--
A nothing--in an European's face,
And you are saved in Asia from the flames!
Is that no wonder, wonder-seeking folk?
What need to summon angels to your aid?
But, Nathan, where's the harm,--if I may speak--
In thinking one was rescued by an angel
Rather than by a man? Are we not brought
Thus nearer to the first mysterious cause
Of our life's preservation?
Pride, rank pride!
The iron pot would with a silver tongs
Be lifted from the furnace, to believe
Itself a silver vase! Well! where's the harm?
And "where's the good?" I well may ask in turn.
Your phrase, "It brings you nearer to the first
Mysterious cause!" is nonsense--if 'tis not
Rank blasphemy:--it works a certain harm.
Attend to me. To him who saved your life,
Whether he be an angel or a man,
You both--and you especially--should pay
Substantial services in just return.
Is not this true? Now, what great services
Have you the power to render to an angel!
To sing his praise--to pour forth sighs and prayers--
Dissolve in transports of devotion o'er him--
Fast on his vigil, and distribute alms?
Mere nothings! for 'tis clear your neighbour gains
Far more than he by all this piety.
Not by your abstinence will he grow fat,
Nor by your alms will he be rendered rich;
Nor by your transports is his glory raised,
Nor by your faith in him his power increased.
Say, is not all this true? But to a man----
No doubt a man had furnished us with more
Occasions to be useful to himself;
God knows how willingly we had seized them!
But he who saved her life demanded nought;
He needed nothing--in himself complete
And self--sufficient--as the angels are;
And when at last he vanished----
How was that?
Did he then vanish? 'Neath yon spreading palms
Has he not since been seen? Or have you sought
Elsewhere to find him?
No, in truth we've not.
Not sought him, Daja? Cold enthusiasts!
See now the harm: suppose your angel stretched
Upon a bed of sickness!
Sickness, what!
A chill creeps over me. I shudder, Daja!
My forehead, which till now was warm, becomes
As cold as very ice; come, feel it, Daja.
He is a Frank, unused to this hot clime,
Young and unpractised in his order's rules,
In fastings and in watchings quite untrained.
Sick! sick!
Your father means 'twere possible.
Friendless and penniless, he may be lying
Without the means to purchase aid.
Alas!
Without advice, or hope, or sympathy,
May lie a prey to agony and death.
Where, where?
And yet for one he never knew--
Enough for him it was a human being--
He plunged amid the flames and----
Spare her, Nathan!
He sought no more to know the being whom
He rescued thus--he shunned her very thanks----
Oh, spare her!
Did not wish to see her more,
Unless to save her for the second time--
Enough for him that she was human!
Hold!
He may have nothing to console him dying,
Save the remembrance of his deed.
You kill her!
And you kill him, or might have done at least.
'Tis med'cine that I give, not poison, Recha!
But be of better cheer: he lives--perhaps
He is not ill.
Indeed? not dead--not ill?
Assuredly not dead--for God rewards
Good deeds done here below--rewards them hero.
Then go, but ne'er forget how easier far
Devout enthusiasm is, than good deeds.
How soon our indolence contents itself
With pious raptures, ignorant, perhaps,
Of their ulterior end, that we may be
Exempted from the toil of doing good.
O father! leave your child no more alone.--
But may he not have only gone a journey?
Perhaps. But who is yonder Mussulman,
Numbering with curious eye my laden camels?
Say, do you know him?
Surely your own Dervise.
Who?
Your Dervise--your old chess companion.
Al-Hafi do you mean? What!--that Al-Hafi?
No other: now the Sultan's treasurer.
What, old Al-Hafi? Do you dream again?
And yet 'tis he himself--he's coming hither.
Quick, in with you! What am I now to hear?
Nathan and the 
Dervise.
Ay, lift your eyes and wonder.
Is it you?
A Dervise so magnificent!
Why not?
Can you make nothing of a Dervise, Nathan?
Ay, surely, but I've still been wont to think
A Dervise--I would say a thorough Dervise--
Will ne'er let anything be made of him.
Well, by the Prophet! though it may be true
That I'm no thorough Dervise, yet one must----
Must, Hafi! You a Dervise! No man must----
And least of all a Dervise.
Nay, he must,
When he is much implored and deems it right.
Well spoken, Hafi! Let us now embrace.
You're still, I trust, my friend.
Why not ask first
What has been made of me?
I take my chance,
In spite of all that has been made of you.
May I not be a servant of the state
Whose friendship is no longer good for you?
If you but still possess your Dervise heart
I'll run the risk of that. The stately robe
Is but your cloak.
And yet it claims some honour.
But, tell me truly, at a court of yours
What had been Hafi's rank?
A Dervise only--
Or, if aught else--perhaps my cook.
Why yes!
That I might thus unlearn my native trade,
Your cook! why not your butler? But the Sultan--
He knows me better--I'm his treasurer.
What, you?--his treasurer?
Mistake me not,
I only bear his lesser purse; his father
Still manages the greater, and I am
The treasurer of his house.
His house is large!
Far larger than you think--all needy men
Are of his house.
Yet Saladin is such
A foe to beggars!
That he'd root them out,
Though he turned beggar in the enterprise.
Bravo! I meant as much.
He's one already.
His treasury at sunset every day
Is worse than empty; and although the tide
Flowed high at morn, 'tis ebb before the noon.
Because it flows through channels such as we
Can neither stop nor fill.
You hit the truth.
I know it well.
Ah! 'tis an evil case
When kings are vultures amid carcases,
But ten times worse when they're the carcases
Amid the vultures.
Dervise, 'tis not so.
Is that your thought? But, come, what will you give
If I resign my office in your favour?
What are your profits?
Mine? not much; but you
Would soon grow rich; for when, as oft occurs,
The Sultan's treasury is at an ebb,
You might unlock your sluices, pour in gold,
And take in form of interest what you please.
And interest on the interest of the interest.
Of course.
Until my capital becomes
All interest.
Well! is not the offer tempting?
Farewell for ever to our friendship then,
For I had counted on you.
How so, Hafi?
I thought you would have helped me to discharge
My task with credit; that I should have found
Your treasury ready. Ha! you shake your head.
Let us explain. We must distinguish here.
To you, Dervise Al-Hafi, all I have
Is welcome; but to you, the Defterdar
Of Saladin--to that Al-Hafi, who----
I guessed as much. You ever are as good
As you are wise and prudent. Only wait.
The two Al-Hafis you distinguish thus
Will soon be parted. See, this robe of honour,
Which Saladin bestowed, before 'tis worn
To rags, and suited to a Dervise back,
Will in Jerusalem hang from a nail;
Whilst I, upon the Ganges' scorching strand,
Barefoot amid my teachers will be found.
That's like yourself!
Or playing chess with them.
Your greatest bliss!
What do you think seduced me?
Hopes of escaping future penury,
The pride of acting the rich man to beggars,
Would this have metamorphosed all at once
The richest beggar to a poor rich man?
No.
    But I yielded to a sillier whim.
For the first time I felt myself allured
By Saladin's kind-hearted, flattering words.
And what were they?
He said a beggar's wants
Are known but to the poor alone; that they
Alone can tell how want should be relieved.
"Thy predecessor was too cold," he said,
"Too harsh, and when he gave, 'twas with a frown.
He searched each case too strictly, not content
To find out want, he would explore the cause,
And thus he measured out his niggard alms.
Not so wilt thou bestow, and Saladin
Will not appear so harshly kind in thee.
Thou art not like that choked-up conduit-pipe,
Whence in unequal streams the water flows,
Which it receives in pure and copious stores.
Al-Hafi thinks, Al-Hafi feels like me."
The fowler whistled, and at last the quail
Ran to his net. Cheated, and by a cheat?
Hush, Dervise, hush!
What! is it not a cheat
To grind mankind by hundred thousands thus!
Oppress them, plunder, butcher, and torment,
And singly play the philanthropic part?
Not cheating, to pretend to imitate
That heavenly bounty, which in even course
Descends alike on desert and on plain,
On good and bad, in sunshine and in shower,
And not possess the never empty hand
Of the Most High! Not cheating----
Dervise, cease!
Nay, let me speak of cheating of my own,
How now? Were it not cheating to seek out
The bright side of impostures such as these,
That under colour of this brighter side
I might take part in them? What say you now?
Fly to your desert quickly. Amongst men
I fear you'll soon unlearn to be a man.
I fear so too. Farewell!
What, so abrupt?
Stay, stay, Al-Hafi! Has the desert wings?
It will not fly away. Here, stay, Al-Hafi!
He's gone; he's gone. I would that I had asked
About that Templar; he must know the man.
Daja (rushing in), 
Nathan.
O Nathan, Nathan!
Well! what now?
He's there.
He shows himself once more.
Who, Daja--who?
He--he!
Where cannot he be found? But he
You mean, is, I suppose, the only He.
That should not be, were he an angel's self.
Beneath the palms he wanders up and down,
And gathers dates.
And eats them, I suppose,
Just as a Templar would.
You mock me, sir!
Her eager eye espied him long ago,
When scarcely seen amid the distant trees.
She watches him intently, and implores
That you will go to him without delay.
Then go, and from the window she will mark
Which way his paces tend. Go, go; make haste!
What! thus, as I alighted from my camel?
Would that be seemly? But do you accost him;
Tell him of my return. I do not doubt
You'll find the honest man forbore our house
Because the host was absent. He'll accept
A father's invitation. Say I ask him,
I heartily request him.
All in vain!
In short, he will not visit any Jew.
Then use your best endeavours to detain him,
Or, with unerring eye, observe his steps,
And mark him well. Go, I shall not be long.

(Nathan enters the house. 
Daja retires.)
A Place of Palms. The Templar, 
walking to and fro; a Friar,
following him at some distance, as if desirous of addressing him.
It cannot be for pastime that this man
Follows me thus. See how he eyes my hands!
Good brother--or, perhaps I should say, father!
No, brother; a lay brother, at your service.
Well, brother, then, if I had anything--
But truly I have nothing----
Thanks the same!
God will reward your purpose thousandfold.
The will and not the deed perfects the giver.
Nor was I sent to follow you for alms.
Sent?
From the convent.
Where I even now
Was hoping to partake a pilgrim's fare.
'Tis meal--time now, the tables all are full;
But if it please you, we will turn together.
No matter, though I have not tasted meat
For many days; these dates, you see, are ripe.
Be sparing of that fruit, sir, for too much
Is hurtful, sours the blood, and makes one sad.
And what if sadness suits me? Though, methinks,
'Twas not to give this warning that you came.
Oh, no! my mission was to question you--
To feel your pulse a little.
And you tell
This tale yourself?
Why not?
An artful soul! (aside).
And has the convent many more like you?
I know not. Mere obedience is my duty.
And you obey without much questioning.
Could it be rightly termed obedience else?
The simple mind is ever in the right.--(aside).
But will you not inform me who it is
That wishes to know more of me? Not you,
I dare be sworn.
Would such a wish become
Or profit me?
Whom would it then become
Or profit to be thus inquisitive?
Perhaps the Patriarch--'twas he that sent.
The Patriarch? and does he know my badge
So ill?--The red cross on the snow-white robe.
Why? I know that.
Well, brother, hear me out.
I am a Templar--and a prisoner now.
Made captive with some others at Tebnin,
Whose fortress we had almost ta'en by storm
Just as the truce expired. Our hopes had been
To threaten Sidon next. Of twenty knights
Made prisoners there together, I alone
Was pardoned by command of Saladin.
The Patriarch now knows what he requires,
And more than he requires.
And yet no more
Than he had learned already. He would ask
Why you, of all the captives doomed to die,
Alone were spared?
Can I myself tell that?
Already with bare neck I had knelt down
Upon my mantle, to await the stroke,
When Saladin with steadfast eye surveys me.
Nearer he draws--he makes a sign--they raise me--
I am unbound--I would express my thanks--
I mark the tear-drop glisten in his eye--
We both stand mute--he turns and leaves the spot--
I stay. And now, how all this hangs together,
The Patriarch must explain.
The Patriarch thinks
That Heaven preserved you for some mighty deed.
Some mighty deed? To rescue from the flames
A Jewish maid! To lead to Sinai's mount
Bands of inquiring pilgrims--and the like!
The time may come for more important tasks:
Perhaps the Patriarch has already planned
Some mighty business for you.
Think you so?
Has he already given you a hint?
Yes--but my task is first to sift a little,
To see if you are one to undertake----
Well--sift away? (We'll see how this man sifts).
The better course will be to name at once
What is the Patriarch's desire.
It is----?
To make you bearer of a letter.
Me?
I am no carrier. Is that the office
More meritorious than to save from death
A Jewish maid?
So, truly, it would seem.
The Patriarch says that this little note
Involves the general weal of Christendom,
And that to bear it to its destined hand,
Safely, will merit a peculiar crown
From Heaven--and of that crown, the Patriarch
Says none can worthier be than you.
Than I!
You have your liberty--can look around;
You understand how cities may be stormed,
And how defended, says the Patriarch;
You know the strength and weakness of the towers,
And of the inner rampart lately reared
By Saladin, and you could point out all
To the Lord's champions fully.
May I know
Exactly the contents of this same letter?
Of that I am not quite informed myself.
'Tis to King Philip; and our Patriarch--
I often wonder how that holy man,
Whose every thought would seem absorbed by Heaven,
Can stoop to earthly things, and how his mind
Can be so deeply skilled in human lore----
Well, then, your Patriarch----
Exactly knows
From secret sources, how, and with what force,
And in what quarter, should the war break out,
The foe and Saladin will take the field.
Knows he so much?
Ay, truly! and he longs
To send the urgent tidings to King Philip,
That he may better calculate if now
The danger be so great, as to demand
At every hazard that he should renew
The truce so boldly broken by the Templars.
The noble Patriarch! He seeks in me
No common herald, but the meanest spy.
Therefore, good brother, tell your Patriarch,
That I am not--as far as you can sift--
The man to suit his ends. I hold myself
A captive still. I know a Templar's duty:
Ready to die, not live to play the spy.
I thought as much. Nor can I censure you
For your resolve. The best has still to come.
Our Patriarch has learnt the very fort,
Its name, its strength, its site on Lebanon,
Wherein those countless treasures are concealed,
Wherewith the Sultan's prudent father pays
His troops, and all the heavy costs of war.
He knows that Saladin, from time to time,
Visits this fortress, by some secret way,
With but a few attendants.
Well! what then?
'Twould be an easy task, methinks, to seize
The Sultan thus defenceless--and to end him.
You shudder, knight! Two monks who fear the Lord,
Are ready now to undertake the task,
And wait a leader.
And the Patriarch
Has pitched on me to do this noble deed?
He thinks King Philip might from Ptolemais
Give aid in the design.
Has pitched on me!
On me!--Say, brother, have you never heard
The boundless debt I owe to Saladin?
Truly I have.
And yet----
The Patriarch
Says that is very well; but yet your order,
And vows to God----
Change nothing; they command
No villainy.
No. But the Patriarch
Says what seems villainy to human eyes,
May not appear so in the sight of God.
Brother, I owe my life to Saladin,
And his shall my hand take?
Oh, no!--But yet
The Patriarch maintains that Saladin,
Who is the common foe of Christendom,
Can never have a claim to be your friend.
My friend? forsooth! because I will not be
A thankless wretch to him!
'Tis so!--But yet
The Patriarch thinks gratitude is not
Before the eyes of God or man, a debt,
Unless, for our own sakes, some benefit
Has been conferred; and, says the Patriarch,
It is affirmed the Sultan spared your life
Merely because your voice, your look, your air,
Awoke a recollection of his brother----
He knows all this, and yet?----Ah, were it true!
And, Saladin, could Nature form in me
A single feature in thy brother's likeness,
With nothing in my soul to answer it?
Or what does correspond, shall I belie
To please a Patriarch? No, surely Nature
Could never lie so basely! Nor, kind God,
Couldst thou so contradict Thyself! Go, brother,
And do not rouse my anger.
I withdraw
More gladly than I came. And, pardon me:
A monk's first duty, sir, is to obey.
(She has been watching him from afar and now approaches.)
Methinks the monk left him in no good mood,
But, spite of that, I must my errand risk.
This hits exactly. As the proverb goes,
Women and monks are ever Satan's tools,
And I to-day am subject to them both.
Whom do I see? Thank God, our noble knight.
Where have you been so long? Not ill, I hope?
No.
In good health?
Yes.
We have all been grieved
Lest something should have ailed you. Have you been
Upon a journey?
Fairly guessed.
Since when
Have you returned to us?
Since yesterday.
Our Recha's father, too, is just returned,
And now may Recha hope at last.
For what?
For what she has so often asked in vain.
Her father pressingly invites you too.
He lately has arrived from Babylon
With twenty camels, bearing precious stones,
And stuffs and fragrant spices, which he sought
In India, Persia, Syria, and China.
I am no merchant.
He is much esteemed
By all his nation--honoured as a prince--
And yet to hear how he is named by all
Nathan the Wise, and not the Rich, seems strange.
It often makes me wonder.
But to them
It may be, wise and rich--both mean the same.
It seems to me he should be called the Good,
So rich a store of goodness dwells in him.
Since he has learned the weighty debt he owes
For service done to Recha there is nought
He would withhold from you.
Well?
Try him, sir!
What then? A moment passes soon away.
I had not dwelt with him so many years
Were he less kind. I know a Christian's worth,
And it was never o'er my cradle sung
That I to Palestine should wend my way,
Following a husband's steps, to educate
A Jewish maid. My husband was a page,
A noble page, in Emperor Frederick's court----
By birth a Swiss, who earned the sorry fame
Of drowning in one river with his lord.
Woman! how often have you told this tale?
When will you cease to persecute me thus?
To persecute you!
Ay, to persecute!
Now mark me. I will never see you more,
Hear you, nor be reminded of a deed
Performed at random. When I think of it,
I wonder somewhat, though I ne'er repent.
But hear me still. Should such a fatal chance
Again occur, you have yourself to blame
If I proceed more calmly, question first.
And let what's burning, burn.
Great God forbid!
And now I have a favour to implore.
Know me henceforth no more. Grant me this grace,
And save me from her father; for with me
A Jew's a Jew; a Swabian blunt am I.
The image of the maid is now erased
Out of my soul--if it was ever there.
But yours remains with her.
Well, and what then?
Who knows? Men are not always what they seem.
They're seldom better.    (Going.)
Stay a little while.
What need of haste?
Woman! forbear to make
These palm--trees odious: I have loved their shade.
Then go, thou German bear! Yet I must follow him.
(She follow him at a distance.)
Saladin and Sittah
(playing at chess).
Where are your thoughts? How ill you play, dear brother!
Not well in truth--and yet I thought----
Oh, yes!
You're playing well for me; take back that move.
Why?
SITTAH.
Don't you see you leave your knight exposed?
Ay, true!--then so.
And now I take your pawn.
That's true again, dear Sittah! Well, then, check!
That will not help you--I protect my king,
And all is safe again.
Well, out of this
Dilemma 'tis not easy to escape.
I cannot save the knight.
I pass him by;
I will not take him.
Well, I owe you nothing;
The place you gain is better than the piece.
SITTAH.
Perhaps.
But reckon not without your host;
You did not see that move.
Not I, indeed;
I did not think you weary of your queen.
My queen!
SITTAH.
Well, well! I see that I to-day
Shall win my thousand dinars and no more.
Why so?
Why so? Because designedly
You lose the game! You vex me, Saladin!
I find no pleasure in a game like this.
And even when I lose, I come off well;
For, to console me for the games you win,
You force me to accept a double stake.
In that case, then, it may be by design
That you have sometimes lost. Is that the truth?
At least your generosity's to blame
That I improve so little in my play.
But we forget the game; come, finish it.
Well, 'tis my move; now, check to king and queen!
Indeed! I did not see the double check.
I lose my queen.
Let's see! Can it be helped?
No, take the queen--I have no luck with her.
Only with her?
Remove her from the board,
I shall not miss her. Now I am right again.
I know from lessons which yourself have taught
How courteously we should behave to queens.
(Offering to restore the piece.)
Take her or not, I shall not move her more.
Why need I take her? Check, and check!
Go on.
Check, check, and check again!
'Tis checkmate now.
Hold!--no, not yet. You may advance the knight,
And ward the danger. But 'twill be the same.
You are the winner, and Al-Hafi pays.
Let him be called, Sittah! You were not wrong.
My thoughts were wandering--were not in the game,
But who gives us so oft these shapeless bits
Of wood? which speak of naught--suggest no thought.
Was it with Iman that I've played--Well, well,
Ill-luck is ever wont to seek excuse.
Not the unmeaning squares or shapeless men
Have made me heedless; your dexterity,
Your calm, sharp eye, dear Sittah!
What of that?
Is that to blunt the sting of your defeat?
Enough--your thoughts were wandering more than mine.
Than yours? What subject could engage your thoughts?
Far different cares than those which trouble you.
But, Saladin, say, when shall we again
Resume this pleasant pastime?
Dearest Sittah,
This interruption will but whet our zeal.
Your thoughts are on the war: well, let it come--
'Twas not my arm that first unsheathed the sword;
I would have willingly prolonged the truce,
And willingly have knit a tender bond,
For Sittah's sake, with Richard's noble brother.
How pleased you are, can you but praise your Richard.
If Richard's sister had but been bestowed
Upon our brother Melek, what a house
Had then been ours! the best, the happiest
The earth could boast. You know I am not slow
To praise myself: I'm worthy of my friends.
What men these unions would have given us!
Did I not smile at once at your fine dreams?
You do not, will not, know the Christian race.
It is their pride not to be men, but Christians.
The virtue which their founder felt and taught,
The charity He mingled with their creed,
Is valued, not because it is humane,
And good, and lovely, but for this alone,
That it was Christ who taught it, Christ who did it.
'Tis well for them He was so good a man,
Well that they take His goodness all on trust,
And in His virtues put their faith. His virtues!
'Tis not His virtues, but His name alone
They wish to thrust upon us--His mere name,
Which they desire should overspread the world,
Should swallow up the name of all good men,
And put the rest to shame. 'Tis for His name
Alone they care.
Else, Sittah, as you say,
They would not have required that you and Melek
Should be called Christians, ere they suffered you
To feel for Christians the pure flame of love.
As if from Christians, and from them alone,
That love can be expected, which the hand
Of our Creator gives to man and wife.
Christians believe such vain absurdities,
That this may be among them. And yet, Sittah,
The Templars, not the Christians, are in this
To blame. 'Tis they alone who thwart my plans;
'Tis they who still hold Acca, pledged to us
By treaty as the dower of Richard's sister.
And, to maintain their order's interests,
They use this cant--the nonsense of the monk.
Scarce would they wait until the truce expired
To fall upon us. But, go on, good sirs!
Would that all else may thrive as well as this!
Why, what else troubles you? What other care
Have you to struggle with?
That constant grief--
I've been to Lebanon, and seen our father.
He's full of care.
Alas!
He must give way.
Straitened on every side, no aid, no help,
Nothing comes in.
What ails him, Saladin?
The only thing that I am loth to name,
Which, when I have it, so superfluous seems,
And, when I have it not, so necessary.
Where is Al-Hafi? Have they gone for him?
Will no one go? Oh, fatal, cursed money!
Welcome, Al-Hafi! You are come at last.
The Dervise Al-Hafi, 
Saladin, and Sittah.
The gold from Egypt, I suppose, is come.
Say, is it much?
                  What! have you heard of it?
Not I. I thought I should receive it here.
Sittah has won a thousand dinars, pay them.
Pay without getting. That is worse than nothing!
And still to Sittah--once again for chess!
But let us see the board; how stands the game?
You grudge me my good fortune?
                      Grudge you? When--
You know too well----
                     Oh, hush! Al-Hafi, hush!
Don't grudge it to yourself.
                                      Al-Hafi, hush!
And were the white men yours?
                                      You gave the check?
'Tis well he does not hear.
                                 The move is his.
Then promise me that I shall have the money.
You shall receive it as you've always done.
How! are you mad?
                       The game's not over yet.
You have not lost it, Saladin.
                                   Oh, yes;
Pay down the money.
                           Pay! here stands the queen.
She's of no use; she's lost.
                            Do say that I
May send and fetch the gold.
                                Oh, yes! of course.
But though the queen be lost, you are not mate.
I say I am. I will be mate.
                               If so,
Small pains, small gains, say I. So got, so spent.
What is he muttering there?
                                You know him well.
He likes entreaties--loves to be implored.
Who knows if he be not a little jealous?
Well, not of thee--not of my sister, surely.
What do I hear? Al-Hafi, are you jealous?

 AL-HAFI.
Perhaps I am. I wish I had her head,
Or that I were as good as she.
                               My brother,
He always pays me fairly, and to-day
He'll do the same. Let him alone. Now go!
Al-Hafi! go! I'll have the money----

 AL-HAFI.
                                   No, not I.
I'll act this farce no more. He must know soon.
Who? what?
SITTAH.
Al-Hafi! say, is this your promise?
Is't thus you keep your word?
                                 Could I foresee
That it would come to this?
                              Well, tell me all.
Al-Hafi! I implore you, be discreet.
'Tis very strange; and what can Sittah have
So earnestly to sue for, from a stranger--
A Dervise--rather than from me, her brother?
Al-Hafi, I command you. Dervise, speak.
Let not a trifle touch my brother nearer
Than is becoming, for you know that I
Have often won as much from you at chess.
But as I stand in little need of gold,
I've left the money in Al-Hafi's chest,
Which is not over full; but never fear,
It is not my intention to bestow
My wealth on either of you.
Were this all!
Some more such trifles are perhaps unclaimed:
My own allowance, which you set apart
Has lain some months untouched.
Nor is this all.
Then tell the whole.
Whilst we've been waiting for
The gold from Egypt, she----
Nay, hear him not.
Not only has had nothing,----
                              Dearest sister I--
But also has been lending it to you?
Ay! at her sole expense maintained your state.
So like my sister!
                   Who but you, my brother,
Could make me rich enough to have the power?
And soon he'll make her once again as poor
As he is now.
I poor! her brother poor!
When had I more--when had I less than now?
A cloak, a horse, a sabre, and my God!
What need I else? and these ne'er can I lack.
And yet, Al-Hafi, I could scold you now.
Nay, brother, do not scold. I would that I
Could thus also relieve our father's cares!
Ah! now my joy has vanished all at once.
We can want nothing; but he's destitute.
And whilst he wants, we all are poor indeed.
What shall I do? From Egypt we can hope
For nothing--though God only knows the cause.
'Tis general peace around, and as for me,
I could live sparingly, reduce, retrench,
If none else suffered; but 'twould not avail.
A cloak, a horse, a sword I ne'er can want.
As to my God, He is not to be bought.
He asks but little, only asks my heart.
I had relied, Al-Hafi, on your chest,
Upon the surplus there.
                          A surplus there!
Say, should I not have been impaled or hanged,
If I had been detected hoarding up
A surplus? Deficits I might have ventured.
Well, but what next? Could you have found out none
To borrow from, but Sittah?
And would I
Have borne it, had another been preferred?
I claim that privilege. I am not yet
Quite beggared.
                No, not quite. Dear Sittah, this
Alone was wanting. But, Al-Hafi, go,
Inquire about, take where and what you can;
Borrow on promise, contract, anyhow;
But, mark me, not from those I have enriched.
'Twould seem as if I wished to have it back.
Go to the covetous. They gladliest lend.
They know how well their money thrives with me.
I know of none.
SITTAH.
                   I recollect just now,
I heard, Al-Hafi, of your friend's return.
Friend! friend of mine! and who can that be, pray?
Your boasted Jew.
                   A Jew! and praised by me!
On whom his God--I think I recollect
The very words you used, as touching him--
On whom his God, of all the choicest goods
Of earth, in full abundance, has bestowed
The greatest and the least.
                             What could I mean
When I said so?
                  The least of good things--wealth.
The greatest--wisdom!
                          How! and of a Jew
Did I say that?
                 Ay, that you did--of Nathan.
Oh, true! of Nathan--yes! He did not now
Occur to me. But he's returned at last,
Then do not doubt that he's well off. He's called
The Wise, the Rich, by all the Jewish folk.
Now more than ever is he named the Rich.
The town resounds with news of costly stuffs
And priceless treasures he has brought with him.
Is he the Rich once more? Then, do not fear,
He'll be the Wise again.
                        What think you? Will
You visit him, Al-Hafi?
                       What, to borrow?
You know him, surely! Think you he will lend?
His very wisdom lies in this--that he
Will lend to no one.
                       Formerly you gave
A picture very different of him.
In case of need he'll lend you merchandise;
But money--money--never! He's a Jew,
Who has not many equals 'mongst his tribe.
He's wise, knows how to live, can play at chess;
Excels in evil, too, as well as good.
Rely not on him. To the poor, indeed,
He vies with Saladin himself in gifts;
And if not quite so much, he gives as freely,
To Jew, and Christian, and Mahometan--
To all alike.
             And such a man as this----
How comes it, then, I never heard of him?
Can he refuse to lend to Saladin,
Who wants for others--never for himself.
Ay, there peeps out the Jew--the vulgar Jew:
Believe me, he is jealous, envious
Of generosity. It seems as though
To earn God's favour were his special mission.
And that he may possess wherewith to give,
He never lends. The law he serves, commands
That he show mercy, but not complaisance.
Thus him has mercy made the rudest churl
In all the world. 'Tis true I have not been
This long time past on friendly terms with him,
But do not think that I would do him wrong,
He's good in all things else, but not in that;
Therefore I'll go and knock at other doors.
I recollect this instant an old Moor,
Who's rich and covetous: I'll go to him. (Exit.)
Why in such haste, Al-Hafi?
                              Let him go.
Sittah, Saladin.
He speeds away, as though he would escape.
Why so? Is he indeed himself deceived,
Or would he now mislead me?
                              Can I guess?
I scarcely know the man of whom you speak,
And, for the first time, hear to-day of him.
Can it be possible you know him not
Who, it is said, has visited the
Of Solomon and David; knows the spell
To ope their marble lids, and thence obtain
The boundless stores that claim no lesser source.
Were this man's wealth by miracle procured,
'Tis not at Solomon's or David's tomb
That it is found. Mere mortal fools lie there.
Or knaves!--But still his source of opulence
Is more productive, more exhaustless than
A cave of Mammon.
               For he trades, I'm told.
His caravans through every desert toil,
His laden camels throng the public roads,
His ships in every harbour furl their sails.
Al-Hafi long ago has told me this,
Adding, with pride, how Nathan gives away,
What he esteems it noble to have earned
By patient industry, for others' wants;
How free from bias is his lofty soul,
His heart to every virtue how unlocked,
To every lovely feeling how allied!
And yet Al-Hafi spoke with coldness of him.
Not coldness, but unwillingness, as if
He deemed it dangerous to praise too much,
Yet knew not how to blame without a cause.
Or can it be, in truth, that e'en the best
Amongst a tribe can never quite escape
The foibles of their race, and that, in fact,
Al-Hafi has in this to blush for Nathan?
But come what may, let him be Jew or not,
If he be rich, that is enough for me.
You would not, sister, take his--wealth by force?
By force? What mean you? Fire and sword? Oh, no!
What force is necessary with the weak
But their own weakness? Come awhile with me,
Into my harem. I have bought a songstress
You have not heard--she came but yesterday.
Meanwhile I'll think upon a subtle plan
For this same Nathan. Follow, Saladin!
The Place of Palms, near Nathan's 
house, from which Recha and
Nathan are coming; Daja, 
meeting them.
Dear father! you have been so slow, that you
Will scarcely meet him now.

 NATHAN.
                         Well, well, my child;
If not beneath the palms, be sure that we
Shall meet him somewhere else. Be satisfied.
Is not that Daja whom I see approaching?
She certainly has lost him.
                            Wherefore so?
Her pace were quicker else.
                            She has not seen us.
There, now she spies us.
                           And her speed redoubles.
Recha, be calm!
                     What! would you have your child
Be cold and unconcerned about his fate
To whom her life is due?--a life to her
But dear because she owed it first to you.
I would not wish you other than you are,
E'en if I knew that in your secret soul
Another and a different feeling throbs.
What means my father?
                         Do you ask of me--
So tremblingly of me? What passes now
Within your soul is innocence and nature.
Nay, fear not, for it gives me no alarm.
But promise, if the heart shall ever speak
A plainer language, you will not conceal
One single of your wishes from my love.
Oh, the bare thought that I should ever wish
To hide them from my father, makes me shudder.
Recha, enough of this. Now, what says Daja?
He's still beneath the palms, and presently
He'll reach yon wall. See! here he comes at last.
He seems irresolute which way to turn,
To left or right!
                  His custom is to seek
The convent walls, so he will pass this way.
What will you wager? Yes, he comes to us.
Right! Did you speak to him? How did he look?
As usual.
            Do not let him see you here.
Stand farther back, or to the house retire.
Just one look more. Ah! the trees hide him now.
Come, come away! Recha, your father's right.
Should he observe us he'll retire at once.
Alas! the trees----
                   Now he emerges from them.
He can't but see you. Hence! I beg of you.
Come, Recha, come! I know a window whence
We may observe him better.
Come, then, come.
(They both retire.)
Nathan (who is presently joined by
the Templar).
I almost shrink from meeting this strange fellow--
Recoil from his rough virtue! That one man
Should ever make another feel confused!
But see, he comes! he seems a noble youth;
Looks like a man. I like his daring eye,
His honest gait. Although the shell is bitter,
The kernel may not be so. I have seen
One like him somewhere. Pardon, noble Frank----
What would you?
                     Pardon me----
                            What would you, Jew?
The privilege of speaking to you.
                                 Well!
How can I help it? Quick, then--what's your wish?
Patience! nor pass with such contempt and pride
One who must be your debtor evermore.
How so? I almost guess. No; are you then----
My name is Nathan, father to the maid
Your generous courage rescued from the flames.
I come to----
            If you come to render thanks,
Spare them. I have already been compelled
To bear too many thanks for this small act.
Besides, you owe me nothing. Could I know
The maiden was your daughter? I was bound--
It is a Templar's duty--to assist
All who need succour; and my life just then
Was a mere burden. It was a relief
To risk it for another, even though
The task were to preserve a Jewess' life.
Great--great yet horrible--I understand
The turn. The modest greatness will assume
The hideous mask to ward off gratitude.
But though he may disdain our proffer'd thanks,
Is there no other tribute we can pay?
Sir Knight! if you were not a stranger here,
And not a pris'ner, I were not so bold.
But, come, what service can I render you?
You!--nothing.
                  I am rich.
                           The richer Jew
Was ne'er in my esteem the better Jew.
Is that a reason why you should not use
The better part of him--his wealth?
                                         Well, well,
I'll not refuse it wholly, for the sake
Of my poor mantle; when it is well worn,
And spite of darning will not hold together,
I'll come and borrow cloth or gold of you,
To make a new one. Nay, Sir, do not start;
The danger is not pressing--'tis not yet
Quite worthless; it is sound, and strong, and good.
Save in one corner, where an ugly spot
Is singed, and that is from a burn it got
When I bore off your daughter from the fire.
'Tis strange, indeed, that such a spot as this
Should bear far better witness to the man
Than his own lips. This spot! Oh, I could kiss it.
Your pardon, Sir, in truth, I meant it not!
What?
       'Twas a tear that fell.
                                 Well, 'tis no matter.
'Tis not the first. (This Jew doth puzzle me.)
Would you but send this mantle to my daughter!
Why?
        That she, too, may press it to her lips;
For at her benefactor's feet to fall
She now may hope in vain.
                            But, Jew, your name?
Tis Nathan, is it not? You choose your words
With skill--I am confused. I did not think
Feign, Templar, and dissemble as you may,
I see the truth. I see your generous heart,
Too honest and too good to be polite.
A grateful girl, all feeling, and her maid
Swift to obey--a father far from home,
You valued her fair fame, and would not see her.
You scorned to tempt lest you should victor prove.
For this too I must tender you my thanks.
You know at least how Templars ought to feel.
Why Templars only? and why ought to feel?
Is it because your rules and vows enjoin
These duties to your order? Sir, I know
How good men all should feel, and know as well
That every country can produce good men.
You'll make distinctions?
                         Yes, in colour, form,
And dress, perhaps.
                    Ay, and in number too--
Here more--there less.
The difference is not much.
Great men, like trees, have ever need of room;
Too many set together only serve
To crush each other's boughs. The middling sort,
Like us, are found in numbers, they abound;
Only let not one scar and bruise the other,
Let not the gnarl be angry with the stump,
Let not the upper branch alone pretend
Not to have started from the common earth.
Well said. And yet what nation was the first
To scatter discord 'mongst their fellow-men?
To claim the title of "the chosen people?"
How now if I were not to hate them, but
To scorn this upstart nation, for their pride?
That pride which it bequeathed to Mussulman
And Christian, as if God were theirs alone.
You start to hear a Christian and a Templar
Talk thus. But when and where has all this rage,
This pious rage, to win the better God,
And force this better God on all the world,
Shown itself more, or in a blacker form,
Than here, and now? Who here, who now retains
The blinding scales upon his eyes--and yet
Let him be blind who will!--forget my words,
And leave me (is going).
                Templar! you but little know
How closer henceforth I shall cling to you.
We must, we must be friends. Despise my people--
We did not choose a nation for ourselves.
Are we our nation's? What then is a nation?
Were Jews or Christians such, ere they were men?
Ah! would that I had found in you one man
To whom it were enough to be a man.
Thou hast so, Nathan! Yes, by Heaven, thou hast.
Thy hand. I blush to have mistaken thee.
Now I feel proud. 'Tis only common souls
In whom we seldom err.
                        Uncommon ones
We do not oft forget. Nathan, we must,
We must be friends.
                     We are so. And my Recha
Will now rejoice. How bright the prospect grows
That dawns upon me! If you did but know her.
I grow impatient, Nathan. But who now
Comes from your house? Methinks it is your Daja.
Yes, and her look how full of care! God grant----
That nothing may have chanced to our Recha!
Daja (rushing in).
Nathan, dear Nathan!
                        Well.
                               Forgive me, Knight,
That I must interrupt you.
                            What has happened?
The Sultan sends for you--commands you straight
To speak with him. Protect us, Heaven! the Sultan!
The Sultan sends for me! He would inspect
The goods--the precious wares that I have brought
From Persia. Say there's nothing yet unpacked.
No, no; 'tis not to look at anything;
He wants to speak to you in person, Nathan,
And orders you to come at once.
                                 I go.
Daja, return.
             Knight, take it not amiss.
We were alarmed for what the Sultan might
Require of Nathan.
                   That I soon shall know. (Exit Daja.)
Nathan, the 
Templar.
Are you then not acquainted with him yet?
Who, Saladin? Not yet. I've neither shunned
Nor sought to see him. And the public voice
Proclaims his fame so loud, that I could wish
Rather to take its language upon trust,
Than sift the truth. And yet if it be true
That he has spared your life----
                                Yes, so it is.
The life I live, he gave.
                          Then he bestows
A double, treble life on me. And thus
He flings a bond around me, which secures
My duty to his service; and henceforth
I burn to know his wishes. Now, for all
I am prepared; and further, will confess
'Tis for your sake alone that I am thus.
Often I've sought to meet him, but as yet
Have found no means to render him my thanks.
The impress which his mind received of me
Was transient, and ere now has disappeared.
Who knows if he may still remember me?
And yet once more at least he must recall
Me to his thoughts--to fix my future lot!
'Tis not enough that by his gracious will
I still have of life; I've yet to learn
According to whose will I have to live.
Therefore 'twere well I did not tarry now.
Perchance some happy word may give excuse
To speak of you. Now, pardon me, farewell!
I must away. When shall we meet again?
Whenever 'tis permitted.
                              When you will.
To-day, then.
               And your name?
                                        My name was--is--
Conrad of Stauffen.
                     Conrad of Stauffen! Stauffen!
What is there in my name to wonder at?
There are more races of that name, no doubt.
Yes, many of the name were here--rot here,
My uncle even--I should say my father.
But wherefore is your eye so fixed on me?
I know not; but I love to look on you.
Therefore I take my leave. The searching eye
Will oft discover more than it desires.
I fear it, Nathan; so, farewell. Let time,
Not curious prying, make us better known. (Exit.)
"The searching eye will oft discover more
Than it desires." As if he read my soul!
That, too, may chance to be. 'Tis not alone
His walk, his stature, but his very voice!
Leonard so bore himself--was even wont
To carry thus his sword upon his arm,
And thus to shade his eyebrow with his hand,
As if to hide the fire that fill'd his look.
So deeply graven images may seem
At times to lie asleep within the soul,
When all at once a single word--a tone--
Calls them to life again. Of Stauffen--right--
Filnek and Stauffen--I will soon know more.
But first to Saladin. Ha! Daja here--
And on the watch! Come nearer, Daja, come.
Daja, Nathan.
Well, both of you have something more at heart
Than to know what the Sultan wants with me.
And you can hardly blame her for it, sir.
You were beginning to converse with him
More trustingly yourself, when suddenly
The Sultan's message drove us from the window.
Go tell her, Daja, she may soon expect
A visit from the Templar.
                            What! indeed!
I think I may rely upon you, Daja.
Be on your guard, I beg, you'll not repent it.
Your conscience shall at length be satisfied,
But do not mar my plans. Inquire, explain,
But with reserve, with fitting modesty.
No need for such advice. I go, I go.
And you must follow; for, see, Hafi comes--
The Sultan sends a second messenger.
Nathan, Al-Hafi.
Ha! are you there? I have been seeking you.
Why in such haste? What can he want with me?
Who?
       Saladin. But I am coming quickly.
To whom? To Saladin?
                       Has he not sent you?
Me? no--but has he sent already?
                               Yes.
Then it is so.
                     What's so?
                   That----I'm not guilty,
God knows, I'm not to blame; 'tis not my fault.
I've done my best--belied, and slandered you--
To save you from it.
                     Save me? and from what?
Be plain.
            From being made his Defterdar.
I pity you--I cannot stay to see it.
I fly this hour--you know the road I take.
Speak, then, if I can serve you; but your wants
Must suit a wretch that's wholly destitute.
Quick, what's your pleasure?
                            Recollect yourself--
Your words are mystery. I know of nothing.
What do you mean?
                  You'll take your money--bags?
My money--bags!
                     Ay, bring your treasures forth--
The treasures you must shower on Saladin.
And is that all?
           Ah! shall I witness it,
How, day by day, he'll scoop and pare you down,
Till nothing but a hollow, empty shell,
A husk as light as film, is left behind.
Nathan, you've yet to learn how spendthrift waste
From prudent bounty's never empty stores
Borrows and borrows, till there's not a crumb
Left to keep rats from starving. Do not think
That he who wants your gold will heed advice.
When has the Sultan listened to advice?
Hear what befel me with him.
                                Well--go on.
He played just now at chess with Sittah. She
Is a keen player. I drew near and watched.
The game which Saladin supposed was lost,
Stood yet upon the board. He had given in,
I marked, and cried, "The game's not lost at all!"
Oh! what a grand discovery for you.
He needed only to remove his king
Behind the castle--and the check was saved.
Could I but show you----
                        I believe it all!
Then with the castle free, he must have won.
I saw it, and I called him to the board.
What do you think he did?
                               He doubted you.
Not only that--he would not hear a word--
And with contempt he overthrew the board.
Indeed!
          He said he chose it--would be mate.
Is that to play the game?
                           Most surely not.
'Twas rather playing with the game.
                                      And yet
The stakes were high.
                       A trifle to the Sultan!
Money is nought to him. It is not that
Which galls, but not to hear Al-Hafi out--
Not to admire his comprehensive glance,
His eagle eye--'tis that demands revenge.
Say, am I right?
                I only tell this tale
That you may know how much his head is worth.
But I am weary of him. All the day
I am running round to every wretched Moor
To borrow--money for him--I who ne'er
Ask for myself, am now obliged to sue
For others--and, according to my creed,
To borrow is to beg, as, when you lend
Your money upon usury, you steal.
Among my Ghebers on the Ganges' shores
I shall need neither; there I shall not be
The tool or pimp of any; there alone
Upon the Ganges honest men are found.
You, Nathan, you alone of all I see
Are worthy on the Ganges' banks to live.
Then come with me; leave him the wretched gold
That he would strip you of--'tis all he wants.
Little by little he will ruin you;
'Tis better to be quit of all at once;
Come, then, and I'll provide you with a staff.
Nay, that resource will still remain for us
As a last refuge. But I'll think of it.
Nay, ponder not upon a thing like this.
Then stay till I have seen the Sultan. Stay
Till I have bid farewell.
                           The man who stays
To hunt for motives, to search reasons out,
Who cannot boldly and at once resolve
To live a free man's life, must be the slave
Of others till his death. But as you please.
Farewell! my path is here, and yours is there!
But stay, Al-Hafi! till you have arranged
The state accounts.
                     Pah! Nathan, there's no need;
The balance in the chest is quickly told,
And my account, Sittah, or you, will vouch.
Farewell!    (Exit.)
           Yes, I will vouch it, honest, wild--
How shall I call him? Ah! the real beggar
Is, after all, the only real king. (Exit at opposite side.)




ACT III.


Scene I.--A room in Nathan's 
house.
Recha, Daja.
Well, Daja, did my father really say
"That I might instantly expect him here?"
That surely meant that he would come at once,
And yet how many minutes have rolled by!
But I'll not dwell upon the moments gone,
I'll only live in those that are to come,
That one which brings him here must come in time.
But for the Sultan's ill-timed messenger
Nathan had brought him hither.
                                 When he comes--
Oh! when this dearest of my inmost hopes
Shall be fulfilled--what then--what then?
                                          What then?
Why then I trust the wish most dear to me
Will also be fulfilled.

 RECHA.
                      And in its place
What wish shall take possession of my breast?
Which now forgets to heave, unless it pant
With some fond wish? Will nothing come? I shudder!
My wish shall then supplant the one fulfilled,
My wish to see you borne to Europe's shores
By hands well worthy of you.
                                 You do err.
The very thought which makes you form this wish
Forbids it to be mine. Your native land
Attracts you, and has mine no charm for me?
Shall a remembrance of your cherished home,
Your absent kindred and your dearest friends,
Which years and distance have not yet effaced,
Rule in your soul with softer, mightier sway
Than what I know, and hear, and feel of mine.
'Tis vain to struggle, for the ways of Heaven
Are still the ways of Heaven. And who can say
If he who saved your life may not be doomed,
Through his God's arm, for whom he nobly fights.
To lead you to that people--to that land
To which you should belong by right of birth?
What are you saying, Daja? dearest Daja!
Indeed you have some strange and curious thoughts.
"His God!" whose God? To whom can God belong,
And how can God belong to any man,
Or need a human arm to fight his battles?
And who, among the scattered clods of earth
Can say for which of them himself was born,
Unless for that on which he was produced?
If Nathan heard thee! How has Nathan sinned,
That Daja seeks to paint my happiness
So far removed from his? What has he done,
That thus amongst the seeds of reason, which
He sowed unmixed and pure within my soul,
The hand of Daja must for ever seek
To plant the weeds, or flowers of her own land?
He has no wish to see upon this soil
Such rank luxuriant blossoms. I myself
Must own I faint beneath the sour--sick odour;
Your head is stronger and is used to it.
I find no fault with those of stronger nerves
Who can support it--mine, alas! give way.
Your angel too, how near befool'd was I
Through him; I blush whene'er I see my father.
As if, dear Recha, you alone were wise.
Folly! If I might speak----
                         And may you not?
Have I not listened gladly to your tales
About the valiant heroes of your faith?
Have I not freely on their deeds bestowed
My admiration--to their sufferings given
The tribute of my tears? Their faith, 'tis true,
Has never seemed to me their noblest boast,
But, therefore, Daja, I have only learnt
To find more consolation in the thought
That our devotion to the God of all
Depends not on our notions of that God.
My father has so often taught me this--
You have so often to this point agreed,
How can it be that you wish now alone
To undermine what you have built together?
But this is no discourse with which to wait
The friend whom we expect--and yet for me
'Tis of some moment whether he----But hark!
Hark! Some one comes this way.---If it were he!
The Templar, Daja, 
Recha.
(A servant ushers in the Templar.)
This way, Sir Knight!--
(Recha starts, composes herself, and is about to fall at his
feet.)
                       'Tis he! my rescuer. Ah!
'Twas only to avoid this scene that I
So long postponed my visit.
                                At the feet
Of this proud man, I will thank God alone,
And not the man. He does not want my thanks--
As little as the bucket does which proved
Itself so useful at the fire, and let
Itself be filled and emptied; so this man,
He too was thrust by chance amid the flames;
I dropped by chance into his open arms,
By chance remained there, like a fluttering spark
Upon his mantle--till--I know not what
Expelled us from the flames. What room is here
For thanks?--In Europe wine excites the men
To greater deeds--The Templar knows his duty,
Performs his task, as well-trained spaniels do,
Who fetch alike from water and from flames.
O Daja, Daja! if in hasty hours
Of care and grief, this unchecked tongue of mine
Betrayed me into rudeness, why convey
To her each idle word that leaves my lips?
This is indeed too galling a revenge!
Yet, if henceforth, you will interpret better----
I question if these little stings, Sir Knight,
Were so shot forth as to have done you wrong.
How! you had cares, and were more covetous
Of them than of your life.
                          Thou best of beings,
How is my soul with eye and ear at strife?
No, 'twas not she I rescued from the fire,
For who could know her and forbear the deed?
In truth, disguised by terror----
(He gazes on her as if entranced.)
                               But to me
You still appear the same as then you seemed.
(A pause, till she resumes in order to interrupt his reverie.)
Tell me, Sir Knight, where have you been so long?
And--I might almost ask--where are you now?
I am where I, perhaps, ought not to be.
And been, perhaps, where you should not have been.
That is not well.
                 I have been up the mountain--
What is the name?--ay! Sinai!
                                    I am glad;
For, doubtless, you can tell me if 'tis true----
If what is true? If holy people show
The spot where Moses stood before his God?
Oh no; not that. Wherever Moses stood
It was before his God. I know enough
About such things already. Is it true--
I wish to learn from you who have been there--
If it is not by far less difficult
To climb than to descend the holy mount?
For with all other mountains that I know,
'Tis quite the contrary. You turn away!
Why do you turn, Sir Knight? Nay, look at me.
I wish to hear you rather.
                           I perceive,
Because you do not wish that I should see
You smile at my simplicity. You smile
That I have not some more important thing
To ask about the holy hill of hills.
Is it so?
          Must I meet those eyes again?
And now you cast them down, and check your smile.
How can I in those changeful features read
What I so plainly hear--the truth your words
So audibly declare, and yet would hide?
How truly did your father say to me,
"If you but knew her!"
                          Who said that to you?
Your father, and of you he spoke the words.
Have I not said it to you many times?
Where is your father now? with Saladin?
Doubtless he is.
                   Still there! Oh, I forget.
He cannot still be there. He waits for me,
As he appointed, near the cloister gate.
Forgive me, I must go in quest of him.
I will do that. Wait here, I'll bring him straight.
O no, O no! He is expecting me.
Besides, you cannot tell what may have chanced.
'Tis not unlikely he may be engaged
With Saladin--you do not know the Sultan--
In some unpleasant----Danger may ensue
If I delay.
           Danger! for whom? for what?
Danger for me--for you--for him! unless
I go at once    (Exit.)
Recha, Daja.
               What is the matter, Daja?
So quick! what ails him--makes him fly from hence?
Let him alone. I think it no bad sign.
Sign! and of what?
                        That something vexes him.
It boils, but it must not boil over. Go,
'Tis your turn now.
                     My turn. You have become
Incomprehensible to me--like him.
Now you may pay him back with interest
All the unrest he once occasioned you.
But be not too vindictive--too severe.
Well, Daja, you must know your meaning best.
And are you then already calm once more?
In truth I am.
                  Confess at least, dear Recha,
That all this restlessness has brought you pleasure,
And that you have to thank his want of ease
For all the ease that you yourself enjoy.
I know not that, but I must still confess
That to myself it seems a mystery
How in this bosom, such a pleasing calm
Can suddenly succeed so rude a storm.
His countenance, his speech, his manner have----
By this time satisfied you.
                             No, not that.
Well, satisfied your more impatient want.
Well, well, if you must have it so.
                                     Not I!
To me he must be ever dear. To me
He must remain more dear than life, although
My pulse no longer flutters at his name,
My heart no longer, when I think of him,
Beats with a fuller throb. What have I said?
Come, Daja, to the window once again
Which overlooks the palms.
                                I see 'tis not
Yet satisfied, that more impatient want.
Now, I shall see the palm--trees once again;
Not him alone amidst them.
                               Such a fit
Of coldness speaks of fevers yet to come.
Nay, I'm not cold, in truth I do not see
Less gladly that which I do calmly see.
(The Hall of Audience in Saladin's 
Palace.)
Saladin, Sittah.
Bring the Jew here, as soon as he arrives.
He seems in no great haste.
                             Nay, Saladin,
Perhaps he was not found at home.
                                     Ah, sister!
You look as if some contest were at hand.
Ay! and with weapons I'm not used to wield.
Must I then play the hypocrite--and frame
Precautions--lay a snare? Where learnt I that?
And for what end? To seek for money--money!
For money from a Jew? And to such arts
Must Saladin descend, that he may win
The most contemptible of paltry things?
But paltry things, despised too much, are sure
To find some method of revenge.
                                 'Tis true!
What, if this Jew should prove an upright man,
Such as the Dervise painted him?
                                     Why, then,
Your difficulty ceases; for a snare
Implies an avaricious, cheating Jew,
And not an upright man. Then he is ours
Without a snare. 'Twill give us joy to hear
How such a man will speak--with what stern strength
He'll tear the net, or with what cunning skill
Untangle all its meshes, one by one.
True, Sittah! 'twill afford me rare delight.
What, then, need trouble you? For if he be,
Like all his nation, a mere cozening Jew,
You need not blush, if you appear to him
No better than he deems all other men.
But if to him you wear a different look,
You'll be a fool--his dupe!
                              So I must, then,
Do ill, lest bad men should think ill of me.
Yes, brother, if you call it doing ill
To put a thing to its intended use.
Well, there is nothing woman's wit invents
It cannot palliate----
                    How, palliate?
Sittah, I fear such fine-wrought filagree
Will break in my rude hand. It is for those
Who frame such plots to bring them into play.
The execution needs the inventor's skill.
But let it pass.--I'll dance as best I can--
Yet sooner would I do it ill than well.
Oh, brother, have more courage in yourself!
Have but the will, I'll answer for the rest.
How strange that men like you are ever prone
To think it is their swords alone that raise them.
When with the fox the noble lion hunts,
'Tis of the fellowship he feels ashamed,
But of the cunning, never.
                       Well, 'tis strange
That women so delight to bring mankind
Down to their level. But, dear Sittah, go;
I think I know my lesson.
                          Must I go?
You did not mean to stay?
                           No, not with you,
But in this neighb'ring chamber.
                                     What! to listen?
Not so, my sister, if I shall succeed.
Away! the curtain rustles--he is come.
Beware of lingering! I'll be on the watch.
(While Sittah retires through,
one door, Nathan 
enters at another, and Saladin seats himself.)
Saladin, Nathan.
Draw nearer, Jew--yet nearer--close to me!
Lay fear aside.
                Fear, Sultan, 's for your foes.
Your name is Nathan?
                        Yes.
                                 Nathan the Wise.
No.
SALADIN.
     But, at least the people call you so.
That may be true. The people!
                                    Do not think
I treat the people's voice contemptuously.
I have been wishing long to know the man
Whom it has called the Wise.
                                What, if it named
Him so in scorn? If wise means prudent only--
And prudent, one who knows his interest well?
Who knows his real interest, you mean.
Then, Sultan, selfish men were the most prudent,
And wise, and prudent, then, would mean the same.
You're proving what your speeches contradict.
You know the real interests of man:
The people know them not--have never sought
To know them. That alone can make man wise.
Which every man conceives himself to be.
A truce to modesty! To meet it ever,
When we are seeking truth is wearisome (springs up).
So, let us to the point. Be candid, Jew,
Be frank and honest.
                     I will serve you, prince,
And prove that I am worthy of your favour.
How will you serve me?
                             You shall have the best
Of all I have, and at the cheapest rate.
What mean you? Not your wares?--My sister, then,
Shall make the bargain with you. (That's for the listener!)
I am not versed in mercantile affairs,
And with a merchant's craft I've nought to do.
Doubtless you would inquire if I have marked
Upon my route the movements of the foe?
Whether he's stirring? If I may presume----
Neither was that my object. On that point
I know enough. But hear me.
                              I obey.
It is another, a far different thing
On which I seek for wisdom; and since you
Are called the Wise, tell me which faith or law
You deem the best.
                      Sultan, I am a Jew.
And I a Mussulman. The Christian stands
Between us. Here are three religions, then,
And of these three one only can be true.
A man like you remains not where his birth
By accident has cast him; or if so,
Conviction, choice, or ground of preference,
Supports him. Let me, Nathan, hear from you,
In confidence, the reasons of your choice,
Which I have lacked the leisure to examine.
It may be, Nathan, that I am the first
Sultan who has indulged this strange caprice,
Which need not, therefore, make a Sultan blush.
Am I the first? Nay, speak; or if you seek
A brief delay to shape your scattered thoughts,
I yield it freely. (Has she overheard?
She will inform me if I've acted right.)
Reflect then, Nathan, I shall soon return.    (Exit.)
Strange! how is this? What can the Sultan want?
I came prepared for cash--he asks for truth!
Truth! as if truth were cash! A coin disused--
Valued by weight! If so, 'twere well, indeed!
But coin quite new, not coin but for the die,
To be flung down and on the counter told----
It is not that. Like gold tied up in bags,
Will truth lie hoarded in the wise man's head,
To be produced at need? Now, in this case,
Which of us plays the Jew? He asks for truth.
Is truth what he requires? his aim, his end?
Or does he use it as a subtle snare?
That were too petty for his noble mind.
Yet what is e'er too petty for the great?
Did he not rush at once into the house,
Whilst, as a friend, he would have paused or knocked?
I must beware. Yet to repel him now
And act the stubborn Jew, is not the thing;
And wholly to fling off the Jew, still less.
For if no Jew, he might with justice ask,
Why not a Mussulman?--That thought may serve.--
Others than children may be quieted
With tales well told. But see, he comes--he comes.
Saladin, Nathan.
(Aside) (The coast is clear)--I am not come too soon?
Have you reflected on this matter, Nathan?
Speak! no one hears.
                        Would all the world might hear!
And are you of your cause so confident?
'Tis wise, indeed, of you to hide no truth,
For truth to hazard all, even life and goods.

 NATHAN.
Ay, when necessity and profit bid.
I hope that henceforth I shall rightly bear
One of my names, "Reformer of the world
And of the law!"
                   A noble title, truly;
But, Sultan, ere I quite explain myself,
Permit me to relate a tale.
                              Why not?
I ever was a friend of tales well told.
Well told! Ah, Sultan! that's another thing.
What! still so proudly modest? But begin.
In days of yore, there dwelt in Eastern lands
A man, who from a valued hand received
A ring of priceless worth. An opal stone
Shot from within an ever-changing hue,
And held this virtue in its form concealed,
To render him of God and man beloved,
Who wore it in this fixed unchanging faith.
No wonder that its Eastern owner ne'er
Withdrew it from his finger, and resolved
That to his house the ring should be secured.
Therefore he thus bequeathed it: first to him
Who was the most beloved of his sons,
Ordaining then that he should leave the ring
To the most dear among his children; then,
That without heeding birth, the fav'rite son,
In virtue of the ring alone, should still
Be lord of all the house. You hear me, Sultan?
I understand. Proceed.
                          From son to son,
The ring at length descended to a sire
Who had three sons, alike obedient to him,
And whom he loved with just and equal love.
The first, the second, and the third, in turn,
According as they each apart received
The overflowings of his heart, appeared
Most worthy as his heir, to take the ring,
Which, with good-natured weakness, he in turn
Had promised privately to each; and thus
Things lasted for a while. But death approached,
The father now embarrassed, could not bear
To disappoint two sons, who trusted him.
What's to be done? In secret he commands
The jeweller to come, that from the form
Of the true ring, he may bespeak two more.
Nor cost nor pains are to be spared, to make
The rings alike--quite like the true one. This
The artist managed. When the rings were brought
The father's eye could not distinguish which
Had been the model. Overjoyed, he calls
His sons, takes leave of each apart--bestows
His blessing and his ring on each--and dies.
You hear me?
                   Ay! I hear. Conclude the tale.
'Tis ended, Sultan! All that follows next
May well be guessed. Scarce is the father dead,
When with his ring, each separate son appears,
And claims to be the lord of all the house.
Question arises, tumult and debate--
But all in vain--the true ring could no more
Be then distinguished than----(after a pause, in which he
awaits the Sultan's reply) the true faith now.
Is that your answer to my question?
                                           No!
But it may serve as my apology.
I cannot venture to decide between
Rings which the father had expressly made,
To baffle those who would distinguish them.
Rings, Nathan! Come, a truce to this! The creeds
Which I have named have broad, distinctive marks,
Differing in raiment, food, and drink!
                                        'Tis true!
But then they differ not in their foundation.
Are not all built on history alike,
Traditional or written? History
Must be received on trust. Is it not so?
In whom are we most likely to put trust?
In our own people? in those very men
Whose blood we are? who, from our earliest youth
Have proved their love for us, have ne'er deceived,
Except in cases where 'twere better so?
Why should I credit my forefathers less
Than you do yours? or can I ask of you
To charge your ancestors with falsehood, that
The praise of truth may be bestowed on mine?
And so of Christians.
                      By our Prophet's faith,
The man is right. I have no more to say.
Now let us to our rings once more return.
We said the sons complained; each to the judge
Swore from his father's hand immediately
To have received the ring--as was the case--
In virtue of a promise, that he should
One day enjoy the ring's prerogative.
In this they spoke the truth. Then each maintained
It was not possible that to himself
His father had been false. Each could not think
His father guilty of an act so base.
Rather than that, reluctant as he was
To judge his brethren, he must yet declare
Some treach'rous act of falsehood had been done.
Well! and the judge? I'm curious now to hear
What you will make him say. Go on, go on!
The judge said: If the father is not brought
Before my seat, I cannot judge the case.
Am I to judge enigmas? Do you think
That the true ring will here unseal its lips?
But, hold! You tell me that the real ring
Enjoys the secret power to make the man
Who wears it, both by God and man, beloved.
Let that decide. Who of the three is loved
Best by his brethren? Is there no reply?
What! do these love--exciting rings alone
Act inwardly? Have they no outward charm?
Does each one love himself alone? You're all
Deceived deceivers. All your rings are false.
The real ring, perchance, has disappeared;
And so your father, to supply the loss,
Has caused three rings to fill the place of one.
O, charming, charming!
                      And,--the judge continued:--
If you insist on judgment, and refuse
My counsel, be it so. I recommend
That you consider how the matter stands.
Each from his father has received a ring:
Let each then think the real ring his own.
Your father, possibly, desired to free
His power from one ring's tyrannous control.
He loved you all with an impartial love,
And equally, and had no inward wish
To prove the measure of his love for one
By pressing heavily upon the rest.
Therefore, let each one imitate this love;
So, free from prejudice, let each one aim
To emulate his brethren in the strife
To prove the virtues of his several ring,
By offices of kindness and of love,
And trust in God. And if, in years to come,
The virtues of the ring shall reappear
Amongst your children's children, then, once more,
Come to this judgment--seat. A greater far
Than I shall sit upon it, and decide.
So spake the modest judge.
                              Oh God, O God!
And if now, Saladin, you think you're he----
(Approaches Nathan, and takes his hand, which he retains to the end of
the scene.)
This promised judge--I?--Dust! I?--Nought! oh God!
What is the matter, Sultan?
                                Dearest Nathan!
That judge's thousand years are not yet past;
His judgment-seat is not for me. But go,
And still remain my friend.
                              Has Saladin
Aught else to say?
                     No.
                           Nothing?
                                       Truly nothing.
But why this eagerness?
                           I could have wished
An opportunity to ask a boon.
Wait not for opportunity. Speak now.
I have been traveling, and am just returned
From a long journey, from collecting debts.
Hard cash is troublesome these perilous times,
I know not where I may bestow it safely.
These coming wars need money; and, perchance,
You can employ it for me, Saladin?
I ask not, Nathan, have you seen Al-Hafi?
Nor if some shrewd suspicion of your own
Moves you to make this offer.
                                What suspicion?
I do not ask--forgive me,--it is just,
For what avails concealment? I confess
I was about----
              To ask this very thing?
Yes!
       Then our objects are at once fulfilled,
And if I cannot send you all my store,
The Templar is to blame for that. You know
The man. I owe a heavy debt to him.
The Templar! Surely, Nathan, with your gold
You do not aid my direst foes?
                                 I speak
Of him whose life was spared by Saladin.
Of what do you remind me? I had quite
Forgot the youth. Where is he? Know you him?
Have you not heard, then, how your clemency
Through him has flowed to me? How, at the risk
Of the existence which your mercy gave,
He saved my daughter from the raging flames?
Ha! did he so? He looked like one that would!
My brother, too--his image--would have done it.
Is he still here? Bring him to me at once.
I have so often spoken to my sister
Of this same brother, whom she never knew,
That I must let her see his counterfeit.
Go, fetch him. How a single noble deed,
Though but the offspring of the merest whim,
Gives birth to other blessings! Bring him to me.
I'll go--the other matter then is settled. (Exit.)
I wish I had but let my sister listen.
I'll go at once to her and tell it all.
                           (Exit on the opposite side.)
The Place of Palms in the neighbourhood of the Convent,
where the
Templar awaits Nathan.
The panting victim here may rest awhile.
So far 'tis well. I dare not ask myself
What change has sprung within me, nor inquire
What yet may happen. Flight has proved in vain,
And, come what may, I could no more than flee,
The stroke was far too sudden to escape.
Long--much--I strove to keep aloof, in vain.
But once to see her, e'en against my will,
To see her, and to frame a firm resolve
Never to lose her. What, then, is resolve?
Resolve is purpose--action, while--in truth--
I was but passive. But to see her once,
And feel that I was woven into her being,
Was then and still remains the self-same thing.
To live apart from her--oh, bitter thought!--
Were death; and after death--where'er we were--
'Twould there be death too. Say, then, is this love?
And doth the Templar love? A Christian loves
A Jewish maiden! Well, and what of that?
This is the holy land; holy to me,
And dear, because I have of late renounced
Full many a prejudice. What says my vow?
In the same hour that made me prisoner
To Saladin. The head he gave me back,
Was it the old one? No. I'm newly framed,
I know no fragment of the ancient forms
That bound me once. My brain is clearer now,
More fit for my paternal home above.
Now I can think as once my father thought,
If tales of him are not untruly told--
Tales that were ne'er so credible as now,
When I am stumbling where my father fell.
Fell! yet 'twere better far to fall with men
Than stand with boys. His conduct guarantees
His approbation. And what need I more
Than Nathan's approbation? Of his praise
I cannot doubt. Oh, what a Jew is he!
And yet he would appear the simple Jew.
But, see, he comes--he comes in haste--delight
Beams from his eye. But who leaves Saladin
With other looks? Ho! Nathan!
Nathan, the 
Templar.
                                 Are you there?
Your visit to the Sultan has been long.
Not over long. My audience was delayed.
But, Conrad, this man well supports his fame--
His fame is but his shadow. But I must
Without delay inform you that he would----
                                             Say on.
Would speak with you. So, come with me at once.
I have some brief commands to give at home,
Then to the Sultan.
                     Nathan, I will ne'er
Enter your door again----
                         Then you've been there
Already--spoken with her. Tell me all.
How do you like my Recha?
                            Words would fail
To tell how much. I dare not trust myself
Alone with her again, unless you say
That I may gaze upon her form for ever.
What can this mean?
                           My father!
How, young man?
Call me your son! I do implore you, Nathan.
Dear youth!
               And not your son! I pray you, Nathan,
Conjure you, by the strongest ties of Nature,
Let it content you now to be a man:
Repel me not.
                 My dearest friend!
                                 Say son!
Why not your son? What, if in Recha's heart
Mere gratitude had paved the way for love,
And if we both but waited your assent
To crown our union! You are silent, sir!
I am astonished at your words, young Knight.
Astonished! Do I then astonish you
With your own thoughts, although you know them not
When uttered by my lips. Astonished, Nathan?
Would that I knew what Stauffen was your father!
What say you, Nathan? At a time like this,
Can you indulge such empty, curious thoughts?
I knew a Stauffen once whose name was Conrad.
What, if my father bore that very name?
And did he so?
                I bear my father's name,
I am called Conrad.
                    So! And yet the man
I knew was not your father, for, like you,
He was a Templar, and was never married.
And what of that?
                     How?
                                 He might still have been
My father.
               Nay, you jest.
                            You're far too good.
What matters it? Does bastard wound your ear?
The race, good sir, is not to be despised.
But spare my pedigree, and I'll spare yours.
Great God! forbid my words should ever cast
The smallest doubt on your ancestral tree.
You can attest it backwards, leaf by leaf,
To Abraham. And from that point--I know it well,
Myself--can even swear to it.
Your words are bitter. Do I merit this?
What have I e'er refused you? I have but
Forborn assent at the first word you spoke.
No more!
          Oh! true, no more. Forgive me, Nathan.
Well, come with me, come.
                            Whither? to your house?
That will I not--it burns. I'll wait you here.
Farewell. If I'm to see her once again,
I then shall see her often; and if not,
I have already seen her too--too much.
The Templar, 
Daja.
Too much, indeed! Strange that the human brain
So infinite of comprehension, should
At times with a mere trifle be engrossed,
Suddenly filled, and all at once quite full,
No matter what it teems with. But the soul
Soon calms again, and the fermenting stuff
Makes itself room, restoring life and order.
And is this, then, the first time that I love?
And was the glow to which I gave that name
Not love at all? And is this love alone
Which now with burning flame consumes my heart?
Sir Knight! Sir Knight!
                        Who calls? What, Daja, you!
Yes, I am here; I managed to slip by him.
But he can see us where we stand. Come nearer,
And place yourself with me behind this tree.
Why so mysterious? What's the secret, Daja?
Yes, 'tis a secret which has brought me hither--
A twofold secret. Part is known to me,
The other part to you. Come, let us change:
First tell me yours, and then I'll tell you mine.
Yes, willingly, when I have ascertained
What you call mine. But yours will throw a light
Upon the whole. Begin, then.
                                That's not fair;
You must begin, Sir Knight, and I will follow.
For be assured my secret's nothing worth,
Unless I hear yours first. Then lose no time,
For if I guess it, you've not trusted me;
My secret, then, will be my own, and yours
Worth nothing. But do you suppose, Sir Knight,
That you can hide such secrets from a woman?
Secrets we often are unconscious of.
Perhaps. But I must prove myself your friend
And tell you all. Confess how happened it
That you so suddenly took leave of us,
And that with Nathan you will not return?
Has Recha, then, made no impression on you,
Or made too deep a one, perchance? Oh yes!
Too deep--too deep! You are a hapless bird
Whose fluttering wing the fatal twig has limed,
Confess it, plainly, with a word, you love--
Love her to madness, and I'll tell you then----
To madness? Ah! you understand it well.
Well, grant the love, the madness I'll resign.
Because, of course, there is no doubt of it.
A Templar love a Jewess!----
                           Why, it seems
Absurd. But often there's more fitness in
Some things than we can readily discern;
And 'twould not be the first time that our Lord
Had drawn us to Him by a secret path
Which we had ne'er discovered of ourselves.
Solemnly spoken I (and if for our Lord
I substituted Providence, 'twere true).
You make me curious, far beyond my wont.
This is the land of miracles!
                              Ay, true,
Of miracles! Can it be otherwise,
When all the world flocks hither? Dearest Daja,
You have your wish; so take it as confessed
That I do love her, nor can comprehend
How I can live without her.
                             Can this be?
Then swear, Sir Knight, to make her yours--to save
Her here on earth--to save her there for ever.
How can I this? How can I swear to do
What stands not in my power.
                               'Tis in your power!
One single word brings it within your power.
But will her father smile upon my suit?
Her father, truly! He shall be compelled.
Compell'd! What, has he fallen among thieves?
Compell'd!
          Then hear me. Nathan will consent:
He must consent.
                     Consent! and must! Oh, Daja!
I have already tried to touch that chord;
It vibrates not responsive.
                                 What! reject you?
He answered me in such discordant tone
That I was hurt.
What say you? Did you breathe
The shadow of a wish to marry Recha.
And did not Nathan leap for joy? Did he
Draw coldly back--raise obstacles?
                                     He did.
         Then I'll deliberate no moment more.
And yet you are deliberating still.
Nathan in all things has been ever good.
I owe him much. Did he refuse to listen?
God knows it grieves me to constrain him thus.

 TEMPLAR.
I pray you, Daja, now to terminate
This dire uncertainty. But if you doubt
Whether the thing you would impart to me
Be right or wrong, worthy of shame or honour,
Then tell it not, and henceforth I'll forget
You have a secret it were well to hide.
Your words but spur me on to tell you all.
Then learn that Recha is no Jewess--that
She is a Christian maid.
                           I wish you joy!
At last the tedious labour's at an end.
The birth-pangs have not hurt you. Still go on
With undiminished zeal, and people heaven
When you are fit no more to people earth.
How, Knight! and does the news I bring deserve
Such bitter taunts? Does it confer no joy
On you to hear that Recha is a Christian,
On you, her lover, and a Christian knight?
And more especially since Recha is
A Christian of your making?
                              Think you so?
Then I would fain see him that may convert her.
It is her fate long since to have been that
Which she can now no more become.
                                           Explain,
Or leave me.
                Well! she is a Christian maid,
Of Christian parents born--and is baptised.
And Nathan!
               Not her father.
                          Nathan not
Her father? Are you sure of that?
                                     I am;
The truth has cost me tears of blood. He's not.
But as his daughter he has brought her up,
Brought up the Christian maiden as a Jewess?
Just so.
          And knows she aught about her birth?
Has she not learnt from him that she was born
A Christian and no Jewess?
                                 Never yet.
And he not only let the child grow up
In this mistaken notion, but he leaves
The woman in it.
                     Ay, alas!
                              Oh, Nathan!
How can the wise, good Nathan lend himself
To stifle Nature's voice--to misdirect
The yearnings of a heart in such a way
Which, to itself abandoned, would have formed
Another bias, Daja? Ay, in truth,
The secret is of moment, and may have
Important issues. But I feel perplexed:
I know not how I ought to act. But go,
Let me have breathing time. He may approach,
He may surprise us suddenly. Farewell!
I tremble with affright.
                      And I can scarce
Express my thoughts. But go; and should you chance
To meet him, say he'll find me at the Sultan's.
Let him not see that you have any thing
Against him. That 'twere well to keep reserved,
To give the proper turn to things at last.
It may remove your scruples, touching Recha.
But if you take her back to Europe, Knight,
You will not leave me here?
                                 We'll see, now go!
The Friar, and presently
afterwards the Templar.
Ay, ay! he must be right, the Patriarch!
And yet, of all his business, no great part
Has prospered in my hands. But why should he
Entrust such tasks to me? I have no wish
To play the knave, to wheedle and persuade,
To worm out secrets, and to thrust my hand
Into my neighbour's business. Not for this
Did I renounce the world, that I might be
Entangled with its cares for other men.
Good brother, are you here? I've sought you long.
Me, sir?
            What, don't you recollect me, then?
Ay! but, Sir Knight, I never thought to see
Your face again--and so I hoped in God.
God knows how much I hated the proposal
Which I was bound to make you, and He knows
How little I desired you should assent,
How in my inmost soul I was rejoiced
When you refused, without a moment's thought,
To do what had been shameful in a Knight.
But have you thought the matter o'er again?
You seem to know what object brings me here.
Have you, Sir Knight, reflected by this time,
That our good Patriarch is not much deceived
In thinking gold and glory may be won
By his commission? that a foe's a foe,
Were he our guardian angel seven times o'er?
Have you 'gainst flesh and blood weighed all these things,
And are you come to strike a bargain now?
My dear good man, be patient; not for this
Am I come hither; not for aught like this
Do I desire to see the Patriarch.
On every point my thoughts remain unchanged;
Nor would I for the wealth of all this world
Forfeit that good opinion, which I won
From such an upright, honest man as you.
I merely come to ask the Patriarch
For counsel.
              Counsel from the Patriarch!
What, you! a knight to ask a priest's advice!
Mine is a priestly business.
                              Yet the priests
Would scorn a knight's advice, were their affairs
Ever so knightly.
                     Therefore they're allowed
To err sometimes, a privilege which I,
For one, don't greatly envy them; and yet,
If I were acting only for myself,
And were not bound to others, I should care
But little for advice. But in some things
'Twere better to go wrong by others' guidance
Than, by our own, go right. And I observe,
By this time, that religion's naught but party,
And he who in his own belief is most
Impartial, does but hold the standard up
Of his own creed, howe'er unconsciously.
Yet since 'tis so, it must be right.
                                  I'm silent.
In truth, I don't quite comprehend.
                                     And yet--
(Let me consider first what 'tis I want--
Decision or advice from sage or simple?)
Thanks, brother; yes, I thank you for your hint.
What is a patriarch? Be thou for once
My patriarch; for 'tis the Christian rather
Whom in the patriarch I would consult,
Than in the Christian the mere patriarch.
Hold, hold, Sir Knight! no more of this, I find
That you mistake me. He who hath learnt much
Must needs have many cares. I know but one----
But hark, behold! here comes the very man!
'Tis he, so stay; he has perceived us both.
The Patriarch, after
marching up one of the aisles with great pomp, approaches.
I'd rather shun him--he is not my man--
A round, red smiling prelate! And what state!
But you should see him at a festival,
Now he but comes from visiting the sick.
Great Saladin will then have cause to blush.
Was that the Templar? What's his business here?
I know not.
               Well, Sir Knight, I'm truly glad
To meet so brave a youth. So very young,
Something may come of him, if Heaven assist.
Not more than has already come of him,
But rather less, my reverend father.
                                        Well,
It is my prayer that so devout a Knight
May for the cause of Christendom and God
Be long preserved; nor can it fail to be,
If valour will give ear to aged words.
Then say, how can I serve you, Sir?
                                     With that
In which my youth's deficient--sound advice.
Most gladly, if you'll follow my advice.
Not blindly, though.
                     Whose words are those? Indeed,
None should neglect to use the intellect
Bestowed by God, when it is suitable.
But is it always suitable? O no!
If God, through one of the celestial choir--
That is, through one of the blest ministers
Of His most sacred word--should condescend
To show some way by which the Church's weal,
Or else the general good of Christendom,
Might be secured, what man would venture then
To weigh the laws of intellect against
His will, who fashioned intellect itself?
Or measure the unchanged decrees of Heaven
By empty rules that suit this petty world?
But of all this enough. Now tell me, Knight,
Wherefore you seek our counsel?
                              Reverend father!
Suppose a Jew possessed an only child--
A girl--whom he with fond parental care
Trained to each virtue, treasured as his soul,
Whilst she, with love as ardent as his own,
Repaid his love,--suppose it rumoured then
That she was not the daughter of this Jew,
But a poor orphan, purchased in her youth,
Or stolen, or found--or anything, but still
Of Christian birth, and in her youth baptised,
And that the Jew had reared her in his faith,
Allowed her to be thought a Jewish maid,
And firmly to believe herself his child,--
Say, reverend father, what should then be done?
I shudder at the thought! But, worthy Sir,
Say, is this fact, or mere hypothesis?
That is, if your own head has framed the case,
Or has it happened--does it still exist?
That's unimportant, and could not assist
Your reverence to pronounce upon the point.
What! unimportant! See, Sir Knight, how apt
Proud reason is to err in sacred things.
'Tis of deep import; though, 'tis true, the case
May be the offspring of your sportive wit,
When we should straight dismiss it from our thoughts,
And I should then refer you to the stage
Where pros and cons like these are oft discussed
With loud applause. But if the object be,
By something better than a sleight of hand,
To sound my judgment, if the thing be fact,
And may have happened in our diocese,
Here in our dear Jerusalem itself,
Why then----
               What then?
                      Then were it well, Sir Knight,
To execute at once upon the Jew
The penalty provided for the case,
By Papal and Imperial laws, against
So foul a crime, such dire iniquity.
Indeed!
          The laws I mention have decreed
That if a Jew shall to apostasy
Seduce a Christian, he shall die by fire.
Indeed!
         How much more when a Jew by force
Tears from baptismal bonds a Christian child?
For all that's done to children is by force,
Save what the Church shall order and perform.
What if the child were steeped in misery,
And must have died, but for this bounteous Jew?
It matters not: the Jew should still be burnt.
'Twere better to expire in misery,
Than live to suffer never-ending pains.
The Jew moreover should not have forestalled
The hand of God, whom had He willed to save,
Could save without him.
                           Make him happy too,
In spite of him.
                  It matters not, the Jew
Must still be burnt.
                     That grieves me very much,
And all the more, as people say that he
Has reared the child not in his own belief,
So much as in no faith at all, and taught
Her neither more nor less of God than is
By reason asked.
                     It matters not, the Jew
Must still be burnt--and for this very cause
Would merit threefold death. To rear a child
Without a faith! Not even teach a child
The greatest of all duties--to believe!
'Tis heinous, and I'm rapt in wonder, Knight,
That you yourself----
                      Oh, reverend Sir, the rest
In the confessional, if God allow.    (Is going.)
What, going! and not await my questioning!
Not name to me this infidel, this Jew!
Not find him out for me at once! But, hold!
A thought occurs. I'll to the Sultan straight.
According to the treaty we have sworn
With Saladin, he must protect our creed
With all the privileges, all the rights
That appertain to our most holy faith.
Thank God! we have retained the deed itself,
With seal and signature affixed, and we
Can readily convince him, make him feel
How full of peril for the state it is
Not to believe. All civil bonds are rent
Asunder, torn to pieces, Knight, when men
Have no belief. Away, away for ever
With such impiety!
                      I much deplore
That I want time to relish this discourse,
This holy sermon. Saladin awaits
My coming.
               Ah, indeed!
                          And I'll prepare
The Sultan for your presence, reverend Sir,
If you desire.
               Why, yes! for I have heard
You have found favour in the Sultan's sight.
I beg to be remembered with respect.
Zeal in the cause of God impels me on,
And all excesses are performed for Him.
Weigh that in kindness, then, most noble Sir!
But, tell me, was your case about the Jew
A problem merely?
                     Problem!    (He retires.)
                              (Of the facts,
I must have fuller knowledge. I must be
Better informed; 'twill be another job
For brother Bonafides.) Son, come hither!
                    (Speaks with the Friar as he retires.)
Saladin's Palace.
(Slaves are employed in bringing bags of gold, and piling
them on the floor.)
Saladin, Sittah.
In truth, this weary business ne'er will end;
Say, is it nearly done?
                           One half is done.
Then take the rest to Sittah? Where's Al-Hafi?
He must take charge of what is here. But, hold,
Were it not best to send it to my father?
Here 'twill be quickly spent. I feel, in truth,
That I am growing miserly. At last
He must be skilful who gets much from me,
And till from Egypt further treasure comes,
Our poverty must be content to struggle.
Yet, at the Holy Sepulchre, the cost
Of all the Christian pilgrims must be paid;
They must, at least, not go with empty hands.
Why, what is this? wherefore this gold to me?
Recoup yourself with it, if aught is left,
Keep it in store.
                     Are Nathan and the Knight
Not yet arrived?
                     The former everywhere
Is seeking him.
SITTAH.
                 Behold what I have found
In turning o'er my ornaments and jewels (showing a small portrait).
Ha! what is here! a portrait! yes, my brother!
'Tis he--'tis he! Was he--was he, alas!
Oh dear, brave youth! so early lost to me!
With thee at hand what had I not achieved!
Give me the portrait, Sittah. I recall
This picture well. He gave it to his Lilla--
Your elder sister--when one summer morn
He tore himself away reluctantly.
She would not yield, but clasped him in her arms.
'Twas the last morning that he e'er rode forth,
And I, alas! I let him ride alone.
Poor Lilla died of grief, and ne'er forgave
My error that I let him ride alone.
He ne'er returned.
                     Poor brother!
                                   Say no more.
A few short years, and we shall ne'er return.
And then who knows? But 'tis not death alone
That blights the hopes and promises of youth,
They have far other foes, and oftentimes
The strongest, like the weakest, is o'ercome.
But be that as it may, I must compare
This portrait with the Templar, that I may
Observe how much my fancy cheated me.
'Twas for that purpose that I brought it here.
But give it, and I'll tell thee if 'tis like:
We women are best judges of such things.
Who's there? the Templar? Bid him come at once.
Not to disturb you, or perplex him with
My curious questions, I'll retire awhile. (Throws herself upon
the sofa, and lets her veil fall.)
That's well. (And now his voice--will that be like?
For Assad's voice still slumbers in my soul!)
The Templar and 
Saladin.
I am your prisoner, Sultan.
                             You my prisoner!
Shall I refuse him liberty, whose life
I freely spared?
                  It is my duty, Sire,
To hear, and not anticipate, your will.
Yet it but ill becomes my character
And station, Sultan, to be thus profuse
Of gratitude because you've spared my life--
A life which henceforth is at your command.
Only forbear to use it to my hurt.
Not that I grudge my mortal enemy
Another pair of hands; but such a heart
As yours I do not yield him willingly.
You valiant youth! I have not gauged you ill:
In soul and body, you are truly Assad.
I fain would learn where you have been so long
Concealed. In what dim cavern you have slept?
What spirit, in some region of the blest,
Has kept this beauteous flower so fresh in bloom?
Methinks I could remind you of our sports
In days gone by; and I could chide you, too,
For having kept one secret from my ear,
For having dared one gallant deed alone.
I'm happy that so much of this deceit
At least is true, that in my sear of life
An Assad blooms for me once more. And you,
You too are happy, Knight!
                               Whate'er you will--
Whatever be your thought--lies as a wish
Within mine inmost soul.
SALADIN.
                          We'll prove you, then.
Will you abide with me?--cling to my side,
Whether as Christian or as Mussulman,
In turban or white mantle? Choose your garb--
Choose for yourself. I never have desired
That the same bark should grow on every tree.
Else, Saladin, you never had become
The hero that you are--who'd rather be
The gardener of the Lord.
                              If thus you think
Of Saladin, we're half agreed, already----
Nay, quite!
One word!
                          One man! and with this hand
Take more than you can e'er take back again.
Henceforth I'm wholly yours.
                             This is too much--
For one day 'tis too much! Came he not with you?
Who?
SALADIN.
         Who? Nathan.
                           No; I came alone.
Oh, what a deed was thine! what happiness
That such a deed should serve so good a man!
'Twas nothing.
             Why so cold, O valiant youth!
When God makes man His minister of good,
He need not be so cold, nor modestly
Wish to appear so cold.
                           But in the world
All things have many sides, and who is he
Can comprehend how they may fit each other?
Cling ever to what's noble, and praise God!
He knows how all things fit. But if you are
So scrupulous, young man, I must beware.
I too have many sides, and some of them
May seem to you not always made to fit.
That grieves me; for suspicion, at the least,
Is not a sin of mine.
                  Then, tell me, whom
Do you suspect? Not Nathan, surely? What!
Nathan suspected, and by you? Explain--
Afford me this first proof of confidence.
I've nothing against Nathan. I am vexed,
But with myself alone.
                           Why so?
                                  For dreaming
That any Jew can think himself no Jew.
I dreamt this waking.
                           Tell me all your dream.
You know that Nathan has a daughter, Sultan!
And what I did for her, I did--because
I did it. Far too proud to reap the thanks
I had not sown, from day to day I shunned
The maiden's sight. Her father was afar.
He comes, he hears, he seeks me, give me thanks;
Wishes that she might please me, and he talks
Of dawning prospects. Well, I hear it all,
I listen to him, go and see the maid--
O! such a maiden, Sultan. But, I blush.
Why blush? Blush that a Jewish maid should win
Your admiration? 'Tis a venial fault.
But oh! that, through her father's sweet discourse,
To this impression my o'er-hasty heart
Such weak resistance offered! Fool. I leaped
A second time into the flame, and then
I wooed, and was denied.
                                 Denied?--denied?
The prudent father does not plainly say
No, to my suit--but he must first inquire--
He must reflect. Well, be it so. Had I
Not done the same? I looked about, inquired--
Reflected--ere I plunged into the flames
Where she was shrieking. Oh, by Heaven! it is
A splendid thing to be so circumspect!
Nay, but you must concede somewhat to age.
His doubts will pass away, nor will he wish
You to become a Jew.
                           Who knows?
                                       Who knows!
One who knows Nathan better than yourself.
And yet the superstitions we have learned
From education, do not lose their power
When we have found them out; nor are all free
Whose judgment mocks the galling chains they wear.
'Tis wisely said; but Nathan, surely Nathan----
That superstition is the worst of all
Which thinks itself the easiest to be borne----
'Tis possible. But Nathan----
                             And to trust
To it alone a blind humanity
Till it is used to truth's more brilliant light.
To it alone----
                   Well, well! But Nathan's fate
Is not to be so weak----
                           I thought so once,
But what if this bright pattern to mankind
Were such a thorough Jew that he seeks out
For Christian children to bring up as Jews?
How then?
               Who speaks so of him?
                                     E'en the maid
For whom I'm so distressed, with hopes of whom
He seemed so glad to recompense the deed
He would not suffer me to do for naught.
This maid is not his daughter; no, she is
A kidnapped Christian child.
                                    Whom Nathan now
Refuses you!
                Refuse or not refuse,
He is found out--the prating hypocrite
Is now found out; but on this Jewish wolf,
For all his philosophical sheep's garb,
Dogs I can loosen who will tear his hide.
Peace, Christian!
               What! peace, Christian? Wherefore so?
Shall Jew and Mussulman be free to boast
Their creeds, and shall the Christian be ashamed
To own his faith?
                     Peace, Christian!
                                      Yes, I feel
What weight of blame lies in your calm reproof--
In that one word pronounced by Saladin.
Oh! that I knew what Assad would have done
Had he but fill'd my place!
                            He had not done
Much better; nay, perhaps, had been more warm.
Where did you learn to bribe me with a word?
And yet, in truth, if all has happened so
As you narrate, it is not much like Nathan.
But Nathan is my friend, and of my friends
One must not quarrel with the other. So
Take counsel, act with prudence. Do not loose
On him the fanatics among your race.
Keep silence. All the clergy of your sect
Would call to me for vengeance upon him
With far more show of right than I could wish.
Let not revenge impel you to become
A Christian to the Jew or Mussulman.
Thanks to the Patriarch's bloodthirsty rage,
Your counsel almost comes too late; and I
Had nearly proved his cruel instrument.
How so? and did you see the Patriarch
Before you came to me?
                            Yes, in the storm
Of passion--in the whirl of doubt----Forgive me.
I fear you will no longer find in me
One feature of your Assad.
                           Yes, that fear
Is like him. But, methinks, I know full well
The weaknesses from which our virtues spring:
Attend to these--the former cannot hurt.
But go, seek Nathan, as he sought for you,
And bring him hither. Be but reconciled.
Are you in earnest, Knight, about this maid?
Be calm--she shall be yours. Nathan shall feel
That without swines-flesh he has dared to rear
A Christian child. Now, Templar, leave me. Go!
                (Exit the Templar. Sittah leaves the
sofa.)
Saladin and 
Sittah.
'Tis strange, indeed.
                   What say you now, my Sittah?
Was not our Assad once a handsome youth?
If this were like him, and 'twere not the knight
Who had his portrait taken. But, dear brother,
How could you ever so forget yourself
As not to make inquiry for his parents?
And more especially about his mother?
That was your meaning--eh?
                           You are too quick.
But nothing is more possible; for he,
My brother Assad, was so favoured by
The Christian ladies--handsome Christian ladies--
That a report once spread----But 'tis not right
We should refer to that. We'll be content
That he is here again, with all his faults,
The faults and wildness of his gentle heart--
That he is here again. Oh, Nathan must
Give him the maid. What think you?
                                       What, to him?
Ay! for what claim has Nathan to the girl
If he is not her father? He, who saved
Her life, may properly assume the rights
Of him who gave existence to the maid.
Then might not Saladin lay claim to her,
Withdrawing her from the unrightful owner?
There is no need of that.
                          No actual need,
But female curiosity suggests
That counsel to me. There are certain men
Of whom I feel impatient till I know
What maidens they can love.
                                Well send for her.
Brother, may I do that?
                        But hurt not Nathan.
He must not think that we, by violence,
Would separate them.
                           Fear it not.
                                        Farewell!
I must find out where this Al-Hafi is.
The hall in Nathan's house, looking towards the
palm-trees, as in the first Act. Part of the merchandise and treasures unpacked
and displayed.
Nathan and 
Daja.
O, how magnificent are all these things!
How rich! they're such as none but you could give.
Where was this silver stuff with sprigs of gold
Woven? What might it cost? 'Tis what I call
A wedding garment. Is there any queen
Could wish aught richer?
                           Why a wedding robe?
In buying it, you never thought of that.
But, Nathan, it must be so--it must, indeed--
'Twas made for that. See, here, the pure white ground,
Emblem of innocence; that branching gold,
Covering the virgin white on every side,
Emblem of wealth. Say, is it not divine?
Why all this ingenuity of speech?
Over whose wedding dress would you display
This learning? Have you found a lover, Daja?
What, I?
               Who, then?
                           I, gracious Heaven?
                                           Who, then?
Whose wedding garment would you speak of, Daja?
All this is yours, 'tis meant for no one else.
What, mine! for me! I thought it was for Recha.
No, what I bought for her is elsewhere packed;
'Tis in another bale. But, come, away
With all this rubbish.
                        Nathan, tempt me not,
For were these things the very costliest
In all the world, I'll touch not one of them
Till you have sworn to seize a happy chance
Which Heaven ne'er offers twice.
                                       What happy chance?
What must I seize?
                  Nathan, feign not such ignorance.
But, in one word--the Templar loves your Recha--
Give her to him, and then your sin, which I
Can hide no longer, will for ever cease.
The maid will then once more resume her place
Amongst the Christians, will again become
What she was born to, and what once she was;
And you, whom we can never thank enough
For all your goodness, will not then have heaped
More burning coals of fire upon your head.
Still harping on the same old string again,
New tuned, but neither to accord nor hold.
How so?
            The Templar pleases me; 'tis true
I'd rather he, than any one, had Recha.
But patience.
               Patience! and, say, is not that
The string you always harp on?
                               Still, have patience
But for a few days longer. Ha! who comes?
A friar! Go ask him what his errand is.
What can he want?
                     Give--give before he begs.
(Oh, that I knew how I could sound the Knight
Without betraying what my motive is!
For should I tell it, and my thoughts prove false,
I shall have staked the father's rights in vain.)
What is the matter?
                                 He would speak with you.
Let him approach. Leave us together, Daja.
Nathan and the 
Friar.
(Aside. Gladly I would continue Recha's father!
And can I not be so, though I may cease
To bear the name? To her--at least to her--
I should be father still, if she but knew
How willingly I bore that title once.)
What can I do to serve you, pious brother?
Not much; and yet it gives me pleasure, Nathan,
To see at least that you are still so well.
You know me, then, it seems?
                              Who knows you not?
You have impressed your name on many a hand--
It has been stamped on mine these many years.
Come, brother, come; here's to refresh it.
                                                  Thanks.
That would be robbing poorer men. I will
Take nothing; but I beg of you, permit
That I refresh your memory with my name;
For I can boast of having formerly
Placed something in your hand you should not scorn.
Excuse me--I'm ashamed--what was it? Say,
And then take for atonement sevenfold
The value of the thing.
                      Well, first of all,
Hear how this very day has brought to mind
The pledge I gave you.
                                    What! a pledge to me?
Not long ago I led a hermit's life
On Quarantana, near to Jericho.
Some Arab thieves came and attacked my cell;
They robbed my oratory, forcing me
To follow them. But fortune favoured me.
I fled, came hither to the Patriarch,
And sought from him another calm retreat,
Where I might serve my God in solitude
Till death should bless me.
                          Ah! I am on thorns.
Be quick! What pledge did you entrust to me?
Yes, Nathan, presently. The Patriarch
Has promised I shall have a hermitage
On Tabor, when 'tis vacant; and meanwhile
Employs me in this convent as a brother,
And here I am at present. But I pine
For Tabor fifty times a day; for here
He makes me toil at work which I detest.
Be speedy, I beseech you.
                             Well, it chanced
Some one has whispered in his ear to-day
That a Jew lives hard by, who educates
A Christian as his daughter.
                              How?
                                               Nay, hear.
He has commissioned me, if possible,
To find this Jew out for him; and he raves
Loudly and bitterly against the crime,
Which he pronounces as the actual sin
Against the Holy Ghost--that is, the sin
The greatest, which a sinner can commit.
But luckily we can't exactly tell
Its nature. But my conscience all at once
Was roused, and it occurred to me that I
Had once, perhaps, been guilty of this sin.
Do you remember, eighteen years ago,
When a knight's squire committed to your hands
A female infant but a few weeks old?
What say you? Well, in fact there was----
                                               Ay, look--
Look well at me--for I'm that squire: 'twas I.
What! you?
                And he from whom I brought the child
Was, if I recollect the matter right,
A Lord of Filneck--Wolf von Filneck.
                                       Right.
Because the mother died not long before;
And he, the father, was obliged to fly
To Gaza suddenly. The helpless child
Could not accompany him, and therefore he
Committed it to you: that was my task.
I found you out at Daran.
                           Right, quite right.
It were no wonder had my memory
Deceived me. I have served so many lords.
The one who fled was not my master long,
He fell at Askalon. His heart was kind.
Yes, yes, and I have much to thank him for.
Not once, but many times he saved my life.
O, glorious! then the greater joy for you
To educate his daughter.
                           You say well.
Where is she now? She is not dead, I hope.
Let me not hear, I pray, that she is dead.
If no one else have found the secret out,
All is yet safe.
                     Indeed!
                          Oh, Nathan, trust me.
This is my way of thinking: if the good
That I propose to do is intertwined
With mischief, then I let the good alone;
For we know well enough what mischief is,
But not what is the best. 'Twas natural,
If you intended to bring up the child
With care, that you should rear it as your own.
And to have done this lovingly and well,
And be thus recompensed, is piteous.
It were perhaps more prudent, if the child
Had been brought up by some good Christian's hand,
In her own faith. But then you had not loved
Your dear friend's orphan child; and children need
Love--were it but the affection of a brute--
More at that age, than Christianity:
There's always time enough for that: and if
The maiden had grown up before your eyes,
Healthy and pious, she had then remained
The same as ever in her Maker's eyes.
For is not Christianity all built
Upon the Jewish creed? Oh oft, too oft,
It vexes me and costs me bitter tears,
To think that Christians will so constantly
Forget that Christ our Saviour was a Jew.
Good brother, you shall be my advocate,
When hate and bigotry shall frown on me,
All for a deed--which you alone shall hear--
But take it with you to the tomb. As yet
E'en vanity has never tempted me
To breathe it to a soul; to you alone
It shall be told; for simple piety
Like yours can truly feel what man can do
Who places his full confidence in God.
You're moved, and your eyes run o'er with tears.
At Daran 'twas you met me with the child.
You had not heard that, a few days before,
The Christians murdered every Jew in Gath--
Woman and child. Amongst them was my wife--
Along with her, my seven hopeful sons.
All had sought shelter 'neath my brother's roof,
And there were burnt alive.
                                 Just God!
                                                You came.
Three nights in dust and ashes I had lain
Before my God and wept; and I at times
Arraigned my Maker, raged, and cursed myself
And the whole world together, and I swore
Eternal hate to Christianity.
Who can condemn you? I believe it well.
But by degrees returning reason came,
And spoke with gentle accent: "God is just!
And this was His decree. Now exercise
The lesson thou so long hast understood,
And which is surely not more difficult
To exercise than well to understand."
I rose and cried to God, "I will, I will!
Do Thou but aid my purpose." And, behold,
Just at that moment you dismounted. You
Gave me the child enfolded in your robe.
The words we spoke occur not to me now.
This much I recollect: I took the child;
I bore it to my bed; I kissed its cheek;
I flung myself upon my knees, and sobbed,
"My God, Thou hast restored me one of seven!"
Nathan, you are a Christian. Yes, I swear
You are a Christian--better never lived.
Indeed! the very thing that makes me seem
Christian to you, makes you a Jew to me.
But let us not distress each other thus,
'Tis time to act, and though a sevenfold love
Had bound me to this strange, this lovely maid,
Though the mere thought distracts me, that in her
I lose my seven dear sons a second time,
If Providence require her at my hands
I'm ready to obey.
                    'Tis well! And thus
I thought to counsel you; but there's no need:
Your own good genius has forestalled my words.
The first chance claimant must not tear her hence.
Most surely not.
                 And he who has no claim
Stronger than mine--at least he ought to have
Those prior claims which----
                                 Certainly,
                                        Those claims
Which are derived from nature and from blood.
In my opinion, yes.
                     Then name the man
As brother, or as uncle, bound to her,
I'll not withhold her from him; she was made
To be the ornament of any house,
The pride of any faith. I hope you know
More of your master and his creed than I.
On that point, Nathan, I'm but ill informed,
I have already told you that I spent
Only some moments with him.
                              Can you tell
The mother's name, at least? She was, I think,
A Stauffen?
               Possibly; nay, more--you're right.
Conrad of Stauffen was her brother's name.
He was a Templar.
                     Yes, I think he was:
But hold, I have a book that was my lord's.
I drew it from his bosom when he lay
Dead, and we buried him at Askalon.
Well!
         There are prayers in it; 'tis what we call
A breviary. This, thought I, yet may serve
Some Christian man--not me, forsooth--for I
Can't read a word.
                     No matter--to the point.
The pages of this book are written all
In his own hand, and, as I'm told, contain
All that's important touching him and her.
Go, run and fetch the book: 'tis fortunate!
I'll pay you for it with its weight in gold.
And with a thousand thanks besides. Go! run!
I go--but what he wrote is Arabic.    (Exit)
No matter, fetch it. What, if from this book
I can find means to keep this precious girl,
And win, to boot, a son-in-law like him!
I hardly hope--fate must decide. But who
Has told the Patriarch this? I must not fail
To ascertain. It surely was not Daja?
Daja and 
Nathan.
Only think, Nathan!
                           What?
                                  Well--only think:
 The child was frightened when the message came!
From whom? The Patriarch?
                                     The Sultan's sister,
The Princess Sittah--
                           Not the Patriarch?
No, Sittah. Can't you hear? The Princess sends,
And wishes Recha to be brought to her.
Wishes for Recha! Sittah wishes thus?
'Tis Sittah, then--and not the Patriarch?

 DAJA.
Why do you speak of him?
                           Have you not heard
Some tidings of him lately? Have you seen
Nothing of him, and whispered nothing to him?
How could I so?
                     Where are the messengers?
They stand without.
                       I'll speak to them myself--
'Tis prudent; I shall see if nothing lurks
Behind this message, from the Patriarch. (Exit.)
Well, I have other fears. The only child,
As they suppose, of such a wealthy Jew,
Would for a Mussulman be no bad thing.
I'll wager that the Templar loses her,
Unless I risk a second step, and state
Plainly to Recha who she is. So, courage!
And to do this I must at once employ
The first brief moments when we are alone.
Chance serves: she waits for me, and on the way
An earnest hint will never prove amiss.
So now or never. All will soon be well. (Follows Nathan.)
(Saladin, and several Mamelukes.)
There lies the gold--and no one yet has seen
The Dervise. He will probably be found
Over the chess-board. Play can often make
A man forget himself. Then why not me?
But patience. What's the matter?
                                   Oh, good news!
Joy, Sultan! joy. The Cairo caravan
Is safe arrived, and from the Nile it brings
The seven years' tribute.
                         Bravo, Ibrahim!
You always were a welcome messenger,
And now at length--accept my heartfelt thanks
For the good tidings.
                                (Let me have them, then!)
What are you waiting for? Go.
                                             Nothing more
For my good news?
                           What further?
                                       Messengers
Of good are paid. Am I to be the first
Whom Saladin has learnt to pay with words?
The first to whom he proves ungenerous?
Go, take a purse.
                        No, no--not now. Not if
You'd give them all to me.
                         All? Hold, young man!
Come hither. Take these purses--take these two.
What, going? And shall I be conquered thus
In generosity? for surely 'tis
More difficult for this man to refuse
Than for the Sultan to bestow. Then, here
Here, Ibrahim! Shall I be tempted, just
Before my death, to be a different man?
Shall Saladin not die like Saladin?
Then wherefore has he lived like Saladin?
(Enter a second Mameluke.)
Hail, Sultan!
                 If you come and bring the news----
That the Egyptian convoy is arrived.
I know it.
               Then I come too late.
                                   Too late?
Wherefore too late? There, for your tidings take
A purse or two.
Say three.
                                  You reckon well;
But take them.
                   A third messenger will come
Ere long, if he be able.
                           Wherefore so?
He may perhaps, ere this, have brok'n his neck.
We three, when we had heard of the approach
Of the rich caravan, mounted our steeds,
And galloped hitherward. The foremost fell,
Then I was first, and I continued so
Into the town; but that sly fellow there,
Who knew the streets----
                       But where is he who fell?
Go seek him out.
                   That I will quickly do,
And if he lives, one half of this is his.    (Exit.)
Oh, what a noble fellow! who can boast
Such Mamelukes as these? And may I not,
Without conceit, imagine that my life
Has helped to make them so? Avaunt the thought!
That I should ever teach them otherwise.
Sultan!
               Are you the man who fell?
                                      No, Sire.
I have to tell you that the Emir Mansor,
Who led the caravan, is just arrived.
Then bring him quickly.--There he is already.
The Emir Mansor and 
Saladin.
Emir, you're welcome! What has happened to you,
Mansor? we have expected you for long.
This letter will explain how, in Thebais,
Some discontents required the sabred hand
Of Abulkassen. But, since then, our march
Has been pressed forward.
                            I believe it all.
But take, good Mansor--take, without delay,
Another escort if you will proceed,
And take the treasure on to Lebanon:
The greater part is destined for my father.
Most willingly.
                  And let your escort be
A strong and trusty one, for Lebanon
Is far from quiet, and the Templars there
Are on the stir again; be cautious, then
Come, I must see your troop, and order all.
(To a slave.) Say I shall presently return to Sittah.
(The palm-trees before Nathan's 
house.)
The Templar, walking up and
down.
Into this house I never enter more:
He'll come to me at last. Yet, formerly,
They used to watch for me with longing eyes;
And now----The time may come he'll send to beg,
Most civilly, that I will get me hence,
And not pace up and down before his door!
No matter: though I feel a little hurt.
I know not what has thus embittered me:
He answered yes, and has refused me naught,
So far, and Saladin has pledged himself
To bring him round. Say, does the Christian live
Deeper in me than the Jew lurks in him?
Ah! who can truly estimate himself?
How comes it else that I should grudge him so
The trifling booty, which he took such pains
To rob the Christians of? No trifling theft!
No less than such a creature! And to whom
Does she belong? Oh, surely not to him,
The thoughtless slave, who floated the mere block
On to life's barren strand, then disappeared.
Rather to him, the artist, whose fine soul
Has from the block moulded this godlike form,
And graved it there. And yet in spite of him,
The Christian, who begot this beauteous maid,
Recha's true father must be still the Jew.
Were I to fancy her a Christian now,
Bereft of all the Jew has given to her--
Which only such a Jew could have bestowed--
Speak out, my heart--where would have been her charm'
It had been nothing--little; then her smile
Had been a pretty twisting of the mouth
And that which caused it were unworthy deemed
Of the enchantment blooming on her lips.
No: not her very smile! I've seen sweet smiles
Squandered on pride, on foppery, on lies,
On flatterers, on wicked wooers spent:
And did they charm me then? Did they awake
The wish to flutter out existence in
Their sunshine? And I'm angry now with him
Who gave this higher value to the maid?
And wherefore so? Do I deserve the taunt
With which I was dismissed by Saladin?
'Twas bad enough he should think thus of me.
How wicked, how contemptible, alas!
I must have seemed to him! And for a girl!
Conrad, this will not do. Avaunt such thoughts!
And what if Daja has been chattering
Of things not easy to be proved? But see,
He comes, engaged in converse; and with whom?
With him, the Friar. Then he knows all: perhaps
He has betrayed him to the Patriarch.
O Conrad! what vile mischief hast thou done!
O! that one spark of love, that wayward passion,
Should so inflame the brain! But, quick! resolve;
What's to be done? Stay, step aside awhile;
Perhaps the Friar will leave him. Let us see.
Nathan and the 
Friar.
Good brother, once more, thanks.
                                         The same to you.
Why thanks from you? Because I'm wayward, and
Would force upon you what you cannot use?
The book you have did not belong to me.
It is the maid's, is all her property,
Her only patrimony--save yourself.
God grant you ne'er have reason to repent
Of what you've done for her!
                                    Impossible!
That cannot be. Fear not.
                            Alas! alas!
These Patriarchs and Templars----
                                    Cannot work
Such evil as to force me to repent.
But are you sure it is a Templar who
Urges the Patriarch?
                         It is none else;
A Templar talked with him just now, and all
I hear confirms the rumour.
                            But there is
Only one Templar in Jerusalem,
And him I know. He is a friend of mine,
A noble, open-hearted youth.
                               The same.
But what one is at heart, and what one must
Appear in active life, are not the same.
Alas! 'tis true. And so let every one
Act as he will, and do his best, or worst.
With your book, brother, I defy them all!
I'm going straightway with it to the Sultan.
Then God be with you! Here I take my leave.
What! without seeing her? But come again,
Come soon--come often. If the Patriarch
To-day learns nothing. Well! no matter now!
Tell him the whole to-day, or when you will.
Not I. Farewell!    (Exit.)
                   Do not forget us, brother!
O God! I could sink down upon my knees,
Here on this spot! Behold, the knotted skein
Which has so often troubled me, at last
Untangles of itself. I feel at ease,
Since henceforth nothing in this world remains
That I need hide. Henceforth, I am as free
Before mankind, as in the sight of God.
Who only does not need to judge us men
By deeds, which oftentimes are not our own.
Nathan and the 
Templar.
(The latter advancing towards him from the side.)
Hold, Nathan, hold! Take me along with you.
Who calls? You, Templar! Where can you have been
That you could not be met with at the Sultan's?
We missed each other; do not be displeased.
Not I, but Saladin.
                           You had just gone.
Oh, then, you spoke with him. I'm satisfied.
Yes; but he wants to talk with us together.
So much the better. Come with me; I go
Direct to him.
                Say, Nathan, may I ask
Who left you even now?
                         What! don't you know?
Was it that worthy fellow, the good friar,
Whom the old Patriarch employs at will
To work his ends?
                    The same--the very same.
'Tis a prime hit to make simplicity
The workman of deceit.
                          Yes, if he use
The fool, and not the pious man.
                                    This last
The Patriarch ne'er trusts.
                              Depend on this,
That man will not assist the Patriarch
To a wicked end.
                    Well, so I think myself.
But has he told you aught of me?
                                    Of you?
He scarcely knows your name.
                                  That's like enough.

 NATHAN.
He spoke to me about a Templar, who----
Who what?
            But then he never mentioned you.
Who knows? Come tell me, Nathan, all he said.
Who has accused me to the Patriarch?
Accused you! With his leave, that is untrue.
No! Hear me, Nathan! I am not the man
E'er to deny my actions. What I've done
I've done--and there's an end. Nor am I one
Who would maintain that all I've done is right.
But should one fault condemn me? Am I not
Resolved on better deeds for time to come?
And who is ignorant how much the man
Who wills it may improve? Then hear me, Nathan:
I am the Templar talked of by the Friar,
Who has accused--you know what maddened me,
What set my blood on fire within my veins--
Fool that I was! I had almost resolved
To fling myself both soul and body, straight
Into your arms. But how was I received?
How did you meet me, Nathan? Cold--or worse.
Lukewarm--far worse than cold. With cautious words,
Well weighed and measured, Nathan, you took care
To put me off, and with calm questions, asked
About my parentage, and God knows what,
You sought to meet my suit. I cannot now
Dwell on it and be patient. Hear me further.
While in this ferment, Daja suddenly
Drew near to me and whispered in my ear
A secret which cleared up the mystery.
What was it?
               Hear me to the end. I thought
The treasure you had from the Christians stolen,
You would not promptly to a Christian yield;
And so the project struck me, with good speed,
To bring you to extremities.
                          Good speed?
Good, good? pray where's the good!
                                But hear me out.
I own my error; you are free from guilt;
That prating Daja knows not what she says.
She's hostile to you, and she seeks to twine
A dangerous snare around you. Be it so.
I'm but a crazed enthusiast, doubly mad,
Aiming at far too much, or much too little.
That may be also true. Forgive me, Nathan.
If you conceive thus of me----
                            Well, in short.
I saw the Patriarch--but named you not.
'Twas false to say so, for I only told
The case in general terms, to sound his mind.
And that I also might have left undone,
For knew I not the Patriarch to be
An arrant, subtle knave? And might I not
As well have told you all the case at first?
Or was it right in me to risk the loss
Of such a father to the hapless maid?
But what has happened now? The Patriarch,
Ever consistent in his villainy,
Has all at once restored me to myself.
For hear me, Nathan, hear me! Were he now
To learn your name, what more could then occur?
He cannot seize the maid, if she belong
To some one else, and not to you alone.
'Tis from your house alone she can be dragged
Into a convent: grant her, then, I pray,
Grant her to me! Then come the Patriarch!
He'll hardly dare to take my wife from me.
Oh! give her to me. Be she yours or not--
Your daughter--Christian--Jewess--'tis all one--
Or be she nothing--I will ne'er inquire,
Or in my lifetime ask you what she is,
'Tis all alike to me.
                      Do you then think
That to conceal the truth I am compelled?
No matter.
             I have ne'er denied the truth
To you, or any one whom it concerned
To know the fact, that she's of Christian birth,
And that the maid is my adopted child.
Why I have not informed her of the truth,
I need explain to none but to herself.
Nathan; no need of that, it were not well
That she should see you in a different light;
Then spare her the discovery. As yet
She's yours alone--no other's--to bestow.
Then grant her to me, Nathan, I implore--
Grant her to me: I only, I alone,
Can rescue her a second time--and will.
Yes, you could once have saved her, but alas!
'Tis now too late.
                     Too late! ah! say not so.
Thanks to the Patriarch.
                         Why, thanks to him?
Why should we thank the Patriarch! For what?
That now we know her relatives, and know
Into whose hands Recha may be restored.
Let him give thanks who shall have better cause
To thank him.
                 But you must receive her now
From other hands than mine.
                                Alas, poor maid!
O hapless Recha! what has chanced to thee,
That what to other orphans had appeared
A real blessing, is to thee a curse!
But, Nathan, where are these new relatives?
Where are they?
                    Ay, both where and who are they?
Her brother is discovered, and to him
You must address yourself.
                               Her brother! Ha!
And what is he--a soldier or a priest?
Tell me at once what I've to hope from him.
I hear he's neither--or he's both. As yet
I do not know him thoroughly.
                                 What more?
He is a gallant fellow, and with him
Recha may be content.
                       But he's a Christian.
At times I know not what to make of you.
Take it not ill, good Nathan, that I ask,
Must she not henceforth play the Christian,
Associate with Christians, and at last
Become the character she long has played?
Will not the tares at length grow up and choke
The pure wheat you have sown? And does not that
Affect you? Yet you say she'll be content
When with her brother.
                            As I think and hope.
For should she e'er have need of anything,
Has she not you and me?
                        What can she need
When with her brother. Gladly he'll provide
His dear new sister with a thousand robes,
With dainties, and with toys and finery.
And what could any sister wish for more--
Unless, perhaps, a husband? And him too,
Him too the brother, in due time, will find;
And the more Christian he, the better!--Nathan,
How sad to think the angel you have formed,
Should now be marred by others!
                                      Be assured
He'll always prove deserving of our love.
Nay speak not so; of my love, speak not so,
For it can brook no loss, however small,
Not e'en a name. But, hold! Has she as yet
Any suspicion of these late events?
'Tis possible, and yet I know not how.
It matters not; she must, in either case,
First learn from me what fate is threat'ning her.
My purpose not to speak with her again,
And ne'er to see her more, till I should call
Your Recha mine, is gone. I take my leave.
Nay, whither would you go?
                               At once to her,
To learn if she be bold enough at heart,
To fix upon the only course that now
Is worthy of her.
                   Name it.
                               It is this:
That henceforth she should never care to know
Aught of her brother or of you.
                                 What more?
To follow me--even if it were her fate
To wed a Mussulman.
                       Stay, Templar, stay!
You will not find her. She's with Sittah now,
The Sultan's sister.
                      Wherefore, and since when?
If you desire to see her brother, come,
Follow me straight.
                       Her brother, say you? Whose?
Recha's, or Sittah's?
                      Both--ay, both, perhaps.
But come this way, I pray you. Come with me.
(Nathan leads
the Templar away.)
Sittah and 
Recha engaged in conversation.
How I am pleased with you, sweet girl. But, come,
Shake off these fears, and be no more alarmed,
Be happy, cheerful. Let me hear you talk.
Princess!
SITTAH.
Nay, child, not princess! Call me friend,
Or Sittah--or your sister--or dear mother,
For I might well be so to you--so good,
So prudent, and so young! How much you know,
How much you must have read!
                                    Read, Sittah! now
You're mocking me, for I can scarcely read.
Scarce read, you young deceiver!
                                   Yes, perhaps
My father's hand; I thought you spoke of books.
And so I did--of books.
                        They puzzle me
To read.
         Indeed!
                   I speak, in veriest truth.
My father hates book-learning, which he says,
Makes an impression only on the brain
With lifeless letters.
                       Well, he's right in that.
And so the greater part of what you know----
I've learnt from his own mouth, and I can tell
The when, the where, and why he taught it me.
So it clings closer, and the soul drinks in
The full instruction.
                        Yes, and Sittah, too,
Has not read much.
                     How so? I am not vain
Of having read, and yet why say you so?
Speak boldly. Tell the reason.
                                    She's so plain--
So free from artifice--so like herself.
Well!
        And my father says 'tis rarely books
Work that effect.
                 Oh, what a man he is,
Dear Recha!
              Is he not?
                        He never fails
To hit the mark.
                 Yes, yes; and yet this father----
What ails you, love?
                     This father----
                                   Oh my God!
You're weeping.
                  And this father--it must forth--
My heart wants room, wants room----
(Throws herself in tears at Sittah's feet.)
                                    What ails you, Recha?
Yes, I must lose this father!
                          Lose him--never!
Why so? Be calm. Courage! it must not be.
Your offer to be friend and sister to me
Will now not be in vain.
                              Yes, I am both.
Arise, arise, or I must call for help.
O pardon! I forget, through agony,
With whom I speak. Tears, sobbing, and despair
Are naught with Sittah. Reason, calm and cool,
Is over her alone omnipotent.
No other argument avails with her.
Well, then?
             My friend and sister, suffer not
Another father to be forced on me.
Another father to be forced on you!
Who can do that, or wish to do it, love?
Who but my good, my evil genius, Daja?
She can both wish it and perform the deed.
You do not know this good, this evil Daja.
May God forgive her, and reward her, too,
For she has done me good and evil, both.
Evil? Then she has little goodness left.
Oh, she has much.
                   Who is she?
                                  Who? a Christian,
Who cared for me in childhood's early years.
You cannot know how little she allowed
That I should miss a mother's tender cares--
May God reward her for it!--but she has
Worried and tortured me.
                              Wherefore, and how?
Poor woman, she's a Christian, and from love
Has tortured me: a warm enthusiast,
Who thinks she only knows the real road
That leads to God.
                    I understand you now.
And one of those who feel in duty bound
To point it out to every one who strays
From the plain path, to lead, to drag them in.
And who can censure them? for if the road
They travel is the only one that's safe,
They cannot, without pain, behold their friends
Pursue a path that lead to endless woe,
Else, at the self-same time, 'twere possible
To love and hate another. Nor does this
Alone compel me to complain aloud.
Her groans, her prayers, her warnings, and her threats
I could have borne much longer willingly.
They always called up good and wholesome thoughts.
Who is not flattered to be held so dear,
And precious by another, that the thought
Of parting pierces him with lasting pain?
This is most true.
                   And yet this goes too far,
And I have nothing to oppose to it--
Patience, reflection, nothing.
                                How? to what?
To what she has disclosed to me.
                                   Say, when?
'Tis scarce an instant. Coming hither
We passed a Christian temple on our way;
She all at once stood still, seemed inly moved,
Raised her moist eyes to heaven, then looked on me.
"Come," she exclaimed at length, "come straight on here,
Through this old fane." She leads, I follow her.
My eyes with horror overrun the dim
And tottering ruin: all at once she stops
By a low ruined altar's sunken steps.
O, how I felt, when there, with streaming eyes
And wringing hands, down at my feet she fell!
Good child!
            And, by the Holy Virgin, who had heard
So many suppliants' prayers, and had performed
Full many a wonder there, she begged, implored
With looks of heart-felt sympathy and love,
That I would now take pity on myself,
And pardon her for daring to unfold
The nature of the Church's claims on me.
I guessed as much.
                     I'm born of Christian blood,
Have been baptised, and am not Nathan's child!
Nathan is not my father! God, O God!
He's not my father, Sittah! Now, behold,
I'm once more prostrate at your feet.
                                     Arise!
Recha, arise! behold, my brother comes.
Saladin, Sittah, 
and Recha.
What is the matter, Sittah?
                                 She has swooned.
Who is she?
SITTAH.
               Don't you know?
                                 'Tis Nathan's child.
What ails her?
SITTAH.
                 Look up, Recha! 'tis the Sultan.
No, I'll not rise--not rise nor even look
Upon the Sultan's countenance, nor wonder
At the bright lustre of unchanging truth
And goodness on his brow and in his eye,
Before----
       Rise, rise!
                        Before he promises----
Come, come! I promise, whatsoe'er your prayer.
'Tis only this--to leave my father to me,
And me to him. As yet I cannot tell
Who seeks to be my father: who it is
Can harbour such a wish I'll ne'er inquire.
Does blood alone make fathers--blood alone?
Who can have been so cruel as to raise
This dire suspicion in my Recha's breast?
Say, is it proved? beyond all doubt made clear?
'Tis proved, for Daja had it from my nurse,
Whose dying lips entrusted it to her.
Dying! she raved. And even were it true,
A father is not made by blood alone;
Scarcely the father of a savage beast--
Blood only gives the right to earn the name.
Then fear no more, but hear me. If there be
Two fathers who contend for thee, leave both,
And claim a third! O! take me for your father!
Oh, do so, Recha, do so!
                         I will be
A good, kind father to you. But, in truth
A better thought occurs. Why should you need
Two fathers? They are mortal, and must die.
'Twere better, Recha, to look out betimes
For one to start with you on equal terms,
And stake his life for thine. You understand?
You make her blush!
SALADIN.
                       Why that was half my scheme.
Blushing becomes plain features, and will make
A beauteous cheek more beauteous. My commands
Are giv'n to bring your father, Nathan, here.
Another comes as well. You'll guess his name?
Hither they come! Will you allow it, Sittah?
Brother!
            And when he comes, maid, you must blush
To crimson.
             Sittah! wherefore should I blush?
You young dissembler, you will else grow pale!
But as thou wilt and canst. (A female slave enters, and
approaches Sittah.) What, here so soon?
Well, let them enter. Brother, here they are!
Nathan, the 
Templar, and the others.
Welcome, my dear good friends! Nathan, to you
I must first mention, you may send and fetch
Your moneys when you will.
                                              Sultan----
                                                   And now
I'm at your service.
                      Sultan----
                                 For my gold
Is now arrived; the caravan is safe:
These many years I have not been so rich.
Now, tell me what you wish for, to achieve
Some splendid speculation? You in trade,
Like us, have never too much ready cash.
Why speak about this trifle first? I see
An eye in tears (going towards Recha). My Recha, you
have wept.
What have you lost? Are you not still my child?
My father!
             That's enough! We're understood
By one another! But look up--be calm,
Be cheerful! If your heart is still your own,
And if no threatened loss disturb your breast,
Your father is not lost to you!
                                 None, none!
None! Then I'm much deceived. What we don't fear
To lose, we ne'er have loved, and ne'er have wished
To be possessed of. But 'tis well, 'tis well!
Nathan, this changes all! At your command,
We come here, Sultan. You have been misled
By me, and I will trouble you no more!
Rash, headlong youth! Must every temper yield
To yours!--and must we all thus guess your mind?
But, Sultan, you have heard and seen it all.
Well, truly, it was awkward to be thus
Uncertain of your cause!
                           I know my fate.
Whoe'er presumes upon a service done,
Cancels the benefit. What you have saved
Is, therefore, not your own. Or else the thief,
Urged by mere avarice through flaming halls,
Were like yourself a hero. (Advancing towards Recha to
lead her to the Templar.) Come, sweet maid!
Be not reserved towards him. Had he been so,
Were he less warm, less proud, he had held back,
And had not saved you. Weigh the former deed
Against the latter, and you'll make him blush!
Do what he should have done! confess your love!
Make him your offer! and if he refuse,
Or e'er forget how infinitely more
You do for him than he has done for you--
For what, in fact, have been his services,
Save soiling his complexion? a mere sport--
Else has he nothing of my Assad in him,
But only wears his mask. Come, lovely maid.
Go, dearest, go! this step is not enough
For gratitude; it is too little.
                                  Hold!
Hold, Saladin! hold, Sittah!
                                         What would you?
It is the duty of another now
To speak.
                     Who questions that? Beyond all doubt
A foster--father has a right to vote
First, if you will. You see I know the whole.
Not quite. I speak not, Sultan, of myself.
There is another and a different man
Whom I must first confer with, Saladin.
And who is he?
                 Her brother.
                               Recha's brother?
E'en so.
          My brother! Have I then a brother?
Where is this brother? Not yet here! 'Twas here
I was to meet him.
                     Patience yet awhile.
He has imposed a father on the girl;
He'll find a brother for her now!
                              Indeed,
That much was wanting. But this mean rebuke,
Christian, had ne'er escaped my Assad's lips.
Forgive him: I forgive him readily.
Who knows what in his youth and in his place
We might ourselves have thought? (Approaching him in
a very friendly manner) Suspicion, knight,
Follows upon reserve. Had you at first
Vouchsafed to me your real name----
                                    How! what!
You are no Stauffen.
                       Tell me who I am.
Conrad of Stauffen, not.
                           Then what's my name?
Leo of Filneck.
                           How?
                                 You start!
                                             With reason.
But who says this?
                 I, who can tell you more.
Meanwhile, observe, I tax you not with falsehood.
Indeed!
         It may be both names fit you well.
I think so. (Aside) God inspired him with that thought.
Your mother was a Stauffen: and her brother
(The uncle to whose care you were consigned,
When, by the rigour of the climate chased,
Your parents quitted Germany, to seek
This land once more) was Conrad. He, perhaps,
Adopted you as his own son and heir.
Is it long since you travelled hither with him?
Does he still live?
                    What shall I answer him?
He speaks the truth. Nathan, 'tis so indeed;
But he himself is dead. I journeyed here,
With the last troops of knights, to reinforce
Our order. But inform me how this tale
Concerns your Recha's brother.
                                Well, your father----
What! did you know him too?
                                He was my friend.
Your friend! Oh, Nathan, is it possible?
Oluf of Filneck did he style himself;
But he was not a German.
                          You know that?
He had espoused a German, and he lived
For some, time with your mother there.
                                        No more
Of this, I beg. But what of Recha's brother?
It is yourself.
                  What, I? am I her brother?
He, my brother?
SALADIN.
                  Are they so near akin?
My brother!
             I, your brother?
                               No, in truth,
It cannot be. His heart makes no response.
O God! we are deceivers.

SALADIN (to the Templar).
                             Say you so?
Is that your thought? All is deceit in you:
The voice, the gesture, and the countenance,
Nothing of these is yours. How! will you not
Acknowledge such a sister? Then begone!
Oh! do not misinterpret my surprise.
Sultan, you never saw your Assad's heart
At any time like this. Then do not err,
Mistake not him and me. (Turning to Nathan.) You give
me much,
Nathan, and also you take much away,
And yet you give me more than you withdraw--
Ay, infinitely more. My sister, sister! (embraces Recha.)
Blanda of Filneck.
                  Blanda, ha! not Recha?
Your Recha now no more! Have you resigned
Your child? Give her her Christian name once more,
And for my sake discard her then. Oh, Nathan,
Why must she suffer for a fault of mine?
What mean you, oh, my children, both of you?
For sure my daughter's brother is my child
Whenever he shall wish.
(While they embrace Nathan, Saladin uneasily approaches
Sittah.)
                           What say you, sister? Sittah.
I'm deeply moved----
                     And I half tremble when
I think of the emotion that must come:
Prepare yourself to bear it as you may.
What! How!
               Nathan, a word--one word with you.
(He joins Nathan, while Sittah approaches the
others to express her sympathy, and Nathan and Saladin 
converse in a low tone.)
Hear, hear me, Nathan. Said you not just now
That he----
          That who?
                   Her father was not born
In Germany. You know then whence he came?
And what he was?
                  He never told me that.
Was he no Frank, nor from the Western land?
He said as much. He spoke the Persian tongue.
The Persian! need I more? 'Tis he! 'twas he!
Who?
      Assad, my brother Assad, beyond doubt.
If you think so, then be assured from this:
Look in this book (handing him the breviary).
                     Oh, 'tis his hand! once more
I recognise it.
                    They know naught of this:
It rests with you to tell them all the truth.
They are my brother's children. Shall I not
Acknowledge them and claim them? Or shall I
Abandon them to you? (Speaking aloud.) Sittah, they are
The children of my brother and of yours. (Rushes to embrace
them.)
What do I hear? Could it be otherwise?
Proud youth! from this time forward you are bound
To love me. (To Recha.) And henceforth, without your leave
Or with it, I am what I vowed to be.
And so am I.
My son! my Assad's son!
I of your blood! Then those were more than dreams
With which they used to lull my infancy--
(Falls at Sultan's feet.)
There, mark the rascal! though he knew something
Of what has chanced, he was content that I
Should have become his murderer! Beware.
(The curtain falls whilst they repeatedly embrace each
other in silence.)
York Street, Covent Garden,
November, 1877.
TRAVEL AND ARCHEOLOGY.
ANCIENT ATHENS; its History, Topography, and Remains. By 
T. H. Dyer, LL.D. Super-royal 8vo. copiously Illustrated. 1l. 5s.
'Dr. Dyer's volume will be a work of reference to the student
of Greek History and literature, of the greatest interest and value.'--Spectator.
DESERT OF THE EXODUS. Journeys on Foot in the Wilderness
of the Forty Years' Wanderings, undertaken in connexion with the Ordnance Survey
of Sinai and the Palestine Exploration Fund. By E. H. Palmer,
M.A., Lord Almoner's Professor of Arabic, and Fellow of St. John's
College, Cambridge. With Maps and numerous Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo. 1l.
8s.
'A work which the biblical student will highly prize for the
strong light which it sheds upon a most important portion of Scripture history,
but which cannot be read without interest and delight by every one who is
capable of taking an intelligent interest in manners and customs widely removed
from our own.'--Saturday Review.
HISTORY OF EGYPT. From the Earliest Times till its
Conquest by the Arabs, A.D. 640. By S.
Sharpe. With numerous Illustrations, Maps, &c. 6th Edition. 2 vols. post
8vo. 10s.
NINEVEH AND ITS PALACES. By J. Bonomi,
F.R.S.L. New Edition, revised and considerably enlarged. With upwards of
300 Engravings. Post 8vo. 5s.
HISTORY OF POMPEII: its Buildings and Antiquities. An
Account of the City, with full description of the Remains and Recent
Excavations, and also an Itinerary for Visitors. By T. H. Dyer,
LL.D. With nearly 300 Wood Engravings, a large Map, and a Plan of the
Forum. 4th Edition, bringing the work down to 1874. Post 8vo. 7s. 6d.
ROME AND THE CAMPAGNA. A Historical and Topographical
Description of the Site, Buildings and Neighbourhood of ancient Rome. By the
Rev. R. Burn, late Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College,
Cambridge. With 85 Engravings by Jewitt, and numerous Maps and Plans. An
Appendix and additional Plan illustrating recent Excavations have lately been
added. Demy 4to. 3l. 3s.
BIOGRAPHY.
BARBAULD (MRS.) A Memoir of, including Letters and
Notices of her Family and Friends. By her great-niece, Anna
Letitia Le Breton. With Portrait. Demy 12mo. 5s.
BOSWELL'S JOHNSON, and JOHNSONIANA.
Including his Tour to the Hebrides, Tour in Wales, &c. Edited, with large
Additions and Notes, by the Rt. Hon. J. W. Croker. The
second and most complete Copyright Edition, with upwards of 40 Engravings on
Steel. Post 8vo. 5 vols. 20s.
BRYAN. A Biographical and Critical Dictionary of
Painters and Engravers. With a List of Ciphers, Monograms, and Marks. By 
M. Bryan. A New Edition by G. Stanley. Imp. 8vo.
2l. 2s.
----A SUPPLEMENT of 
RECENT and LIVING PAINTERS. By 
H. Ottley. Imp. 8vo. 12s.
COLERIDGE (S. T.) Biographia Literaria, and two Lay
Sermons. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d.
COOPER (THOMPSON). A New Biographical Dictionary. By 
T. Cooper, F.S.A. 1 vol. 8vo. 12s.
FOSTER (JOHN), The Life of. 2 vols. post 8vo. 3s.
6d. each.
GOETHE, Autobiography of (Wahrheit und Dichtung aus
Meinem Leben). 2 vols. post 8vo. 3s. 6d. each.
GOETHE. Conversations with Eckermann and Soret. Post
8vo. 3s. 6d.
GOETHE. Correspondence with Schiller. 2 vols. post 8vo.
7s.
GOLDSMITH (O.) The Life of, together with The
Sketch-Book. By
Washington Irving. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d. The
Life alone, in paper wrapper, 1s. 6d.
IRVING (W.) Life and Letters. By his Nephew, 
P. E. Irving. In 2 vols. post 8vo. 3s. 6d. each.
LUTHER, Michelet's Life of. Translated by 
W. Hazlitt. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d.
MAHOMET AND HIS SUCCESSORS. By 
Washington Irving. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d.
MICHAEL ANGELO AND RAPHAEL, their Lives and Works. By 
Duppa and
Quatremere de Quincy. With 13 Engravings on Steel. Post
8vo. 5s.
NELSON, The Life of. By R. Southey.
With additional Notes and numerous Illustrations. Post 8vo. 5s.
RICHTER (J. P. F.) Autobiography and short Memoir, with
the Levana. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d.
WASHINGTON, The Life of. By W. Irving.
With Portrait. In 4 vols. post 8vo. 3s. 6d. each.
WELLINGTON, The Life of. By An Old
Soldier, from the materials of Maxwell. Eighteen Engravings. Post 8vo. 5s.
WESLEY (JOHN), The Life of. By R.
Southey. New and Complete Edition. With Portrait. Post 8vo. 5s.
By the late Sir A. Helps, K.C.B.
BRASSEY (T.) The Life and Labours of the late. With
Illustrations. 5th Edition, 10s. 6d.
HERNANDO CORTES, The Life of, and The 
CONQUEST OF MEXICO. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 15s.
COLUMBUS, The Life of. The Discoverer of America. 5th
Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.
PIZARRO, The Life of. With Some Account of his
Associates in the Conquest of Peru. 2nd Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.
LAS CASAS, The Life of, the Apostle of the Indies. 3rd
Edition. Crown 8vo. 6s.
HISTORY.
MODERN EUROPE, from the Fall of Constantinople to the
Founding of the German Empire, A.D. 1453-1871. By Thomas Henry
Dyer, LL.D. 2nd Edition, revised throughout and continued by the Author.
In 5 vols. demy 8vo. 2l. 12s. 6d.
KINGS OF ROME, History of the. By T.
Dyer, LL.D. With a Prefatory Dissertation on the Sources and Evidences of
Early Roman History. Demy 8vo. 16s.
'It will mark or help to mark an era in the history of the
subject to which it is devoted. It is one of the most decided as well as one of
the ablest results of the reaction which is now in progress against the
influence of Niebuhr.'--Pall Mall Gazette.
DECLINE OF THE ROMAN REPUBLIC. From the Destruction of
Carthage to the Consulship of Julius Cćsar. By George Long, M.A.
5 vols. 8vo. 14s. per vol.
'If any one can guide us through the almost inextricable mazes
of this labyrinth, it is Mr. Long. As a chronicler, he possesses all the
requisite knowledge, and what is nearly, if not quite as important, the
necessary caution. He never attempts to explain that which is hopelessly corrupt
or obscure: he does not confound twilight with daylight; he warns the reader
repeatedly that he is standing on shaking ground; he has no framework of theory
into which he presses his facts.'--Saturday Review.
LIFE OF THE EMPEROR KARL THE GREAT. Translated from the
contemporary
History Of Eginhard, with Notes and Chapters on
Eginhard--the Franks--Karl--and the Breaking-up of the Empire. With a Map. By 
William Glaister, M.A., B.C.L., University College, Oxford. Crown 8vo. 4s.
6d.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND, during the Early and Middle Ages. By 
C. H. Pearson, M.A., Fellow of Oriel College, Oxford. 2nd Edition, much
enlarged. Vol. I. 8vo. 16s. Vol. II. 8vo. 14s.
HISTORICAL MAPS OF ENGLAND during the first Thirteen
Centuries. With Explanatory Essays and Indices. By C. H.
Pearson, M.A. Imp. folio. 2nd Edition. 31s. 6d.
THE BARONS' WAR. Including the Battles of Lewes and
Evesham. By W. H. Blaauw, M.A. 2nd Edition, with
Additions and Corrections by C. H. Pearson, M.A. Demy
8vo. 10s. 6d.
THIRTY YEARS' PEACE, 1815-45, A History of the. By 
Harriet Martineau. 4 vols. post 8vo. 3s. 6d. each.
QUEENS OF ENGLAND, from the Norman Conquest to the Reign
of Queen Anne. By Agnes Strickland. Library Edition,
with Portraits, Autographs, and Vignettes, 8 vols. post 8vo. 7s. 6d.
each. Cheap Edition, 6 vols. 5s. each.
MARY, QUEEN OF SCOTS, The Life of. By 
A. Strickland. 2 vols. post 8vo. cloth gilt, 11s.
PHILOSOPHY.
ELEMENTS OF THOUGHT. By Isaac Taylor,
Post 8vo. 4s.
HOME EDUCATION. By the same Author. Fcap. 8vo. 5s.
ELEMENTS OF MORALITY, including Polity. By 
W. Whewell, D.D. 4th Edition. In 1 vol. 8vo. 15s.
MORAL PHILOSOPHY. Lectures on the History of, in
England. By W. Whewell, D.D. Crown 8vo. 8s.
MANUAL OF HUMAN CULTURE. By M. A.
Garvey, LL.B. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.
LOCKE. PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS,
containing an Essay on the Human Understanding, &c., with Notes and Index by 
J. A. St. John. Portrait. In 2 vols. Post 8vo. 7s.
INTELLECTUAL DEVELOPMENT OF EUROPE.
A History of the. By J. W. Draper, M.D., LL.D. 2 vols.
Post 8vo. 10s.
COMTE'S PHILOSOPHY OF THE SCIENCES.
Edited by G. H. Lewes. Post 8vo. 5s.
KANT. CRITIQUE OF PURE REASON.
Translated by J. M. D. Meiklejohn. Post 8vo. 5s.
HEGEL. LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF
HISTORY. Translated by J. Sibree, M.A. Post 8vo.
5s.
THEOLOGY.
ARTICLES OF RELIGION, History of the. To which is added
a Series of Documents from A.D. 1536 to A.D. 1615. Together with Illustrations
from contemporary sources. By the late C. Hardwick, M.A.,
Archdeacon of Ely. 3rd Edition. Revised by the Rev. F. Procter,
M.A., Author of 'A History of the Book of Common Prayer,' with additional
matter. Post 8vo. 5s.
THE CREEDS, History of. By J. Rawson
Lumby, M.A., Tyrwhitt's Hebrew Scholar, Crosse Divinity Scholar. Crown
8vo. 7s. 6d.
PEARSON (BP.) ON THE CREED. Carefully printed from an
Early Edition. With Analysis and Index. Edited by E. Walford,
M.A. Post 8vo. 5s.
COMMON PRAYER. Historical and Explanatory Treatise on
the Book of. By W. G. Humphry, B.D., Prebendary of St.
Paul's and Vicar of St. Martin-in-the-Fields. 5th Edition, revised and enlarged.
Fcap. 8vo. 4s. 6d.
COMMON PRAYER, Rational Illustrations of the Book of. By 
C. Wheatly, M.A. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d.
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE OLD TESTAMENT.
By F. Bleek. Translated from the German by 
G. H. Venables, under the supervision of the Rev. E.
Venables. In 2 vols. 10s.
COMPANION TO THE GREEK TESTAMENT.
For the use of Theological Students and the Upper Forms in Schools. By 
A. C. Barrett, M.A., Caius College. 3rd Edition, enlarged and improved.
Fcap. 8vo. 5s.
By F. H. Scrivener, D.C.L., Prebendary of Exeter.
NOVUM TESTAMENTUM GRĆCUM, TEXTUS
STEPHANICI, 1550. Accedunt varić lectiones editionum Bezć, Elzeviri,
Lachmanni, Tischendorfii, et Tregellesii. 16mo. 4s. 6d. With wide
Margin for Notes, 4to. 12s.
A PLAIN INTRODUCTION TO THE CRITICISM
OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. With 40 Facsimiles from Ancient Manuscripts.
Containing also an Account of the Egyptian Versions by Canon 
Lightfoot, D.D. For the Use of Biblical Students. New Edition. Demy 8vo.
16s.
SIX LECTURES ON THE TEXT OF THE NEW
TESTAMENT and the ancient Manuscripts which contain it. Chiefly addressed
to those who do not read Greek. With facsimiles from MSS. &c. Crown 8vo. 6s.
BOOK OF PSALMS; a New Translation, with Introductions
and Notes, Critical and Explanatory. By the Rev. J. J. Stewart
Perowne, D.D., Canon Residentiary of Llandaff, and Hulsean Professor of
Divinity, Cambridge. 8vo. Vol. I. 3rd Edition, 18s. Vol. II. 3rd Edition,
16s. An abridged Edition for Schools and Private Students. Crown 8vo. 10s.
6d.
A COMMENTARY ON THE GOSPELS AND
EPISTLES for the Sundays and other Holy Days of the Christian Year. By
the Rev. W. Denton, A.M., Worcester College, Oxford, and
Incumbent of St. Bartholomew's, Cripplegate. In 5 vols. 18s. each.
A COMMENTARY ON THE ACTS OF THE
APOSTLES. In 2 vols. Vol. I. 18s. Vol. II. 14s. These
Commentaries originated in Notes collected by the compiler to aid in the
composition of expository sermons. They are derived from all available sources,
and especially from the wide but little-known field of theological comment found
in the 'Schoolmen' of the Middle Ages. They are recommended to the notice of
young Clergymen, who frequently, while inexperienced, are called upon to preach
to educated and intelligent congregations.
BIBLE-ENGLISH. Chapters on Words and Phrases in the
Authorized Version of the Holy Scriptures and the Book of Common Prayer, no
longer in common use; illustrated from contemporaneous writers. By the Rev. 
T. Lewis O. Davies, M.A., Vicar of St. Mary Extra, Southampton. Small
crown 8vo. 5s.
'Everyone who takes an interest in the history of the English
Language, and indeed everyone who is not absolutely inattentive to the words
spoken around him, may turn to Mr. Davies's little book with the certainty of
finding both useful information and agreeable entertainment in its pages.'--Pall
Mall Gazette.
LIFE OF JESUS CHRIST; in its Historical Connexion and
Development. By
A. Neander. From the 4th German Edition. Post 8vo. 3s.
6d.
LIFE AND EPISTLES OF ST. PAUL. By T.
Lewin, Esq., M.A., F.S.A., Trinity College, Oxford, Barrister-at-law,
Author of 'Fasti Sacri,' 'Siege of Jerusalem,' 'Cćsar's Invasion,' 'Treatise on
Trusts,' &c. With upwards of 350 Illustrations finely engraved on Wood, Maps,
Plans, &c. In 2 vols. 3rd Edition, revised. Demy 4to. 2l. 2s.
'Nothing but a careful inspection of the work itself can give
the reader an adequate idea of the thoroughness with which Mr. Lewin has carried
out his plan--a plan which may be described as the giving of all information
possibly attainable about every person or place connected directly or even
indirectly with St. Paul.'--Spectator.
FASTI SACRI; or, a Key to the Chronology of the New
Testament. By the same Author. 4to. 21s.
ANALOGY OF RELIGION, Natural and Revealed, and Sermons
with Notes. By Bp. Butler. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d.
HOLY LIVING AND DYING. By Bp. Jeremy
Taylor. With portrait. Post 8vo. 3s. 6d.
THOMAS A KEMPIS. On the Imitation of Christ. A New
Translation. By the Rt. Rev. H. Goodwin, Bishop of
Carlisle. 3rd Edition. With fine Steel Engraving after Guido, 5s.;
without the Engraving, 3s. 6d. Cheap Edition, 1s. cloth; 6d.
sewed.
For Confirmation Candidates.
THE CHURCH TEACHER'S MANUAL OF 
CHRISTIAN INSTRUCTION. Being the Church Catechism expanded and explained
in Question and Answer, for the use of Clergymen, Parents, and Teachers. By the
Rev. M. F. Sadler. 16th Thousand. Fcap. 8vo. 2s.
6d.
'It is impossible to overrate the service to religious
instruction achieved by this compact and yet pregnant volume.... We owe many
boons to Mr. Sadler, whose sermons and theological lectures and treatises have
wrought much good in matters of faith. This Catechetical Manual is second to
none of such.'--English Churchman.
CATECHETICAL HINTS AND HELPS. A Manual for Parents and
Teachers on giving Instruction in the Catechism of the Church of England. 3rd
Edition, enlarged. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d.
'Perhaps the most thoroughly practical little book on
its subject we have ever seen. Its explanations, its paraphrases, its questions,
and the mass of information contained in its appendices, are not merely
invaluable in themselves, but they are the information actually wanted for the
purpose of the teaching contemplated. We do not wonder at its being in its third
edition.'--Literary Churchman.
THE WINTON CHURCH CATECHIST. Questions and Answers on
the Teaching of the Church Catechism. 32mo. cloth, 3s. Also in Four
Parts, 6d. or 9d. each.
LIFE AFTER CONFIRMATION. By J. S. Blunt.
18mo. 1s.
CONFIRMATION DAY. Being a Book of Instruction for Young
Persons how they ought to spend that solemn day. By the Rt. Rev. 
H. Goodwin, D.D., Bp. of Carlisle. 8th Thousand. 2d., or 25 for 3s.
6d.
By the Rev. M. F. Sadler, Rector of Honiton.
THE ONE OFFERING; a Treatise on the Sacrificial Nature
of the Eucharist. 3rd Edition. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d.
'A treatise of singular clearness and force, which gives us
what we did not really possess till it appeared.'--Church Times.
'It is by far the most useful, trustworthy, and accurate book
we have seen upon the subject.'--Literary Churchman.
'The subject of the Holy Eucharist is ably and fully treated,
and in a candid spirit, by Mr. Sadler in these pages.'--English Churchman.
JUSTIFICATION OF LIFE: its Nature, Antecedents, and
Consequences. Fcap. 8vo.    [In
the press.]
THE LOST GOSPEL AND ITS CONTENTS; or, the Author of
'Supernatural Religion' Refuted by Himself. By Rev. M. F.
Sadler, Rector of Honiton. Demy 8vo. 7s. 6d.
THE SACRAMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY: or, Testimony of the
Scripture to the Teaching of the Church on Holy Baptism. Fcap. 8vo. cloth, 2s.
6d. Also, Cheap Edition, 25th Thousand, fcap. 8vo. sewed, 6d.
'An exceedingly valuable repertory of arguments on the
questions it refers to.'--English Churchman.
CHURCH DOCTRINE--BIBLE TRUTH. Fcap. 8vo. 18th Thousand,
3s. 6d.
'Some writers have the gift of speaking the right word at the
right time, and the Rev. M. F. Sadler is pre-eminently one of them. "Church
Doctrine--Bible Truth," is full of wholesome truths fit for these times.... He
has power of putting his meaning in a forcible and intelligible way, which will,
we trust, enable his valuable work to effect that which it is well calculated to
effect, viz. to meet with an appropriate and crushing reply one of the most
dangerous misbeliefs of the time.'--Guardian.
THE SECOND ADAM AND THE NEW BIRTH; or, the Doctrine of
Baptism as contained in Holy Scripture. Fcap. 8vo. 7th Edition, price 4s.
6d.
'The most striking peculiarity of this useful little work is
that its author argues almost exclusively from the Bible. We commend it most
earnestly to clergy and laity, as containing in a small compass, and at a
trifling cost, a body of sound and Scriptural doctrine respecting the New Birth,
which cannot be too widely circulated.'--Guardian.
PARISH SERMONS. Trinity to Advent. Fcap. 8vo. 2nd
Edition, 6s.
PLAIN SPEAKING ON DEEP TRUTHS. Sermons preached at St.
Paul's Church, Bedford. Fcap. 8vo. 4th Edition, 6s.
ABUNDANT LIFE, and other Sermons. Fcap. 8vo. 6s.
THE COMMUNICANT'S MANUAL; being a Book of
Self-examination, Prayer, Praise, and Thanksgiving. 8th Thousand. Royal 32mo.
roan, gilt edges, price 2s.; cloth, 1s. 6d. Cheap Edition,
for distribution, 25th Thousand, 8d. A larger Edition, on fine paper, and
Rubrics. Fcap. 8vo. 2s. 6d.; morocco, 7s.
SCRIPTURE TRUTHS. A Series of Ten Plain, Popular Tracts
upon subjects now universally under discussion, 9d. per set, sold
separately. No. 1. Reasons for Infant Baptism. 2. On Eucharistic Worship. 3. On
the Priesthood of the Christian Ministry. 4. On Confirmation. 5. Reasons for
receiving the Holy Communion. 6. On the Doctrine of the Holy Communion. 7. On
Baptism and Conversion. 8. Some Objections to receiving the Holy Communion
considered. 9. On the First Truths of the Christian Faith. 10. On Faith and
Justification.
STANDARD PROSE WORKS.
ADDISON. Works. With Notes by Bishop 
Hurd, and numerous unpublished Letters. With Portrait and eight steel
Engravings. 6 vols. cloth, gilt, post 8vo. 4s. each.
BACON'S (LORD) ESSAYS AND HISTORICAL
WORKS, with Introduction and Notes by J. Devey, M.A.
Post 8vo. 3s. 6d.
BURKE. Works. In 8 vols. post 8vo. cloth, gilt, 4s.
each.
COLERIDGE (S. T.) THE FRIEND. A