# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2006
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Émile Zola, L'Assommoir
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/8600/8600-h/8600-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Gervaise flushed. She thought she would have felt less shame if he had
 taken her in his arms and kissed her. Goujet was an odd fellow, proposing
 to elope, just the way it happens in novels. Well, she had seen plenty of
 workingmen making up to married women, but they never took them even as
 far as Saint-Denis.
 

 "Ah, Monsieur Goujet," she murmured, not knowing what else to say.
 

 "Don't you see?" he said. "There would only be the two of us. It annoys me
 having others around."
 

 Having regained her self-possession, however, she refused his proposal.
 

 "It's impossible, Monsieur Goujet. It would be very wrong. I'm a married
 woman and I have children. We'd soon regret it. I know you care for me,
 and I care for you also, too much to let you do anything foolish. It's
 much better to stay just as we are. We have respect for each other and
 that's a lot. It's been a comfort to me many times. When people in our
 situation stay on the straight, it is better in the end."
 

 He nodded his head as he listened. He agreed with her and was unable to
 offer any arguments. Suddenly he pulled her into his arms and kissed her,
 crushing her. Then he let her go and said nothing more about their love.
 She wasn't angry. She felt they had earned that small moment of pleasure.
 

 Goujet now didn't know what to do with his hands, so he went around
 picking dandelions and tossing them into her basket. This amused him and
 gradually soothed him. Gervaise was becoming relaxed and cheerful. When
 they finally left the vacant lot they walked side by side and talked of
 how much Etienne liked being at Lille. Her basket was full of yellow
 dandelions.
 

 Gervaise, at heart, did not feel as courageous when with Lantier as she
 said. She was, indeed, perfectly resolved not to hear his flattery, even
 with the slightest interest; but she was afraid, if ever he should touch
 her, of her old cowardice, of that feebleness and gloominess into which
 she allowed herself to glide, just to please people. Lantier, however, did
 not avow his affection. He several times found himself alone with her and
 kept quiet. He seemed to think of marrying the tripe-seller, a woman of
 forty-five and very well preserved. Gervaise would talk of the
 tripe-seller in Goujet's presence, so as to set his mind at ease. She
 would say to Virginie and Madame Lerat, whenever they were singing the
 hatter's praises, that he could very well do without her admiration,
 because all the women of the neighborhood were smitten with him.
 

 Coupeau went braying about everywhere that Lantier was a friend and a true
 one. People might jabber about them; he knew what he knew and did not care
 a straw for their gossip, for he had respectability on his side. When they
 all three went out walking on Sundays, he made his wife and the hatter
 walk arm-in-arm before him, just by way of swaggering in the street; and
 he watched the people, quite prepared to administer a drubbing if anyone
 had ventured on the least joke. It was true that he regarded Lantier as a
 bit of a high flyer. He accused him of avoiding hard liquor and teased him
 because he could read and spoke like an educated man. Still, he accepted
 him as a regular comrade. They were ideally suited to each other and
 friendship between men is more substantial than love for a woman.
 

 Coupeau and Lantier were forever going out junketing together. Lantier
 would now borrow money from Gervaise—ten francs, twenty francs at a
 time, whenever he smelt there was money in the house. Then on those days
 he would keep Coupeau away from his work, talk of some distant errand and
 take him with him. Then seated opposite to each other in the corner of
 some neighboring eating house, they would guzzle fancy dishes which one
 cannot get at home and wash them down with bottles of expensive wine. The
 zinc-worker would have preferred to booze in a less pretentious place, but
 he was impressed by the aristocratic tastes of Lantier, who would discover
 on the bill of fare dishes with the most extraordinary names.
 

 It was hard to understand a man so hard to please. Maybe it was from being
 a southerner. Lantier didn't like anything too rich and argued about every
 dish, sending back meat that was too salty or too peppery. He hated
 drafts. If a door was left open, he complained loudly. At the same time,
 he was very stingy, only giving the waiter a tip of two sous for a meal of
 seven or eight francs. He was treated with respect in spite of that.
 

 The pair were well known along the exterior boulevards, from Batignolles
 to Belleville. They would go to the Grand Rue des Batignolles to eat tripe
 cooked in the Caen style. At the foot of Montmartre they obtained the best
 oysters in the neighborhood at the "Town of Bar-le-Duc." When they
 ventured to the top of the height as far as the "Galette Windmill" they
 had a stewed rabbit. The "Lilacs," in the Rue des Martyrs, had a
 reputation for their calf's head, whilst the restaurant of the "Golden
 Lion" and the "Two Chestnut Trees," in the Chaussee Clignancourt, served
 them stewed kidneys which made them lick their lips. Usually they went
 toward Belleville where they had tables reserved for them at some places
 of such excellent repute that you could order anything with your eyes
 closed. These eating sprees were always surreptitious and the next day
 they would refer to them indirectly while playing with the potatoes served
 by Gervaise. Once Lantier brought a woman with him to the "Galette
 Windmill" and Coupeau left immediately after dessert.
 

 One naturally cannot both guzzle and work; so that ever since the hatter
 was made one of the family, the zinc-worker, who was already pretty lazy,
 had got to the point of never touching a tool. When tired of doing
 nothing, he sometimes let himself be prevailed upon to take a job. Then
 his comrade would look him up and chaff him unmercifully when he found him
 hanging to his knotty cord like a smoked ham, and he would call to him to
 come down and have a glass of wine. And that settled it. The zinc-worker
 would send the job to blazes and commence a booze which lasted days and
 weeks. Oh, it was a famous booze—a general review of all the dram
 shops of the neighborhood, the intoxication of the morning slept off by
 midday and renewed in the evening; the goes of "vitriol" succeeded one
 another, becoming lost in the depths of the night, like the Venetian
 lanterns of an illumination, until the last candle disappeared with the
 last glass! That rogue of a hatter never kept on to the end. He let the
 other get elevated, then gave him the slip and returned home smiling in
 his pleasant way. He could drink a great deal without people noticing it.
 When one got to know him well one could only tell it by his half-closed
 eyes and his overbold behavior to women. The zinc-worker, on the contrary,
 became quite disgusting, and could no longer drink without putting himself
 into a beastly state.
 

 Thus, towards the beginning of November, Coupeau went in for a booze which
 ended in a most dirty manner, both for himself and the others. The day
 before he had been offered a job. This time Lantier was full of fine
 sentiments; he lauded work, because work ennobles a man. In the morning he
 even rose before it was light, for he gravely wished to accompany his
 friend to the workshop, honoring in him the workman really worthy of the
 name. But when they arrived before the "Little Civet," which was just
 opening, they entered to have a plum in brandy, only one, merely to drink
 together to the firm observance of a good resolution. On a bench opposite
 the counter, and with his back against the wall, Bibi-the-Smoker was
 sitting smoking with a sulky look on his face.
 

 "Hallo! Here's Bibi having a snooze," said Coupeau. "Are you down in the
 dumps, old bloke?"
 

 "No, no," replied the comrade, stretching his arm. "It's the employers who
 disgust me. I sent mine to the right about yesterday. They're all toads
 and scoundrels."
 

 Bibi-the-Smoker accepted a plum. He was, no doubt, waiting there on that
 bench for someone to stand him a drink. Lantier, however, took the part of
 the employers; they often had some very hard times, as he who had been in
 business himself well knew. The workers were a bad lot, forever getting
 drunk! They didn't take their work seriously. Sometimes they quit in the
 middle of a job and only returned when they needed something in their
 pockets. Then Lantier would switch his attack to the employers. They were
 nasty exploiters, regular cannibals. But he could sleep with a clear
 conscience as he had always acted as a friend to his employees. He didn't
 want to get rich the way others did.
 

 "Let's be off, my boy," he said, speaking to Coupeau. "We must be going or
 we shall be late."
 

 Bibi-the-Smoker followed them, swinging his arms. Outside the sun was
 scarcely rising, the pale daylight seemed dirtied by the muddy reflection
 of the pavement; it had rained the night before and it was very mild. The
 gas lamps had just been turned out; the Rue des Poissonniers, in which
 shreds of night rent by the houses still floated, was gradually filling
 with the dull tramp of the workmen descending towards Paris. Coupeau, with
 his zinc-worker's bag slung over his shoulder, walked along in the
 imposing manner of a fellow who feels in good form for a change. He turned
 round and asked:
 

 "Bibi, do you want a job. The boss told me to bring a pal if I could."
 

 "No thanks," answered Bibi-the-Smoker; "I'm purging myself. You should ask
 My-Boots. He was looking for something yesterday. Wait a minute. My-Boots
 is most likely in there."
 

 And as they reached the bottom of the street they indeed caught sight of
 My-Boots inside Pere Colombe's. In spite of the early hour l'Assommoir was
 flaring, the shutters down, the gas lighted. Lantier stood at the door,
 telling Coupeau to make haste, because they had only ten minutes left.
 

 "What! You're going to work for that rascal Bourguignon?" yelled My-Boots,
 when the zinc-worker had spoken to him. "You'll never catch me in his
 hutch again! No, I'd rather go till next year with my tongue hanging out
 of my mouth. But, old fellow, you won't stay three days, and it's I who
 tell you so."
 

 "Really now, is it such a dirty hole?" asked Coupeau anxiously.
 

 "Oh, it's about the dirtiest. You can't move there. The ape's for ever on
 your back. And such queer ways too—a missus who always says you're
 drunk, a shop where you mustn't spit. I sent them to the right about the
 first night, you know."
 

 "Good; now I'm warned. I shan't stop there for ever. I'll just go this
 morning to see what it's like; but if the boss bothers me, I'll catch him
 up and plant him upon his missus, you know, bang together like two fillets
 of sole!"
 

 Then Coupeau thanked his friend for the useful information and shook his
 hand. As he was about to leave, My-Boots cursed angrily. Was that lousy
 Bourguignon going to stop them from having a drink? Weren't they free any
 more? He could well wait another five minutes. Lantier came in to share in
 the round and they stood together at the counter. My-Boots, with his smock
 black with dirt and his cap flattened on his head had recently been
 proclaimed king of pigs and drunks after he had eaten a salad of live
 beetles and chewed a piece of a dead cat.
 

 "Say there, old Borgia," he called to Pere Colombe, "give us some of your
 yellow stuff, first class mule's wine."
 

 And when Pere Colombe, pale and quiet in his blue-knitted waistcoat, had
 filled the four glasses, these gentlemen tossed them off, so as not to let
 the liquor get flat.
 

 "That does some good when it goes down," murmured Bibi-the-Smoker.
 

 The comic My-Boots had a story to tell. He was so drunk on the Friday that
 his comrades had stuck his pipe in his mouth with a handful of plaster.
 Anyone else would have died of it; he merely strutted about and puffed out
 his chest.
 

 "Do you gentlemen require anything more?" asked Pere Colombe in his oily
 voice.
 

 "Yes, fill us up again," said Lantier. "It's my turn."
 

 Now they were talking of women. Bibi-the-Smoker had taken his girl to an
 aunt's at Montrouge on the previous Sunday. Coupeau asked for the news of
 the "Indian Mail," a washerwoman of Chaillot who was known in the
 establishment. They were about to drink, when My-Boots loudly called to
 Goujet and Lorilleux who were passing by. They came just to the door, but
 would not enter. The blacksmith did not care to take anything. The
 chainmaker, pale and shivering, held in his pocket the gold chains he was
 going to deliver; and he coughed and asked them to excuse him, saying that
 the least drop of brandy would nearly make him split his sides.
 

 "There are hypocrites for you!" grunted My-Boots. "I bet they have their
 drinks on the sly."
 

 And when he had poked his nose in his glass he attacked Pere Colombe.
 

 "Vile druggist, you've changed the bottle! You know it's no good your
 trying to palm your cheap stuff off on me."
 

 The day had advanced; a doubtful sort of light lit up l'Assommoir, where
 the landlord was turning out the gas. Coupeau found excuses for his
 brother-in-law who could not stand drink, which after all was no crime. He
 even approved Goujet's behavior for it was a real blessing never to be
 thirsty. And as he talked of going off to his work Lantier, with his grand
 air of a gentleman, sharply gave him a lesson. One at least stood one's
 turn before sneaking off; one should not leave one's friends like a mean
 blackguard, even when going to do one's duty.
 

 "Is he going to badger us much longer about his work?" cried My-Boots.
 

 "So this is your turn, sir?" asked Pere Colombe of Coupeau.
 

 The latter paid. But when it came to Bibi-the-Smoker's turn he whispered
 to the landlord who refused with a shake of the head. My-Boots understood,
 and again set to abusing the old Jew Colombe. What! A rascal like him
 dared to behave in that way to a comrade! Everywhere else one could get
 drink on tick! It was only in such low boozing-dens that one was insulted!
 The landlord remained calm, leaning his big fists on the edge of the
 counter. He politely said:
 

 "Lend the gentleman some money—that will be far simpler."
 

 "Mon Dieu! Yes, I'll lend him some," yelled My-Boots. "Here! Bibi,
 throw this money in his face, the limb of Satan!"
 

 Then, excited and annoyed at seeing Coupeau with his bag slung over his
 shoulder, he continued speaking to the zinc-worker:
 

 "You look like a wet-nurse. Drop your brat. It'll give you a hump-back."
 

 Coupeau hesitated an instant; and then, quietly, as though he had only
 made up his mind after considerable reflection, he laid his bag on the
 ground saying:
 

 "It's too late now. I'll go to Bourguignon's after lunch. I'll tell him
 that the missus was ill. Listen, Pere Colombe, I'll leave my tools under
 this seat and I'll call for them at twelve o'clock."
 

 Lantier gave his blessing to this arrangement with an approving nod. Labor
 was necessary, yes, but when you're with good friends, courtesy comes
 first. Now the four had five hours of idleness before them. They were full
 of noisy merriment. Coupeau was especially relieved. They had another
 round and then went to a small bar that had a billiard table.
 

 At first Lantier turned up his nose at this establishment because it was
 rather shabby. So much liquor had been spilled on the billiard table that
 the balls stuck to it. Once the game got started though, Lantier recovered
 his good humor and began to flaunt his extraordinary knack with a cue.
 

 When lunch time came Coupeau had an idea. He stamped his feet and cried:
 

 "We must go and fetch Salted-Mouth. I know where he's working. We'll take
 him to Mere Louis' to have some pettitoes."
 

 The idea was greeted with acclamation. Yes, Salted-Mouth, otherwise
 Drink-without-Thirst, was no doubt in want of some pettitoes. They started
 off. Coupeau took them to the bolt factory in the Rue Marcadet. As they
 arrived a good half hour before the time the workmen came out, the
 zinc-worker gave a youngster two sous to go in and tell Salted-Mouth that
 his wife was ill and wanted him at once. The blacksmith made his
 appearance, waddling in his walk, looking very calm, and scenting a
 tuck-out.
 

 "Ah! you jokers!" said he, as soon as he caught sight of them hiding in a
 doorway. "I guessed it. Well, what are we going to eat?"
 

 At mother Louis', whilst they sucked the little bones of the pettitoes,
 they again fell to abusing the employers. Salted-Mouth, otherwise
 Drink-without-Thirst, related that they had a most pressing order to
 execute at the shop. Oh! the ape was pleasant for the time being. One
 could be late, and he would say nothing; he no doubt considered himself
 lucky when one turned up at all. At any rate, no boss would dare to throw
 Salted-Mouth out the door, because you couldn't find lads of his capacity
 any more. After the pettitoes they had an omelet. When each of them had
 emptied his bottle, Mere Louis brought out some Auvergne wine, thick
 enough to cut with a knife. The party was really warming up.
 

 "What do you think is the ape's latest idea?" cried Salted-Mouth at
 dessert. "Why, he's been and put a bell up in his shed! A bell! That's
 good for slaves. Ah, well! It can ring to-day! They won't catch me again
 at the anvil! For five days past I've been sticking there; I may give
 myself a rest now. If he deducts anything, I'll send him to blazes."
 

 "I," said Coupeau, with an air of importance, "I'm obliged to leave you;
 I'm off to work. Yes, I promised my wife. Amuse yourselves; my spirit you
 know remains with my pals."
 

 The others chuffed him. But he seemed so decided that they all accompanied
 him when he talked of going to fetch his tools from Pere Colombe's. He
 took his bag from under the seat and laid it on the ground before him
 whilst they had a final drink. But at one o'clock the party was still
 standing drinks. Then Coupeau, with a bored gesture placed the tools back
 again under the seat. They were in his way; he could not get near the
 counter without stumbling against them. It was too absurd; he would go to
 Bourguignon's on the morrow. The other four, who were quarrelling about
 the question of salaries, were not at all surprised when the zinc-worker,
 without any explanation, proposed a little stroll on the Boulevard, just
 to stretch their legs. They didn't go very far. They seemed to have
 nothing to say to each other out in the fresh air. Without even consulting
 each other with so much as a nudge, they slowly and instinctively ascended
 the Rue des Poissonniers, where they went to Francois's and had a glass of
 wine out of the bottle. Lantier pushed his comrades inside the private
 room at the back; it was a narrow place with only one table in it, and was
 separated from the shop by a dull glazed partition. He liked to do his
 drinking in private rooms because it seemed more respectable. Didn't they
 like it here? It was as comfortable as being at home. You could even take
 a nap here without being embarrassed. He called for the newspaper, spread
 it out open before him, and looked through it, frowning the while. Coupeau
 and My-Boots had commenced a game of piquet. Two bottles of wine and five
 glasses were scattered about the table.
 

 They emptied their glasses. Then Lantier read out loud:
 

 "A frightful crime has just spread consternation throughout the Commune of
 Gaillon, Department of Seine-et-Marne. A son has killed his father with
 blows from a spade in order to rob him of thirty sous."
 

 They all uttered a cry of horror. There was a fellow whom they would have
 taken great pleasure in seeing guillotined! No, the guillotine was not
 enough; he deserved to be cut into little pieces. The story of an
 infanticide equally aroused their indignation; but the hatter, highly
 moral, found excuses for the woman, putting all the wrong on the back of
 her husband; for after all, if some beast of a man had not put the
 wretched woman into the way of bleak poverty, she could not have drowned
 it in a water closet.
 

 They were most delighted though by the exploit of a Marquis who, coming
 out of a dance hall at two in the morning, had defended himself against an
 attack by three blackguards on the Boulevard des Invalides. Without taking
 off his gloves, he had disposed of the first two villains by ramming his
 head into their stomachs, and then had marched the third one off to the
 police. What a man! Too bad he was a noble.
 

 "Listen to this now," continued Lantier. "Here's some society news: 'A
 marriage is arranged between the eldest daughter of the Countess de
 Bretigny and the young Baron de Valancay, aide-de-camp to His Majesty. The
 wedding trousseau will contain more than three hundred thousand francs'
 worth of lace."
 

 "What's that to us?" interrupted Bibi-the-Smoker. "We don't want to know
 the color of her mantle. The girl can have no end of lace; nevertheless
 she'll see the folly of loving."
 

 As Lantier seemed about to continue his reading, Salted-Mouth, otherwise
 Drink-without-Thirst, took the newspaper from him and sat upon it, saying:
 

 "Ah! no, that's enough! This is all the paper is good for."
 

 Meanwhile, My-Boots, who had been looking at his hand, triumphantly banged
 his fist down on the table. He scored ninety-three.
 

 "I've got the Revolution!" he exulted.
 

 "You're out of luck, comrade," the others told Coupeau.
 

 They ordered two fresh bottles. The glasses were filled up again as fast
 as they were emptied, the booze increased. Towards five o'clock it began
 to get disgusting, so much so that Lantier kept very quiet, thinking of
 how to give the others the slip; brawling and throwing the wine about was
 no longer his style. Just then Coupeau stood up to make the drunkard's
 sign of the cross. Touching his head he pronounced Montpernasse, then
 Menilmonte as he brought his hand to his right shoulder, Bagnolet giving
 himself a blow in the chest, and wound up by saying stewed rabbit three
 times as he hit himself in the pit of the stomach. Then the hatter took
 advantage of the clamor which greeted the performance of this feat and
 quietly made for the door. His comrades did not even notice his departure.
 He had already had a pretty good dose. But once outside he shook himself
 and regained his self-possession; and he quietly made for the shop, where
 he told Gervaise that Coupeau was with some friends.
 

 Two days passed by. The zinc-worker had not returned. He was reeling about
 the neighborhood, but no one knew exactly where. Several persons, however,
 stated that they had seen him at mother Baquet's, at the "Butterfly," and
 at the "Little Old Man with a Cough." Only some said that he was alone,
 whilst others affirmed that he was in the company of seven or eight
 drunkards like himself. Gervaise shrugged her shoulders in a resigned sort
 of way. Mon Dieu! She just had to get used to it. She never ran
 about after her old man; she even went out of her way if she caught sight
 of him inside a wineshop, so as to not anger him; and she waited at home
 till he returned, listening at night-time to hear if he was snoring
 outside the door. He would sleep on a rubbish heap, or on a seat, or in a
 piece of waste land, or across a gutter. On the morrow, after having only
 badly slept off his booze of the day before, he would start off again,
 knocking at the doors of all the consolation dealers, plunging afresh into
 a furious wandering, in the midst of nips of spirits, glasses of wine,
 losing his friends and then finding them again, going regular voyages from
 which he returned in a state of stupor, seeing the streets dance, the
 night fall and the day break, without any other thought than to drink and
 sleep off the effects wherever he happened to be. When in the latter
 state, the world was ended so far as he was concerned. On the second day,
 however, Gervaise went to Pere Colombe's l'Assommoir to find out something
 about him; he had been there another five times, they were unable to tell
 her anything more. All she could do was to take away his tools which he
 had left under a seat.
 

 In the evening Lantier, seeing that the laundress seemed very worried,
 offered to take her to a music-hall, just by way of passing a pleasant
 hour or two. She refused at first, she was in no mood for laughing.
 Otherwise she would not have said, "No," for the hatter made the proposal
 in too straightforward a manner for her to feel any mistrust. He seemed to
 feel for her in quite a paternal way. Never before had Coupeau slept out
 two nights running. So that in spite of herself, she would go every ten
 minutes to the door, with her iron in her hand, and look up and down the
 street to see if her old man was coming.
 

 It might be that Coupeau had broken a leg, or fallen under a wagon and
 been crushed and that might be good riddance to bad rubbish. She saw no
 reason for cherishing in her heart any affection for a filthy character
 like him, but it was irritating, all the same, to have to wonder every
 night whether he would come in or not. When it got dark, Lantier again
 suggested the music-hall, and this time she accepted. She decided it would
 be silly to deny herself a little pleasure when her husband had been out
 on the town for three days. If he wasn't coming in, then she might as well
 go out herself. Let the entire dump burn up if it felt like it. She might
 even put a torch to it herself. She was getting tired of the boring
 monotony of her present life.
 

 They ate their dinner quickly. Then, when she went off at eight o'clock,
 arm-in-arm with the hatter, Gervaise told mother Coupeau and Nana to go to
 bed at once. The shop was shut and the shutters up. She left by the door
 opening into the courtyard and gave Madame Boche the key, asking her, if
 her pig of a husband came home, to have the kindness to put him to bed.
 The hatter was waiting for her under the big doorway, arrayed in his best
 and whistling a tune. She had on her silk dress. They walked slowly along
 the pavement, keeping close to each other, lighted up by the glare from
 the shop windows which showed them smiling and talking together in low
 voices.
 

 The music-hall was in the Boulevard de Rochechouart. It had originally
 been a little cafe and had been enlarged by means of a kind of wooden shed
 erected in the courtyard. At the door a string of glass globes formed a
 luminous porch. Tall posters pasted on boards stood upon the ground, close
 to the gutter.
 

 "Here we are," said Lantier. "To-night, first appearance of Mademoiselle
 Amanda, serio-comic."
 

 Then he caught sight of Bibi-the-Smoker, who was also reading the poster.
 Bibi had a black eye; some punch he had run up against the day before.
 

 "Well! Where's Coupeau?" inquired the hatter, looking about. "Have you,
 then, lost Coupeau?"
 

 "Oh! long ago, since yesterday," replied the other. "There was a bit of a
 free-for-all on leaving mother Baquet's. I don't care for fisticuffs. We
 had a row, you know, with mother Baquet's pot-boy, because he wanted to
 make us pay for a quart twice over. Then I left. I went and had a bit of a
 snooze."
 

 He was still yawning; he had slept eighteen hours at a stretch. He was,
 moreover, quite sobered, with a stupid look on his face, and his jacket
 smothered with fluff; for he had no doubt tumbled into bed with his
 clothes on.
 

 "And you don't know where my husband is, sir?" asked the laundress.
 

 "Well, no, not a bit. It was five o'clock when we left mother Baquet's.
 That's all I know about it. Perhaps he went down the street. Yes, I fancy
 now that I saw him go to the 'Butterfly' with a coachman. Oh! how stupid
 it is! Really, we deserve to be shot."
 

 Lantier and Gervaise spent a very pleasant evening at the music-hall. At
 eleven o'clock when the place closed, they strolled home without hurrying
 themselves. The cold was quite sharp. People seemed to be in groups. Some
 of the girls were giggling in the darkness as their men pressed close to
 them. Lantier was humming one of Mademoiselle Amanda's songs. Gervaise,
 with her head spinning from too much drink, hummed the refrain with him.
 It had been very warm at the music-hall and the two drinks she had had,
 along with all the smoke, had upset her stomach a bit. She had been quite
 impressed with Mademoiselle Amanda. She wouldn't dare to appear in public
 wearing so little, but she had to admit that the lady had lovely skin.
 

 "Everyone's asleep," said Gervaise, after ringing three times without the
 Boches opening the door.
 

 At length the door opened, but inside the porch it was very dark, and when
 she knocked at the window of the concierge's room to ask for her key, the
 concierge, who was half asleep, pulled out some rigmarole which she could
 make nothing of at first. She eventually understood that Poisson, the
 policeman, had brought Coupeau home in a frightful state, and that the key
 was no doubt in the lock.
 

 "The deuce!" murmured Lantier, when they had entered, "whatever has he
 been up to here? The stench is abominable."
 

 There was indeed a most powerful stench. As Gervaise went to look for
 matches, she stepped into something messy. After she succeeded in lighting
 a candle, a pretty sight met their eyes. Coupeau appeared to have
 disgorged his very insides. The bed was splattered all over, so was the
 carpet, and even the bureau had splashes on its sides. Besides that, he
 had fallen from the bed where Poisson had probably thrown him, and was
 snoring on the floor in the midst of the filth like a pig wallowing in the
 mire, exhaling his foul breath through his open mouth. His grey hair was
 straggling into the puddle around his head.
 

 "Oh! the pig! the pig!" repeated Gervaise, indignant and exasperated.
 "He's dirtied everything. No, a dog wouldn't have done that, even a dead
 dog is cleaner."
 

 They both hesitated to move, not knowing where to place their feet.
 Coupeau had never before come home and put the bedroom into such a
 shocking state. This sight was a blow to whatever affection his wife still
 had for him. Previously she had been forgiving and not seriously offended,
 even when he had been blind drunk. But this made her sick; it was too
 much. She wouldn't have touched Coupeau for the world, and just the
 thought of this filthy bum touching her caused a repugnance such as she
 might have felt had she been required to sleep beside the corpse of
 someone who had died from a terrible disease.
 

 "Oh, I must get into that bed," murmured she. "I can't go and sleep in the
 street. Oh! I'll crawl into it foot first."
 

 She tried to step over the drunkard, but had to catch hold of a corner of
 the chest of drawers to save herself from slipping in the mess. Coupeau
 completely blocked the way to the bed. Then, Lantier, who laughed to
 himself on seeing that she certainly could not sleep on her own pillow
 that night, took hold of her hand, saying, in a low and angry voice:
 

 "Gervaise, he is a pig."
 

 She understood what he meant and pulled her hand free. She sighed to
 herself, and, in her bewilderment, addressed him familiarly, as in the old
 days.
 

 "No, leave me alone, Auguste. Go to your own bed. I'll manage somehow to
 lie at the foot of the bed."
 

 "Come, Gervaise, don't be foolish," resumed he. "It's too abominable; you
 can't remain here. Come with me. He won't hear us. What are you afraid
 of?"
 

 "No," she replied firmly, shaking her head vigorously. Then, to show that
 she would remain where she was, she began to take off her clothes,
 throwing her silk dress over a chair. She was quickly in only her chemise
 and petticoat. Well, it was her own bed. She wanted to sleep in her own
 bed and made two more attempts to reach a clean corner of the bed.
 

 Lantier, having no intention of giving up, whispered things to her.
 

 What a predicament she was in, with a louse of a husband that prevented
 her from crawling under her own blankets and a low skunk behind her just
 waiting to take advantage of the situation to possess her again. She
 begged Lantier to be quiet. Turning toward the small room where Nana and
 mother Coupeau slept, she listened anxiously. She could hear only steady
 breathing.
 

 "Leave me alone, Auguste," she repeated. "You'll wake them. Be sensible."
 

 Lantier didn't answer, but just smiled at her. Then he began to kiss her
 on the ear just as in the old days.
 

 Gervaise felt like sobbing. Her strength deserted her; she felt a great
 buzzing in her ears, a violent tremor passed through her. She advanced
 another step forward. And she was again obliged to draw back. It was not
 possible, the disgust was too great. She felt on the verge of vomiting
 herself. Coupeau, overpowered by intoxication, lying as comfortably as
 though on a bed of down, was sleeping off his booze, without life in his
 limbs, and with his mouth all on one side. The whole street might have
 entered and laughed at him, without a hair of his body moving.
 

 "Well, I can't help it," she faltered. "It's his own fault. Mon Dieu!
 He's forcing me out of my own bed. I've no bed any longer. No, I can't
 help it. It's his own fault."
 

 She was trembling so she scarcely knew what she was doing. While Lantier
 was urging her into his room, Nana's face appeared at one of the glass
 panes in the door of the little room. The young girl, pale from sleep, had
 awakened and gotten out of bed quietly. She stared at her father lying in
 his vomit. Then, she stood watching until her mother disappeared into
 Lantier's room. She watched with the intensity and the wide-open eyes of a
 vicious child aflame with curiosity.
 

 
 
 

 That winter mother Coupeau nearly went off in one of her coughing fits.
 Each December she could count on her asthma keeping her on her back for
 two and three weeks at a time. She was no longer fifteen, she would be
 seventy-three on Saint-Anthony's day. With that she was very rickety,
 getting a rattling in her throat for nothing at all, though she was plump
 and stout. The doctor said she would go off coughing, just time enough to
 say: "Good-night, the candle's out!"
 

 When she was in her bed mother Coupeau became positively unbearable. It is
 true though that the little room in which she slept with Nana was not at
 all gay. There was barely room for two chairs between the beds. The
 wallpaper, a faded gray, hung loose in long strips. The small window near
 the ceiling let in only a dim light. It was like a cavern. At night, as
 she lay awake, she could listen to the breathing of the sleeping Nana as a
 sort of distraction; but in the day-time, as there was no one to keep her
 company from morning to night, she grumbled and cried and repeated to
 herself for hours together, as she rolled her head on the pillow:
 

 "Good heavens! What a miserable creature I am! Good heavens! What a
 miserable creature I am! They'll leave me to die in prison, yes, in
 prison!"
 

 As soon as anyone called, Virginie or Madame Boche, to ask after her
 health, she would not reply directly, but immediately started on her list
 of complaints: "Oh, I pay dearly for the food I eat here. I'd be much
 better off with strangers. I asked for a cup of tisane and they brought me
 an entire pot of hot water. It was a way of saying that I drank too much.
 I brought Nana up myself and she scurries away in her bare feet every
 morning and I never see her again all day. Then at night she sleeps so
 soundly that she never wakes up to ask me if I'm in pain. I'm just a
 nuisance to them. They're waiting for me to die. That will happen soon
 enough. I don't even have a son any more; that laundress has taken him
 from me. She'd beat me to death if she wasn't afraid of the law."
 

 Gervaise was indeed rather hasty at times. The place was going to the
 dogs, everyone's temper was getting spoilt and they sent each other to the
 right about for the least word. Coupeau, one morning that he had a
 hangover, exclaimed: "The old thing's always saying she's going to die,
 and yet she never does!" The words struck mother Coupeau to the heart.
 They frequently complained of how much she cost them, observing that they
 would save a lot of money when she was gone.
 

 When at her worst that winter, one afternoon, when Madame Lorilleux and
 Madame Lerat had met at her bedside, mother Coupeau winked her eye as a
 signal to them to lean over her. She could scarcely speak. She rather
 hissed than said in a low voice:
 

 "It's becoming indecent. I heard them last night. Yes, Clump-clump and the
 hatter. And they were kicking up such a row together! Coupeau's too decent
 for her."
 

 And she related in short sentences, coughing and choking between each,
 that her son had come home dead drunk the night before. Then, as she was
 not asleep, she was easily able to account for all the noises, of
 Clump-clump's bare feet tripping over the tiled floor, the hissing voice
 of the hatter calling her, the door between the two rooms gently closed,
 and the rest. It must have lasted till daylight. She could not tell the
 exact time, because, in spite of her efforts, she had ended by falling
 into a dose.
 

 "What's most disgusting is that Nana might have heard everything,"
 continued she. "She was indeed restless all the night, she who usually
 sleeps so sound. She tossed about and kept turning over as though there
 had been some lighted charcoal in her bed."
 

 The other two women did not seem at all surprised.
 

 "Of course!" murmured Madame Lorilleux, "it probably began the very first
 night. But as it pleases Coupeau, we've no business to interfere. All the
 same, it's not very respectable."
 

 "As for me," declared Madame Lerat through clenched teeth, "if I'd been
 there, I'd have thrown a fright into them. I'd have shouted something,
 anything. A doctor's maid told me once that the doctor had told her that a
 surprise like that, at a certain moment, could strike a woman dead. If she
 had died right there, that would have been well, wouldn't it? She would
 have been punished right where she had sinned."
 

 It wasn't long until the entire neighborhood knew that Gervaise visited
 Lantier's room every night. Madame Lorilleux was loudly indignant, calling
 her brother a poor fool whose wife had shamed him. And her poor mother,
 forced to live in the midst of such horrors. As a result, the neighbors
 blamed Gervaise. Yes, she must have led Lantier astray; you could see it
 in her eyes. In spite of the nasty gossip, Lantier was still liked because
 he was always so polite. He always had candy or flowers to give the
 ladies. Mon Dieu! Men shouldn't be expected to push away women who
 threw themselves at them. There was no excuse for Gervaise. She was a
 disgrace. The Lorilleuxs used to bring Nana up to their apartment in order
 to find out more details from her, their godchild. But Nana would put on
 her expression of innocent stupidity and lower her long silky eyelashes to
 hide the fire in her eyes as she replied.
 

 In the midst of this general indignation, Gervaise lived quietly on,
 feeling tired out and half asleep. At first she considered herself very
 sinful and felt a disgust for herself. When she left Lantier's room she
 would wash her hands and scrub herself as if trying to get rid of an evil
 stain. If Coupeau then tried to joke with her, she would fly into a
 passion, and run and shiveringly dress herself in the farthest corner of
 the shop; neither would she allow Lantier near her soon after her husband
 had kissed her. She would have liked to have changed her skin as she
 changed men. But she gradually became accustomed to it. Soon it was too
 much trouble to scrub herself each time. Her thirst for happiness led her
 to enjoy as much as she could the difficult situation. She had always been
 disposed to make allowances for herself, so why not for others? She only
 wanted to avoid causing trouble. As long as the household went along as
 usual, there was nothing to complain about.
 

 Then, after all, she could not be doing anything to make Coupeau stop
 drinking; matters were arranged so easily to the general satisfaction. One
 is generally punished if one does what is not right. His dissoluteness had
 gradually become a habit. Now it was as regular an affair as eating and
 drinking. Each time Coupeau came home drunk, she would go to Lantier's
 room. This was usually on Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays. Sometimes on
 other nights, if Coupeau was snoring too loudly, she would leave in the
 middle of the night. It was not that she cared more for Lantier, but just
 that she slept better in his room.
 

 Mother Coupeau never dared speak openly of it. But after a quarrel, when
 the laundress had bullied her, the old woman was not sparing in her
 allusions. She would say that she knew men who were precious fools and
 women who were precious hussies, and she would mutter words far more
 biting, with the sharpness of language pertaining to an old
 waistcoat-maker. The first time this had occurred Gervaise looked at her
 straight in the face without answering. Then, also avoiding going into
 details, she began to defend herself with reasons given in a general sort
 of way. When a woman had a drunkard for a husband, a pig who lived in
 filth, that woman was to be excused if she sought for cleanliness
 elsewhere. Once she pointed out that Lantier was just as much her husband
 as Coupeau was. Hadn't she known him since she was fourteen and didn't she
 have children by him?
 

 Anyway, she'd like to see anyone make trouble for her. She wasn't the only
 one around the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or. Madame Vigouroux, the coal-dealer
 had a merry dance from morning to night. Then there was the grocer's wife,
 Madame Lehongre with her brother-in-law. Mon Dieu! What a slob of a
 fellow. He wasn't worth touching with a shovel. Even the neat little
 clockmaker was said to have carried on with his own daughter, a
 streetwalker. Ah, the entire neighborhood. Oh, she knew plenty of dirt.
 

 One day when mother Coupeau was more pointed than usual in her
 observations, Gervaise had replied to her, clinching her teeth:
 

 "You're confined to your bed and you take advantage of it. Listen! You're
 wrong. You see that I behave nicely to you, for I've never thrown your
 past life into your teeth. Oh! I know all about it. No, don't cough. I've
 finished what I had to say. It's only to request you to mind your own
 business, that's all!"
 

 The old woman almost choked. On the morrow, Goujet having called about his
 mother's washing when Gervaise happened to be out, mother Coupeau called
 him to her and kept him some time seated beside her bed. She knew all
 about the blacksmith's friendship, and had noticed that for some time past
 he had looked dismal and wretched, from a suspicion of the melancholy
 things that were taking place. So, for the sake of gossiping, and out of
 revenge for the quarrel of the day before, she bluntly told him the truth,
 weeping and complaining as though Gervaise's wicked behavior did her some
 special injury. When Goujet quitted the little room, he leant against the
 wall, almost stifling with grief. Then, when the laundress returned home,
 mother Coupeau called to her that Madame Goujet required her to go round
 with her clothes, ironed or not; and she was so animated that Gervaise,
 seeing something was wrong, guessed what had taken place and had a
 presentiment of the unpleasantness which awaited her.
 

 Very pale, her limbs already trembling, she placed the things in a basket
 and started off. For years past she had not returned the Goujets a sou of
 their money. The debt still amounted to four hundred and twenty-five
 francs. She always spoke of her embarrassments and received the money for
 the washing. It filled her with shame, because she seemed to be taking
 advantage of the blacksmith's friendship to make a fool of him. Coupeau,
 who had now become less scrupulous, would chuckle and say that Goujet no
 doubt had fooled around with her a bit, and had so paid himself. But she,
 in spite of the relations she had fallen into with Coupeau, would
 indignantly ask her husband if he already wished to eat of that sort of
 bread. She would not allow anyone to say a word against Goujet in her
 presence; her affection for the blacksmith remained like a last shred of
 her honor. Thus, every time she took the washing home to those worthy
 people, she felt a spasm of her heart the moment she put a foot on their
 stairs.
 

 "Ah! it's you, at last!" said Madame Goujet sharply, on opening the door
 to her. "When I'm in want of death, I'll send you to fetch him."
 

 Gervaise entered, greatly embarrassed, not even daring to mutter an
 excuse. She was no longer punctual, never came at the time arranged, and
 would keep her customers waiting for days on end. Little by little she was
 giving way to a system of thorough disorder.
 

 "For a week past I've been expecting you," continued the lace-mender. "And
 you tell falsehoods too; you send your apprentice to me with all sorts of
 stories; you are then busy with my things, you will deliver them the same
 evening, or else you've had an accident, the bundle's fallen into a pail
 of water. Whilst all this is going on, I waste my time, nothing turns up,
 and it worries me exceedingly. No, you're most unreasonable. Come, what
 have you in your basket? Is everything there now? Have you brought me the
 pair of sheets you've been keeping back for a month past, and the chemise
 which was missing the last time you brought home the washing?"
 

 "Yes, yes," murmured Gervaise, "I have the chemise. Here it is."
 

 But Madame Goujet cried out. That chemise was not hers, she would have
 nothing to do with it. Her things were changed now; it was too bad! Only
 the week before, there were two handkerchiefs which hadn't her mark on
 them. It was not to her taste to have clothes coming from no one knew
 where. Besides that, she liked to have her own things.
 

 "And the sheets?" she resumed. "They're lost, aren't they? Well! Woman,
 you must see about them, for I insist upon having them to-morrow morning,
 do you hear?"
 

 There was a silence which particularly bothered Gervaise when she noticed
 that the door to Goujet's room was open. If he was in there, it was most
 annoying that he should hear these just criticisms. She made no reply,
 meekly bowing her head, and placing the laundry on the bed as quickly as
 possible.
 

 Matters became worse when Madame Goujet began to look over the things, one
 by one. She took hold of them and threw them down again saying:
 

 "Ah! you don't get them up nearly so well as you used to do. One can't
 compliment you every day now. Yes, you've taken to mucking your work—doing
 it in a most slovenly way. Just look at this shirt-front, it's scorched,
 there's the mark of the iron on the plaits; and the buttons have all been
 torn off. I don't know how you manage it, but there's never a button left
 on anything. Oh! now, here's a petticoat body which I shall certainly not
 pay you for. Look there! The dirt's still on it, you've simply smoothed it
 over. So now the things are not even clean!"
 

 She stopped whilst she counted the different articles. Then she exclaimed:
 

 "What! This is all you've brought? There are two pairs of stockings, six
 towels, a table-cloth, and several dish-cloths short. You're regularly
 trifling with me, it seems! I sent word that you were to bring me
 everything, ironed or not. If your apprentice isn't here on the hour with
 the rest of the things, we shall fall out, Madame Coupeau, I warn you."
 

 At this moment Goujet coughed in his room. Gervaise slightly started. Mon
 Dieu! How she was treated before him. And she remained standing in the
 middle of the rooms, embarrassed and confused and waiting for the dirty
 clothes; but after making up the account Madame Goujet had quietly
 returned to her seat near the window, and resumed the mending of a lace
 shawl.
 

 "And the dirty things?" timidly inquired the laundress.
 

 "No, thank you," replied the old woman, "there will be no laundry this
 week."
 

 Gervaise turned pale. She was no longer to have the washing. Then she
 quite lost her head; she was obliged to sit down on a chair, for her legs
 were giving way under her. She did not attempt to vindicate herself. All
 that she would find to say was:
 

 "Is Monsieur Goujet ill?"
 

 Yes, he was not well. He had been obliged to come home instead of
 returning to the forge, and he had gone to lie down on his bed to get a
 rest. Madame Goujet talked gravely, wearing her black dress as usual and
 her white face framed in her nun-like coif. The pay at the forge had been
 cut again. It was now only seven francs a day because the machines did so
 much of the work. This forced her to save money every way she could. She
 would do her own washing from now on. It would naturally have been very
 helpful if the Coupeaus had been able to return her the money lent them by
 her son; but she was not going to set the lawyers on them, as they were
 unable to pay. As she was talking about the debt, Gervaise lowered her
 eyes in embarrassment.
 

 "All the same," continued the lace-maker, "by pinching yourselves a little
 you could manage to pay it off. For really now, you live very well; and
 spend a great deal, I'm sure. If you were only to pay off ten francs a
 month—"
 

 She was interrupted by the sound of Goujet's voice as he called:
 

 "Mamma! Mamma!"
 

 And when she returned to her seat, which was almost immediately, she
 changed the conversation. The blacksmith had doubtless begged her not to
 ask Gervaise for money; but in spite of herself she again spoke of the
 debt at the expiration of five minutes. Oh! She had foreseen long ago what
 was now happening. Coupeau was drinking all that the laundry business
 brought in and dragging his wife down with him. Her son would never have
 loaned the money if he had only listened to her. By now he would have been
 married, instead of miserably sad with only unhappiness to look forward to
 for the rest of his life. She grew quite stern and angry, even accusing
 Gervaise of having schemed with Coupeau to take advantage of her foolish
 son. Yes, some women were able to play the hypocrite for years, but
 eventually the truth came out.
 

 "Mamma! Mamma!" again called Goujet, but louder this time.
 

 She rose from her seat and when she returned she said, as she resumed her
 lace mending:
 

 "Go in, he wishes to see you."
 

 Gervaise, all in a tremble left the door open. This scene filled her with
 emotion because it was like an avowal of their affection before Madame
 Goujet. She again beheld the quiet little chamber, with its narrow iron
 bedstead, and papered all over with pictures, the whole looking like the
 room of some girl of fifteen. Goujet's big body was stretched on the bed.
 Mother Coupeau's disclosures and the things his mother had been saying
 seemed to have knocked all the life out of his limbs. His eyes were red
 and swollen, his beautiful yellow beard was still wet. In the first moment
 of rage he must have punched away at his pillow with his terrible fists,
 for the ticking was split and the feathers were coming out.
 

 "Listen, mamma's wrong," said he to the laundress in a voice that was
 scarcely audible. "You owe me nothing. I won't have it mentioned again."
 

 He had raised himself up and was looking at her. Big tears at once filled
 his eyes.
 

 "Do you suffer, Monsieur Goujet?" murmured she. "What is the matter with
 you? Tell me!"
 

 "Nothing, thanks. I tired myself with too much work yesterday. I will rest
 a bit."
 

 Then, his heart breaking, he could not restrain himself and burst out:
 

 "Mon Dieu! Ah! Mon Dieu! It was never to be—never. You
 swore it. And now it is—it is! Ah, it pains me too much, leave me!"
 

 And with his hand he gently and imploringly motioned to her to go. She did
 not draw nearer to the bed. She went off as he requested her to, feeling
 stupid, unable to say anything to soothe him. When in the other room she
 took up her basket; but she did not go home. She stood there trying to
 find something to say. Madame Goujet continued her mending without raising
 her head. It was she who at length said:
 

 "Well! Good-night; send me back my things and we will settle up
 afterwards."
 

 "Yes, it will be best so—good-night," stammered Gervaise.
 

 She took a last look around the neatly arranged room and thought as she
 shut the door that she seemed to be leaving some part of her better self
 behind. She plodded blindly back to the laundry, scarcely knowing where
 she was going.
 

 When Gervaise arrived, she found mother Coupeau out of her bed, sitting on
 a chair by the stove. Gervaise was too tired to scold her. Her bones ached
 as though she had been beaten and she was thinking that her life was
 becoming too hard to bear. Surely a quick death was the only escape from
 the pain in her heart.
 

 After this, Gervaise became indifferent to everything. With a vague
 gesture of her hand she would send everybody about their business. At each
 fresh worry she buried herself deeper in her only pleasure, which was to
 have her three meals a day. The shop might have collapsed. So long as she
 was not beneath it, she would have gone off willingly without a chemise to
 her back. And the little shop was collapsing, not suddenly, but little by
 little, morning and evening. One by one the customers got angry, and sent
 their washing elsewhere. Monsieur Madinier, Mademoiselle Remanjou, the
 Boches themselves had returned to Madame Fauconnier, where they could
 count on great punctuality. One ends by getting tired of asking for a pair
 of stockings for three weeks straight, and of putting on shirts with
 grease stains dating from the previous Sunday. Gervaise, without losing a
 bite, wished them a pleasant journey, and spoke her mind about them,
 saying that she was precious glad she would no longer have to poke her
 nose into their filth. The entire neighborhood could quit her; that would
 relieve her of the piles of stinking junk and give her less work to do.
 

 Now her only customers were those who didn't pay regularly, the
 street-walkers, and women like Madame Gaudron, whose laundry smelled so
 bad that not one of the laundresses on the Rue Neuve would take it. She
 had to let Madame Putois go, leaving only her apprentice, squint-eyed
 Augustine, who seemed to grow more stupid as time passed. Frequently there
 was not even enough work for the two of them and they sat on stools all
 afternoon doing nothing.
 

 Whilst idleness and poverty entered, dirtiness naturally entered also. One
 would never have recognised that beautiful blue shop, the color of heaven,
 which had once been Gervaise's pride. Its window-frames and panes, which
 were never washed, were covered from top to bottom with the splashes of
 the passing vehicles. On the brass rods in the windows were displayed
 three grey rags left by customers who had died in the hospital. And inside
 it was more pitiable still; the dampness of the clothes hung up at the
 ceiling to dry had loosed all the wallpaper; the Pompadour chintz hung in
 strips like cobwebs covered with dust; the big stove, broken and in holes
 from the rough use of the poker, looked in its corner like the stock in
 trade of a dealer in old iron; the work-table appeared as though it had
 been used by a regiment, covered as it was with wine and coffee stains,
 sticky with jam, greasy from spilled gravy.
 

 Gervaise was so at ease among it all that she never even noticed the shop
 was getting filthy. She became used to it all, just as she got used to
 wearing torn skirts and no longer washing herself carefully. The disorder
 was like a warm nest.
 

 Her own ease was her sole consideration; she did not care a pin for
 anything else. The debts, though still increasing, no longer troubled her.
 Her honesty gradually deserted her; whether she would be able to pay or
 not was altogether uncertain, and she preferred not to think about it.
 When her credit was stopped at one shop, she would open an account at some
 other shop close by. She was in debt all over the neighborhood, she owed
 money every few yards. To take merely the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or, she no
 longer dared pass in front of the grocer's, nor the charcoal-dealer's, nor
 the greengrocer's; and this obliged her, whenever she required to be at
 the wash-house, to go round by the Rue des Poissonniers, which was quite
 ten minutes out of her way. The tradespeople came and treated her as a
 swindler. One evening the dealer from whom she had purchased Lantier's
 furniture made a scene in the street. Scenes like this upset her at the
 time, but were soon forgotten and never spoiled her appetite. What a nerve
 to bother her like that when she had no money to pay. They were all
 robbers anyway and it served them right to have to wait. Well, she'd have
 to go bankrupt, but she didn't intend to fret about it now.
 

 Meanwhile mother Coupeau had recovered. For another year the household
 jogged along. During the summer months there was naturally a little more
 work—the white petticoats and the cambric dresses of the
 street-walkers of the exterior Boulevard. The catastrophe was slowly
 approaching; the home sank deeper into the mire every week; there were ups
 and downs, however—days when one had to rub one's stomach before the
 empty cupboard, and others when one ate veal enough to make one burst.
 Mother Coupeau was for ever being seen in the street, hiding bundles under
 her apron, and strolling in the direction of the pawn-place in the Rue
 Polonceau. She strutted along with the air of a devotee going to mass; for
 she did not dislike these errands; haggling about money amused her; this
 crying up of her wares like a second-hand dealer tickled the old woman's
 fancy for driving hard bargains. The clerks knew her well and called her
 "Mamma Four Francs," because she always demanded four francs when they
 offered three, on bundles no bigger than two sous' worth of butter.
 

 At the start, Gervaise took advantage of good weeks to get things back
 from the pawn-shops, only to put them back again the next week. Later she
 let things go altogether, selling her pawn tickets for cash.
 

 One thing alone gave Gervaise a pang—it was having to pawn her clock
 to pay an acceptance for twenty francs to a bailiff who came to seize her
 goods. Until then, she had sworn rather to die of hunger than to part with
 her clock. When mother Coupeau carried it away in a little bonnet-box, she
 sunk on to a chair, without a particle of strength left in her arms, her
 eyes full of tears, as though a fortune was being torn from her. But when
 mother Coupeau reappeared with twenty-five francs, the unexpected loan,
 the five francs profit consoled her; she at once sent the old woman out
 again for four sous' worth of brandy in a glass, just to toast the
 five-franc piece.
 

 The two of them would often have a drop together, when they were on good
 terms with each other. Mother Coupeau was very successful at bringing back
 a full glass hidden in her apron pocket without spilling a drop. Well, the
 neighbors didn't need to know, did they. But the neighbors knew perfectly
 well. This turned the neighborhood even more against Gervaise. She was
 devouring everything; a few more mouthfuls and the place would be swept
 clean.
 

 In the midst of this general demolishment, Coupeau continued to prosper.
 The confounded tippler was as well as well could be. The sour wine and the
 "vitriol" positively fattened him. He ate a great deal, and laughed at
 that stick Lorilleux, who accused drink of killing people, and answered
 him by slapping himself on the stomach, the skin of which was so stretched
 by the fat that it resembled the skin of a drum. He would play him a tune
 on it, the glutton's vespers, with rolls and beats loud enough to have
 made a quack's fortune. Lorilleux, annoyed at not having any fat himself,
 said that it was soft and unhealthy. Coupeau ignored him and went on
 drinking more and more, saying it was for his health's sake.
 

 His hair was beginning to turn grey and his face to take on the drunkard's
 hue of purplish wine. He continued to act like a mischievous child. Well,
 it wasn't his concern if there was nothing about the place to eat. When he
 went for weeks without work he became even more difficult.
 

 Still, he was always giving Lantier friendly slaps on the back. People
 swore he had no suspicion at all. Surely something terrible would happen
 if he ever found out. Madame Lerat shook her head at this. His sister said
 she had known of husbands who didn't mind at all.
 

 Lantier wasn't wasting away either. He took great care of himself,
 measuring his stomach by the waist-band of his trousers, with the
 constant dread of having to loosen the buckle or draw it tighter; for he
 considered himself just right, and out of coquetry neither desired to grow
 fatter nor thinner. That made him hard to please in the matter of food,
 for he regarded every dish from the point of view of keeping his waist as
 it was. Even when there was not a sou in the house, he required eggs,
 cutlets, light and nourishing things. Since he was sharing the lady of the
 house, he considered himself to have a half interest in everything and
 would pocket any franc pieces he saw lying about. He kept Gervaise running
 here and there and seemed more at home than Coupeau. Nana was his favorite
 because he adored pretty little girls, but he paid less and less attention
 to Etienne, since boys, according to him, ought to know how to take care
 of themselves. If anyone came to see Coupeau while he was out, Lantier, in
 shirt sleeves and slippers, would come out of the back room with the bored
 expression of a husband who has been disturbed, saying he would answer for
 Coupeau as it was all the same.
 

 Between these two gentlemen, Gervaise had nothing to laugh about. She had
 nothing to complain of as regards her health, thank goodness! She was
 growing too fat. But two men to coddle was often more than she could
 manage. Ah! Mon Dieu! one husband is already too much for a woman!
 The worst was that they got on very well together, the rogues. They never
 quarreled; they would chuckle in each other's faces, as they sat of an
 evening after dinner, their elbows on the table; they would rub up against
 one another all the live-long day, like cats which seek and cultivate
 their pleasure. The days when they came home in a rage, it was on her that
 they vented it. Go it! hammer away at the animal! She had a good back; it
 made them all the better friends when they yelled together. And it never
 did for her to give them tit-for-tat. In the beginning, whenever one of
 them yelled at her, she would appeal to the other, but this seldom worked.
 Coupeau had a foul mouth and called her horrible things. Lantier chose his
 insults carefully, but they often hurt her even more.
 

 But one can get used to anything. Soon their nasty remarks and all the
 wrongs done her by these two men slid off her smooth skin like water off a
 duck's back. It was even easier to have them angry, because when they were
 in good moods they bothered her too much, never giving her time to get a
 bonnet ironed.
 

 Yes, Coupeau and Lantier were wearing her out. The zinc-worker, sure
 enough, lacked education; but the hatter had too much, or at least he had
 education in the same way that dirty people have a white shirt, with
 uncleanliness underneath it. One night, she dreamt that she was on the
 edge of a wall; Coupeau was knocking her into it with a blow of his fist,
 whilst Lantier was tickling her in the ribs to make her fall quicker.
 Well! That resembled her life. It was no surprise if she was becoming
 slipshod. The neighbors weren't fair in blaming her for the frightful
 habits she had fallen into. Sometimes a cold shiver ran through her, but
 things could have been worse, so she tried to make the best of it. Once
 she had seen a play in which the wife detested her husband and poisoned
 him for the sake of her lover. Wasn't it more sensible for the three of
 them to live together in peace? In spite of her debts and poverty she
 thought she was quite happy and could live in peace if only Coupeau and
 Lantier would stop yelling at her so much.
 

 Towards the autumn, unfortunately, things became worse. Lantier pretended
 he was getting thinner, and pulled a longer face over the matter every
 day. He grumbled at everything, sniffed at the dishes of potatoes—a
 mess he could not eat, he would say, without having the colic. The least
 jangling now turned to quarrels, in which they accused one another of
 being the cause of all their troubles, and it was a devil of a job to
 restore harmony before they all retired for the night.
 

 Lantier sensed a crisis coming and it exasperated him to realise that this
 place was already so thoroughly cleaned out that he could see the day
 coming when he'd have to take his hat and seek elsewhere for his bed and
 board. He had become accustomed to this little paradise where he was
 nicely treated by everybody. He should have blamed himself for eating
 himself out of house and home, but instead he blamed the Coupeaus for
 letting themselves be ruined in less than two years. He thought Gervaise
 was too extravagant. What was going to happen to them now?
 

 One evening in December they had no dinner at all. There was not a radish
 left. Lantier, who was very glum, went out early, wandering about in
 search of some other den where the smell of the kitchen would bring a
 smile to one's face. He would now remain for hours beside the stove wrapt
 in thought. Then, suddenly, he began to evince a great friendship for the
 Poissons. He no longer teased the policeman and even went so far as to
 concede that the Emperor might not be such a bad fellow after all. He
 seemed to especially admire Virginie. No doubt he was hoping to board with
 them. Virginie having acquainted him with her desire to set up in some
 sort of business, he agreed with everything she said, and declared that
 her idea was a most brilliant one. She was just the person for trade—tall,
 engaging and active. Oh! she would make as much as she liked. The capital
 had been available for some time, thanks to an inheritance from an aunt.
 Lantier told her of all the shopkeepers who were making fortunes. The time
 was right for it; you could sell anything these days. Virginie, however,
 hesitated; she was looking for a shop that was to be let, she did not wish
 to leave the neighborhood. Then Lantier would take her into corners and
 converse with her in an undertone for ten minutes at a time. He seemed to
 be urging her to do something in spite of herself; and she no longer said
 "no," but appeared to authorize him to act. It was as a secret between
 them, with winks and words rapidly exchanged, some mysterious
 understanding which betrayed itself even in their handshakings.
 

 From this moment the hatter would covertly watch the Coupeaus whilst
 eating their dry bread, and becoming very talkative again, would deafen
 them with his continual jeremiads. All day long Gervaise moved in the
 midst of that poverty which he so obligingly spread out. Mon Dieu!
 he wasn't thinking of himself; he would go on starving with his friends as
 long as they liked. But look at it with common sense. They owed at least
 five hundred francs in the neighborhood. Besides which, they were two
 quarters' rent behind with the rent, which meant another two hundred and
 fifty francs; the landlord, Monsieur Marescot, even spoke of having them
 evicted if they did not pay him by the first of January. Finally the
 pawn-place had absorbed everything, one could not have got together three
 francs' worth of odds and ends, the clearance had been so complete; the
 nails remained in the walls and that was all and perhaps there were two
 pounds of them at three sous the pound. Gervaise, thoroughly entangled in
 it all, her nerves quite upset by this calculation, would fly into a
 passion and bang her fists down upon the table or else she would end by
 bursting into tears like a fool. One night she exclaimed:
 

 "I'll be off to-morrow! I prefer to put the key under the door and to
 sleep on the pavement rather than continue to live in such frights."
 

 "It would be wiser," said Lantier slyly, "to get rid of the lease if you
 could find someone to take it. When you are both decided to give up the
 shop—"
 

 She interrupted him more violently:
 

 "At once, at once! Ah! it'll be a good riddance!"
 

 Then the hatter became very practical. On giving up the lease one would no
 doubt get the new tenant to be responsible for the two overdue quarters.
 And he ventured to mention the Poissons, he reminded them that Virginie
 was looking for a shop; theirs would perhaps suit her. He remembered that
 he had heard her say she longed for one just like it. But when Virginie's
 name was mentioned the laundress suddenly regained her composure. We'll
 see how things go along. When you're angry you always talk of quitting,
 but it isn't so easy when you just stop to think about it.
 

 During the following days it was in vain that Lantier harped upon the
 subject. Gervaise replied that she had seen herself worse off and had
 pulled through. How would she be better off when she no longer had her
 shop? That would not put bread into their mouths. She would, on the
 contrary, engage some fresh workwomen and work up a fresh connection.
 

 Lantier made the mistake of mentioning Virginie again. This stirred
 Gervaise into furious obstinacy. No! Never! She had always had her
 suspicions of what was in Virginie's heart. Virginie only wanted to
 humiliate her. She would rather turn it over to the first woman to come in
 from the street than to that hypocrite who had been waiting for years to
 see her fail. Yes, Virginie still had in mind that fight in the
 wash-house. Well, she'd be wiser to forget about it, unless she wanted
 another one now.
 

 In the face of this flow of angry retorts, Lantier began by attacking
 Gervaise. He called her stupid and stuck-up. He even went so far as to
 abuse Coupeau, accusing him of not knowing how to make his wife respect
 his friend. Then, realising that passion would compromise everything, he
 swore that he would never again interest himself in the affairs of other
 people, for one always got more kicks than thanks; and indeed he appeared
 to have given up all idea of talking them into parting with the lease, but
 he was really watching for a favorable opportunity of broaching the
 subject again and of bringing the laundress round to his views.
 

 January had now arrived; the weather was wretched, both damp and cold.
 Mother Coupeau, who had coughed and choked all through December, was
 obliged to take to her bed after Twelfth-night. It was her annuity, which
 she expected every winter. This winter though, those around her said she'd
 never come out of her bedroom except feet first. Indeed, her gaspings
 sounded like a death rattle. She was still fat, but one eye was blind and
 one side of her face was twisted. The doctor made one call and didn't
 return again. They kept giving her tisanes and going to check on her every
 hour. She could no longer speak because her breathing was so difficult.
 

 One Monday evening, Coupeau came home totally drunk. Ever since his mother
 was in danger, he had lived in a continual state of deep emotion. When he
 was in bed, snoring soundly, Gervaise walked about the place for a while.
 She was in the habit of watching over mother Coupeau during a part of the
 night. Nana had showed herself very brave, always sleeping beside the old
 woman, and saying that if she heard her dying, she would wake everyone.
 Since the invalid seemed to be sleeping peacefully this night, Gervaise
 finally yielded to the appeals of Lantier to come into his room for a
 little rest. They only kept a candle alight, standing on the ground behind
 the wardrobe. But towards three o'clock Gervaise abruptly jumped out of
 bed, shivering and oppressed with anguish. She thought she had felt a cold
 breath pass over her body. The morsel of candle had burnt out; she tied on
 her petticoats in the dark, all bewildered, and with feverish hands. It
 was not till she got into the little room, after knocking up against the
 furniture, that she was able to light a small lamp. In the midst of the
 oppressive silence of night, the zinc-worker's snores alone sounded as two
 grave notes. Nana, stretched on her back, was breathing gently between her
 pouting lips. And Gervaise, holding down the lamp which caused big shadows
 to dance about the room, cast the light on mother Coupeau's face, and
 beheld it all white, the head lying on the shoulder, the eyes wide open.
 Mother Coupeau was dead.
 

 Gently, without uttering a cry, icy cold yet prudent, the laundress
 returned to Lantier's room. He had gone to sleep again. She bent over him
 and murmured:
 

 "Listen, it's all over, she's dead."
 

 Heavy with sleep, only half awake, he grunted at first:
 

 "Leave me alone, get into bed. We can't do her any good if she's dead."
 

 Then he raised himself on his elbow and asked:
 

 "What's the time?"
 

 "Three o'clock."
 

 "Only three o'clock! Get into bed quick. You'll catch cold. When it's
 daylight, we'll see what's to be done."
 

 But she did not listen to him, she dressed herself completely. Bundling
 himself in the blankets, Lantier muttered about how stubborn women were.
 What was the hurry to announce a death in the house? He was irritated at
 having his sleep spoiled by such gloomy matters.
 

 Meanwhile, Gervaise had moved her things back into her own room. Then she
 felt free to sit down and cry, no longer fearful of being caught in
 Lantier's room. She had been fond of mother Coupeau and felt a deep sorrow
 at her loss. She sat, crying by herself, her sobs loud in the silence, but
 Coupeau never stirred. She had spoken to him and even shaken him and
 finally decided to let him sleep. He would be more of a nuisance if he
 woke up.
 

 On returning to the body, she found Nana sitting up in bed rubbing her
 eyes. The child understood, and with her vicious urchin's curiosity,
 stretched out her neck to get a better view of her grandmother; she said
 nothing but she trembled slightly, surprised and satisfied in the presence
 of this death which she had been promising herself for two days past, like
 some nasty thing hidden away and forbidden to children; and her young
 cat-like eyes dilated before that white face all emaciated at the last
 gasp by the passion of life, she felt that tingling in her back which she
 felt behind the glass door when she crept there to spy on what was no
 concern of chits like her.
 

 "Come, get up," said her mother in a low voice. "You can't remain here."
 

 She regretfully slid out of bed, turning her head round and not taking her
 eyes off the corpse. Gervaise was much worried about her, not knowing
 where to put her till day-time. She was about to tell her to dress
 herself, when Lantier, in his trousers and slippers, rejoined her. He
 could not get to sleep again, and was rather ashamed of his behavior. Then
 everything was arranged.
 

 "She can sleep in my bed," murmured he. "She'll have plenty of room."
 

 Nana looked at her mother and Lantier with her big, clear eyes and put on
 her stupid air, the same as on New Year's day when anyone made her a
 present of a box of chocolate candy. And there was certainly no need for
 them to hurry her. She trotted off in her night-gown, her bare feet
 scarcely touching the tiled floor; she glided like a snake into the bed,
 which was still quite warm, and she lay stretched out and buried in it,
 her slim body scarcely raising the counterpane. Each time her mother
 entered the room she beheld her with her eyes sparkling in her motionless
 face—not sleeping, not moving, very red with excitement, and
 appearing to reflect on her own affairs.
 

 Lantier assisted Gervaise in dressing mother Coupeau—and it was not
 an easy matter, for the body was heavy. One would never have thought that
 that old woman was so fat and so white. They put on her stockings, a white
 petticoat, a short linen jacket and a white cap—in short, the best
 of her linen. Coupeau continued snoring, a high note and a low one, the
 one sharp, the other flat. One could almost have imagined it to be church
 music accompanying the Good Friday ceremonies. When the corpse was dressed
 and properly laid out on the bed, Lantier poured himself out a glass of
 wine, for he felt quite upset. Gervaise searched the chest of drawers to
 find a little brass crucifix which she had brought from Plassans, but she
 recollected that mother Coupeau had, in all probability, sold it herself.
 They had lighted the stove, and they passed the rest of the night half
 asleep on chairs, finishing the bottle of wine that had been opened,
 worried and sulking, as though it was their own fault.
 

 Towards seven o'clock, before daylight, Coupeau at length awoke. When he
 learnt his loss he at first stood still with dry eyes, stuttering and
 vaguely thinking that they were playing him some joke. Then he threw
 himself on the ground and went and knelt beside the corpse. His kissed it
 and wept like a child, with such a copious flow of tears that he quite
 wetted the sheet with wiping his cheeks. Gervaise had recommenced sobbing,
 deeply affected by her husband's grief, and the best of friends with him
 again. Yes, he was better at heart than she thought he was. Coupeau's
 despair mingled with a violent pain in his head. He passed his fingers
 through his hair. His mouth was dry, like on the morrow of a booze, and he
 was still a little drunk in spite of his ten hours of sleep. And,
 clenching his fist, he complained aloud. Mon Dieu! she was gone
 now, his poor mother, whom he loved so much! Ah! what a headache he had;
 it would settle him! It was like a wig of fire! And now they were tearing
 out his heart! No, it was not just of fate thus to set itself against one
 man!
 

 "Come, cheer up, old fellow," said Lantier, raising him from the ground;
 "you must pull yourself together."
 

 He poured him out a glass of wine, but Coupeau refused to drink.
 

 "What's the matter with me? I've got copper in my throat. It's mamma. When
 I saw her I got a taste of copper in my mouth. Mamma! Mon Dieu!
 mamma, mamma!"
 

 And he recommenced crying like a child. Then he drank the glass of wine,
 hoping to put out the flame searing his breast. Lantier soon left, using
 the excuse of informing the family and filing the necessary declaration at
 the town hall. Really though, he felt the need of fresh air, and so he
 took his time, smoking cigarettes and enjoying the morning air. When he
 left Madame Lerat's house, he went into a dairy place on Les Batignolles
 for a cup of hot coffee and remained there an hour, thinking things over.
 

 Towards nine o'clock the family were all united in the shop, the shutters
 of which were kept up. Lorilleux did not cry. Moreover he had some
 pressing work to attend to, and he returned almost directly to his room,
 after having stalked about with a face put on for the occasion. Madame
 Lorilleux and Madame Lerat embraced the Coupeaus and wiped their eyes,
 from which a few tears were falling. But Madame Lorilleux, after giving a
 hasty glance round the death chamber, suddenly raised her voice to say
 that it was unheard of, that one never left a lighted lamp beside a
 corpse; there should be a candle, and Nana was sent to purchase a packet
 of tall ones. Ah, well! It made one long to die at Clump-clump's, she laid
 one out in such a fine fashion! What a fool, not even to know what to do
 with a corpse! Had she then never buried anyone in her life? Madame Lerat
 had to go to the neighbors and borrow a crucifix; she brought one back
 which was too big, a cross of black wood with a Christ in painted
 cardboard fastened to it, which covered the whole of mother Coupeau's
 chest, and seemed to crush her under its weight. Then they tried to obtain
 some holy water, but no one had any, and it was again Nana who was sent to
 the church to bring some back in a bottle. In practically no time the tiny
 room presented quite another appearance; on a little table a candle was
 burning beside a glass full of holy water into which a sprig of boxwood
 was dipped. Now, if anyone came, it would at least look decent. And they
 arranged the chairs in a circle in the shop for receiving people.
 

 Lantier only returned at eleven o'clock. He had been to the undertaker's
 for information.
 

 "The coffin is twelve francs," said he. "If you desire a mass, it will be
 ten francs more. Then there's the hearse, which is charged for according
 to the ornaments."
 

 "Oh! it's quite unnecessary to be fancy," murmured Madame Lorilleux,
 raising her head in a surprised and anxious manner. "We can't bring mamma
 to life again, can we? One must do according to one's means."
 

 "Of course, that's just what I think," resumed the hatter. "I merely asked
 the prices to guide you. Tell me what you desire; and after lunch I will
 give the orders."
 

 They were talking in lowered voices. Only a dim light came into the room
 through the cracks in the shutters. The door to the little room stood half
 open, and from it came the deep silence of death. Children's laughter
 echoed in the courtyard. Suddenly they heard the voice of Nana, who had
 escaped from the Boches to whom she had been sent. She was giving commands
 in her shrill voice and the children were singing a song about a donkey.
 

 Gervaise waited until it was quiet to say:
 

 "We're not rich certainly; but all the same we wish to act decently. If
 mother Coupeau has left us nothing, it's no reason for pitching her into
 the ground like a dog. No; we must have a mass, and a hearse with a few
 ornaments."
 

 "And who will pay for them?" violently inquired Madame Lorilleux. "Not we,
 who lost some money last week; and you either, as you're stumped. Ah! you
 ought, however, to see where it has led you, this trying to impress
 people!"
 

 Coupeau, when consulted, mumbled something with a gesture of profound
 indifference, and then fell asleep again on his chair. Madame Lerat said
 that she would pay her share. She was of Gervaise's opinion, they should
 do things decently. Then the two of them fell to making calculations on a
 piece of paper: in all, it would amount to about ninety francs, because
 they decided, after a long discussion, to have a hearse ornamented with a
 narrow scallop.
 

 "We're three," concluded the laundress. "We'll give thirty francs each. It
 won't ruin us."
 

 But Madame Lorilleux broke out in a fury.
 

 "Well! I refuse, yes, I refuse! It's not for the thirty francs. I'd give a
 hundred thousand, if I had them, and if it would bring mamma to life
 again. Only, I don't like vain people. You've got a shop, you only dream
 of showing off before the neighborhood. We don't fall in with it, we
 don't. We don't try to make ourselves out what we are not. Oh! you can
 manage it to please yourself. Put plumes on the hearse if it amuses you."
 

 "No one asks you for anything," Gervaise ended by answering. "Even though
 I should have to sell myself, I'll not have anything to reproach myself
 with. I've fed mother Coupeau without your help, and I can certainly bury
 her without your help also. I already once before gave you a bit of my
 mind; I pick up stray cats, I'm not likely to leave your mother in the
 mire."
 

 Then Madame Lorilleux burst into tears and Lantier had to prevent her from
 leaving. The argument became so noisy that Madame Lerat felt she had to go
 quietly into the little room and glance tearfully at her dead mother, as
 though fearing to find her awake and listening. Just at this moment the
 girls playing in the courtyard, led by Nana, began singing again.
 

 "Mon Dieu! how those children grate on one's nerves with their
 singing!" said Gervaise, all upset and on the point of sobbing with
 impatience and sadness. Turning to the hatter, she said:
 

 "Do please make them leave off, and send Nana back to the concierge's with
 a kick."
 

 Madame Lerat and Madame Lorilleux went away to eat lunch, promising to
 return. The Coupeaus sat down to eat a bite without much appetite, feeling
 hesitant about even raising a fork. After lunch Lantier went to the
 undertaker's again with the ninety francs. Thirty had come from Madame
 Lerat and Gervaise had run, with her hair all loose, to borrow sixty
 francs from Goujet.
 

 Several of the neighbors called in the afternoon, mainly out of curiosity.
 They went into the little room to make the sign of the cross and sprinkle
 some holy water with the boxwood sprig. Then they sat in the shop and
 talked endlessly about the departed. Mademoiselle Remanjou had noticed
 that her right eye was still open. Madame Gaudron maintained that she had
 a fine complexion for her age. Madame Fauconnier kept repeating that she
 had seen her having coffee only three days earlier.
 

 Towards evening the Coupeaus were beginning to have had enough of it. It
 was too great an affliction for a family to have to keep a corpse so long
 a time. The government ought to have made a new law on the subject. All
 through another evening, another night, and another morning—no! it
 would never come to an end. When one no longer weeps, grief turns to
 irritation; is it not so? One would end by misbehaving oneself. Mother
 Coupeau, dumb and stiff in the depths of the narrow chamber, was spreading
 more and more over the lodging and becoming heavy enough to crush the
 people in it. And the family, in spite of itself, gradually fell into the
 ordinary mode of life, and lost some portion of its respect.
 

 "You must have a mouthful with us," said Gervaise to Madame Lerat and
 Madame Lorilleux, when they returned. "We're too sad; we must keep
 together."
 

 They laid the cloth on the work-table. Each one, on seeing the plates,
 thought of the feastings they had had on it. Lantier had returned.
 Lorilleux came down. A pastry-cook had just brought a meat pie, for the
 laundress was too upset to attend to any cooking. As they were taking
 their seats, Boche came to say that Monsieur Marescot asked to be
 admitted, and the landlord appeared, looking very grave, and wearing a
 broad decoration on his frock-coat. He bowed in silence and went straight
 to the little room, where he knelt down. All the family, leaving the
 table, stood up, greatly impressed. Monsieur Marescot, having finished his
 devotions, passed into the shop and said to the Coupeaus:
 

 "I have come for the two quarters' rent that's overdue. Are you prepared
 to pay?"
 

 "No, sir, not quite," stammered Gervaise, greatly put out at hearing this
 mentioned before the Lorilleuxs. "You see, with the misfortune which has
 fallen upon us—"
 

 "No doubt, but everyone has their troubles," resumed the landlord,
 spreading out his immense fingers, which indicated the former workman. "I
 am very sorry, but I cannot wait any longer. If I am not paid by the
 morning after to-morrow, I shall be obliged to have you put out."
 

 Gervaise, struck dumb, imploringly clasped her hands, her eyes full of
 tears. With an energetic shake of his big bony head, he gave her to
 understand that supplications were useless. Besides, the respect due to
 the dead forbade all discussion. He discreetly retired, walking backwards.
 

 "A thousand pardons for having disturbed you," murmured he. "The morning
 after to-morrow; do not forget."
 

 And as on withdrawing he again passed before the little room, he saluted
 the corpse a last time through the wide open door by devoutly bending his
 knee.
 

 They began eating and gobbled the food down very quickly, so as not to
 seem to be enjoying it, only slowing down when they reached the dessert.
 Occasionally Gervaise or one of the sisters would get up, still holding
 her napkin, to look into the small room. They made plenty of strong coffee
 to keep them awake through the night. The Poissons arrived about eight and
 were invited for coffee.
 

 Then Lantier, who had been watching Gervaise's face, seemed to seize an
 opportunity that he had been waiting for ever since the morning. In
 speaking of the indecency of landlords who entered houses of mourning to
 demand their money, he said:
 

 "He's a Jesuit, the beast, with his air of officiating at a mass! But in
 your place, I'd just chuck up the shop altogether."
 

 Gervaise, quite worn out and feeling weak and nervous, gave way and
 replied:
 

 "Yes, I shall certainly not wait for the bailiffs. Ah! it's more than I
 can bear—more than I can bear."
 

 The Lorilleuxs, delighted at the idea that Clump-clump would no longer
 have a shop, approved the plan immensely. One could hardly conceive the
 great cost a shop was. If she only earned three francs working for others
 she at least had no expenses; she did not risk losing large sums of money.
 They repeated this argument to Coupeau, urging him on; he drank a great
 deal and remained in a continuous fit of sensibility, weeping all day by
 himself in his plate. As the laundress seemed to be allowing herself to be
 convinced, Lantier looked at the Poissons and winked. And tall Virginie
 intervened, making herself most amiable.
 

 "You know, we might arrange the matter between us. I would relieve you of
 the rest of the lease and settle your matter with the landlord. In short,
 you would not be worried nearly so much."
 

 "No thanks," declared Gervaise, shaking herself as though she felt a
 shudder pass over her. "I'll work; I've got my two arms, thank heaven! to
 help me out of my difficulties."
 

 "We can talk about it some other time," the hatter hastened to put in.
 "It's scarcely the thing to do so this evening. Some other time—in
 the morning for instance."
 

 At this moment, Madame Lerat, who had gone into the little room, uttered a
 faint cry. She had had a fright because she had found the candle burnt
 out. They all busied themselves in lighting another; they shook their
 heads, saying that it was not a good sign when the light went out beside a
 corpse.
 

 The wake commenced. Coupeau had gone to lie down, not to sleep, said he,
 but to think; and five minutes afterwards he was snoring. When they sent
 Nana off to sleep at the Boches' she cried; she had been looking forward
 ever since the morning to being nice and warm in her good friend Lantier's
 big bed. The Poissons stayed till midnight. Some hot wine had been made in
 a salad-bowl because the coffee affected the ladies' nerves too much. The
 conversation became tenderly effusive. Virginie talked of the country: she
 would like to be buried at the corner of a wood with wild flowers on her
 grave. Madame Lerat had already put by in her wardrobe the sheet for her
 shroud, and she kept it perfumed with a bunch of lavender; she wished
 always to have a nice smell under her nose when she would be eating the
 dandelions by the roots. Then, with no sort of transition, the policeman
 related that he had arrested a fine girl that morning who had been
 stealing from a pork-butcher's shop; on undressing her at the commissary
 of police's they had found ten sausages hanging round her body. And Madame
 Lorilleux having remarked, with a look of disgust, that she would not eat
 any of those sausages, the party burst into a gentle laugh. The wake
 became livelier, though not ceasing to preserve appearances.
 

 But just as they were finishing the hot wine a peculiar noise, a dull
 trickling sound, issued from the little room. All raised their heads and
 looked at each other.
 

 "It's nothing," said Lantier quietly, lowering his voice. "She's
 emptying."
 

 The explanation caused the others to nod their heads in a reassured way,
 and they replaced their glasses on the table.
 

 When the Poissons left for home, Lantier left also, saying he would sleep
 with a friend and leave his bed for the ladies in case they wanted to take
 turns napping. Lorilleux went upstairs to bed. Gervaise and the two
 sisters arranged themselves by the stove where they huddled together close
 to the warmth, talking quietly. Coupeau was still snoring.
 

 Madame Lorilleux was complaining that she didn't have a black dress and
 asked Gervaise about the black skirt they had given mother Coupeau on her
 saint's day. Gervaise went to look for it. Madame Lorilleux then wanted
 some of the old linen and mentioned the bed, the wardrobe, and the two
 chairs as she looked around for other odds and ends. Madame Lerat had to
 serve as peace maker when a quarrel nearly broke out. She pointed out that
 as the Coupeaus had cared for their mother, they deserved to keep the few
 things she had left. Soon they were all dozing around the stove.
 

 The night seemed terribly long to them. Now and again they shook
 themselves, drank some coffee and stretched their necks in the direction
 of the little room, where the candle, which was not to be snuffed, was
 burning with a dull red flame, flickering the more because of the black
 soot on the wick. Towards morning, they shivered, in spite of the great
 heat of the stove. Anguish, and the fatigue of having talked too much was
 stifling them, whilst their mouths were parched, and their eyes ached.
 Madame Lerat threw herself on Lantier's bed, and snored as loud as a man;
 whilst the other two, their heads falling forward, and almost touching
 their knees, slept before the fire. At daybreak, a shudder awoke them.
 Mother Coupeau's candle had again gone out; and as, in the obscurity, the
 dull trickling sound recommenced, Madame Lorilleux gave the explanation of
 it anew in a loud voice, so as to reassure herself:
 

 "She's emptying," repeated she, lighting another candle.
 

 The funeral was to take place at half-past ten. A nice morning to add to
 the night and the day before! Gervaise, though without a sou, said she
 would have given a hundred francs to anybody who would have come and taken
 mother Coupeau away three hours sooner. No, one may love people, but they
 are too great a weight when they are dead; and the more one has loved
 them, the sooner one would like to be rid of their bodies.
 

 The morning of a funeral is, fortunately, full of diversions. One has all
 sorts of preparations to make. To begin with, they lunched. Then it
 happened to be old Bazouge, the undertaker's helper, who lived on the
 sixth floor, who brought the coffin and the sack of bran. He was never
 sober, the worthy fellow. At eight o'clock that day, he was still lively
 from the booze of the day before.
 

 "This is for here, isn't it?" asked he.
 

 And he laid down the coffin, which creaked like a new box. But as he was
 throwing the sack of bran on one side, he stood with a look of amazement
 in his eyes, his mouth opened wide, on beholding Gervaise before him.
 

 "Beg pardon, excuse me. I've made a mistake," stammered he. "I was told it
 was for you."
 

 He had already taken up the sack again, and the laundress was obliged to
 call to him:
 

 "Leave it alone, it's for here."
 

 "Ah! Mon Dieu! Now I understand!" resumed he, slapping his thigh.
 "It's for the old lady."
 

 Gervaise had turned quite pale. Old Bazouge had brought the coffin for
 her. By way of apology, he tried to be gallant, and continued:
 

 "I'm not to blame, am I? It was said yesterday that someone on the ground
 floor had passed away. Then I thought—you know, in our business,
 these things enter by one ear and go out by the other. All the same, my
 compliments to you. As late as possible, eh? That's best, though life
 isn't always amusing; ah! no, by no means."
 

 As Gervaise listened to him, she draw back, afraid he would grab her and
 take her away in the box. She remembered the time before, when he had told
 her he knew of women who would thank him to come and get them. Well, she
 wasn't ready yet. Mon Dieu! The thought sent chills down her spine.
 Her life may have been bitter, but she wasn't ready to give it up yet. No,
 she would starve for years first.
 

 "He's abominably drunk," murmured she, with an air of disgust mingled with
 dread. "They at least oughtn't to send us tipplers. We pay dear enough."
 

 Then he became insolent, and jeered:
 

 "See here, little woman, it's only put off until another time. I'm
 entirely at your service, remember! You've only to make me a sign. I'm the
 ladies' consoler. And don't spit on old Bazouge, because he's held in his
 arms finer ones than you, who let themselves be tucked in without a
 murmur, very pleased to continue their by-by in the dark."
 

 "Hold your tongue, old Bazouge!" said Lorilleux severely, having hastened
 to the spot on hearing the noise, "such jokes are highly improper. If we
 complained about you, you would get the sack. Come, be off, as you've no
 respect for principles."
 

 Bazouge moved away, but one could hear him stuttering as he dragged along
 the pavement:
 

 "Well! What? Principles! There's no such thing as principles, there's no
 such thing as principles—there's only common decency!"
 

 At length ten o'clock struck. The hearse was late. There were already
 several people in the shop, friends and neighbors—Monsieur Madinier,
 My-Boots, Madame Gaudron, Mademoiselle Remanjou; and every minute, a man's
 or a woman's head was thrust out of the gaping opening of the door between
 the closed shutters, to see if that creeping hearse was in sight. The
 family, all together in the back room, was shaking hands. Short pauses
 occurred interrupted by rapid whisperings, a tiresome and feverish waiting
 with sudden rushes of skirts—Madame Lorilleux who had forgotten her
 handkerchief, or else Madame Lerat who was trying to borrow a prayer-book.
 Everyone, on arriving, beheld the open coffin in the centre of the little
 room before the bed; and in spite of oneself, each stood covertly studying
 it, calculating that plump mother Coupeau would never fit into it. They
 all looked at each other with this thought in their eyes, though without
 communicating it. But there was a slight pushing at the front door.
 Monsieur Madinier, extending his arms, came and said in a low grave voice:
 

 "Here they are!"
 

 It was not the hearse though. Four helpers entered hastily in single file,
 with their red faces, their hands all lumpy like persons in the habit of
 moving heavy things, and their rusty black clothes worn and frayed from
 constant rubbing against coffins. Old Bazouge walked first, very drunk and
 very proper. As soon as he was at work he found his equilibrium. They did
 not utter a word, but slightly bowed their heads, already weighing mother
 Coupeau with a glance. And they did not dawdle; the poor old woman was
 packed in, in the time one takes to sneeze. A young fellow with a squint,
 the smallest of the men, poured the bran into the coffin and spread it
 out. The tall and thin one spread the winding sheet over the bran. Then,
 two at the feet and two at the head, all four took hold of the body and
 lifted it. Mother Coupeau was in the box, but it was a tight fit. She
 touched on every side.
 

 The undertaker's helpers were now standing up and waiting; the little one
 with the squint took the coffin lid, by way of inviting the family to bid
 their last farewell, whilst Bazouge had filled his mouth with nails and
 was holding the hammer in readiness. Then Coupeau, his two sisters and
 Gervaise threw themselves on their knees and kissed the mamma who was
 going away, weeping bitterly, the hot tears falling on and streaming down
 the stiff face now cold as ice. There was a prolonged sound of sobbing.
 The lid was placed on, and old Bazouge knocked the nails in with the style
 of a packer, two blows for each; and they none of them could hear any
 longer their own weeping in that din, which resembled the noise of
 furniture being repaired. It was over. The time for starting had arrived.
 

 "What a fuss to make at such a time!" said Madame Lorilleux to her husband
 as she caught sight of the hearse before the door.
 

 The hearse was creating quite a revolution in the neighborhood. The
 tripe-seller called to the grocer's men, the little clockmaker came out on
 to the pavement, the neighbors leant out of their windows; and all these
 people talked about the scallop with its white cotton fringe. Ah! the
 Coupeaus would have done better to have paid their debts. But as the
 Lorilleuxs said, when one is proud it shows itself everywhere and in spite
 of everything.
 

 "It's shameful!" Gervaise was saying at the same moment, speaking of the
 chainmaker and his wife. "To think that those skinflints have not even
 brought a bunch of violets for their mother!"
 

 The Lorilleuxs, true enough, had come empty-handed. Madame Lerat had given
 a wreath of artificial flowers. And a wreath of immortelles and a bouquet
 bought by the Coupeaus were also placed on the coffin. The undertaker's
 helpers had to give a mighty heave to lift the coffin and carry it to the
 hearse. It was some time before the procession was formed. Coupeau and
 Lorilleux, in frock coats and with their hats in their hands, were chief
 mourners. The first, in his emotion which two glasses of white wine early
 in the morning had helped to sustain, clung to his brother-in-law's arm,
 with no strength in his legs, and a violent headache. Then followed the
 other men—Monsieur Madinier, very grave and all in black; My-Boots,
 wearing a great-coat over his blouse; Boche, whose yellow trousers
 produced the effect of a petard; Lantier, Gaudron, Bibi-the-Smoker,
 Poisson and others. The ladies came next—in the first row Madame
 Lorilleux, dragging the deceased's skirt, which she had altered; Madame
 Lerat, hiding under a shawl her hastily got-up mourning, a gown with lilac
 trimmings; and following them, Virginie, Madame Gaudron, Madame
 Fauconnier, Mademoiselle Remanjou and the rest. When the hearse started
 and slowly descended the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or, amidst signs of the cross
 and heads bared, the four helpers took the lead, two in front, the two
 others on the right and left. Gervaise had remained behind to close the
 shop. She left Nana with Madame Boche and ran to rejoin the procession,
 whilst the child, firmly held by the concierge under the porch, watched
 with a deeply interested gaze her grandmother disappear at the end of the
 street in that beautiful carriage.
 

 At the moment when Gervaise caught up with the procession, Goujet arrived
 from another direction. He nodded to her so sympathetically that she was
 reminded of how unhappy she was, and began to cry again as Goujet took his
 place with the men.
 

 The ceremony at the church was soon got through. The mass dragged a
 little, though, because the priest was very old. My-Boots and
 Bibi-the-Smoker preferred to remain outside on account of the collection.
 Monsieur Madinier studied the priests all the while, and communicated his
 observations to Lantier. Those jokers, though so glib with their Latin,
 did not even know a word of what they were saying. They buried a person
 just in the same way that they would have baptized or married him, without
 the least feeling in their heart.
 

 Happily, the cemetery was not far off, the little cemetery of La Chapelle,
 a bit of a garden which opened on to the Rue Marcadet. The procession
 arrived disbanded, with stampings of feet and everybody talking of his own
 affairs. The hard earth resounded, and many would have liked to have moved
 about to keep themselves warm. The gaping hole beside which the coffin was
 laid was already frozen over, and looked white and stony, like a plaster
 quarry; and the followers, grouped round little heaps of gravel, did not
 find it pleasant standing in such piercing cold, whilst looking at the
 hole likewise bored them. At length a priest in a surplice came out of a
 little cottage. He shivered, and one could see his steaming breath at each
 de profundis that he uttered. At the final sign of the cross he
 bolted off, without the least desire to go through the service again. The
 sexton took his shovel, but on account of the frost, he was only able to
 detach large lumps of earth, which beat a fine tune down below, a regular
 bombardment of the coffin, an enfilade of artillery sufficient to make one
 think the wood was splitting. One may be a cynic; nevertheless that sort
 of music soon upsets one's stomach. The weeping recommenced. They moved
 off, they even got outside, but they still heard the detonations.
 My-Boots, blowing on his fingers, uttered an observation aloud.
 

 "Tonnerre de Dieu! poor mother Coupeau won't feel very warm!"
 

 "Ladies and gentlemen," said the zinc-worker to the few friends who
 remained in the street with the family, "will you permit us to offer you
 some refreshments?"
 

 He led the way to a wine shop in the Rue Marcadet, the "Arrival at the
 Cemetery." Gervaise, remaining outside, called Goujet, who was moving off,
 after again nodding to her. Why didn't he accept a glass of wine? He was
 in a hurry; he was going back to the workshop. Then they looked at each
 other a moment without speaking.
 

 "I must ask your pardon for troubling you about the sixty francs," at
 length murmured the laundress. "I was half crazy, I thought of you—"
 

 "Oh! don't mention it; you're fully forgiven," interrupted the blacksmith.
 "And you know, I am quite at your service if any misfortune should
 overtake you. But don't say anything to mamma, because she has her ideas,
 and I don't wish to cause her annoyance."
 

 She gazed at him. He seemed to her such a good man, and sad-looking, and
 so handsome. She was on the verge of accepting his former proposal, to go
 away with him and find happiness together somewhere else. Then an evil
 thought came to her. It was the idea of borrowing the six months' back
 rent from him.
 

 She trembled and resumed in a caressing tone of voice:
 

 "We're still friends, aren't we?"
 

 He shook his head as he answered:
 

 "Yes, we'll always be friends. It's just that, you know, all is over
 between us."
 

 And he went off with long strides, leaving Gervaise bewildered, listening
 to his last words which rang in her ears with the clang of a big bell. On
 entering the wine shop, she seemed to hear a hollow voice within her which
 said, "All is over, well! All is over; there is nothing more for me to do
 if all is over!" Sitting down, she swallowed a mouthful of bread and
 cheese, and emptied a glass full of wine which she found before her.
 

 The wine shop was a single, long room with a low ceiling occupied by two
 large tables on which loaves of bread, large chunks of Brie cheese and
 bottles of wine were set out. They ate informally, without a tablecloth.
 Near the stove at the back the undertaker's helpers were finishing their
 lunch.
 

 "Mon Dieu!" exclaimed Monsieur Madinier, "we each have our time.
 The old folks make room for the young ones. Your lodging will seem very
 empty to you now when you go home."
 

 "Oh! my brother is going to give notice," said Madame Lorilleux quickly.
 "That shop's ruined."
 

 They had been working upon Coupeau. Everyone was urging him to give up the
 lease. Madame Lerat herself, who had been on very good terms with Lantier
 and Virginie for some time past, and who was tickled with the idea that
 they were a trifle smitten with each other, talked of bankruptcy and
 prison, putting on the most terrified airs. And suddenly, the zinc-worker,
 already overdosed with liquor, flew into a passion, his emotion turned to
 fury.
 

 "Listen," cried he, poking his nose in his wife's face; "I intend that you
 shall listen to me! Your confounded head will always have its own way.
 But, this time, I intend to have mine, I warn you!"
 

 "Ah! well," said Lantier, "one never yet brought her to reason by fair
 words; it wants a mallet to drive it into her head."
 

 For a time they both went on at her. Meanwhile, the Brie was quickly
 disappearing and the wine bottles were pouring like fountains. Gervaise
 began to weaken under this persistent pounding. She answered nothing, but
 hurried herself, her mouth ever full, as though she had been very hungry.
 When they got tired, she gently raised her head and said:
 

 "That's enough, isn't it? I don't care a straw for the shop! I want no
 more of it. Do you understand? It can go to the deuce! All is over!"
 

 Then they ordered some more bread and cheese and talked business. The
 Poissons took the rest of the lease and agreed to be answerable for the
 two quarters' rent overdue. Boche, moreover, pompously agreed to the
 arrangement in the landlord's name. He even then and there let a lodging
 to the Coupeaus—the vacant one on the sixth floor, in the same
 passage as the Lorilleuxs' apartment. As for Lantier, well! He would like
 to keep his room, if it did not inconvenience the Poissons. The policeman
 bowed; it did not inconvenience him at all; friends always get on
 together, in spite of any difference in their political ideas. And
 Lantier, without mixing himself up any more in the matter, like a man who
 has at length settled his little business, helped himself to an enormous
 slice of bread and cheese; he leant back in his chair and ate devoutly,
 his blood tingling beneath his skin, his whole body burning with a sly
 joy, and he blinked his eyes to peep first at Gervaise, and then at
 Virginie.
 

 "Hi! Old Bazouge!" called Coupeau, "come and have a drink. We're not
 proud; we're all workers."
 

 The four undertaker's helpers, who had started to leave, came back to
 raise glasses with the group. They thought that the lady had weighed quite
 a bit and they had certainly earned a glass of wine. Old Bazouge gazed
 steadily at Gervaise without saying a word. It made her feel uneasy though
 and she got up and left the men who were beginning to show signs of being
 drunk. Coupeau began to sob again, saying he was feeling very sad.
 

 That evening when Gervaise found herself at home again, she remained in a
 stupefied state on a chair. It seemed to her that the rooms were immense
 and deserted. Really, it would be a good riddance. But it was certainly
 not only mother Coupeau that she had left at the bottom of the hole in the
 little garden of the Rue Marcadet. She missed too many things, most likely
 a part of her life, and her shop, and her pride of being an employer, and
 other feelings besides, which she had buried on that day. Yes, the walls
 were bare, and her heart also; it was a complete clear out, a tumble into
 the pit. And she felt too tired; she would pick herself up again later on
 if she could.
 

 At ten o'clock, when undressing, Nana cried and stamped. She wanted to
 sleep in mother Coupeau's bed. Her mother tried to frighten her; but the
 child was too precocious. Corpses only filled her with a great curiosity;
 so that, for the sake of peace, she was allowed to lie down in mother
 Coupeau's place. She liked big beds, the chit; she spread herself out and
 rolled about. She slept uncommonly well that night in the warm and
 pleasant feather bed.
 

 
 
 

 The Coupeaus' new lodging was on the sixth floor, staircase B. After
 passing Mademoiselle Remanjou's door, you took the corridor to the left,
 and then turned again further along. The first door was for the apartment
 of the Bijards. Almost opposite, in an airless corner under a small
 staircase leading to the roof, was where Pere Bru slept. Two doors further
 was Bazouge's room and the Coupeaus were opposite him, overlooking the
 court, with one room and a closet. There were only two more doors along
 the corridor before reaching that of the Lorilleuxs at the far end.
 

 A room and a closet, no more. The Coupeaus perched there now. And the room
 was scarcely larger than one's hand. And they had to do everything in
 there—eat, sleep, and all the rest. Nana's bed just squeezed into
 the closet; she had to dress in her father and mother's room, and her door
 was kept open at night-time so that she should not be suffocated. There
 was so little space that Gervaise had left many things in the shop for the
 Poissons. A bed, a table, and four chairs completely filled their new
 apartment but she didn't have the courage to part with her old bureau and
 so it blocked off half the window. This made the room dark and gloomy,
 especially since one shutter was stuck shut. Gervaise was now so fat that
 there wasn't room for her in the limited window space and she had to lean
 sideways and crane her neck if she wanted to see the courtyard.
 

 During the first few days, the laundress would continually sit down and
 cry. It seemed to her too hard, not being able to move about in her home,
 after having been used to so much room. She felt stifled; she remained at
 the window for hours, squeezed between the wall and the drawers and
 getting a stiff neck. It was only there that she could breathe freely.
 However, the courtyard inspired rather melancholy thoughts. Opposite her,
 on the sunny side, she would see that same window she had dreamed about
 long ago where the spring brought scarlet vines. Her own room was on the
 shady side where pots of mignonette died within a week. Oh, this wasn't at
 all the sort of life she had dreamed of. She had to wallow in filth
 instead of having flowers all about her.
 

 On leaning out one day, Gervaise experienced a peculiar sensation: she
 fancied she beheld herself down below, near the concierge's room under the
 porch, her nose in the air, and examining the house for the first time;
 and this leap thirteen years backwards caused her heart to throb. The
 courtyard was a little dingier and the walls more stained, otherwise it
 hadn't changed much. But she herself felt terribly changed and worn. To
 begin with, she was no longer below, her face raised to heaven, feeling
 content and courageous and aspiring to a handsome lodging. She was right
 up under the roof, among the most wretched, in the dirtiest hole, the part
 that never received a ray of sunshine. And that explained her tears; she
 could scarcely feel enchanted with her fate.
 

 However, when Gervaise had grown somewhat used to it, the early days of
 the little family in their new home did not pass off so badly. The winter
 was almost over, and the trifle of money received for the furniture sold
 to Virginie helped to make things comfortable. Then with the fine weather
 came a piece of luck, Coupeau was engaged to work in the country at
 Etampes; and he was there for nearly three months without once getting
 drunk, cured for a time by the fresh air. One has no idea what a quench it
 is to the tippler's thirst to leave Paris where the very streets are full
 of the fumes of wine and brandy. On his return he was as fresh as a rose,
 and he brought back in his pocket four hundred francs with which they paid
 the two overdue quarters' rent at the shop that the Poissons had become
 answerable for, and also the most pressing of their little debts in the
 neighborhood. Gervaise thus opened two or three streets through which she
 had not passed for a long time.
 

 She had naturally become an ironer again. Madame Fauconnier was quite
 good-hearted if you flattered her a bit, and she was happy to take
 Gervaise back, even paying her the same three francs a day as her best
 worker. This was out of respect for her former status as an employer. The
 household seemed to be getting on well and Gervaise looked forward to the
 day when all the debts would be paid. Hard work and economy would solve
 all their money troubles. Unfortunately, she dreamed of this in the warm
 satisfaction of the large sum earned by her husband. Soon, she said that
 the good things never lasted and took things as they came.
 

 What the Coupeaus most suffered from at that time was seeing the Poissons
 installing themselves at their former shop. They were not naturally of a
 particularly jealous disposition, but people aggravated them by purposely
 expressing amazement in their presence at the embellishments of their
 successors. The Boches and the Lorilleuxs especially, never tired.
 According to them, no one had ever seen so beautiful a shop. They were
 also continually mentioning the filthy state in which the Poissons had
 found the premises, saying that it had cost thirty francs for the cleaning
 alone.
 

 After much deliberation, Virginie had decided to open a shop specializing
 in candies, chocolate, coffee and tea. Lantier had advised this, saying
 there was much money to be made from such delicacies. The shop was
 stylishly painted black with yellow stripes. Three carpenters worked for
 eight days on the interior, putting up shelves, display cases and
 counters. Poisson's small inheritance must have been almost completely
 used, but Virginie was ecstatic. The Lorilleuxs and the Boches made sure
 that Gervaise did not miss a single improvement and chuckled to themselves
 while watching her expression.
 

 There was also a question of a man beneath all this. It was reported that
 Lantier had broken off with Gervaise. The neighborhood declared that it
 was quite right. In short, it gave a moral tone to the street. And all the
 honor of the separation was accorded to the crafty hatter on whom all the
 ladies continued to dote. Some said that she was still crazy about him and
 he had to slap her to make her leave him alone. Of course, no one told the
 actual truth. It was too simple and not interesting enough.
 

 Actually Lantier climbed to the sixth floor to see her whenever he felt
 the impulse. Mademoiselle Remanjou had often seen him coming out of the
 Coupeaus' at odd hours.
 

 The situation was even more complicated by neighborhood gossip linking
 Lantier and Virginie. The neighbors were a bit too hasty in this also; he
 had not even reached the stage of buttock-pinching with her. Still, the
 Lorilleuxs delighted in talking sympathetically to Gervaise about the
 affair between Lantier and Virginie. The Boches maintained they had never
 seen a more handsome couple. The odd thing in all this was that the Rue de
 la Goutte-d'Or seemed to have no objection to this new arrangement which
 everyone thought was progressing nicely. Those who had been so harsh to
 Gervaise were now quite lenient toward Virginie.
 

 Gervaise had previously heard numerous reports about Lantier's affairs
 with all sorts of girls on the street and they had bothered her so little
 that she hadn't even felt enough resentment to break off the affair.
 However, this new intrigue with Virginie wasn't quite so easy to accept
 because she was sure that the two of them were just out to spite her. She
 hid her resentment though to avoid giving any satisfaction to her enemies.
 Mademoiselle Remanjou thought that Gervaise had words with Lantier over
 this because one afternoon she heard the sound of a slap. There was
 certainly a quarrel because Lantier stopped speaking to Gervaise for a
 couple of weeks, but then he was the first one to make up and things
 seemed to go along the same as before.
 

 Coupeau found all this most amusing. The complacent husband who had been
 blind to his own situation laughed heartily at Poisson's predicament. Then
 Coupeau even teased Gervaise. Her lovers always dropped her. First the
 blacksmith and now the hatmaker. The trouble was that she got involved
 with undependable trades. She should take up with a mason, a good solid
 man. He said such things as if he were joking, but they upset Gervaise
 because his small grey eyes seemed to be boring right into her.
 

 On evenings when Coupeau became bored being alone with his wife up in
 their tiny hole under the roof, he would go down for Lantier and invite
 him up. He thought their dump was too dreary without Lantier's company so
 he patched things up between Gervaise and Lantier whenever they had a
 falling out.
 

 In the midst of all this Lantier put on the most consequential airs. He
 showed himself both paternal and dignified. On three successive occasions
 he had prevented a quarrel between the Coupeaus and the Poissons. The good
 understanding between the two families formed a part of his contentment.
 Thanks to the tender though firm glances with which he watched over
 Gervaise and Virginie, they always pretended to entertain a great
 friendship for each other. He reigned over both blonde and brunette with
 the tranquillity of a pasha, and fattened on his cunning. The rogue was
 still digesting the Coupeaus when he already began to devour the Poissons.
 Oh, it did not inconvenience him much! As soon as one shop was swallowed,
 he started on a second. It was only men of his sort who ever have any
 luck.
 

 It was in June of that year that Nana was confirmed. She was then nearly
 thirteen years old, as tall as an asparagus shoot run to seed, and had a
 bold, impudent air about her. The year before she had been sent away from
 the catechism class on account of her bad behavior; and the priest had
 only allowed her to join it this time through fear of losing her
 altogether, and of casting one more heathen onto the street. Nana danced
 for joy as she thought of the white dress. The Lorilleuxs, being godfather
 and godmother, had promised to provide it, and took care to let everyone
 in the house know of their present. Madame Lerat was to give the veil and
 the cap, Virginie the purse, and Lantier the prayer-book; so that the
 Coupeaus looked forward to the ceremony without any great anxiety. Even
 the Poissons, wishing to give a house-warming, chose this occasion, no
 doubt on the hatter's advice. They invited the Coupeaus and the Boches,
 whose little girl was also going to be confirmed. They provided a leg of
 mutton and trimmings for the evening in question.
 

 It so happened that on the evening before, Coupeau returned home in a most
 abominable condition, just as Nana was lost in admiration before the
 presents spread out on the top of the chest of drawers. The Paris
 atmosphere was getting the better of him again; and he fell foul of his
 wife and child with drunken arguments and disgusting language which no one
 should have uttered at such a time. Nana herself was beginning to get hold
 of some very bad expressions in the midst of the filthy conversations she
 was continually hearing. On the days when there was a row, she would often
 call her mother an old camel and a cow.
 

 "Where's my food?" yelled the zinc-worker. "I want my soup, you couple of
 jades! There's females for you, always thinking of finery! I'll sit on the
 gee-gaws, you know, if I don't get my soup!"
 

 "He's unbearable when he's drunk," murmured Gervaise, out of patience; and
 turning towards him, she exclaimed:
 

 "It's warming up, don't bother us."
 

 Nana was being modest, because she thought it nice on such a day. She
 continued to look at the presents on the chest of drawers, affectedly
 lowering her eyelids and pretending not to understand her father's naughty
 words. But the zinc-worker was an awful plague on the nights when he had
 had too much. Poking his face right against her neck, he said:
 

 "I'll give you white dresses! So the finery tickles your fancy. They
 excite your imagination. Just you cut away from there, you ugly little
 brat! Move your hands about, bundle them all into a drawer!"
 

 Nana, with bowed head, did not answer a word. She had taken up the little
 tulle cap and was asking her mother how much it cost. And as Coupeau
 thrust out his hand to seize hold of the cap, it was Gervaise who pushed
 him aside exclaiming:
 

 "Do leave the child alone! She's very good, she's doing no harm."
 

 Then the zinc-worker let out in real earnest.
 

 "Ah! the viragos! The mother and daughter, they make the pair. It's a nice
 thing to go to church just to leer at the men. Dare to say it isn't true,
 little slattern! I'll dress you in a sack, just to disgust you, you and
 your priests. I don't want you to be taught anything worse than you know
 already. Mon Dieu! Just listen to me, both of you!"
 

 At this Nana turned round in a fury, whilst Gervaise had to spread out her
 arms to protect the things which Coupeau talked of tearing. The child
 looked her father straight in the face; then, forgetting the modest
 bearing inculcated by her confessor, she said, clinching her teeth: "Pig!"
 

 As soon as the zinc-worker had had his soup he went off to sleep. On the
 morrow he awoke in a very good humor. He still felt a little of the booze
 of the day before but only just sufficient to make him amiable. He
 assisted at the dressing of the child, deeply affected by the white dress
 and finding that a mere nothing gave the little vermin quite the look of a
 young lady.
 

 The two families started off together for the church. Nana and Pauline
 walked first, their prayer-books in their hands and holding down their
 veils on account of the wind; they did not speak but were bursting with
 delight at seeing people come to their shop-doors, and they smiled primly
 and devoutly every time they heard anyone say as they passed that they
 looked very nice. Madame Boche and Madame Lorilleux lagged behind, because
 they were interchanging their ideas about Clump-clump, a gobble-all, whose
 daughter would never have been confirmed if the relations had not found
 everything for her; yes, everything, even a new chemise, out of respect
 for the holy altar. Madame Lorilleux was rather concerned about the dress,
 calling Nana a dirty thing every time the child got dust on her skirt by
 brushing against the store fronts.
 

 At church Coupeau wept all the time. It was stupid but he could not help
 it. It affected him to see the priest holding out his arms and all the
 little girls, looking like angels, pass before him, clasping their hands;
 and the music of the organ stirred up his stomach and the pleasant smell
 of the incense forced him to sniff, the same as though someone had thrust
 a bouquet of flowers into his face. In short he saw everything cerulean,
 his heart was touched. Anyway, other sensitive souls around him were
 wetting their handkerchiefs. This was a beautiful day, the most beautiful
 of his life. After leaving the church, Coupeau went for a drink with
 Lorilleux, who had remained dry-eyed.
 

 That evening the Poissons' house-warming was very lively. Friendship
 reigned without a hitch from one end of the feast to the other. When bad
 times arrive one thus comes in for some pleasant evenings, hours during
 which sworn enemies love each other. Lantier, with Gervaise on his left
 and Virginie on his right, was most amiable to both of them, lavishing
 little tender caresses like a cock who desires peace in his poultry-yard.
 But the queens of the feast were the two little ones, Nana and Pauline,
 who had been allowed to keep on their things; they sat bolt upright
 through fear of spilling anything on their white dresses and at every
 mouthful they were told to hold up their chins so as to swallow cleanly.
 Nana, greatly bored by all this fuss, ended by slobbering her wine over
 the body of her dress, so it was taken off and the stains were at once
 washed out in a glass of water.
 

 Then at dessert the children's future careers were gravely discussed.
 

 Madame Boche had decided that Pauline would enter a shop to learn how to
 punch designs on gold and silver. That paid five or six francs a day.
 Gervaise didn't know yet because Nana had never indicated any preference.
 

 "In your place," said Madame Lerat, "I would bring Nana up as an
 artificial flower-maker. It is a pleasant and clean employment."
 

 "Flower-makers?" muttered Lorilleux. "Every one of them might as well walk
 the streets."
 

 "Well, what about me?" objected Madame Lerat, pursing her lips. "You're
 certainly not very polite. I assure you that I don't lie down for anyone
 who whistles."
 

 Then all the rest joined together in hushing her. "Madame Lerat! Oh,
 Madame Lerat!" By side glances they reminded her of the two girls, fresh
 from communion, who were burying their noses in their glasses to keep from
 laughing out loud. The men had been very careful, for propriety's sake, to
 use only suitable language, but Madame Lerat refused to follow their
 example. She flattered herself on her command of language, as she had
 often been complimented on the way she could say anything before children,
 without any offence to decency.
 

 "Just you listen, there are some very fine women among the flower-makers!"
 she insisted. "They're just like other women and they show good taste when
 they choose to commit a sin."
 

 "Mon Dieu!" interrupted Gervaise, "I've no dislike for artificial
 flower-making. Only it must please Nana, that's all I care about; one
 should never thwart children on the question of a vocation. Come Nana,
 don't be stupid; tell me now, would you like to make flowers?"
 

 The child was leaning over her plate gathering up the cake crumbs with her
 wet finger, which she afterwards sucked. She did not hurry herself. She
 grinned in her vicious way.
 

 "Why yes, mamma, I should like to," she ended by declaring.
 

 Then the matter was at once settled. Coupeau was quite willing that Madame
 Lerat should take the child with her on the morrow to the place where she
 worked in the Rue du Caire. And they all talked very gravely of the duties
 of life. Boche said that Nana and Pauline were women now that they had
 partaken of communion. Poisson added that for the future they ought to
 know how to cook, mend socks and look after a house. Something was even
 said of their marrying, and of the children they would some day have. The
 youngsters listened, laughing to themselves, elated by the thought of
 being women. What pleased them the most was when Lantier teased them,
 asking if they didn't already have little husbands. Nana eventually
 admitted that she cared a great deal for Victor Fauconnier, son of her
 mother's employer.
 

 "Ah well," said Madame Lorilleux to the Boches, as they were all leaving,
 "she's our goddaughter, but as they're going to put her into artificial
 flower-making, we don't wish to have anything more to do with her. Just
 one more for the boulevards. She'll be leading them a merry chase before
 six months are over."
 

 On going up to bed, the Coupeaus agreed that everything had passed off
 well and that the Poissons were not at all bad people. Gervaise even
 considered the shop was nicely got up. She was surprised to discover that
 it hadn't pained her at all to spend an evening there. While Nana was
 getting ready for bed she contemplated her white dress and asked her
 mother if the young lady on the third floor had had one like it when she
 was married last month.
 

 This was their last happy day. Two years passed by, during which they sank
 deeper and deeper. The winters were especially hard for them. If they had
 bread to eat during the fine weather, the rain and cold came accompanied
 by famine, by drubbings before the empty cupboard, and by dinner-hours
 with nothing to eat in the little Siberia of their larder. Villainous
 December brought numbing freezing spells and the black misery of cold and
 dampness.
 

 The first winter they occasionally had a fire, choosing to keep warm
 rather than to eat. But the second winter, the stove stood mute with its
 rust, adding a chill to the room, standing there like a cast-iron
 gravestone. And what took the life out of their limbs, what above all
 utterly crushed them was the rent. Oh! the January quarter, when there was
 not a radish in the house and old Boche came up with the bill! It was like
 a bitter storm, a regular tempest from the north. Monsieur Marescot then
 arrived the following Saturday, wrapped up in a good warm overcoat, his
 big hands hidden in woolen gloves; and he was for ever talking of turning
 them out, whilst the snow continued to fall outside, as though it were
 preparing a bed for them on the pavement with white sheets. To have paid
 the quarter's rent they would have sold their very flesh. It was the rent
 which emptied the larder and the stove.
 

 No doubt the Coupeaus had only themselves to blame. Life may be a hard
 fight, but one always pulls through when one is orderly and economical—witness
 the Lorilleuxs, who paid their rent to the day, the money folded up in
 bits of dirty paper. But they, it is true, led a life of starved spiders,
 which would disgust one with hard work. Nana as yet earned nothing at
 flower-making; she even cost a good deal for her keep. At Madame
 Fauconnier's Gervaise was beginning to be looked down upon. She was no
 longer so expert. She bungled her work to such an extent that the mistress
 had reduced her wages to two francs a day, the price paid to the clumsiest
 bungler. But she was still proud, reminding everyone of her former status
 as boss of her own shop. When Madame Fauconnier hired Madame Putois,
 Gervaise was so annoyed at having to work beside her former employee that
 she stayed away for two weeks.
 

 As for Coupeau, he did perhaps work, but in that case he certainly made a
 present of his labor to the Government, for since the time he returned
 from Etampes Gervaise had never seen the color of his money. She no longer
 looked in his hands when he came home on paydays. He arrived swinging his
 arms, his pockets empty, and often without his handkerchief; well, yes, he
 had lost his rag, or else some rascally comrade had sneaked it. At first
 he always fibbed; there was a donation to charity, or some money slipped
 through the hole in his pocket, or he paid off some imaginary debts.
 Later, he didn't even bother to make up anything. He had nothing left
 because it had all gone into his stomach.
 

 Madame Boche suggested to Gervaise that she go to wait for him at the shop
 exit. This rarely worked though, because Coupeau's comrades would warn him
 and the money would disappear into his shoe or someone else's pocket.
 

 Yes, it was their own fault if every season found them lower and lower.
 But that's the sort of thing one never tells oneself, especially when one
 is down in the mire. They accused their bad luck; they pretended that fate
 was against them. Their home had become a regular shambles where they
 wrangled the whole day long. However, they had not yet come to blows, with
 the exception of a few impulsive smacks, which somehow flew about at the
 height of their quarrels. The saddest part of the business was that they
 had opened the cage of affection; all their better feelings had taken
 flight, like so many canaries. The genial warmth of father, mother and
 child, when united together and wrapped up in each other, deserted them,
 and left them shivering, each in his or her own corner. All three—Coupeau,
 Gervaise and Nana—were always in the most abominable tempers, biting
 each other's noses off for nothing at all, their eyes full of hatred; and
 it seemed as though something had broken the mainspring of the family, the
 mechanism which, with happy people, causes hearts to beat in unison. Ah!
 it was certain Gervaise was no longer moved as she used to be when she saw
 Coupeau at the edge of a roof forty or fifty feet above the pavement. She
 would not have pushed him off herself, but if he had fallen accidentally,
 in truth it would have freed the earth of one who was of but little
 account. The days when they were more especially at enmity she would ask
 him why he didn't come back on a stretcher. She was awaiting it. It would
 be her good luck they were bringing back to her. What use was he—that
 drunkard? To make her weep, to devour all she possessed, to drive her to
 sin. Well! Men so useless as he should be thrown as quickly as possible
 into the hole and the polka of deliverance be danced over them. And when
 the mother said "Kill him!" the daughter responded "Knock him on the
 head!" Nana read all of the reports of accidents in the newspapers, and
 made reflections that were unnatural for a girl. Her father had such good
 luck an omnibus had knocked him down without even sobering him. Would the
 beggar never croak?
 

 In the midst of her own poverty Gervaise suffered even more because other
 families around her were also starving to death. Their corner of the
 tenement housed the most wretched. There was not a family that ate every
 day.
 

 Gervaise felt the most pity for Pere Bru in his cubbyhole under the
 staircase where he hibernated. Sometimes he stayed on his bed of straw
 without moving for days. Even hunger no longer drove him out since there
 was no use taking a walk when no one would invite him to dinner. Whenever
 he didn't show his face for several days, the neighbors would push open
 his door to see if his troubles were over. No, he was still alive, just
 barely. Even Death seemed to have neglected him. Whenever Gervaise had any
 bread she gave him the crusts. Even when she hated all men because of her
 husband, she still felt sincerely sorry for Pere Bru, the poor old man.
 They were letting him starve to death because he could no longer hold
 tools in his hand.
 

 The laundress also suffered a great deal from the close neighborhood of
 Bazouge, the undertaker's helper. A simple partition, and a very thin one,
 separated the two rooms. He could not put his fingers down his throat
 without her hearing it. As soon as he came home of an evening she
 listened, in spite of herself, to everything he did. His black leather hat
 laid with a dull thud on the chest of drawers, like a shovelful of earth;
 the black cloak hung up and rustling against the walls like the wings of
 some night bird; all the black toggery flung into the middle of the room
 and filling it with the trappings of mourning. She heard him stamping
 about, felt anxious at the least movement, and was quite startled if he
 knocked against the furniture or rattled any of his crockery. This
 confounded drunkard was her preoccupation, filling her with a secret fear
 mingled with a desire to know. He, jolly, his belly full every day, his
 head all upside down, coughed, spat, sang "Mother Godichon," made use of
 many dirty expressions and fought with the four walls before finding his
 bedstead. And she remained quite pale, wondering what he could be doing in
 there. She imagined the most atrocious things. She got into her head that
 he must have brought a corpse home, and was stowing it away under his
 bedstead. Well! the newspapers had related something of the kind—an
 undertaker's helper who collected the coffins of little children at his
 home, so as to save himself trouble and to make only one journey to the
 cemetery.
 

 For certain, directly Bazouge arrived, a smell of death seemed to permeate
 the partition. One might have thought oneself lodging against the Pere
 Lachaise cemetery, in the midst of the kingdom of moles. He was frightful,
 the animal, continually laughing all by himself, as though his profession
 enlivened him. Even when he had finished his rumpus and had laid himself
 on his back, he snored in a manner so extraordinary that it caused the
 laundress to hold her breath. For hours she listened attentively, with an
 idea that funerals were passing through her neighbor's room.
 

 The worst was that, in spite of her terrors, something incited Gervaise to
 put her ear to the wall, the better to find out what was taking place.
 Bazouge had the same effect on her as handsome men have on good women:
 they would like to touch them. Well! if fear had not kept her back,
 Gervaise would have liked to have handled death, to see what it was like.
 She became so peculiar at times, holding her breath, listening
 attentively, expecting to unravel the secret through one of Bazouge's
 movements, that Coupeau would ask her with a chuckle if she had a fancy
 for that gravedigger next door. She got angry and talked of moving, the
 close proximity of this neighbor was so distasteful to her; and yet, in
 spite of herself, as soon as the old chap arrived, smelling like a
 cemetery, she became wrapped again in her reflections, with the excited
 and timorous air of a wife thinking of passing a knife through the
 marriage contract. Had he not twice offered to pack her up and carry her
 off with him to some place where the enjoyment of sleep is so great, that
 in a moment one forgets all one's wretchedness? Perhaps it was really very
 pleasant. Little by little the temptation to taste it became stronger. She
 would have liked to have tried it for a fortnight or a month. Oh! to sleep
 a month, especially in winter, the month when the rent became due, when
 the troubles of life were killing her! But it was not possible—one
 must sleep forever, if one commences to sleep for an hour; and the thought
 of this froze her, her desire for death departed before the eternal and
 stern friendship which the earth demanded.
 

 However, one evening in January she knocked with both her fists against
 the partition. She had passed a frightful week, hustled by everyone,
 without a sou, and utterly discouraged. That evening she was not at all
 well, she shivered with fever, and seemed to see flames dancing about her.
 Then, instead of throwing herself out of the window, as she had at one
 moment thought of doing, she set to knocking and calling:
 

 "Old Bazouge! Old Bazouge!"
 

 The undertaker's helper was taking off his shoes and singing, "There were
 three lovely girls." He had probably had a good day, for he seemed even
 more maudlin than usual.
 

 "Old Bazouge! Old Bazouge!" repeated Gervaise, raising her voice.
 

 Did he not hear her then? She was ready to give herself at once; he might
 come and take her on his neck, and carry her off to the place where he
 carried his other women, the poor and the rich, whom he consoled. It
 pained her to hear his song, "There were three lovely girls," because she
 discerned in it the disdain of a man with too many sweethearts.
 

 "What is it? what is it?" stuttered Bazouge; "who's unwell? We're coming,
 little woman!"
 

 But the sound of this husky voice awoke Gervaise as though from a
 nightmare. And a feeling of horror ascended from her knees to her
 shoulders at the thought of seeing herself lugged along in the old
 fellow's arms, all stiff and her face as white as a china plate.
 

 "Well! is there no one there now?" resumed Bazouge in silence. "Wait a
 bit, we're always ready to oblige the ladies."
 

 "It's nothing, nothing," said the laundress at length in a choking voice.
 "I don't require anything, thanks."
 

 She remained anxious, listening to old Bazouge grumbling himself to sleep,
 afraid to stir for fear he would think he heard her knocking again.
 

 In her corner of misery, in the midst of her cares and the cares of
 others, Gervaise had, however, a beautiful example of courage in the home
 of her neighbors, the Bijards. Little Lalie, only eight years old and no
 larger than a sparrow, took care of the household as competently as a
 grown person. The job was not an easy one because she had two little tots,
 her brother Jules and her sister Henriette, aged three and five, to watch
 all day long while sweeping and cleaning.
 

 Ever since Bijard had killed his wife with a kick in the stomach, Lalie
 had become the little mother of them all. Without saying a word, and of
 her own accord, she filled the place of one who had gone, to the extent
 that her brute of a father, no doubt to complete the resemblance, now
 belabored the daughter as he had formerly belabored the mother. Whenever
 he came home drunk, he required a woman to massacre. He did not even
 notice that Lalie was quite little; he would not have beaten some old
 trollop harder. Little Lalie, so thin it made you cry, took it all without
 a word of complaint in her beautiful, patient eyes. Never would she
 revolt. She bent her neck to protect her face and stifled her sobs so as
 not to alarm the neighbors. When her father got tired of kicking her, she
 would rest a bit until she got her strength back and then resume her work.
 It was part of her job, being beaten daily.
 

 Gervaise entertained a great friendship for her little neighbor. She
 treated her as an equal, as a grown-up woman of experience. It must be
 said that Lalie had a pale and serious look, with the expression of an old
 girl. One might have thought her thirty on hearing her speak. She knew
 very well how to buy things, mend the clothes, attend to the home, and she
 spoke of the children as though she had already gone through two or thee
 nurseries in her time. It made people smile to hear her talk thus at eight
 years old; and then a lump would rise in their throats, and they would
 hurry away so as not to burst out crying. Gervaise drew the child towards
 her as much as she could, gave her all she could spare of food and old
 clothing. One day as she tried one of Nana's old dresses on her, she
 almost choked with anger on seeing her back covered with bruises, the skin
 off her elbow, which was still bleeding, and all her innocent flesh
 martyred and sticking to her bones. Well! Old Bazouge could get a box
 ready; she would not last long at that rate! But the child had begged the
 laundress not to say a word. She would not have her father bothered on her
 account. She took his part, affirming that he would not have been so
 wicked if it had not been for the drink. He was mad, he did not know what
 he did. Oh! she forgave him, because one ought to forgive madmen
 everything.
 

 From that time Gervaise watched and prepared to interfere directly she
 heard Bijard coming up the stairs. But on most of the occasions she only
 caught some whack for her trouble. When she entered their room in the
 day-time, she often found Lalie tied to the foot of the iron bedstead; it
 was an idea of the locksmith's, before going out, to tie her legs and her
 body with some stout rope, without anyone being able to find out why—a
 mere whim of a brain diseased by drink, just for the sake, no doubt, of
 maintaining his tyranny over the child when he was no longer there. Lalie,
 as stiff as a stake, with pins and needles in her legs, remained whole
 days at the post. She once even passed a night there, Bijard having
 forgotten to come home. Whenever Gervaise, carried away by her
 indignation, talked of unfastening her, she implored her not to disturb
 the rope, because her father became furious if he did not find the knots
 tied the same way he had left them. Really, it wasn't so bad, it gave her
 a rest. She smiled as she said this though her legs were swollen and
 bruised. What upset her the most was that she couldn't do her work while
 tied to the bed. She could watch the children though, and even did some
 knitting, so as not to entirely waste the time.
 

 The locksmith had thought of another little game too. He heated sous in
 the frying pan, then placed them on a corner of the mantle-piece; and he
 called Lalie, and told her to fetch a couple of pounds of bread. The child
 took up the sous unsuspectingly, uttered a cry and threw them on the
 ground, shaking her burnt hand. Then he flew into a fury. Who had saddled
 him with such a piece of carrion? She lost the money now! And he
 threatened to beat her to a jelly if she did not pick the sous up at once.
 When the child hesitated she received the first warning, a clout of such
 force that it made her see thirty-six candles. Speechless and with two big
 tears in the corners of her eyes, she would pick up the sous and go off,
 tossing them in the palm of her hand to cool them.
 

 No, one could never imagine the ferocious ideas which may sprout from the
 depths of a drunkard's brain. One afternoon, for instance, Lalie having
 made everything tidy was playing with the children. The window was open,
 there was a draught, and the wind blowing along the passage gently shook
 the door.
 

 "It's Monsieur Hardy," the child was saying. "Come in, Monsieur Hardy.
 Pray have the kindness to walk in."
 

 And she curtsied before the door, she bowed to the wind. Henriette and
 Jules, behind her, also bowed, delighted with the game and splitting their
 sides with laughing, as though being tickled. She was quite rosy at seeing
 them so heartily amused and even found some pleasure in it on her own
 account, which generally only happened to her on the thirty-sixth day of
 each month.
 

 "Good day, Monsieur Hardy. How do you do, Monsieur Hardy?"
 

 But a rough hand pushed open the door, and Bijard entered. Then the scene
 changed. Henriette and Jules fell down flat against the wall; whilst
 Lalie, terrified, remained standing in the very middle of the curtsey. The
 locksmith held in his hand a big waggoner's whip, quite new, with a long
 white wooden handle, and a leather thong, terminating with a bit of
 whip-cord. He placed the whip in the corner against the bed and did not
 give the usual kick to the child who was already preparing herself by
 presenting her back. A chuckle exposed his blackened teeth and he was very
 lively, very drunk, his red face lighted up by some idea that amused him
 immensely.
 

 "What's that?" said he. "You're playing the deuce, eh, you confounded
 young hussy! I could hear you dancing about from downstairs. Now then,
 come here! Nearer and full face. I don't want to sniff you from behind. Am
 I touching you that you tremble like a mass of giblets? Take my shoes
 off."
 

 Lalie turned quite pale again and, amazed at not receiving her usual
 drubbing, took his shoes off. He had seated himself on the edge of the
 bed. He lay down with his clothes on and remained with his eyes open,
 watching the child move about the room. She busied herself with one thing
 and another, gradually becoming bewildered beneath his glance, her limbs
 overcome by such a fright that she ended by breaking a cup. Then, without
 getting off the bed, he took hold of the whip and showed it to her.
 

 "See, little chickie, look at this. It's a present for you. Yes, it's
 another fifty sous you've cost me. With this plaything I shall no longer
 be obliged to run after you, and it'll be no use you getting into the
 corners. Will you have a try? Ah! you broke a cup! Now then, gee up! Dance
 away, make your curtsies to Monsieur Hardy!"
 

 He did not even raise himself but lay sprawling on his back, his head
 buried in his pillow, making the big whip crack about the room with the
 noise of a postillion starting his horses. Then, lowering his arm he
 lashed Lalie in the middle of the body, encircling her with the whip and
 unwinding it again as though she were a top. She fell and tried to escape
 on her hands and knees; but lashing her again he jerked her to her feet.
 

 "Gee up, gee up!" yelled he. "It's the donkey race! Eh, it'll be fine of a
 cold morning in winter. I can lie snug without getting cold or hurting my
 chilblains and catch the calves from a distance. In that corner there, a
 hit, you hussy! And in that other corner, a hit again! And in that one,
 another hit. Ah! if you crawl under the bed I'll whack you with the
 handle. Gee up, you jade! Gee up! Gee up!"
 

 A slight foam came to his lips, his yellow eyes were starting from their
 black orbits. Lalie, maddened, howling, jumped to the four corners of the
 room, curled herself up on the floor and clung to the walls; but the lash
 at the end of the big whip caught her everywhere, cracking against her
 ears with the noise of fireworks, streaking her flesh with burning weals.
 A regular dance of the animal being taught its tricks. This poor kitten
 waltzed. It was a sight! Her heels in the air like little girls playing at
 skipping, and crying "Father!" She was all out of breath, rebounding like
 an india-rubber ball, letting herself be beaten, unable to see or any
 longer to seek a refuge. And her wolf of a father triumphed, calling her a
 virago, asking her if she had had enough and whether she understood
 sufficiently that she was in future to give up all hope of escaping from
 him.
 

 But Gervaise suddenly entered the room, attracted by the child's howls. On
 beholding such a scene she was seized with a furious indignation.
 

 "Ah! you brute of a man!" cried she. "Leave her alone, you brigand! I'll
 put the police on to you."
 

 Bijard growled like an animal being disturbed, and stuttered:
 

 "Mind your own business a bit, Limper. Perhaps you'd like me to put gloves
 on when I stir her up. It's merely to warm her, as you can plainly see—simply
 to show her that I've a long arm."
 

 And he gave a final lash with the whip which caught Lalie across the face.
 The upper lip was cut, the blood flowed. Gervaise had seized a chair, and
 was about to fall on to the locksmith; but the child held her hands
 towards her imploringly, saying that it was nothing and that it was all
 over. She wiped away the blood with the corner of her apron and quieted
 the babies, who were sobbing bitterly, as though they had received all the
 blows.
 

 Whenever Gervaise thought of Lalie, she felt she had no right to complain
 for herself. She wished she had as much patient courage as the little girl
 who was only eight years old and had to endure more than the rest of the
 women on their staircase put together. She had seen Lalie living on stale
 bread for months and growing thinner and weaker. Whenever she smuggled
 some remnants of meat to Lalie, it almost broke her heart to see the child
 weeping silently and nibbling it down only by little bits because her
 throat was so shrunken. Gervaise looked on Lalie as a model of suffering
 and forgiveness and tried to learn from her how to suffer in silence.
 

 In the Coupeau household the vitriol of l'Assommoir was also commencing
 its ravages. Gervaise could see the day coming when her husband would get
 a whip like Bijard's to make her dance.
 

 Yes, Coupeau was spinning an evil thread. The time was past when a drink
 would make him feel good. His unhealthy soft fat of earlier years had
 melted away and he was beginning to wither and turn a leaden grey. He
 seemed to have a greenish tint like a corpse putrefying in a pond. He no
 longer had a taste for food, not even the most beautifully prepared stew.
 His stomach would turn and his decayed teeth refuse to touch it. A pint a
 day was his daily ration, the only nourishment he could digest. When he
 awoke in the mornings he sat coughing and spitting up bile for at least a
 quarter of an hour. It never failed, you might as well have the basin
 ready. He was never steady on his pins till after his first glass of
 consolation, a real remedy, the fire of which cauterized his bowels; but
 during the day his strength returned. At first he would feel a tickling
 sensation, a sort of pins-and-needles in his hands and feet; and he would
 joke, relating that someone was having a lark with him, that he was sure
 his wife put horse-hair between the sheets. Then his legs would become
 heavy, the tickling sensation would end by turning into the most
 abominable cramps, which gripped his flesh as though in a vise. That
 though did not amuse him so much. He no longer laughed; he stopped
 suddenly on the pavement in a bewildered way with a ringing in his ears
 and his eyes blinded with sparks. Everything appeared to him to be yellow;
 the houses danced and he reeled about for three seconds with the fear of
 suddenly finding himself sprawling on the ground. At other times, while
 the sun was shining full on his back, he would shiver as though iced water
 had been poured down his shoulders. What bothered him the most was a
 slight trembling of both his hands; the right hand especially must have
 been guilty of some crime, it suffered from so many nightmares. Mon
 Dieu! was he then no longer a man? He was becoming an old woman! He
 furiously strained his muscles, he seized hold of his glass and bet that
 he would hold it perfectly steady as with a hand of marble; but in spite
 of his efforts the glass danced about, jumped to the right, jumped to the
 left with a hurried and regular trembling movement. Then in a fury he
 emptied it into his gullet, yelling that he would require dozens like it,
 and afterwards he undertook to carry a cask without so much as moving a
 finger. Gervaise, on the other hand, told him to give up drink if he
 wished to cease trembling, and he laughed at her, emptying quarts until he
 experienced the sensation again, flying into a rage and accusing the
 passing omnibuses of shaking up his liquor.
 

 In the month of March Coupeau returned home one evening soaked through. He
 had come with My-Boots from Montrouge, where they had stuffed themselves
 full of eel soup, and he had received the full force of the shower all the
 way from the Barriere des Fourneaux to the Barriere Poissonniere, a good
 distance. During the night he was seized with a confounded fit of
 coughing. He was very flushed, suffering from a violent fever and panting
 like a broken bellows. When the Boches' doctor saw him in the morning and
 listened against his back he shook his head, and drew Gervaise aside to
 advise her to have her husband taken to the hospital. Coupeau was
 suffering from pneumonia.
 

 Gervaise did not worry herself, you may be sure. At one time she would
 have been chopped into pieces before trusting her old man to the
 saw-bones. After the accident in the Rue de la Nation she had spent their
 savings in nursing him. But those beautiful sentiments don't last when men
 take to wallowing in the mire. No, no; she did not intend to make a fuss
 like that again. They might take him and never bring him back; she would
 thank them heartily. Yet, when the litter arrived and Coupeau was put into
 it like an article of furniture, she became all pale and bit her lips; and
 if she grumbled and still said it was a good job, her heart was no longer
 in her words. Had she but ten francs in her drawer she would not have let
 him go.
 

 She accompanied him to the Lariboisiere Hospital, saw the nurses put him
 to bed at the end of a long hall, where the patients in a row, looking
 like corpses, raised themselves up and followed with their eyes the
 comrade who had just been brought in. It was a veritable death chamber.
 There was a suffocating, feverish odor and a chorus of coughing. The long
 hall gave the impression of a small cemetery with its double row of white
 beds looking like an aisle of marble tombs. When Coupeau remained
 motionless on his pillow, Gervaise left, having nothing to say, nor
 anything in her pocket that could comfort him.
 

 Outside, she turned to look up at the monumental structure of the hospital
 and recalled the days when Coupeau was working there, putting on the zinc
 roof, perched up high and singing in the sun. He wasn't drinking in those
 days. She used to watch for him from her window in the Hotel Boncoeur and
 they would both wave their handkerchiefs in greeting. Now, instead of
 being on the roof like a cheerful sparrow, he was down below. He had built
 his own place in the hospital where he had come to die. Mon Dieu!
 It all seemed so far way now, that time of young love.
 

 On the day after the morrow, when Gervaise called to obtain news of him,
 she found the bed empty. A Sister of Charity told her that they had been
 obliged to remove her husband to the Asylum of Sainte-Anne, because the
 day before he had suddenly gone wild. Oh! a total leave-taking of his
 senses; attempts to crack his skull against the wall; howls which
 prevented the other patients from sleeping. It all came from drink, it
 seemed. Gervaise went home very upset. Well, her husband had gone crazy.
 What would it be like if he came home? Nana insisted that they should
 leave him in the hospital because he might end by killing both of them.
 

 Gervaise was not able to go to Sainte-Anne until Sunday. It was a
 tremendous journey. Fortunately, the omnibus from the Boulevard
 Rochechouart to La Glaciere passed close to the asylum. She went down the
 Rue de la Sante, buying two oranges on her way, so as not to arrive
 empty-handed. It was another monumental building, with grey courtyards,
 interminable corridors and a smell of rank medicaments, which did not
 exactly inspire liveliness. But when they had admitted her into a cell she
 was quite surprised to see Coupeau almost jolly. He was just then seated
 on the throne, a spotlessly clean wooden case, and they both laughed at
 her finding him in this position. Well, one knows what an invalid is. He
 squatted there like a pope with his cheek of earlier days. Oh! he was
 better, as he could do this.
 

 "And the pneumonia?" inquired the laundress.
 

 "Done for!" replied he. "They cured it in no time. I still cough a little,
 but that's all that is left of it."
 

 Then at the moment of leaving the throne to get back into his bed, he
 joked once more. "It's lucky you have a strong nose and are not bothered."
 

 They laughed louder than ever. At heart they felt joyful. It was by way of
 showing their contentment without a host of phrases that they thus joked
 together. One must have had to do with patients to know the pleasure one
 feels at seeing all their functions at work again.
 

 When he was back in bed she gave him the two oranges and this filled him
 with emotion. He was becoming quite nice again ever since he had had
 nothing but tisane to drink. She ended by venturing to speak to him about
 his violent attack, surprised at hearing him reason like in the good old
 times.
 

 "Ah, yes," said he, joking at his own expense; "I talked a precious lot of
 nonsense! Just fancy, I saw rats and ran about on all fours to put a grain
 of salt under their tails. And you, you called to me, men were trying to
 kill you. In short, all sorts of stupid things, ghosts in broad daylight.
 Oh! I remember it well, my noodle's still solid. Now it's over, I dream a
 bit when I'm asleep. I have nightmares, but everyone has nightmares."
 

 Gervaise remained with him until the evening. When the house surgeon came,
 at the six o'clock inspection, he made him spread his hands; they hardly
 trembled at all, scarcely a quiver at the tips of the fingers. However, as
 night approached, Coupeau was little by little seized with uneasiness. He
 twice sat up in bed looking on the ground and in the dark corners of the
 room. Suddenly he thrust out an arm and appeared to crush some vermin
 against the wall.
 

 "What is it?" asked Gervaise, frightened.
 

 "The rats! The rats!" murmured he.
 

 Then, after a pause, gliding into sleep, he tossed about, uttering
 disconnected phrases.
 

 "Mon Dieu! they're tearing my skin!—Oh! the filthy beasts!—Keep
 steady! Hold your skirts right round you! beware of the dirty bloke behind
 you!—Mon Dieu! she's down and the scoundrels laugh!—Scoundrels!
 Blackguards! Brigands!"
 

 He dealt blows into space, caught hold of his blanket and rolled it into a
 bundle against his chest, as though to protect the latter from the
 violence of the bearded men whom he beheld. Then, an attendant having
 hastened to the spot, Gervaise withdrew, quite frozen by the scene.
 

 But when she returned a few days later, she found Coupeau completely
 cured. Even the nightmares had left him; he could sleep his ten hours
 right off as peacefully as a child and without stirring a limb. So his
 wife was allowed to take him away. The house surgeon gave him the usual
 good advice on leaving and advised him to follow it. If he recommenced
 drinking, he would again collapse and would end by dying. Yes, it solely
 depended upon himself. He had seen how jolly and healthy one could become
 when one did not get drunk. Well, he must continue at home the sensible
 life he had led at Sainte-Anne, fancy himself under lock and key and that
 dram-shops no longer existed.
 

 "The gentleman's right," said Gervaise in the omnibus which was taking
 them back to the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or.
 

 "Of course he's right," replied Coupeau.
 

 Then, after thinking a minute, he resumed:
 

 "Oh! you know, a little glass now and again can't kill a man; it helps the
 digestion."
 

 And that very evening he swallowed a glass of bad spirit, just to keep his
 stomach in order. For eight days he was pretty reasonable. He was a great
 coward at heart; he had no desire to end his days in the Bicetre
 mad-house. But his passion got the better of him; the first little glass
 led him, in spite of himself, to a second, to a third and to a fourth, and
 at the end of a fortnight, he had got back to his old ration, a pint of
 vitriol a day. Gervaise, exasperated, could have beaten him. To think that
 she had been stupid enough to dream once more of leading a worthy life,
 just because she had seen him at the asylum in full possession of his good
 sense! Another joyful hour had flown, the last one no doubt! Oh! now, as
 nothing could reclaim him, not even the fear of his near death, she swore
 she would no longer put herself out; the home might be all at sixes and
 sevens, she did not care any longer; and she talked also of leaving him.
 

 Then hell upon earth recommenced, a life sinking deeper into the mire,
 without a glimmer of hope for something better to follow. Nana, whenever
 her father clouted her, furiously asked why the brute was not at the
 hospital. She was awaiting the time when she would be earning money, she
 would say, to treat him to brandy and make him croak quicker. Gervaise, on
 her side, flew into a passion one day that Coupeau was regretting their
 marriage. Ah! she had brought him her saucy children; ah! she had got
 herself picked up from the pavement, wheedling him with rosy dreams! Mon
 Dieu! he had a rare cheek! So many words, so many lies. She hadn't
 wished to have anything to do with him, that was the truth. He had dragged
 himself at her feet to make her give way, whilst she was advising him to
 think well what he was about. And if it was all to come over again, he
 would hear how she would just say "no!" She would sooner have an arm cut
 off. Yes, she'd had a lover before him; but a woman who has had a lover,
 and who is a worker, is worth more than a sluggard of a man who sullies
 his honor and that of his family in all the dram-shops. That day, for the
 first time, the Coupeaus went in for a general brawl, and they whacked
 each other so hard that an old umbrella and the broom were broken.
 

 Gervaise kept her word. She sank lower and lower; she missed going to her
 work oftener, spent whole days in gossiping, and became as soft as a rag
 whenever she had a task to perform. If a thing fell from her hands, it
 might remain on the floor; it was certainly not she who would have stooped
 to pick it up. She took her ease about everything, and never handled a
 broom except when the accumulation of filth almost brought her to the
 ground. The Lorilleuxs now made a point of holding something to their
 noses whenever they passed her room; the stench was poisonous, said they.
 Those hypocrites slyly lived at the end of the passage, out of the way of
 all these miseries which filled the corner of the house with whimpering,
 locking themselves in so as not to have to lend twenty sou pieces. Oh!
 kind-hearted folks, neighbors awfully obliging! Yes, you may be sure! One
 had only to knock and ask for a light or a pinch of salt or a jug of
 water, one was certain of getting the door banged in one's face. With all
 that they had vipers' tongues. They protested everywhere that they never
 occupied themselves with other people. This was true whenever it was a
 question of assisting a neighbor; but they did so from morning to night,
 directly they had a chance of pulling any one to pieces. With the door
 bolted and a rug hung up to cover the chinks and the key-hole, they would
 treat themselves to a spiteful gossip without leaving their gold wire for
 a moment.
 

 The fall of Clump-clump in particular kept them purring like pet cats.
 Completely ruined! Not a sou remaining. They smiled gleefully at the small
 piece of bread she would bring back when she went shopping and kept count
 of the days when she had nothing at all to eat. And the clothes she wore
 now. Disgusting rags! That's what happened when one tried to live high.
 

 Gervaise, who had an idea of the way in which they spoke of her, would
 take her shoes off, and place her ear against their door; but the rug over
 the door prevented her from hearing much. She was heartily sick of them;
 she continued to speak to them, to avoid remarks, though expecting nothing
 but unpleasantness from such nasty persons, but no longer having strength
 even to give them as much as they gave her, passed the insults off as a
 lot of nonsense. And besides she only wanted her own pleasure, to sit in a
 heap twirling her thumbs, and only moving when it was a question of
 amusing herself, nothing more.
 

 One Saturday Coupeau had promised to take her to the circus. It was well
 worth while disturbing oneself to see ladies galloping along on horses and
 jumping through paper hoops. Coupeau had just finished a fortnight's work,
 he could well spare a couple of francs; and they had also arranged to dine
 out, just the two of them, Nana having to work very late that evening at
 her employer's because of some pressing order. But at seven o'clock there
 was no Coupeau; at eight o'clock it was still the same. Gervaise was
 furious. Her drunkard was certainly squandering his earnings with his
 comrades at the dram-shops of the neighborhood. She had washed a cap and
 had been slaving since the morning over the holes of an old dress, wishing
 to look decent. At last, towards nine o'clock, her stomach empty, her face
 purple with rage, she decided to go down and look for Coupeau.
 

 "Is it your husband you want?" called Madame Boche, on catching sight of
 Gervaise looking very glum. "He's at Pere Colombe's. Boche has just been
 having some cherry brandy with him."
 

 Gervaise uttered her thanks and stalked stiffly along the pavement with
 the determination of flying at Coupeau's eyes. A fine rain was falling
 which made the walk more unpleasant still. But when she reached
 l'Assommoir, the fear of receiving the drubbing herself if she badgered
 her old man suddenly calmed her and made her prudent. The shop was ablaze
 with the lighted gas, the flames of which were as brilliant as suns, and
 the bottles and jars illuminated the walls with their colored glass. She
 stood there an instant stretching her neck, her eyes close to the window,
 looking between two bottle placed there for show, watching Coupeau who was
 right at the back; he was sitting with some comrades at a little zinc
 table, all looking vague and blue in the tobacco smoke; and, as one could
 not hear them yelling, it created a funny effect to see them gesticulating
 with their chins thrust forward and their eyes starting out of their
 heads. Good heavens! Was it really possible that men could leave their
 wives and their homes to shut themselves up thus in a hole where they were
 choking?
 

 The rain trickled down her neck; she drew herself up and went off to the
 exterior Boulevard, wrapped in thought and not daring to enter. Ah! well
 Coupeau would have welcomed her in a pleasant way, he who objected to be
 spied upon! Besides, it really scarcely seemed to her the proper place for
 a respectable woman. Twice she went back and stood before the shop window,
 her eyes again riveted to the glass, annoyed at still beholding those
 confounded drunkards out of the rain and yelling and drinking. The light
 of l'Assommoir was reflected in the puddles on the pavement, which
 simmered with little bubbles caused by the downpour. At length she thought
 she was too foolish, and pushing open the door, she walked straight up to
 the table where Coupeau was sitting. After all it was her husband she came
 for, was it not? And she was authorized in doing so, because he had
 promised to take her to the circus that evening. So much the worse! She
 had no desire to melt like a cake of soap out on the pavement.
 

 "Hullo! It's you, old woman!" exclaimed the zinc-worker, half choking with
 a chuckle. "Ah! that's a good joke. Isn't it a good joke now?"
 

 All the company laughed. Gervaise remained standing, feeling rather
 bewildered. Coupeau appeared to her to be in a pleasant humor, so she
 ventured to say:
 

 "You remember, we've somewhere to go. We must hurry. We shall still be in
 time to see something."
 

 "I can't get up, I'm glued, oh! without joking," resumed Coupeau, who
 continued laughing. "Try, just to satisfy yourself; pull my arm with all
 your strength; try it! harder than that, tug away, up with it! You see
 it's that louse Pere Colombe who's screwed me to his seat."
 

 Gervaise had humored him at this game, and when she let go of his arm, the
 comrades thought the joke so good that they tumbled up against one
 another, braying and rubbing their shoulders like donkeys being groomed.
 The zinc-worker's mouth was so wide with laughter that you could see right
 down his throat.
 

 "You great noodle!" said he at length, "you can surely sit down a minute.
 You're better here than splashing about outside. Well, yes; I didn't come
 home as I promised, I had business to attend to. Though you may pull a
 long face, it won't alter matters. Make room, you others."
 

 "If madame would accept my knees she would find them softer than the
 seat," gallantly said My-Boots.
 

 Gervaise, not wishing to attract attention, took a chair and sat down at a
 short distance from the table. She looked at what the men were drinking,
 some rotgut brandy which shone like gold in the glasses; a little of it
 had dropped upon the table and Salted-Mouth, otherwise
 Drink-without-Thirst, dipped his finger in it whilst conversing and wrote
 a woman's name—"Eulalie"—in big letters. She noticed that
 Bibi-the-Smoker looked shockingly jaded and thinner than a hundred-weight
 of nails. My-Boot's nose was in full bloom, a regular purple Burgundy
 dahlia. They were all quite dirty, their beards stiff, their smocks ragged
 and stained, their hands grimy with dirt. Yet they were still quite
 polite.
 

 Gervaise noticed a couple of men at the bar. They were so drunk that they
 were spilling the drink down their chins when they thought they were
 wetting their whistles. Fat Pere Colombe was calmly serving round after
 round.
 

 The atmosphere was very warm, the smoke from the pipes ascended in the
 blinding glare of the gas, amidst which it rolled about like dust,
 drowning the customers in a gradually thickening mist; and from this cloud
 there issued a deafening and confused uproar, cracked voices, clinking of
 glasses, oaths and blows sounding like detonations. So Gervaise pulled a
 very wry face, for such a sight is not funny for a woman, especially when
 she is not used to it; she was stifling, with a smarting sensation in her
 eyes, and her head already feeling heavy from the alcoholic fumes exhaled
 by the whole place. Then she suddenly experienced the sensation of
 something more unpleasant still behind her back. She turned round and
 beheld the still, the machine which manufactured drunkards, working away
 beneath the glass roof of the narrow courtyard with the profound
 trepidation of its hellish cookery. Of an evening, the copper parts looked
 more mournful than ever, lit up only on their rounded surface with one big
 red glint; and the shadow of the apparatus on the wall at the back formed
 most abominable figures, bodies with tails, monsters opening their jaws as
 though to swallow everyone up.
 

 "Listen, mother Talk-too-much, don't make any of your grimaces!" cried
 Coupeau. "To blazes, you know, with all wet blankets! What'll you drink?"
 

 "Nothing, of course," replied the laundress. "I haven't dined yet."
 

 "Well! that's all the more reason for having a glass; a drop of something
 sustains one."
 

 But, as she still retained her glum expression, My-Boots again did the
 gallant.
 

 "Madame probably likes sweet things," murmured he.
 

 "I like men who don't get drunk," retorted she, getting angry. "Yes, I
 like a fellow who brings home his earnings, and who keeps his word when he
 makes a promise."
 

 "Ah! so that's what upsets you?" said the zinc-worker, without ceasing to
 chuckle. "Yes, you want your share. Then, big goose, why do you refuse a
 drink? Take it, it's so much to the good."
 

 She looked at him fixedly, in a grave manner, a wrinkle marking her
 forehead with a black line. And she slowly replied:
 

 "Why, you're right, it's a good idea. That way, we can drink up the coin
 together."
 

 Bibi-the-Smoker rose from his seat to fetch her a glass of anisette. She
 drew her chair up to the table. Whilst she was sipping her anisette, a
 recollection suddenly flashed across her mind, she remembered the plum she
 had taken with Coupeau, near the door, in the old days, when he was
 courting her. At that time, she used to leave the juice of fruits
 preserved in brandy. And now, here was she going back to liqueurs. Oh! she
 knew herself well, she had not two thimblefuls of will. One would only
 have had to have given her a walloping across the back to have made her
 regularly wallow in drink. The anisette even seemed to be very good,
 perhaps rather too sweet and slightly sickening. She went on sipping as
 she listened to Salted-Mouth, otherwise Drink-without-Thirst, tell of his
 affair with fat Eulalie, a fish peddler and very shrewd at locating him.
 Even if his comrades tried to hide him, she could usually sniff him out
 when he was late. Just the night before she had slapped his face with a
 flounder to teach him not to neglect going to work. Bibi-the-Smoker and
 My-Boots nearly split their sides laughing. They slapped Gervaise on the
 shoulder and she began to laugh also, finding it amusing in spite of
 herself. They then advised her to follow Eulalie's example and bring an
 iron with her so as to press Coupeau's ears on the counters of the
 wineshops.
 

 "Ah, well, no thanks," cried Coupeau as he turned upside down the glass
 his wife had emptied. "You pump it out pretty well. Just look, you
 fellows, she doesn't take long over it."
 

 "Will madame take another?" asked Salted-Mouth, otherwise
 Drink-without-Thirst.
 

 No, she had had enough. Yet she hesitated. The anisette had slightly
 bothered her stomach. She should have taken straight brandy to settle her
 digestion.
 

 She cast side glances at the drunkard manufacturing machine behind her.
 That confounded pot, as round as the stomach of a tinker's fat wife, with
 its nose that was so long and twisted, sent a shiver down her back, a fear
 mingled with a desire. Yes, one might have thought it the metal pluck of
 some big wicked woman, of some witch who was discharging drop by drop the
 fire of her entrails. A fine source of poison, an operation which should
 have been hidden away in a cellar, it was so brazen and abominable! But
 all the same she would have liked to have poked her nose inside it, to
 have sniffed the odor, have tasted the filth, though the skin might have
 peeled off her burnt tongue like the rind off an orange.
 

 "What's that you're drinking?" asked she slyly of the men, her eyes
 lighted up by the beautiful golden color of their glasses.
 

 "That, old woman," answered Coupeau, "is Pere Colombe's camphor. Don't be
 silly now and we'll give you a taste."
 

 And when they had brought her a glass of the vitriol, the rotgut, and her
 jaws had contracted at the first mouthful, the zinc-worker resumed,
 slapping his thighs:
 

 "Ha! It tickles your gullet! Drink it off at one go. Each glassful cheats
 the doctor of six francs."
 

 At the second glass Gervaise no longer felt the hunger which had been
 tormenting her. Now she had made it up with Coupeau, she no longer felt
 angry with him for not having kept his word. They would go to the circus
 some other day; it was not so funny to see jugglers galloping about on
 houses. There was no rain inside Pere Colombe's and if the money went in
 brandy, one at least had it in one's body; one drank it bright and shining
 like beautiful liquid gold. Ah! she was ready to send the whole world to
 blazes! Life was not so pleasant after all, besides it seemed some
 consolation to her to have her share in squandering the cash. As she was
 comfortable, why should she not remain? One might have a discharge of
 artillery; she did not care to budge once she had settled in a heap. She
 nursed herself in a pleasant warmth, her bodice sticking to her back,
 overcome by a feeling of comfort which benumbed her limbs. She laughed all
 to herself, her elbows on the table, a vacant look in her eyes, highly
 amused by two customers, a fat heavy fellow and a tiny shrimp, seated at a
 neighboring table, and kissing each other lovingly. Yes, she laughed at
 the things to see in l'Assommoir, at Pere Colombe's full moon face, a
 regular bladder of lard, at the customers smoking their short clay pipes,
 yelling and spitting, and at the big flames of gas which lighted up the
 looking-glasses and the bottles of liqueurs. The smell no longer bothered
 her, on the contrary it tickled her nose, and she thought it very
 pleasant. Her eyes slightly closed, whilst she breathed very slowly,
 without the least feeling of suffocation, tasting the enjoyment of the
 gentle slumber which was overcoming her. Then, after her third glass, she
 let her chin fall on her hands; she now only saw Coupeau and his comrades,
 and she remained nose to nose with them, quite close, her cheeks warmed by
 their breath, looking at their dirty beards as though she had been
 counting the hairs. My-Boots drooled, his pipe between his teeth, with the
 dumb and grave air of a dozing ox. Bibi-the-Smoker was telling a story—the
 manner in which he emptied a bottle at a draught, giving it such a kiss
 that one instantly saw its bottom. Meanwhile Salted-Mouth, otherwise
 Drink-without-Thirst, had gone and fetched the wheel of fortune from the
 counter, and was playing with Coupeau for drinks.
 

 "Two hundred! You're lucky; you get high numbers every time!"
 

 The needle of the wheel grated, and the figure of Fortune, a big red woman
 placed under glass, turned round and round until it looked like a mere
 spot in the centre, similar to a wine stain.
 

 "Three hundred and fifty! You must have been inside it, you confounded
 lascar! Ah! I shan't play any more!"
 

 Gervaise amused herself with the wheel of fortune. She was feeling awfully
 thirsty, and calling My-Boots "my child." Behind her the machine for
 manufacturing drunkards continued working, with its murmur of an
 underground stream; and she despaired of ever stopping it, of exhausting
 it, filled with a sullen anger against it, feeling a longing to spring
 upon the big still as upon some animal, to kick it with her heels and
 stave in its belly. Then everything began to seem all mixed up. The
 machine seemed to be moving itself and she thought she was being grabbed
 by its copper claws, and that the underground stream was now flowing over
 her body.
 

 Then the room danced round, the gas-jets seemed to shoot like stars.
 Gervaise was drunk. She heard a furious wrangle between Salted-Mouth,
 otherwise Drink-without-Thirst, and that rascal Pere Colombe. There was a
 thief of a landlord who wanted one to pay for what one had not had! Yet
 one was not at a gangster's hang-out. Suddenly there was a scuffling,
 yells were heard and tables were upset. It was Pere Colombe who was
 turning the party out without the least hesitation, and in the twinkling
 of an eye. On the other side of the door they blackguarded him and called
 him a scoundrel. It still rained and blew icy cold. Gervaise lost Coupeau,
 found him and then lost him again. She wished to go home; she felt the
 shops to find her way. This sudden darkness surprised her immensely. At
 the corner of the Rue des Poissonniers, she sat down in the gutter
 thinking she was at the wash-house. The water which flowed along caused
 her head to swim, and made her very ill. At length she arrived, she passed
 stiffly before the concierge's room where she perfectly recognized the
 Lorilleuxs and the Poissons seated at the table having dinner, and who
 made grimaces of disgust on beholding her in that sorry state.
 

 She never remembered how she had got up all those flights of stairs. Just
 as she was turning into the passage at the top, little Lalie, who heard
 her footsteps, hastened to meet her, opening her arms caressingly, and
 saying, with a smile:
 

 "Madame Gervaise, papa has not returned. Just come and see my little
 children sleeping. Oh! they look so pretty!"
 

 But on beholding the laundress' besotted face, she tremblingly drew back.
 She was acquainted with that brandy-laden breath, those pale eyes, that
 convulsed mouth. Then Gervaise stumbled past without uttering a word,
 whilst the child, standing on the threshold of her room, followed her with
 her dark eyes, grave and speechless.
 

 
 
 

 Nana was growing up and becoming wayward. At fifteen years old she had
 expanded like a calf, white-skinned and very fat; so plump, indeed, you
 might have called her a pincushion. Yes, such she was—fifteen years
 old, full of figure and no stays. A saucy magpie face, dipped in milk, a
 skin as soft as a peach skin, a funny nose, pink lips and eyes sparkling
 like tapers, which men would have liked to light their pipes at. Her pile
 of fair hair, the color of fresh oats, seemed to have scattered gold dust
 over her temples, freckle-like as it were, giving her brow a sunny crown.
 Ah! a pretty doll, as the Lorilleuxs say, a dirty nose that needed wiping,
 with fat shoulders, which were as fully rounded and as powerful as those
 of a full-grown woman. Nana no longer needed to stuff wads of paper into
 her bodice, her breasts were grown. She wished they were larger though,
 and dreamed of having breasts like a wet-nurse.
 

 What made her particularly tempting was a nasty habit she had of
 protruding the tip of her tongue between her white teeth. No doubt on
 seeing herself in the looking-glasses she had thought she was pretty like
 this; and so, all day long, she poked her tongue out of her mouth, in view
 of improving her appearance.
 

 "Hide your lying tongue!" cried her mother.
 

 Coupeau would often get involved, pounding his fist, swearing and
 shouting:
 

 "Make haste and draw that red rag inside again!"
 

 Nana showed herself very coquettish. She did not always wash her feet, but
 she bought such tight boots that she suffered martyrdom in St. Crispin's
 prison; and if folks questioned her when she turned purple with pain, she
 answered that she had the stomach ache, so as to avoid confessing her
 coquetry. When bread was lacking at home it was difficult for her to trick
 herself out. But she accomplished miracles, brought ribbons back from the
 workshop and concocted toilettes—dirty dresses set off with bows and
 puffs. The summer was the season of her greatest triumphs. With a cambric
 dress which had cost her six francs she filled the whole neighborhood of
 the Goutte-d'Or with her fair beauty. Yes, she was known from the outer
 Boulevards to the Fortifications, and from the Chaussee de Clignancourt to
 the Grand Rue of La Chapelle. Folks called her "chickie," for she was
 really as tender and as fresh-looking as a chicken.
 

 There was one dress which suited her perfectly, a white one with pink
 dots. It was very simple and without a frill. The skirt was rather short
 and revealed her ankles. The sleeves were deeply slashed and loose,
 showing her arms to the elbow. She pinned the neck back into a wide V as
 soon as she reached a dark corner of the staircase to avoid getting her
 ears boxed by her father for exposing the snowy whiteness of her throat
 and the golden shadow between her breasts. She also tied a pink ribbon
 round her blond hair.
 

 Sundays she spent the entire day out with the crowds and loved it when the
 men eyed her hungrily as they passed. She waited all week long for these
 glances. She would get up early to dress herself and spend hours before
 the fragment of mirror that was hung over the bureau. Her mother would
 scold her because the entire building could see her through the window in
 her chemise as she mended her dress.
 

 Ah! she looked cute like that said father Coupeau, sneering and jeering at
 her, a real Magdalene in despair! She might have turned "savage woman" at
 a fair, and have shown herself for a penny. Hide your meat, he used to
 say, and let me eat my bread! In fact, she was adorable, white and dainty
 under her overhanging golden fleece, losing temper to the point that her
 skin turned pink, not daring to answer her father, but cutting her thread
 with her teeth with a hasty, furious jerk, which shook her plump but
 youthful form.
 

 Then immediately after breakfast she tripped down the stairs into the
 courtyard. The entire tenement seemed to be resting sleepily in the
 peacefulness of a Sunday afternoon. The workshops on the ground floor were
 closed. Gaping windows revealed tables in some apartments that were
 already set for dinner, awaiting families out working up an appetite by
 strolling along the fortifications.
 

 Then, in the midst of the empty, echoing courtyard, Nana, Pauline and
 other big girls engaged in games of battledore and shuttlecock. They had
 grown up together and were now becoming queens of their building. Whenever
 a man crossed the court, flutelike laugher would arise, and then starched
 skirts would rustle like the passing of a gust of wind.
 

 The games were only an excuse for them to make their escape. Suddenly
 stillness fell upon the tenement. The girls had glided out into the street
 and made for the outer Boulevards. Then, linked arm-in-arm across the full
 breadth of the pavement, they went off, the whole six of them, clad in
 light colors, with ribbons tied around their bare heads. With bright eyes
 darting stealthy glances through their partially closed eyelids, they took
 note of everything, and constantly threw back their necks to laugh,
 displaying the fleshy part of their chins. They would swing their hips, or
 group together tightly, or flaunt along with awkward grace, all for the
 purpose of calling attention to the fact that their forms were filling
 out.
 

 Nana was in the centre with her pink dress all aglow in the sunlight. She
 gave her arm to Pauline, whose costume, yellow flowers on a white ground,
 glared in similar fashion, dotted as it were with little flames. As they
 were the tallest of the band, the most woman-like and most unblushing,
 they led the troop and drew themselves up with breasts well forward
 whenever they detected glances or heard complimentary remarks. The others
 extended right and left, puffing themselves out in order to attract
 attention. Nana and Pauline resorted to the complicated devices of
 experienced coquettes. If they ran till they were out of breath, it was in
 view of showing their white stockings and making the ribbons of their
 chignons wave in the breeze. When they stopped, pretending complete
 breathlessness, you would certainly spot someone they knew quite near, one
 of the young fellows of the neighborhood. This would make them dawdle
 along languidly, whispering and laughing among themselves, but keeping a
 sharp watch through their downcast eyelids.
 

 They went on these strolls of a Sunday mainly for the sake of these chance
 meetings. Tall lads, wearing their Sunday best, would stop them, joking
 and trying to catch them round their waists. Pauline was forever running
 into one of Madame Gaudron's sons, a seventeen-year-old carpenter, who
 would treat her to fried potatoes. Nana could spot Victor Fauconnier, the
 laundress's son and they would exchange kisses in dark corners. It never
 went farther than that, but they told each other some tall tales.
 

 Then when the sun set, the great delight of these young hussies was to
 stop and look at the mountebanks. Conjurors and strong men turned up and
 spread threadbare carpets on the soil of the avenue. Loungers collected
 and a circle formed whilst the mountebank in the centre tried his muscles
 under his faded tights. Nana and Pauline would stand for hours in the
 thickest part of the crowd. Their pretty, fresh frocks would get crushed
 between great-coats and dirty work smocks. In this atmosphere of wine and
 sweat they would laugh gaily, finding amusement in everything, blooming
 naturally like roses growing out of a dunghill. The only thing that vexed
 them was to meet their fathers, especially when the hatter had been
 drinking. So they watched and warned one another.
 

 "Look, Nana," Pauline would suddenly cry out, "here comes father Coupeau!"
 

 "Well, he's drunk too. Oh, dear," said Nana, greatly bothered. "I'm going
 to beat it, you know. I don't want him to give me a wallop. Hullo! How he
 stumbles! Good Lord, if he could only break his neck!"
 

 At other times, when Coupeau came straight up to her without giving her
 time to run off, she crouched down, made herself small and muttered: "Just
 you hide me, you others. He's looking for me, and he promised he'd knock
 my head off if he caught me hanging about."
 

 Then when the drunkard had passed them she drew herself up again, and all
 the others followed her with bursts of laughter. He'll find her—he
 will—he won't! It was a true game of hide and seek. One day,
 however, Boche had come after Pauline and caught her by both ears, and
 Coupeau had driven Nana home with kicks.
 

 Nana was now a flower-maker and earned forty sous a day at Titreville's
 place in the Rue du Caire, where she had served as apprentice. The
 Coupeaus had kept her there so that she might remain under the eye of
 Madame Lerat, who had been forewoman in the workroom for ten years. Of a
 morning, when her mother looked at the cuckoo clock, off she went by
 herself, looking very pretty with her shoulders tightly confined in her
 old black dress, which was both too narrow and too short; and Madame Lerat
 had to note the hour of her arrival and tell it to Gervaise. She was
 allowed twenty minutes to go from the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or to the Rue du
 Caire, and it was enough, for these young hussies have the legs of
 racehorses. Sometimes she arrived exactly on time but so breathless and
 flushed that she must have covered most of the distance at a run after
 dawdling along the way. More often she was a few minutes late. Then she
 would fawn on her aunt all day, hoping to soften her and keep her from
 telling. Madame Lerat understood what it was to be young and would lie to
 the Coupeaus, but she also lectured Nana, stressing the dangers a young
 girl runs on the streets of Paris. Mon Dieu! she herself was
 followed often enough!
 

 "Oh! I watch, you needn't fear," said the widow to the Coupeaus. "I will
 answer to you for her as I would for myself. And rather than let a
 blackguard squeeze her, why I'd step between them."
 

 The workroom at Titreville's was a large apartment on the first floor,
 with a broad work-table standing on trestles in the centre. Round the four
 walls, the plaster of which was visible in parts where the dirty
 yellowish-grey paper was torn away, there were several stands covered with
 old cardboard boxes, parcels and discarded patterns under a thick coating
 of dust. The gas had left what appeared to be like a daub of soot on the
 ceiling. The two windows opened so wide that without leaving the
 work-table the girls could see the people walking past on the pavement
 over the way.
 

 Madame Lerat arrived the first, in view of setting an example. Then for a
 quarter of an hour the door swayed to and fro, and all the workgirls
 scrambled in, perspiring with tumbled hair. One July morning Nana arrived
 the last, as very often happened. "Ah, me!" she said, "it won't be a pity
 when I have a carriage of my own." And without even taking off her hat,
 one which she was weary of patching up, she approached the window and
 leant out, looking to the right and the left to see what was going on in
 the street.
 

 "What are you looking at?" asked Madame Lerat, suspiciously. "Did your
 father come with you?"
 

 "No, you may be sure of that," answered Nana coolly. "I'm looking at
 nothing—I'm seeing how hot it is. It's enough to make anyone, having
 to run like that."
 

 It was a stifling hot morning. The workgirls had drawn down the Venetian
 blinds, between which they could spy out into the street; and they had at
 last begun working on either side of the table, at the upper end of which
 sat Madame Lerat. They were eight in number, each with her pot of glue,
 pincers, tools and curling stand in front of her. On the work-table lay a
 mass of wire, reels, cotton wool, green and brown paper, leaves and petals
 cut out of silk, satin or velvet. In the centre, in the neck of a large
 decanter, one flower-girl had thrust a little penny nosegay which had been
 fading on her breast since the day before.
 

 "Oh, I have some news," said a pretty brunette named Leonie as she leaned
 over her cushion to crimp some rose petals. "Poor Caroline is very unhappy
 about that fellow who used to wait for her every evening."
 

 "Ah!" said Nana, who was cutting thin strips of green paper. "A man who
 cheats on her every day!"
 

 Madame Lerat had to display severity over the muffled laughter. Then
 Leonie whispered suddenly:
 

 "Quiet. The boss!"
 

 It was indeed Madame Titreville who entered. The tall thin woman usually
 stayed down in the shop. The girls were quite in awe of her because she
 never joked with them. All the heads were now bent over the work in
 diligent silence. Madame Titreville slowly circled the work-table. She
 told one girl her work was sloppy and made her do the flower over. Then
 she stalked out as stiffly as she had come in.
 

 The complaining and low laughter began again.
 

 "Really, young ladies!" said Madame Lerat, trying to look more severe than
 ever. "You will force me to take measures."
 

 The workgirls paid no attention to her. They were not afraid of her. She
 was too easy-going because she enjoyed being surrounded by these young
 girls whose zest for life sparkled in their eyes. She enjoyed taking them
 aside to hear their confidences about their lovers. She even told their
 fortunes with cards whenever a corner of the work-table was free. She was
 only offended by coarse expressions. As long as you avoided those you
 could say what you pleased.
 

 To tell the truth, Nana perfected her education in nice style in the
 workroom! No doubt she was already inclined to go wrong. But this was the
 finishing stroke—associating with a lot of girls who were already
 worn out with misery and vice. They all hobnobbed and rotted together,
 just the story of the baskets of apples when there are rotten ones among
 them. They maintained a certain propriety in public, but the smut flowed
 freely when they got to whispering together in a corner.
 

 For inexperienced girls like Nana, there was an undesirable atmosphere
 around the workshop, an air of cheap dance halls and unorthodox evenings
 brought in by some of the girls. The laziness of mornings after a gay
 night, the shadows under the eyes, the lounging, the hoarse voices, all
 spread an odor of dark perversion over the work-table which contrasted
 sharply with the brilliant fragility of the artificial flowers. Nana
 eagerly drank it all in and was dizzy with joy when she found herself
 beside a girl who had been around. She always wanted to sit next to big
 Lisa, who was said to be pregnant, and she kept glancing curiously at her
 neighbor as though expecting her to swell up suddenly.
 

 "It's hot enough to make one stifle," Nana said, approaching a window as
 if to draw the blind farther down; but she leant forward and again looked
 out both to the right and left.
 

 At the same moment Leonie, who was watching a man stationed at the foot of
 the pavement over the way, exclaimed, "What's that old fellow about? He's
 been spying here for the last quarter of an hour."
 

 "Some tom cat," said Madame Lerat. "Nana, just come and sit down! I told
 you not to stand at the window."
 

 Nana took up the stems of some violets she was rolling, and the whole
 workroom turned its attention to the man in question. He was a
 well-dressed individual wearing a frock coat and he looked about fifty
 years old. He had a pale face, very serous and dignified in expression,
 framed round with a well trimmed grey beard. He remained for an hour in
 front of a herbalist's shop with his eyes fixed on the Venetian blinds of
 the workroom. The flower-girls indulged in little bursts of laughter which
 died away amid the noise of the street, and while leaning forward, to all
 appearance busy with their work, they glanced askance so as not to lose
 sight of the gentleman.
 

 "Ah!" remarked Leonie, "he wears glasses. He's a swell. He's waiting for
 Augustine, no doubt."
 

 But Augustine, a tall, ugly, fair-haired girl, sourly answered that she
 did not like old men; whereupon Madame Lerat, jerking her head, answered
 with a smile full of underhand meaning:
 

 "That is a great mistake on your part, my dear; the old ones are more
 affectionate."
 

 At this moment Leonie's neighbor, a plump little body, whispered something
 in her ear and Leonie suddenly threw herself back on her chair, seized
 with a fit of noisy laughter, wriggling, looking at the gentleman and then
 laughing all the louder. "That's it. Oh! that's it," she stammered. "How
 dirty that Sophie is!"
 

 "What did she say? What did she say?" asked the whole workroom, aglow with
 curiosity.
 

 Leonie wiped the tears from her eyes without answering. When she became
 somewhat calmer, she began curling her flowers again and declared, "It
 can't be repeated."
 

 The others insisted, but she shook her head, seized again with a gust of
 gaiety. Thereupon Augustine, her left-hand neighbor, besought her to
 whisper it to her; and finally Leonie consented to do so with her lips
 close to Augustine's ear. Augustine threw herself back and wriggled with
 convulsive laughter in her turn. Then she repeated the phrase to a girl
 next to her, and from ear to ear it traveled round the room amid
 exclamations and stifled laughter. When they were all of them acquainted
 with Sophie's disgusting remark they looked at one another and burst out
 laughing together although a little flushed and confused. Madame Lerat
 alone was not in the secret and she felt extremely vexed.
 

 "That's very impolite behavior on your part, young ladies," said she. "It
 is not right to whisper when other people are present. Something indecent
 no doubt! Ah! that's becoming!"
 

 She did not dare go so far as to ask them to pass Sophie's remark on to
 her although she burned to hear it. So she kept her eyes on her work,
 amusing herself by listening to the conversation. Now no one could make
 even an innocent remark without the others twisting it around and
 connecting it with the gentleman on the sidewalk. Madame Lerat herself
 once sent them into convulsions of laughter when she said, "Mademoiselle
 Lisa, my fire's gone out. Pass me yours."
 

 "Oh! Madame Lerat's fire's out!" laughed the whole shop.
 

 They refused to listen to any explanation, but maintained they were going
 to call in the gentleman outside to rekindle Madame Lerat's fire.
 

 However, the gentleman over the way had gone off. The room grew calmer and
 the work was carried on in the sultry heat. When twelve o'clock struck—meal-time—they
 all shook themselves. Nana, who had hastened to the window again,
 volunteered to do the errands if they liked. And Leonie ordered two sous
 worth of shrimps, Augustine a screw of fried potatoes, Lisa a bunch of
 radishes, Sophie a sausage. Then as Nana was doing down the stairs, Madame
 Lerat, who found her partiality for the window that morning rather
 curious, overtook her with her long legs.
 

 "Wait a bit," said she. "I'll go with you. I want to buy something too."
 

 But in the passage below she perceived the gentleman, stuck there like a
 candle and exchanging glances with Nana. The girl flushed very red,
 whereupon her aunt at once caught her by the arm and made her trot over
 the pavement, whilst the individual followed behind. Ah! so the tom cat
 had come for Nana. Well, that was nice! At fifteen years and a half
 to have men trailing after her! Then Madame Lerat hastily began to
 question her. Mon Dieu! Nana didn't know; he had only been
 following her for five days, but she could not poke her nose out of doors
 without stumbling on men. She believed he was in business; yes, a
 manufacturer of bone buttons. Madame Lerat was greatly impressed. She
 turned round and glanced at the gentleman out of the corner of her eye.
 

 "One can see he's got a deep purse," she muttered. "Listen to me, kitten;
 you must tell me everything. You have nothing more to fear now."
 

 Whilst speaking they hastened from shop to shop—to the pork
 butcher's, the fruiterer's, the cook-shop; and the errands in greasy paper
 were piled up in their hands. Still they remained amiable, flouncing along
 and casting bright glances behind them with gusts of gay laughter. Madame
 Lerat herself was acting the young girl, on account of the button
 manufacturer who was still following them.
 

 "He is very distinguished looking," she declared as they returned into the
 passage. "If he only has honorable views—"
 

 Then, as they were going up the stairs she suddenly seemed to remember
 something. "By the way, tell me what the girls were whispering to each
 other—you know, what Sophie said?"
 

 Nana did not make any ceremony. Only she caught Madame Lerat by the hand,
 and caused her to descend a couple of steps, for, really, it wouldn't do
 to say it aloud, not even on the stairs. When she whispered it to her, it
 was so obscene that Madame Lerat could only shake her head, opening her
 eyes wide, and pursing her lips. Well, at least her curiosity wasn't
 troubling her any longer.
 

 From that day forth Madame Lerat regaled herself with her niece's first
 love adventure. She no longer left her, but accompanied her morning and
 evening, bringing her responsibility well to the fore. This somewhat
 annoyed Nana, but all the same she expanded with pride at seeing herself
 guarded like a treasure; and the talk she and her aunt indulged in in the
 street with the button manufacturer behind them flattered her, and rather
 quickened her desire for new flirtations. Oh! her aunt understood the
 feelings of the heart; she even compassionated the button manufacturer,
 this elderly gentleman, who looked so respectable, for, after all,
 sentimental feelings are more deeply rooted among people of a certain age.
 Still she watched. And, yes, he would have to pass over her body before
 stealing her niece.
 

 One evening she approached the gentleman, and told him, as straight as a
 bullet, that his conduct was most improper. He bowed to her politely
 without answering, like an old satyr who was accustomed to hear parents
 tell him to go about his business. She really could not be cross with him,
 he was too well mannered.
 

 Then came lectures on love, allusions to dirty blackguards of men, and all
 sorts of stories about hussies who had repented of flirtations, which left
 Nana in a state of pouting, with eyes gleaming brightly in her pale face.
 

 One day, however, in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonniere the button
 manufacturer ventured to poke his nose between the aunt and the niece to
 whisper some things which ought not to have been said. Thereupon Madame
 Lerat was so frightened that she declared she no longer felt able to
 handle the matter and she told the whole business to her brother. Then
 came another row. There were some pretty rumpuses in the Coupeaus' room.
 To begin with, the zinc-worker gave Nana a hiding. What was that he
 learnt? The hussy was flirting with old men. All right. Only let her be
 caught philandering out of doors again, she'd be done for; he, her father,
 would cut off her head in a jiffy. Had the like ever been seen before! A
 dirty nose who thought of beggaring her family! Thereupon he shook her,
 declaring in God's name that she'd have to walk straight, for he'd watch
 her himself in future. He now looked her over every night when she came
 in, even going so far as to sniff at her and make her turn round before
 him.
 

 One evening she got another hiding because he discovered a mark on her
 neck that he maintained was the mark of a kiss. Nana insisted it was a
 bruise that Leonie had given her when they were having a bit of a
 rough-house. Yet at other times her father would tease her, saying she was
 certainly a choice morsel for men. Nana began to display the sullen
 submissiveness of a trapped animal. She was raging inside.
 

 "Why don't you leave her alone?" repeated Gervaise, who was more
 reasonable. "You will end by making her wish to do it by talking to her
 about it so much."
 

 Ah! yes, indeed, she did wish to do it. She itched all over, longing to
 break loose and gad all the time, as father Coupeau said. He insisted so
 much on the subject that even an honest girl would have fired up. Even
 when he was abusing her, he taught her a few things she did not know as
 yet, which, to say the least was astonishing. Then, little by little she
 acquired some singular habits. One morning he noticed her rummaging in a
 paper bag and rubbing something on her face. It was rice powder, which she
 plastered on her delicate satin-like skin with perverse taste. He caught
 up the paper bag and rubbed it over her face violently enough to graze her
 skin and called her a miller's daughter. On another occasion she brought
 some ribbon home, to do up her old black hat which she was so ashamed of.
 He asked her in a furious voice where she had got those ribbons from. Had
 she earned them by lying on her back or had she bagged them somewhere? A
 hussy or a thief, and perhaps both by now?
 

 More than once he found her with some pretty little doodad. She had found
 a little interlaced heart in the street on Rue d'Aboukir. Her father
 crushed the heart under his foot, driving her to the verge of throwing
 herself at him to ruin something of his. For two years she had been
 longing for one of those hearts, and now he had smashed it! This was too
 much, she was reaching the end of the line with him.
 

 Coupeau was often in the wrong in the manner in which he tried to rule
 Nana. His injustice exasperated her. She at last left off attending the
 workshop and when the zinc-worker gave her a hiding, she declared she
 would not return to Titreville's again, for she was always placed next to
 Augustine, who must have swallowed her feet to have such a foul breath.
 Then Coupeau took her himself to the Rue du Caire and requested the
 mistress of the establishment to place her always next to Augustine, by
 way of punishment. Every morning for a fortnight he took the trouble to
 come down from the Barriere Poissonniere to escort Nana to the door of the
 flower shop. And he remained for five minutes on the footway, to make sure
 that she had gone in. But one morning while he was drinking a glass with a
 friend in a wineshop in the Rue Saint-Denis, he perceived the hussy
 darting down the street. For a fortnight she had been deceiving him;
 instead of going into the workroom, she climbed a story higher, and sat
 down on the stairs, waiting till he had gone off. When Coupeau began
 casting the blame on Madame Lerat, the latter flatly replied that she
 would not accept it. She had told her niece all she ought to tell her, to
 keep her on her guard against men, and it was not her fault if the girl
 still had a liking for the nasty beasts. Now, she washed her hands of the
 whole business; she swore she would not mix up in it, for she knew what
 she knew about scandalmongers in her own family, yes, certain persons who
 had the nerve to accuse her of going astray with Nana and finding an
 indecent pleasure in watching her take her first misstep. Then Coupeau
 found out from the proprietress that Nana was being corrupted by that
 little floozie Leonie, who had given up flower-making to go on the street.
 Nana was being tempted by the jingle of cash and the lure of adventure on
 the streets.
 

 In the tenement in the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or, Nana's old fellow was talked
 about as a gentleman everyone was acquainted with. Oh! he remained very
 polite, even a little timid, but awfully obstinate and patient, following
 her ten paces behind like an obedient poodle. Sometimes, indeed, he
 ventured into the courtyard. One evening, Madame Gaudron met him on the
 second floor landing, and he glided down alongside the balusters with his
 nose lowered and looking as if on fire, but frightened. The Lorilleuxs
 threatened to move out if that wayward niece of theirs brought men
 trailing in after her. It was disgusting. The staircase was full of them.
 The Boches said that they felt sympathy for the old gentleman because he
 had fallen for a tramp. He was really a respectable businessman, they had
 seen his button factory on the Boulevard de la Villette. He would be an
 excellent catch for a decent girl.
 

 For the first month Nana was greatly amused with her old flirt. You should
 have seen him always dogging her—a perfect great nuisance, who
 followed far behind, in the crowd, without seeming to do so. And his legs!
 Regular lucifers. No more moss on his pate, only four straight hairs
 falling on his neck, so that she was always tempted to ask him where his
 hairdresser lived. Ah! what an old gaffer, he was comical and no mistake,
 nothing to get excited over.
 

 Then, on finding him always behind her, she no longer thought him so
 funny. She became afraid of him and would have called out if he had
 approached her. Often, when she stopped in front of a jeweler's shop, she
 heard him stammering something behind her. And what he said was true; she
 would have liked to have had a cross with a velvet neck-band, or a pair of
 coral earrings, so small you would have thought they were drops of blood.
 

 More and more, as she plodded through the mire of the streets, getting
 splashed by passing vehicles and being dazzled by the magnificence of the
 window displays, she felt longings that tortured her like hunger pangs,
 yearnings for better clothes, for eating in restaurants, for going to the
 theatre, for a room of her own with nice furniture. Right at those
 moments, it never failed that her old gentleman would come up to whisper
 something in her ear. Oh, if only she wasn't afraid of him, how readily
 she would have taken up with him.
 

 When the winter arrived, life became impossible at home. Nana had her
 hiding every night. When her father was tired of beating her, her mother
 smacked her to teach her how to behave. And there were free-for-alls; as
 soon as one of them began to beat her, the other took her part, so that
 all three of them ended by rolling on the floor in the midst of the broken
 crockery. And with all this, there were short rations and they shivered
 with cold. Whenever the girl bought anything pretty, a bow or a pair of
 buttons, her parents confiscated the purchase and drank what they could
 get for it. She had nothing of her own, excepting her allowance of blows,
 before coiling herself up between the rags of a sheet, where she shivered
 under her little black skirt, which she stretched out by way of a blanket.
 No, that cursed life could not continue; she was not going to leave her
 skin in it. Her father had long since ceased to count for her; when a
 father gets drunk like hers did, he isn't a father, but a dirty beast one
 longs to be rid of. And now, too, her mother was doing down the hill in
 her esteem. She drank as well. She liked to go and fetch her husband at
 Pere Colombe's, so as to be treated; and she willingly sat down, with none
 of the air of disgust that she had assumed on the first occasion, draining
 glasses indeed at one gulp, dragging her elbows over the table for hours
 and leaving the place with her eyes starting out of her head.
 

 When Nana passed in front of l'Assommoir and saw her mother inside, with
 her nose in her glass, fuddled in the midst of the disputing men, she was
 seized with anger; for youth which has other dainty thoughts uppermost
 does not understand drink. On these evenings it was a pretty sight. Father
 drunk, mother drunk, a hell of a home that stunk with liquor, and where
 there was no bread. To tell the truth, a saint would not have stayed in
 the place. So much the worse if she flew the coop one of these days; her
 parents would have to say their mea culpa, and own that they had
 driven her out themselves.
 

 One Saturday when Nana came home she found her father and her mother in a
 lamentable condition. Coupeau, who had fallen across the bed was snoring.
 Gervaise, crouching on a chair was swaying her head, with her eyes vaguely
 and threateningly staring into vacancy. She had forgotten to warm the
 dinner, the remains of a stew. A tallow dip which she neglected to snuff
 revealed the shameful misery of their hovel.
 

 "It's you, shrimp?" stammered Gervaise. "Ah, well, your father will take
 care of you."
 

 Nana did not answer, but remained pale, looking at the cold stove, the
 table on which no plates were laid, the lugubrious hovel which this pair
 of drunkards invested with the pale horror of their callousness. She did
 not take off her hat but walked round the room; then with her teeth
 tightly set, she opened the door and went out.
 

 Coupeaus had lunched very late on just a bite or two, because the stoves
 were already in use, and because they did not want to dirty any dishes
 needed for the evening. By four o'clock the two women were working very
 hard. The huge goose was being cooked on a spit. Squint-eyed Augustine was
 sitting on a low bench solemnly basting the goose with a long-handled
 spoon. Gervaise was busy with the peas with bacon. Mother Coupeau, kept
 spinning around, a bit confused, waiting for the right time to begin
 reheating the pork and the veal.
 

 Towards five o'clock the guests began to arrive. First of all came the two
 workwomen, Clemence and Madame Putois, both in their Sunday best, the
 former in blue, the latter in black; Clemence carried a geranium, Madame
 Putois a heliotrope, and Gervaise, whose hands were just then smothered
 with flour, had to kiss each of them on both cheeks with her arms behind
 her back. Then following close upon their heels entered Virginie dressed
 like a lady in a printed muslin costume with a sash and a bonnet though
 she had only a few steps to come. She brought a pot of red carnations. She
 took the laundress in her big arms and squeezed her tight. At length Boche
 appeared with a pot of pansies and Madame Boche with a pot of mignonette;
 then came Madame Lerat with a balm-mint, the pot of which had dirtied her
 violet merino dress. All these people kissed each other and gathered
 together in the back-room in the midst of the three stoves and the
 roasting apparatus, which gave out a stifling heat. The noise from the
 saucepans drowned the voices. A dress catching in the Dutch oven caused
 quite an emotion. The smell of roast goose was so strong that it made
 their mouths water. And Gervaise was very pleasant, thanking everyone for
 their flowers without however letting that interfere with her preparing
 the thickening for the stewed veal at the bottom of a soup plate. She had
 placed the pots in the shop at one end of the table without removing the
 white paper that was round them. A sweet scent of flowers mingled with the
 odor of cooking.
 

 "Do you want any assistance?" asked Virginie. "Just fancy, you've been
 three days preparing all this feast and it will be gobbled up in no time."
 

 "Well, you know," replied Gervaise, "it wouldn't prepare itself. No, don't
 dirty your hands. You see everything's ready. There's only the soup to
 warm."
 

 Then they all made themselves comfortable. The ladies laid their shawls
 and their caps on the bed and pinned up their skirts so as not to soil
 them. Boche sent his wife back to the concierge's lodge until time to eat
 and had cornered Clemence in a corner trying to find out if she was
 ticklish. She was gasping for breath, as the mere thought of being tickled
 sent shivers through her. So as not to bother the cooks, the other ladies
 had gone into the shop and were standing against the wall facing the
 table. They were talking through the door though, and as they could not
 hear very well, they were continually invading the back-room and crowding
 around Gervaise, who would forget what she was doing to answer them.
 

 There were a few stories which brought sly laughter. When Virginie
 mentioned that she hadn't eaten for two days in order to have more room
 for today's feast, tall Clemence said that she had cleaned herself out
 that morning with an enema like the English do. Then Boche suggested a way
 of digesting the food quickly by squeezing oneself after each course,
 another English custom. After all, when you were invited to dinner, wasn't
 it polite to eat as much as you could? Veal and pork and goose are placed
 out for the cats to eat. The hostess didn't need to worry a bit, they were
 going to clean their plates so thoroughly that she wouldn't have to wash
 them.
 

 All of them kept coming to smell the air above the saucepans and the
 roaster. The ladies began to act like young girls, scurrying from room to
 room and pushing each other.
 

 Just as they were all jumping about and shouting by way of amusement,
 Goujet appeared. He was so timid he scarcely dared enter, but stood still,
 holding a tall white rose-tree in his arms, a magnificent plant with a
 stem that reached to his face and entangled the flowers in his beard.
 Gervaise ran to him, her cheeks burning from the heat of the stoves. But
 he did not know how to get rid of his pot; and when she had taken it from
 his hands he stammered, not daring to kiss her. It was she who was obliged
 to stand on tip-toe and place her cheek against his lips; he was so
 agitated that even then he kissed her roughly on the eye almost blinding
 her. They both stood trembling.
 

 "Oh! Monsieur Goujet, it's too lovely!" said she, placing the rose-tree
 beside the other flowers which it overtopped with the whole of its tuft of
 foliage.
 

 "Not at all, not at all!" repeated he, unable to say anything else.
 

 Then, after sighing deeply, he slightly recovered himself and stated that
 she was not to expect his mother; she was suffering from an attack of
 sciatica. Gervaise was greatly grieved; she talked of putting a piece of
 the goose on one side as she particularly wished Madame Goujet to have a
 taste of the bird. No one else was expected. Coupeau was no doubt
 strolling about in the neighborhood with Poisson whom he had called for
 directly after his lunch; they would be home directly, they had promised
 to be back punctually at six. Then as the soup was almost ready, Gervaise
 called to Madame Lerat, saying that she thought it was time to go and
 fetch the Lorilleuxs. Madame Lerat became at once very grave; it was she
 who had conducted all the negotiations and who had settled how everything
 should pass between the two families. She put her cap and shawl on again
 and went upstairs very stiffly in her skirts, looking very stately. Down
 below the laundress continued to stir her vermicelli soup without saying a
 word. The guests suddenly became serious and solemnly waited.
 

 It was Madame Lerat who appeared first. She had gone round by the street
 so as to give more pomp to the reconciliation. She held the shop-door wide
 open whilst Madame Lorilleux, wearing a silk dress, stopped at the
 threshold. All the guests had risen from their seats; Gervaise went
 forward and kissing her sister-in-law as had been agreed, said:
 

 "Come in. It's all over, isn't it? We'll both be nice to each other."
 

 And Madame Lorilleux replied:
 

 "I shall be only too happy if we're so always."
 

 When she had entered Lorilleux also stopped at the threshold and he
 likewise waited to be embraced before penetrating into the shop. Neither
 the one nor the other had brought a bouquet. They had decided not to do so
 as they thought it would look too much like giving way to Clump-clump if
 they carried flowers with them the first time they set foot in her home.
 Gervaise called to Augustine to bring two bottles of wine. Then, filling
 some glasses on a corner of the table, she called everyone to her. And
 each took a glass and drank to the good friendship of the family. There
 was a pause whilst the guests were drinking, the ladies raising their
 elbows and emptying their glasses to the last drop.
 

 "Nothing is better before soup," declared Boche, smacking his lips.
 

 Mother Coupeau had placed herself opposite the door to see the faces the
 Lorilleuxs would make. She pulled Gervaise by the skirt and dragged her
 into the back-room. And as they both leant over the soup they conversed
 rapidly in a low voice.
 

 "Huh! What a sight!" said the old woman. "You couldn't see them; but I was
 watching. When she caught sight of the table her face twisted around like
 that, the corners of her mouth almost touched her eyes; and as for him, it
 nearly choked him, he coughed and coughed. Now just look at them over
 there; they've no saliva left in their mouths, they're chewing their
 lips."
 

 "It's quite painful to see people as jealous as that," murmured Gervaise.
 

 Really the Lorilleuxs had a funny look about them. No one of course likes
 to be crushed; in families especially when the one succeeds, the others do
 not like it; that is only natural. Only one keeps it in, one does not make
 an exhibition of oneself. Well! The Lorilleuxs could not keep it in. It
 was more than a match for them. They squinted—their mouths were all
 on one side. In short it was so apparent that the other guests looked at
 them, and asked them if they were unwell. Never would they be able to
 stomach this table with its fourteen place-settings, its white linen table
 cloth, its slices of bread cut in advance, all in the style of a
 first-class restaurant. Mme. Lorilleux went around the table,
 surreptitiously fingering the table cloth, tortured by the thought that it
 was a new one.
 

 "Everything's ready!" cried Gervaise as she reappeared with a smile, her
 arms bare and her little fair curls blowing over her temples.
 

 "If the boss would only come," resumed the laundress, "we might begin."
 

 "Ah, well!" said Madame Lorilleux, "the soup will be cold by then. Coupeau
 always forgets. You shouldn't have let him go off."
 

 It was already half-past six. Everything was burning now; the goose would
 be overdone. Then Gervaise, feeling quite dejected, talked of sending
 someone to all the wineshops in the neighborhood to find Coupeau. And as
 Goujet offered to go, she decided to accompany him. Virginie, anxious
 about her husband went also. The three of them, bareheaded, quite blocked
 up the pavement. The blacksmith who wore his frock-coat, had Gervaise on
 his left arm and Virginie on his right; he was doing the two-handled
 basket as he said; and it seemed to them such a funny thing to say that
 they stopped, unable to move their legs for laughing. They looked at
 themselves in the pork-butcher's glass and laughed more than ever. Beside
 Goujet, all in black, the two women looked like two speckled hens—the
 dressmaker in her muslin costume, sprinkled with pink flowers, the
 laundress in her white cambric dress with blue spots, her wrists bare, and
 wearing round her neck a little grey silk scarf tied in a bow. People
 turned round to see them pass, looking so fresh and lively, dressed in
 their Sunday best on a week day and jostling the crowd which hung about
 the Rue des Poissonniers, on that warm June evening. But it was not a
 question of amusing themselves. They went straight to the door of each
 wineshop, looked in and sought amongst the people standing before the
 counter. Had that animal Coupeau gone to the Arc de Triomphe to get his
 dram? They had already done the upper part of the street, looking in at
 all the likely places; at the "Little Civet," renowned for its preserved
 plums; at old mother Baquet's, who sold Orleans wine at eight sous; at the
 "Butterfly," the coachmen's house of call, gentlemen who were not easy to
 please. But no Coupeau. Then as they were going down towards the
 Boulevard, Gervaise uttered a faint cry on passing the eating-house at the
 corner kept by Francois.
 

 "What's the matter?" asked Goujet.
 

 The laundress no longer laughed. She was very pale, and laboring under so
 great an emotion that she had almost fallen. Virginie understood it all as
 she caught a sight of Lantier seated at one of Francois's tables quietly
 dining. The two women dragged the blacksmith along.
 

 "My ankle twisted," said Gervaise as soon as she was able to speak.
 

 At length they discovered Coupeau and Poisson at the bottom of the street
 inside Pere Colombe's l'Assommoir. They were standing up in the midst of a
 number of men; Coupeau, in a grey blouse, was shouting with furious
 gestures and banging his fists down on the counter. Poisson, not on duty
 that day and buttoned up in an old brown coat, was listening to him in a
 dull sort of way and without uttering a word, bristling his carroty
 moustaches and beard the while. Goujet left the women on the edge of the
 pavement, and went and laid his hand on the zinc-worker's shoulder. But
 when the latter caught sight of Gervaise and Virginie outside he grew
 angry. Why was he badgered with such females as those? Petticoats had
 taken to tracking him about now! Well! He declined to stir, they could go
 and eat their beastly dinner all by themselves. To quiet him Goujet was
 obliged to accept a drop of something; and even then Coupeau took a
 fiendish delight in dawdling a good five minutes at the counter. When he
 at length came out he said to his wife:
 

 "I don't like this. It's my business where I go. Do you understand?"
 

 She did not answer. She was all in a tremble. She must have said something
 about Lantier to Virginie, for the latter pushed her husband and Goujet
 ahead, telling them to walk in front. The two women got on each side of
 Coupeau to keep him occupied and prevent him seeing Lantier. He wasn't
 really drunk, being more intoxicated from shouting than from drinking.
 Since they seemed to want to stay on the left side, to tease them, he
 crossed over to the other side of the street. Worried, they ran after him
 and tried to block his view of the door of Francois's. But Coupeau must
 have known that Lantier was there. Gervaise almost went out of her senses
 on hearing him grunt:
 

 "Yes, my duck, there's a young fellow of our acquaintance inside there!
 You mustn't take me for a ninny. Don't let me catch you gallivanting about
 again with your side glances!"
 

 And he made use of some very coarse expressions. It was not him that she
 had come to look for with her bare elbows and her mealy mouth; it was her
 old beau. Then he was suddenly seized with a mad rage against Lantier. Ah!
 the brigand! Ah! the filthy hound! One or the other of them would have to
 be left on the pavement, emptied of his guts like a rabbit. Lantier,
 however, did not appear to notice what was going on and continued slowly
 eating some veal and sorrel. A crowd began to form. Virginie led Coupeau
 away and he calmed down at once as soon as he had turned the corner of the
 street. All the same they returned to the shop far less lively than when
 they left it.
 

 The guests were standing round the table with very long faces. The
 zinc-worker shook hands with them, showing himself off before the ladies.
 Gervaise, feeling rather depressed, spoke in a low voice as she directed
 them to their places. But she suddenly noticed that, as Madame Goujet had
 not come, a seat would remain empty—the one next to Madame
 Lorilleux.
 

 "We are thirteen!" said she, deeply affected, seeing in that a fresh omen
 of the misfortune with which she had felt herself threatened for some time
 past.
 

 The ladies already seated rose up looking anxious and annoyed. Madame
 Putois offered to retire because according to her it was not a matter to
 laugh about; besides she would not touch a thing, the food would do her no
 good. As to Boche, he chuckled. He would sooner be thirteen than fourteen;
 the portions would be larger, that was all.
 

 "Wait!" resumed Gervaise. "I can manage it."
 

 And going out on to the pavement she called Pere Bru who was just then
 crossing the roadway. The old workman entered, stooping and stiff and his
 face without expression.
 

 "Seat yourself there, my good fellow," said the laundress. "You won't mind
 eating with us, will you?"
 

 He simply nodded his head. He was willing; he did not mind.
 

 "As well him as another," continued she, lowering her voice. "He doesn't
 often eat his fill. He will at least enjoy himself once more. We shall
 feel no remorse in stuffing ourselves now."
 

 This touched Goujet so deeply that his eyes filled with tears. The others
 were also moved by compassion and said that it would bring them all good
 luck. However, Madame Lorilleux seemed unhappy at having the old man next
 to her. She cast glances of disgust at his work-roughened hands and his
 faded, patched smock, and drew away from him.
 

 Pere Bru sat with his head bowed, waiting. He was bothered by the napkin
 that was on the plate before him. Finally he lifted it off and placed it
 gently on the edge of the table, not thinking to spread it over his knees.
 

 Now at last Gervaise served the vermicelli soup; the guests were taking up
 their spoons when Virginie remarked that Coupeau had disappeared. He had
 perhaps returned to Pere Colombe's. This time the company got angry. So
 much the worse! One would not run after him; he could stay in the street
 if he was not hungry; and as the spoons touched the bottom of the plates,
 Coupeau reappeared with two pots of flowers, one under each arm, a stock
 and a balsam. They all clapped their hands. He gallantly placed the pots,
 one on the right, the other on the left of Gervaise's glass; then bending
 over and kissing her, he said:
 

 "I had forgotten you, my lamb. But in spite of that, we love each other
 all the same, especially on such a day as this."
 

 "Monsieur Coupeau's very nice this evening," murmured Clemence in Boche's
 ear. "He's just got what he required, sufficient to make him amiable."
 

 The good behavior of the master of the house restored the gaiety of the
 proceedings, which at one moment had been compromised. Gervaise, once more
 at her ease, was all smiles again. The guests finished their soup. Then
 the bottles circulated and they drank their first glass of wine, just a
 drop pure, to wash down the vermicelli. One could hear the children
 quarrelling in the next room. There were Etienne, Pauline, Nana and little
 Victor Fauconnier. It had been decided to lay a table for the four of
 them, and they had been told to be very good. That squint-eyed Augustine
 who had to look after the stoves was to eat off her knees.
 

 "Mamma! Mamma!" suddenly screamed Nana, "Augustine is dipping her bread in
 the Dutch oven!"
 

 The laundress hastened there and caught the squint-eyed one in the act of
 burning her throat in her attempts to swallow without loss of time a slice
 of bread soaked in boiling goose fat. She boxed her ears when the young
 monkey called out that it was not true. When, after the boiled beef, the
 stewed veal appeared, served in a salad-bowl, as they did not have a dish
 large enough, the party greeted it with a laugh.
 

 "It's becoming serious," declared Poisson, who seldom spoke.
 

 It was half-past seven. They had closed the shop door, so as not to be
 spied upon by the whole neighborhood; the little clockmaker opposite
 especially was opening his eyes to their full size and seemed to take the
 pieces from their mouths with such a gluttonous look that it almost
 prevented them from eating. The curtains hung before the windows admitted
 a great white uniform light which bathed the entire table with its
 symmetrical arrangement of knives and forks and its pots of flowers
 enveloped in tall collars of white paper; and this pale fading light, this
 slowly approaching dusk, gave to the party somewhat of an air of
 distinction. Virginie looked round the closed apartment hung with muslin
 and with a happy criticism declared it to be very cozy. Whenever a cart
 passed in the street the glasses jingled together on the table cloth and
 the ladies were obliged to shout out as loud as the men. But there was not
 much conversation; they all behaved very respectably and were very
 attentive to each other. Coupeau alone wore a blouse, because as he said
 one need not stand on ceremony with friends and besides which the blouse
 was the workman's garb of honor. The ladies, laced up in their bodices,
 wore their hair in plaits greasy with pomatum in which the daylight was
 reflected; whilst the gentlemen, sitting at a distance from the table,
 swelled out their chests and kept their elbows wide apart for fear of
 staining their frock coats.
 

 Ah! thunder! What a hole they were making in the stewed veal! If they
 spoke little, they were chewing in earnest. The salad-bowl was becoming
 emptier and emptier with a spoon stuck in the midst of the thick sauce—a
 good yellow sauce which quivered like a jelly. They fished pieces of veal
 out of it and seemed as though they would never come to the end; the
 salad-bowl journeyed from hand to hand and faces bent over it as forks
 picked out the mushrooms. The long loaves standing against the wall behind
 the guests appeared to melt away. Between the mouthfuls one could hear the
 sound of glasses being replaced on the table. The sauce was a trifle too
 salty. It required four bottles of wine to drown that blessed stewed veal,
 which went down like cream, but which afterwards lit up a regular
 conflagration in one's stomach. And before one had time to take a breath,
 the pig's back, in the middle of a deep dish surrounded by big round
 potatoes, arrived in the midst of a cloud of smoke. There was one general
 cry. By Jove! It was just the thing! Everyone liked it. They would do it
 justice; and they followed the dish with a side glance as they wiped their
 knives on their bread so as to be in readiness. Then as soon as they were
 helped they nudged one another and spoke with their mouths full. It was
 just like butter! Something sweet and solid which one could feel run
 through one's guts right down into one's boots. The potatoes were like
 sugar. It was not a bit salty; only, just on account of the potatoes, it
 required a wetting every few minutes. Four more bottles were placed on the
 table. The plates were wiped so clean that they also served for the green
 peas and bacon. Oh! vegetables were of no consequence. They playfully
 gulped them down in spoonfuls. The best part of the dish was the small
 pieces of bacon just nicely grilled and smelling like horse's hoof. Two
 bottles were sufficient for them.
 

 "Mamma! Mamma!" called out Nana suddenly, "Augustine's putting her fingers
 in my plate!"
 

 "Don't bother me! give her a slap!" replied Gervaise, in the act of
 stuffing herself with green peas.
 

 At the children's table in the back-room, Nana was playing the role of
 lady of the house, sitting next to Victor and putting her brother Etienne
 beside Pauline so they could play house, pretending they were two married
 couples. Nana had served her guests very politely at first, but now she
 had given way to her passion for grilled bacon, trying to keep every piece
 for herself. While Augustine was prowling around the children's table, she
 would grab the bits of bacon under the pretext of dividing them amongst
 the children. Nana was so furious that she bit Augustine on the wrist.
 

 "Ah! you know," murmured Augustine, "I'll tell your mother that after the
 veal you asked Victor to kiss you."
 

 But all became quiet again as Gervaise and mother Coupeau came in to get
 the goose. The guests at the big table were leaning back in their chairs
 taking a breather. The men had unbuttoned their waistcoats, the ladies
 were wiping their faces with their napkins. The repast was, so to say,
 interrupted; only one or two persons, unable to keep their jaws still,
 continued to swallow large mouthfuls of bread, without even knowing that
 they were doing so. The others were waiting and allowing their food to
 settle while waiting for the main course. Night was slowly coming on; a
 dirty ashy grey light was gathering behind the curtains. When Augustine
 brought two lamps and placed one at each end of the table, the general
 disorder became apparent in the bright glare—the greasy forks and
 plates, the table cloth stained with wine and covered with crumbs. A
 strong stifling odor pervaded the room. Certain warm fumes, however,
 attracted all the noses in the direction of the kitchen.
 

 "Can I help you?" cried Virginie.
 

 She left her chair and passed into the inner room. All the women followed
 one by one. They surrounded the Dutch oven, and watched with profound
 interest as Gervaise and mother Coupeau tried to pull the bird out. Then a
 clamor arose, in the midst of which one could distinguish the shrill
 voices and the joyful leaps of the children. And there was a triumphal
 entry. Gervaise carried the goose, her arms stiff, and her perspiring face
 expanded in one broad silent laugh; the women walked behind her, laughing
 in the same way; whilst Nana, right at the end, raised herself up to see,
 her eyes open to their full extent. When the enormous golden goose,
 streaming with gravy, was on the table, they did not attack it at once. It
 was a wonder, a respectful wonderment, which for a moment left everyone
 speechless. They drew one another's attention to it with winks and nods of
 the head. Golly! What a bird!
 

 "That one didn't get fat by licking the walls, I'll bet!" said Boche.
 

 Then they entered into details respecting the bird. Gervaise gave the
 facts. It was the best she could get at the poulterer's in the Faubourg
 Poissonniers; it weighed twelve and a half pounds on the scales at the
 charcoal-dealer's; they had burnt nearly half a bushel of charcoal in
 cooking it, and it had given three bowls full of drippings.
 

 Virginie interrupted her to boast of having seen it before it was cooked.
 "You could have eaten it just as it was," she said, "its skin was so fine,
 like the skin of a blonde." All the men laughed at this, smacking their
 lips. Lorilleux and Madame Lorilleux sniffed disdainfully, almost choking
 with rage to see such a goose on Clump-clump's table.
 

 "Well! We can't eat it whole," the laundress observed. "Who'll cut it up?
 No, no, not me! It's too big; I'm afraid of it."
 

 Coupeau offered his services. Mon Dieu! it was very simple. You
 caught hold of the limbs, and pulled them off; the pieces were good all
 the same. But the others protested; they forcibly took possession of the
 large kitchen knife which the zinc-worker already held in his hand, saying
 that whenever he carved he made a regular graveyard of the platter.
 Finally, Madame Lerat suggested in a friendly tone:
 

 "Listen, it should be Monsieur Poisson; yes, Monsieur Poisson."
 

 But, as the others did not appear to understand, she added in a more
 flattering manner still:
 

 "Why, yes, of course, it should be Monsieur Poisson, who's accustomed to
 the use of arms."
 

 And she passed the kitchen knife to the policeman. All round the table
 they laughed with pleasure and approval. Poisson bowed his head with
 military stiffness, and moved the goose before him. When he thrust the
 knife into the goose, which cracked, Lorilleux was seized with an outburst
 of patriotism.
 

 "Ah! if it was a Cossack!" he cried.
 

 "Have you ever fought with Cossacks, Monsieur Poisson?" asked Madame
 Boche.
 

 "No, but I have with Bedouins," replied the policeman, who was cutting off
 a wing. "There are no more Cossacks."
 

 A great silence ensued. Necks were stretched out as every eye followed the
 knife. Poisson was preparing a surprise. Suddenly he gave a last cut; the
 hind-quarter of the bird came off and stood up on end, rump in the air,
 making a bishop's mitre. Then admiration burst forth. None were so
 agreeable in company as retired soldiers.
 

 The policeman allowed several minutes for the company to admire the
 bishop's mitre and then finished cutting the slices and arranging them on
 the platter. The carving of the goose was now complete.
 

 When the ladies complained that they were getting rather warm, Coupeau
 opened the door to the street and the gaiety continued against the
 background of cabs rattling down the street and pedestrians bustling along
 the pavement. The goose was attacked furiously by the rested jaws. Boche
 remarked that just having to wait and watch the goose being carved had
 been enough to make the veal and pork slide down to his ankles.
 

 Then ensued a famous tuck-in; that is to say, not one of the party
 recollected ever having before run the risk of such a stomach-ache.
 Gervaise, looking enormous, her elbows on the table, ate great pieces of
 breast, without uttering a word, for fear of losing a mouthful, and merely
 felt slightly ashamed and annoyed at exhibiting herself thus, as
 gluttonous as a cat before Goujet. Goujet, however, was too busy stuffing
 himself to notice that she was all red with eating. Besides, in spite of
 her greediness, she remained so nice and good! She did not speak, but she
 troubled herself every minute to look after Pere Bru, and place some
 dainty bit on his plate. It was even touching to see this glutton take a
 piece of wing almost from her mouth to give it to the old fellow, who did
 not appear to be very particular, and who swallowed everything with bowed
 head, almost besotted from having gobbled so much after he had forgotten
 the taste of bread. The Lorilleuxs expended their rage on the roast goose;
 they ate enough to last them three days; they would have stowed away the
 dish, the table, the very shop, if they could have ruined Clump-clump by
 doing so. All the ladies had wanted a piece of the breast, traditionally
 the ladies' portion. Madame Lerat, Madame Boche, Madame Putois, were all
 picking bones; whilst mother Coupeau, who adored the neck, was tearing off
 the flesh with her two last teeth. Virginie liked the skin when it was
 nicely browned, and the other guests gallantly passed their skin to her;
 so much so, that Poisson looked at his wife severely, and bade her stop,
 because she had had enough as it was. Once already, she had been a
 fortnight in bed, with her stomach swollen out, through having eaten too
 much roast goose. But Coupeau got angry and helped Virginie to the upper
 part of a leg, saying that, by Jove's thunder! if she did not pick it, she
 wasn't a proper woman. Had roast goose ever done harm to anybody? On the
 contrary, it cured all complaints of the spleen. One could eat it without
 bread, like dessert. He could go on swallowing it all night without being
 the least bit inconvenienced; and, just to show off, he stuffed a whole
 drum-stick into his mouth. Meanwhile, Clemence had got to the end of the
 rump, and was sucking it with her lips, whilst she wriggled with laughter
 on her chair because Boche was whispering all sorts of smutty things to
 her. Ah, by Jove! Yes, there was a dinner! When one's at it, one's at it,
 you know; and if one only has the chance now and then, one would be
 precious stupid not to stuff oneself up to one's ears. Really, one could
 see their sides puff out by degrees. They were cracking in their skins,
 the blessed gormandizers! With their mouths open, their chins besmeared
 with grease, they had such bloated red faces that one would have said they
 were bursting with prosperity.
 

 As for the wine, well, that was flowing as freely around the table as
 water flows in the Seine. It was like a brook overflowing after a
 rainstorm when the soil is parched. Coupeau raised the bottle high when
 pouring to see the red jet foam in the glass. Whenever he emptied a
 bottle, he would turn it upside down and shake it. One more dead solder!
 In a corner of the laundry the pile of dead soldiers grew larger and
 larger, a veritable cemetery of bottles onto which other debris from the
 table was tossed.
 

 Coupeau became indignant when Madame Putois asked for water. He took all
 the water pitchers from the table. Do respectable citizens ever drink
 water? Did she want to grow frogs in her stomach?
 

 Many glasses were emptied at one gulp. You could hear the liquid gurgling
 its way down the throats like rainwater in a drainpipe after a storm. One
 might say it was raining wine. Mon Dieu! the juice of the grape was
 a remarkable invention. Surely the workingman couldn't get along without
 his wine. Papa Noah must have planted his grapevine for the benefit of
 zinc-workers, tailors and blacksmiths. It brightened you up and refreshed
 you after a hard day's work.
 

 Coupeau was in a high mood. He proclaimed that all the ladies present were
 very cute, and jingled the three sous in his pocket as if they had been
 five-franc pieces.
 

 Even Goujet, who was ordinarily very sober, had taken plenty of wine.
 Boche's eyes were narrowing, those of Lorilleux were paling, and Poisson
 was developing expressions of stern severity on his soldierly face. All
 the men were as drunk as lords and the ladies had reached a certain point
 also, feeling so warm that they had to loosen their clothes. Only Clemence
 carried this a bit too far.
 

 Suddenly Gervaise recollected the six sealed bottles of wine. She had
 forgotten to put them on the table with the goose; she fetched them, and
 all the glasses were filled. Then Poisson rose, and holding his glass in
 the air, said:
 

 "I drink to the health of the missus."
 

 All of them stood up, making a great noise with their chairs as they
 moved. Holding out their arms, they clinked glasses in the midst of an
 immense uproar.
 

 "Here's to this day fifty years hence!" cried Virginie.
 

 "No, no," replied Gervaise, deeply moved and smiling; "I shall be too old.
 Ah! a day comes when one's glad to go."
 

 Through the door, which was wide open, the neighborhood was looking on and
 taking part in the festivities. Passers-by stopped in the broad ray of
 light which shone over the pavement, and laughed heartily at seeing all
 these people stuffing away so jovially.
 

 The aroma from the roasted goose brought joy to the whole street. The
 clerks on the sidewalk opposite thought they could almost taste the bird.
 Others came out frequently to stand in front of their shops, sniffing the
 air and licking their lips. The little jeweler was unable to work, dizzy
 from having counted so many bottles. He seemed to have lost his head among
 his merry little cuckoo clocks.
 

 Yes, the neighbors were devoured with envy, as Coupeau said. But why
 should there be any secret made about the matter? The party, now fairly
 launched, was no longer ashamed of being seen at table; on the contrary,
 it felt flattered and excited at seeing the crowd gathered there, gaping
 with gluttony; it would have liked to have knocked out the shop-front and
 dragged the table into the road-way, and there to have enjoyed the dessert
 under the very nose of the public, and amidst the commotion of the
 thoroughfare. Nothing disgusting was to be seen in them, was there? Then
 there was no need to shut themselves in like selfish people. Coupeau,
 noticing the little clockmaker looked very thirsty, held up a bottle; and
 as the other nodded his head, he carried him the bottle and a glass. A
 fraternity was established in the street. They drank to anyone who passed.
 They called in any chaps who looked the right sort. The feast spread,
 extending from one to another, to the degree that the entire neighborhood
 of the Goutte-d'Or sniffed the grub, and held its stomach, amidst a rumpus
 worthy of the devil and all his demons. For some minutes, Madame
 Vigouroux, the charcoal-dealer, had been passing to and fro before the
 door.
 

 "Hi! Madame Vigouroux! Madame Vigouroux!" yelled the party.
 

 She entered with a broad grin on her face, which was washed for once, and
 so fat that the body of her dress was bursting. The men liked pinching
 her, because they might pinch her all over without ever encountering a
 bone. Boche made room for her beside him and reached slyly under the table
 to grab her knee. But she, being accustomed to that sort of thing, quietly
 tossed off a glass of wine, and related that all the neighbors were at
 their windows, and that some of the people of the house were beginning to
 get angry.
 

 "Oh, that's our business," said Madame Boche. "We're the concierges,
 aren't we? Well, we're answerable for good order. Let them come and
 complain to us, we'll receive them in a way they don't expect."
 

 In the back-room there had just been a furious fight between Nana and
 Augustine, on account of the Dutch oven, which both wanted to scrape out.
 For a quarter of an hour, the Dutch oven had rebounded over the tile floor
 with the noise of an old saucepan. Nana was now nursing little Victor, who
 had a goose-bone in his throat. She pushed her fingers under his chin, and
 made him swallow big lumps of sugar by way of a remedy. That did not
 prevent her keeping an eye on the big table. At every minute she came and
 asked for wine, bread, or meat, for Etienne and Pauline, she said.
 

 "Here! Burst!" her mother would say to her. "Perhaps you'll leave us in
 peace now!"
 

 The children were scarcely able to swallow any longer, but they continued
 to eat all the same, banging their forks down on the table to the tune of
 a canticle, in order to excite themselves.
 

 In the midst of the noise, however, a conversation was going on between
 Pere Bru and mother Coupeau. The old fellow, who was ghastly pale in spite
 of the wine and the food, was talking of his sons who had died in the
 Crimea. Ah! if the lads had only lived, he would have had bread to eat
 every day. But mother Coupeau, speaking thickly, leant towards him and
 said:
 

 "Ah! one has many worries with children! For instance, I appear to be
 happy here, don't I? Well! I cry more often than you think. No, don't wish
 you still had your children."
 

 Pere Bru shook his head.
 

 "I can't get work anywhere," murmured he. "I'm too old. When I enter a
 workshop the young fellows joke, and ask me if I polished Henri IV.'s
 boots. To-day it's all over; they won't have me anywhere. Last year I
 could still earn thirty sous a day painting a bridge. I had to lie on my
 back with the river flowing under me. I've had a bad cough ever since
 then. Now, I'm finished."
 

 He looked at his poor stiff hands and added:
 

 "It's easy to understand, I'm no longer good for anything. They're right;
 were I in their place I should do the same. You see, the misfortune is
 that I'm not dead. Yes, it's my fault. One should lie down and croak when
 one's no longer able to work."
 

 "Really," said Lorilleux, who was listening, "I don't understand why the
 Government doesn't come to the aid of the invalids of labor. I was reading
 that in a newspaper the other day."
 

 But Poisson thought it his duty to defend the Government.
 

 "Workmen are not soldiers," declared he. "The Invalides is for soldiers.
 You must not ask for what is impossible."
 

 Dessert was now served. In the centre of the table was a Savoy cake in the
 form of a temple, with a dome fluted with melon slices; and this dome was
 surmounted by an artificial rose, close to which was a silver paper
 butterfly, fluttering at the end of a wire. Two drops of gum in the centre
 of the flower imitated dew. Then, to the left, a piece of cream cheese
 floated in a deep dish; whilst in another dish to the right, were piled up
 some large crushed strawberries, with the juice running from them.
 However, there was still some salad left, some large coss lettuce leaves
 soaked with oil.
 

 "Come, Madame Boche," said Gervaise, coaxingly, "a little more salad. I
 know how fond you are of it."
 

 "No, no, thank you! I've already had as much as I can manage," replied the
 concierge.
 

 The laundress turning towards Virginie, the latter put her finger in her
 mouth, as though to touch the food she had taken.
 

 "Really, I'm full," murmured she. "There's no room left. I couldn't
 swallow a mouthful."
 

 "Oh! but if you tried a little," resumed Gervaise with a smile. "One can
 always find a tiny corner empty. Once doesn't need to be hungry to be able
 to eat salad. You're surely not going to let this be wasted?"
 

 "You can eat it to-morrow," said Madame Lerat; "it's nicer when its
 wilted."
 

 The ladies sighed as they looked regretfully at the salad-bowl. Clemence
 related that she had one day eaten three bunches of watercresses at her
 lunch. Madame Putois could do more than that, she would take a coss
 lettuce and munch it up with some salt just as it was without separating
 the leaves. They could all have lived on salad, would have treated
 themselves to tubfuls. And, this conversation aiding, the ladies cleaned
 out the salad-bowl.
 

 "I could go on all fours in a meadow," observed the concierge with her
 mouth full.
 

 Then they chuckled together as they eyed the dessert. Dessert did not
 count. It came rather late but that did not matter; they would nurse it
 all the same. When you're that stuffed, you can't let yourself be stopped
 by strawberries and cake. There was no hurry. They had the entire night if
 they wished. So they piled their plates with strawberries and cream
 cheese. Meanwhile the men lit their pipes. They were drinking the ordinary
 wine while they smoked since the special wine had been finished. Now they
 insisted that Gervaise cut the Savoy cake. Poisson got up and took the
 rose from the cake and presented it in his most gallant manner to the
 hostess amidst applause from the other guests. She pinned it over her left
 breast, near the heart. The silver butterfly fluttered with her every
 movement.
 

 "Well, look," exclaimed Lorilleux, who had just made a discovery, "it's
 your work-table that we're eating off! Ah, well! I daresay it's never seen
 so much work before!"
 

 This malicious joke had a great success. Witty allusions came from all
 sides. Clemence could not swallow a spoonful of strawberries without
 saying that it was another shirt ironed; Madame Lerat pretended that the
 cream cheese smelt of starch; whilst Madame Lorilleux said between her
 teeth that it was capital fun to gobble up the money so quickly on the
 very boards on which one had had so much trouble to earn it. There was
 quite a tempest of shouts and laughter.
 

 But suddenly a loud voice called for silence. It was Boche who, standing
 up in an affected and vulgar way, was commencing to sing "The Volcano of
 Love, or the Seductive Trooper."
 

 A thunder of applause greeted the first verse. Yes, yes, they would sing
 songs! Everyone in turn. It was more amusing than anything else. And they
 all put their elbows on the table or leant back in their chairs, nodding
 their heads at the best parts and sipping their wine when they came to the
 choruses. That rogue Boche had a special gift for comic songs. He would
 almost make the water pitchers laugh when he imitated the raw recruit with
 his fingers apart and his hat on the back of his head. Directly after "The
 Volcano of Love," he burst out into "The Baroness de Follebiche," one of
 his greatest successes. When he reached the third verse he turned towards
 Clemence and almost murmured it in a slow and voluptuous tone of voice:
 

 "The baroness had people there,
 Her sisters four, oh! rare surprise;
 And three were dark, and one was fair;
 Between them, eight bewitching eyes."

 
 Then the whole party, carried away, joined in the chorus. The men beat
 time with their heels, whilst the ladies did the same with their knives
 against their glasses. All of them singing at the top of their voices:
 

 "By Jingo! who on earth will pay
 A drink to the pa—to the pa—pa—?
 By Jingo! who on earth will pay
 A drink to the pa—to the pa—tro—o—l?"

 
 The panes of glass of the shop-front resounded, the singers' great volume
 of breath agitated the muslin curtains. Whilst all this was going on,
 Virginie had already twice disappeared and each time, on returning, had
 leant towards Gervaise's ear to whisper a piece of information. When she
 returned the third time, in the midst of the uproar, she said to her:
 

 "My dear, he's still at Francois's; he's pretending to read the newspaper.
 He's certainly meditating some evil design."
 

 She was speaking of Lantier. It was him that she had been watching. At
 each fresh report Gervaise became more and more grave.
 

 "Is he drunk?" asked she of Virginie.
 

 "No," replied the tall brunette. "He looks as though he had merely had
 what he required. It's that especially which makes me anxious. Why does he
 remain there if he's had all he wanted? Mon Dieu! I hope nothing is
 going to happen!"
 

 The laundress, greatly upset, begged her to leave off. A profound silence
 suddenly succeeded the clamor. Madame Putois had just risen and was about
 to sing "The Boarding of the Pirate." The guests, silent and thoughtful,
 watched her; even Poisson had laid his pipe down on the edge of the table
 the better to listen to her. She stood up to the full height of her little
 figure, with a fierce expression about her, though her face looked quite
 pale beneath her black cap; she thrust out her left fist with a satisfied
 pride as she thundered in a voice bigger than herself:
 

 "If the pirate audacious
 Should o'er the waves chase us,
 The buccaneer slaughter,
 Accord him no quarter.
 To the guns every man,
 And with rum fill each can!
 While these pests of the seas
 Dangle from the cross-trees."

 
 That was something serious. By Jove! it gave one a fine idea of the real
 thing. Poisson, who had been on board ship nodded his head in approval of
 the description. One could see too that that song was in accordance with
 Madame Putois's own feeling. Coupeau then told how Madame Putois, one
 evening on Rue Poulet, had slapped the face of four men who sought to
 attack her virtue.
 

 With the assistance of mother Coupeau, Gervaise was now serving the
 coffee, though some of the guests had not yet finished their Savoy cake.
 They would not let her sit down again, but shouted that it was her turn.
 With a pale face, and looking very ill at ease, she tried to excuse
 herself; she seemed so queer that someone inquired whether the goose had
 disagreed with her. She finally gave them "Oh! let me slumber!" in a sweet
 and feeble voice. When she reached the chorus with its wish for a sleep
 filled with beautiful dreams, her eyelids partly closed and her rapt gaze
 lost itself in the darkness of the street.
 

 Poisson stood next and with an abrupt bow to the ladies, sang a drinking
 song: "The Wines of France." But his voice wasn't very musical and only
 the final verse, a patriotic one mentioning the tricolor flag, was a
 success. Then he raised his glass high, juggled it a moment, and poured
 the contents into his open mouth.
 

 Then came a string of ballads; Madame Boche's barcarolle was all about
 Venice and the gondoliers; Madame Lorilleux sang of Seville and the
 Andalusians in her bolero; whilst Lorilleux went so far as to allude to
 the perfumes of Arabia, in reference to the loves of Fatima the dancer.
 

 Golden horizons were opening up all around the heavily laden table. The
 men were smoking their pipes and the women unconsciously smiling with
 pleasure. All were dreaming they were far away.
 

 Clemence began to sing softly "Let's Make a Nest" with a tremolo in her
 voice which pleased them greatly for it made them think of the open
 country, of songbirds, of dancing beneath an arbor, and of flowers. In
 short, it made them think of the Bois de Vincennes when they went there
 for a picnic.
 

 But Virginie revived the joking with "My Little Drop of Brandy." She
 imitated a camp follower, with one hand on her hip, the elbow arched to
 indicate the little barrel; and with the other hand she poured out the
 brandy into space by turning her fist round. She did it so well that the
 party then begged mother Coupeau to sing "The Mouse." The old woman
 refused, vowing that she did not know that naughty song. Yet she started
 off with the remnants of her broken voice; and her wrinkled face with its
 lively little eyes underlined the allusions, the terrors of Mademoiselle
 Lise drawing her skirts around her at the sight of a mouse. All the table
 laughed; the women could not keep their countenances, and continued
 casting bright glances at their neighbors; it was not indecent after all,
 there were no coarse words in it. All during the song Boche was playing
 mouse up and down the legs of the lady coal-dealer. Things might have
 gotten a bit out of line if Goujet, in response to a glance from Gervaise,
 had not brought back the respectful silence with "The Farewell of
 Abdul-Kader," which he sang out loudly in his bass voice. The song rang
 out from his golden beard as if from a brass trumpet. All the hearts
 skipped a beat when he cried, "Ah, my noble comrade!" referring to the
 warrior's black mare. They burst into applause even before the end.
 

 "Now, Pere Bru, it's your turn!" said mother Coupeau. "Sing your song. The
 old ones are the best any day!"
 

 And everybody turned towards the old man, pressing him and encouraging
 him. He, in a state of torpor, with his immovable mask of tanned skin,
 looked at them without appearing to understand. They asked him if he knew
 the "Five Vowels." He held down his head; he could not recollect it; all
 the songs of the good old days were mixed up in his head. As they made up
 their minds to leave him alone, he seemed to remember, and began to
 stutter in a cavernous voice:
 

 "Trou la la, trou la la,
 Trou la, trou la, trou la la!"

 
 His face assumed an animated expression, this chorus seemed to awake some
 far-off gaieties within him, enjoyed by himself alone, as he listened with
 a childish delight to his voice which became more and more hollow.
 

 "Say there, my dear," Virginie came and whispered in Gervaise's ear, "I've
 just been there again, you know. It worried me. Well! Lantier has
 disappeared from Francois's."
 

 "You didn't meet him outside?" asked the laundress.
 

 "No, I walked quickly, not as if I was looking for him."
 

 But Virginie raised her eyes, interrupted herself and heaved a smothered
 sigh.
 

 "Ah! Mon Dieu! He's there, on the pavement opposite; he's looking
 this way."
 

 Gervaise, quite beside herself, ventured to glance in the direction
 indicated. Some persons had collected in the street to hear the party
 sing. And Lantier was indeed there in the front row, listening and coolly
 looking on. It was rare cheek, everything considered. Gervaise felt a
 chill ascend from her legs to her heart, and she no longer dared to move,
 whilst old Bru continued:
 

 "Trou la la, trou la la,
 Trou la, trou la, trou la la!"

 
 "Very good. Thank you, my ancient one, that's enough!" said Coupeau. "Do
 you know the whole of it? You shall sing it for us another day when we
 need something sad."
 

 This raised a few laughs. The old fellow stopped short, glanced round the
 table with his pale eyes and resumed his look of a meditative animal.
 Coupeau called for more wine as the coffee was finished. Clemence was
 eating strawberries again. With the pause in singing, they began to talk
 about a woman who had been found hanging that morning in the building next
 door. It was Madame Lerat's turn, but she required to prepare herself. She
 dipped the corner of her napkin into a glass of water and applied it to
 her temples because she was too hot. Then, she asked for a thimbleful of
 brandy, drank it, and slowly wiped her lips.
 

 "The 'Child of God,' shall it be?" she murmured, "the 'Child of God.'"
 

 And, tall and masculine-looking, with her bony nose and her shoulders as
 square as a grenadier's she began:
 

 "The lost child left by its mother alone
 Is sure of a home in Heaven above,
 God sees and protects it on earth from His throne,
 The child that is lost is the child of God's love."

 
 Her voice trembled at certain words, and dwelt on them in liquid notes;
 she looked out of the corner of her eyes to heaven, whilst her right hand
 swung before her chest or pressed against her heart with an impressive
 gesture. Then Gervaise, tortured by Lantier's presence, could not restrain
 her tears; it seemed to her that the song was relating her own suffering,
 that she was the lost child, abandoned by its mother, and whom God was
 going to take under his protection. Clemence was now very drunk and she
 burst into loud sobbing and placed her head down onto the table in an
 effort to smother her gasps. There was a hush vibrant with emotion.
 

 The ladies had pulled out their handkerchiefs, and were drying their eyes,
 with their heads erect from pride. The men had bowed their heads and were
 staring straight before them, blinking back their tears. Poisson bit off
 the end of his pipe twice while gulping and gasping. Boche, with two large
 tears trickling down his face, wasn't even bothering to squeeze the
 coal-dealer's knee any longer. All these drunk revelers were as
 soft-hearted as lambs. Wasn't the wine almost coming out of their eyes?
 When the refrain began again, they all let themselves go, blubbering into
 their plates.
 

 But Gervaise and Virginie could not, in spite of themselves, take their
 eyes off the pavement opposite. Madame Boche, in her turn, caught sight of
 Lantier and uttered a faint cry without ceasing to besmear her face with
 her tears. Then all three had very anxious faces as they exchanged
 involuntary signs. Mon Dieu! if Coupeau were to turn round, if
 Coupeau caught sight of the other! What a butchery! What carnage! And they
 went on to such an extent that the zinc-worker asked them:
 

 "Whatever are you looking at?"
 

 He leant forward and recognized Lantier.
 

 "Damnation! It's too much," muttered he. "Ah! the dirty scoundrel—ah!
 the dirty scoundrel. No, it's too much, it must come to an end."
 

 And as he rose from his seat muttering most atrocious threats, Gervaise,
 in a low voice, implored him to keep quiet.
 

 "Listen to me, I implore you. Leave the knife alone. Remain where you are,
 don't do anything dreadful."
 

 Virginie had to take the knife which he had picked up off the table from
 him. But she could not prevent him leaving the shop and going up to
 Lantier.
 

 Those around the table saw nothing of this, so involved were they in
 weeping over the song as Madame Lerat sang the last verse. It sounded like
 a moaning wail of the wind and Madame Putois was so moved that she spilled
 her wine over the table. Gervaise remained frozen with fright, one hand
 tight against her lips to stifle her sobs. She expected at any moment to
 see one of the two men fall unconscious in the street.
 

 As Coupeau rushed toward Lantier, he was so astonished by the fresh air
 that he staggered, and Lantier, with his hands in his pockets, merely took
 a step to the side. Now the two men were almost shouting at each other,
 Coupeau calling the other a lousy pig and threatening to make sausage of
 his guts. They were shouting loudly and angrily and waving their arms
 violently. Gervaise felt faint and as it continued for a while, she closed
 her eyes. Suddenly, she didn't hear any shouting and opened her eyes. The
 two men were chatting amiably together.
 

 Madame Lerat's voice rose higher and higher, warbling another verse.
 

 Gervaise exchanged a glance with Madame Boche and Virginie. Was it going
 to end amicably then? Coupeau and Lantier continued to converse on the
 edge of the pavement. They were still abusing each other, but in a
 friendly way. As people were staring at them, they ended by strolling
 leisurely side by side past the houses, turning round again every ten
 yards or so. A very animated conversation was now taking place. Suddenly
 Coupeau appeared to become angry again, whilst the other was refusing
 something and required to be pressed. And it was the zinc-worker who
 pushed Lantier along and who forced him to cross the street and enter the
 shop.
 

 "I tell you, you're quite welcome!" shouted he. "You'll take a glass of
 wine. Men are men, you know. We ought to understand each other."
 

 Madame Lerat was finishing the last chorus. The ladies were singing all
 together as they twisted their handkerchiefs.
 

 "The child that is lost is the child of God's love."
 

 The singer was greatly complimented and she resumed her seat affecting to
 be quite broken down. She asked for something to drink because she always
 put too much feeling into that song and she was constantly afraid of
 straining her vocal chords. Everyone at the table now had their eyes fixed
 on Lantier who, quietly seated beside Coupeau, was devouring the last
 piece of Savoy cake which he dipped in his glass of wine. With the
 exception of Virginie and Madame Boche none of the guests knew him. The
 Lorilleuxs certainly scented some underhand business, but not knowing
 what, they merely assumed their most conceited air. Goujet, who had
 noticed Gervaise's emotion, gave the newcomer a sour look. As an awkward
 pause ensued Coupeau simply said:
 

 "A friend of mine."
 

 And turning to his wife, added:
 

 "Come, stir yourself! Perhaps there's still some hot coffee left."
 

 Gervaise, feeling meek and stupid, looked at them one after the other. At
 first, when her husband pushed her old lover into the shop, she buried her
 head between her hands, the same as she instinctively did on stormy days
 at each clap of thunder. She could not believe it possible; the walls
 would fall in and crush them all. Then, when she saw the two sitting
 together peacefully, she suddenly accepted it as quite natural. A happy
 feeling of languor benumbed her, retained her all in a heap at the edge of
 the table, with the sole desire of not being bothered. Mon Dieu!
 what is the use of putting oneself out when others do not, and when things
 arrange themselves to the satisfaction of everybody? She got up to see if
 there was any coffee left.
 

 In the back-room the children had fallen asleep. That squint-eyed
 Augustine had tyrannized over them all during the dessert, pilfering their
 strawberries and frightening them with the most abominable threats. Now
 she felt very ill, and was bent double upon a stool, not uttering a word,
 her face ghastly pale. Fat Pauline had let her head fall against Etienne's
 shoulder, and he himself was sleeping on the edge of the table. Nana was
 seated with Victor on the rug beside the bedstead, she had passed her arm
 round his neck and was drawing him towards her; and, succumbing to
 drowsiness and with her eyes shut, she kept repeating in a feeble voice:
 

 "Oh! Mamma, I'm not well; oh! mamma, I'm not well."
 

 "No wonder!" murmured Augustine, whose head was rolling about on her
 shoulders, "they're drunk; they've been singing like grown up persons."
 

 Gervaise received another blow on beholding Etienne. She felt as though
 she would choke when she thought of the youngster's father being there in
 the other room, eating cake, and that he had not even expressed a desire
 to kiss the little fellow. She was on the point of rousing Etienne and of
 carrying him there in her arms. Then she again felt that the quiet way in
 which matters had been arranged was the best. It would not have been
 proper to have disturbed the harmony of the end of the dinner. She
 returned with the coffee-pot and poured out a glass of coffee for Lantier,
 who, by the way, did not appear to take any notice of her.
 

 "Now, it's my turn," stuttered Coupeau, in a thick voice. "You've been
 keeping the best for the last. Well! I'll sing you 'That Piggish Child.'"
 

 "Yes, yes, 'That Piggish Child,'" cried everyone.
 

 The uproar was beginning again. Lantier was forgotten. The ladies prepared
 their glasses and their knives for accompanying the chorus. They laughed
 beforehand, as they looked at the zinc-worker, who steadied himself on his
 legs as he put on his most vulgar air. Mimicking the hoarse voice of an
 old woman, he sang:
 

 "When out of bed each morn I hop,
 I'm always precious queer;
 I send him for a little drop
 To the drinking-den that's near.
 A good half hour or more he'll stay,
 And that makes me so riled,
 He swigs it half upon his way:
 What a piggish child!"

 
 And the ladies, striking their glasses, repeated in chorus in the midst of
 a formidable gaiety:
 

 "What a piggish child!
 What a piggish child!"

 
 Even the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or itself joined in now. The whole
 neighborhood was singing "What a piggish child!" The little clockmaker,
 the grocery clerks, the tripe woman and the fruit woman all knew the song
 and joined in the chorus. The entire street seemed to be getting drunk on
 the odors from the Coupeau party. In the reddish haze from the two lamps,
 the noise of the party was enough to shut out the rumbling of the last
 vehicles in the street. Two policemen rushed over, thinking there was a
 riot, but on recognizing Poisson, they saluted him smartly and went away
 between the darkened buildings.
 

 Coupeau was now singing this verse:
 

 "On Sundays at Petite Villette,
 Whene'er the weather's fine,
 We call on uncle, old Tinette,
 Who's in the dustman line.
 To feast upon some cherry stones
 The young un's almost wild,
 And rolls amongst the dust and bones,
 What a piggish child!
 What a piggish child!"

 
 Then the house almost collapsed, such a yell ascended in the calm warm
 night air that the shouters applauded themselves, for it was useless their
 hoping to be able to bawl any louder.
 

 Not one of the party could ever recollect exactly how the carouse
 terminated. It must have been very late, it's quite certain, for not a cat
 was to be seen in the street. Possibly too, they had all joined hands and
 danced round the table. But all was submerged in a yellow mist, in which
 red faces were jumping about, with mouths slit from ear to ear. They had
 probably treated themselves to something stronger than wine towards the
 end, and there was a vague suspicion that some one had played them the
 trick of putting salt into the glasses. The children must have undressed
 and put themselves to bed. On the morrow, Madame Boche boasted of having
 treated Boche to a couple of clouts in a corner, where he was conversing a
 great deal too close to the charcoal-dealer; but Boche, who recollected
 nothing, said she must have dreamt it. Everyone agreed that it wasn't very
 decent the way Clemence had carried on. She had ended by showing
 everything she had and then been so sick that she had completely ruined
 one of the muslin curtains. The men had at least the decency to go into
 the street; Lorilleux and Poisson, feeling their stomachs upset, had
 stumblingly glided as far as the pork-butcher's shop. It is easy to see
 when a person has been well brought up. For instance, the ladies, Madame
 Putois, Madame Lerat, and Virginie, indisposed by the heat, had simply
 gone into the back-room and taken their stays off; Virginie had even
 desired to lie on the bed for a minute, just to obviate any unpleasant
 effects. Thus the party had seemed to melt away, some disappearing behind
 the others, all accompanying one another, and being lost sight of in the
 surrounding darkness, to the accompaniment of a final uproar, a furious
 quarrel between the Lorilleuxs, and an obstinate and mournful "trou la la,
 trou la la," of old Bru's. Gervaise had an idea that Goujet had burst out
 sobbing when bidding her good-bye; Coupeau was still singing; and as for
 Lantier, he must have remained till the end. At one moment even, she could
 still feel a breath against her hair, but she was unable to say whether it
 came from Lantier or if it was the warm night air.
 

 Since Madame Lerat didn't want to return to Les Batignolles at such a late