# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2015
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Zeyneb Hanoum, A Turkish Woman's European Impressions
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/50540/50540-h/50540-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

BY

ZEYNEB HANOUM
(HEROINE OF PIERRE LOTI’S NOVEL
“LES DÉSENCHANTÉES”)

EDITED & WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
GRACE ELLISON

WITH 23 ILLUSTRATIONS
FROM PHOTOGRAPHS & A DRAWING BY
AUGUSTE RODIN

PHILADELPHIA
J. B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY
LONDON: SEELEY, SERVICE & CO. LTD.
1913
ix
A DASH FOR FREEDOM
ZEYNEB’S GIRLHOOD
BEWILDERING EUROPE
SCULPTURE’S FORBIDDEN JOY
THE ALPS AND ARTIFICIALITY
FREEDOM’S DOUBTFUL ENCHANTMENT
GOOD-BYE TO YOUTH—TAKING THE VEIL
A MISFIT EDUCATION
“SMART WOMEN” THROUGH THE VEIL
THE TRUE DEMOCRACY
A COUNTRY PICTURE
THE STAR FROM THE WEST—THE EMPRESS EUGÉNIE
TURKISH HOSPITALITY—A REVOLUTION FOR CHILDREN
A STUDY IN CONTRASTS
DREAMS AND REALITIES
THE MOON OF RAMAZAN
AND IS THIS REALLY FREEDOM?
THE CLASH OF CREEDS
IN THE ENEMY’S LAND
THE END OF THE DREAM
xi
Zeyneb in her Paris Drawing-room
A Turkish Child with a Slave
A Turkish House
“Les Désenchantées” (by M. Rodin)
A Turkish Dancer
A Turkish Lady dressed as a Greek Dancer
Turkish Lady in Tcharchoff (outdoor costume)
Silent Gossip of a Group of Turkish Women
Turkish Ladies in their Garden with their Children’s Governesses
Yashmak and Mantle
Melek in Yashmak
Zeyneb in her Western Drawing-room
Turkish Ladies paying a Visit
Zeyneb with a black Face-veil thrown back
A Corner of a Turkish Harem of to-day
Turkish Women and Children in the Country
The Balcony at the Back of Zeyneb’s House
Zeyneb and Melek
The Drawing-room of a Harem showing the Bridal Throne
A Corner of the Harem
A Caïque on the Bosphorus
Turkish Women in the Country
Melek on the Verandah at Fontainebleau
xiii
In the preface of his famous novel, Les Désenchantées,
M. Pierre Loti writes: “This novel is
pure fiction; those who take the trouble to find
real names for Zeyneb, Melek, or André will be
wasting their energy, for they never existed.”
These words were written to protect the two
women, Zeyneb and Melek, who were mainly
responsible for the information contained in
that book, from the possibility of having to
endure the terror of the Hamidian régime as a
consequence of their indiscretion. This precaution
was unnecessary, however, seeing that
the two heroines, understanding the impossibility
of escaping the Hamidian vigilance, had
fled to Europe, at great peril to their lives, before
even the novel appeared.
Although it is not unusual to find Turkish
women who can speak fluently two or three
European languages (and this was very striking
to me when I stayed in a Turkish harem), and
although M. Loti has in his novel taken thexiv
precaution to let Melek die, yet it would still
have been an easy task to discover the identity
of the two heroines of his book.
Granddaughters of a Frenchman who for
les beaux yeux of a Circassian became a Turk
and embraced Mahometanism, they had been
signalled out from amongst the enlightened
women who are a danger to the State, and
were carefully watched.
For a long time many cultured Turkish
women had met to discuss what could be done
for the betterment of their social status; and
when it was finally decided to make an appeal
to the sympathy of the world in the form of a
novel, who better than Pierre Loti, with his
magic pen and keen appreciation of Turkish
life, could be found to plead the cause of the
women of what he calls his “second fatherland”?
In one of my letters written to Zeyneb from
Constantinople, I hinted that the Young Turks
met in a disused cistern to discuss the Revolution
which led Europe to expect great things of them.
The women, too, met in strange places to plot
and plan—they were full of energetic intentions,
but, with the Turkish woman’s difficulty
of bringing thought into action, they did littlexv
more than plot and plan, and but for Zeyneb
and Melek, Les Désenchantées would never have
been written.
At the conclusion of his preface, M. Loti says:
“What is true in my story is the culture allowed
to Turkish women and the suffering which must
necessarily follow. This suffering, which to my
foreign eyes appeared perhaps more intense, is
also giving anxiety to my dear friends the Turks
themselves, and they would like to alleviate it.
The remedy for this evil I do not claim to have
discovered, since the greatest thinkers of the
East are still diligently working to find it.”
Like M. Loti I, too, own my inability to come
any nearer a solution of this problem. I, who
through the veil have studied the aimless, unhealthy
existences of these pampered women,
am nevertheless convinced that the civilisation
of Western Europe for Turkish women is a case of
exchanging the frying-pan for the fire. Zeyneb
in her letters to me, written between 1906-1912,
shows that, if her disenchantment with her
harem existence was bitter, she could never
appreciate our Western civilisation.
Turkish women are clamouring for a more
solid education and freedom. They would cast
aside the hated veil; progress demands theyxvi
should—but do they know for what they are
asking?
“Be warned by us, you Turkish women,” I
said to them, painting the consequences of our
freedom in its blackest colours, “and do not pull
up your anchor till you can safely steer your
ship. My own countrymen have become too
callous to the bitter struggles of women; civilisation
was never meant to be run on these lines,
therefore hold fast to the protection of your
harems till you can stand alone.”
Since my return to London, I have sometimes
spoken on Turkish life, and have been asked
those very naïve questions which wounded the
pride of Zeyneb Hanoum. When I said I had
actually stayed in an harem, I could see the male
portion of my audience, as it were, passing round
the wink. “You must not put the word
‘harem’ on the title of your lecture,” said the
secretary of a certain society. “Many who
might come to hear you would stay away for
fear of hearing improper revelations, and others
would come hoping to hear those revelations
and go away disappointed.”
In one of her letters to me, Zeyneb complains
that the right kind of governess is not sent to
Constantinople. The wonder to me is, whenxvii
one hears what a harem is supposed to be, that
European women have the courage to go there
at all.
The word harem comes from the Arabic
“Maharem,” which means “sacred or forbidden,”
and no Oriental word has been more
misunderstood. It does not mean a collection
of wives; it is simply applied to those rooms in
a Turkish house exclusively reserved for the
use of the women. Only a blood relation may
come there to visit the lady of the house, and
in many cases even cousins are not admitted.
There is as much sense in asking an Englishman
if he has a boudoir as in asking a Turk if he has
a harem; and to think that when I stayed in
Turkey, our afternoon’s impropriety consisted
of looking through the latticed windows! The
first Bey who passed was to be for me, the second
for Fathma, and the third for Selma; this was
one of our favourite games in the harem. One
day I remember in the country we waited an
hour for my Bey to pass, and after all he was not
a Bey, but a fat old man carrying water.
The time has not yet come for the Turkish
woman to vindicate her right to freedom; it
cannot come by a mere change of law, and it is
a cruelty on the part of Europeans to encouragexviii
them to adopt Western habits which are a part
of a general system derived from a totally
different process of evolution.
In the development of modern Turkey, the
Turkish woman has already played a great part,
and she has a great part still to play in the
creation of a new civilisation; but present experience
has shown that no servile imitation of
the West will redeem Turkey from the evils of
centuries of patriarchal servitude.
*****
By a strange irony of fate, it was at Fontainebleau
that I first made the acquaintance of
Pierre Loti’s heroines. To me every inch of
Fontainebleau was instinct with memories of
happiness and liberty. It was here that
Francis I. practised a magnificence which
dazzled Europe; here, too, is the wonderful
wide forest of trees which are still there to listen
to the same old story.... From a Turkish harem
to Fontainebleau. What a change indeed!
The two sisters were sitting on the verandah
of their villa when I arrived. Zeyneb had
been at death’s door; she looked as if she were
there still.
“Why did you not come to lunch?” asked
Melek.
xix
“I was not invited,” I answered.
“Well, you might have come all the same.”
“Is that the custom in Turkey?”
“Why, of course, when you are invited to
lunch you can come to breakfast instead, or
the meal after, or not at all. Whenever our
guests arrive, it is we who are under obligations
to them for coming.”
“What a comforting civilisation; I am sure
I should love to be in Turkey.”
I wanted to ask indiscreet questions.
“Have you large trees in Turkey with hollows
big enough to seat two persons?” I began.
Melek saw through the trick at once.
“Ah!” she answered, “now you are treading
on dangerous ground; next time you come to
see us we shall speak about these things. In
the meanwhile learn that the charming side of
life to which you have referred, and about
which we have read so much in English novels,
does not exist for us Turkish women. Nothing
in our life can be compared to yours, and in a
short time you will see this. We have no right
to vary ever so little the programme arranged
for us by the customs of our country; an adventure
of any kind generally ends in disaster.
As you may know, we women never see ourxx
husbands till we are married, and an unhappy
marriage is none the less awful to bear when it
is the work of some one else.”
“Do tell me more,” I persisted.
“The marriage of a Turkish woman is an
intensely interesting subject to anyone but a
Turkish woman....”
*****
I left my new friends with reluctance, but
after that visit began the correspondence which
forms the subject matter of this book.
GRACE ELLISON.    
21/23
A TURKISH WOMAN’S
EUROPEAN IMPRESSIONS
A few days after my visit to the Désenchantées
at Fontainebleau, which is described
in the Introduction, I received the following
letter from Zeyneb:
Fontainebleau, Sept. 1906.
You will never know, my dear and latest
friend, the pleasure your visit has given us. It
was such a new experience, and all the more to
be appreciated, because we were firmly convinced
we had come to the end of new
experiences.
For almost a quarter of a century, in our dear
Turkey, we longed above all for something new;
we would have welcomed death even as a change,
but everything, everything was always the same.
24
And now, in the space of eight short months,
what have we not seen and done! Every day
has brought some new impressions, new faces,
new joys, new difficulties, new disappointments,
new surprises and new friends; it seemed to
both of us that we must have drunk the cup of
novelty to its very dregs.
On Sunday, after you had left us, we talked
for a long time of you and the many subjects
we had discussed together.
Sympathy and interest so rarely go hand in
hand—interest engenders curiosity, sympathy
produces many chords in the key of affection,
but the sympathetic interest you felt for us has
given birth on our side to a sincere friendship,
which I know will stand the test of time.
We felt a few minutes after you had been
with us, how great was your comprehension, not
only of our actions, but of all the private reasons,
alas! so tragic, which made them necessary.
You understood so much without our having to
speak, and you guessed a great deal of what
could not be put into words. That is what a
Turkish woman appreciates more than anything
else.
We, who are not even credited with the possession
of a soul, yet guard our souls as our25
most priceless treasures. Those who try to force
our confidence in any way, we never forgive.
Between friend and friend the highest form of
sympathy is silence. For hours we Turkish
women sit and commune with one another
without speaking. You would, I know, understand
this beautiful side of our life.
Since our departure from our own country,
and during these few months we have been in
France, from all sides we have received kindness.
We were ready to face yet once more unjust
criticism, blame, scandal even; but instead, ever
since we left Belgrade till we arrived here, everything
has been quite the opposite. All the
European papers have judged us impartially,
some have even defended and praised us, but
not one censured us for doing with our lives
what it pleased us.
But in Turkey what a difference! No Constantinople
paper spoke of our flight. They
were clever enough to know that by giving vent
to any ill-feeling, saying what they really
thought of our “disgraceful” conduct, they
would draw still more attention to the women’s
cause; so we were left by the Press of our
country severely alone.
The Sultan Hamid, who interested himself a26
little too much in our welfare, became very
anxious about us. Having left no stone unturned
to force us to return (he had us arrested
in the middle of the night on our arrival at
Belgrade on the plea that my sister was a
minor, and that both of us had been tricked
away by an elderly lady for illicit purposes) he
next ordered that all those European papers in
which we were mentioned should be sent to
him. As our flight drew forth bitter criticism
of his autocratic government, he must, had he
really taken the trouble to read about us, have
found some very uncomfortable truths about
himself. But that was no new régime. For
years he has fed himself on these indigestible
viands, and his mechanism is used to them by
now.
I need not tell you that in Constantinople, for
weeks, these forbidden papers were sold at a
high price. Regardless of the risk they were
running, everyone wanted to have news of the
two women who had had the audacity to escape
from their homes and the tyranny of the Sultan
Hamid. In the harems, we were the one topic
of conversation. At first no one seemed to
grasp the fact that we had actually gone, but
when at last the truth slowly dawned upon27
them, the men naturally had not a kind word
to say of us, and we did not expect it would
be otherwise. But the women, alas! Many
were obliged officially to disapprove of our
action. There were a few, however, who had
the courage to defend us openly; they have our
deepest and sincerest gratitude. But do not
think for a moment that we blame or feel unkindly
towards the others. Have not we, like
them, had all our lives to suffer and fear and
pretend as captives always must do? Could
they be expected to find in one day the strength
of character to defend a cause however just, and
not only just, but their own—their freedom.
Yes, my friend, we ourselves have lived that
life of constant fear and dissimulation, of hopes
continually shattered, and revolt we dared not
put into words.
Yet never did the thought occur to us that
we might adapt ourselves to this existence we
were forced to lead. We spent our life in striving
for one thing only—the means of changing it.
Could we, like the women of the West, we
thought, devote our leisure to working for the
poor, that would at least be some amusement to
break the monotony. We also arranged to meet
and discuss with intelligent women the question28
of organising charity, but the Sultan came down
upon us with a heavy hand. He saw the danger
of allowing thinking women to meet and talk
together, and the only result of this experiment
was that the number of spies set to watch the
houses of “dangerous women” was doubled.
Then it was that we made up our minds,
after continual failure, that as long as we remained
in our country under the degrading
supervision of the Hamidian régime, we could do
nothing, however insignificant, to help forward
the cause of freedom for women.
I need not tell you again all the story of our
escape; it is like a nightmare to me still, and
every detail of that horrible journey will remain
clearly fixed in my mind until death. Shall I
tell you all that has happened to us since?
But so much has been said about us by all sorts
and conditions of men and women, that you will
no doubt have already had an overdose. Yet
I thought I understood, from the sympathetic
interest you showed us the other afternoon, that
there was much you would still like to hear.
Have I guessed rightly? Then there is nothing
you shall not know.—Your affectionate
Zeyneb.
29
What a long and interesting letter! and from
a Turkish woman too! Several times I read
and re-read it, then I felt that I could not give
my new friend a better proof of the pleasure
that it had given me, than by writing her at
once to beg for more. But I waited till the
next day, and finally sent a telegram—“Please
send another letter.”
30/33
Fontainebleau, Sept. 1906.
When I was quite young I loved to read the
history of my country told in the Arabian
Nights style. The stories are so vivid and
picturesque, that even to-day, I remember the
impression my readings made on me. [Alas!
the profession of conteur or raconteur is one
which has been left behind in the march of
time.] Formerly every Pasha had a conteur,
who dwelt in the house, and friends were invited
from all around to come and listen to his
Arabian Nights stories. The tales that were
most appreciated were those which touched on
tragic events. But the stories contained also a
certain amount of moral reflection, and were told
in a style which, if ever I write, I will try to
adopt. The sentences are long, but the rhythm
of the well-chosen language is so perfect that it
is almost like a song.
What a powerful imagination had these men!34
And how their stories delighted me! There
were stories of Sultans who poisoned, Ministers
who were strangled, Palace intrigues which ended
in bloodshed, and descriptions of battles where
conqueror and conquered were both crowned
with the laurels of a hero. But I never for a
moment thought of these tales but as fiction!
Could the history of any country be so awful!
Yet was not the story of the reign in which I
was living even worse, only I was too young to
know it? Were not the awful Armenian massacres
more dreadful than anything the conteurs
had ever described? Was not the bare awful
truth around us more ghastly than any fiction?
Indeed, it was.
How can I impress upon your mind the
anguish of our everyday life; our continual
and haunting dread of what was coming; no
one could imagine what it means except those
Turkish women who, like ourselves, have experienced
that life.
Had we possessed the blind fatalism of our
grandmothers, we should probably have suffered
less, but with culture, as so often happens, we
began to doubt the wisdom of the Faith which
should have been our consolation.
35
You will say, that I am sad—morbid even;
but how can I be otherwise when the best years
of my life have been poisoned by the horrors of
the Hamidian régime. There are some sentiments
which, when transplanted, make me suffer
even as they did in the land of my birth. I
am thinking particularly of the agony of waiting.
Do you think there is in any language a sentence
stronger and more beautiful than that
which terminates in Loti’s Pêcheurs d’Islande—the
tragedy of waiting—with these words, “Il
ne revint jamais”?
I mention this to you because my whole
youth had been so closely allied with this very
anguish of waiting.
Imagine for a moment a little Turkish Yali1
on the shores of the Bosphorus. It is dark,
it is still, and for hours the capital of Turkey
has been deep in slumber. Scarcely a star is
in the sky, scarcely a light can be seen in the
narrow and badly-paved streets of the town.
I had been reading until very late—reading
and thinking, thinking and reading to deaden
the uneasiness I always felt when something
was going to happen. What was coming this
time?
36
By a curious irony of fate, I had been reading
in the Bible2 of Christ’s apostles whose eyes
were heavy with sleep. But I could not sleep,
and after a time I could not even read. This
weary, weary waiting!
So I rose from my bed and looked through
my latticed windows at the beautiful Bosphorus,
so calm and still, whilst my very soul
was being torn with anguish. But what is that
noise? What is that dim light slowly sailing
up the Bosphorus? My heart begins to beat
quickly, I try to call out, my voice chokes me.
The caïque has stopped at our Yali.
Now I know what it is. Four discreet taps
at my father’s window, and his answer “I am
coming.” Like a physician called to a dying
patient, he dresses and hastily leaves the house.
It is three o’clock in the morning à la Franque,3
but his master is not sleeping. Away yonder,
in his fortress of Yildiz, the dreaded Sultan
trembles even more than I. What does he want
37with my father? Will he be pacified this time
as he has often been before? What if my
father should have incurred the wrath of this
terrible Sultan? The caïque moves away as
silently as it came. Will my beloved father
ever return? There is nothing to do but to go
on waiting, waiting.
*****
Let us change the scene. A Turkish official
has arrived at our house, he has dared to come
as far as the very door of the harem. He is
speaking to my mother.
“I am only doing my duty in seeing if your
husband is here? I have every right to go up
those harem stairs which you are guarding so
carefully, look in all your rooms and cupboards.
My duty is to find out where your husband is,
and to report to his Majesty at once.”
This little incident may sound insignificant
to you, yet what a tragedy to us! What was
to happen to the bread-winner of our family?
What had my beloved father done?
The explanation of it was simple enough.
A certain Pasha had maligned him to the Sultan
in a most disgraceful manner. And the Sultan
might have believed it, had he not, by the merest
chance, discovered that my father was at the38
Palace when the Pasha so emphatically said he
was elsewhere. On such slender evidence, the
fate of our family was to be weighed! Would
it mean exile for our father? Would we ever
see him any more? Again I say, there was
nothing to do but wait.
*****
As we told you on Sunday, we Turkish women
read a great deal of foreign literature, and this
does not tend to make us any more satisfied
with our lot.
Amongst my favourite English books were
Beatrice Harraden’s Ships that Pass in the Night,4
passages of which I know by heart, and Lady
Mary Montagu’s Letters. Over and over again,
and always with fresh interest, I read those
charming and clever letters. Although they
are the letters of another century, there is
nothing in them to shock or surprise a Turkish
woman of to-day in their criticism of our life.
It is curious to notice, when reading Lady
Mary’s Letters, how little the Turkey of to-day
differs from the Turkey of her time; only,
Turkey, the child that Lady Mary knew, has
grown into a big person.
39
There are two great ways, however, in which
we have become too modern for Lady Mary’s
book. In costume we are on a level with Paris,
seeing we buy our clothes there; and as regards
culture, we are perhaps more advanced than
is the West, since we have so much leisure for
study, and are not hampered with your Western
methods. And yet how little we are known
by the European critics!
The people of the West still think of us
women as requiring the services of the public
letter-writer! They think of us also—we, who
have so great an admiration for them, and interest
ourselves in all they are doing—as one
amongst many wives. Yet Polygamy (and here
I say a Bismillah5 or prayer of thankfulness)
has almost ceased to exist in Turkey.
I know even you are longing to make the
acquaintance of a harem, where there is more
than one wife, but to-day the number of these
establishments can be counted on five fingers.
We knew intimately the wife of a Pasha who had
more than one wife. He was forty years old,
a well-known and important personage, and in
his Palace beside his first wife were many slave-40wives;
the number increased from year to year.
But again I repeat this is an exception.
We used often to visit the poor wife, who since
her marriage had never left her home, her
husband being jealous of her, as he was of all
the others; they were his possessions, and in
order to err on the safe side, he never let them
out.
Our friend, the first wife, was very beautiful,
though always ailing. Every time we went to
see her, she was so grateful to us for coming,
thanked us over and over again for our visit,
and offered us flowers and presents of no mean
value. And she looked so happy, continually
smiling, and was so gentle and kind to all her
entourage.
She told our mother, however, of the sorrow
that was gnawing at her heart-strings, and when
she spoke of the Pasha she owned how much
she had suffered from not being the favourite.
She treated her rivals with the greatest courtesy.
“It would be easy to forgive,” she said, “the
physical empire that each in turn has over my
husband, but what I feel most is that he does
not consult me in preference to the others.”
She had a son fifteen years old, whom she
loved very dearly, but she seemed to care for the41
fourteen other children of the Pasha quite as
much, and spoke of them all as “our children.”
Although her husband had bought her as a
slave, she had a certain amount of knowledge
too, and she read a great deal in the evenings
when she was alone, alas! only too often.
The view of the Bosphorus, with the ships
coming and going, was a great consolation to
her, as it has been to many a captive. And she
thanked Allah over and over again that she at
least had this pleasure in life.
I have often thought of this dear, sweet
woman in my many moments of revolt, as
one admires and reverences a saint, but I
have never been able to imitate her calm
resignation.
Unlike our grandmothers, who accepted without
criticism their “written fate,” we analysed
our life, and discovered nothing but injustice
and cruel, unnecessary sorrow. Resignation
and culture cannot go together. Resignation
has been the ruin of our country. There never
would have been all this suffering, this perpetual
injustice, but for resignation; and resignation
was no longer possible for us, for our Faith was
tottering.
But I am not really pitying women more42
than men under the Hamidian régime. A
man’s life is always in danger. Do you know,
the Sultan was informed when your friend
Kathleen came to see us? Every time our
mother invited guests to the house, she was
obliged to send the list to his Majesty, who, by
every means, tried to prevent friends from
meeting. Two or three Turks meeting together
in a café were eyed with suspicion, and reported
at head-quarters, so that rather than run risks
they spent the evenings in the harems with their
wives. One result, however, of this awful
tyranny, was that it made the bonds which
unite a Turkish family together stronger than
anywhere else in the world.
Can you imagine what it is to have detectives
watching your house day and night? Can
you imagine the exasperation one feels to think
that one’s life is at the mercy of a wretched
individual who has only to invent any story
he likes and you are lost? Every calumny,
however stupid and impossible, is listened to
at head-quarters. The Sultan’s life-work (what
a glorious record for posterity!) has been to
have his poor subjects watched and punished.
What his spies tell him he believes. No trial is43
necessary, he passes sentence according to his
temper at the moment—either he has the culprit
poisoned, or exiles him to the most unhealthy
part of Arabia, or far away into the desert of
Tripoli, and often the unfortunate being who
is thus punished has no idea why he has been
condemned.
I shall always remember the awful impression
I felt, when told with great caution that
a certain family had disappeared. The family
consisted of the father, the mother, son and
daughter, and a valet. They were my neighbours—quiet,
unobtrusive people—and I thought
all the more of them for that reason.
One morning, when I looked out of my window,
I saw my neighbour’s house was closed as if no
one lived there. Without knowing what had
happened to them, I became anxious, and discreetly
questioned my eunuch, who advised
me not to speak about them. It appeared,
however, that in the night the police had
made an inspection of the house, and no
one has since then heard of its occupants, or
dared to ask, for fear of themselves becoming
“suspect.”
I found out long after, from a cutting sent me44
from a foreign friend in Constantinople, that
H. Bey’s house had been searched, and the
police—and this in spite of the fact that he
had been forbidden to write—had found there
several volumes of verses, and he was condemned
to ten years’ seclusion in a fortified
castle at Bassarah.
This will perhaps give you some idea of the
conditions under which we were living. Constant
fear, anguish without hope of compensation,
or little chance of ever having anything
better.
That we preferred to escape from this life, in
spite of the terrible risks we were running, and
the most tragic consequences of our action, is
surely comprehensible.
If we had been captured it would only have
meant death, and was the life we were leading
worth while? We had taken loaded revolvers
with us, to end our lives if necessary, remembering
the example of one of our childhood friends,
who tried to escape, but was captured and taken
back to her husband, who shut her up till the
end of her days in a house on the shores of the
Marmora.
You have paid a very pretty compliment to45
our courage. Yet, after all, does it require very
much to risk one’s life when life is of so little
value? In Turkey our existence is so long, so
intolerably long, that the temptation to drop a
little deadly poison in our coffee is often too
great to withstand. Death cannot be worse
than life, let us try death.—Your affectionate
Zeyneb.
46/49
What a curious thing it was I found so much
difficulty in answering Zeyneb’s letters. To
send anything banal to my new friend I felt
certain was to run the risk of ending the correspondence.
She knew I was in sympathy with her; she
knew I could understand, as well as any one,
how awful her life must have been, but to have
told her so would have offended her. Most of
the reasons for her escape, every argument that
could justify her action, she had given me,
except one; and it was probably that “one”
reason that had most influenced her.
In due time probably she would tell me all,
but if she did not, nothing I could do or say
would make her, for Turkish women will not be
cross-examined. One of them, when asked one
day in a Western drawing-room “how many
wives has your father?” answered, without hesitation,
“as many as your husband, Madame.”
50
Zeyneb had once told me that I succeeded in
guessing so much the truth of what could not be
put into words. She had on one occasion said
“we never see our husbands until we are married,”
and a little later “sometimes the being
whose existence we have to share inspires us
with a horror that can never be overcome.”
Putting these two statements together, I was
able to draw my own conclusions as to the
“one” reason.... Poor little Zeyneb!
It seemed to me from the end of her letter,
that Zeyneb would have been grateful had I
said that I approved of her action in leaving
her own country. To have told her the contrary
would not have helped matters in the least,
and sooner or later she was sure to find out her
mistake for herself.
And who that noticed her enthusiasm for all
she saw would have dreamt of the tragedy that
was in her life? The innocent delight she had
when riding on the top of a bus, and her jubilation
at discovering an Egyptian Princess indulging
in the same form of amusement!
Zeyneb told me that economy was a word for
which there was no equivalent in the Turkish
language, so how could she be expected to
practise an art which did not exist in her country?51
It was from her I had learnt the habit of answering
her letters by telegram, and the result had
been satisfactory. “Eagerly waiting for another
letter,” I wired her. The following letter
arrived:

Fontainebleau, Oct. 1906.
A few days after our arrival began in earnest
a new experience for us. The “demands” for
interviews from journalists—every post brought
a letter. Many reporters, it is true, called without
even asking permission; wanted to know our
impressions of West Europe after eight days; the
reasons why we had left Turkey; and other
questions still more ignorant and extraordinary
about harem life.
When, however, we had conquered the absurd
Oriental habit of being polite, we changed our
address, and called ourselves by Servian names.
What an extraordinary lack of intelligence, it
seemed, to suppose that in a few phrases could
be related the history of the Turkish woman’s
evolution; and the psychology of a state of
mind which forces such and such a decision
explained. How would it have been possible
to give the one thousand and one private reasons
connected with our action! And what would52
be the use of explaining all this to persons one
hoped never to see again—persons by whom
you are treated as a spectacle, a living spectacle,
whose adventures will be retailed in a certain
lady’s boudoir to make her “five o’clock” less
dull?
“What made you think of running away
from Turkey?” asked one of these press detectives.
He might as well have been saying
to me, “You had on a blue dress the last time
I saw you, why are you not wearing it
to-day?”
“Weren’t you sorry to leave your parents?”
asked another. Did he suppose because we
were Turks that we had hearts of stone. How
could anyone, a complete stranger too, dare to
ask such a question? And yet, angry as I was,
this indiscretion brought tears to my eyes, as
it always does when I think of that good-bye.
“Good night, little girl,” said my father, on
the eve of our departure. “Don’t be so long in
coming to dine with us again. Promise that you
will come one day next week.”
I almost staggered. “I’ll try,” I answered.
Every minute I felt that I must fling myself in
his arms and tell him what I intended to do,
but when I thought of our years and years of53
suffering, my mind was made up, and I kept
back my tears.
Do you see now, dear Englishwoman, why we
appreciated your discreet interest in us, and how
we looked forward to a friendship with you who
have understood so well, that there can be
tears behind eyes that smile, that a daughter’s
heart is not necessarily hard because she breaks
away from the family circle, nor is one’s love for
the Fatherland any the less great because one
has left it forever? All this we feel you have
understood, and again and again we thank you.—Your
affectionate

Zeyneb.


Fontainebleau, Oct. 1906.

You ask me to give you my first impression
of France (wrote Zeyneb), but it is not so
much an impression of France, as the impression
of being free, that I am going to write.
What I would like to describe to you is the
sensation of intense joy I felt as I stood for the
first time before a window wide open that had
neither lattice-work nor iron bars.
It was at Nice. We had just arrived from
our terrible journey. We had gone from hotel
to hotel, but no one would give us shelter even
for a few hours. Was that Christian charity, to54
refuse a room because I was thought to be
dying? I cannot understand this sentiment.
A friend explained that a death in an hotel
would keep other people away. Why should
the Christians be so frightened of death?
I was too ill at the moment to take in our
awful situation, and quite indifferent to the
prospect of dying on the street. Useless it
was, however, our going to any more hotels; it
was waste of time and waste of breath, and I
had none of either to spare. No one advised
us, and no one seemed to care to help us, until,
by the merest chance, my sister remembered our
friends in Belgrade had given us a doctor’s
address. We determined to find him if we
possibly could. In half an hour’s time we found
our doctor, who sent us at once to a sanatorium.
There they could not say, “You are too ill to
come in,” seeing illness was a qualification for
admittance. But I shall not linger on those
first moments in Europe: they were sad beyond
words.
It must have been early when I awoke the
next morning, to find the sun forcing its way
through the white curtains, and flooding the whole
room with gold. Ill as I was, the scene was so
beautiful that I got out of bed and opened wide55
the window, and what was my surprise to find
that there was no lattice-work between me and
the blue sky, and the orange trees, and the hills
of Nice covered with cypress and olives? The
sanatorium garden was just one mass of flowers,
and their sweet perfume filled the room. With
my eyes I drank in the scene before me, the
hills, and the sea, and the sky that never seemed
to end.
A short while after, my sister came in. She
also from her window had been watching at the
same time as I. But no explanation was necessary.
For the first time in our lives we could
look freely into space—no veil, no iron bars. It
was worth the price we had paid, just to have
the joy of being before that open window. I
sign myself in Turkish terms of affection.—Your
carnation and your mouse,
Zeyneb.
56/59
Zeyneb and Melek left Fontainebleau and
travelled to Switzerland by short stages; their
first halting-place was Paris.
They stayed for a week in the gay capital,
and during that time Melek and I visited some
of the principal churches and monuments.
“Sight-seeing” was what the Hanoums6 then
called “freedom.” To them it meant being out
of the cage; tasting those pleasures which for
so many years had been forbidden. Their
lesson was yet to be learnt.
We went one afternoon to see M. Rodin.
Rising, summer and winter, at a very early hour,
the sculptor had finished the greater part of his
work for the day when we arrived; the model
was resting, and he was talking with the students,
who had come to discuss their difficulties with
him.
60
To me this opportunity given to young talent
of actually seeing a master at work was such
a happy idea, I made the remark to M. Rodin.
“If only those who succeed,” he said, “be
it in the difficult accomplishment of their daily
task, or in the pursuit of some glorious end, had
the courage to speak of their continual efforts,
their struggles, and their suffering, what a
glorious lesson in energy it would be for those
who were striving for a place amongst the
workers.
“Those who have arrived should say to those
who are starting: At each corner, there is suffering;
at each turning some fresh struggle begins,
and there is sorrow all the time. We who have
conquered have passed by that road, you can
go no other way.
“But when once they have got to their
destination, the successful men are silent. And
they who are still on the way get tired of the
daily toil, knowing not that they who have
arrived, have had the very same experience.”
Many beautiful works attracted our attention
that afternoon, the most striking being Mary
Magdalene, in repentant anguish at the feet of
her Master, Jesus; the Prodigal Son with his
hands clasped in useless regret towards a wasted
61and ill-spent life. Then there was a nude (I
forget the name by which she will be immortalised),
her wonderful arms in a movement of
supplication, so grand, that the Eastern woman
and I together stretched out our hands towards
it in appreciation.
The sculptor saw our movement, understood
and thanked us; a few moments later, conscious
of our action, we blushed. What had we done?
I, the Scotch puritan, had actually admired
one of those beautiful nudes before which we,
as children, shut our eyes. But the Oriental?
“In my country these marble figures are not
seen,” she explained, “‘the face and form created
by God must not be copied by man,’ said our
Prophet, and for centuries all good Moslems
have obeyed this command.”
“Do you know the legend of the Prophet’s
son-in-law Osman?” she said.
“No,” I answered, “please tell me.”
“One day, long, long ago,” related Melek,
“when the followers of Christ had left their
church, Osman entered and broke all the sacred
images except one. Then when he had finished
his work of destruction, he placed his axe at the
foot of the figure he had left intact.
“The next day, the Christians discovering62
what had happened, tried to find the guilty
person. Osman’s air of calm triumph betrayed
him.
“‘What have you done?’ they cried, rushing
towards him.
“‘Nothing,’ he answered, ‘I am innocent; it
is your Divinity who has destroyed everything.’
“‘Our Divinity cannot move.’
“‘If your Divinity is lifeless,’ answered
Osman, ‘why do you pray to a God of stone?’7
*****
“In the Meandre valley in Asia,” went on
Melek, “the sculptured heads on the tombs are
cursed. At Ephesus and Herapolis the Turcomans
turn away in horror from the faces that
are engraven in marble; and never are to be
seen these Western pictures in stone, and
statues erected to the immortal memory of
heroes.”
*****
The two Hanoums left for Switzerland.
63
64/65
Territet, Dec. 1906.
I wonder if you know what life is like in a
big caravanserai on the shores of Lake Leman
in December. This hotel is filled from the
ground to the sixth floor, and from east to west
with people of all ages, who have a horror of
being where they ought to be—that is to say, in
their own homes—and who have come to the
Swiss mountains with but one idea—that of
enjoying themselves. What can be the matter
with their homes, that they are all so anxious
to get away?
I have been more than a month in this place,
and cannot get used to it. After the calm of
the Forest of Fontainebleau and the quiet little
house where, for the first time, we tasted the joys
of real rest, this existence seems to me strange
and even unpleasant. Indeed, it makes me tired
even to think of the life these people lead and
their expense of muscular force to no purpose.
66
But the doctor wished me to come here, and
I, who long above everything else to be strong,
am hoping the pure air will cure me.
On the terrace which overlooks the lake I
usually take my walks, but when I have taken
about a hundred steps I have to sit down and
rest. Certainly I would be no Alpinist.
One thing to which I never seem to accustom
myself is my hat. It is always falling off.
Sometimes, too, I forget that I am wearing a hat
and lean back in my chair; and what an absurd
fashion—to lunch in a hat! Still, hats seem
to play a very important rôle in Western life.
Guess how many I possess at present—twenty.
I cannot tell whom I have to thank, since the
parcels come anonymously, but several kind
friends, hearing of our escape, have had the
thoughtfulness and the same original idea of
providing us with hats. Hardly a day passes
but someone sends us a hat; it is curious, but
charming all the same. Do they think we are
too shy to order hats for ourselves, and are still
wandering about Switzerland in our tcharchafs?8
*****
Every morning the people here row on the
67lake, or play tennis—tennis being one of their
favourite forms of amusement. I watch them
with interest, yet even were I able I should
not indulge in this unfeminine sport.
Women rush about the court, from left to
right, up and down, forwards and backwards.
Their hair is all out of curl, often it comes down;
and they wear unbecoming flat shoes and men’s
shirts and collars and ties.
The ball comes scarcely over the net, a woman
rushes forward, her leg is bared to the sight of
all; by almost throwing herself on the ground,
she hits it back over the net, and then her
favourite man (not her husband, I may mention),
with whom she waltzes and rows and climbs,
chooses this moment to take a snapshot of her
most hideous attitude. What an unpleasant idea
to think a man should possess such a souvenir!
And yet after tennis these people do not rest—on
they go, walking and climbing; and what is
the use of it all?—they only come back and
eat four persons’ share of lunch.
At meal-time, the conversation is tennis and
climbing, and climbing and tennis; and again I
say, I cannot understand why they employ all
this muscular force to no higher end than to
give themselves an unnatural appetite.
68
A friend of my father’s, who is staying here,
tells me the wonderful climbing he has accomplished.
He explains to me that he has faced
death over and over again, and only by the
extraordinary pluck of his guide has his life
been spared.
“And did you at last reach your friend?”
I asked.
“What friend?”
“Was it not to rescue some friend that you
faced death?”
“No,” he said, “for pleasure.”
“For pleasure,” I repeated, and he burst out
laughing.
He spoke of this as if it were something of
which to be proud, “and his oft-repeated encounters
with death,” he said, “only whetted
his appetite for more.” Was life then of so
little value to this man that he could risk it so
easily?
Naturally in trying to explain this curious
existence I compare it with our life in the
harem, and the more I think the more am I
astonished. What I should like to ask these
people, if I dared, is, are they really satisfied
with their lot, or are they only pretending to be69
happy, as we in Turkey pretended to be happy?
Are they not tired of flirting and enjoying themselves
so uselessly?
We in Turkey used to envy the women of the
West. We, who were denied the rights of taking
part in charitable works, imagined that the
European women not only dared to think, but
carry their schemes into action for the betterment
of their fellow-creatures.
But are these women here an exception?
Do they think, or do they not? I wonder
myself whether they have not found life so
empty that they are endeavouring to crush
out their better selves by using up their physical
energy. How is it possible, I ask myself, that,
after all this exercise, they have strength enough
to dance till midnight. Life to me at present
is all out of focus; in time perhaps I shall see it
in its proper proportions.
We go down sometimes to see the dancing.
Since I have been here, I perfectly understand
why you never find time to go to balls, if dancing
in your country is anything like it is here. When
we were children of twelve, before we were
veiled, we were invited to dances given in
Constantinople. I have danced with young70
attachés at the British Embassy, yet, child
though I was, I saw nothing clever in their
performance.
All the people at this dance are grown up,
not one is under twenty—some are old gentlemen
of fifty—yet they romp like children all
through the evening till deep into the night,
using up their energy and killing time, as if
their life depended on the rapidity with which
they hopped round the room without sitting
down or feeling ill.
The waltz is to my mind senseless enough,
but the lancers? “The ring of roses” the little
English girls play is more dignified.
It seems to me that women must forfeit a
little of the respect that men owe to them when
they have romped with them at lancers.
To-night, I have found out, dancing here is
after all an excuse for flirting. In a very short
while couples who were quite unacquainted
with one another become very intimate. “Oh!
I could not wish for a better death than to die
waltzing,” I heard one young woman say to her
partner. His wishes were the same. Surely
the air of Switzerland does not engender ambition!
One gentleman came and asked me if I could
71dance. I said, “Yes, I can dance,” laying particular
emphasis on the word dance. But I do
not think he understood.
“Will you dance with me?” he asked.
“No,” I replied, “I dance by myself.” He
stared at me as if I were mad—probably he took
me for a professional dancer.
*****
When you come to stay with us at Nice, after
we have had enough of this pure air to justify
our leaving Switzerland and these commonplace
and unsympathetic people, and we are in our
own villa again and free to do as we will, then
we will teach you Turkish dances, and you will
no longer be surprised at my criticisms.
Dancing with us is a fine art. In the Imperial
Harem more attention is paid to the teaching
of dancing than to any other learning. When
the Sultan is worn out with cares of state and
the thousand and one other worries for which
his autocratic rule is responsible, his dancing
girls are called into his presence, and there with
veils and graceful movements they soothe his
tired nerves till he almost forgets the atrocities
which have been committed in his name.
A Turkish woman who dances well is seen to
very great advantage; a dancing woman may72
become a favourite, a Sultana, a Sultan’s mother,
the queen of the Imperial Harem.
I can assure you a Western woman is not
seen at her best when she dances the lancers.—Your
affectionate
Zeyneb.
73/75
Territet, Dec. 1906.
I am conservative in my habits, as you will find
out when you know me better, although Turkish
women are generally supposed to be capricious
and changeable.
Every day you can picture me sitting on the
same terrace, in the same chair, looking at the
same reposeful Lake Leman and writing to the
same sympathetic friends.
The sea before me is so blue and silent and
calm! Does it know, I wonder, the despair
which at times fills my soul! or is its blue there
to remind me of our home over yonder!
In the spring the Bosphorus had such sweet,
sad tints. As children when we walked near
its surface my little Turkish friends said to me,
“Don’t throw stones at the Bosphorus—you will
hurt it.”
Lake Leman also has ships which destroy
the limpid blue of its surface and remind me of76
those which passed under my lattice windows
and sailed so far away that my thoughts could
not follow them.
Here I might almost imagine I was looking
at the Bosphorus, and yet, is the reflection of
snow-clad peaks what I ought to find in the
blue sea away yonder? Where are the domes
and minarets of our mosques? Is not this the
hour when the Muezzins9 lift up their voices,
and solemnly call the faithful to prayer?
On such an autumn evening as this in Stamboul,
I should be walking in a quiet garden
where chrysanthemums would be growing in
profusion. The garden would be surrounded
by high walls, giant trees would throw around
us a damp and refreshing shade, and the red
rays of the dying sun would find their way
through the leaves, and my companions’ white
dresses would all be stained with its roseate
hues.
But suddenly we remember the sun is setting.
To the cries of the frightened birds we hurry
back quickly through the trees. How can a
77
Turkish woman dare to be out after sunset?...
Ah! I see it all again now—those garden walls,
those knotted trees, those jealous lattice-work
windows which give it all an impression of distress!
and I am looking at it without a veil
and eyes that are free!
*****
Even as I write to you, young men and
maidens pass and repass before me, and I
wonder more than ever whether they are happy—yet
what do they know of life and all its
sorrows; sorrow belongs to the Turks—they
have bought its exclusive rights.
In spite of our efforts not to have ourselves
spoken about, the Sultan still interests himself
in us. In all probability, he has had us reported
as “dangerous revolutionists” whom
the Swiss Government would do well to watch.
And perhaps the Swiss authorities, having had
so many disagreeable experiences of anarchists
of late, are keeping their eyes on us! Yet why
should we care? All our lives have we not been
thus situated? We ought to be used to it by this
time.
Around me I see people breathing in the pure
air, going out and coming in, and no government
watches their movements. Why should78
Fate have chosen certain persons rather than
others to place under such intolerable conditions?
Why should we have been born Turks
rather than these free women who are here
enjoying life? I ask myself this question again
and again, and all to no purpose; it only makes
me bitter.
Do you know, I begin to regret that I ever
came in contact with your Western education
and culture! But if I begin writing of Western
culture, this letter will not be finished for weeks,
and I want news of you very soon.—Au revoir,
petite chérie,

Zeyneb.

*****
Territet, Jan. 1907.

Your letter of yesterday annoys me. You
are “changing your pension,” you say, “because
you are not free to come in to meals when
you like.”
What an awful grievance! If only you English
women knew how you are to be envied!
Come, follow me to Turkey, and I will make
you thank Allah for your liberty.
Ever since I can remember, I have had a
passion for writing, but this is rather the exception
than the rule for a Turkish woman. At79
one time of my life, I exchanged picture postcards
with unknown correspondents, who sent
me, to a poste restante address, views of places
and people I hoped some day to visit.
This correspondence was for us the DREAM
SIDE of our existence. In times of unhappiness
(extra unhappiness, for we were always unhappy),
discouragement, and, above all, revolt, it was in
this existence that we tried to find refuge. The
idea that friends were thinking of us, however
unknown they were, made us look upon life with
a little more resignation—and you, my friend,
who complain that “you are not free to have
your meals when you like,” should know that
this correspondence had to be hidden with as much
care, as if it had been a plot to kill the Imperial
Majesty himself.
*****
When our correspondence was sent to us
direct, it had to pass through the hands of three
different persons before we had the pleasure of
receiving it ourselves. All the letters we sent
out and received were read not only by my
father and his secretary, but by the officials
of the Ottoman Post.
One day, I remember, the daughter of an
ex-American minister sent me a long account80
of her sister’s marriage, and she stopped short
at the fourth page. I was just going to write
to her for an explanation, when the remaining
sheets were sent on to me by the police, whose
duty it was to read the letters, and who had simply
forgotten to put the sheets in with the others.
You could never imagine the plotting and
intriguing necessary to receive the most ordinary
letters; not even the simplest action could be
done in a straightforward manner; we had to
perjure our souls by constantly pretending, in
order to enjoy the most innocent pleasures—it
mattered little to us, I do assure you, “whether
we had our meals at the time we liked” or not.
*****
All around me little girls are playing. They
wear their hair loose or in long plaits, their
dresses are short. Up the steps they climb;
they play at hide-and-seek with their brothers
and their brothers’ friends. They laugh, they
romp, their eyes are full of joy, and their complexions
are fresh—surely this is the life children
should lead?
I close my eyes, and I see the children of my
own country who at their age are veiled. Their
childhood has passed before they know it.
They do not experience the delight of playing81
in the sun, and when they go out they wear
thick black veils which separate them from all
the joys of youth.
I was scarcely ten years old when I saw one
of my little friends taking the veil, and from
that day she could no longer play with us.
That incident created such an impression on us
that for days we could hardly speak. Poor
little Suate! No longer could she dance with
us at the Christians’ balls nor go to the circus.
Her life had nothing more in common with
ours, and we cried for her as if she had died.
But we were happy not to be in her place,
and I remember saying to my sister, “Well, at
least I have two years before me; perhaps in
a short time our customs will have changed.
What is the use of worrying so long beforehand?”
“I am still more certain to escape, for I have
four years before me,” she answered.
Little Suate was veiled at a time when those
delightful volumes of the Bibliothèque Rose were
almost part of our lives. From them we learnt
to believe that some good fairy must come,
and with the touch of her magic wand all our
destinies would be changed.
But to-day, when I am no longer a child, I ask82
myself whether my great-great-grandchildren
can ever free themselves from this hideous
bondage.
Melek is writing for you her impressions of
taking the veil. They are more recent than
mine.—Your affectionate
Zeyneb.
83/85
Territet, Jan. 1907.
I am thinking of a sad spring morning of long
ago. I was twelve years old, but the constant
terror in which I had lived had increased my
tendency towards uneasiness and melancholy.
The life I was forced to lead had nothing in
common with my nature. Ever since I can
remember, I had loved the bright light, open
horizons, galloping on horses against the wind,
and all my surroundings were calm and
monotonous.
As time went on, I put off every day the
moment for wakening, because I had to open
my eyes in the same room, and the same white
muslin curtains were always there to greet me.
How can I explain to you my jealousy at
seeing how contentedly all the furniture lay
in the soft light which filtered through the
latticed windows of our harems? A heavy86
weight was pressing on my spirit! How many
times when the governess came into my room
did she not find me in tears!
“What is the matter, my darling?” she
would ask, and under the influence of this unexpected
tenderness I would sob without even
knowing the cause of my sorrow.
Then I dressed myself slowly, so that there
should be less time to live. How was it, I
wondered, that some people feared death?
Death would have been such a change—the only
change to which a Turkish woman could look
forward.
In our house there was scarcely a sound;
hardly were the steps of the young Circassian
slaves heard as they passed along the corridors.
Our mother was kind but stern, and her
beautiful face had an expression of calm resignation.
She lived like a stranger amongst us,
not being able to associate herself with either
our thoughts or our ideals.
The schoolroom where we worked the greater
part of the day looked on to a garden thick with
trees and perfumed with the early roses. Its
furniture consisted of a big oak table and chairs,
shelves full of books, a globe, and three busts
in plaster of Paris, of Napoleon, Dante, and87
Mozart. What strange thoughts have those
three men, so different and yet so interesting,
not suggested to me! What a curious influence
they all three had on my child mind!
It was in this schoolroom, twice a week, that
we studied the Koran; but before the lesson
began an old servant covered up the three great
men in plaster. The Hodja10 must not see these
heathenish figures.
When the Imam arrived, my sister and I
went to the door to meet him, kissing his hand
as a sign of respect. Then he used to pass his
bony fingers over our hair, saying as a greeting,
“May Allah protect you, my children.”
With the Hodja Effendi came into our schoolroom
a perfume of incense of burnt henna and
sandal-wood. His green tunic and turban, which
showed he had visited the Holy Tomb at Mecca,
made his beard so white and his eyes so pale,
that he seemed like a person from another
world—indeed he reminded me, not a little, of
those Indian Fakirs, who live on prayers.
From the moment he sat down at the table,
my sorrows seemed to vanish for a while, and an
atmosphere of calm and blessed peace took
possession of my soul.
88
“Only God is God,” he began.
“And Mahomet is His Prophet,” we responded,
as we opened the Koran at the place he had
chosen for the lesson.
“Read, my child,” he said.
I took the book, and began to read the prayer,
which is a rhythmed chant. The Imam read
with me in a soft, low voice, and when the chapter
was finished he murmured, “You read well,
Neyr; may Allah protect you.”
Then he questioned us on the prayers we had
learnt, on the good we had to do and the evil
to avoid, and his voice was so monotonous that
each sentence sounded like a prayer.
When we had finished, he asked, as he always
did, to see our governess. I went to find her in
the garden, and she came at once.
As the Hodja could not speak English, he
asked us to say to her, “You have a fine face.
Allah loves the good and the kind and those who
go the way they should go. He will be with
you.” And before he went away, taking with
him the delightful perfume of incense, he shook
the hand of the Englishwoman in his.
During the reign of Abdul Aziz (vide text) Turkish ladies wore the Yashmak in the
street, now they wear a thick black veil through which they can see and are not
supposed to be seen. The women must always wear gloves.
Another day he came, and after the lesson
he said to me, “Neyr, you are twelve years old;
you must be veiled. You can no longer have
89your hair exposed and your face uncovered—you
must be veiled. Your mother has not
noticed you have grown a big girl, I therefore
must. I teach you to love Allah, you are my
spiritual child, and for that reason I must warn
you of the danger henceforward of going out
unveiled. Neyr, you must be veiled.”
I was not even listening to the Imam! An
awful agony had seized and numbed my soul;
the words which he had uttered resounded in
my brain, and little by little sank into my understanding—“Neyr,
you must be veiled”—that
is to say, to be forever cloistered like those
who live around you; to be a slave like your
mother, and your cousins, and your elder sister;
to belong henceforth to the harem; no longer
to play in the garden unveiled; nor ride Arabian
ponies in the country; to have a veil over your
eyes, and your soul; to be always silent, always
forgotten, to be always and always a thing.
“Neyr, you must be veiled,” the old Hodja
began again.
I raised my head. “Yes, I know, Hodja
Effendi, I shall be veiled, since it is necessary.”
Then I was silent.
The old Imam went away, not understanding
what had happened to me, and without my90
having kissed his hand. I remained in the same
place, my elbows on the table. I was alone.
All around was deadly still.
Suddenly, however, Miss M. opened the door;
her eyes were red. Gently shutting the door
and coming towards me, she said:
“Neyr, I have seen the Imam, and I understand
that from to-morrow you must be
veiled.”
I saw the pain stamped on her face, but I
could say nothing. Already she had taken me
in her arms and carried me into her room at
the end of the corridor, murmuring all the
while, “The brutes!”
Together we wept; I, without unnecessary
complaints, she without useless consolation.
Once my sorrow had passed a little, I questioned
my governess.
“You are English, are you not?”
“Yes, dear, I am English.”
“In England are the women veiled, and the
children free?”
“The women and children are free.”
“Then I will go to England.”
“Silence, Neyr, silence.”
“Take me to England.”
“I cannot, Neyr,” she answered.
91
But all that day and all that night I dreamt
of dear, free England, I longed to see.
*****
The country house where we lived was large,
with big rooms, long corridors, and dark halls.
Now and again carriages passed, bringing excursionists
to the neighbouring wood, and when
we heard the wheels rumbling over the uneven
road, we rushed to the latticed windows to see
all we could.
Sometimes we used to go with Miss M. to see
Stamboul, which was on the opposite shore.
Miss M. loved the town, and used to take us
there as often as possible. Sometimes we used
to ride with my brother in the country, and I
loved to feel the wind blowing through my untidy
hair, but all that would be over now.
Sometimes my father would take me to see
friends of his—foreigners they were—and the
girls and boys played together, and I laughed
and played with them. But I understood that
I was only on the margin of their great life,
that each day part of my right to existence
would be taken from me, a veil would soon cover
my face, and I would only be a Moslem woman,
whose every aspiration and emotion would be
trampled under foot.
92
That moment had come.
*****
We were to go out with mother that afternoon.
On my bed in the monotonous room I
disliked so much, a black mantle, a cape, and a
veil were placed.
Several persons had come to see me veiled
for the first time. Awkwardly I placed the
pleated skirt round my waist, the cape over my
shoulders, and the veil over my face; but, in
order that the tears which were falling should
not be seen, I did not lift it up again.
“Neyr,” asked mother, “are you ready?”
“Yes,” I answered, and followed her with my
head up in spite of this mourning. And from
that day, from that moment, I had determined
on revolt.
Melek (N. Neyr-el-Nirsa).
93/95
Territet, Jan. 1907.
I began to write to you the other day of the
influence which Western culture has had on the
lives of Turkish women.
If you only knew the disastrous consequences
of that learning and the suffering for which it
is responsible! From complete ignorance, we
were plunged into the most advanced culture;
there was no middle course, no preparatory
school, and, indeed, what ought to have been
accomplished in centuries we have done in
three, and sometimes in two generations.
When our grandmothers could sign their names
and read the Koran, they were known as “cultured
women” compared with those who had
never learnt to read and write; when a woman
could dispense with the services of a “public
letter-writer” she was looked upon as a learned
woman in the town in which she lived, and her96
time was fully occupied writing the correspondence
of her neighbours.
What I call the disastrous influence was the
influence of the Second French Empire.
One day, when I have time, I shall look up
the papers which give a description of the
Empress Eugénie’s visit to the East. No doubt
they will treat her journey as a simple exchange
of courtesies between two Sovereigns. They
may lay particular emphasis on the pageantry
of her reception, but few women of that time
were aware of the revolution that this visit had
on the lives of the Turkish women.
The Empress of the French was incontestably
beautiful—but she was a woman, and the first
impression which engraved itself on the understanding
of these poor Turkish captives, was,
that their master, Abdul Aziz, was paying homage
to a woman.
The extraordinary beauty and charm of the
Empress was enhanced by the most magnificent
reception ever offered to a Sovereign, and even
to-day, one figure stands out from all that
wonderful Oriental pageant—a slight, lovely
woman before whom a Sultan bowed in all his
majesty.
97
In honour of a woman, a jewelled palace in
marble and gold was being built, and from the
opposite side of the Bosphorus the captives
watched it coming into existence with ever-increasing
wonderment.
For a woman, had been prepared rose and
gold caïques all carpeted with purple velvet.
From a magnificent little Arabian kiosk especially
built Ottoman troops from all corners of
the Empire passed in review before a woman;
even her bath sandals were all studded with
priceless gems; no honour was too high, no
luxury too great for this woman. The Sultanas
could think of nothing else; in the land of
Islam great honour had been rendered to a
woman.
It was after the visit of the Empress Eugénie
that the women of the palace and the wives of
the high functionaries copied as nearly as they
could the appearance of the beautiful Empress.
They divided their hair in the middle, and spent
hours in making little bunches of curls. High-heeled
shoes replaced the coloured babouches;11
they even adopted the hideous crinolines, and
abandoned forever those charming Oriental
98garments, the chalvar12 and enturi,13 which they
considered symbols of servitude, but which no
other fashion has been able to equal in beauty.
As might be supposed, the middle class soon
followed the example of the palace ladies and
adopted Western costume. Then there was a
craze for everything French. The most eccentric
head-dresses and daring costumes were copied.
To these Oriental women were given more jewels
than liberty, more sensual love than pure affection,
and it mattered little, until they found
out from reading the foreign papers that there
was something else except the beauty of the body—the
beauty of the soul.
The more they read and learnt, the greater
was their suffering. They read everything they
could lay their hands on—history, religion, philosophy,
poetry, and even risqué books. They
had an indigestion of reading, and no one was
there to cure them.
This desire for everything French lasted until
our generation. No one seemed to understand
99how harmful it was to exaggerate the atmosphere
of excitement in which we were living.
With the craze for the education of the West,
French governesses came to Constantinople in
great numbers; for it was soon known what high
salaries the Turks paid, and how hospitable
they were.
If you had seen the list of books that these
unfortunate Turkish girls read to get a knowledge
of French literature, I think you would
agree with me they must have been endowed
with double moral purity for the books not to
have done them more harm.
For nearly thirty years this dangerous experiment
went on. No parents seemed to see
the grave error of having in one’s house a woman
about whom they knew nothing, and who in a
very short time could exert a very disastrous
influence over a young life. It was only when
catastrophe after catastrophe14 had brought
100this to their notice, they began to take any
interest in their daughters’ governesses, and
occupy themselves a little more seriously about
what they read.
When I look back on our girlhood, I do feel
bitterly towards these women, who had not the
honesty to find out that we had souls. How
they might have helped us if only they had
cared! How they might have discussed with us
certain theories which we were trying to apply
disastrously to our Eastern existence! But
they said to themselves, no doubt, Let us take
advantage of the high salary, for we cannot
stand this tedious existence too long. And the
Turkish women went on reading anything that
came within their reach.
Could these Turkish girls be blamed for thus
unknowingly destroying their own happiness?
What was there to do but read? When all
the recognised methods of enjoyment are removed,
and when few visits are paid (and to go
out every day is not considered ladylike), think
what an enormous part of the day is still left
unoccupied.
In our grandmothers’ days, the women used
to assemble in the evening and make those101
beautiful embroideries which you admire so
much. Others made their daughters’ trousseaux,
others told stories in the Arabian Nights style,
and with that existence they were content.
Not one of them wanted to read the fashionable
French novels, nor had they any desire to play
the piano.
It was at the beginning of the reign of Abdul
Hamid that this craze for Western culture was
at its height. The terrible war, and the fall of
the two beloved Sultans, woke the women from
their dreams. Before the fact that their country
was in danger, they understood their duty.
From odalisques15 they became mothers and
wives determined to give their children the
education they themselves had so badly needed.
The new monarch then endowed the Ottoman
Empire with schools for little girls. The pupils
who applied themselves learnt very quickly,
and soon they could favourably be compared
with their sisters of the West.
This was the first step that Turkish women
had made towards their evolution.
*****
At the age of ten, when I began the study of
102
English, we were learning at the same time
French, Arabic, and Persian, as well as Turkish.
Not one of these languages is easy, but no one
complained, and every educated Turkish girl
had to undergo the same torture.
What I disliked most bitterly in my school
days was the awful regularity. My mother,
rather the exception than the rule, found we
must be always occupied. As a child of twelve,
I sat almost whole days at the piano, and when
I was exhausted, Mdlle. X. was told to give me
needlework. Delighted to be rid of me, she gave
me slippers to work for my father, whilst she
wrote to “Mon cher Henri.” She took no
notice of me, as I stitched away, sighing all the
while. In order to get finished quickly, I applied
myself to my task; the more I hurried, the more
I was given to do, and in a few weeks the drawers
were full of my work. Our education was
overdone.
*****
So we Turkish women came to a period of our
existence when it was useless to sigh for a mind
that could content itself with the embroidery
evenings of our grandmothers. These gatherings,
too, became less and less frequent, for
103women were not allowed out after dark, no
matter what their age.
Then it was, however, that, in spite of its
being forbidden, I inaugurated a series of “white
dinner parties”16 for girls only. This created
a scandal throughout the town. Our parents
disliked the idea intensely, but we remained
firm, and were happy to see our efforts crowned
with success. Later, when we were married,
we continued those dinners as long as we dared,
and then it was we discussed what we could do
for the future of women.
And what delightful evenings we spent together!
Those soirées were moments when we
could be ourselves, open our hearts to one
another, and try to brighten for a little our
lives. The fourteen friends I most loved in
Turkey were all of the company of “white
diners,” and all those fourteen girls have played
some special rôle in life.
*****
I am sending you a letter, written by a friend
whom I shall never see again.
104
“Since your departure,” she wrote, “we
have not been allowed to go a step out of doors,
lest we should follow your example. We are
living under a régime of terror which is worse
than it has ever been before.
“I want to implore you to work for us. Tell
the whole world what we are suffering; indeed
it would be a consolation, much as it hurts our
pride.”
*****
I look around me and see all these happy
children here in Switzerland without one care,
and again I say to myself, how unjust is life.—Your
affectionate friend,
Zeyneb.
105/107
In answer to my query as to whether Caux
had smart enough visitors to justify an editor
sending there a special correspondent, I had the
following letter from Zeyneb:

Caux, Jan. 1907.

The articles which I have written for you on
the beauties of Switzerland will possibly not
appeal to the British public.
For a long time last night, when I returned
to my room, I tried to make you understand
the intense delight I had felt in watching the
good-night kiss which the lovesick moon had
given to the beautiful lake, before going away
far into space.
This moon scene reminds me more than ever
of one of our magnificent moonlights on the
Bosphorus, and I am sure if you had been with
me on the Terrace you would have loved the108
moonlit Bosphorus for its resemblance to Leman,
and Leman for helping you to understand how
wonderful is the Bosphorus. But the poetry of
moonlight does not appeal evidently to the
British soul, since they are clamouring for news
of people who are “smart.”
I have always wondered at the eagerness with
which the society ladies here seize the paper.
Now I understand—it is to see whether their
names are included amongst people “who are
smart.” What a morbid taste, to want to see
one’s name in a newspaper!
I could not tell you whether the people or
the life at Caux would be considered smart.
They certainly are extraordinary, and the life
they lead seems to me to be a complete reversal
of all prevailing customs. From early in the
morning till late at night they toboggan and
skate. Everything is arranged with a view to
the practice of these two sports. I cannot tell
you the disagreeable impression that the women
produce on me, sitting astride of their little
machines and coming down the slope with a
giddy rapidity. Their hair is all out of order,
their faces vivid scarlet, and their skirts, arranged
like those of a Cambodgian dancer, are lacking109
in grace. But this is not a competition for a
beauty prize; all that counts is to go more
quickly down the course than the others, no
matter whether you kill yourself in the attempt.
That there are people in England who are
interested in knowing who is staying at a Swiss
Hotel, the guests they receive, and the clothes
they wear, is an unpleasant discovery for me.
I thought English people were more intelligent.
One of the reasons for which we left Turkey
was, that we could no longer bear the degrading
supervision of the Sultan’s spies. But is it not
almost the same here? Here, too, there are
detectives of a kind! Alas! Alas! there is no
privacy inside or outside Turkey.
The people who interest me most are not the
smart ladies, but the Swiss themselves. They
alone in all this cosmopolitan crowd know that
the sun has flooded with its golden tints the
wonderful panorama of their mountains, the
lake stretches out in a mystery of mauve and
rose, and they alone have time to bow in admiration
to the Creator of Beauty and the great
Poet of Nature.—Affectionately,
Zeyneb.
110/113
The two fugitives left Switzerland for Nice.
Melek was in perfect health, and still delighted
with her Western liberty.
Zeyneb, although better, began more and
more to see her new life lose its glamour. But
it was too late—there was no going back.
I wonder which of the two suffers more—the
person who expects much and is disappointed;
or the person of whom much is expected and
feels she has disappointed. It seemed to me so
often, I could often read in Zeyneb’s eyes, “Was
it worth it?” Was she like the woman of her
own country, counting the cost when the debt
had already been incurred. I, who thought I
saw this, suffered in consequence.
Perhaps, as elder sister and ringleader in the
preparations for their flight, Zeyneb was feeling
her responsibility. Would the younger sister,114
when the glamour of freedom had passed, reproach
her for the step they had taken? That
was a question that had to be left to the uncertain
answer of the Future.
A little while after they were installed at
Nice, Zeyneb resumed her correspondence with
me.
Nice, 15th Feb. 1907.
For a week now we have had the sun shining
almost as in the East. After the mountains
and the snow of Switzerland, how good it is to
be here! I just love to watch the blue sky, the
flowers and the summer dresses! And I am
warm again for a little while.
We are living at Cimiez, well up the hill, in a
little villa surrounded by a big garden full of
flowers and exotic plants and a few cypress
trees; the only sad note in our whole surroundings,
except for us its name, the Villa Selma,
for curiously enough our villa has a Turkish
name—the name of a friend for whom the sadness
of life had been too great, and who is now
sleeping under the shade of the cypress in a
comfortable cemetery17 in our own land. How
115strange that fate should have directed our steps
to a villa that bears her name, and surrounded
us with trees that remind us day and night of
her past existence.
Hardly had we arrived at Nice, when in a
restaurant we met a lady friend from Turkey,
a friend whom the Sultan, in a fit of madness,
or shall I call it prudence, allowed to come to
Nice with her husband and children for a change
of air. Our departure, no doubt, has made this
great despot think, and in order to prove to all
his subjects how great was his generosity, he
had allowed this woman to travel alone as she
wished.
But we did not waste time discussing the
psychology of Hamid’s character, we were only
too delighted to see one another. How many
things had we not to talk about! how many
impressions had we not in common! If only a
snapshot had been taken of us and sent to Constantinople
what a very bad impression it would
have made on our poor captive friends away
yonder. How they would have envied us!
116
Imagine! the next day we all three lunched
together at Monte Carlo, and that without our
friend’s husband! We were seated on the
terrace overlooking the blue sea, and the newcomer
was breathing in the “free air” for the
first time, whilst we, old refugees of a year, were
pleased to see her enthusiasm.
“When I think,” she said, “that only three
of us are enjoying this liberty compared to the
thousands of poor women who have not any
idea of what they have been deprived, it makes
me unhappy.”
But the weather was too fine for such sad
thoughts. Near us a Hungarian band was playing,
and it seemed so in harmony with the surroundings.
Not one of the faces round us
betrayed the least suspicion of sadness. Could
they all be happy, these unknown people? It
really matters so little—we are happy as prisoners
to whom liberty has been given, and it is at a
moment like this that we appreciate it most.
At dessert, after having discussed many questions,
we finally spoke of the dear country
which only she of us three would see again,
and now, a certain melancholy overshadows the
table where a while ago we were so gay.
117
The Orient is like a beautiful poem which is
always sad, even its very joy is sadness. All
Eastern stories end in tragedy. Even the landscape
which attracts by its beauty has its note
of sorrow, and yet one of the many women
writers who was introduced to us, and welcomed
as our guest, said to me: “I never laughed anywhere
as I laughed in Constantinople.” That
was quite true, for I was witness of her delightful
merriment, always caught from one of us; for
no one can laugh like a Turkish woman when
she takes the trouble.
The foundation of our character is joyous,
persistently joyous, since neither the monotony
of our existence, nor the tragedy of the Hamidian
régime, nor the lamentable circumstances of our
life has been able to utterly crush laughter
out of life. There is no middle course in Turkey.
But I told you that it was from studying the
customs of Western Europe that I was beginning
to better understand the land I had left. If the
joys of freedom have been denied to Turkish
women, how many worries have they been
spared. Are not women to be sincerely pitied
who make “Society” the aim and object of
their existence? No longer can they do what118
they feel they ought for fear of compromising
a “social position.” Is not the gaiety of their
lives worse even than the monotony of ours?
Ofttimes they have to sacrifice a noble friendship
to the higher demands of social exclusiveness.
How strange and narrow and insincere
it all seems to a Turkish woman.
I never made the acquaintance of the disease
“snobbery” in my own land. Here, for the
first time, I have an opportunity of studying
its victims. There may be something wanting
in my Turkish constitution to prevent my appreciating
the rare delight of a visit from a great
personage. Ambitious people I have often met—in
what country do they not thrive? There
are many in Turkey, and that is only natural
when it is remembered the very limited number
of ways for individuality to express itself. But
snobs! How childish they are! Can they
really believe I am a more desirable person
to have at a tea-table since I have been noticed
by an ex-Empress? Only by inflicting their
society on people who obviously do not want
them, and by “bluff”—another word which
does not exist in the Turkish language—can
they be invited at all. Not a single woman in119
the whole of Turkey would put so low an estimate
on her own importance! So snobbery
would never get a foothold with us.
You cannot know how this simple black veil,
which covers our faces, can completely change
the whole conditions of the life of a nation.
What is there in common between you and us?
“The heart,” you will say.
But is the heart the same in the East as in
the West? And what a difference there is
between our method of seeing things, even of
great importance. Ambition with us does not
seek the same ends; pride with us is wounded
by such a different class of actions; and individuality
in the East seeks other gratifications
than it does in the West.
How would it be possible for “snobbery” to
exist in a country where there is no society,
and where the ideal of democracy is so admirably
understood; where the poor do not envy
the rich, the servant respects his master, and
the humble do not crave for the position of
Grand Vizier?
I said there were ambitious people in my
country, yes; but they are still more fatalists.
If a man has been unsuccessful, he blames his120
“written destiny,” which no earthly being can
alter. Is not this resignation to the yoke of
the tyrannical Sultan a proof of fatalism?
What other nation would, for thirty-one years,
have put up with such a régime?
It is only since I have seen other Governments
and other peoples that I can fully realise
the passionate fatalism of the Turks.
Those “discontents,” whom I knew, were the
true “Believers,” for at least they knew how
to distinguish between belief and useless resignation.
Their number, fortunately, grows every
day. More and more impatiently am I waiting
for the result of a Revolution intelligently
arranged, the aim of which will be the Liberty
of the Individual, and the uplifting of the race.
*****
And yet a revoltée though I was, I think I
envied my grandmother’s calm happiness.
“My poor little girls,” she used to say, “your
young days are so much sadder than mine. At
your age I didn’t think of changing the face of
the world, nor working for the betterment of
the human race, still less for raising the status
of women. Our mothers taught us the Koran,
and we had confidence in its laws. If one of121
us had less happiness than another, we never
thought of revolting; ‘it was written,’ we said,
and we had not the presumption to try to
change our destiny.”
“Grandmother,” I asked her, “is it our fault
if we are unhappy? We have read so many
books which have shown us the ugly side of our
life in comparison with the lives of the women
of the West. We are young. We long for just
a little joy; and, grandmother,” I added slowly,
and with emphasis, “we want to be free, to find
it ourselves.”
Did she understand? That I cannot tell,
for she did not answer, but her eyes were fixed
on us in unending sadness; then suddenly she
dropped them again on to her embroidery.
In the autumn or in the spring our darling
grandmother came to fetch us to stay with her
in her lovely home at Smyrna. I must add,
to point out to you another beautiful feature
of our Turkish life, that this woman was not my
father’s own mother. She was my late grandfather’s
seventh and only living widow, but she
treated all my grandfather’s children with equal
tenderness. Rarely is it otherwise in Turkey.
She loved us, this dear, dear woman, quite as122
much, if not more, than the children of her own
daughter, and we never supposed till we came
to the West there was anything exceptional in
this attachment. Just as a woman loves her
own children, she cares for the children of a
former wife, confident, when her time comes to
die, her children will be well treated by her
successor.
In our grandmother’s home life was just a
lovely long dream; a life of peace unceasing—the
life of a Turkish woman before the régime
of Hamid and thoughts of Revolution haunted
our existence. Every evening young women
and girls brought musical instruments. First,
there was singing, then one after another we
danced, and the one who danced the best was
applauded and made to dance until she almost
fell exhausted.
Towards midnight we supped by the light
of the moon, either in our garden or at friends’
houses; and we talked and danced and laughed,
all so happy in one another’s society, and none
of us remembering we were subjects of a Mighty
Tyrant, who, had we been at Constantinople,
would have stopped those festivities by order
of the police.
123
The gatherings in this house, covered with
wisteria and roses, and surrounded by an old-world
garden, where flowers were allowed to
grow with a liberty of which we were jealous,
were moments of joy indescribable. It was
good for us to be in a garden not trimmed and
pruned and spoilt as are the gardens of the
West, but whose greatest charm is that it can
be its own dear natural self; to live in peace
when the meaning of terror had been learnt,
and comparative freedom when we had known
captivity.
If ever you have a chance find out for yourself
the difference between the harems in the
town and those of the country, then I know
you will understand the few really happy
moments of my life.—Your affectionate friend
Zeyneb.
124/127
Sometimes in the summer afternoons, in
large parties, and in big springless waggons,
we drove to the olive woods or the vineyards
near the seashore. In spite of our veils, we just
revelled in the beauty of the sky and the scenery
all round. Sometimes we spent all day in the
country, lunching on the grass, and playing like
children, happy, though not free. Then we
went for excursions—wonderful excursions to
the ruins of Ephesus and Hierapolis and Parganu.
Those women who had learnt Ancient
History explained the ruins to the others, and
all that mass of crumbling stones took life and
breath for us captives.
Many times, too, we stayed with the country
people, who divided up their rooms for us, and
we lived their life for a time. Those were the
moments when I learnt to know and appreciate
our fine, trustworthy, primitive Turks. With128
what kindness they took care of us, paying
particular attention to our beds, our meals,
our horses, even our attendant eunuchs! Whole
families put themselves at our disposal, and very
often they would not let us pay for anything
we had had during our stay. In no country
in the world, I am sure, could such hospitality
and such cordial generosity be found, being as
we were to them perfect strangers.
One day at Gondjeli, after having visited
the ruins of Taacheer, we lost the last train
home. One of our attendants, however, called
on the Imam, who was known throughout the
village for his kindness. He and his wife, a
delightful woman whom I shall never forget,
not only gave us food and lodging for the night,
but the next day begged us to stay longer.
We were five women and three attendants.
The meals offered us were abundant; the beds,
simple mattresses thrown on the floor, were
spotlessly clean, and ever so daintily arranged;
and the next morning, early, before we dressed,
our baths were ready. When the moment of
departure came mother wished to leave them
something for all the trouble they had taken.
But the old Imam answered: “My child,129
there are no poor in our village. Each man
here has his own little bit of ground to till, and
enough bread to eat. Why should he ask Allah
for more?”
I have often thought of those words. Every
time I used to look at the useless luxury of our
Turkish households, the Imam’s little modest
dwelling and his kindly face rose up to reproach
me.—Your affectionate
Zeyneb.
130/133
Nice, Feb. 1907.
We have just returned from Cap Martin, where
we have had the pleasure and honour of being
introduced to the Empress Eugénie, the person
of all persons I hoped to meet in Europe.
Never will she know how much I have appreciated
seeing her to-day, and all the charming
past she called back to my memory.
Imagine actually seeing in the flesh, the
heroine of your grandmothers’ stories; the
Empress whose beauty fascinated the East,
the Empress whose clothes the women copied,
whose language they learnt, the woman who
had, though perhaps she may not know it, the
greatest influence on the lives of Turkish women.
It seemed to me as I looked at the ex-Empress,
that I was back in Constantinople again, but
the Constantinople that my grandmother had134
known, the Constantinople where the Sultan
Abdul-Aziz reigned and the life of the Turkish
women was one of independence compared to
ours.
The Empress remembered with great pleasure
every detail of her visit to the East. She spoke of
the persons she had known, and asked for news
of them. Alas! so many were dead, and others
scattered to the four corners of the Empire!
She remembered the town, the Palaces, and
the marble Beylerbei which had been built
specially for her. So kindly, too, did she speak
of the Sultan Aziz, saying how welcome he had
made her, and how his people loved him.
Was it possible without appearing unpatriotic
to make her understand that the lovely Palace
in which she had stayed, the Palace which had
echoed with the sounds of Eastern music and
dancing and singing, was now being put to a very
different usage? During Hamid’s reign Palaces
are not required for festivity, but captivity.
Many unfortunate souls have only known
Beylerbei as the stepping stone to Eternity!
I should have liked to remind the Empress,
had I dared, of the impression her beauty had
made on the women.
135
She is an old lady now, but she did not seem
so to me. I was looking at the Empress my
countrywomen had admired, the Empress for
whom they had sacrificed their wonderful
Eastern garments; I saw the curls they had
copied, the little high-heeled shoes she wore, and
even the jewels she had liked best.
“Are the women still as much veiled as when
I was in Constantinople?” asked the Empress;
and when I told her that a thick black veil
had taken the place of the white Yachmack,
she could hardly believe it. “What a pity!”
she said, “it was so pretty.”
The home in which I saw the Empress, reminded
me of one of our Turkish Islands. The
sea was as blue and the sky as clear, and the
sun, which forced her to change her place several
times, was almost as intense. With an odour
of pine wood was mixed a fragrant perfume of
violets, and the more I looked at it, the more
Oriental did the landscape become.
Having spoken so much about the past and
the people and the country we have left for ever,
it seemed to me that all of us had given way to
the inevitable Oriental sadness, yet we fought
against it, for there were other visitors there.
136
I shall always regret not having had the
opportunity of seeing the Empress alone; it
seemed to me that so much of what I might have
told her had been left unsaid, and I know she
would have been so glad to listen.—Your
affectionate
Zeyneb.
137/139
Nice, March 1907.
I can assure you, I do not exaggerate our
Oriental hospitality. Go to Turkey and you
will see for yourself that everywhere you will
be received like a Queen. Everyone will want
to be honoured by your presence in their
home.
The most modest household has its rooms
for the mussafirs or guests. In wealthy establishments,
the guest is given the choicest furniture,
the daintiest golden goblets and bon-bon dishes,
the best and finest linen and embroideries, a
little trousseau for her own use, and slaves in
constant attendance.
I never remember sitting down to a meal
without guests being present. All our rooms
for the mussafirs were filled, and in this matter
my family was by no means the exception;140
everyone received with the same pleasure.
In England, I believe, you do have guest-rooms,
but here in France they do not understand the
elements of hospitality.
You cannot imagine how it shocked me when
I first heard a French son paid his father for
board, and that here in France for a meal received,
a meal must be returned. Surely this
is not the case in England?
Often have I tried to find a satisfactory explanation
of this lack of hospitality in the
French. I put it down first to the cost of living,
then to the limited accommodation, then to the
disobliging servants, but I have now come to
the conclusion that it is one of their national
characteristics, and it is useless to waste time
trying to explain it.
Let us know as soon as possible when you are
coming.
*****
After the description I have given you of our
life in Smyrna you will understand how sorry
we were to return to Constantinople. Even the
delight of again seeing our parents could not
console us. As soon as we were back again
began the same monotony and perpetual dread,
141and the Hamidian régime made life more and
more impossible.
The year that the Belgian anarchist tried to
kill the Sultan Hamid, was certainly the worst
I have ever spent. Even the Armenian Massacres,
which were amongst the most haunting
and horrible souvenirs of our youth, could not
be compared with what we had then to bear.
Arrests went on wholesale! Thousands were
“suspect,” questioned, tortured perhaps. And
when the real culprit had declared his guilt
before the whole tribunal and had proved that
it was he, and he alone, who had thrown the
bomb, the poor prisoners were not released.
It was in the summer. Up till then in the
country, a woman could go out in the evening,
if she were accompanied, but this was at once
prohibited; every Turkish boat which was not
a fishing boat was stopped; in the streets all
those who could not prove the reason for being
out were arrested; no longer were visits to the
Embassies possible, no longer could the ladies
from the Embassies come to see us; no “white
dinners,” no meeting of friends. There were
police stationed before the doors, and we dared
not play the piano for fear of appearing too142
gay, when our “Sovereign Lord’s” life had been
in danger.
Of course no letters could be received from
our Western friends. The foreign posts were
searched through and through, and nearly all
the movement of the daily life was at an end.
One evening my sister and I went outside to
look at the moonlit Bosphorus. Although accompanied
by a male relative, three faithful guardians
of the safety of our beloved Monarch stepped
forward and asked for explanations as to why
we were gazing at the sea. Not wishing to
reply, we were asked to follow them to the
nearest police station. My sister and I went in,
leaving our relative to explain matters, and I
can assure you that was the last time we dared
to study moon effects. Never, I think, more
than that evening, was I so decided to leave
our country, come what might! Life was just
one perpetual nightmare, and for a long time
after, even now in security, I still dream of
these days of terror.
I remember full well what importance was
given to the French 1st of May riots. When I
myself saw one of the strikers throw a stone
which nearly blinded a doctor, called in haste143
to see a patient, and saw his motor stopped
and broken to pieces and the chauffeur thrashed,
I thought of the days of our Armenian massacres—the
awful days of Hamidian carnage—and the
1st of May riots seemed to me a Revolution
arranged to amuse little children.—Your affectionate
Zeyneb.
144/147
Nice, March 1907.
There are habits, my dearest friend, which
cannot be lost in the West any more than they
can be acquired in the East. You know what a
terrible task it is for a Turkish woman to write
a letter—even a Turkish woman who pretends
to be Western in many ways. Can you, who
belong to a race which can quietly take a decision
and act upon it, understand this fault of
ours, which consists of always putting off till the
morrow what should be done the same day?
Thanks to this laziness, we Turks are where we
are to-day. Some people call it kismet; you
can find it in almost all our actions. Since we
started, now a year ago, I have been expecting
an answer to a letter sent the day after my
arrival here. It will come; Allah knows when,
but it will come.
But I am as bad as my friend, you will say.148
Three weeks ago I began this letter to you, and
it is not finished yet, for all I am doing is so
strange and curious, I feel I must let you know
all about it.
It was at Monte Carlo that I first saw and
heard the wonderful operas of Wagner. When
I heard they were performing Rheingold, in spite
of medical advice not to go into a theatre, I
could not keep away. Since my childhood, I
had longed to hear an orchestral interpretation
of the works of this genius. I seemed to have
a presentiment that it would be to me an incomparable
revelation, and I was not disappointed.
Do you know what it is, to have loved music
all your life and never to have an opportunity
of hearing a first-class concert? My father
used to invite the distinguished women artistes,
passing through Constantinople, to come to sing
and play for us. He, too, was passionately fond
of music. But what I longed above all to hear
was a full orchestra, and Wagner! So that,
when I was actually at Monte Carlo listening
to the entrancing work of this Master, it was as
though I had been blind all my days and had
at last received my sight.
It was wonderful! It was magnificent! It149
moved my very soul! Why should we regret
having left our country when such masterpieces
as this are yet to be heard?
I did not want to stir. I wanted to remain
under the spell of that glorious music! But
the theatre authorities thought differently, and
in a little while the beautiful performance of
Rheingold became one of my most happy
memories.
*****
The scene changes. From my first beautiful
impression of music I came to look upon that
most degrading spectacle of your Western
civilisation—I mean gambling. I had never
realised till now that collective robbery could
be so shameful! That a poor, unintelligent,
characterless being can come to Monte Carlo,
ruin himself and his family, and kill himself
without anyone taking the trouble to pity him
a little or have him treated like a sick man, is
to me incomprehensible. When I told the lady
and gentleman, who accompanied me, the impression
that their gaming-tables had on me,
they smiled; indeed they made an effort not to
laugh.
I remained long enough to study that strange150
collection of heads round the table with their
expressions all so different, but the most hideous
which I have ever seen.
I had received that day two new and very
different impressions; one the impression of
the highest form of art and the other the impression
of perhaps the saddest of all modern
vices.
The whole night through I was torn between
these two impressions. Which would get the
better of me? I tried to hum little passages
of Rheingold, and fix my attention on Wagner’s
opera and the joy it had been to me, but in
spite of my efforts my thoughts wandered, and I
was far away in Turkey.
In our cloistered homes I had heard vague
rumours of magic games, the players at which
lost their all or made a colossal fortune according
to the caprice of fate. But I did not pay
much attention to this fairy tale. Now, however,
I have seen and believe, and a feeling of
terrible anxiety comes over me whenever I
think of the honest men of my own country,
who are concentrating all their energies on the
acquirement of Western civilisation. They will
not accept Europeanism in moderate doses151—
they will drain the cup to the very dregs—this
awful vice, as well as drunkenness and all your
other weaknesses.
In the course of time I fell asleep. I was
back in Turkey enduring the horrors of the
Hamidian régime. Rheingold was forgotten,
and the azure of the Mediterranean Sea, the
flowers, and the summer dresses. I went from
scene to scene, one more awful than the other,
but everywhere I went and to everything I saw
were attached the diabolical faces I had seen at
the Monte Carlo gaming-tables.—Your affectionate
Zeyneb.
152/155
Hendaye, July 1907.
What a relief! What a heart-felt relief to
leave Paris! Paris with its noise and clamour
and perpetual and useless movement! Paris
which is so different from what I expected!
We have had in Paris what you English people
call a “season,” and I shall require many months
of complete rest, to get over the effects of that
awful modern whirlwind.
What an exhausting life! What unnecessary
labour! And what a contrast to our calm harem
existence away yonder. I think—yes, I almost
think I have had enough of the West now, and
want to return to the East, just to get back the
old experience of calm.
Picture to yourself the number of new faces
we have seen in six weeks. What a collection
of women—chattering, irritating, inquisitive, demonstrative,
and obliging women, who invite156
you again and again, and when you do go to
their receptions you get nothing for your trouble
but crowding and pushing.
All the men and women in Paris are of uncertain
years. The pale girl who serves the tea
might be of any age from fifteen to thirty, and
the men with the well-trimmed fingers and
timid manners are certainly not sixty, but they
might be anything up to forty.
But where are the few intellectuelles? Lost
between the lace and the teacups. They look
almost ashamed of being seen there at all.
They have real knowledge, and to meet them is
like opening the chapter of a valuable Encyclopedia;
but hardly has one taken in the discovery,
when one is pushed along to find the conclusion
of the chapter somewhere in the crowd, if indeed
it can be found.
As you know, since our arrival from Nice we
have not had one free evening. The Grandes
Dames of France wanted to get a closer view
of two Turkish women, and they have all been
charming to us, especially the elder ones.
Yes, charming is the word which best applies
to all these society ladies, young and old, and is
not to be charming the modern ideal of civilisa157tion?
These women are all physically the
model of a big Paris dressmaker, and morally
what society allows them to be—some one quite
inoffensive. But it is not their fault that they
have all been formed on the same pattern, and
that those who have originality hide it under
the same exterior as the others, fearful lest such
a blemish should even be suspected!
But really, am I not a little pedantic? How
can I dare to come to such a conclusion after a
visit which lasts barely a quarter of an hour?
At luncheon and dinner the favourite topics
of conversation are the pieces played at the
theatres or the newest books. Marriage, too,
is always an interesting subject, and everyone
seems eager to get married in spite of the thousand
and one living examples there are to warn
others of what it really is. This supreme trust
in a benign Fate amuses me. Every bride-elect
imagines it is she who will be the one exception
to the general rule. Turkish women do not
look forward to matrimony with the same
confidence.
Divorce has a morbid fascination for the men
and women here: so have other people’s misfortunes.
And as soon as a man or woman is158
down—a woman particularly—everyone delights
in giving his or her contribution to the moral
kicking.
I must own, too, I cannot become enthusiastic
about Mdlle. Cecile Sorel’s clothes nor the grace
of a certain Russian dancer. What I would
like to talk about would be some subject which
could help us two peoples to understand each
other better, but such subjects are carefully
avoided as tiresome.
Do you remember how anxious we were to
hear Strauss’s Salome discussed, and what it
was in all this work which interested these
Paris Society ladies?—nothing more nor less
than whether it was Trohohanova or Zambelli
who was to dance the part of Salome.
That was a disappointment for me! All my
life I looked forward to being in a town where
music was given the place of honour, for in Constantinople,
as you know, there is music for
everyone except the Turkish woman.
I had no particular desire to see the monuments
of Paris, and now I have visited them
my affection for them is only lukewarm. The
Philistine I am! I wish I dared tell the
Parisians what I really thought of them and159
their beautiful Paris! I had come above all
things to educate myself in music, and now I
find that they, with their unbounded opportunities,
have shamefully failed to avail themselves
of what to me, as a Turkish woman, is
the great chance of a lifetime.
Yesterday afternoon, accompanied by M.
Pierre Loti, we visited the cemetery of Birreyatou.
Its likeness to Turkey attracted us
at once, for all that is Eastern has a peculiar
fascination for Loti. There were the same
cypress trees and plants that grow in our cemeteries,
and the tombs were cared for in a manner
which is quite unusual in Western Europe.
To go for a walk in a burial-ground I know
is exclusively an Eastern form of amusement.
But wait till you have seen our cemeteries and
compared them with your own, then you will
understand better this taste of ours. Oh, the
impression of loneliness and horror I felt when
I first saw a Western cemetery! It was Père
La Chaise, the most important of them all. I160
went there to steal a leaf from the famous
weeping willow on Musset’s grave, and to my
great surprise I found by the Master’s tomb,
amongst other tokens of respect, a Russian
girl’s visiting card with the corner turned down.
But this was an exception. How you Western
people neglect your dead!
I could not for a long time explain to myself
this fear of death, but since I have seen here
the painful scenes connected with it—the terror
of Extreme Unction,18 the visit of the relatives
to the dead body, the funeral pomp, the hideous
black decorations on the horses’ heads, and last
but not least the heart-rending mourning—I,
too, am terrified.
We, like the Buddhists, have no mourning.
The Angel of Death takes our dear ones from
us to a happier place, and night and morning
we pray for them. The coffin is carried out on
men’s shoulders in the simplest manner possible,
and the relatives in the afternoon take their
embroidery and keep the dear ones company.
It is as if they were being watched in their
sleep, and they are very, very near.
161
Yet here in the West what a difference! I
shudder at the thought that some day I might
have to rest in one of these untidy waste heaps,
and that idea has been preying on my mind so
that I have actually written to my father and
begged him, should I die in Paris, to have me
taken home and buried in a Turkish cemetery.
*****
Did I ever tell you of my visit to the Comédie
Française? Alas, alas! again I have to
chronicle a disappointment. I am trying to
think what I pictured to myself I was going
to see, and I am not at all clear about it. In
my childish imagination I must have thought
of something I will never see.
Naturally the piece played was Œdipus Rex.
Every time I am invited to the Comédie Française
I see Œdipus Rex. It seems a particular
favourite in Paris, I am sure I cannot tell
why.
The scenery was perfect, so were the costumes,
but you cannot imagine how uncomfortable I
was when I heard the actors, together or one
after the other, screaming, moaning, hissing, and162
calling on the whole audience to witness a misfortune,
which was only too obvious.
All the actors were breathless, hoarse, exhausted—in
sympathy I was exhausted too, and
longed for the entr’acte. Then when at last a
pause did come, I began to hope in the next
scene a little calm would be established and the
actors take their task a little more leisurely.
But no! they cried out louder still, threw themselves
about in torture, and gesticulated with
twice as much violence.
When I heard the voice of Œdipus it reminded
me of the night watchers in my own country
giving the fire alarm, and all those Turks who
have heard it are of the same opinion. As I
left the theatre tired out, I said to myself,
“Surely it is not possible that this is the idea
the Greeks had of Dramatic Art.”
What a difference to the theatre I had known
in Turkey! Sometimes our mothers organised
excursions, and we were taken in long springless
carts, dragged by oxen, to the field of Conche-Dili
in the valley of Chalcedonia, where there
was a kind of theatre, or caricature of a theatre,
built of unpainted wood, which held about four
hundred people.
163
The troop was composed of Armenian men
and women who had never been at the Paris
Conservatoire, but who gave a fine interpretation
of the works of Dumas, Ohnet, Octave
Feuillet, and Courteline. The stage was small
and the scenery was far from perfect, but the
Moslem women were delighted with this open-air
theatre, although they had to sit in latticed
boxes and the men occupied the best seats in
the stalls.
During the entr’acte, there was music and
singing, the orchestra being composed of six
persons who played upon stringed instruments.
The conductor beat time on a big drum, and
sometimes he sang songs of such intense sadness
that we wondered almost whence they
came.
That was a dear little theatre, the theatre of
my childhood. Primitive though it was, it was
very near to me as I listened to the piercing
cries of alarm sent out by Œdipus. Would
they not, these rustic actors of the Chalcedonian
valley, I wonder, have given a truer and better
interpretation of the plays of Sophocles?
164
Guess, my dear, where I have been this afternoon.
Guess, guess! I, a Turkish woman, have
been to a bull-fight! There were many English
people present. They are, I am told, the
habitués of the place, and they come away, like
the Spaniards, almost intoxicated by the spectacle.
This is an excitement which does not in the
least appeal to me. Surely one must be either
prehistoric or decadent to get into this unwholesome
condition of the Spaniards. Is the
sight of a bull which is being killed, and perhaps
the death of a toreador, “such a delightful show,”
to quote the exact words of my American neighbour?
He shouted with frenzy whilst my sister
and two Poles, unable to bear the sight of the
horses’ obtruding intestines, had to be led out
of the place in an almost fainting condition.
As for myself, I admit to having admired two
things, the suppleness of the men and the
brilliant appearance of the bull-ring. The
women of course lent a picturesque note to
the ensemble with their sparkling jewels, their
faces radiant as those of the men, their dark165
eyes dancing with excitement, and their handsome
gowns and their graceful mantillas. But
shall I ever forget the hideous sight of the poor
horse staggering out of the ring, nor the roars
of the wounded bull? It was a spectacle awful to
look upon. What a strange performance for a
Turkish woman, used to the quiet of our harem
life!
Perhaps, however, for those to whom life has
brought no emotion or sorrow, no joy or love,
those who have never seen the wholesale butchery
to which we, alas! had almost become accustomed—perhaps
to these people this horrible
sight is a necessity. Spanish writers have told
me they have done their best work after a bull-fight,
and before taking any important step in
life they needed this stimulus to carry them
safely through. I can assure you, however, I
heaved a sigh of relief when the performance
was over, and not for untold gold would I ever
go to see it again.
After leaving the scene I have described to
you, we followed the crowd to a little garden
planted with trees, which is situated in the
Calle Mayor and stretches along the side of the
stream till it meets the Bidassoa. This is the166
spot where, on cool evenings, men and maidens
meet to dance the Fandango. Basque men with
red caps are seated in the middle to supply the
music. On the sandy earth, which is the ballroom,
the couples dance, in and out of the
gnarled trees, to the rhythm of dance music,
that is strange and passionate and at the same
time almost languishing.
The music played was more Arabian than
anything I have yet heard in the West, but
unfortunately the modern note too was creeping
into these delightful measures. The Basques
with their red caps, bronzed faces, white teeth,
and fine manly figures, the women with their
passionate and supple movements and decorated
mantillas, and the almost antique frame
of Fontarabia, proud of its past, hopeful for its
future, were all so new and so different to me.
But it is dark now, the dancing has ceased,
the crowd has dispersed. How good it is to be
out at this hour of the evening. I, who am
free (or think I am), delight in the fact there
are no Turkish policemen to question me as to
what I am doing.
*****
But alas! alas! I spoke of my freedom a167
little too soon. Even in this quiet city can I
not pass unobserved?
“Have you anything to declare?” a Custom
House officer asks me.
“Yes,” I replied, “my hatred of your Western
‘Customs,’ and my delight at being alive.”—Your
affectionate friend,

Zeyneb.

168/171
Hendaye, August 1907.
You ask me to describe the life a Turkish
woman leads during Ramazan.
The evenings of Ramazan are the only
evenings of the year when she has the right
to be out of doors; the time when she seizes
every opportunity of meeting her friends and
arranging interesting soirées; the time when she
goes on foot or drives to the Mosques to hear
the Imams explain the Word of the Prophet.
Need I remind you, unlike the women of the
lower and middle classes, who go out every
evening, the more important the family to
which a woman belongs, the more difficult is
it for her to go out.
It is for the evenings of Ramazan that most
amusements are arranged, and our husbands,
fathers, and brothers usually patronise the
travelling circus, Turkish theatre, performances172
of Karakheuz.19 The women on their side have
their dinners, Oriental dancing, and conversation
which lasts deep into the night.
Amongst my most delightful remembrances
of Constantinople are the Ramazan visits to
St. Sophia and the Chah-zade Mosque. From
the height of a gallery reserved for women,
which is separated from the rest of the church
by a thick wooden lattice-work, hundreds of
“Believers” are to be seen, seated on the
ground round the Imam, who reads and preaches
to them. All the oil lamps are lighted for the
thirty days, and the incense burning in the
silver brasiers rises with the prayers to Heaven.
Not a voice is to be heard save that of the Imam
(preacher), and the most wonderful impression of
all is that created by the profound silence.
And yet children are there—little ones asleep
in their mother’s arms, little girls in the women’s
gallery, whilst boys over eight are counted men,
and sit beside their fathers on the ground, their
little legs tucked under them.
On returning home supper is ready for three
o’clock, and an hour later the cannon announce
173the commencement of a fresh day of fasting.
After a short prayer in one’s own room, sleep
takes possession of us until late the next day,
sometimes until almost four o’clock, when everyone
must be up and again ready for the firing of
the cannon which gives permission to eat and
drink and smoke.
With us fasting20 is more strict than it is in
the West. From sunrise to sunset, no one
would dare to touch a mouthful of food or even
smoke.
When we are lucky enough to have Ramazan
during the winter months the fasting hours are
shorter, but when it comes in the month of
August “Believers” have to fast for sixteen
hours, and the labourers suffer much in consequence.
Imagine how long a soirée can be, when you
begin dinner at half-past four! What must we
not think of to amuse our guests, for no one
dines alone! The Oriental hospitality demands
that every evening friends should assemble,
and acquaintances come without even letting
you know. When people are known to be rich,
174the poor and complete strangers come to them
to dinner. I remember being at one house which
was filled to overflowing with women of all
classes, most of whom had never before even
seen the hostess.
At the Palaces a special door is built, through
which anyone who wants to dine can enter,
and after the meal money is distributed. You
can understand while this patriarchal system
exists there is no reason for the poor to envy
the rich. Turkey is the only country in Europe
which in this respect lives according to Christ’s
teaching, but no doubt in the march of progress
all these beautiful customs will disappear.
I have often thought when in a Western
drawing-room, where one stays a few minutes,
and eats perhaps a sandwich, how different are
our receptions in the East. We meet without
being invited, talk till late in the night, and a
proper supper is served.
It surprises me, too, in the West to meet such
poor linguists. In Turkey it is quite usual
to hear discussions going on in five European
languages without one foreigner being present.
Wait till you have taken part in some of these
Ramazan gatherings, and have seen what hospi175tality
really is, then you will understand my rather
slighting remarks about your Western society.
*****
I am constantly being asked how a Turkish
woman amuses herself. I have a stock answer
ready: “That depends on what you call amusement.”
It sounds futile to have to remind my questioners
that amusement is a relative quality,
and depends entirely on one’s personal tastes.
The Spaniards are mad with delight at the sight
of a bull-fight—to me it was disgusting; and yet,
probably, were those bull-fights to take place in
Turkey, I should enjoy them. We used to
have in the country exhibitions of wrestling
at which whole families were present. Travelling
circuses were also a favourite amusement,
but during the last years of Hamid’s reign
Turkish women have been forbidden the pleasures
of going to a travelling theatre and
Karakheuz, the most appreciated of all the
Eastern amusements.
Tennis, croquet, and other games are impossible
for us, neither is rowing allowed: to
have indulged in that sport was to expose myself
to the criticism of the whole capital.
176
Although the people of the West are so fond
of walking as a recreation, the pleasure that a
Turkish woman can obtain from a walk is
practically non-existent, and most of us would
be insulted if asked, as I have been in Paris, to
walk for two hours.
We are fond of swimming, but how is this
taste to be indulged when women are only
allowed to swim in an enclosed place, surrounded
by a high wall? Surely the only charm of
swimming is to be in the open sea.
Those who are fond of music have either to
go without, learn to play themselves, or take
the terrible risk of disguising themselves as
Europeans and go to a concert.
Towards 1876 we began playing bezique, but
that craze did not last long, and a short time
afterwards cards were considered bad form. The
Perotes,21 however, still remain faithful to card-playing,
and have more than one reason to
prefer this pastime to all the others in which
they might indulge. Unlike the Perotes, we
Turkish women never played cards for money.
177
You might think from my letters that travelling
in the country was quite an ordinary event
for women of our class: on the contrary, it is
quite exceptional, and perhaps only ten families
in all Turkey have travelled as we travelled in
our own country.
So you see a Turkish woman is not very ambitious
for “amusement” as you Western people
understand the word. When she is allowed to
travel in foreign countries as she likes, I believe
she will be more satisfied with her lot.
All the Turks I have met since I came to
Europe are of my opinion, but we shall see what
will happen when their theories are put into
practice.
Since it has been my privilege to meet my
countrymen I have found out what fine qualities
they possess. Indeed it is wrong for custom to
divide so markedly our nation into two sexes
and to create such insuperable barriers between
them. We shall never be strong until we are
looked upon as one, and can mix freely together.
The Turks have all the qualities necessary to
make good husbands and fathers, and yet we
have no opportunity of knowing even the men
we marry until we are married.
178
How I wish that nine out of every ten of
the books written on Turkey could be burned!
How unjustly the Turk has been criticised! And
what nonsense has been written about the
women! I cannot imagine where the writers
get their information from, or what class of
women they visited. Every book I have read
has been in some way unfair to the Turkish
woman. Not one woman has really understood
us! Not one woman has credited us with the
possession of a heart, a mind, or a soul.—Your
affectionate friend,

Zeyneb.
*****
The year of 1908 was a year of mourning for
Zeyneb and Melek. For them began that bitter
period, when a woman has the opportunity of
judging independence at its true value, without
a father and a substantial income as buffers
between them and life.
*****
During that year, too, Melek married.
Zeyneb remained alone.
179/181
London, Nov.-Dec. 1908.

About a week ago,22 whilst you were writing
your first letter to me and speaking of the
beautiful Eastern sun that was shining through
your latticed window, what a different experience
was mine in London. I was walking by
myself in the West End, when suddenly, the
whole city was shrouded in one of those dense
fogs to which you no doubt have become
accustomed. I could not see the name of the
streets nor the path at the opposite side, so I
wandered on for a little while, only to discover
that I had arrived back at the same place.
There was no one to show me the way, and
the English language that I had spoken from
182infancy seemed of no use to me, since no one
took any notice of my questions.
I looked in vain for a policeman. Your
London policemen are so amiable and clever.
Whatever difficulty I have, they seem to be
able to help me, and the most curious of all
curious things is, they will not accept tips!
What wonderful men! and what a difference
from our policemen in Constantinople! In Constantinople,
I trembled almost at the sight of a
policeman, but here I cannot imagine what I
should do without them.
However, after losing myself and getting back
always to the same point, I finally struck out in a
new direction, and walked on and on until, when
I was least expecting it, I found that just by
chance I was safe in front of my club. You
can perhaps imagine my relief. It seemed to
me as if I had escaped from some terrible danger,
and I wonder more and more how you English
people manage to find your way in one of these
dense fogs.
When I got into my club, I found your letter
waiting me, and the Turkish post-mark cheered me
just a little, and made me forget for a while the
hideous black mantle in which London was wrapt.
183
On those evenings when I dine at “my club”
(see how English I have become!) I eat alone,
studying all the time the people I see around
me. What a curious harem! and what a
difference from the one in which you are living
at present.
The first time I dined there I ordered the
vegetarian dinner, expecting to have one of
those delicious meals which you are enjoying
(you lucky woman!), which consists of everything
that is good. But alas! the food in this
harem has been a disappointment to me. Surely
I must not accept this menu as a sample of what
English food really is.
On a little table all to myself, I was served
with, first of all, rice which was cooked not as in
Turkey, and as a second course I had carrots
cooked in water! After sprinkling on them
quantities of salt and pepper I could not even
then swallow them, so I asked for pickles, but
as there were none, that dish was sent away
almost untouched to join the first. Next I was
served with a compote of pears without sugar,
but that also did not come up to my expectations.
I ate up, however, all my bread and
asked for more. Then the waiter kindly went184
from table to table to see how much he could
collect, brought just a handful, and informed
me he really could not give me any more. But
I told him it was not enough. “I want a very
large piece,” I said, so finally he decided to
consult the butler, went to the kitchen, and
brought me back a loaf to myself.
All this while, the curious people around me
had been staring at me devouring my loaf, but
after a while they wearied of that exciting entertainment,
their faces again resumed their usual
calm expression, and they went on once more
talking to one another. Sometimes, but not
often, they almost got interested in their neighbour’s
remark, but as soon as the last words
were uttered again they adopted a manner
which seemed to me one of absolute indifference.
As you know, I do not swear by everything
Turkish, but you must now admit from experience
that when once the Danube is crossed the
faces to be seen do express some emotion, either
love or hate, contentment or disappointment, but
not indifference. Since I left Belgrade, I have
tried, almost in vain, to find in the Western faces
the reflection of some personality, and so few
examples have I found that their names would
185not certainly fill this page. Here in London
I met with the same disappointment. Have
these people really lost all interest in life?
They give me the impression that they all belong
to the same family, so much alike are they in
appearance and in facial expression.
In the reading-room, where I spent my
evening, I met those same people, who spoke in
whispers, wrote letters, and read the daily papers.
The silence of the room was restful, there was
an atmosphere almost of peace, but it is not
the peace which follows strife, it is the peace of
apathy. Is this, then, what the Turkish women
dream of becoming one day? Is this their
ideal of independence and liberty?
Were you to show my letter to one of my
race she would think that I had a distinct
aversion for progress, or that I felt obliged to
be in opposition to everything in the countries
where I was travelling. You know enough of
my life, however, to know that this is not the
case. What I do feel, though, is that a Ladies’
Club is not a big enough reward for having
broken away from an Eastern harem and all
the suffering that has been the consequence of
that action. A club, as I said before, is after186
all another kind of harem, but it has none of
the mystery and charm of the Harem of the
East.
How is one to learn and teach others what
might perhaps be called “the tact of evolution”—I
mean the art of knowing when to stop even
in the realm of progress?
I cannot yet either analyse or classify in a
satisfactory way your methods of thinking, since
in changing from country to country even the
words alter their meaning. In Servia, Liberal
means Conservative, and Freemason on the
Continent has quite a different meaning from
what it has here; so that the interpretation I
would give to an opinion might fail to cover
my real meaning.
Do not think that this evening’s pessimism
is due to the fog nor to my poor dinner. It is
the outcome of disillusions which every day
become more complete. It seems to me that we
Orientals are children to whom fairy tales have
been told for too long—fairy tales which have
every appearance of truth. You hear so much
of the mirage of the East, but what is that compared
to the mirage of the West, to which all
Orientals are attracted?
187
They tell you fairy tales, too, you women of
the West—fairy tales which, like ours, have all
the appearance of truth. I wonder, when the
Englishwomen have really won their vote and
the right to exercise all the tiring professions of
men, what they will have gained? Their faces
will be a little sadder, a little more weary, and
they will have become wholly disillusioned.
Go to the root of things and you will find the
more things change the more they are the same;
nothing really changes. Human nature is
always the same. We cannot stop the ebb or
flow of Time, however much we try. The great
mass of mediocrity alone is happy, for it is content
to swim with the tide. Does it not seem
to you, that each of us from the age when we
begin to reason feels more or less the futility
and uselessness of some of our efforts; the little
good that struggling has brought us, and the
danger we necessarily run, in this awful desire
to go full speed ahead? And yet, this desire to
go towards something, futile though it be, is
one of the most indestructible of Western
sentiments.
When in Turkey we met together, and spoke
of the Women of England, we imagined that188
they had nothing more to wish for in this world.
But we had no idea of what the struggle for life
meant to them, nor how terrible was this eternal
search after happiness. Which is the harder
struggle of the two? The latter is the only
struggle we know in Turkey, and the same
futile struggle goes on all the world over.
Happiness—what a mirage! At best is it not
a mere negation of pain, for each one’s idea of
happiness is so different? When I was fifteen
years old they made me a present of a little
native from Central Africa. For her there was
no greater torture than to wear garments of
any kind, and her idea of happiness was to get
back to the home on the borders of Lake Chad
and the possibility of eating another roasted
European.
*****
Last night I went to a banquet. It was the
first time that I had ever heard after-dinner
speeches, and I admired the ease with which
everyone found something to say, and the women
spoke quite as well as the men. Afterwards I
was told, however, that these speeches had all
been prepared beforehand.
The member of Parliament who sat on my189
right spoilt my evening’s enjoyment by making
me believe I had to speak, and all through the
dinner I tried to find something to say, and yet
I knew that, were I actually to rise, I could not
utter a sound. What most astonished me at
that banquet, however, was that all those women,
who made no secret of wanting to direct the
affairs of the nation, dared not take the responsibility
of smoking until they were told. What a
contradiction!
Since I came here I have seen nothing but
“Votes for Women” chalked all over the pavements
and walls of the town. These methods
of propaganda are all so new to me.
I went to a Suffrage street corner meeting the
other night, and I can assure you I never want
to go again. The speaker carried her little stool
herself, another carried a flag, and yet a third
woman a bundle of leaflets and papers to distribute
to the crowd. After walking for a little
while they placed the stool outside a dirty-looking
public-house, and the lady who carried the flag
boldly got on to the stool and began to shout,
not waiting till the people came to hear her,
so anxious was she to begin. Although she did
not look nervous in the least she possibly was,190
for her speech came abruptly to an end, and my
heart began to beat in sympathy with her.
When the other lady began to speak quite a
big crowd of men and women assembled: degraded-looking
ruffians they were, most of them,
and a class of man I had not yet seen. All the
time they interrupted her, but she went bravely
on, returning their rudeness with sarcasm. What
an insult to womanhood it seemed to me, to have
to bandy words with this vulgar mob. One man
told her that “she was ugly.” Another asked
“if she had done her washing,” but the most of
their hateful remarks I could not understand, so
different was their English from the English I
had learned in Turkey.
Yet how I admired the courage of that woman!
No physical pain could be more awful to me
than not to be taken for a lady, and this speaker
of such remarkable eloquence and culture was
not taken for a lady by the crowd, seeing she
was supposed “to do her own washing” like
any women of the people.
The most pitiful part of it all to me is the
blind faith these women have in their cause, and
the confidence they have that in explaining their
policy to the street ruffians, who cannot even191
understand that they are ladies, they will further
their cause by half an inch.
I was glad when the meeting was over, but
sorry that such rhetoric should have been wasted
on the half-intoxicated loungers who deigned to
come out of the public-house and listen. If
this is what the women of your country have to
bear in their fight for freedom, all honour to
them, but I would rather groan in bondage.
*****
I have been to see your famous Houses of
Parliament, both the Lords and the Commons.
Like all the architecture in London, these buildings
create such an atmosphere of kingly greatness
in which I, the democrat of my own country,
am revelling. The Democracy of the East is so
different from that of the West, of which I had
so pitiful an example at the street corner.
I was invited to tea at the House of Commons,
and to be invited to tea there of all places
seemed very strange to me. Is the drinking of
tea of such vital importance that the English
can never do without it? I wonder if the Turks,
now their Parliament is opened, will drink coffee
with ladies instead of attending to the laws of
the nation!
192
What a long, weary wait I had before they
would let me into the Houses of Parliament.
Every time I asked the policeman where the
member of Parliament was who had invited
me, he smilingly told me they had gone to fetch
him. I thought he was joking at first, and
threatened to go, but he only laughed, and said,
“He will come in time.” Only when I had
made up my mind that the tea-party would
never come off, and had settled myself on an
uncomfortable divan to study the curious people
passing in and out, did my host appear. I
thought it was only in Turkey that appointments
were kept with such laxity, but I was
reminded by the M.P. who invited me that I
was three-quarters of an hour late in the first
place.
This photograph was taken expressly for a London paper. It was returned with this
comment: “The British public would not accept this as a picture of a Turkish Harem.”
As a matter of fact, in the smartest Turkish houses European furniture is much in
evidence.
I was conducted through a long, handsome
corridor to a lobby where all sorts of men and
women were assembled, pushing one another,
gesticulating and speaking in loud, disagreeable
voices like those outside of the Paris Bourse.
Just then, however, a bell rang, and I was conducted
back past the policeman to my original
seat. What curious behaviour! What did it all
mean? I spoke to the friendly policeman, but
193his explanation that they were “dividing” did
not convey much to my mind. As I stood there,
a stray member of Parliament came and looked
at me. He must have been a great admirer of
Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, for he wore a monocle
and an orchid in his buttonhole.
“Are these suffragettes?” he asked the
policeman, staring at me and the other women.
“No, sir,” answered the policeman, “ladies.”
It was too late for tea when my host returned
to fetch me, but the loss of a cup of tea is no
calamity to me, as I only drink it to appear
polite. I was next taken up to the Ladies’
Gallery, and was sworn in as one of the relations
of a member who had given up his ladies’ tickets
to my host. The funny part of it was, that I
could not understand the language my relation
spoke, so different was his English from the English
I had learnt in Turkey. But what a fuss
to get into that Ladies’ Gallery! I had no idea
of making a noise before it was suggested to
my mind by making me sign a book, and I certainly
wanted to afterwards. What unnecessary
trouble! What do you call it? Red tapeism!
One might almost be in Turkey under Hamid
and not in Free England.
194
But, my dear, why have you never told me
that the Ladies’ Gallery is a harem? A harem
with its latticed windows! The harem of the
Government! No wonder the women cried
through the windows of that harem that they
wanted to be free! I felt inclined to shout out
too. “Is it in Free England that you dare to
have a harem? How inconsistent are you
English! You send your women out unprotected
all over the world, and here in the workshop
where your laws are made, you cover them
with a symbol of protection.”
The performance which I saw through the
harem windows was boring enough. The
humbler members of the House had little respect
for their superiors, seeing they sat in their
presence with their hats on, and this I am told
was the habit of a very ill-bred man. Still
perhaps this attitude does not astonish me
since on all sides I hear complaints of the
Government. It is a bad sign for a country,
my dear. Are you following in Turkey’s footsteps?
Hatred of the Government and prison
an honour! Poor England!
I was very anxious to see the notorious Mr.
Lloyd George. Since I have been in London195
his name is on everyone’s lips. I have heard
very little good of him except from the ruffians
at the street corner meeting, and yet like our
Hamid he seems to be all-powerful. For a long
time, I could not distinguish him in the crowd
below, although my companion spared no pains
in pointing him out. I was looking for some
one with a commanding presence, some one
with an eagle eye and a wicked face like our
Sultan, some one before whom a whole nation
was justified in trembling. But I still wonder
whether I am thinking of the right man when
I think of Mr. Lloyd George.
There is not much excitement in your House
of Commons, is there? I prefer the Chamber
of Deputies, even though some one fired at
M. Briand the day I went there. There at
least they are men of action. Here some
members were so weary of law-making, that
they crossed their legs, folded their arms, and
went to sleep whilst their colleagues opposite
were speaking. I thought it would have been
more polite to have gone out and taken tea, as
the other members seemed to be doing all the
time. It would have given them strength to
listen to the tiresome debate.
196
To me, perhaps, the speaking would have been
less unbearable if the harem windows had not
deadened the sound, which, please notice, is my
polite Turkish way of saying, they all spoke
so indistinctly.
The bell began to ring again. The members of
Parliament all walked towards the harem to this
curious direction, “Eyes to the right and nose to
the left.”23 And at last my friend took me away.
*****
We went to see a performance of Trilby at
His Majesty’s Theatre the other night. I liked
the acting of the terrible Svengali, but not the
piece. As a great treat to me, my friend and
her husband had us invited to supper in the
roof of the theatre with the famous Sir Herbert
Tree. I could not help saying, “I preferred
not to go, for Sir Herbert Tree frightened me.”
However, we went all the same, and had a
delightful supper-party. For some reason or
other the manager was our host, and I was
thankful not to eat with Sir Herbert Tree. As
we came away my friend asked if I was still
frightened now we had eaten with him.
“But we have not eaten with him,” I said.
197
“Indeed we have,” she said.
“Is the person with whom we had supper the
horrid Svengali?” I asked.
“Why, of course,” she answered, laughing.
As you know, this is not my first experience
of a theatre, so there is no excuse for me. But
I can assure you no one would ever dream that
Svengali was made up. What a pity it would
have been for me to have gone through life
thinking of your famous actor as Svengali.
I think that when actors have to play such disagreeable
parts, they should show themselves
to the public afterwards as they really are, or
not put their names on the programme.
*****
I saw another play at His Majesty’s in which
the principal rôles were played by children. You
cannot imagine how delightful I found it, and
what a change it was from the eternal pièce à
thèse which I had become accustomed to see in
Paris. The scenery indeed was a fairy panorama,
and the piece charmingly interpreted.
What astonished me was to see that both men
and women took as much delight in it as the
young folks. Only mothers in Paris would have
brought their children to see such a moral play.
198
Ah, but I must tell you I have at last seen an
Englishwoman who does not look weary of life.
She is Miss Ellen Terry. How good it was to
see her act. She was so natural and so full of
fun, and enjoyed all she had to say and do, that
her performance was a real joy to me. I wish
I could have thanked her.
*****
I just love your hansom cabs. If I had money
enough I would buy one for myself and drive
about seeing London. You get the best view
of everything in this way. When I first stepped
into one I could not imagine where the coachman
sat; he called out to me from somewhere, but I
could not find his voice, until he popped his
fingers through a little trap door and knocked
off my hat, for I cannot bear to pin on my hat.
“Here I am,” he answered to my query, and
he thought he had a mad-woman for a fare.
*****
One night when I returned to my club after
the theatre, there was one lonely woman seated
in the reading-room near the fire. She seemed
to me to be the youngest of all the ladies,
although you may say that was no guarantee
against middle age. I don’t know how it was199
we began to speak, since no one had introduced
us, but she imagined I was a Frenchwoman,
hence probably the explanation of the liberty
she had taken in addressing me. Yet she looked
so sad.
“You French,” she said, “are used to sitting
up a good deal later than we do here.”
“I thought,” I said, “the protocol did not
bother about such trifles.”
“Ah, now you are in the country of protocols
and etiquette,” she answered.
She must have been asking me questions only
as an excuse to speak herself, because she took
really no interest in my answers, and she kept
on chattering and chattering because she did
not want me to go away. She spoke of America
and India and China and Japan, all of which
countries she seemed to know as well as her
own. Never have I met in my travels anyone
so fond of talking, and yet at the same time
with a spleen which made me almost tired.
I concluded that she was an independent
woman, whose weariness must have been the
result of constant struggling. She was all alone
in the world; one of those poor creatures who
might die in a top back-room without a soul200
belonging to her. Her mind must have been
saturated with theories, she must have known
all the uncomfortable shocks which come from
a changed position, and yet she was British
enough to tremble before Public Opinion.
“But do you know why I travel so much?”
at last I had the opportunity of asking her.
“Like Diogenes who tried to find a Man, I have
been trying to find a Free woman, but have not
been successful.”
I do not think she understood in the least
what I meant.—Your affectionate friend,

Zeyneb.

201/203
London, Jan. 1909.
I am indeed a désenchantée. I envy you even
your reasonable illusions about us. We are
hopelessly what we are. I have lost all mine
about you, and you seem to me as hopelessly
what you are.
The only difference between the spleen of
London and the spleen of Constantinople is that
the foundation of the Turkish character is dry
cynicism, whilst the Englishman’s is inane
doggedness without object. In his fatalism the
Turk is a philosopher. Your Englishman calls
himself a man of action, but he is a mere empiric.
I quite understand now, however, that you do
not pity my countrywomen, not because they
do not need pity, but because for years you have
led only the life of the women of this country,
women who start so courageously to fight life’s
battle and who ultimately have had to bury all204
their life’s illusions. Now, I see only too well,
there are beings for whom freedom becomes too
heavy a burden to bear. The women I have
met here, seem to have been striving all their
lives to get away from everything—home, family,
social conventions. They want the right to live
alone, to travel as they like, to be responsible
for their own lives. Yet when their ambition
is realised, the only harvest they reap after a
youth of struggle is that of disenchantment.
Yet I ask myself, is a lonely old age worth a
youth of effort? Have they not confused individual
liberty, which is the right to live as one
pleases, with true liberty, which to my Oriental
mind is the right to choose one’s own joys and
forbearances?
*****
Is it not curious that here, in a Christian
country, I see nothing of the religion of Christ?
And yet commentaries are not lacking. Every
sect has the presumption to suppose its particular
interpretation of the words of Christ
is the only right interpretation, and Christians
have changed the meaning of His words so
much, and seen Christ through the prism of
their own minds, that I, primitive being that I205
am, do not recognise in their tangled creeds
the simple and beautiful teaching of Jesus of
Nazareth, Son of the carpenter Joseph.
Sometimes it seems to me that the religion of
Christ has been brought beyond the confines of
absurdity. Would it not be better to try and
follow the example of Christ than to waste time
disputing whether He would approve of eating
chocolate biscuits on fast-days and whether
wild duck is a fasting diet, whilst duck of the
farmyard is forbidden? To me, all this seems
profanely childish.
The impression these numerous creeds make
on me is like that of members of the same
family disputing with one another. What
happens in the case of families happens in the
case of religion. From these discussions over
details follow, first mistrust, then dislike,
then hatred, always to the detriment of the
best interest of them all.
I went to a Nonconformist chapel the other
evening, but I could not bring myself to realise
that I was in a chapel at all. There was nothing
divine or sacred either in the building or the
service. It was more like a lecture by an
eloquent professor. Nor did the congregation206
worship as we worship in the East. It seemed
to me, as if it was not to worship God that they
were there, but to appease the anger of some
Northern Deity, cold, intolerant, and wrathful—an
idea of the Almighty which I shall never
understand.
It astonished me to hear the professor calling
those present “miserable sinners,” and as I was
one of the congregation I was not a little hurt,
for I have nothing very serious on my conscience.
But the Catholics, in this respect, err as much
as the Protestants. Why this hysteria for sins
you have not committed? Why this shame
of one’s self, this exaggerated humility, this
continual fear? Why should you stand
trembling before your Maker?
While I was still inside the chapel, a lady
came up and was introduced to me. We walked
down the street together, and in the course of
conversation she discovered I was not even a
Nonconformist, nor a Roman Catholic, but a
heathen. And she at once began to pity me,
and show me the advantages of her religion.
But what could she teach me about Christ that
I did not already know? Unfortunately for
her she knew nothing of the religion of Mahomet,
207nor how broad-minded he was, nor with what
admiration he had spoken of the crucified
Jesus, and how we all loved Christ from
Mahomet’s interpretation of His life and work.24
*****
As usual here, as in other Christian countries,
marriage seems an everlasting topic of interest.
I was hardly seven years old when I was taken
for the first time to a non-Turkish marriage.
It was the wedding of some Greek farm-people
our governess knew. We were present at the
nuptial benediction, which took place inside
the house and which seemed to me interminable.
After that, everyone, including the bride, partook
of copious refreshments. Then, when we
had been taken for a drive in the country, we
returned to dinner, which was served in front
of the stable. After the meal we danced on
the grass to the strains of a violin, accordion,
and triangle. That is the only Christian marriage
I had seen till 1908, and I was astonished to
find how different a Christian wedding is here.
What is the use of an organ for marrying
208people? And twelve bridesmaids? The bridal
pair themselves look extremely uncomfortable
at all this useless ceremonial, to which nobody
pays any particular attention. Every bride
and bridegroom must know how unnecessary
are all these preparations, and how marriages
bore friends. Yet they go on putting themselves
to all this useless trouble, and for what?
Each person invited, I am told, has to bring
a present. What a wicked expense to put
their friends to. Oh, vanity of vanities!
How is it possible not to admire the primitive
Circassians, who when they love one another
and wish to marry, walk off without consulting
anyone but themselves?
*****
I am also disappointed at the manner in
which divorce proceedings are conducted in
England. What a quantity of unkind words
and vile accusations! What a low handling and
throwing of mud at each other, what expense,
what time and worry! And all simply to prove
that two people are not suited to live together.
To think that, with the possibility of such a
life of tragedy, there are still people who have
the courage to get married! It seems to me209
there are some who take marriage too seriously,
others who do not take it seriously enough,
and that others again only take it seriously when
one of the partners wants to be liberated.
How sad it is! And what good can be said
of laws, the work of human beings, which not
only do not help us in our misfortunes, but
extend neither pity nor pardon to those who
try to suffer a little less.
During the time I lived away yonder and
suffered from a total absence of liberty, I
imagined that Europe respected the happiness
and the misfortunes of individuals. How
horrible it is to find in the daily papers the
names of people mercilessly branded by their
fellow-men for having committed no other fault
than that of trying to be less unhappy, for
having the madness to wish to repair their
wrecked existence. To publish the reports of
the evidence, the sordid gossip of menials, the
calumnies, the stolen letters, written under such
different circumstances, in moments of happiness,
in absolute confidence, or extreme mental
agony, in which a woman has laid her soul bare,
is loathsome. Is it not worse than perjury to
exact from a friend’s lips what he only knows210
in confidence? Poor imprudent beings! They
have had their moments of sincerity: for this
your sad civilisation of the West makes them
pay with the rest of their broken lives.
*****
For a long time I have wanted to make the
acquaintance of Mr. W. T. Stead, who is known
and respected in the East more perhaps than
any Englishman. I had no particular reason to
go and see him except that he knew my father
at the first Hague Conference. So, one day I
was bold enough to jump into a hansom and
drive to his office. I was asked whom I
wanted. I asked for Mr. Stead.
“Who wants him?” I was asked.
“I do,” I replied.
“Give me your card.” But as I had no card
I wrote on a slip of paper: “The daughter of
a Turkish friend of the Hague Conference will
be so pleased to see you.”
He received me at once. There was so much
to talk about. He spoke so nicely of my poor
dead father, questioned me about the Sultan,
about the country I had left, about the Balkans,
about Crete, and the Turks themselves. More
than an hour we talked together, and when211
finally I rose to go he said to me: “Is there
anything I can do for you?”
“No,” I said, thanking him very kindly.
“Then it was simply to see me,” he went on,
“that you came.”
“Yes,” I said, “it is a friendly visit.” He
laughed heartily.
“Do you know,” he said, “that is the first
time that this has happened in my life.”
Then he was kind enough to send for tea,
and the tray was put down on the table among
the papers and the journals, and he showed me
signed portraits which he had collected during
his travels, among them the one that my dear
father had given him at The Hague. He then
gave me his own, and signed it, “To my only
Turkish lady friend.”
*****
I saw him for a little while in Paris on his
return from Constantinople, and he came back
really enthusiastic. He was much in sympathy
with the Young Turks, though he had much also
to find fault with. He despised but pitied
Abdul Hamid, and hoped that an entente between
England and Turkey could be arranged,
but his ideas were quite unpractical. His policy212
was purely sentimental, and his suggestions
impossible.
*****
I have had the pleasure, since I have been
here, of seeing two diplomatists with whose
voices I was familiar for many years in Constantinople.
My father highly esteemed them
both; they often came to see him. When they
had drunk their coffee, sometimes my father
sent for us to come and play and sing to them,
and from behind a curtain they courteously
thanked us for our performance.
Although I had so often heard their voices I
never had an opportunity of seeing a photo of
either of them, and I can’t tell whether I was
agreeably surprised or not. Have you ever tried
putting a body to a voice?
*****
What a magnificent city London is! If you
English are not proud of it, you ought to be.
It is not only grand and magnificent but has an
aristocratic look that despises mere ornament.
Here in London I have a feeling of security,
which I have had nowhere else in the world.
It is the only capital in Europe I have so far
seen that gives me a sense of orderliness not213
dependent on authority. It seems to me as if
English character were expressed even in the
houses of the people. You can tell at a glance
what kind of people dwell in the house you are
entering. How different is Paris! What a
delight to have no concierge, those petty potentates
who, as it were, keep the key of your daily
life, and remedy there is none.
For the first time since I left Turkey I have
had here the sensation of real home life. As
you know, we have no flats in Turkey, and have
room to move about freely—room for your delightful
English furniture, which to me is the
most comfortable in the whole world.
Like ours, the houses here are made for use,
and their wide doors and broad passages seem to
extend a welcome to you which French houses
hardly ever do. In France you smell economy
before you even reach the door-mat.
You who are in Turkey can now understand
what I have suffered from this narrowness of
French domestic life. You can imagine my
surprise when, the morning after my arrival
here, a big tray was sent into my room with a
heavy meal of eggs, bacon, fish, toast, marmalade,
and what not. I thought I must have214
looked ill and as if I needed extra feeding, and
I explained to my hostess that my white skin
was not a sign of anæmia but my Oriental complexion:
all the eggs and bacon in the world
would not change the colour of my skin. She
was not aware that the Mahometan never eats
pork, and like so many others, seemed to forget
that bacon, like pork, came from a forbidden
source.
I do not find London noisy, but what noise
there is one feels is serving a purpose. Life
seems so serious; everyone is busy crowding
into twelve hours the work of twenty-four.
We Turks take no heed of the passing hours.
The Englishmen remind me of the Turks.
They have the same grave demeanour, the same
appearance of indifference to our sex, the same
look of stubborn determination, and, like the
Turk, every Englishman is a Sultan in his own
house. Like the Turk, too, he is sincere and
faithful in his friendships, but Englishmen have
two qualities that the Turks do not possess.
They are extremely good business men, and in
social relations are extremely prudent, although
it is difficult to say where prudence ends and
hypocrisy begins.
On the Bridal Throne the Turkish woman sits on her wedding day to receive
her friends’ good wishes. It remains the chief seat in the harem; in the
Imperial Palace it is a fine throne, in poor houses only a glorified chair, but it
is always there.
215
But if Englishmen remind me of Turks, I can
find nothing in common between English and
Turkish women. They are in direct contrast
to one another in everything. Perhaps it is
this marked contrast that balances our friendship.
A Turkish woman’s life is as mysterious
as an Englishwoman’s life is an open book, which
all can read who care. Before I met the suffragettes,
I knew only sporting and society women.
They were all passionately absorbed in their
own amusements, which as you know do not in
the least appeal to me. I suppose we Turkish
women who have so much time to devote to
culture become unreasonably exacting. But
everywhere I have been—in England, Germany,
France, Italy, and Spain—I have found how little
and how uselessly the women read, and how society
plays havoc with their taste for good books.
Englishwomen are pretty, but are deficient
in charm. They have no particular desire and
make no effort to please. You know the charm
of the Turkish woman. The Englishwoman is
pig-headed, undiplomatic, brutally sincere, but
a good and faithful friend. The Turkish
woman—well, you must fill that in yourself!
I am too near to focus her.
216
But now that I have seen the women of most
countries, you may want to know which I most
admire.
Well, I will tell you frankly, the Turkish
woman. An ordinary person would answer,
“Of course,” but you are not an ordinary
person, so I shall at once give you my reasons.
It is not because I am a Turkish woman myself,
but because, in spite of the slavery of their
existence, Turkish women have managed to
keep their minds free from prejudice. With
them it is not what people think they ought to
think, but what they think themselves. Nowhere
else in Europe have I found women with
such courage in thinking.
In every country there are women—though
they may be a mere handful—who are above
class, above nationality, and dare to be themselves.
These are the people I appreciate the
most. These are the people I shall always wish
to know, for to them the whole world is kin.—Your
affectionate friend,

Zeyneb.

217/219
Venice, Oct. 1911.
You will say perhaps I am reminded of the
Bosphorus everywhere, just as Maurice Barres
is reminded of Lorraine in every land he visits.
Yet how would it be possible not to think of the
Bosphorus in Venice, especially when for so many
years I have had to do without it? Here, there
is the same blue sky, the same blue carpet of sea,
the same sunset, and the same wonderful sunrise—only
gondolas have taken the place of caïques.
All day and part of the evening I allow myself
to be rowed as my gondolier wishes from
canal to canal, and I am indignant I did not
know sooner there was a place in Europe where
one could come to rest. Why do the French
and Swiss doctors not send their patients here?
They would be cured certainly of that disease
from which everyone suffers nowadays, the
fatigue of the big towns.
220
But since so many illustrious poets have sung
the praises of Venice what is there for me to
say? I prefer to glorify it as the Brahmins
worship their Deity, in silence.
The Venetians do not appreciate Venice any
more than I appreciated Constantinople when I
lived there. They have no idea how lovely
Venice is, but prefer the Lido, where they meet
the people of all nations, whose buzzing in the
daytime replaces the mosquitoes at night.
On our way here, the train went off the rails,
so we had to alight for some time: then one of
the party suggested that we should visit Verona,
and I was very delighted at this happy idea.
It was midnight. We walked along the narrow
streets of the deserted city. The town was
bathed in a curious, indescribable light, and it
was more beautiful than anything we could have
seen in the daylight, when perhaps the noise
would have killed its charm. I hope that fate
has not decreed that my impression of that
silent sleeping city shall ever be destroyed.
I travelled to Venice in a compartment marked
“Ladies only,” not because I have any particular
affection for those “harem” compartments,
but because there was not a seat for me221
with my friends. An old English spinster was my
companion. She welcomed me with a graciousness
that I did not appreciate, and at once began
a very dull and conventional conversation.
Presently, however, two Italian officers came
in, and politely excusing themselves in their
language, sat down. They said they had been
up all night, had been standing from Milan, and
had to go on duty when they reached Venice,
and begged the old lady politely to allow them
a quarter of an hour’s rest.
The spinster did not understand, so I translated.
“Disgraceful,” she said and ordered them
out. But still the officers remained. Then
turning to me she said, “You who must be
Italian, please tell them what I think of them.”
I told her, “It was not my rôle to interpret
such uncharitable language.”
Then the officers turning to me, said in
Italian, “Although English, you are much
kinder than your companion; please tell her we
only want to stop a quarter of an hour, and
there is absolutely no danger for her.”
Rising, the old spinster looked for the alarm
signal, but finally decided to call the guard,222
who ordered the officers out. Before they went,
however, they pulled out their watches and
asked me to thank her for her kind hospitality:
they reminded me that they had what they
wanted, a quarter of an hour’s rest.
Luckily our arrival at Venice meant good-bye
to this disagreeable old creature, whose type
flourishes all over the Continent, even in Constantinople,
and who sacrifices on the altar of
respectability everything, even charity.
*****
Now I understand the enthusiasm of those
who have spoken of Italy. Nothing one can
say is sufficient eulogy for this land of sunshine
and poetry and tradition.
I am told by the people of the north I shall
be disappointed when I see the south, but
that does not disturb my impression of the
moment. I am worshipping Venice, and everything
there pleases me.
To me it seems almost as if it were the home
of the ancient Greeks, with all their artistic
instincts and roguery, all their faults, and all
their primitive charm. From my open window,
which looks into a canaletto, I heard the song
of a gondolier. His voice was the sweetest I
223have ever heard; no opera singer ever gave me
greater pleasure. Now that I know the number
of his boat, I have engaged him as my gondolier,
and every evening after dinner, instead of wasting
my time at Bridge, I go on to the canal, leaving
it to the discretion of my guide where he takes
me; and when he is tired of rowing, he brings
me back. All the time he sings and sings and
I dream, and his beautiful voice takes me far,
far away—away from the unfriendly West.
Amongst its other attractions, Venice has an
aristocracy. They are poor certainly, but, with
such blood in their veins, do they need riches?
And surely their charm and nobility are worth
all the dollars put together of the vulgar Transatlantics
who have bought the big historic
palaces of Venice. I feel here as I felt in London,
the delight of being again in a Kingdom, and I
can breathe and live. How restful it is, after
the nervous strain of the exaggerated Democracy
of France.
*****
Brussels, Nov. 1911.

I have had this letter quite a fortnight in my
trunk. I did not want to send it to you. Some224how
I felt ashamed to let you see how much I
had loved Italy—Turkey’s enemy.
I left Venice the day after the Declaration of
War, if such a disgraceful proceeding would be
called a Declaration of War. For a long time
I could not make up my mind that that nation
of gentlemen, that nation of poetry and music
and art, that nation whose characteristics so
appealed to my Oriental nature, that nation
whom I thought so civilised in the really good
sense of the word, could be capable of such
injustice.
Even in the practice of “the rights of the
strong” a little more tact could have been
exercised. Surely it is not permissible in the
twentieth century to act as savages did—at least
those we thought savages.
In a few years from now, we shall be able to
see more clearly how the Italian Government of
1911 was able to step forward and take advantage
of a Sister State, whose whole efforts were
centred on regeneration, and no one protested.
What a wonderful account of the history of
our times!
When I think that it is in Christian Europe
that such injustice passes unheeded, and that225
Christian Europe dares to send us missionaries
to preach this gospel of Civilisation—I curse the
Fate which has forced me to accept the hospitality
of the West.
*****
Paris, Feb. 1912.

Two chapters more seem necessary to my
experience of the West. I submit in silence.
Kismet.
Hardly had I returned from Brussels than I
became seriously ill. Do not ask me what was
the matter with me. Science has not yet found
a name for my suffering. I have consulted
doctors, many doctors, and perhaps for this
reason I have no idea as to the nature of my
illness. Each doctor wanted to operate for
something different, and only when I told them
I had not the money for an operation have they
found that after all it is not necessary. I think
I have internal neuralgia, but modern science
calls it “appendicitis,” and will only treat me
under that fashionable name. At Smyrna, I
remember having a similar attack. My grandmother,
terrified to see me suffering, ran in for a
neighbour whom she knew only by name. The226
neighbour came at once, said a few prayers over
me, passed her magic hands over my body, and
in a short time I was healed.
Here I might have knocked up all the inhabitants
of Paris: not one would have come
to help me.
“The progress of modern science” was my
last illusion. Why must I have this final disappointment?
Yet what does it matter?
Every cloud has a silver lining. And this
final experience has brought me to the decision,
that I shall go back to Turkey as soon as I can
walk. There at least, unless my own people
have been following in the footsteps of modern
civilisation, I shall be allowed to be ill at my
leisure, without the awful spectre hovering over
me of a useless operation.
One night I was suffering so much that I
thought it advisable to send for the doctor. It
was only two o’clock in the morning, but the
message the concierge sent back was, “that one
risked being assassinated in Paris at that hour,”
and he refused to go.
The next day I had a letter from my landlord
requesting me not to wake the concierge up
again at two o’clock in the morning. And this227
is the country of liberty, the country where one
is free to die, provided only the concierge is not
awakened at two o’clock in the morning.
This little incident seems insignificant in itself,
but to me it will be a very painful remembrance
of one of the chief characteristics of the people
of this country—a total lack of hospitality.
If our Oriental countries must one day become
like these countries of the West, if they too
must inherit all the vices, with which this civilisation
is riddled through and through, then let
them perish now.
If civilisation does not teach each individual
the great and supreme quality of pity, then
what use is it? What difference is there, please
tell me, between the citizens of Paris and the
carnivorous inhabitants of Darkest Africa? We
Orientals imagine the word civilisation is a
synonym of many qualities, and I, like others,
believed it. Is it possible to be so primitive?
Yet why should I be ashamed of believing in
the goodness of human beings? Why should I
blame myself, because these people have not
come up to my expectations?
This musing reminds me of a story which our
Koran Professor used to tell us. “There was228
once,” he said, “in a country of Asia Minor, a
little girl who believed all she heard. One day
she looked out of her window, and saw a chain
of mountains blue in the distance.
“‘Is that really their colour?’ she asked her
comrades.
“‘Yes,’ they answered.
“And so delighted was she with this information
that she started out to get a nearer view
of the blue mountains.
“Day after day she walked and walked, and
at last got to the summit of the blue mountains,
only to find grass just as she would have found
it anywhere else. But she would not give up.
“‘Where are the blue mountains?’ she asked
a shepherd, and he showed another chain higher
and farther away, and on and on she went until
she came to the mountains of Alti.
“All her existence she had the same hopes
and the same illusions. Only when she came to
the evening of her life did she understand that
it was the distance that lent the mountains their
hue—but it was too late to go back, and she
perished in the cold, biting snow.”
*****
I do not know if there is another country in
229the world where foreigners can be as badly
treated as they are here; at any rate they could
not be treated worse. They are criticised,
laughed at, envied, and flattered, and they have
the supreme privilege of paying for all those
people whose hobby is economy.
Everything is done here by paradox; the
foreigner who has talent is more admired than
the Frenchman, yet if he does anything wrong,
there is no forgiveness for him.
An Englishwoman I knew quarrelled with a
Frenchwoman, and the latter reproached her
with having accepted one luncheon and one
dinner. The Englishwoman (it sounds fearfully
English, doesn’t it?) sent her ex-hostess twelve
francs, and the Frenchwoman not only accepted
it but sent a receipt. If I had not seen that
receipt I don’t think I could have believed the
story!
Another lady, whose dressmaker claimed
from her a sum she was not entitled to, was
told by that dressmaker, unless she were paid
at once, she would inform the concierge.
Tell me, I beg of you, in what other country
would this have been possible? In what other
country of the world would self-respecting230
people pay any attention, far less go for information,
to the vulgar harpies who preside
over the destinies of the fifteen or twenty
families who occupy a Paris house?
When I have been able to get my ideas and
impressions a little into focus, I intend to write
for you, and for you only, what a woman without
any preparation for the battle of life, a foreigner,
a woman alone, and last but not least, a Turk,
has had to suffer in Paris.
You who know what our life is in Turkey,
and how we have been kept in glass cases and
wrapt in cotton wool, with no knowledge of
the meaning of life, will understand what the
awful change means, and how impossible for a
Turkish woman is Western life.
Do you remember the year of my arrival?
Do you remember how I wanted to urge all my
young friends away yonder to take their liberty
as I had taken mine, so that before they died
they might have the doubtful pleasure of knowing
what it was to live?
Now, I hope if ever they come to Europe they
will not come to Paris except as tourists; that
they will see the beautiful things there are to be
seen, the Provence with its fine cathedrals and231
its historic surroundings; that they will amuse
themselves taking motor-car trips and comparing
it with their excursions on a mule’s back
in Asia; that they will see the light of Paris,
but never its shade; and that they will return,
as you have returned from Constantinople, with
one regret, that you couldn’t stay longer.
If only my experience could be of use to my
compatriots who are longing as I longed six
years ago for the freedom of the West, I shall
never regret having suffered.—Your affectionate
friend,

Zeyneb.

232/235
Marseilles, 5th March, 1912.

It is to-morrow that I sail. In a week from
to-day, I shall again be away yonder amongst
those whom I have always felt so near, and who
I know have not forgotten me.
In just a week from to-day I shall again be
one of those unrecognisible figures who cross
and recross the silent streets of our town—some
one who no longer belongs to the same world as
you—some one who must not even think as you
do—some one who will have to try and forget
she led the existence of a Western woman for
six long, weary years.
What heart-breaking disappointments have
I not to take away with me! It makes me sad
to think how England has changed! England
with its aristocratic buildings and kingly architecture—England
with its proud and self-respecting
democracy—the England that our236
great Kemal Bey taught us to know, that
splendid people the world admires so much,
sailing so dangerously near the rocks.
I do not pretend to understand the suffragettes
or their “window-smashing” policy, but
I must say, I am even more surprised at the
attitude of your Government. However much
these ill-advised women have over-stepped the
boundaries of their sex privileges, however
wrong they may be, surely the British Government
could have found some other means of
dealing with them, given their cause the attention
they demanded, or used some diplomatic
way of keeping them quiet. I cannot tell you
the horrible impression it produces on the mind
of a Turkish woman to learn that England not
only imprisons but tortures women; to me it is
the cataclysm of all my most cherished faiths.
Ever since I can remember, England had been
to me a kind of Paradise on earth, the land
which welcomed to its big hospitable bosom
all Europe’s political refugees. It was the land
of all lands I longed to visit, and now I hear a
Liberal Government is torturing women. Somehow
my mind will not accept this statement.
Write to me often, very often, dear girl.237
You know exactly where I shall be away yonder,
and exactly what I shall be doing. You know
even the day when I shall again begin my quiet,
almost cloistered existence as a Moslem woman,
and how I shall long for news of that Europe
which has so interested and so disappointed
me.
Do you remember with what delight I came
to France, the country of Liberté, Egalité, and
Fraternité? But now I have seen those three
magic words in practice, how the whole course
of my ideas has changed! Not only are my
theories on the nature of governments no longer
the same, but my confidence in the individual
happiness that each can obtain from these
governments is utterly shattered.
But you will say, I argue like a reactionary.
Let me try to explain. Am I not now a woman
of experience, a woman of six years’ experience,
which ought to count as double, for every day
has brought me a double sensation, the one of
coming face to face with the reality, and the
other, the effort of driving from my mind the
remembrance of what I expected to find?
You know how I loved the primitive soul
of the people, how I sympathise with them, and238
how I hoped that some scheme for the betterment
of their condition would be carried out.
But I expected in France the same good
honest Turks I knew in our Eastern villages,
and it was from the Eastern simplicity and
loyalty that I drew my conclusions about the
people of the West. You know now what they
are! And do not for a moment imagine that
I am the only one to make this mistake: nine
out of ten of my compatriots, men and women,
would have the same expectation of them.
Until they have come to the West to see for
themselves and had some of the experiences
that we have had, they will never appreciate
the calm, leisurely people of our country.
How dangerous it is to urge those Orientals
forward, only to reduce them in a few years to
the same state of stupidity as the poor degenerate
peoples of the West, fed on unhealthy
literature and poisoned with alcohol.
You are right: it is in the West that I have
learned to appreciate my country. Here I
have studied its origin, its history (and I still
know only too little of it), but I shall take away
with me very serious knowledge about Turkey.
But again I say, what a disappointment the239
West has been. Yes, taking it all round I must
own that I am again a désenchantée. Do you
know, I am now afraid even of a charwoman
who comes to work for me. Alas! I have learned
of what she is capable—theft, hatred, vengeance,
and the greed of money, for which she would sell
her soul.
I told the editor of a Paris paper one day that
I blushed at the manner in which he encouraged
dirty linen to be washed in public. “All your
papers are the same,” I said. “Take them one
after the other and see if one article can be
found which is favourable to your poor country.
You give the chief place to horrible crimes.
Your leading article contains something scandalous
about a minister, and from these articles
France is judged not only by her own people
but by the whole world.”
He did not contradict me, but smiling maliciously,
he answered, “Les journalistes ont à cĹur
d’être aussi veridique que possible.” (“Journalists
must try to be as truthful as possible.”)
A clever phrase, perhaps, but worse than anything
he could have written in the six pages of
his paper.
But perhaps I am leaving you under the im240pression,
désenchantée though I be, that nothing
has pleased me in the West. Not at all!
I have many delightful impressions to take
back with me, and I want to return some day
if the “Kismet” will allow it.
Munich, Venice, the Basque Countries, the
Riviera, and London I hope to see again. Art
and music, the delightful libraries, the little
towns where I have worked, thought, and
discovered so many things, and a few friends
“who can understand”—surely these are attractions
great enough to bring me back to
Europe again.
The countries I have seen are beautiful enough,
but civilisation has spoiled them. To take a
copy of what it was going to destroy, however,
civilisation created art—art in so many forms,
art in which I had revelled in the West. It was
civilisation that collected musical harmonies,
civilisation that produced Wagner, and music
to my mind is the finest of all its works.
But there are books too, you will say, wonderful
books. Yes, but in the heart of Asia there
are quite as many masterpieces, and they are
far more reposeful.
241
6th March.

This morning early I was wakened by the sun,
the advance-guard of what I expect away yonder.
From my window I see a portion of the harbour,
and the curious ships which start and arrive
from all corners of the earth. Again I see the
Bosphorus with its ships, which in my childish
imagination were fairy godmothers who would
one day take me far, far away ... and now
they are the fairy godmothers who will take
me back again.
I like to watch this careless, boisterous, gay
crowd of Marseilles. It is just a little like the
port of Échelles du Levant with its variegated
costumes, its dirt, which the sun makes bearable,
and the continual cries and quarrelling
among men of all nations.
All my trunks are packed and ready, and it
is with joy and not without regret that I see I
have no hatbox. Not that I care for that
curious and very unattractive invention, the
fashionable hat, but it is the external symbol
of liberty, and now I am setting it aside for ever.
My tchatchaff is ready, and once we have passed
the Piræus I shall put it on. How strange I
shall feel clad again from head to foot in a black242
mantle all out of fashion, for the Turks have
narrowed their tchatchaffs as the Western
women have tightened their skirts. It will not
be without emotion, either, that I feel a black
veil over my face, a veil between me and the
sun, a veil to prevent me from seeing it as I saw
it for the first time at Nice from my wide open
window.
Yet what anguish, what terrible anguish would
it not be for me to put on that veil again, if I
did not hope to see so many of those I have
really loved, the companions of my childhood,
friends I know who wanted me and have missed
me. Even when I left Constantinople, you
know under what painful circumstances, I hoped
to return one day.
“The world is a big garden which belongs to
us all,” said a Turkish warrior of the past;
“one must wander about and gather its most
agreeable fruits as one will.” Ah! the holy
philosophy! yet how far are we from ever
attempting to understand it! Will there ever
come a personality strong enough, with a voice
powerful enough to persuade us that this philosophy
is for our sovereign being, and that without
it we shall be led and lead others to disappointments?
243
During the time I was away yonder, I believed
in the infallibility of new theories. I had almost
completely neglected the books of our wise men
of the East, but I have read them in the libraries
of the West, where I have neglected modern
literature for the pleasure of studying that philosophy,
which shows the vanity of these struggles
and the suffering that can follow.
I am longing to see an old uncle from the
Caucasus. When we were young girls he pitied
us because we were so unarmed against the disenchantment
which inevitably had to come to us.
“You are of another century,” we said to
him. “You reason with theories you find remarkable,
but we want to go forward, we want
to fight for progress, and that is only right.”
Ah! he knew what he was talking about,
that old uncle, when he spoke of the disenchantment
of life.
“You are arguing as I argued when I was a
little boy, and my father gave me the answer
that I have given to you. My children,” he
continued, “life does not consist in always
asking for more: believe me, there is more merit
in living happily on as little as you can, than
in struggling to rise on the defeat of others.
I have fought in all the battles against the244
Russians, and had great experience of life, but
I remind you of the fact merely lest you should
think me a vulgar fatalist in the hands of
destiny. I, too, have had many struggles, and
it was my duty.”
What a lot I shall have to tell this dear old
uncle! How well we shall understand each
other now, how happy he will be to see that I
have understood him! We shall speak in that
language which I need to speak again after six
long years. Loving the East to fanaticism as I
do, to me it stands for all that glorious past
which the younger generation should appreciate
but not blame, all the past with which I find
myself so united.
I will tell this dear old uncle (and indeed am
I not as old and experienced as he?) that I love
my country to-day as I never loved it before,
and if only I may be able to prove this I shall
ask nothing more of life.
*****
Naples.

I can only write you a few lines to-day. The
sea has been so rough that many of the passengers
have preferred to remain on board.
Some one impertinently asked me if I were245
afraid to go on shore, but I did not answer,
having too much to say. Around me I hear the
language which once I spoke with such delight;
now it has become odious to me, as odious as
that Italy which I have buried like a friend of
the past.
Now there is a newspaper boy on board crying
with rapture “Another Italian victory.” He
offers me a paper. I want to shout my hatred
of his country, I want to call from Heaven the
vengeance of Allah on these cowardly Italians,
but my tongue is tied and my lips will not give
utterance to the thoughts I feel. I stand like
one dazed.
Surely these accounts of victory are false.
Are not these reports prepared beforehand to
give courage to the Italian soldiers in their
glorious mission of butchering the Turks, those
fine valiant men who will stand up for their
independence as long as a man remains to fight?
At last I go and lock myself in my cabin, so
as not to hear their hateful jubilation, but they
follow me even to my solitude. Some one
knocks. Reluctantly I open. It is a letter.
But there must be some error. Who can have
written to me when I particularly asked that I
should have no letters until I arrived?
246
But the letter came from Turkey, and the
Turkish stamp almost frightened me: for a long
time I had not the courage to open it. When
at last I slowly cut the envelope of that letter,
I found it contained the cutting of a newspaper
which announced the death of the dear old
uncle whom more than anyone I was longing
to see again.
Outside the conquerors were crying out, even
louder than before, “More Turkish losses, more
Turkish losses.” I folded up the letter and put
it back in its envelope with a heart too bitter
for tears.
*****
What did it all mean? What was the
warning that fate was sending to me in this
cruel manner? Désenchantée I left Turkey,
désenchantée I have left Europe. Is that rôle
to be mine till the end of my days?—Your
affectionate friend,

Zeyneb.
1 Yali = a little summer residence resorted to when it is
too hot to remain in Constantinople itself.
2 The Turkish women with whom I lived in Constantinople
read the Bible by the advice of the Imam (the Teacher
of the Koran) to help them in the better understanding of
the Koran. I may add that Zeyneb’s knowledge of our
Scriptures, and her understanding of Christ’s teaching, would
put to shame many professing Christians in our Western
Churches.
3 French time.
4 When I asked a Turkish friend to write in my album,
to my surprise and pride she wrote from memory a passage
from Ships that Pass in the Night.
5 Prayer which all devout Moslems say before beginning
a work.
6 Hanoum = Turkish lady.
7 The answer to such an observation is obvious, but I
prefer to present the Hanoum’s anecdote as she gave it.—G.E.
8 Tcharchafs = cloak and veil worn by Turkish women
when walking out of doors.
9 Muezzins = the religious teachers amongst the Mohammedans,
whose duty it is five times a day to ascend the
minaret and call the faithful followers of Mohammed to prayer
from the four corners of the earth.
10 Hodja = teacher of the Koran.
11 Babouche = Turkish slippers without heels.
12 Chalvar = Turkish pantaloons, far more graceful than the
hideous harem skirts, which met with such scant success in
this country.
13 Enturi = the tunic, heavily embroidered, which almost
covered the pantaloons.
14 The Western governesses, in so many cases, took no
interest in their pupils’ reading, and allowed them to read
everything they could lay their hands on. With their capacity
for intrigue, they smuggled in principally French novels of
the most harmful kind. Physical exercise being impossible
to work off the evil effects of this harmful reading, the
Turkish woman, discontented with her lot, saw only two
ways of ending her unhappy existence—flight or suicide; she
generally preferred the latter method.
15 Slaves.
16 They were called “white” because they were originally
attended by unmarried women only, and they all wore white
dresses.—G. E.
17 It sounds strange to the Western mind to speak of a
“comfortable cemetery,” but the dead are very near to the
living Turks; the cemetery is the Turkish woman’s favourite
walk, and the greatest care is taken of the last resting-place
of the loved ones.—G. E.
18 The editor is not responsible for the ideas expressed in
this book, which are not necessarily her own.
19 Karakheuz = Turkish performance similar to our Punch
and Judy Show.
20 Zeyneb has forgotten that as well as Fridays and various
fast days, every Catholic receives the Holy Communion
fasting.—G. E.
21 Inhabitants of Pera. There is no love lost between
these ladies and the Turkish women proper. I personally
found many of them very charming.—G. E.
22 I received this letter in Constantinople, where I was
staying in a Turkish harem, having travelled there in order
to be present at the first debate in the newly-opened Turkish
Parliament.—G. E.
23 I leave my friend’s spelling unchanged—G. E.
24 It may be reasonably urged in reply that Zeyneb’s
criticism of our Christianity is far from adequate. But I
have preferred to present the impressions of a Turkish
woman.—G. E.
Printed by Ballantyne, Hanson & Co.
Edinburgh & London