# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2018
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, Jinny the Carrier
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57836/57836-h/57836-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

“It’s not a bad notion,” admitted the ancient.
“It’s a ripping notion.”
“Arter all, as you say, there’s no reason we should come into
colloosion.” He dropped the knife back on the table, and looked
out of the still open window.
“Ay, it’s a grand coach!” he gurgled.
“The talk of the countryside—only needs a turnpike road to
beat the train!” said Will, expanding afresh. “Snowdrop and
Cherry-blossom I call these horses for fun—because they’re so
black, you see.”
“Ay, black as the devil! And hark at ’em pawin’—there’s
fire and sperrit for you. That’s as foine a coach as ever Oi took
up from. It’ll not look amiss with Quarles painted ’stead o’
Flynt.”
“I beg your pardon,” said Will quickly. “Flynt must
remain. The Flynt Flyer—you can’t alter that.”
“Why can’t you?”
“You can’t say the Quarles Flyer—the Quarles Creeper runs
better off the tongue. The Flynt Flyer—that goes together.”
“But it’s you and me’s got to goo together,” retorted the
obstinate old man. “Anyways it must be the Quarles and
Flynt Flyer.”
“That’s too long. Besides the Flynt Flyer’s become a trade-mark—known
everywhere.”
“And what about Daniel Quarles, Carrier? That’s a better
known trade-mark. We’ll paint that.”
Will shook his head. “I can’t do that, but I’ll paint Flynt
and Quarles, Carriers, underneath the name of the coach. And
that’s the limit.”
“Daniel Quarles was always a peaceable man. . . . Quarles
and Flynt!” breathed the Gaffer beatifically.
“No, Flynt and Quarles,” Will corrected. “Flynt must go
first.”
“Why must?”
“Don’t F come before Q? Folks would think we didn’t
know our A B C.”
“It would be more scholardy,” Daniel admitted.
Will proffered a conclusive hand. “Then it’s a bargain!”
But Daniel let the hand hover.
“Oi don’t droive much meself nowadays,” he repeated with
anxious honesty.
“We don’t expect it of the head of the firm,” said Will grandly;
“there’s substitutes and subordinates.” But his hand drooped
with a sense of bathos.
“Ay,” said the old man, swelling, “subordinators and granddarters.”
He fished for the hand.
“Oughtn’t we to let ’em know?” Will insinuated.
“Oi allus liked young Flynt, your father,” answered the
Gaffer, squeezing his fingers heartily. “And there warn’t much
amiss with your mother. A forthright family, aldoe Peculiar.
Jinny droives a-Sundays to chapel with the buoy-oys!”
At which sudden failure—or rather resurgence—of memory,
Will felt more urgently than ever the need of getting Jinny’s
consent rather than the nonagenarian’s.
“You’re mighty lucky,” he said craftily, “to have a granddaughter
so spry. I reckon we’d better have her down and tell
her.”
“Ay, that Oi be,” replied the Gaffer. “ ’Tis heartenin’ to
hear her singin’ up and down the house.”
Indeed a little silvery trill was reaching them now. To Will it
recalled more than one moment of mockery, but he felt nothing
provocative in this song except its parade of happiness. It
seemed to fling back his compassion, to be ominous of a refusal
of his proposition. Perhaps, on second thoughts, it might be
better to leave the old man to present her with a finished fact.
“Well, I must be getting home,” he said. “Glad that’s
settled.”
Daniel clutched the knife again. “And we’ll cut the cake
upon it.”
“No, no.” Mistake or no mistake, it seemed sacrilegious to
slice into this quasi-ecclesiastical magnificence.
“But it’s a bargain. Jinny shall cut it. Jinny!” he called up.
“Just coming, Gran’fer.”
“That’s too grand for a bargain,” Will remonstrated. “Would
almost do for a wedding,” he added with sly malice.
“Well, ain’t this for a pardnership?” the old man cackled.
He moved to the door and stood looking out on the horses.
“Steady, my beauties,” he said proprietorially. He shuffled to
them and rubbed a voluptuous hand along the satiny sheen of
their skins. “Flynt and Quarles,” he murmured.
Will had taken the opportunity to escape from the house. He
now prepared to light his lamps. Bats were swooping and
darting, weaving their weird patterns, but the air was still
uncooled.
“Ye’re not a-gooin’ afore the cake’s cut!” the Gaffer protested.
“I’d best not see Jinny—she might only fly at me.”
“Rubbidge. When we’ve made it up!”
“But I’m late, and I shouldn’t wonder if there’s a thunderstorm.”
“Won’t take half a jiffy!” He dashed into the house and
seized the knife. Will was only in time to arrest his uplifted
arm, and Jinny, descending on the tableau, had a tragi-comic
sense of rushing betwixt a murderer and her lover.
“What are you doing, Gran’fer?” she gasped.
He surrendered the bread-knife blinkingly to her, and Will
released his arm, struck breathless by the change in Jinny. Not
only were apron and shabby gown replaced by the Gentry
masterpiece, not only was her hair combed and braided in a
style he had never seen, but the face which reduced all these
fripperies to insignificance seemed years younger and fresher.
The little lines were gone from the forehead, the hard defiance
from the eyes, and the wanness from the cheeks: the whole face
was mantled with a soft light. How shrewd he had been to
suggest this partnership, he thought with a pleasant glow, forgetting
its origin in pity. For assuredly this softly radiant
person made no call on that emotion. The old man was equally
astonished. “Why, Jinny, ye’re as smart as a carrot!” he cried
naïvely. “Bless ye.” He kissed her fondly. “Willie wants to
goo into pardnership—Quarles and Flynt.”
The young people looked at each other, both as carrots in hue.
“Well, Willie, where’s your tongue? Tell her how we’ve
settled it.”
“He can tell me on Sunday,” said Jinny, not utterly unresentful
of their masculine methods.
“On Sunday?” the Gaffer gasped.
“After chapel,” Jinny explained.
“Oi won’t have no such talk a-Sundays. It’s got to be now.
Goo ahead, buoy-oy!”
“Oh, Gran’fer,” Jinny pleaded. “Can’t you go and light
Will’s lamps?”
“Ye want to upset it all behind my back,” he said with a
cunning air.
“No, I don’t.”
“Ye can’t diddle Daniel Quarles. It’s a fust-rate proposition,
and don’t ye dare say ‘Noa.’ ”
“But, Gran’fer!” Jinny hung her head. “You might understand.”
“Oi understand better nor you. Look at that coach now—a
grand coach—Quarles and Flynt.”
“Never mind the coach—light the lamps,” Jinny cried
paradoxically.
Daniel moved out reluctantly. “It’s a hansum proposition,
Jinny,” he said. “Where’s your tinder-box, Willie?”
“Here’s matches,” said Will. He looked uneasy. Her grandfather
seemed to be irritating the girl—it boded ill for his
proposition.
“Don’t be afeared, Willie. She won’t fly at ye now. Easy,
my beauties. Steady, Snowdrop!”
“You don’t mind my clearing up,” said Jinny, pouncing upon
Farmer Gale’s imperilled cake.
“Not if you don’t fly at me,” Will quoted with a nervous
facetiousness.
Jinny smiled with equal nervousness: “Oh, I won’t fly at
you—nor jump at you, neither.”
Will flinched. Had he not felt committed to her grandfather,
he would have shrunk from the rebuff now menacing his proposition.
Indeed, he was not quite clear as to how he could really
amalgamate the two concerns. The notion of a girl guard, which
had first flashed upon him as an inspiration, was now felt to be
beset by obstacles. True, the operations of blowing such a long
horn, taking so many fares, booking so many parcels, and locking
and unlocking the boots, were a serious discount from the
pleasures of driving, and a person familiar with the minutiæ of
carrying, and a ready-reckoner incarnate, (and so agreeably
incarnate) might well seem providential. But would the unfitness
of so unconventional an occupation be glossed over by the
existing acceptance of her in that line of business, and would
his overlordship be a protection or an added scandal? Still, he
was in for it now, unless she refused the post—which he hoped
she would not! For after all, at the worst, with all these new
circuits of his, he might still leave to her her little pottering round,
counting it as a branch of the new Flynt and Quarles business.
He would still have won the monopoly of the local carrying, and
without the weight on his conscience of starving her out.
“I know you’ve got a deal of pride and all that,” he began
diffidently, “but you’ll bear in mind your grandfather’s tickled
with the notion.”
“It’s hardly Gran’fer’s business,” Jinny murmured, blushing.
“Oh, I quite understand that. Of course it’s your business
really. Didn’t I ask you not to run away? I didn’t mean to
reckon it settled unless you said ‘Yes.’ ”
“I should hope not,” said Jinny with a spirit that banished
the blush. She carried the cake back to the top of the chest of
drawers.
“Of course it’s silly our going on separate, don’t you think
so?”
“I haven’t thought.” She took up the beer-jug to remove
it.
“Well, I have—I’ve thought a good deal—that’s why I figured
that with you as my partner—No, not for me, thank you.”
For Jinny was mechanically filling a glass. Flushing afresh,
she poured the beer back. “But who’s to look after Gran’fer?”
she said, her eyes averted. “How can I leave him?”
“I’ve thought of that—naturally when you’re so much with
me, you can’t be much with him. But, you see, there’ll be
plenty of dollars to share out—money, I mean—and we’d be
able to get in a woman to take care of him.”
To get in a woman! So he was prepared to let poor old
Gran’fer live with them! O exquisite, incredible magnanimity!
It solved all difficulties in a flash. “And what about Methusalem?”
she asked, expectant of a similarly sublime solution.
“Poor old Methusalem!” he laughed. “Won’t he like going
to grass? Well, if he’s so very keen, suppose he trots around
once a week on his own little affairs—hair-restorers and the
like.”
Even the little dart failed to pierce. She was overwhelmed by
this culminating magnanimity. This was indeed surrender. So
she was not ignorant of horses, so her work had not been improper.
She smiled responsively, but her voice shook. “You mean I
can carry on?”
“Under the Flynt flag, of course.”
“You wouldn’t really mind?”
“All’s grist that comes to the mill. Besides, it would leave
me free to branch out to Totfield Major, and perhaps even
Colchester. Tuesdays, say, if you like.”
But she did not like. Her conception of a wife’s dignity
boggled at the notion of driving around as before. Unmaidenly
it was not—he had handsomely admitted it—but unwifely it
assuredly was. A wife’s place, she felt instinctively, was the
home. She shook her head. “I don’t think I ought to drive
Methusalem any more.”
He gasped. “Well, you wouldn’t expect to handle a pair of
horses, would you?”
If he meant she could not, Jinny was not so sure. But why
argue so irrelevant a point? “No, of course not,” she murmured
obediently. “I mean Methusalem will like going out to
grass.”
He breathed freely again. The path to his project was clear
at last. “But as a sort of guard now——” he ventured, With
an indulgent air.
Jinny beamed at so facetious a picture. She saw herself in
red, with big buttons and shorn hair. “So I’m to blow your
horn for you after all!”
“Sure—once you’ve paid up the gloves!”
She laughed merrily. Even Miss Gentry’s bill was a dissipated
nightmare now.
“But where shall I get the money?” she joked, for the pleasure
of his reply.
“Oh, you’ll take all the money,” he instructed her seriously.
“I’ll have to allow you some, though,” she pointed out
gaily.
“Half,” he explained. “We divide the takings equally—that’s
my proposition. Snacks!”
“Oh, that’s much too much,” she protested as seriously.
The apparent admission pleased him, but increased his sense
of magnanimity. “Share and share alike,” he repeated magnificently.
“But you don’t want to spend half the takings,” Jinny persisted.
“How could I manage on a half?”
“Why, you’ll have much more than you ever had!”
Jinny was mystified. “But there’ll be the house to keep up
and—and——” She paused with shy flaming cheeks.
Will was getting a bit puzzled too. “And your grandfather?
But I’ve already offered to pay for him and his minder too—out
of the joint takings, I mean. Surely half and half is the most
you can expect.”
But it showed once more how little our Jinny had really been
changed from early-Victorian womanhood by her exceptional
experiences, that so unconventional a system of joint housekeeping
made no appeal to her. “A quarter is the most you can
expect,” she retorted.
“What!” Will was even more revolted by her ingratitude
than by her impudence. “When you only bring in your wretched
little cart, and I sank all my capital in the coach!”
“Your capital?” Jinny repeated blankly.
“You know what I had to pay for the horses!”
It was an unfortunate memory to stir up, and it helped a
flood of raw light to burst upon her.
“You’re not really proposing I should be your guard?” she
asked in a changed voice.
“Yes, I am,” he reassured her.
“For money?” she breathed incredulously.
“Of course. You don’t suppose I ask it for love! Business
is——!”
Jinny turned on him like a tigress—anger was the only thing
that could drown this dreadful sense of shame. “How dare
you?” she cried. “How dare you ask me to work for you
for money?”
Will winced before her passion. “You promised not to fly at
me,” he reminded her glumly.
“I didn’t think you’d suggest that.”
“And what’s wrong in suggesting a partnership?”
“A partnership!” she sneered. “Do you suppose I’m going
to pull you out of the mud?”
Will’s blood was up in its turn. “You pull me?”
“What else? You find yourself stuck and you come to me
to save your funeral coach.”
“Funeral coach?”
“That’s what Gran’fer calls it. And you will find yourself
carrying corpses if you go on cooping up your passengers in this
weather. Your silly concern hasn’t got a tilt to take off, but at
least you might put the luggage inside and the live-stock on top.
Oh, don’t be frightened, I won’t charge for my advice. But you
being young and raw——”
“Here! Stow that!” Will banged the floor with his whip.
“Then you refuse my offer!”
“Offer? I call it a petition.”
“Me petitioning——!” His breath failed.
“It wasn’t me that came with a flag of truce.”
He snorted. “You’ll come one day with a cry for mercy.”
“Me! You’ll never see me at Frog Farm. I’d rather go to
the poorhouse—to see you, I mean.”
Will set his teeth. “Very well then—my conscience is clear.
I did think I might have been hard on you. But now——!”
“Now,” she echoed mockingly.
“I shall crush you.”
She laughed tauntingly “Pride goes before a fall.”
“I shall crush you without pity.”
“You young rapscallion!” It was the Gaffer hobbling back.
Having lit the coach-lamps, he had lingered in voluptuous contemplation
of what they illumined. But the noise of high words
had reached him, and now with the astonishing muscularity that
still lingered in his shrunken frame, the ancient seized the whip
and wrenched it from Will’s grasp. Jinny flew between them,
fearing he would strike as he stood there in prophetic fury,
palpitating in his every limb. Her earlier intervention, though
against a knife, had been comic: here was tragedy, she felt.
“You crush my Jinny! Why, Oi’ll snap ye in two like this
whip.” And he hurled the pieces of the stock at Will’s feet.
Nip leapt for the butt-end and brought it back in his mouth
with high-wagging tall, demanding another throw. He broke
the tension of foolish mortality.
“Don’t excite yourself, Gran’fer,” said Jinny, leading him to
his chair. “I’ll cut him out before he’s a month older.”
Will guffawed. “I offered her a fair chance, Mr. Quarles,” he
said, taking the butt from Nip’s mouth. “You yourself said it
was a handsome offer.”
“We don’t want your offers, ye pirate thief, nor your chances
neither. Ye’ve only got our crumbles. Oi’ve sent a mort o’
customers to hell, and you can goo with ’em.”
“As you please.” Will picked up the whip-end quietly. But
the old volcano was still rumbling.
“You crush my Jinny—you with your flags and rags. Why,
all Bradmarsh ’ould give ye rough music. Ye’d be tin-kettled.”
“Very well! Only don’t say I didn’t give you a fair and
friendly chance. Don’t blame me if you come to want bread.”
“Bread!” The old man sprang towards the chest of drawers
and this time the cake was stabbed to the heart. “Have a
shiver?” he cried magnificently, holding up a regal hunk on the
knife-point.
Even Will was taken aback by this deed of derring-do. “Better
save it up,” he said sullenly.
“Save it?” repeated Daniel hysterically. Nip was already
on his hind legs begging for it—with a superb gesture the prodigal
grandfather threw it at the tireless mouth. “Never you darken
my doorstep again!” he cried to Will.
Will cracked his bit of whip with a scornful laugh. “Before
you see me in this house again, you’ll have to carry me in!”
“Carry him in? D’ye hear that, Nip?” The ancient
chuckled contemptuously. “That’s a good ’un.”
“Carry me in,” repeated Will fiercely. And holding up his
hand, “So help me God!” he cried.
“Spare your swearings, buoy-oy,” said Daniel grimly, throwing
the plaintive Nip another pile of sugary splendour. “Ye
’ont never cross this threshold agen save on your hands and
knees.” And sending his knife quivering into the floor, he brought
down his hand on his Bible. “On your hands and knees,” he
repeated solemnly.
Will turned and strode out stiffly. He looked almost tall. A
moment later they heard the clatter and jingle of the great
equipage moving forwards and the jubilant winding of the long
horn.
HORSE, GROOM, AND BRIDE
Then lay my tott’ring legs so low
  That have run very far,
O’er hedges and o’er ditches,
  O’er turnpike gate and bar,
Poor old horse! Poor old horse!
Somerset Song.
Normally the nonagenarian preserved scant memory of the
happenings of the present, vivid though his youthful recollections
were: But the great wedding-cake, served up at every meal for
days, co-operated with the intensity of the scene to stamp his
quarrel with Will upon his feebly registering brain. Especially
did Nip’s standing supplication for his quota revive and deepen
the impression. “On your hands and knees!” he would cry
savagely, as he threw the lucky dog a luscious morsel. And
even when Nip was absent at meal-times—as his mistress contrived
more than once, in her anxiety to pamper neither him nor
her grandfather’s resentment—the old man would growl grimly:
“Carry him in!” Aching enough at heart from her own
quarrel with Will, she had the wretched feeling that if by some
impossibility she and her rival could ever again come together,
the grotesque oaths of these two obstinate males would keep the
family breach unhealed.
But sentiment cannot retain its acuteness under business
worries and carking household cares. The rich cake eaten
through so monotonously became to Jinny a sort of ironic
symbol of the declining fortunes of Blackwater Hall. It contributed
indeed no little to the decay of the old business, not
merely by the great sum that had to be paid to the confectioner,
but through the loss of the considerable customer whose hymeneal
festivities its absence overgloomed. Marie Antoinette’s advice
to the starving to eat cake did not come into the Spelling-Book,
otherwise Jinny might have reflected how near they were come
to adopting it. Not that her grandfather had as yet occasion
to suspect the bareness of the larder. Unlike Mother Hubbard
he never went to the cupboard, the cupboard always comfortably
coming to him. Moreover, some rabbits shot by the farmers as
the falling crops uncovered them, and presented to the ancient
by annual custom, served to postpone the evil day. Jinny was
hardly conscious how much she stinted herself for his sake, so
poor was her appetite become. It was only once—-when passing
the big Harvest Dinner barn where Farmer Gale’s men roared
drunken choruses—that she felt a craving for food. This
valuable freedom from hunger she attributed to the heat: in
the winter, she told herself, she could always stoke for the week
at the Tuesday and Friday meals so amiably provided at Mother
Gander’s. That worthy lady would also doubtless refill grandfather’s
beer-barrel at cost price. It was fortunate he did not
smoke or snuff. Methodism had its points.
A more serious problem was presented by Methusalem—growing
distended by overmuch grass—and even her goats
coveted an occasional supplement to the hedgerows and the oak
scrub if their milk was to run freely. But of hay or cabbages
her store was small, and these finicking feeders, though they
condescended to eat horse-chestnuts, would not even accept a
gnawed apple. The poultry, too, must soon be eaten, if they
could not be properly fed, and the thought of instructing her
grandfather to twist a familiar neck made her blood run cold.
With such a varied household to cater for, our little housekeeper
began to envy Maria, who, according to Mrs. Flynt, raised her
large and frequent families on everything and anything on earth,
rhubarb-leaves being the one and only pabulum pigs turned up
their snouts at. It was not the least painful part of this novel
pinch of poverty that Jinny felt herself compelled to forgo those
calls with little presents for the Pennymoles, the Bidlakes, and
the poor and the bed-ridden in general, with which she had
diversified her deliveries: she did not realize that her mere
presence would have been a creature comfort.
But of these pangs and problems the world knew naught, hearing
her little horn making its gay music and seeing her still jauntily
perched on her driving-board in her elegant rose-pink frock and
with the latest fancy whipcord edge to the straw of her bonnet.
Her music, indeed, was far livelier than the wheezy notes of the
Flynt Flyer’s guard, though otherwise the red-coated clodhopper
who had been stuck up on the coach a few days after its visit
to Blackwater Hall, lent the last touch to its fascinations. But
if passengers, other than Elijah Skindle and one or two equally
unbusinesslike young men, were no longer content to crawl along
in her cart, that historic vehicle showed scant sign of defeat.
Already when the removal of the hoops in the hot weather had
threatened to expose too clearly the nakedness of the land,
parcels of stones on the model of the swain-chaser had begun to
cumber it up, and when one Monday morning the Flynt Flyer
came swaggering in new pea-green paint, the Quarles Crawler
turned up on Tuesday mountainous with the old boxes and
cypress clothes-chests routed out of the ante-room, and emptied
of their litter.
It was at this point that the Gaffer had had to be put into the
plot. He had long since begun to smell a rat—having a super-sense
for his business, however his other senses might fail—and
it would have been impossible to heave up the boxes without
him, or to explain their removal without imparting some notion of
the tragic truth. And the truth did not diminish his resentment
against young Caleb’s boy or his vigilance against further robbers.
“Carry him in!” he would cackle and croak as he bore out the
emptied “spruce-hutches” to the cart or carefully permutated
their positions in it. Then with hoarse thunder: “On your hands
and knees, ye pirate thief!”
But these ostentated boxes—while they saved the pride of the
Quarleses—did but damage the remainder of their custom. The
faithful few had been held back by solicitude for Jinny’s livelihood:
seeing her now so flourishing, the very tail-board lowered
on its chains and groaning under protruding “portmantles,” her
last clients save Peculiars lapsed in silent relief, one after another.
Daily, poor Jinny expected to see four horses on the rival vehicle
and its circuit extended to Colchester. But that would have
meant for Will a grandeur inconsistent with the petty commissions
which he still deigned to execute: it would have allowed
some of her old custom to return to her. And he was sullenly
bent on driving her—literally—out of the business. But he
enhanced the dignity of his profession by copying from an old
inn of the pack-horse days its signboard of “The Carriers’ Arms,”
depicting a rope, a wanty-hook, and five packing skewers. These,
painted in black on the pea-green, seemed to proclaim his formal
annexation and monopoly of the local carrying trade.
Jinny began to think seriously of buying up from the barns
some straw from the reaped sheaves and competing with the
cottagers in the all-pervasive plaiting industry. Splitting straws
was no despicable occupation in the valley of the Brad, where it
was done by enginery, and provided even children of six and
old men of eighty with the opportunity of adding to the family
income. Tambour-lace and other things also entered into her
thoughts. The only thing that never entered into them was
the idea of ceasing to ply. So long as the boxes and the cart
held together, the Flynt Flyer should always see the rival
vehicle imperturbably jogging. In every sense she would
“carry on.”
August was ending aridly. Methusalem’s sensitive nose was
protected from flies by green bracken. Calves snuggled in the
hot meadows, meditatively chewing, an image of somnolence,
their tails flicking whitely. Stooks or manure-heaps had reduced
the fields to geometrical patterns. Tall hollyhocks leaned
dustily like ruined towers. Bucolic conversation was of the
absent rain. Rooks were more destructive than ever. Swedes
were doing badly and every one had waited to sow turnips, rape,
or mustard. They had no fodder even for winter stock. Master
Peartree began to worry over his sheep as they munched the
sapless grass. In the waterless little villages the ground was
hard as iron, and Bundock strode over the swamps around Frog
Farm as fearlessly as now frequently. “A regular doucher”
was the general demand upon Providence, though it was couched—for
church and chapel—in less vivid terms. These prayers
enabled Bundock to work off one of his old aphorisms, saved for
a rainless day. “It’s no use praying for rain,” he chuckled to
the countryside, “till you see the storm-clouds.” “But you
don’t scarce need to pray then,” the countryside pointed out, to
his disgust.
In Jinny’s soul, too, there was drought, and she seemed to
share Bundock’s view that prayer was waste of breath. Not
that her evening prayers were left unsaid, but in her apathy and
weariness no private plea was added to the prescribed form,
though the Spelling-Book commended the asking for extra mercies,
provided also one begged for a perpetual continuance of the
Protestant Succession. What deliverance could there be for
her? God Himself, she felt obscurely, could not help her, any
more than she had ever been able to help little mavises fallen
from their nests and deserted by their mothers. Their thrilling-eyed
vitality and exquisite flutterings had only made her
miserable. But perhaps God was now as sorry for her.
One grown-up mavis, too, she remembered, a victim to the
winter battle of life, the neck half severed from the half-plucked
body, the liquid eye gazing appealingly at her, the legs stirring
feebly in a welter of feathers. She had nerved herself to grant
its dumb plea: she had stamped sharply on its skull and seen
its eye fly out on the path like a bright bead. Could God do
aught less drastic for her? Not that she ever dreamed of dying:
she must live on, however mutilated, for it was impossible to
conceive her grandfather getting along without her. Consider
only his trousers! How loosely they were now flapping round
his shrunken calves, almost like a sailor’s. Soon the winter
winds would be piping through them. Without her to take in
a tuck, where would he be? And who would cut his hair and
trim his beard?
It was her grandfather who was mainly responsible for the discontinuance
of her chapel habit on Lord’s Day. His increased
fretfulness and fractiousness since he was become aware of the
rival power, made it imprudent to leave him for long except
unavoidably—not to mention the danger to herself of awkward
meetings at chapel with that rival power—and there was the
further difficulty of getting to Chipstone, now Farmer Gale’s trap
was out of the question. But she was not without a nearer place
of worship—for to the scandal of the Peculiars, particularly
Bundock, she now began to attend the parish church of Little
Bradmarsh, whose emptiness with its parade of free seats after
eleven o’clock was a standing pleasantry in the spheres of Dissent.
The convenience of proximity was not, however, its main attraction
for Jinny, and Miss Gentry would have rejoiced less had
she understood that a change of heart or doctrine or the magnetism
of the Reverend Mr. Fallow had as little to do with
Jinny’s apparent conversion; though the fact that Jinny had
never forgotten her one childish glimpse of the prayer-absorbed
pastor doubtless served to reassure the girl as to the not altogether
ungodly character of his edifice.
She had entered to cart over to the Chipstone hospital some fruit
laid before the altar at the Harvest Thanksgiving by the one
prosperous worshipper. For Mr. Fallow was still an unwavering
client of hers, almost the last outside her own communion, possibly
because having neither family nor flock to distract him from his
classics, he had scarcely observed the coach.
In the “Speculi Britanniæ Pars,” in which he had once hunted
out her genealogy—to his own satisfaction and nobody’s hurt—Essex
was compared to Palestine for its flow of “milke and
hunny.” And “hunny” was still her staple link with the tall
fusty-coated, snuff-smeared figure, stooping over his hives or his
Virgil, both sacredly fused for him in the Fourth Georgic. She
marketed his surplus, exchanging it for firkins of butter and—O
aberrations of the godliest—canisters of Lundy Foot. And it
was after disposing of some of his smaller tithes—for the parish
had remained outside the recent Commutation Act of 1836—that
Jinny had been thus led to set foot in his church. There
were in those days no floral decorations to mar the completeness
with which the arches and pillars ministered to her troubled
mood. The outside she had always found soothing, with its
grey old stonework and its lichened tower rising amid haystacks
and thatched cottages with dormer windows. But how much
cooler the peace that fell upon her, when she passed through the
old, spiky, oak door and under the long, wooden, vaulted roof into
a dimness shot with rich stained glass. Mr. Fallow had been
one of the earliest clergymen of the century to remove the
whitewash from the old painted walls of his church, and though
the royal arms—the lion and the unicorn—still lingered over the
chancel, there was no other jar in the spiritual harmony except
the stove, whose pipe went hideously up and along the ceiling.
Ignoring that, however, in the effect of the whole and forgetting
everything else, Jinny sank upon a pew-bench and abandoned
herself to the unholy influences of architecture, so restful after
her chapel with its benches and table-desk, ugliness unadorned.
Not even a gradual consciousness of neglected duty could impair
the divine tranquillity.
But the sober beauty of the place might not have sufficed to
draw her again, but for a strange circumstance. One of the
stained-glass figures, dully familiar to her from without as a
leaden glaze, proved when seen from within in all the glory of
art to be an angel of the very type under which her childish
vision had imagined her hovering mother. And that it actually
was mystically interfused with her mother, as her emotion had
immediately intertwined it, was demonstrated by the fact that
even when she at last went forward to gather up the plums and
apples, the eyes followed her about in protection and benediction.
Miss Gentry’s legend of her moving angel lost its last shade of
improbability, and it was with a new humility that Jinny repeated
to her at the first opportunity her remorse for the permuted
pot.
Nor did the angel’s emanation of guardianship prove
illusory, for outraged though Miss Gentry had been by the
suggestion that her moustache needed a hair-restorer, she
graciously intimated—after the second Sunday of Jinny’s
attendance—that the debt for the dress could be worked off in
commission charges. It was a vast relief, for the Bundock-borne
rumour of her apostacy had alienated the bulk of her co-religionists
and exchanged the lingering remorse of earlier deserters
for a sense of rectitude and foresight. Bundock’s sympathy
with the Brotherhood almost reinstated him in its good graces.
“But it brings its own punishment,” he pointed out consolingly.
“Fancy putting a parson over herself to poke his snuffy nose
into everything. That’s a pretty dress, Jinny, he’ll say, is it
paid for? Or, that’s a cranky old grandpa you’ve got—why
don’t ye put him in the poorhouse?”
It was as well poor Jinny did not overhear him, or she might
have doubted whether her load of boxes was so uniformly imposing
as she imagined. The Deacon, who did hear him, and who spent
his life poking into holes and reprimanding sinners, was even
more righteously indignant at the interference of parsons. “Inquisitive
as warmin in a larder,” he described them. “Fussing
around the poor, but without a drop of rum in their milk of
human koindness.” Mr. Fallow—it would appear—had interfered
on behalf of his parishioner in the threatened lawsuit with
Miss Gentry: he had persuaded the guileless rat-catcher to
promise to clear her cottage for nothing, and this although Mrs.
Mott was paying her in full for his wife’s silk dress, the responsibility
for which he had righteously repudiated.
“Oi’ll clear her cottage,” he added darkly, and it seemed to
Bundock that the parson had succeeded only in patching up the
feud. But what was to be expected of the canting crew, the
postman inquired. The new Chipstone curate had called on his
father, and Bundock related with a chuckle how the bed-ridden
old boy had patronizingly regretted that, being on his back, he
could do nothing to help his visitor. “He sent him away with
a bed-flea in his ear,” gloated Bundock. Mr. Joshua Mawhood
recalled a bigger flea in the same clerical ear. The hapless
curate had offered him a ticket for a lecture on “Economy.”
“Come with me Bradmarsh way,” the rat-catcher had retorted,
“and Oi’ll show you Mrs. Pennymole’s cottage, and if you’ll
show me how she can bring up her nine childer on eleven shillings
a week, Oi’ll eat your shovel-hat.” Bundock, unable to find a
still larger flea, fell back on hypothesis. “If I’d been a Churchman
and a chap in a white choker came to mine,” he said, “I’d
tell him to mind his own business, and I dare say he’d be insulted,
though I’d be giving him splendid advice. You know where the
door is, I’d say, for you didn’t come in by the chimney. Now
walk out, or else——!” And carried away by his own drama,
Bundock administered a hearty kick to the apparently still-lingering
phantom.
Needless to say, Mr. Fallow exercised none of this imagined
prying into Jinny’s affairs. Like his pew-opener, whose long
caped coat with the official red border found now a fresh justification,
he was only too glad of her uninvited attendance, and the
considerable accretion she brought to his congregation. Her
presence freshened up for himself his old sermons: for her sake
he even put in new Latin quotations. But Jinny enjoyed
more the three musicians in the gallery—’cellist, flautist, and
bassoonist—whose black frock-coats and trousers made them as
important in quality as they were in quantity, and when after
they had played a few bars the congregation sang:
“Awake my soul, and with the sun
 Thy daily stage of duty run,”
Jinny felt herself rapt far indeed from her daily stage of duty.
Even the pew-opener shuffling about in his list slippers to poke
up the stove or a small boy, or to snuff the guttering tallow
candles on dark mornings, could not bring her to earth.
And another factor than the church and its mother-angel
helped Jinny over this dreary time. This was her dog. For
only now did Nip emerge into his full caninity, or at least only
now did Jinny learn to appreciate him to the full. In howsoever
leaden a mood she started her carrying work, Nip’s ecstasy soon
tinged it with gold. His blissful staccato barks, his tall inflated
tail, his upleapings at her as she harnessed Methusalem, his
gallopings and gambollings round that stolider fellow-quadruped,
his crazy friskings and curvetings—who could resist such joy of
life? Often it seemed to Jinny that he was returning thanks to
his Maker for the sunshine or the good smells, rebuking unconsciously
her heart-heaviness, bidding her cry no more over spilt
milk, but just lap up what she could. “Cheer up, Jinny!” she
heard him bark. “Men are brutes and women fools and gran’fers
grumpy and customers cruel, but life is jolly and odours numerous
and where there’s a way there’s a Will.” And infected by these
sentiments of his, she would crack her whip, and Methusalem
would prick up his ears and pretend for her sake to go faster,
and there would be a lull in the ache at her heart.
Nip, however, was less consoling when the rival carriers met
on the road. Then his invincible persuasion that the two were
one brought Jinny considerable discomfort. For Will persisted
in his later tactics of slowing down, whether to take stock of her
appearance or to rub in the odious comparison of their respective
equipages, so that while these were in proximity, Nip was able
to feel himself shepherding them, and he ran from one to the
other, rounding them up. Even when Jinny manœuvred off
down the first by-way, Nip, not to be baulked, would travel
between one and the other, growing more and more desperate
as they grew more and more distant, till at last, fearful of losing
both, he exchanged his frenzied shuttling between them for a
still more frenzied standstill midway between the mutually
receding vehicles—you saw him almost literally torn in two.
Finally, after plaintive ululations of protest, he would trot back,
with hang-dog look and drooping tail, to the shabby cart, where
his mistress throned, grim and pale, amid her manifold mock
parcels.
But it was neither Mr. Fallows sermons nor Nip’s that gave
Jinny her first real sense of religion; not even the bass-viol and
flute, though she heard them with ecstasy, nor the collects and
litanies, though she perused them with interest. It came to her
one pitch-black night when she had too confidently ventured out
to bring first aid—a jug of real tea with some bread and butter—to
poor rheumatic Uncle Lilliwhyte, whom earlier that day, while
gathering mushrooms for supper, she had discovered in a deserted
charcoal-burner’s hut.
She had not known before that Farmer Gale had carried out
his threat of evicting the nondescript from his cottage on the
plea of needing it for a labourer, and although she had been
compelled to suspend the ministrations which had set Mr. Fallow
looking for the Lady Bountiful in her blood, she felt vaguely
responsible for Uncle Lilliwhyte’s declined fortunes, so parallel to
her own. Would, in fact, the Cornishman have turned him out
if Jinny had allowed that all-powerful arm to remain round her
waist at the cattle-market; nay, could she not have cheered and
nourished a subject countryside?
The unsavoury ancient was lying on some coarse sacking in a
clearing still half charred. Literally “sackcloth and ashes,”
Jinny thought, as she groped her way along the glade by the
twinkle of his candle through the chinks of his ramshackle hut.
An old flintlock, some snares, nets and rods, and a cooking-pot
seemed all its furniture. She was horrified to think—as she
gazed at the gaps in the roof—that the prayer for rain might be
granted. But to her surprise the old man was sharing the
communal aspiration—“a good rine as’ll make the seeds spear”—though
not hopeful of the boon immediately. He did not
want to be a “wet-’ead,” he declared paradoxically, but the
ground would be harder before the sun met the wind. Such
solicitude on behalf of soil belonging so largely to the farmer who
had evicted him seemed to Jinny touchingly Christian.
It was only when she had turned her back on his glimmering
light and got into the thick of the woods that they became
curiously unfamiliar. Great trees that she did not know existed
came colliding against her, tangles of roots tripped her up on her
favourite paths; she stumbled into unfriendly pricklinesses of
every species. She seemed, indeed, ridiculously lost within a
furlong of her own door: how this black labyrinth had got there
she could not understand, but it looked as if she might be all
night escaping from it. She was even uneasily expecting one of
the snakes Uncle Lilliwhyte hunted to glide perversely under
her feet, she bruising its head and it biting her heel as the curse
in Genesis predicted. Of course, if she could spit into its mouth
after chewing some Spanish bugloss, it would instantly die. So
at least Miss Gentry had assured her. But how find the rare
bugloss in this blackness, or how spit accurately into the serpent’s
mouth?
Why had she not brought a lantern, she asked herself. Was
it really because she was jug and package laden, or had it been only
conceit? She asked the question still more self-reproachfully
when, after smashing the empty jug in a stumble which left her
knuckles bleeding, she heard the gurgle of a water-hen and
realized that she was far off her track and nearly into the Brad.
She could not swim, but even a swimmer in such a moonless,
starless void would not see the shore. Cautiously feeling her
way among the willows, she groped towards the pasture-land,
paradoxically pleased when she fell over a sleeping cow. She
lay there some minutes in the warm darkness, not anxious to
move on, for the river wound perilously in and out, one could
still hear it rippling deliciously in the reeds, and the odours of
the night were as exquisite. And then through the measureless
blackness a faint suggestion of grey began to make itself perceptible
or rather divinable, so shadowy was it, a lesser shade of
black rather than an adumbration of light; it was as if behind
the blank firmament some star was striving to shine.
And suddenly, mystically, she felt that this hinted radiance
was God, the Light behind life’s darkness, and the words of the
twenty-third Psalm came to her mind with all the force of a
revelation. “The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want. He
maketh me lie down in green pastures. He leadeth me beside the
still waters.” How divinely apt was every word! So long as
she had not wanted for aught, so long as she had not needed to
be led, she had not really felt the meaning of the words: now
that she was strayed and a-hungered, she knew overpoweringly
that she had a shepherd. He was behind her watching, as surely
as she watched over her grandfather. Now she understood what
the Peculiars meant when they got up to testify. She must go
back to them, bear witness this very next Sunday. Mr. Fallow’s
church had no place for such testimonies. Women could not
speak even at Morning Service.
And as if to complete her conversion, there was a swift pattering,
a joyous bark, and a cold nose in her fevered palm. She had
only to attach her handkerchief to Nip’s collar to be guided
safely home. But it was Nip that was really her shepherd, she
told herself, or at least her sheep-dog: it was Nip that was
leading her beside the still waters. Dog was after all only God
spelt backwards, she thought, with a sense of mystic discovery.
And remembering all that Nip had done to bring her back to
faith in life, she felt he was indeed a divine messenger. But then
it was borne in upon her that if she testified her true thoughts,
the Brethren would deem her irreverent. After all, it was Mr.
Fallow who might understand better, he who spoke of his bees
with love, and had once cited to her a passage from a Roman
poet about bees being part of the divine mind. The Roman
writer was not a Catholic, he had explained carefully, seeing her
dubious face.
In her gratitude to the dressmaker, Jinny had become more than
ever her intellectual parasite, and a wealth of information from
“The Christian Mother’s Miscellany” and “Culpeper’s Herbal”—to
say nothing of the spinster’s own sibylline rhymes—enriched
the walk to and from church, which Miss Gentry graciously
permitted her carrier and debtor to take in her society next
Sunday morning. They parted indeed inside, Miss Gentry
plumping herself unrebuked into the curtained three-benched
pew of the dead and gone squire whom old Farmer Gale had dispossessed.
Jinny was thus unable to exchange glances with her
at the thrilling announcement read out by the cleric, who after
the Second Lesson declared curtly—as if it were the most natural
thing in the world—that Mr. Anthony Flippance, widower, of
Frog Farm, and Miss Bianca Cleopatra Jones, spinster, of Foxearth
Farm, both of this parish, proposed to enter into holy
matrimony. At once a whirligig of images circled round Jinny
and she saw dizzily the explanation of a disappearance that had
puzzled her, for Tony had vanished from “The Black Sheep”
without leaving a tip, the old waiter grumbled. What had led
up to this adventure, she wondered, and how was Polly taking
her intended stepmother?
“Isn’t that the Showman you’ve spoken of?” Miss Gentry
inquired, as the congregation of seven streamed out, swollen by
musicians, sexton, clerk, and pew-opener. “The fomenter of
ungodliness?”
“It certainly seems my old customer,” replied Jinny, somewhat
evasively. “But I didn’t know he was living at Frog
Farm.”
“Didn’t you tell me he was going to turn your chapel into a
playhouse?”
“So he said once, but nothing seems to have come of it.”
“More’s the pity,” Miss Gentry surprised Jinny by commenting.
She added, “Even a playhouse would do less harm.”
“I—I don’t see that,” Jinny stammered, protesting.
“It’s as clear as daylight. The Devil stamps his sign plainly
on a playhouse: he forges God’s name on a chapel. And who
is this Miss Jones?”
“I don’t know. I never heard of any girl at Foxearth Farm
called Cleopatrick—what a funny name!”
“Cleopatra,” corrected Miss Gentry grandly, her bosom
expanding till it strained her Sunday silk. “A great Queen of
Egypt in the days of old. Born under Venus and died of the
bite of an asp!”
“What’s an asp?” said Jinny.
“It’s what they call the serpent of old Nile!”
“Good gracious!” Jinny exclaimed. “Couldn’t they have
given Her Majesty agrimony wine?”
“Neither horse-mint nor wild parsnip could avail: there is no
ointment against suicide,” Miss Gentry explained. “She killed
herself.”
“A queen kill herself! What for?”
“What does one kill oneself for?” Miss Gentry demanded
crushingly. “For love, of course. But I hope her namesake is
more respectable. Cleopatra never published the banns. But
how comes this Miss Jones to be at Foxearth Farm? I thought
the people were called Purley—hurdle-makers, aren’t they?”
“Yes—it must be a lodger. They do take lodgers. I must
ask Barnaby—I meet him on the road sometimes.” She stood
still suddenly, going red and white by turns like the revolving
lens of a lighthouse.
Miss Gentry stared, then smiled in sentimental sympathy
“Is he a nice boy?” she cooed.
“Who? Ye-es, very nice,” Jinny stammered. “But I’ve
just remembered Miss Jones isn’t his sister!”
“Who said she was? Oh, Jinny, Jinny!” Miss Gentry
sometimes became roguish.
“She’s only his stepsister,” Jinny explained desperately.
“Mrs. Purley’s first husband was called Jones.”
If the bride should really be the Purley creature—the fair
charmer who rode so often in Will’s coach as to be almost
“keeping company” with him! What a lifting of a nightmare!
What a sudden horizon of rose! But no, it was too good to be
true!
“But I never heard she was called Cleopatra,” she wound up
sadly.
“People often have a second name hidden away like a tuck,”
said Miss Gentry.
“But her first name isn’t the same either, it’s Blanche.”
“But Bianca is Blanche!” bayed Miss Gentry, like an excited
bloodhound. “Only more grand and foreign-like.”
Jinny’s colours revolved again.
“Is it?” she breathed. But she remembered Mr. Flippance’s
address had been announced as Frog Farm. If he had thus
ousted young Mr. Flynt, she urged, how could he be living so
amicably under his rival’s roof? Besides, how should Mr.
Purley’s second wife, a matron as famous for her cheeses as her
spouse for his hurdles, have christened her girl so outlandishly?
No, Joneses were as abundant as hips and haws, and this Miss
Jones could only have come to their out-of-the-way parish—like
Mr. Flippance—for reasons of statutory residence, though why
the Showman should bury himself to be married, Miss Gentry
declared to be an exciting enigma. Perhaps he liked a quiet
wedding, Jinny suggested, having too many acquaintances in
towns, and with that she dismissed the hope from her mind.
But it was not so easy to dismiss the topic from Miss Gentry’s.
That lady was rolling the hymeneal discussion under her tongue.
She pointed out that Foxearth Farm was not in Little Bradmarsh
and was prepared to discuss the romantic ramifications, if it
should turn out on the wedding-day that the bride was disqualified.
But Jinny cruelly took the sweet out of her mouth.
Foxearth Farm was in the parish, she declared. “It’s one of
those funny bits, lost, stolen, or strayed into other parishes. I
know because of the women from there who come upon our
parish for blankets when they’re laid aside——”
“Oh, Jinny!” deprecated Miss Gentry, to whom, maternity
was as sordid and surreptitious as matrimony was righteously
romantic.
But Jinny, innocently misunderstanding, persisted. “Why, I
remember the fuss when the steam-roller tried to charge our parish
for doing up a scrap of the road beyond Foxearth Farm.”
They walked through the sunlit churchyard in constrained
silence, Miss Gentry feeling as if the steam-roller had gone over
roses. But stimulated by the iron pole and the four steps, by
which ladies who rode pillion anciently mounted and dismounted,
she began wondering who would be making the bride’s dress.
That gave Jinny a happy idea. How if she got Miss Gentry the
work—that would be a slight return for all she owed her!
“Why shouldn’t you make it?” she inquired excitedly. “I
could speak to Mr. Flippance, now that I know where he is.”
“Hush, child, don’t profane the Sabbath! Men don’t count
in wedding matters,” said Miss Gentry in complex correction.
“Nor would I care about the patronage of stage people.”
“But she mayn’t be stage.”
“Like runs to like,” Miss Gentry sighed, and Jinny felt the
Colchester romance hovering again. But it did not descend.
Instead, Miss Gentry remarked that she ought to have known
that it could not be a local beauty. No play-actor with any
brains at all could be attracted by anything hereabouts, especially
when they could not achieve the acquaintance of women of real
attraction and intellect, these preferring the company of cats to
that of strolling sinners. Nevertheless, far be it from her
wilfully to rob Jinny of a commission.
“I wasn’t thinking of my commission,” Jinny protested with
a little flush.
“I couldn’t dream of it otherwise. Squibs and I need so little
and have more work than we can manage.”
“Squibs?” Jinny murmured.
“The place is overrun with rats,” Miss Gentry explained.
“What will it be when the cold drives them in from the ditches?
However, fortunately that horrible old Mawhood stands compelled
to clear the cottage before winter. That was the compromise
our too kindly pastor let him off with.”
“So you told me. Shall I order the Deacon at once?”
“The Deacon?” Miss Gentry sniffed. “Bishops they’ll call
themselves next.”
“There is a bishop,” Jinny reminded her. “Bishop Harrod.”
“Wretched little rat-catchers!” Miss Gentry hissed. “Setting
themselves up against the Church Established. I’m so glad
you’re done with them.”
“But I’m not,” Jinny confessed shyly. “I’m still Peculiar.”
“You are, indeed!” Miss Gentry cried, startled. “Do you
mean to tell me that after the glorious privilege of sitting under
Mr. Fallow——!” Words failed her, and they also failed Jinny,
to whom this unfamiliar metaphor conjured up a puzzling
picture of the vicar perched on her Sunday bonnet. The girl was
the first to recover her breath.
“Gran’fer told me my mother wanted me to be Peculiar,” she
explained. “I can’t go against my Angel-Mother.” Then she
blushed prettily, never having mentioned the angel mother since
childhood, and feeling somehow as if she had profaned a sacred
secret.
“If your angel mother was alive,” cried Miss Gentry with
conviction, “it’s to our church that she would come—to our
grand old church with its storied windows!”
A divine thrill ran through all Jinny’s frame. Her belief that
her mother and the painted angel were mysteriously one was
sealed. The oracle had spoken.
Miss Gentry, swelling at her silence—Jinny heard the silk
crackling—felt herself indeed an oracle. Squibs had his pick of
the plates at that Sunday dinner, enjoying a Sabbath rest from
rats, and basking in his mistress’s lap, a black curled-up breathing
mass of felicity.
As Jinny jogged along next Tuesday morning, diverging from
her usual beat to take in the hurdle-maker’s home, that lay—like
a geological “fault”—in the wrong parish, the plan that
formed itself in her mind was to approach the question of the
bride and the wedding-dress by way of Barnaby Purley, the
youth who had so chivalrously come to her rescue by delivering
at Uckford Manor the keg of oil overlooked by her on that memorable
journey with Elijah Skindle. It was because Foxearth
Farm possessed this hobbledehoy scion and a trap of its own
that Jinny had never done its marketing, nor come face to face
with the creature of whom with sidelong eye she caught tantalizing
glimpses in the Flynt Flyer. “Not bad-lookin’ ” was
the countryside’s appraisal of her, which was rather ominous,
indicating as it did considerable beauty, and conjoined as it was
with a rumour of easy conquests, culminating in the coach-owner.
But a good square look at her had not been attainable,
even on Sunday, for though the family was Church of England—Mr.
Giles Purley being even a churchwarden—it preferred to
worship in the parish church to which it did not parochially
belong. Jinny told herself she was hastening at this first opportunity
purely in Miss Gentry’s interest, for fear the bridal gown
had been ordered elsewhere. But she could not quite disguise
from herself her consuming anxiety to discover whether this
everyday Miss Jones was really a Cleopatra, though she called her
poignant emotion mere curiosity, and deemed herself as apathetic
at heart as the bumble-bees now crawling miserably about her
cart, which could be flicked into a feeble flight and drone, but
which soon relapsed into their torpor.
In truth the suppressed hope of finding Blanche safely paired
with the Showman was now quickening her pulses and restoring
the wild rose to her cheeks. The September day, too, for all the
long-continued drought, and despite the drowsy bumble-bees,
was not devoid of animating influences, especially the delicious
smell of burnings from the fields, where men tossed from their
prongs brown masses of weed into red and smoking heaps, or
carried like merry devils fiery forks from one pile to another.
Monstrous fungi clove in pied picturesqueness to the elm-trunks,
and a hawthorn grove with its scarlet berries was like a vast
radiant smile. Overhead the sun, a shimmery thin-clouded
sphere, showed like an eye in a great white peacock’s wing. The
hips and blackberries were interfused in the hedges, the ivy
flowered on the squat church towers, the Virginia creepers were
reddening the cottages, and the dahlias grew tall in the little
front gardens. In the orchards the pear-trees and apple-trees
were heavy with fruit. Around them the turnip-fields looked
more like spreads of mustard, so thick were the slender yellow-flowering
stems pushing between the crop proper. And everywhere
was life; pecking poultry scattering before Methusalem’s
feet, and little frogs playing leapfrog; swarms of the Daddy-long-legs
and gigantic spiders, great quarrelling families of rooks,
quiet chewing cattle, pigs nosing for acorns or windfall apples,
hares or great rats or weasels scuttling across the road, partridges
straying fearlessly in the stubble, swallows darting unpromisingly
high, and when Jinny passed over the little brick bridge, at
which a black drainage-mill waved what seemed its four
crossed white combs, a pair of superb swans hissed their proud
protectiveness over a very drab cygnet.
Driving through an avenue of firs and hornbeam, and past a
dirty pond with two flagged mounds in the middle, she reached
the clearing where the hurdle-maker operated, with his farmhouse
for base of his combined industrial, agricultural, and pastoral
occupations.
Mr. Giles Purley, a rosy-wrinkled apple-faced ancient, stood in
his shirt-sleeves, looking as pleasantly untidy as his farmyard,
which was full of felled logs and split wood, and bean and corn
stacks, and ramshackle sheds. He was planing off knots with
a bill-hook, and as Jinny drove up to the gate of the old timbered
red house, he greeted her with a cheery grumble at the drought
which forced such winter work prematurely upon him. Jinny
was abashed to find no pretext for her visit coming to her tongue,
so she stammered out that she wanted to see Barnaby, and the
droll look that twinkled across his father’s face sent her colour
up still higher. “Always wants a change, they youngsters,”
he chuckled benevolently, “whether ’tis of work or sweet-hearts.”
At this point Jinny became aware of Barnaby himself, who,
equally in his shirt-sleeves, was smiling sheepishly up at her from
the ditch which he was discumbering with a hook. “Lilies of
the walley they stick in their buttonholes,” went on his father
waggishly, “as if weeds was ever aught but weeds. There ain’t
one that showlders his sack o’ corn or sticks to his dearie. Sheep’s
eyes they can make, but as for sheep-hurdles——!” The note
was now earnest. It seemed an unpropitious moment to tackle
Barnaby.
And to make it more impossible, Blanche herself suddenly
bounded from the orchard, flourishing a great corroded pear.
“Nipped thirteen!” she cried gaily.
“Not bad-lookin’,” forsooth! To Jinny she appeared in her
bloom and colour like a rich peach dipped in cream: overripeness
was the only flaw her beauty suggested to this girl in her teens.
But the chill at Jinny’s heart did not prevent her crying out with
equal gaiety, “What an unlucky number—for the wasps!”
Barnaby laughed adoringly from his ditch, Mr. Giles Purley
in simple joy of the slaughter. The pigs, he explained gleefully,
had gnawed at the pear-bags and Blanche was “wunnerful
masterous” at nipping the wasps as they crawled out of the
forbidden fruit. Asps, Jinny found herself thinking, would have
a bad time at such bold hands, though they made the Cleopatra
likelier—she slued her eyes round to see the rings on them, but
the engagement finger was hidden by the big pear, and Miss
Jones, her gaiety checked, was eyeing her like the intruder
she was.
“She can kill two at once,” Barnaby called up.
“Like you with the lasses,” flashed his father, to his confusion.
“It’s nothing,” said Blanche coldly. “They haven’t time to
curl their tails round.”
“Who? The lasses?” asked Jinny, and to her relief the
beautiful Blanche vouchsafed a smile.
“You won’t be stung if you don’t think you’ll be,” the girl
explained more cordially. Then, unable to retain the proud
secret longer, even from the Carrier, she burst forth, “I’m going
on the stage with it.”
“What!” Jinny gasped.
“Only as a beginning, of course. ‘Bianca, The Bare-Handed
Wasp-Killer,’ it’ll be on the bills.”
“Rubbidge!” came explosively from Mr. Purley. “And
where will Mr. Flippance get the wapses in the winter? A circus-slut
indeed—I wonder what your mother can be thinkin’ of! And
what’s Mr. Honeytongue going to bill you as, Barnaby? Not
champion hurdle-maker, I’ll go gaff!”
“Wait till you see me,” said Barnaby with sullen mysteriousness.
“You don’t know a circus from a theaytre.”
“You’ll stick to your shackles and bolts,” said his parent
grimly, “and peel the bark off, too!”
At the mention of Mr. Flippance, Jinny’s heart beat fast: she
felt hovering on the verge of the revelation, and the Bianca and
the stage-project rekindled her hope. But Mr. Purley’s grievance
had to be worked off first. “They’re too lazy to peel the wood,”
he explained to Jinny. “But that’s the main thing for hurdles—to
strip ’em well against rain. Same as you was full-dressed
in a pouring rain—the time it ’ud take you to dry! If you was
naked now——”
“Oh, dad!” Barnaby remonstrated, to his parent’s confusion,
and enjoyed this tit-for-tat.
“When do you expect Mr. Flippance, Mr. Purley?” Jinny
asked him hastily.
“Oh, he never comes in the mornings,” Blanche replied, and
this appropriation of the question seemed to Jinny to continue
the promise of Bianca and the stage-project.
“Then can I speak to—to his intended?” she flashed brilliantly,
with a clever smile.
“She’s gone to her dressmaker,” said Blanche simply.
It was a double blow, and Jinny winced before it. In that
twinkling of her eye Blanche seemed years younger, diabolically
handsome, a nipper of buds as well as of wasps. But a worse
blow awaited her, for she had scarcely regained her composure
when the distant sound of a wheezy horn and a sense of an
impending avalanche brought Blanche into bounding activity
again.
“Why, there’s Will!” she exclaimed with a comic, happy
start. “And me not dressed yet!” And without a word to
the little Carrier, she ran gaily into the house.
Frantically clutching Nip who was about to spring to meet the
coach, Jinny cried vague thanks to the hurdle-maker and hurried
Methusalem down a by-way so narrow that she could hardly
squeeze through the untrimmed “werges” neglected of Barnaby.
When she heard the coach well on its way again on the Chipstone
road, with Blanche divined within, she found herself
possessed by an unexpected urging towards Mr. Flippance. She
had no real round any longer—only the hours to fill and her
grandfather to half deceive—and perhaps, despite Miss Gentry’s
own opinion, the bridegroom might yet be able to prevent her
being cut out by the rival pair of scissors. The truth was,
Jinny felt a physical need of the toning up the Showman somehow
imparted to life. To drive around the rest of the day with
practically no business but her own thoughts would be too
dreadful. He must surely babble happily about his bride, and
apart from the interest of her identity, some of his glow could
not but radiate to her. And there was Caleb and Martha to see,
too—how were they faring, these dear, simple creatures, too long
unvisited? But then—thought that froze the heart!—had she
not declared she would never set foot in Frog Farm again? No,
she answered herself defiantly—and no memory of hereditary
quibbling, nothing of her sense of humour, rose to trouble the
reply—all she had said was that Will should never see her there.
And Will was safely chained to the Chipstone road.
All the same she looked round apprehensively and with wildly
beating heart before she allowed Methusalem to lift the latch of
the familiar gate, and she had somehow expected so great a
transformation in the farmhouse under its new and sinister
activities, and was conscious of so vast a change in herself since
she had last seen it, that its primitive black front almost startled
her, so unchanged did it appear. True, the ferrets’ cages were
gone, but their absence only made it more its old self, and the
moan of the doves was as reassuring as the singing of the kettle
on her own hearth. Caleb’s red shirt-sleeves looked for once in
keeping with the scene, arising as they did out of yellow flame-tinged
clouds from the rubbish-heap which he was burning, and
the pleasant pungent smell of which filled her eyes with tears,
half smoke, half emotion. Even in that glow the homely hair-circled
face was capable of a new illumination.
“Gracious goodness, there’s Jinny!” He ran to the house-door.
“Mother! Mother!” he cried in jubilant agitation.
Martha emerged at a hobbling run, apron-girded. Despite the
glow, her face darkened.
“You give a body a turn,” she grumbled. “I almost thought
’twas the Golden City coming down.”
“ ’Tis nigh as good,” he retorted boldly, “bein’ as Jinny was
same as gone there. And bless me, ef she don’t look ghosty!”
“Good morning, Jinny!” said Martha coldly. “We don’t
need a carrier now—with our coach to get everything.”
Jinny’s cheeks turned far from “ghosty.” “I haven’t come
to you—only to Mr. Flippance.”
“But he gets everything, too, through Willie.”
“I know that—I merely want to speak to him.”
“You can’t now.”
“The missus means he’s abed,” Caleb explained, rushing to
Jinny’s relief, and indeed the information brought a smile back
to her twitching lips. “Minds me of a great old tortoise, diggin’
hisself into his blankets. Do him good to be up with the sun,
same as when Oi was a scarecrow, soon as the wheat was
sown.”
“You don’t want to tell everybody you began as a scarecrow,”
said Martha frigidly.
“Ef we’re rich now, dear heart, and can ride in our own coach,
’tis the Lord’s hand, not ours. Oi watched over wheat and
winter beans, and ’arly peas, and winter oats, and then spring
barley, but all the time the Lord was watchin’ over me.”
“Not as a scarecrow,” said Martha severely.
“Oi warn’t a scarecrow ploughin’-time, bein’ set on the
middle hoss to flick the whip, and chance times when ’twas too
frosty to plough Oi went to Dame Pippler’s to school.”
“I never heard that before,” said Martha.
“Dedn’t like to tell ye,” he confessed, “being as ’twas too
cowld to howd the slate-pencil, and the book-larnin’ leaked out
’twixt the frosts. ’Twas a penny a week wasted.”
Martha saw their visitor was amused at this revelation after
fifty years of wedlock. “Jinny wants to be going on,” she
observed testily. “Look at all her boxes.”
“Oi’m proper pleased to see ’em, for as Oi says to Willie, Oi
hope as you ain’t hart Jinny’s business and grieved the Lord.
Ye can’t sleep, Oi says, ef ye’ve grieved the Lord.”
“Then Mr. Flippance must be a saint,” laughed Jinny. But
she was touched to tears.
Caleb had, however, not finished his apologia for his lack of
learning, and was to be diverted neither by Jinny’s jests nor his
wife’s grimaces. “And in the summer,” he explained carefully,
“Oi got to goo out with my liddle old gun agin they
bird-thieves, though peas and pebbles was all the shot my
feyther——”
“Can’t you try some at Mr. Flippance’s window?” interrupted
Jinny, fearful the fretful Martha would soon close her
door upon her.
“Oi’d have to stand sideways for that!” He pointed to a
hooked-back casement. “Fust he kivers hisself up, then he
opens hisself out”—he chuckled contemptuously—“ ’tis ‘in
dock, out nettle,’ as the sayin’ goos.”
Jinny lifted her little horn to her lips and blew a blast so
literally rousing that hardly had its echoes died than from the
black casement framework a red unshaven face, like the rayed
rising sun on an inn signboard, dawned above clouds of flamboyant
dressing-gown.
“Jinny! Hurrah!” cried the apparition in delighted surprise.
“The very person I’ve been wanting for weeks!”
In the effulgence of that great rubicund sphere of a face
Jinny’s mists began to dissolve—after all, with all his faults he
belonged to her rosy past, to the good old times ere black horses
or red men had arisen to rend her. “Then why didn’t you let
me know?” she smiled.
“Just what I was thinking of doing. So glad you’ve saved
me a letter. Never was so hard-worked in my life. Good
morning, ma,” he threw to Mrs. Flynt, whose set face now
relaxed into a maternal mildness, “do I smell breakfast?”
“Ye could ha’ smelt it afore seven, friend,” said Caleb, growing
dour as Martha grew soft. “And the missus a bit paltry to-day,
too!”
“Am I late? I’m so sorry. Why, I thought it was Will’s
horn!”
“Mr. Flippance overslept himself, dearie,” Martha said
reproachfully.
“But you hate food spilin’,” Caleb protested.
“Not so much as I hate spoilt food!” said Tony. “Not that
a good housekeeper like Mrs. Flynt would really let food spoil—any
more than you your wheat-patch.”
“Ef ye had helped gittin’ that bit o’ corn in,” retorted Caleb,
“ye’d fare to have more to sleep on.”
“There’s more than one kind of work, Caleb,” said Martha
severely. “There’s brain-work for them that have never been
scarecrows.”
“Yes, indeed, Mrs. Flynt!” said Tony earnestly. “I’m
worked to a shadow.”
“And there was no such hurry to get the corn in,” Martha
added.
“With all they prayers for rine gooin’ on, ye can’t be too
careful,” Caleb urged.
“But what work had you got, Mr. Flippance?” Jinny laughed.
“Getting married. Didn’t you know?”
She was startled. “But you’re not married already?”
“No such luck. When the lady says ‘Yes,’ you think all
your troubles are over. But they’re only beginning.”
Caleb’s face relaxed in a grin, whereupon Martha’s hardened
to a frown. “Marriage is no laughing matter,” she said, with a
glower at her husband.
“No, indeed, Mrs. Flynt!” endorsed Tony. “What with the
forms and questions and ceremonies and witnesses and what not,
and rings to buy and bouquets to order—it’s worse than a
dress rehearsal!”
“But you’ve had the rehearsal,” Jinny reminded him.
“I was young and strong. Now you’ve got to help me.”
“Me?” Jinny was enchanted at this smoothing of the path
for Miss Gentry. “But I’m so busy,” she protested professionally.
“I can’t wait till you’re up.”
“Jinny’s too busy,” Martha corroborated. And in her eagerness
to be rid of the girl, she unconsciously clucked to Methusalem,
and so exactly like Jinny that the noble animal actually
started.
“Wait! Wait!” Mr. Flippance shouted down wildly. “Do
wait! Such a lot to consult you about. Haven’t even got a
best man yet. Find me one and I’ll call down blessings on your
head!”
“I don’t want you to call them down,” she jested up. “That’s
the trouble.”
“I’ll be down before you can say ‘Jack Robinson.’ ”
“I wasn’t going to suggest him!” And she reined in her
fiery steed.
Martha had hurried to her kitchen to bring in the belated
breakfast, and the convulsion into which Jinny’s last remark
appeared to throw Caleb was left unchecked by wifely grimaces.
The veteran alternated between gurgles and roars so continuously
that Jinny, flattered as she was by the reception of her jest,
began to feel uneasy.
“That fair flabbergasted him,” he gasped, getting his breath
at last. “How can Oi, says Oi, ef Oi’m a buoy-oy, Oi says.”
He wiped the tears from his whiskered cheeks and blew his nose
into his great “muckinger.”
“But he didn’t ask you to be best man,” she said, puzzled.
“And you aren’t a boy.”
“ ’Twas master as called me a buoy-oy,” he explained, his eyes
still dancing, “so as to keep down my wages. Oi’ve got three
hosses same as the min, Oi says, and can plough my stetch
similar-same as them and cut and trave up my corn better’n
Bill Ravens as felt the teeth of the sickle two days arter he
started and couldn’t work no more, though double-money time,
as Oi can sartify bein’ as ’twar me what tied my neckercher
round his arm with the blood pourin’ down like sweat, and
lucky ’twarn’t his wife, Oi says, but another woman gooin’
behind him to be larnt how, she bein’ in confinement. But
master he wouldn’t listen to nawthen. Oi’ll give you easy
ploughin’ was all he promised, ye’re onny a buoy-oy, he says,
obstinacious like, and Oi stayed on a bit, not mislikin’ the cans
of tea the wives brought, all hot and sweet, and the big granary
with pillars and fower on us thrashin’ and rattlin’ on the big
oak floor, jolly as a harvest supper, and Bill Ravens—that be
the feyther of the rollin’ stone as shears chance times for Master
Peartree—singin’ like the saints in Jerusalem, all except for
the words. But at last, bein’ as feyther wanted the money and
Oi needed time to look for a farmer not so nippy, gimme a
week off, says Oi to old Skindflint. A week off! says master.
What for? Gooin’ to git married?”
At this point the convulsion recommenced, and Jinny, though
she understood how the Flippance wedding had set his memories
agog, had still to wait for enlightenment as to why they were
agrin.
“Married, Oi says! How can Oi git married, ef Oi’m a
buoy-oy?”
It was out at last, the great repartee of his life, and Jinny felt
he was right to cherish its memory. She occupied the period of
his renewed cachinnation in descending from her seat and giving
Methusalem his impoverished nosebag. Her action reminded
Caleb to offer to show her the enlarged stables, with the old roof
raised to admit the coach. Then, colouring as if at an indelicacy,
he hastily inquired how her grandfather was, remarking with
commiseration that he must be getting a bit elderly.
Never had Jinny known him so loquacious—the absence of
Martha was combining with her own advent to loosen his
usually ruly member. And at last the pent-up flood of his
grievances against the Showman burst forth. The return of
Will, Jinny gathered, had been dislocating enough, even before
his new-fangled coach had brought the stir of the great world
and Bundock almost daily, but now the house and the hours
were all “topsy-tivvy,” worse than in Cousin Caroline’s time.
He would do Will the justice to say that it wasn’t his fault—Will
had been against putting up a “furriner” in their spare bedroom—but
the “great old sluggaby” had come and ingratiated
himself so with the rheumatic but romantic Martha, and offered
such startling prices—a pound a week for board and lodging—“enough
to feed the whole Pennymole family for a fortnight”—that
she had forced her will upon both the male Flynts. “The
trouble with Martha is,” Caleb summed up, “she allus wants
what she wants.” Mr. Flippance, he explained, “got a piper
for her from her Lunnon Sin Agog—funny name that for the
Lord’s House, even in Lunnon—and that piper fared to be all
about the Christy Dolphins and their doin’s—the Loightstand,
Martha called it. And she read me a piece out of it how Mr.
Somebody, husband o’ Sister T’other, was baptized by Elder
Somebody Else; and she wanted me to goo and do likewise.”
“But you are nearly one of them, aren’t you?” Jinny smiled.
He looked uneasy.
“Oi don’t want to be baptized a Jew,” he said plaintively.
“Martha she argufies as Paul says we are the Jews, bein’
Abraham’s seed in our innards. So long as she calls us the
Lord’s people, Oi fair itches to be one, but that goos agin the
stomach like to call yourself a Jew. Same as she was satisfied
with the New Jerusalem part, Oi’d goo with her. For ef the
Book says, ‘No man hath gone up to heaven,’ or ‘Whither Oi
goo, ye cannot come,’ that proves as heaven’s got to come to us,
and happen Oi’ll live to see it droppin’ down with its street of
pure gold same as transparent brass. But Oi won’t be swallowed
up whole like a billy-owl swallows a mouse.”
“What’s that you’re saying, Caleb?” said Martha, now
perceived back at her house-door.
“He was telling me about the Lightstand,” said Jinny glibly.
Martha beamed again. “Ah, it won’t be long before that
light spreads, though now the world is all shrouded in darkness
and superstition. But salvation is of the Jews.”
“That ain’t writ in the Book?” inquired Caleb anxiously.
“Salvation is of the Jews,” repeated Martha implacably.
“John iv. 22. There’s nine of us now in Essex alone, the
Lightstand says, not reckoning London. They don’t know
about another that’s on the way Zionwards,” she added mysteriously.
“Meaning me?” said Caleb nervously.
“Meaning a man with brains and book-learning,” said Martha
sternly, “and he’s ready to see you now, Jinny.”
“Well, nine ain’t no great shakes,” Caleb murmured.
“We are the salt of the earth,” Martha reminded him. “A
pinch of salt goes a long way.”
“Ay, when it rolls in a pill-box,” Caleb reflected ruefully.
“And hows the old chapel, Jinny?” he said aloud. “Willy
never goos now.”
Jinny coloured up: one of her pretexts for apostacy seemed
null and void.
“I’ll see you when I come out, I suppose,” she said evasively,
as she followed Martha within.
The parlour of Frog Farm had not the peculiar mustiness
which greeted Jinny’s nostrils when last she peeped into it that
tragic morning of Maria’s illness, but there was by way of compensation
a reek of stale tobacco and the odours of the breakfast
bacon and mushrooms, while in lieu of the sacrosanct tidiness
there was a pervasion of papers, with a whole mass of scripts
sliding steadily from the slippery sofa. The brown-lozenged
text on the wall: “When He giveth quietness, who then can
make trouble?” seemed to shriek for Caleb’s answer: “Friend
Flippance.” Other documents bulged and bristled from both
pockets of the dressing-gown as from greasy paniers.
“Bless you, Jinny,” Tony gurgled from his breakfast-cup.
He eyed her rapturously. “What a pretty pair you’ll make at
the wedding!”
“It’s no use, Mr. Flippance,” said Martha, beaming, “I’ve
told you before I won’t go into a church.”
Mr. Flippance, who had been mentally coupling his bride and
Jinny, replied with but the briefest muscular quiver, that the
only thing that reconciled him to Martha’s absence was that she
was incapacitated by matrimony from the rôle of bridesmaid.
This morning he would not trouble her to wait. “You can
‘withdraw’ from me,” he said jocosely.
Martha was jarred by this profane use of the sacred vocabulary,
and moreover felt it almost as improper to leave Jinny alone in
her house, even with a budding bridegroom. “Jinny’s got no
secrets from me,” she said tartly; and Mr. Flippance, divining
his error, remarked blandly, “Nor have I.” And as Martha
started to dust the mantelpiece ornaments and to discover cigar-ash
in her china shoes, he drew Jinny’s attention to the “beautiful”
silk sampler that hung over them. “And all worked with
Mrs. Flynt’s own hand! What a wonderful lion—and as for
the unicorn, she’s got it to the life!”
“Oh, it’s only what I did when a girl,” said Martha, blushing
modestly. “Only I didn’t like to hang it up then, because I’d
left no room for the foreign trees like my sisters put in!”
“Well, but you’ve got in the alphabet, big and little, and all
the figures! Wonderful!”
“That’s where Willie learnt his A B C from,” said Martha,
radiant.
“Ah, that gay deceiver!” sighed Mr. Flippance. “He told
me he was a Yankee, but now I find he’s only a yumorist. Still
he’s a chap any woman can be proud of—what do you say,
Jinny?”
Jinny, who had seated herself on the sofa, carefully steadied
the slipping manuscripts as she replied with a forced lightness:
“I say, if you want a best man, you can’t find a better.”
“Ah, that’s the trouble. He won’t take part in a Church
ceremony neither, he says he’s got to consider the old folks—at
the chapel,” he added promptly. “But at any rate we shall
have the best bridesmaid.”
“You don’t mean me?” said Jinny, colouring under his
admiring gaze. “Because it’s impossible. I haven’t the time—or
the money.”
“Is it the dress you’re thinking of? Surely the Theatre
Royal, Chipstone, can run to that?” And pulling a protrusive
scroll from a pocket of his dressing-gown, he unfurled it beatifically,
exposing a poster with the coupled names of Anthony
Flippance and Cleopatra Jones in giant letters.
“Anthony and Cleopatra!” he breathed in a ravishment.
“The moment she told me her second name was Cleopatra I
knew it was useless fighting against the fates.”
“But have you bought our chapel then?” Jinny inquired.
“Bought your chapel?” Mr. Flippance was mystified. “Why
on earth should I buy your chapel?”
“You—you might have turned it into a theatre!” she stammered
apologetically.
He waved the suggestion away with a jewelled hand. “Only
a new Temple of Thespis could live up to Anthony and Cleopatra.
We are building!”
“Where?” Now it was Jinny that was mystified—she had
seen no such enterprise afoot.
“Here!” He tapped the other pocket of his dressing-gown.
“Plans!” He rolled up his poster reluctantly. “Cleopatra
wanted to see it in print. Didn’t I say what a work getting
married was? But now that the bridesmaid’s settled——!”
“But she’s not!” said Jinny, more alarmed than when he
was trying to cast her for the bride, perhaps because the danger
of being sucked in was greater.
“Oh, Jinny!” He looked at her with large reproachful eyes
and mechanically threw bacon to Nip, who had at last sniffed
his way in, and who, fortunately for Martha’s composure, caught
it ere it reached her carpet. “You see she wants to have the
thing all regular and respectable, and all her family are in Wales.
She hasn’t got a parent handy to give her away. And having
led a wandering life, she hadn’t even a parish to marry in. I
never thought you’d desert an old pal.”
“But I’m no pal of hers—I don’t even know her.”
“Oh, Jinny!” And just arresting a paper-slide, he extricated
a photograph from the imperilled mass. “The new Scott Archer
process,” he declared proudly. “Knocks your daguerreotypes
into the middle of last week. Good gag that, eh?”
But it was Jinny who seemed knocked into that period; and
not only by this new triumph of the camera. For in this wonderful
breathing image she recognized—in all save size, for this
seemed a Cleopatra swelling to regal stature—the beauteous human
doll she had last seen walking down the steps of a toy house,
conning a part.
“But she’s married!” she gasped.
“Not yet. Would to heaven it were all over!” said Mr.
Flippance airily, but his great brow grew black for an instant ere
he turned it sunnily on Martha. “Oh, ma, could I have more of
these marvellous mushrooms?”
“I’ll see, you greedy boy,” she smiled, retreating.
“Well, who could help saying encore to such items?” He
turned reproachfully on Jinny. “You nearly shocked the old
lady.”
“But didn’t you—didn’t you call her the Duchess?” Jinny
stammered. “Oh, but perhaps it is Mrs. Duke’s sister—she
looks taller.”
“That’s because she’s got no legs,” he explained paradoxically.
“But it’s all right—The Loveliest Leading Lady in London.”
(Jinny heard the capital letters distinctly.)
He went on to explain that London didn’t know this yet, and
that some time must elapse before Cleopatra would be in a
position to demonstrate it on the spot, owing to local jealousies.
But Jinny came back remorselessly to her point.
“But surely she was married to Mr. Duke!”
“Hush! Appearances are deceptive. They were just close
friends.”
“You couldn’t well be closer—in that doll’s house,” said Jinny
scornfully. And her own words reminded her how he had
denounced the Duchess as a “squeaking doll” whose “golden”
hair was spurious.
“Now you shock me, Jinny,” said Mr. Flippance severely.
“Pure as the driven snow is my Cleo, stainless as the Lady
Agnes, shut up in that great oak chest on her wedding morn, sweet
as her namesake, Bianca, in The Taming of the Shrew.”
“Why does she tame shrews?” asked Jinny, puzzled.
“That’s a play by Shakespeare”—the name not occurring
in the Spelling-Book, left Jinny unimpressed. “A shrew is a
vixen.”
This natural history left Jinny still less impressed. “That’s
nonsense,” she said. “A shrew is tiny and lovely to look at,
with darling rounded ears. I buried one the other day, and its
eye was as bright as life.”
“It’s only a way of speaking,” he explained, “as you call a
woman a cat. Katharina’s the polecat of the play that her
husband has to tame with a whip, but Bianca is a dove, gentle
and spotless.”
“Doves are not so gentle,” said Jinny. “They peck each
other dreadfully. I like vixens better, at least they seem fonder
of their family when you peep down their earths.”
Mr. Flippance, who had never in his life seen either a shrew
or a vixen or a polecat or observed the habits of doves, was taken
aback. He had even a vague sense of blasphemy, some ancient
religious images whirring confusedly in his brain. “Understand
this, Jinny,” he said sharply, abandoning the shifting sands of
metaphor, “Cleo gave Mr. Duke her companionship and her
artistic co-operation, but as for marrying him—bring me that
Book!”
He indicated the precious volume which Mrs. Flynt had left
in the parlour for his study of the text-evidence of the Christadelphian
teaching. But Jinny took his Bible oath for granted.
Sincerity and righteous indignation radiated from every round
inch of his face, and Jinny, despite her farmyard experience, was
too nebulous in her ideas of human matings not to be shaken.
In truth he had been vastly relieved by the discovery that the
couple had pretermitted the ceremony and that he was saved
the tedium and expense of a divorce suit, though he wondered
why Mr. Duke with his meticulous book-keeping and contracts
should be so loose where women were concerned, while he, so
averse from parchments and figures, had a proper respect for the
marriage-tie. Human nature was devilishly deep, he thought:
no wonder a man got drowned if he tried to fathom himself.
But Jinny, though she now believed she had misunderstood
the ducal ménage, was not without an instinctive distrust. “She
didn’t want to live in the caravan,” she protested.
“No,” he agreed, misapprehending the local idiom. “It was
that pig-headed wire-puller who wanted it. Duke’s the villain
of the piece, abusing my darling’s innocence and exploiting her
artistic aspirations. He got round the poor girl, knowing her
aunt had left her all her money. Cleo, my dear Jinny, is the
niece of the famous Cleopatra, the Cairo Contortionist, after
whom she was christened, and whose death a year or so ago
eclipsed the gaiety of Astley’s and Mr. Batty’s new Hippodrome.”
“Was she so beautiful?” asked Jinny, somewhat awed.
“I was in love with her myself in my youth,” Mr. Flippance
replied simply. “But though you could gossip with her round
the coke-brazier at the back of the ring, she always made you
feel that no man was worthy to chalk the soles of her tight-rope
shoes. And her niece, as you have doubtless perceived, has the
same grand manner.”
“Then why did she keep company with Mr. Duke?”
Jinny returned to the sore spot, Mr. Flippance felt, like a
buzzing bluebottle.
“If you don’t believe me,” he cried, “show me the little
Dukes and Duchesses. Where are they? Produce ’em.”
He looked at her fiercely—as demanding a rain of coroneted
cherubs from the air.
The bold stroke put the climax to Jinny’s obfuscation.
Marriage without children was practically unknown on her round,
though the children often died. “Don’t you see he wanted to
compromise her?” pursued Tony triumphantly, after giving the
cherubs a reasonable time to materialize. “He thought she’d
never dare break away with her money, and that he could spend
her last farthing on boosting himself into the legitimate. He’s
all right with the marionettes—a dapster as you say here,” Mr.
Flippance admitted magnanimously. “But as an actor he could
no more expect to please my public than to keep Cleo hidden in
a bushel. He might throw up the sponge and go back to his
fantoccini—but what career was that for Cleo? She broke with
him on the nail—the partnership, I mean. And I ask you, ma,”
he wound up, with an appreciative sniff as Martha re-entered,
not only with mushrooms but freshly fried bacon, “what woman
of spirit could do otherwise?”
Mrs. Flynt beamed assent, and her apparent acquaintance with
the facts contributed to lull Jinny’s uneasiness. Surely the
pious Martha would not connive at scandalous proceedings.
Relieved, she sat silent; wondering—while Mr. Flippance did
jovial justice to the encore dish—what the Duchess would think
if she knew that she, Jinny, could have anticipated her in the
rôle of the second Mrs. Flippance. And what would Polly have
thought of her as a stepmother, she wondered still more whimsically.
Perhaps between them they could have made a man of
him. She had never seen his daughter over her cigar and milk
or her sense of Polly as a pillar of respectability might have been
shattered.
“And how is Miss Flippance?” she said.
His face changed suddenly—rain-clouds overgloomed the sun.
His fork fell from his fingers. “You don’t know what daughters
are,” he blubbered. “She’s left me!”
“Left you?”
“Ask ma,” he half sobbed. It was infinitely pathetic.
“Don’t let it get cold again,” Martha coaxed.
“I can’t eat.” He lit a cheroot abstractedly, and the old
woman and the young girl followed his silent puffings with a
yearning sympathy, while Nip begged, unheeded.
“Mad on marionettes is Polly,” he said at last. “The moment
I got rid of ’em, she packed up my things and was off.”
“Stole your things?” cried the startled Jinny.
“No—no. She knew I should be moving on for the banns—Cleo
likes a quiet place—so she left me tidy. That was her sole
conception of her duty to her legal pa. But she had always
looked upon me as a thing to be tidied—not a soul to be loved
and cherished.” He wiped an eye with the sleeve of his dressing-gown
and asked brokenly for his brandy. Martha hurried to his
bedroom.
“But perhaps your daughter’ll come back,” Jinny suggested
soothingly.
“God forbid!” he cried. “I mean they’d be at it hammer
and tongs. Perhaps Providence does all things for the best.”
“But where has she gone?” Jinny’s sympathy was now
passing to Polly, as she began to grasp the true complexity of
her exodus.
“To her grandmother in Cork, I expect.” He blew a placid
puff. “Did I never tell you my pa’s real wife—the one he didn’t
live with, I mean—was originally the widow of a well-to-do
cheesemonger? Polly always looked up her nominal granny
when we played Ireland. She likes respectable people.”
“Is that why she won’t come to the wedding?” Jinny inquired
cruelly, for Polly’s refusal to countenance it again stirred up her
doubts.
Mr. Flippance was angered afresh. “I tell you, my Cleopatra
can hold up her head with the whitest cheesemonger’s widow in
the land. But it’s hard,” he said, reverting to pathos and
flicking his cigar-ash mournfully into the just-dusted shoe, “to
be left without a daughter at such a crisis. Think how she would
have stage-managed everything—even bought the ring.” The
tragedy of his situation mastered him. “Forgive my emotion—I
was always one to wear my heart on my sleeve.” He wiped
his eyes on it again. “Nobody will ever pack like Polly. Ah,
thank you, ma,” he said, as Martha reappeared with the brandy
bottle. “Have you half a crown?” he added, pouring himself
out a careless quota. “You see,” he explained, setting down
his glass dolefully, and tendering Martha’s half-crown to the
astonished Jinny, “though old pals desert one at the altar, Tony
Flip doesn’t forget his obligations.”
“But what’s it for?” Jinny took the coin tentatively.
“You lent me it when that wicked Duke demanded money
on the contract.”
“Oh, thank you!” Jinny was touched—a half-crown seemed
as large as her cart-wheel nowadays. Half remorsefully she
suggested that a far better bridesmaid would be the girl at
Foxearth Farm.
He shook his head. “I’ve been into that. But there are—objections.
It doesn’t do, you see, for the super to be taller
than the leading lady. Now you being shorter——”
“But if Miss Jones were to wear very low heels——”
“But that would only make Miss Purley look still taller,” he
said, puzzled.
“I mean Miss Purley to wear the low heels—she is a Miss Jones,
too.”
“What?”
“Blanche Jones is her name—she’s only old Purley’s stepdaughter.”
He started up. “Then Mrs. Purley was formerly Mrs. Jones?”
“Yes.”
“Hurrah!” He seized the surprised Martha by the waist
and began waltzing with her, while Nip barked with excitement.
“Quiet, Nip! What’s the matter?” cried Jinny, smiling.
“A relation at last! Don’t you see that Mrs. Jones can give
the bride away?”
“But she’s not really a relation.”
“All these Joneses are one large family,” he said airily.
“But you don’t need a relation,” Martha pointed out. “A
friend will do.”
“Really? I must study the stage-directions—I mean,” he
corrected himself hastily, “yours may be different from the
Church of England.”
“But I know all the same, for we weren’t allowed to marry in
our own chapels, leastways not till after Willie was born.”
“Well, anyhow, I’m sure Cleopatra would prefer a relation.
Mrs. Jones is a Churchwoman, I hope. It’s necessary, ma, you
know,” he apologized.
“Yes—her husband’s a churchwarden,” said Jinny.
“A churchwarden! Hurrah! Better and better. Then he
shall give Cleo away.” He bumped the beaming, breathless
Martha round again.
“But he isn’t even called Jones,” Jinny reminded him.
“A husband takes over his wife’s Jonesiness. Bless you,
Jinny!” He seized her hand and dragged her likewise into the
circular movement. “Now we go round the mulberry-bush, the
mulberry-bush, the mulberry-bush——”
Caleb, coming past the door at this instant, stood spellbound.
Had Mr. Flippance been really converted, and was it the joy of
the New Jerusalem? Or had Martha now “moved on,” and
was this the new dancing sect of which one heard rumours?
Martha’s caperings ceased at sight of him. “It’s the wedding,”
she said somewhat shamefacedly. “I’m just going to pickle
your walnuts, dear heart,” she added sweetly. “And Jinny
must be getting to her work, too.”
At which delicate hint, Jinny, faintly flushing, rose to take
her leave, and Nip, who had been whining his impatience, was
already gambolling hysterically without, before she remembered
she had forgotten the very purpose of her visit.
“Oh, by the way, Mr. Flippance,” she said, as she followed Nip,
“I suppose the wedding-gown is ordered.”
“Wedding-gown!” he repeated. “You don’t think Cleo has
any need of wedding-gowns! Why the Lady Agnes dress—Act
One—is the very prop. for the occasion, and brand new, for
she had just got Duke to put on The Mistletoe Bough. Otherwise
I should have been asking you for the address of that wonderful
French friend of yours—the bearded lady, you know. But if
you won’t be a bridesmaid, you’ve got to come to the show—yes,
and the wedding breakfast too—I won’t take any refusal. It’ll
be at Foxearth Farm, and I’m ordering oceans of sweet champagne.
Well, thank you a million times for finding Cleo a
father. Good-bye, dear. God bless you!” He had shuffled
without and now kissed his hand to the moving cart.
“What about a new wedding-gown for you?” Jinny called
back. “A dressing-gown, I mean.”
“Yumorist!” came his chuckled answer.
Though not unconscious of a subterranean hostility in Martha,
which she put down to the new business rivalry, and though still
perturbed about the Duchess, Jinny felt distinctly better for this
visit, not to mention the half-crown, that now rare coin. She
was still more heartened two days later when Bundock brought
a letter from Mr. Flippance stating that, strange to say, Cleopatra
did not find the Lady Agnes dress suitable. It would make her
feel she was only playing at marrying, she said, and she was too
respectful of holy matrimony to desecrate it by any suggestion
of unreality: indeed she was already being fitted by the leading
Chipstone artist. The dress was, however, turning out so
dubiously that she would be glad if Jinny’s French friend would
call upon her at Foxearth Farm with a view to preparing a
“double.” As for Jinny being bridesmaid, he must reluctantly
ask her to abandon the idea, as Cleopatra considered her too
short.
“That’s the Flippance fist,” said Bundock, lingering to watch
her read the letter, “scrawls all over the shop. I don’t mind
your answering by post,” he added maliciously, “now I’ve got
to go there so much. I often kill—he, he, he!—two frogs with
one stone now. So you’re to be bridesmaid, Tony tells me.”
“Nothing of the sort,” said Jinny, “and mind your own
business.”
“It is my business,” he said in an aggrieved tone. “Didn’t
he ask me to be best man? As if in this age of reason I could
take part in superstitious rites!”
“I don’t see any superstition about marrying,” said Jinny.
“I’m not so sure—tying a man to a woman like a dog to a
barrel. But anyhow, why drag in heaven?”
“Because marriages are made there, I suppose,” said Jinny.
“Stuff and nonsense! And then the rice and the old shoes
they throw!”
“I saw you throw one when your sister got married.”
“Maybe. But I didn’t believe in it.”
“Then why did you throw it?”
He hesitated a moment. “They say if you don’t believe in
it, it’s even luckier than if you do.”
Jinny laughed heartily.
“I’m not joking!” Bundock declared angrily.
“If you were, I shouldn’t be laughing,” said Jinny.
“Oh well, go to church!” Bundock retorted in disgust. “And
I hope the beadle will give you an extra prod next Sunday.”
“What do you mean?”
“Don’t pretend. Everybody knows that church is a double
torture—first the parson sends you to sleep with his sermon, and
then the verger wakes you up with his rod.”
Jinny laughed again.
“Don’t tell me!” said Bundock. “My own father was forced
to go—all the labourers on the estate, poor chaps, dead-sleepy
after the week’s work, and that rod used to puggle ’em about. No
wonder dad chucked both squire and parson.”
“It doesn’t happen in Mr. Fallow’s church,” Jinny assured him.
“Because nobody goes!” And Bundock hurried off with
this great last word, and Jinny saw his bag heaving with the
mirthful movement of his shoulders.
Somewhat to Jinny’s surprise, Miss Gentry from being Cleopatra’s
alternative dressmaker developed into her adorer, it
appearing that the lady displayed not only proportions most
pleasing to the technical eye—“just made for clothes,” Miss
Gentry put it—but a positive appetite for tracts. She loathed
Dissent, it transpired, and to be married by a minister would
seem to her little better than living in sin. A very paragon of
propriety and an elegant pillar of the faith, Miss Cleopatra
Jones, spinster, worshipped regularly with the churchwarden and
his family in the wrong parish church. Miss Gentry, ravished
by this combination of respectability and romance, did not once
compel the fair client to attend upon her, travelling to Foxearth
Farm instead in Jinny’s cart. It was impossible for Jinny’s
doubts of Cleopatra’s immaculacy to survive Miss Gentry’s
encomiums. While Miss Gentry ascended to the bedroom of her
beautiful and still golden-haired client, posed in an atmosphere
of old oak bedsteads and panelled linen presses, Jinny would sit
with the second Mrs. Purley in her dairy—a cheerful, speckless
room which enjoyed a specially spacious window, dairies being
immune from the window-tax—while that bulkier edition of
Blanche made cheeses and conversation. Mrs. Purley made conversation
irrespective of her auditor, for she needed no collaborator:
indeed a second party coming athwart this Niagara of
monologue would have been swept aside like a straw.
As a great musician can take a few simple notes, and out of this
theme evoke endless intricacies, enlargements, repetitions, echoes,
duplications, parallelisms, and permutations, and then transform
the whole into another key and give it you all over again, so out
of a simple happening, like her feeding of a sick chicken, or her
discovery that a hen had laid her clutch in the hedge, Mrs.
Purley, without for a moment interrupting the milling of curd
or the draining of whey, could improvise a fugal discourse that
went ramifying and returning upon itself ad infinitum. It
reminded Jinny of Kelcott Wood, where every day from three
to five, on these September afternoons, hundreds of starlings,
perched like bits of black coal on the mountain-ashes, kept up
a ceaseless chattering, shrilling, clucking, querying, cackling.
But she soon ceased to hear Mrs. Purley, was even lulled by the
cascade. Very familiar grew every pan, dipper, vat, tub, press,
cheese-cloth, or straw-mat, while the one readable article she
knew by heart. It was the inscription on a china mug, in which
Mrs. Purley sometimes put milk, and it recorded the virtues of
a black-haired, black-whiskered head painted thereon. “The
Incorruptible Patriot. . . . The Undaunted Supporter of the
People’s Rights. . . . The Father of the Fatherless. . . . The
Pride and Glory of his Country” . . . such were a few of the
attributes ascribed, with a profuseness resembling Mrs. Purley’s
conversation, to a certain Henry Brougham, Esq., who, as Jinny
learnt from Miss Gentry, was really and truly “a love,” having
defended Queen Caroline when Miss Gentry was a schoolgirl.
Queens were as liable to ill-luck as herself, Jinny began to suspect,
recalling that Egyptian asp, and she became a little anxious for
Victoria, who now came to figure in her dreams, as defended
against French fire-eaters by this black-avised man, with the
protruding nose, retreating forehead, and weak chin. Somehow—it
was unintelligible when she woke up, but quite clear in her
dream—the defended Victoria was also herself, for was not
Henry Brougham “The Father of the Fatherless”?
Adjoining the dairy was a room, lit from it—to avoid taxation—by
a pane in the door. Jinny sometimes had an uneasy sense
that Blanche was inspecting her through that pane. Otherwise
she hardly ever encountered the vespacide, who betrayed indeed
no sense of rivalry, for the relations between Will and the little
Carrier were unknown, and Blanche would, in any case, have
considered so humble a personage negligible or at least nippable.
For if this handsome creature was—as she had struck Jinny-a
shade overripe, it was not for lack of volunteer pluckers, and
the mutability which Mr. Giles Purley had gently derided in his
son had been even more marked in his stepdaughter. Fortunately
Will was unaware of the episodes that had preceded his return
to England. And not only did he regard himself as the first
male that had ever squeezed that fair hand, but, untaught by
its prowess as a wasp-killer, he believed her a passive victim to
his own compelling charm. And the apparent perfection of
Blanche’s surrender was the more grateful to him after the
granite he had kept striking in Jinny. But the mobility which
had hitherto marked Miss Blanche’s affections was now manifesting
itself in a novel shape, for like Miss Gentry, she had come
under the spell of Cleopatra, though a very different Cleopatra
from the ardent Churchwoman who revealed herself to the dressmaker.
The Cleopatra who magnetized the cheese-maker’s
daughter, and who, carelessly abetted by Mr. Flippance’s sketchy
promises, filled the ignorant girl with dramatic and palpitating
ambitions, was a queen of the footlights, an inspirer of romantic
passions, and in her unguarded moments—as when you sat on
her bed at midnight with your hair down—a teller of strange
Bohemian stories, a citer of perturbing Sapphic songs, the
melodies of which she could even whistle. What wonder if Mrs.
Hemans—Blanche’s favourite poet hitherto—began to pall! She
had been proud enough of her culture, leaving, as she felt it did,
the parental perspectives far behind her; but now boundless
horizons seemed opening up before her, and the London Journal
which Cleopatra swallowed with her meals seemed to Blanche to
contain nothing so alluring as Cleopatra’s own career.
It was by quite accidentally overhearing a remark of Blanche’s,
and not by dint of Mr. Flippance’s repeated invitation, that
Jinny was finally strung up to attend the great wedding. The
probability that Will and Blanche would be at the feast was a
drawback that prevailed over the lure of a good square meal,
and even over the glamour of that mysterious nectar—champagne.
But when she heard Blanche instruct her mother that
she would certainly not have to lay a place for “that common
carrier,” in a flame that might almost have consumed her letter-paper,
Jinny wrote her acceptance to Mr. Flippance, and expended
his half-crown, which she had laid by for a rainy day, on a
wedding present which would do him good—a Bible, to wit.
In prevision of the great day she left off wearing her best
gown, cleaned it, and by the aid of Miss Gentry and a bit of lace
gave it a new turn. After the wedding it must, alas, be pawned!
Jinny, though she had hitherto entered the pawnshop only to
pledge or redeem things for her customers, had schooled herself
to the inevitable. So had Mr. Flippance, whose idea of a best
man had now sunk to Barnaby. But he was used to handling
unpromising performers, he said, though he regretted the absence
of a dress rehearsal, more especially for Mrs. Purley, who, having
been induced to mother Cleopatra (nothing would induce Mr.
Purley to father her), was unlikely, he feared, to confine herself
to a simple “I do.” That was not, he groaned drolly, her
idea of a speaking part. He deplored, too, that there were not
enough bells or bell-ringers in the Little Bradmarsh church to
ring an elaborate joy-peal, as Cleopatra was so anxious to have
every property and accessory of holy matrimony complete. It
was for this reason, doubtless, that Miss Gentry, after reducing
the rival dress to a rag, ultimately emerged as the bridesmaid.
For the convenience of Foxearth Farm, as well as of Will, who,
though a bit sulky about his mother’s waiting on the Showman,
was too entangled with Miss Purley to refuse to grace the festal
board, the ceremony had been fixed for a Saturday at ten, and
on that morning Jinny had meant to rise with the sun, so as to
do the bulk of her day’s chares in advance. What was her
dismay, therefore, to open blinking eyes on her grandfather
standing over her pseudo-bed in his best Sunday smock, whip in
hand, and to hear through her wide-flung casement Methusalem
neighing outside and the cart creaking!
“Am I late?” she gasped, sitting up. Then she became
aware of a beautiful blue moonlight filling the room with glory,
and of a lambent loveliness spreading right up to the stars
sprinkled over her slit of sky.
“ ’Tis your wedding-day, dearie,” said the ghostly figure of the
Gaffer, and she now perceived there were wedding favours on his
whip, evidently taken from Methusalem’s May Day ribbons,
which he must have hunted out of the “glory-hole” where odds
and ends were kept.
Bitterly she regretted having excited his brain by informing
him of her programme. He was evidently prepared to drive her
to the ceremony.
“But it’s too early,” she temporized.
“Ye’ve got to be there for breakfus, you said, dearie,” he
reminded her.
“No, no,” she explained. “The wedding breakfast with
fashionable folk is only a sort of bever or elevener at earliest.”
He chuckled. “Ye’re gooin’ to be rich and fashionable—won’t
it wex that jackanips! Oi suspicioned ’twas you he war
arter the fust time he come gawmin’ to the stable. Ye can’t
deceive Daniel Quarles. On your hands and knees, ye pirate
thief!” He cracked his whip fiercely. “Up ye git, Jinny,
ye’ve got to titivate yerself. Oi’ve put the water in your
basin.”
“But Gran’fer,” she said, acutely distressed, “it’s not my
wedding.”
“Not your wedding!”
“Of course not.”
“Then whose wedding be it?” he demanded angrily. “ ’Tain’t
mine, seein’ as Oi’m too poor to keep Annie though she’s riddy of
her rascal at last.” He seized her wrists and shook her. “Why
did you lie to me and make a fool o’ me?”
So this was why Gran’fer had embraced her so effusively last
night when she avowed her programme for the morrow; this
was why he had given her blessings in lieu of the expected
reproaches for her projected absence; this was why he had gone
up to bed humming his long-silent song: “Oi’m seventeen come
Sunday.”
It was a mistake, she felt now, to have stayed at home for his
sake on the Friday, changing the immemorial day of absence.
He had been strange all day, without grasping what was the cause
of his unrest, and Nip’s parallel uneasiness had reacted upon
him. It was not, however, till she had incautiously remarked
that Methusalem too was off his feed, that he cried out in horror
that she had forgotten to go on her rounds. Smilingly she
assured him she had not forgotten: indeed the void in her whole
being occasioned by the loss of Mother Gander’s gratis meal had
been a gnawing reminder since midday. But imagining—and
not indeed untruly—that her work was gone, he had burst into
imprecations on “the pirate thief.”
As she sat up now on her mattress, helpless in her grief, her
mind raced feverishly through the episode, recalling every word
of the dialogue, unravelling his senile misapprehension; half
wilful it seemed to her now, in his eagerness to clutch at happier
times.
“It’s nothing to do with the coach competition, Gran’fer. It’s
only because I’ve got to be out to-morrow for a wedding!”
“A wedding! She ain’t marrying agen?”
“Who?”
“Annie.”
“Annie? Which Annie?”
“There’s onny one Annie. ’Lijah’s mother.”
“Old Mrs. Skindle! What an idea! It’s a friend of mine, a
gentleman you’ve never seen.”
At this point she had had, she remembered, the fatal idea of
showing him her furbished-up frock to soothe him, for he was
trembling all over.
“Would you like to see what I’m going to wear?”
She understood now the new light that had shot into his eye
as he touched the lace trimming.
“Similar-same to what your Great-Aunt Susannah wore the
day she married that doddy little Dap! Ye ain’t a-gooin’ to
make a fool o’ yerself similar-same. Who’s the man?” he had
demanded fiercely.
“You don’t know him, I told you—it’s a Mr. Flippance!”
A beautiful peace had come over the convulsed face. “Flippance!
Ain’t that the gent what’s come to live in Frog Farm?
That’s a fust-class toff, no mistake. Uncle Lilliwhyte should be
tellin’ me, when he come with the watercress on Tuesday, as
Mr. Flippance pays a pound a week for hisself alone!”
That was the point at which her grandfather had kissed her
with effusion, crying: “Ye’ll be in clover, dearie!” while she,
licking her chaps at the thought of the morrow’s banquet, had
playfully answered that there would certainly be “a mort to
eat.” The prospect set him clucking gleefully.
“Spite o’ that rapscallion!” he had chuckled, enlarging thereupon
to her on the way the Lord protects His righteous subjects,
and enlivening his discourse with adjurations to “the pirate
thief” to take to his hands and knees. Had followed reproaches
for hiding the news from him, reproaches to Mr. Flippance for
not calling on him, not even inviting him to the wedding: soothing
explanations from her that Mr. Flippance knew he was too
poorly to go that far; assurances she would be back as early as
possible.
She ought to have understood his delusion or self-delusion, she
thought, when he had clung to her in a sudden panic.
“Then ye will come back—ye ain’t leavin’ me to starve! Ye
won’t let that jackanips starve me out?”
And when she had reassured him, and caressed him, even
promised to bring him something tasty from the wedding breakfast,
he had gripped her harder than ever—she could still feel
his bony fingers on her wrist—but of course they actually were
on her wrists as she sat there now against her pillow—“ye’ll live
here with me—same as afore!”
“Why ever shouldn’t I?” she had answered in her innocence.
“We’ll always live with you—Methusalem, Nip, all of us.”
What unlucky impulse of affection or reassurance had made her
stoop down to kiss the dog in his basket—all her being burnt
with shame at the remembrance of her grandfather’s reply,
though at the time it had touched her to tears.
“God bless ye, Jinny. Oi know this ain’t a proper bedroom
for you, but Oi’ll sleep here if you like, and do you and he move
up to mine.”
She had put by the offer gently. “Nonsense, Gran’fer. You
can’t shift at your age—or Nip either.”
“Oi bain’t so old as Sidrach,” he had retorted, not without
resentment, “and Oi doubt he ain’t left off bein’ a rollin’ stone.
And Oi reckon Oi can fit into that chest of drawers better than
when Oi was bonkka.”
But the shrivelled form, with the hollow cheeks, flaming eyes,
and snowy beard, was still shaking her angrily, and her sense of
his pathos vanished in a sick fear, not so much for herself, though
his fingers seemed formidably sinister, as for his aged brain
under this disappointment. “Why did you say ’twas your
wedding morn?”
The Dutch clock, providentially striking three, offered a fresh
chance of temporizing.
“There, Gran’fer! Can’t be my wedding morn yet, only three
o’clock!”
He let go her hands. “Ain’t ye ashamed to have fun with
your Gran’fer?” he asked, vastly relieved. “But it’s a middlin’
long drive to Chipstone before breakfus.”
“It’s not at Chipstone—the wedding’s at Little Bradmarsh.”
“Oh!” he said blankly.
“So there’s lots of time, Gran’fer, and you can go back to bed.”
“Not me! Do, Oi mightn’t wake in time agen.”
“I’ll wake you—but I’ll be fit for nothing in the morning, if
I don’t go to sleep now.”
“The day Oi was married,” he chuckled, “Oi never offered to
sleep the noight afore—ne yet the noight arter! He, he!”
“Go away, Gran’fer!” she begged frantically. “Let me go
to sleep.”
“Ay, ay, goo to sleep, my little mavis. Nobody shan’t
touch ye. What a pity we ate up that wedding-cake! But Oi
had to cut a shiver to stop his boggin’ and crakin’, hadn’t Oi,
dearie?”
“Quite right. Better eat wedding-cake than humble-pie!”
she jested desperately.
“Ef he comes sniffin’ around arter you’re married, Oi’ll snap
him in two like this whip!”
“Don’t break my whip!” She clutched at the beribboned
butt.
“That’s my whip, Jinny! Let that go!”
“Well, go to bed then!” With a happy thought, she lit
the tallow candle on her bedside chair and tendered it to him. It
operated as mechanically upon his instinctive habits as she had
hoped.
“Good night, dearie,” he said, and very soon she heard him
undressing as usual, and his snore came with welcome rapidity.
Then she sprang out of bed, pulled on some clothes, and ran out
to release the angry and mystified Methusalem from the shafts
and to receive his nuzzled forgiveness in the stable. But when
she got back to bed, sleep long refused to come; the sense of her
tragic situation was overwhelming. Even the great peace of the
moonlit night could not soak into her. It was impossible to go
to the wedding now, she felt. When at last sleep came, she was
again incomprehensibly Queen Victoria hemmed in by foes, and
protected only by “The Father of the Fatherless” with his
black whiskers. She awoke about dawn, unrefreshed and
hungry, but a cold sponging from the basin her grandfather had
prepared enabled her to cope with the labours of the day. She
looked forward with apprehension to the scene with the old man
when he should realize that the grand match was indeed off, but
she could think of nothing better than going about in her dirtiest
apron to keep his mind off the subject. The precaution proved
unnecessary. He slept so late and so heavily—as if a weight
was off his mind—that when he at last awoke he seemed to have
slept the delusion off, as though it were something too recent to
remain in his memory. As for the scene in the small hours, that
had apparently left no impress at all upon his brain. In fact, so
jocose and natural was he at breakfast, which she purposely
made prodigal for him, that the optimism of the morning sun,
which came streaming in, almost banished her own memory of
it too: it seemed as much a nightmare as her desperate struggle
against the foes of Victoria-Jinny. The lure of the wedding
jaunt revived, and the thought of the domestic economy she
would be achieving thereby, made her sparing of her own breakfast.
She had a bad moment, however, when her grandfather
suddenly caught sight of the horseless cart outside.
“Stop thief!” he cried, jumping up agitatedly.
Jinny was vexed with herself. To have left that reminder of
the grotesque episode!
“It’s that ’Lijah!” he shrieked. “He’s stole Methusalem.”
“Hush, Gran’fer!” she warned him. “Suppose anybody
heard you!”
But he ran out towards the Common and she after him. His
tottering limbs seemed galvanized.
“My horse is all right,” she gasped, catching him up in a few
rods. “I was too tired yesterday to put my cart away, that’s
all.”
He turned and glared suspiciously at her. “That’s my hoss—and
my cart, too! Can’t you read the name—‘Daniel Quarles,
Carrier.’ But ye won’t never let me put no padlock on my
stable!”
“Your horse is there safe—come and see!”
He allowed himself to be led to the soothing spectacle.
“But Oi’ll put a padlock at once, same as in my barn,” he
said firmly. “Don’t, that rascal ’Lijah will grab him without
tippin’ a farden!”
The overlooked cart proved a blessing, not a calamity, for the
operation of padlocking the stable-door before the horse was
stolen so absorbed the Gaffer that Jinny found it possible, after
all, to don her finery and slip off to the wedding unseen even of
Nip, who was supervising the new measures for Methusalem’s
safety. Curiosity to see Miss Gentry’s creation in action had
combined with the pangs of appetite and her acceptance of the
invitation to make temptation irresistible, and she calculated
that she could be back by noon, and that, pottering over his
vegetable patch or his Bible, the old man would scarcely notice
her absence.
When she reached the church, she found the coach stationed
outside, and though the liveried guard was lacking to-day, the
black horses looked handsomer than ever with their red wedding-favours,
while the pea-green polish of the vehicle reduced her to
a worm-like humility at the thought of the impossibility of her
cart taking part in to-day’s display. Evidently Will had brought
the bridegroom from Frog Farm. Out of the corner of her eye
she espied Will himself, sunning himself on his box, and her
heart thumped, though all she was conscious of was the insolent
incongruity of his pipe with the occasion, the edifice, his new
frock-coat, and the posy in its buttonhole. Fearing she was late,
she hurried into the church. But nothing was going on, though
the size of the congregation—far larger than usual—was an
exciting surprise. There was no sign of any of the wedding-party,
not even Mr. Flippance, and after imperceptibly saluting
her Angel-Mother, she sank back into a rear pew, half pleased to
have missed nothing, half uneasy lest there be a delay. Turning
over a Prayer Book in search of the Wedding Service, she
came for the first time, and not without surprise, on the Fifth
of November Thanksgiving “for the happy deliverance of
King James I and the Three Estates of England from the most
traitorous and bloody-intended massacre by Gunpowder: And also
for the happy Arrival of King William on this Day, for the Deliverance
of our Church and Nation.” King William’s arrival struck
her as providential but confusing—for though he had apparently
detected the Popish barrels in the nick of time, how came there to
be two kings at once? Suddenly she was aware, by some tingling
telegraphy, that the bride and bridesmaid had arrived outside
in a grand open carriage. Mr. Fallow in his surplice came in at
the clerk’s intimation and took up his position at the altar rails,
the musicians struck up “The Voice that Breathed o’er Eden,”
and then there was a sudden faltering, and a whispering took
place ’twixt parson and clerk, and Mr. Fallow was swallowed
again by his vestry, while the clerk disappeared through the
church door. It was realized that Mr. Flippance was not in the
church, and it was understood that the bride’s face was being
saved in the vestry, where, however, as time passed, the agitated
congregation divined hysterics.
Jinny—thinking of her neglected grandfather—was what he
called “on canterhooks.” Had Mr. Flippance not then come in
the coach, had he been carelessly left in bed as usual? Catching
her Angel-Mother’s eye, she received a distinct injunction to go
out in search of him, but she was too shy to move in the presence
of all those people, though she had a vision of herself frantically
harnessing Methusalem and carting the bridegroom to church in
his dressing-gown—would carpet slippers be an impediment to
matrimony, she wondered. Mr. Fallow came in again, looking so
worried that she recalled an ecclesiastical experience he had related
to her: how one of his parishioners, nowadays a notorious Hot
Gospeller, had “found religion” on the very verge of setting out
to be married, and had passed so much time on his knees, absorbed
in the newly felt truth, that it was only through his friend the
bell-ringer stopping the church clock that he was married by
noon; if indeed—a doubt which ever after weighed on Mr.
Fallow—he was legally married at all. What if at this solemn
moment of his life Mr. Flippance should similarly find religion!
She devoutly hoped the discovery would be at least
delayed till he was safely married. Good heavens! perhaps the
Bible she had given him was in fault! Perhaps she was responsible
for his rapt remissness. Disregarding the congregation’s
eyes, she went boldly into the vestry.
Here, sure enough, she found the heroine of the day supported
by a trio of ladies. The outstanding absence of Mr. Flippance
left Jinny but a phantasmagoric sense of a bride, still composed
indeed, but so ghastly that despite her glamour of veil-folds and
orange-blossom she scarcely looked golden-haired; of a bridesmaid
hardly recognizable as Miss Gentry, for the opposite reason
that it was she with her swarthy splendour, opulent bosom, and
glory of silk and flowers who seemed the Cleopatra; of a Blanche
so appallingly queenly in her creamier fashion under the art of
the rival dressmaker, that her own cleaned gown seemed but to
emphasize her shabbiness and dowdiness. Acoustically the
voice of Mrs. Purley expatiating on the situation was the dominant
note, but through and beneath the cascade Jinny was aware of
Miss Gentry explaining to the bride that the horses which had
brought the bridegroom were not responsible for his disappearance.
Not unpropitious, but of the finest augury were these
sable animals, omens going by contraries. So they had brought
Mr. Flippance!
They were tossing their bepranked heads, Jinny found, and
champing their bits, as if sharing in the human unrest. Will was
no longer smoking placidly on his box, but in agitated parley
with Barnaby and his father. She heard the inn suggested, and
saw the Purleys posting towards it. She herself ran round to
the tower, fantastically figuring Mr. Flippance on his knees on
the belfry floor amid the ropes and the cobwebs, but even the
one bell-ringer seemed to have sallied in search of the bridegroom,
or at least of the inn.
The churchyard was large and rambling and thickly populated—pathetic
proof there had been life in the church once—and it
was in a sequestered corner behind a tall monument that Jinny
with a great upleap of the heart at last espied the object of her
quest, though he seemed even more unreal than Miss Gentry in
his narrow-brimmed top-hat, satin stock with horseshoe pin, and
swallowtail coat, while his face was as white as his waistcoat.
“What are you doing?” came involuntarily to her lips.
“Reading the tombstones,” he said wistfully. “So peaceful!”
“But they’re waiting for you!”
“They’re waiting for everybody. That’s the joke of it all.”
“I don’t mean the gravestones.”
“Look! There’s a French inscription. And that name must
be Flemish, see!”
“I haven’t time!”
“Why, what have you got to do?”
“I mean, you haven’t got time. It’s your wedding!”
“Don’t rub it in! What long grass! So we go to grass—all
of us. Thanks for your Bible, by the way!”
So her apprehensions had been right. It was religion that was
bemusing him.
“So glad you like it. Come along!” she said in rousing
accents.
“All flesh is grass,” he maundered on. “And rank grass at
that!”
“It’s only thick here because they can’t mow this bit,”
she explained. “Too many tombs!” She plucked at his
sleeve.
“So it’s hay we run to!” he said, disregarding her “O
Lord! Mr. Fallow’s tithes, I suppose.”
“Well, why waste good hay? He’s waiting for you.”
“Well, he’s got plenty of time by all accounts.”
“I mean, she’s waiting,” she cried, in distress.
“Is she there already? Look at that bird cracking its snail
on the gravestone.”
“It’s an early bird—you’ll be late.”
“Don’t worry. Tony Flip never missed his cue yet. Funny,
isn’t it, how it all comes right at night—especially with Polly
there! Perhaps she’ll come, if we give her a little time.”
“But have you invited her? Does she know?”
“If she don’t, it’s not for want of telegrams to every possible
address.”
“But she may be in Cork, you said. You can’t keep the bride
waiting.”
“She shouldn’t have come so early—it’s the first time I’ve
known her punctual. The early bird catches the snail, eh?”
“But it’s half-past ten! And there’s a crowd too—I don’t
know where they all come from. Come along!”
“One can’t consider the supers!”
“Well, consider me then. I’ve got to get back to Gran’fer!”
“The true artist always has stage-fright, Jinny. Give me a
moment. I’ll be on soon.”
“All right.” She was vastly relieved. “Have you got the
ring?”
“Tony Flip never forgets a property. See!” And whisking
it suddenly out of his waistcoat pocket, he seized her left hand
and slipped it on her gloved wedding-finger. “That’s where it
ought to be, Jinny!”
She pulled it off, outraged, and flung it from her.
“On your wedding day, too!” she cried.
“Now it’s lost,” he said cheerfully, “and the bearded bridesmaid
will have to go home with the unblushing bride.”
“You ought to have given it to Barnaby,” she said.
Anxious and remorseful, she went on her knees, groping
feverishly in the long grass. “On your hands and knees” kept
sounding irrelevantly in her brain. Mr. Flippance watched her
like a neutral. “I’d forgotten that the woman runs away with
the piece,” he explained to her distracted ear. “I thought
marriage was a show with two principals. But if there’s got to
be a leading lady, why not stick to Polly?”
“You should have thought of that before,” she murmured.
“Correct as Polonius, Jinny. Even when I get the theatre,
it’ll only be hell over again. Why couldn’t I stick to the
marionettes? I charge thee fling away ambition, Jinny—by
that sin fell the angels. But you’ve only flung away my ring.”
“Here it is!” She pounced joyfully.
“Just my luck!” He took it ruefully.
“I thought you said she was so pure and wonderful!” she
reminded him.
He winced. “That wouldn’t prevent her bullying me,” he
replied somewhat lamely.
“What about the taming of the shrew?” she asked.
“By Jove! You’re right, Jinny! Petruchio’s the game!
Whips and scorpions, what?” His face took on a little of its
old colour. “It’s getting up so early that has upset me. After
all, Jinny, a lovely woman who loves you and puts all her money
on you isn’t to be picked up every day.”
“Of course not. Anyhow it’s too late to change now.”
“Don’t say that! As if I didn’t want to change before there
was anything to change—oh, you know what I mean.”
“It’s too late now!” she repeated firmly. She stood over
him, a stern-faced little monitor of duty. “Come along!”
“Go ahead—the rose-wreathed victim will be at the altar.”
They moved on a little. He paused as with sudden hopefulness.
“You don’t happen to know if there’s a great oak chest
with a spring lock in Foxearth Farm?”
“How should I know?” she murmured, apprehensive now for
his reason.
He sighed. “Well, never mind—it’ll all be all right at night.
And what’s it all for, anyhow? ‘Wife of the above,’ ” he read
out weirdly. “How they cling on!”
But Jinny had gone off into a reverie of her own. The tombstone
formula he had recited struck a long-buried memory, and
in a flash she saw again a quiet graveyard and a stone behind a
tumbledown tower, and Commander Dap’s black-gloved forefinger
tracing out her mother’s epitaph to a strange solemn little
girl. All the wonder and glamour of childhood was in that
flash, all the strangeness of life and time, and her eyes filled with
tears. When the mist cleared away, Mr. Flippance was gone.
She ran frantically around among the tombs like a sheep-dog till
at length the sound of Mr. Fallow’s ecclesiastical voice floated
out to her, and hurrying back into the church, she felt foolish
and tranquillized to find the service well forward.
Jinny had misread Mr. Fallow’s look: it was not fear of
dragging on beyond the legal hour—noon was still too remote—but
impatience at being kept away from his antiquarian lore by
such trifles as matrimony, especially matrimony which was no
longer, as in pre-Reformation days, preceded by the Holy Communion
and symbolic of the union of Christ and His Church.
Had there been a care-cloth to be thrown over the couples’ heads,
such as existed in Essex churches in 1550, even matrimony might
have interested him. But as it was, his thoughts ran on old
cheeses. He had been comparing his Latin edition of Camden’s
“Britannia” (1590) with the two-volume folio translation, a
century later, by a worthy bishop, and was half scandalized, half
excited, to find that the translator had introduced a wealth of
new matter. Incidentally Mr. Fallow had learned the Hundred
was celebrated for its huge cheeses—inusitatæ magnitudinis—of
ewes’ milk, and that to make them the men milked the ewes like
women elsewhere. And these huge cheeses were consumed not
only in England, but exported—ad saturandos agrestes et opifices—“to
satisfie the coarse stomachs of husbandmen and labourers,”
as the bishop put it. When had this manufacture of giant
cheeses from ewes’ milk died out in Essex? Mr. Fallow had
already seized the opportunity of interrogating Mrs. Purley,
whose reputation as a cheesemaker had reached him. But
appalled by the voluminousness of her ignorance, he had taken
sanctuary in his church and was still brooding over the problem
as his lips framed the more trivial interrogatories of the ceremony.
For Jinny, however, it was a thrilling moment when Mr. Fallow
lackadaisically called upon the couple “as ye will answer at the
dreadful Day of Judgment” to avow if they knew any impediment
to their lawful union. That in face of so formidable a
threat neither came out with “Mr. Duke,” though she still half
expected him to pop up in person from the void, was for her
sweet stupidity the final proof of the bride’s immaculacy. And
the whole service she thought beautiful and moving, having
missed the gross beginning thereof. She was startled to hear
the bridegroom addressed by Mr. Fallow as Anthony, and the
bride with equal familiarity as Bianca Cleopatra. Otherwise the
ceremonial seemed far too highflown for this terrestrial twain,
though somehow not at all transcending the relationship in
which her own soul could stand towards its spiritual comrade.
But the replies of the three principals came all in unexpected
wise. Mr. Flippance’s “I will” was so ready and ringing, and
his countenance so rosy, that Jinny wondered which was the
actor—the Flippance of the churchyard or the Flippance of the
church. The ex-Duchess, on the other hand, still pallid, faltered
her affirmation almost in a whisper, at any rate it was not so
loud as his comment: “I’ve told you always to speak sharp on
your cue.” Certainly no husband could ever have asserted
himself at an earlier moment—was he perhaps already following
Jinny’s hint, or was it only the stage-manager responding
mechanically to stimulus? As for Mrs. Purley, she showed even
more stage-fright, her “I do” failing even as a gesture, and
having to be prompted. “Too small a speaking part for her,”
commented Tony later, with a twinkle.
When everything was over and the register signed and Barnaby,
breaking down under the weight of his financial duties, had wished
the bride many happy returns—a felicitation only dispelled by
his father saluting her as “Mrs. Flippance”—that now reassured
lady, sweeping regally to her carriage, her train over one arm
and her husband over the other—smiled at the admiring avenue
of villagers and small boys as though they had thrown her the
bouquet she held. When Mr. Flippance, gay and debonair, had
handed Mrs. Flippance, looking golden-haired again, into their
barouche, and been driven off with the hood up and his beautiful
doll beside him, Jinny perceived Will handing the gorgeously
gowned Blanche with parallel ceremoniousness into the coach,
where the transmogrified Miss Gentry was already installed
behind the bulwark of her great bouquet. And then Jinny became
aware of Barnaby hovering shyly between her and the trap
which held his parents, and indicating dumbly that the niche
vacated by his sister was now for her. She had a sudden feeling
that they did not want her in the coach beside those grand gowns
hunched out with starched petticoats. As if she would have set
foot in it! No, not for all the gowns in the world! But they
were right, she thought bitterly—what had she to do with all
this grandeur and happiness? The honeymoon was even to be
in Boulogne, she had gathered. And she heard some force,
welling up from the dark depths of herself, cry to Barnaby: “I
can’t come—I’m so sorry. But Gran’fer was upset in the night.
Please excuse me to Mr. Flippance.”
At this the bitterness passed from her soul to poor Barnaby’s.
Everybody was pairing off: the Flippances, his parents, Will
and his sister: there was nobody left for him but Miss Gentry.
“But there’ll be oysters as well as dumplings,” he pleaded.
“Will brought them from Colchester.”
Jinny’s famished interior—in making such a skimpy breakfast
it had counted on the wedding meal—seconded his plea desperately.
But the mention of Will was fatal. As a hermit’s sick
fantasy conjures up the temptation he knows he will resist, so
Jinny saw yearningly, vividly, but hopelessly, the spread banquet,
the dumplings soused in gravy, the brown bread and butter for
the oysters, the juicy meats, the mysterious champagne-bottles,
the sunny napery, the laughing festival faces, and, above all, the
curly aureole of Will’s hair.
“I’m sorry,” she repeated veraciously.
In a panic the youth ran after the receding barouche. “Jinny
won’t come,” he gasped.
“Don’t stop, coachman,” said Mrs. Flippance sharply.
“Tell her,” called back Mr. Flippance, “she must—or I’ll
never ask her to my wedding again!”
Poor Barnaby tore back to the coach. “I say, Miss Gentry,
you’re a friend of Jinny’s—do make her come.”
“A friend of Jinny’s!” It was an even unluckier remark
than the reference to Will. A patron, an educator, an interpreter
of herbs and planets, gracious and kindly, who might even—in
private—admit the little Carrier to confidences and Pythian
inspirations, yes. But a friend? How came Mr. Flippance to
commit such a faux pas as to bring a carrier into equality with
her and Blanche? Why had not the adorable Cleopatra been
firmer with the man? “I can’t order her to come,” she reminded
Barnaby majestically. “It’s not like for a parcel.”
As the horses tossed their wedding-favours and the coach
jingled off with its fashionable burden, even the trap moving on
under the stimulus of Mrs. Purley’s rhetoric, the whole scene
became a blur to Jinny, and standing there by the old pillion-steps,
she felt herself dwindled into a little aching heart alone in
a measureless misery. How tragic to be cut off from all this
gay eating and drinking! There was almost a voluptuousness
in the very poignancy of her self-mutilation. What a blessing
we all do run to hay, she brooded, in a warm flood of self-pity.
But if Jinny thus saw the wedding-guests through a blur of
self-torturing bitterness, their feast did not begin as merrily as
she beheld it, despite that Mrs. Purley, as soon as she had
exchanged her bonnet-cap with the net quilting for a home cap,
served up unexpected glasses of gin. Anthony, no less than
Barnaby, was upset by Jinny’s absence, and Cleopatra resented
this fuss over a super. But still more disgruntled by the gap at
the table was, odd to say, Will. For his soul had not been so
placid as his pipe. The glimpses he had caught of Jinny were
perturbing. Overpowering as were the presences of the bride
and Blanche, or rather, precisely because they were overpowering,
they struck him as artificial by the side of this little wild rose
with her woodland flavour, and the memory of their afternoon
in the ash-grove came up glowing, touched as with the enchantment
of its bluebells. Blanche, for her part, was peevish at
Will’s taciturnity. Miss Gentry, still rankling under Barnaby’s
suspicion that she was the Carrier’s bosom friend, was particularly
down upon that youth’s naïve attempt to confine the conversation
to Jinny, though it confirmed her suspicion of the state of
things between those two. Mr. Purley in his turn had been
dismayed by Blanche’s fineries: the young generation forgot
that their fathers were only farmers compelled to take lodgers in
bad seasons. Thus it was left to Mrs. Purley to sustain almost
the whole burden of conversation. But her preoccupation with her
little serving-maid and the kitchen, plus her uneasiness at eating
in this grand room away from her hanging hams and onions,
interposed intervals of silence even in her prattle, and the theme
of her facetious variations—her fear in church that the bridegroom
had bolted—did not add to the general cheeriness. The
old wainscoted parlour, with its rough oak beams across the ceiling,
had seldom heard oysters swallowed with gloomier gulps.
Fortunately the pop of the sweet champagne brought a
note of excited gaiety into the funereal air, and glass-clinking
and looking to one another and catching one another’s eye were
soon the order of the early-Victorian day. Mr. Flippance,
acknowledging the toast of the bride and bridegroom, did not
fail to thank Mr. and Mrs. Purley for the precious treasure they
had solemnly entrusted to his unworthy hands, a being whose
beauty equalled her brains, and whose virtue her genius. Mr.
Purley deprecatingly murmured “Don’t mention it,” meaning
of course his share in the production of this prodigy, but Mrs.
Purley, fresh from her church rôle, began to feel that she had
dandled Cleopatra in her arms. In replying for himself and his
“good wife”—for the age assumed that Mrs. Purley could not
speak—Mr. Purley could not wish the newly married couple
anything better than to be as happy as they had been. “Literally
‘a good wife,’ eh?” interlarded Tony genially. “None better,”
asseverated Mr. Purley. “I’m close, but she’s nippy.” “You’re
thinking of Blanche,” Barnaby called out gaily, through the
laughter. “I don’t say as your mother’s nippy in words,” Mr.
Purley corrected, with a twinkle. He went on to wish as much
happiness to all the unmarried people present, at which Miss
Gentry giggled and markedly avoided Barnaby’s eye; while
Will, reconciled to fate several glasses ago, squeezed Blanche’s
hand under the table. Even when Mr. Purley, becoming a little
broad, referred to the time when his “good wife” had first
ventured into “The Hurdle-Maker’s Arms,” Miss Gentry joined
in the hilarity. Her passion for the church-going Cleopatra had
convinced her that the stage was not necessarily of the devil—The
Mistletoe Bough, she had found, was only the same story
that had been written as a poem (“Ginevra”) by a Mr. Rogers,
who, she had gathered, was a most respectable banker, and she
was looking forward to her Mistress-ship of the Robes at the
coming Theatre Royal, and even to witnessing her darling’s
debut as Lady Agnes from the front. Several hysterical embraces
had already passed between her and the bride—somewhat
to Blanche’s jealousy—and all things swam before her in a rosy
mist as she now pulled a cracker with Mr. Purley and read
unblushingly:
“When glass meets glass and Friendship quaffs,
 From lip to lip ’tis Love that laughs!”
a motto which caused the hurdle-maker to remark that it was
lucky his “good wife” had left the room.
That loquacious lady had fallen strangely silent. The wine
which had loosened all the other tongues seemed to have constricted
hers. Perhaps it was merely the already mentioned
preoccupation with her pies or other dishes still in the oven. Or
perhaps it was the encounter for the first time in her life with
a great rival tongue. It consorted with this latter hypothesis
that she could be heard babbling now from her kitchen like a
cricket on the hearth, and her elaboration of a temperature
theme came distractingly across the larger horizons of Mr.
Flippance’s discourse, playing havoc with his account of
Macready’s Farewell at Drury Lane that March, and obscuring
the moral of the vacant succession. Charles Kean? Pooh!
Not a patch on his father. Had they seen him in Dion Boucicault’s
new play at the Princess’s, Love in a Maze? No? Then
before voting for Charles Kean he would advise them to go—or,
rather, not to go. He had never denied the merits of the manager
of Sadler’s Wells especially as Sir Pertinax Macsycophant,
though he knew his young friend Willie preferred Mr. Phelps in
Othello. “I say whom the mantle fits, let him wear it,” summed
up Mr. Flippance oracularly, and launched into an exposition
of how he would run “The National Theatre.” No Miss Mitford
tragedies for him with Macreadys at thirty pounds a week, still
less Charles Kean Hamlets at fifty pounds a night, but real plays
of the day—he did not mean the sort of things they did at the
Surrey, which were no truer to life than the repertory of the
marionettes, but why not, say, the Chartist movement and
the forbidden demonstration on Kennington Common? Or let
Mr. Sheridan Knowles, instead of talking his Baptist theology at
Exeter Hall, write a “No Popery” play, with Cardinal Wiseman
as the villain. (Hear, hear! from Miss Gentry.) Of course
there was the danger the censor would quash such plays as he
had quashed even Miss Mitford’s Charles the First, but then he,
Mr. Flippance, knew old John Kemble, and would undertake to
persuade him that times had changed.
Mrs. Flippance, who had displayed some restiveness under the
long appraisal of male talent, displayed yet more when Mr.
Flippance was now provoked to rapturous boyish memories of
the censor’s sister, Mrs. Siddons. But Blanche and Barnaby
listened so spellbound that they ceased finally to hear their
mother’s inborne monologue at all.
It was at this literally dramatic moment that Bundock
appeared at the banquet with the explanation that nobody
would answer his knocking, and tendered the bridegroom a pink
envelope which he had benevolently brought on from Frog Farm
on his homeward journey. Miss Gentry, unused to these bomb-shells,
uttered a shriek, which more than ever riveted the postman’s
eyes on her flamboyant efflorescence.
“Steady! Steady!” said Tony, opening the telegram with
unfaltering fingers. “Take some more fizz. And give brother
Bundock a glass.”
He read the fateful message, and the anxious watchers saw
strange thoughts and feelings passing in lines across his forehead,
and in waves across the folds of his flabby clean-shaven jowl.
Then his emotions all coalesced and crashed into laughter, noisy,
but not devoid of grimness. “Listen to this!” he cried. “‘Sincere
condolences. Married Polly this morning. Duke.’”
Mrs. Flippance turned scarlet. “He’s married Polly!” she
shrieked. “The beast! The insulting beast!”
“Easy! Easy!” said the bridegroom to this second perturbed
female. “It isn’t him Polly’s married—it’s his marionettes.
Chingford, the telegram is marked. I expect the
caravan is honeymooning in Epping Forest. Give me Boulogne.”
But nobody was listening to him any longer. The hysterics
that had been only a rumour in church became a reality now.
Miss Gentry had produced salts for her darling and was calling
for burnt feathers, and Blanche and Barnaby, tumbling over each
other kitchenwards, only set their mother’s tongue clacking
fortissimo. Even Mr. Purley was slapping the bride’s hands as
she shrieked on the sofa—he was deeply moved by her convulsions,
never having seen a doll in distress. Bundock alone
remained petrified, the empty champagne-glass in his hand, his
eyes still glued on Miss Gentry, and the bubbles in his veins
re-evoking that effervescence of the Spring in which even a rear-ward
consciousness of green mud had not availed to blunt the
charm of opulent beauty. Through the tohu-bohu Mr. Flippance
calmly scribbled a counter-telegram: “Congratulations on your
marriage. Condolences to Polly.”
“Pity we ain’t got some of that Scotch stuff to quiet her,” said
the agitated hurdle-maker.
“Whisky, do you mean?” said Tony.
“No, no! That new stuff they should be telling of—discovered
by that Scotch doctor—puts you to sleep, like, and onsenses you.”
“Oh, chloroform!” said Tony.
“Ay, that’s the name. Masterous stuff for females to my
thinking.”
“So it is, I understand.” Mr. Flippance smiled faintly. “But
not for cases like this.”
“The parsons won’t let you use it!” Bundock burst forth.
“They say it’s against religion. I suppose they want the
monopoly of sending you to sleep.” He sniggered happily.
“I’ll chloroform her,” Mr. Flippance murmured. He could
well understand Cleopatra’s fury at being replaced by a woman
so superficially unattractive as dear Polly, especially as she
herself, catching at any stage career in her impecunious days,
had not even been married by the fellow.
“Can you read my writing, Bundock?” he asked loudly,
proceeding to read to him in stentorian tones as if from the
telegram. “Polly, care of Duke’s Marionettes, Chingford.
Come home at once and all shall be forgotten and forgiven.
Your heart-broken——”
But Mrs. Flippance was already on her feet and the telegram
in fragments on the floor. “I won’t have her here!” she cried.
“You’ve got to choose between us!”
“My darling! Who could hesitate? Try a little gin.” He
hovered over her tenderly. “Take down a different reply, Bundock,
please.” He dictated the message he had really written.
“Condolences to Polly!” repeated Mrs. Flippance, smiling
savagely. “I should think so. I doubt if he has even legally
married her.”
“Oh, trust Polly for that! She’s got her head square on.”
At this Mrs. Flippance showed signs of relapse.
“Poor Polly!” said Tony hastily. “Fancy her being tied to
a man like that!”
“I don’t know that she could have done much better,” snorted
Mrs. Flippance.
“But fancy Polly being wasted on a man who packs for
himself! Another glass, Bundock?”
“Not while I’m on the Queen’s business, thank you,” said the
postman.
“But you’re not. Aren’t your letters delivered?”
“What about your telegram?”
“True, true. O Bundock, what a sense of duty! You recall
us to ours. We must drink to the Queen! The Queen, ladies
and gentlemen——” he filled up Bundock’s glass.
“I can’t refuse to drink that,” sniggered Bundock. “Wonderful
what one day’s round can bring forth!” he said, putting
down his glass. “I began with a baby—I mean the midwife
told me of one—went on to a corpse—and now here am I at a
wedding! It’s in a cottage by the holly-grove—the corpse, I
mean——”
“We don’t want the skeleton at the feast,” interrupted Tony.
Bundock hastened to turn the conversation to the grand new
house Elijah Skindle was building—Rosemary Villa.
Blanche pouted her beautiful lips in disgust: “Don’t talk of
a knacker—that’s worse than a corpse.”
But Bundock was anxious to work off that Elijah called his
house “Rosemary Villa” because rosemary was good for the
hair, and having achieved this stroke, prudently departed before
the laughter died. Blanche seemed especially taken with his
gibe at that poor grotesque Mr. Skindle.
After his departure, flown with stuff for scandal and witticism,
headier to him than the wine, the party grew jollier than ever.
They played Pope Joan with mother-o’-pearl counters and then
Blanche sang “Farewell to the Mountain,” by ear, like—a bird,
without preliminary fuss or instrumental accompaniment, and
Mr. Flippance crying “Encore!” and “Bis!” spoke significantly
of the possibility of including an annual opera season in English
in his Drury Lane repertory. Why should Her Majesty’s Theatre
and the Italian tongue have a monopoly? Ravished, Blanche
gave “The Lass that Loves a Sailor,” her eyes languishing, and
this led Mr. Purley on to dancing the old Essex hornpipe, whose
name sounded like his own, with Barnaby banging a tray for the
tambourine and Will’s throat replacing the melodeon. To Miss
Gentry, beaming in Christian goodwill upon the merry company,
it appeared strangely multiplied at moments. But the more the
merrier!
When the happy pair had departed for Boulogne via the
Chipstone barouche, what wonder if Will, finding himself alone
in the passage with Blanche, and not denied a kiss, felt his last
hesitations deliciously dissolved. How restful to absorb this
clinging femininity, this surrendered sweetness! With what
almost open abandonment she had sung “The Lass that Loves
a Sailor” at him, with what breaking trills and adoring glances!
Marriage was in the air—two examples of it had been brought
to his ken in one morning—and he now plumply proposed a
third. A strange awakening awaited him.
Blanche grew suddenly rigid. Her imagination had already
been inflamed by Cleopatra, clinging to whose aromatic skirts
she saw herself soaring to a world of romance and mystery. She
had swallowed credulously the exuberant play of Mr. Flippance’s
fantasy round her feats of wasp-killing, and was willing to do
even that on the stage if it enabled her soles to touch the sacred
boards. In her daydreams Will had already begun to recede.
But now that Mr. Flippance had discovered a voice in her too,
and operatic vistas opened out under his champagne and his no
less gaseous compliments, she could not suddenly sink to the
comparative lowliness of a box-seat. That song which Will had
taken for the symbol of her submission was really the final
instrument of his humiliation.
Rejected by the girl who has snuggled into one’s heart, evoked
one’s protective emotions, exhibited herself all softness and
sweetness! It was incredible! He did not know whether he
was more angry or more ashamed, and he was tortured by this
warm, creamy, scented loveliness which a moment before had
seemed under his palms to mould as he would, and was now
become baffling, polar, and remote.
“Blanche! Blanche!” he cried, trying to retain her hand,
and tears actually rolled down his cheeks. But underneath all
the storm he heard a still small voice crying: “Jinny! Jinny!
Jinny!”
So he had been saved from this fatuous marriage, from this
supple, conceited minx with her imitative scents and mock
graces. The genuine simple rosebud of a Jinny was waiting,
waiting for him all the time, the Jinny round whose heart his
own heart-strings had been twined from mysterious infancy, who
touched him like the song of “Home, Sweet Home,” heard when
miserable in Montreal, the darling lovable little Jinny as pretty
as she was merry, no real exemplar of the unmaidenly, only a
dutiful supporter of her grandfather and his business, at most a
bit unbalanced by her mannish role; Jinny the girl with the
brains to appreciate him, and whom he alone could appreciate
as she deserved! How wonderful were the ways of Providence!
How nearly he had been trapped and caged and robbed of her!
“I don’t see what you mean by leading a fellow on!” he
reproached Blanche hoarsely, with no feigned sense of grievance,
as he gazed at the mocking mirage of her loveliness. But underneath
the tears and the torment, his heart seemed to have come
to haven.
“Jinny!” it sang happily. “Jinny! Jinny! Jinny!”
On arriving home, Jinny’s first thought after giving the
Gaffer his dinner and swallowing a few mouthfuls to overcome
her faintness—her mood of self-torture would not allow more—was
to give Methusalem some oats extracted by stratagem from
the old man’s padlocked barn. She had scraped together a few
handfuls and was bearing them towards his manger in a limp
sack when she perceived that the stable-door was open and
gave on a littered emptiness. Her heart stood still as before the
supernatural. True, the new padlock was clawing laxly at its
staple as if forced open, but then it had not been there at all till
that very morning, and for Methusalem to leave his stable
voluntarily was as unthinkable as for a sheep to abandon a
clover-field. Yet there stretched the bare space, looking portentously
vast. What had happened? She ran round the little
estate, as though Methusalem would not have bulked on the
vision from almost any point, and then she peered anxiously
over the Common, as if he could be concealed among the gorse
or the blackberry-bushes. The hard ground of the road, marked
only by the dried-up ruts of her own wheels, gave no indication
of his hoofs. It flashed upon her that padlocks were after all
not so ridiculous, but examining more closely the one that
drooped by the stable-door, she saw that its little key was still
in it. Evidently the old man had forgotten to turn it. The
cart was still in its shed, looking as dead to her now as a shell
without its snail, though the image was perhaps a little too hard
on Methusalem.
But to alarm her grandfather before she had made a thorough
search would only confirm him in his delusions. Peeping through
the casement of the living-room, she was relieved to see and hear
him at the table, safely asleep on his after-dinner Bible. With
his beard thus buried in the text, he might sleep for hours in the
warmth and buzzing silence. Lucky, she thought, as she tip-toed
past, that he had not made the discovery himself. He
would probably have accused poor Mr. Skindle again, even set
out after the innocent vet. with his whip. Then perhaps actions
for assault and battery, for slander, for who knew what!
Horse-stealing was unheard of in these parts, and who save a
dealer in antiquities would steal Methusalem? No; as in a fit
of midsummer madness—under the depression of the drought
and his depleted nosebags—he had bolted! After all, old horses
were probably as uncertain as old grandfathers. Was there to
be a new course of senility for her study, she wondered ruefully:
had she now to school herself to the vagaries of horsey decay as
she had schooled herself to human? But, of course, she surmised
suddenly, it was the dragging the poor horse up in the middle of
the night that had turned his aged brain, and the hammering-in
of the staple had lent the last touch of alarm. He had been
liable to panic even in his prime. Perhaps he had bolted before
Gran’fer’s very eyes, mane and tail madly erect. That might
explain the uneasy look with which the old man had met her
return—a sidelong glance almost like Nip’s squint after an
escapade—his taciturnity as of a culprit not daring to confess his
carelessness, as well as his welcome blindness to the wedding
fineries she had been too desperate to remove. But no, he
would not have sat down under such a loss, or brisked up so
swiftly under the smell of dinner, or pressed the food so solicitously
upon her with the remark, “There’s a plenty for both of us,
dearie—-do ye don’t be afeared.” It would almost seem as if he
had been noting her self-denial: at any rate such an assurance
could not coexist with the loss of their means of livelihood.
It was a mystery. The only thing that was clear was that
Methusalem must be recaptured before her grandfather was
aware of his loss. Such a catastrophe, coming after the scene in
the small hours, might have as morbid an effect upon him as that
nocturnal episode had evidently had upon Methusalem himself.
Bonnetless, with streaming ringlets, in her lace-adorned dress,
she wandered farther and farther in quest of her beloved companion.
It was some time before she discovered that her other
friend was at her heels. Surely Nip would guide her to Methusalem,
as he had guided her through the darkness. But this
abandonment to his whim only led her to the cottages with
which he was on terms of cupboard affection, and dragged her
into the very heart of the tragedy retailed by Bundock to the
wedding-party, to the home of a dead labourer.
“His fitten were dead since the morning,” the widow informed
her with lachrymose gusto. “At the end he was loight-headed
and talked about puttin’ up the stack.”
The neighbours were still more ghoulishly garrulous, and the
odour of this death pervaded their cottages like the smell of the
straw steeped in their pails, and as the housewives turned their
plaiting-wheels they span rival tales of lurid deceases, while a
woman who was walking with her little girl—both plaiting hard
as they walked—removed the split straws from her mouth to
proclaim that she had prophesied a death in the house—having
seen the man’s bees swarm on his clothes-prop. She hoped they
would tell his bees of his decease. But desirable as it was to
meet a white horse—that bringer of luck—nobody had set eyes on
a wild-wandering Methusalem. Nor was he in the village pound.
She found herself drifting through the wood where she had
once sat with Will, and through the glade where the tops of the
aspens were a quiver of little white gleams. Had Methusalem
perhaps come trampling here? That was all her thought, save
for a shadowy rim of painful memory. Bare of Methusalem, the
wood at this anxious moment was as blank of poetry as the
lanky hornbeam “poles,” or the bundles of “tops” lying
around. One aspen was so weak and bent it recalled her grandfather,
and the white-barked birches craned so over the other
trees, she was reminded of a picture with giraffes in Mother
Gander’s sanctum. But of horses there was no sign. Picking
up a wing covert of a jay, not because of the beautiful blue
barring, but because it would make fishing flies for Uncle Lilliwhyte,
she now ran to his hut with a flickering hope that he
would have information, but it was empty of him, and she saw
from the absence of his old flintlock that he was sufficiently
recovered to be poaching. She emerged from the wood near
Miss Gentry’s cottage. But the landlady, who had the deserted
Squibs in her arms, could only calculate that Methusalem had
left his stable at the same moment as the dead labourer’s soul
had flown out of his body, and that there was doubtless a connexion.
“Harses has wunnerful sense,” said the good woman.
Jinny agreed, but withheld her opinion of humans. She felt if
only all the horses jogging along these sun-splashed arcades of
elms could speak, the mystery would soon be cleared up. For
Methusalem was of a nose-rubbing sociability. But it was only
the drivers of all these lazy-rolling carts—fodder, straw, timber,
dung, what not—that presumed to speak for their great hairy-legged
beasts. To one wagoner lying so high on his golden-hued
load that his eye seemed to sweep all Essex, she called up with
peculiar hope: he confessed he had been drowsing in the heat.
“So mungy,” he pleaded. Indeed the afternoon was getting
abnormally hot and stuffy, and Jinny had to defend her bare
head from the sun with her handkerchief. Hedgers and ditchers
had seen as little of a masterless, bare-flanked Methusalem as
the thatcher with his more advantageous view-point. Leisurely
driving in the stakes with his little club, this knee-padded,
corduroyed elder opined that it would be “tempesty.” And
they could do with some rain.
That the rain was indeed wanted as badly as she wanted Methusalem
was obvious enough from the solitude about the white,
gibbet-shaped Silverlane pump and the black barrel on wheels
round which aproned, lank-bosomed women should have been
gossiping, jug or pail in hand. In the absence of this congregation
Jinny had to perambulate the green-and-white houses of
the great square and hurl individual inquiries across the wooden
door-boards that safeguarded the infants. Only the village
midwife had seen a horse like Methusalem as she returned from
a case. She had been too sleepy, though, to notice properly.
From this futile quest Jinny came out on the road again. But
wheelwright and blacksmith, ploughman and gipsy, publican and
tinker, all were drawn blank.
Beside trees tidily bounding farms, or meadows dotted with
cows and foals, and every kind of horse except Methusalem, past
grotesque quaint-chimneyed houses half brick, half weather-board,
the road led Jinny on and on till it took her across the bridge.
Here on the bank she recognized the plastered hair of Mr. Charles
Mott, who was fishing gloomily. No, he had not seen a white
horse—worse luck!—and would to God, he added savagely, that
he had never seen a black sheep. Jinny hurried off, as from a
monster of profanity, for Mr. Mott’s disinclination for his wife’s
society, especially on chapel days, was, she knew, beginning to
perturb the “Peculiars”; and with the sacramental language
of the marriage service yet ringing in her ears, it seemed to our
guileless Jinny ineffably wicked to be sunk in selfish sport instead
of cherishing and comforting the woman to whom you had
consecrated yourself.
She moved on pensively—the road after descending rose somewhat,
so that Long Bradmarsh seemed to nestle behind her in a
hollow, a medley of thatch and slate, steeple and chimney-stacks,
hayricks and inn-signs, and fluttering sheets and petticoats. But
the forward view seemed far more bounded than usual, deprived
as it was of the driver’s vantage-point: to the toiling pedestrian
her familiar landscape was subtly changed, and this added to
the sense of change and disaster.
She passed Foxearth Farm near enough to see again the
barouche now awaiting the honeymooners, and to hear the
voices of Will and Blanche mingling in a merry chorus. There
was an aching at her heart, but everything now came dulled to
her as through an opiate. Methusalem was the only real thing
in life. She wanted to make her inquiry of the driver, but her
legs bore her onwards to a glade where she could rest on one of
Mr. Purley’s felled trunks. Even there the chorus pursued her,
spoiling the music of the little stream that babbled at her feet,
and the beauty of willow-herb and tall yellow leopard’s-bane and
those white bell-blossoms of convolvulus twining and twisting
high up among the trees still standing.
It was well past five before, footsore and spent, she stopped
on her homeward road at the Pennymole cottage for information
and a glass of water. This must be her last point, for standing
as it did at the Four Wantz Way, it overlooked every direction
in which Methusalem could possibly have gone, had he come
thus far, while the size of the Pennymole family provided over
a score of eyes. She found herself plunged into the eve-of-Sabbath
ritual—all the seven younger children being scrubbed
in turn by the mother in a single tub of water, and left to run
about in a state of nature, or varying stages of leisurely redressing.
But neither the nude nor the semi-decent nor Mrs. Pennymole
herself, with her bar of yellow soap, had seen even the tip of
Methusalem’s tail, and the extinction of this last hope left Jinny
so visibly overcome that the busy mother insisted on her sitting
down and waiting for tea. She urged that “father” would soon
be home, as well as the two elder boys, all at work in different
places, and “happen lucky” one of the three would have seen
the missing animal. Jinny felt too weak to refuse the tea, and
though the thought of her neglected grandfather was as gnawing
as her hunger, she reasoned with herself that she would really
get to him quicker if refreshed. The elder lads came in very
soon, one after the other, each handing his day’s sixpence to his
mother and receiving a penny for himself. But neither brought
even a crumb for Jinny. Mrs. Pennymole beguiled the time of
waiting for the master and the meal by relating, in view of the
labourer’s death, how she had lost two children five years ago.
No fewer than four were down at once with the black thrush.
Two boys lay on the sofa, one at each end, an infant in the
bassinet under the table, and a girl in the bed. One of the
sofa patients had swellings behind his ears the size of eggs, but
they were lanced and he lived to earn his three shillings a week.
The other, a fine lad of thirteen, died at three in the afternoon.
The girl died at half-past eleven at night—beautiful she looked;
like a wax statue. The undertaker was afraid to put them in
their coffin; afraid to bring contagion to his own children.
“Perhaps your husband would do it,” he suggested to her.
But her husband, poor man, couldn’t. “How would you like
to put your childer in coffins?” he asked the undertaker.
The doctor wouldn’t let her follow the funeral, she was so
broken.
But it was Jinny who was broken now. These reminiscences
were more painful for her than for the mother who—inexhaustible
fountain of life—scoured her newer progeny to their accompaniment.
Yes, existence seemed very black to Jinny, sitting there
without food, or Will, or Methusalem, or anything but a grandfather;
and the china owl with a real coloured handkerchief tied
round its head, which was the outstanding ornament of the
mantelpiece, seemed in its grotesque gloom an apt symbol of
existence. She was very glad when cheery, brawny Mr. Pennymole
burst in, labouring with a story in which whisker-shaking
laughter bubbled through a humorous stupefaction.
He had begun to tell the story almost before he had perceived
and greeted Jinny, and Methusalem’s disappearance, on which he
could throw no light, served to enhance it. To him, too, the day
had brought an earth-shaking novelty—there must be something
in the moon. For thirty years, he explained, as he took off his
coat and boots (though not his cap), he had risen at half-past
four. But waking that morning at one o’clock, he had got to
sleep again, and the next thing he knew—after what seemed to
him a little light slumber—was a child saying: “Mother, what’s
the time?” Half-past five, mother had replied—Mrs. Pennymole
here corroborated the statement at some length; adding
that it was Jemima who inquired, she being such a light sleeper,
and always so anxious to be off to school: an interruption that
her lord sustained impatiently, for this was the dramatic moment
of the story. Half-past five! Up he had jumped, never made
his fire nor his tea, never had his pipe, and instead of leaving
home at twenty to six, still smoking it, he had rushed round to
his brother-in-law’s, where fortunately he was in time for the
last cup o’ tea, and then out with his horses as usual!
“And I made him tea and sent it round to the field,” gurgled
Mrs. Pennymole as she unhooked her bodice for the last baby.
“He had two teas!”
Mr. Pennymole and Jinny joined in her laugh. “Sometimes
I’ve woke at ’arf-past three,” he explained carefully. “But then
I felt all right.” He recapitulated the wonder of his oversleeping
himself, as he drew up to the table, where the bulk of his progeny
was already installed, and it overbrooded his distribution of bread
and jam in great slices.
“And I was up at four!” Mrs. Pennymole bragged waggishly.
“Yes, upstairs!” Mr. Pennymole retorted, sharp as his knife,
and the table was in a roar, not to mention the four corners of the
room, where those of the brood squatted who could not find
places at the board. Everybody sat munching the ritual hunk,
though for the black strong tea the adults alone had cups, two
mugs circulating among the swarm of children, whose clamours
for their fair turn had to be checked by paternal cries for silence.
Mrs. Pennymole pressed both husband and guest to share her
little piece of fat pork fried with bread, but they knew better
what was due to a nursing mother. Jinny felt grateful enough for
the bread and jam and the tea, cheap but at least not from burnt
crusts, and sugared abundantly, despite that sugar—as Mrs. Pennymole
complained—had gone up “something cruel.” But though
such a meal was luxury for her nowadays, she could hardly help
wistful mouth-watering visions of the wedding-feast, from the
known dumplings to the unknown champagne. It was for a strange
company she had exchanged the wedding-party, she thought
ruefully, as she refused a third slice of bread. She could not well
accept it, when each child, solemnly asked in turn whether it
would like a second, had replied with wonderful unanimity in
the affirmative, and Mr. Pennymole, with his eye on the waning
loaf, had remarked that children had wonderful healthy appetites,
though that was better than doctors. She was glad,
however, to be given a wedge of bread and cheese, though when
her host jabbed his into his mouth at the point of his knife, it
called up a distressing memory of a gobbet of wedding-cake
thrown to a dog, and she became suddenly aware that Nip
was no longer with her. She remembered seeing him last as she
sat on the log, and she rightly divined that—wiser than she—he
had gone to the wedding-meal!
Before she could get away from her Barmecide banquet, the
brother-in-law and his wife came in, and then the whole story of
the oversleeping had to be laughed and marvelled over afresh.
The more often Mr. Pennymole told the story, the more his sense
of its whimsicalness and wonder grew upon him, and the more
his audience enjoyed it. “I made his tea,” cackled Mrs. Pennymole.
“I sent it round to the field. So he had two teas!”
The cottage rocked with laughter. Only the owl and Jinny
preserved their gravity. And even Jinny could not resist the
infection when Mrs. Pennymole boasted to her visitors that
she herself had been up at four, and Mr. Pennymole, with an
air of invincible shrewdness, pointed out that it was “upstairs”
she had been. So that though neither of the new-comers
could throw light upon the Methusalem mystery, Jinny left the
cottage refreshed by more than tea, and with the flavour of the
corpse-talk washed away. The humour of it all even went with
her on her long homeward tramp. In imagination she heard
the oddness of the oversleeping and the duplication of the teas
still savoured with grins and guffaws, while the little ones dribbled
bedwards, while the elder boys were scrubbed in the scullery, and
while the indefatigable Mrs. Pennymole was washing the hero
of the history down to his waist. Her fancy followed the tale
spreading over the parish, told and retold, borne by Bundock to
ever wider circles, adding to the gaiety of the Hundred, abiding
as a family tradition when that babe at Mrs. Pennymole’s breast
was a grandmother—the tale of how for thirty years Mr. Pennymole
had got up at half-past four, and how at long last the
record was broken!
Speeding along in this merrier mood, Jinny had almost reached
home by a short cut through the woods, when she espied a gay-stringed,
battered beaver and learned the tragic truth.
Uncle Lilliwhyte was carrying by its long legs the spoil of his
rusty flintlock—Jinny was glad to see it was only a legitimate
curlew with its dagger-like bill. He offered the bird for sale, but
she was afraid it had fed too long on the marsh mud. She was
glad to hear, though, he had called that very morning and sold
her grandfather truffles—Uncle had a pig’s nose for truffles, and
her grandfather a passion for them.
“He hadn’t got change for a foive-pun’ note,” Uncle Lilliwhyte
reported. “And Oi hadn’t, neither,” he chuckled. “So ye owes
me tuppence.”
Jinny was amused at her grandfather’s magnificent mendacity—his
lordly way of carrying off his pennilessness.
“Never mind the twopence now,” she said. “You haven’t
seen Methusalem, I suppose?”
She had supposed it so often that she took the answer for
granted. This reply struck her like a cannon-ball.
“Not since ’Lijah Skindle took him away this marnin’!”
“Elijah Skindle took him!” she gasped, breathless yet
relieved. “What for? Where?” Had her grandfather’s fears
been justified then?
“To his ’orspital, Oi reckon. Trottin’ behind the trap he
was, tied to it. A sick ’oss don’t want to goo that pace though,
thinks Oi. ’Twould be before bever,” he added, when she
demanded the exact hour.
“When I was at church! But Methusalem wasn’t sick when
I left home.”
“Must ha’ been took sick—or it stands to reason your Gran’fer
wouldn’t ha’ let him goo!”
“But Gran’fer didn’t know——!”
“Arxin’ your pardon, Jinny—Mr. Quarles waved to ’em as
they went off. And Oi’ll be thankful to you for the tuppence,
needin’ my Sunday beer.”
She groped in her purse. “But if Mr. Skindle took him back
to Chipstone, how comes it nobody has seen him?”
“He went roundabouts by Bog Lane and Squash End,
’tis all droied-up nowadays. And took Bidlake’s Ferry, Oi
reckon, stead o’ the bridge.”
A sinister feeling, as yet formless, began to creep into Jinny’s
veins. Handing the nondescript his twopence and the jay
feather, she ran out of the wood and then in the dusking owl-light
by a field-path, and through a prickly hedge of dog-rose and
blackberry that left her with scratched fingers, into her own
little plot of ground. The stable door was now locked, though
its aching emptiness was still visible through the weather-boarding
as she passed by; the house-door was even more securely fastened,
and all the windows were tightly closed. She rattled the casement
of the living-room and heard her grandfather finally
hobbling down the stairs.
He examined her cautiously through the little panes.
“Ye’ve left me in the dark,” he complained, turning the
window-clasp. “Oi’m famished. Where you been gaddin’ in
that frock?”
“Did you send Methusalem away?” she cried impatiently.
He put a scooped hand to his ear. “What be you a-sayin’?”
“Open the door!” she called angrily. “You mustn’t shut
me out.”
“We’ve got to be careful, Jinny.” He moved to the door.
“There’s a sight o’ bad charriters about.”
“Yes, indeed. What did Mr. Skindle want here?” she asked,
as the bolts shot back.
“Skindle!” He pondered. “Young ’Lijah, d’ye mean? He
brought me a pot.”
“That was long ago—what did he want this morning?”
“This marnin’? Oh, ay”—the sidelong look returned with
remembrance and was succeeded by one of defiance—“That’s
my business.”
A terrible suspicion flashed upon Jinny.
“You haven’t sold Methusalem?” she cried.
He winced. “That’s my property. Daniel Quarles, Carrier.
And by the good rights, Oi——”
“You have sold him!” she hissed in a fury strange to herself.
And she found herself shaking the old man by the arms, shaking
him as he had shaken her that very morning in the small hours.
And he was cowering before her, the fierce old man, cowering
there on his own doorstep.
“Oi couldn’t see ye starve,” he pleaded.
“Oh, it’s not me you were thinking of!” she said harshly, not
caring whether she was just or not. “You might have trusted
yourself to me after all these years.” Indignation at Elijah’s
supposed swindling mingled with her wrath—the idea of his
getting Methusalem, an animal worth his weight in gold, for a
miserable five-pound note! She gave the old man a final
shake, imaginatively intended for Mr. Skindle. “Where’s the
money?” she cried, letting him go.
He recovered himself somewhat. “That’s my money,” he
said sullenly.
“But where have you put it?”
Cunning and obstinacy mingled in his eye. “Oi’ve put it safe
agin all they thieves!”
“I don’t believe you’ve got any money!” she said, matching
cunning by cunning. “You just let Mr. Skindle rob you.”
“Noa, Oi dedn’t. Oi got more than Methusalem was worth.”
“Really? More than a sovereign?”
“A suvran!” He cackled with a crafty air. “More than
double that!”
“More than two sovereigns?” said Jinny in tones of ingenuous
admiration.
“More than double that!”
“More than four sovereigns?” Enthusiasm shone in her eyes
through the dusk.
He hurried towards the stairs.
“You’re not going to bed?” she called with mock anxiety.
“You haven’t had supper!”
“We’ll have plenty o’ supper now. He, he!” His gleeful
cackle descended from the winding staircase. Before he returned,
chuckling still, she had lit the lamp and put out some cold
rabbit-pie and a jug of beer on the tiger-painted tray.
“A foiver!” he cried, waving it.
She snatched at the note and tore it in two and let the pieces
flutter away.
“Help! Thieves! She’s robbed me,” screamed the Gaffer.
He scrambled on his knees after the fragments.
“Hush! How dare you sell Methusalem?” He cowered
again before her passion.
“That was eating us out of house and home!” he whimpered.
“Get up! There’s your supper.”
He rose like a scolded child, clutching the scraps of thin paper.
She put on her bonnet.
“Where ye gooin’?”
“To Mr. Skindle, of course.”
“Too late for that!”
“No, it isn’t.”
“But ye won’t git Methusalem back.”
“Oh, won’t I, though!”
“But ye’ve tore up his foiver!”
“I don’t care.” But alarmed at heart over her insane deed,
she took the pieces from his unresisting hand and put them in
her purse. “Don’t bolt me out or I’ll break the window.”
“But listen, dearie, Mr. Skindle won’t be there—the place’ll
be shut up!”
“All the better. I’ll break it in.”
“But what’s the good o’ that? Poor old Methusalem’s out
o’ his misery by now!”
Her heart stood still. “What do you mean?” She was
white and shaking.
“ ’Lijah kills at seven,” he said, “afore his supper.”
“Oh, my God!” she gasped, the completeness of the tragedy
impinging on her for the first time. “You sold him to be killed!
No, no!” she cried, recovering. “He wouldn’t give five pounds
just for a carcase!”
“Then ef that ain’t killed yet,” said the Gaffer, “that won’t
be till to-morrow night.”
A sensible remark for once, Jinny thought, subsiding almost
happily into a chair. It had been silly even to contemplate
setting out afresh after all the day’s journeyings. In this
weather the doomed horses would be shut up in Mr. Skindle’s
field,—she recalled their joyous gambollings—the first thing in
the morning she would set out to the rescue. And yet what if
her grandfather should be wrong, what if Mr. Skindle killed
before breakfast! No, delay might be fatal, and she started up
afresh and, unlocking the stable-door, brought in her lantern.
“Ye’re not gooin’ to Mr. Skindle at this time o’ day?”
protested the Gaffer from his soothing tray.
“I must.” She lit the candle in the lantern.
“Well, give my love to his mother!” She thought it sarcasm
and went off even more embittered against him.
She had not gone far before she met the returning reveller.
Nip’s ears were abased and his eyes edge-long, but in an instant,
aware she was glad of his company, he welcomed her roysterously
to it. But the blackness that now began to fall upon the pair
was not wholly of the night. Great livid thunder-clouds were
sagging over them, and of a sudden the whole landscape was lit
up with blue blazings and shaken with terrific thunder. And
then came the rain—the long-prayed-for rain, with its rich
rejoicing gurgle. Providence, importuned on all sides, now
asserted itself in a pour that was like solid sheets of water, and
the parched soil seemed swilled in a few seconds. To plough
along was not only difficult but foolhardy. Heaven had clearly
thrown cold water on the project. She crept almost shame-facedly
back to her still guzzling grandfather.
“Got a wettin’,” he chuckled. “Sarve ye right to be sow
obstropolus. And sarve you right too!” he added, launching a
kick towards the shivering and dripping animal. Nip, though
untouched, uttered a dreadful howl, and grovelled on his back.
“Do you want to kill them both?” cried Jinny. She was now
sure that Methusalem was beyond reprieve—the point of Mr.
Skindle’s strategy in purchasing him, so as to leave her no
sphere but matrimony, was penetrating to her mind, and, by the
side of such “a dirty bit,” Will’s frank and blusterous methods
began to appear magnanimity itself. To have found out, too,
probably from Bundock, that she would be away at the wedding!
The sly skunk!
For a full hour after Nip and her grandfather slept the sleep of
the innocent in their beds, she sat up watching the storm, with
no surprise at this unrest of the elements. No less a cataclysm
was adequate to the passing of Methusalem. This sympathy of
Nature indeed relieved her, some of her stoniness melted, and
her face—as if in reciprocation—became as deluged as the
face of the earth-mother. All the long years with Methusalem
passed before her vision, ever since that first meeting of theirs
outside the Watch Vessel: their common adventures in sunshine
and snow, in mud and rain, her whip only an extra tail for him
to whisk off his flies withal: ah, the long martyrdom from those
flies, especially the nose-fly that spoilt the glory of July. She
heard again that queer tick-tack of his hoofs, his whinnying, his
coughing, saw the spasmodic shudder of his shoulder-joints, the
peculiar gulp with which he took his drench. How often they
had gone together to have a nail fixed, or his shoes roughed for
the winter! What silly alarms he had felt, when she had had
to soothe him like a mother, coax him to pass something, and on
the other hand what a skill beyond hers in going unguided
through the moonless, swift-fallen winter night! How happily
he had nibbled at the beans in his corner-crib or the oats in his
manger, what time he was brushed and combed—would that
beloved mane get into rats’-tails no more? Was she never
again to feel that soft nose against her cheek in a love passing
the love of man? Could all this cheery laborious vitality have
ended, be one with the dust she had so often brushed from his
fetlocks? That joy which had set him frisking like an uncouth
kitten when he was released from the shafts, was it not to be his
now that he was freed for ever? Was he to be nothing but a
carcase? Nay—horror upon horror—would he survive only as
glove-or boot-buttons, as that wretch of a Skindle calculated?
Would that triumphant tail wave only at human funerals, his
own last rites unpaid? A remembrance of her glimpse at the
charnel-house made her almost sick. Fed to the foxhounds
perhaps! Could such things be in a God-governed world?
And her cart too would go—of the old life there would be
nothing left any more. She could see the bill pasted up on the
barn-doors: “Carrier’s Cart on Springs, with Set of Harness,
Cart Gear, Back Bands, Belly Bands——” But what nonsense!
Who would advertise such a ramshackle ruin? “A Shabby,
Cracked Canvas Tilt, Patched with Sacking”—fancy that on a
poster! No, like its horse, it would be adjudged fit only to be
broken up. Perhaps somebody wearing Methusalem on his
shoes would sit on the bar of a stile made of its axle-tree.
She woke from her reverie and to the wetness of her face,
streaming with bitter-sweet tears. The moon rode almost full,
and in the pale blue spread of sky sparse stars shone, one or two
twinkling. She opened the door and went out into the night.
What delicious wafts of smells after the long mugginess of the
day! The elms and poplars rose in mystic lines bordering the
great bare spaces. Surely the death of Methusalem had been
but a nightmare—if she went to the stable, there would he be
as usual, snug and safe in his straw. She sped thither, over the
sodden grass, with absolute conviction. Alas, the same endless
emptiness yawned, the manger looked strange and tragic in the
moonlight. She thought of a divine infant once lying in one,
wrapped in his swaddling-clothes, and then looking up skywards
she saw a figure hovering. Yes, it was—it was the Angel-Mother,
so beautiful in the azure light. At the sight all her anguish was
dissolved in sweetness. “Mother! Mother!” she cried,
stretching up her arms to the vision. “Comfort thee, my child!”
came the dulcet tones. “Methusalem is not dead, but sleeping!”
At the glad news Jinny burst into tears, and, in the mist they
made, her mother faded away. But she walked in soft happiness
back to the house, and said her prayers of gratitude and went
believingly to bed and slept as when she was a babe.
So long did she sleep that when she woke, the old man was
standing over her again, just as the morning before, save that
now he was in his everyday earth-coloured smock and wore a
frown instead of a wedding-look, and the sunshine was streaming
into the room.
“Where’s my breakfus, Jinny?” he said grumpily.
“I’m so sorry,” she said, yawning and rubbing her eyes. “I
must have overslept myself.” And then she remembered Mr.
Pennymole’s story, and a smile came over her face.
“There’s nawthen to laugh at,” he said savagely. “Ef ye goo
out at bull’s noon, ye’re bound to forgit my breakfus. And that
eatin’ his head off too! Ye know there’s no work for him. Ye
dedn’t want to bring him back.”
“Back?” she almost screamed. “Is Methusalem back?”
“As ef ye dedn’t know!” he said, disgusted.
Disregarding him and everything else, she sprang out of bed,
rolling the blanket round her, and with bare feet she sped to the
stable. But she had hardly got outside before the jet of hope
had sunk back. It was but another of her grandfather’s
delusions.
But no! O incredible, miraculous, enchanting spectacle!
There he was, the dear old beast, not dead but sleeping, exactly
as the Angel-Mother had said, not a hair of his mane injured,
not an inch of his tail less, and never did two Polynesian lovers
rub noses half so passionately as this happy pair.
Jinny would have rubbed his nose still more adoringly had she
known—as she knew later—the rôle it had played in his salvation.
The threatening thunder-clouds had made Mr. Skindle put
off his slaughtering till the morning, so that he himself might
get home before the storm broke. The doomed horses he left
shut in his field—who cared whether they got wet? But as soon as
the coast was clear of Skindle and his latest-lingering myrmidons,
Methusalem had simply lifted the latch of the gate with his
nose and gone home. Mr. Skindle, oblivious of this accomplishment
of his, though he had seen it practised on his never-forgotten
journey with Jinny, had imagined him conclusively corralled.
Mr. Charles Mott, returning with some boon companions from a
distant hostelry where the draughts were more generous than
he was allowed at “The Black Sheep,” was among the few who
saw the noble animal hurrying homewards, and he told Jinny the
next Tuesday that she ought to enter Methusalem for the
Colchester Stakes. His unusual rate of motion was also reported
by Miss Gentry, who, lying awake with a headache after the
excitement of the day, had heard him snort past her window
just when the storm was ebbing. He must have sagely sheltered
while it raged and have arrived at Blackwater Hall soon after
Jinny had beheld her vision.
But as yet Jinny attributed the miracle to her Angel-Mother.
And what a happy Sunday morning was that, with the church
bells all clearly ringing “Come and thank God and her!” She
did not fail to obey them, though not without a sharp turn in
that padlock, and with the little key safe in her bosom. And
having happily ascertained from Mother Gander that the five-pound
note was valid in pieces, she dropped them into Mr.
Skindle’s letter-box together with remarks that drew heavily on
her Spelling-Book’s “Noun Adjectives of Four Syllables.”
Cadaverous (Belonging to a Carcase); Execrable (Hateful,
Accursed); Sophistical (Captious, Deceitful); Sulphureous (Full
of Brimstone); and Vindictive (Belonging to an Apology) were
among her proudest specimens. They were not calculated to
encourage Mr. Skindle’s matrimonial hopes.
WINTER’S TALE
Thou barrein ground, whome winters wrath hath wasted,
Art made a myrrhour to behold my plight.
Spenser, “The Shepheards Calendar.”
Pitter-patter was the dominant note of the rest of the year.
The prayer for rain had been only too successful, and the blackbirds
whistled their thanksgiving over their worms. But
humanity grumbled with its wonted ingratitude. There were
warm and windy days, and cold and sparkling days, but the roads
never quite dried up. The short cuts to Frog Farm became
impassable for Bundock; in the coursing season the long-grassed
marshlands clove to the spectators’ gaiters, and when the beagles
were out, Jinny had the satisfaction of seeing Farmer Gale and
breathless bumpkins floundering over sodden stubble-fields or
ankle-deep in mud, what time baffled whippers-in piped plaintively,
or jetted husky cries at their scattered pack. Glad as
she was to eat of the leporine family, she detested sport for
sport’s sake, even the fox-hunting, though her poultry-run had
just been raided and a dog-fox had snarled fearlessly at Nip
from the ditch. Once, when the hare, crossing her cart with
the dogs at his very heels, cleared the broad ditch with a magnificent
leap, Jinny clapped her hands as though at a Flippance
melodrama.
Sport for life’s sake was another affair, and she looked back
regretfully to the good old times described by her grandfather,
when the farmer, having finished his day’s work, would go out
rabbit-shooting to preserve his crop, or when the fox could be
shot, snared, or even hooked, as a dangerous animal. Now, when
poor old Uncle Lilliwhyte had found Jinny’s vulpine enemy dead
in one of his gins, caught by a claw, that rising vet., Mr. Skindle,
was called in to make a post-mortem examination, and it was
only because he certified that the sacred animal had died of
starvation, and not been poisoned, that the old woodman escaped
the worst rigours of the unwritten law. As it was, his crime in
setting the trap at all on land not his own, and his failing—through
a new attack of rheumatism—to examine it before the
fox died, almost resulted in his being officially driven from his
derelict hut into the Chipstone poorhouse; a fate he only escaped
by passionate asseverations that he had always been and till death
would continue “upright,” by which he meant “independent.”
That was in one sense more than Jinny could call herself,
for her store of barley or rye for her breadmaking was dangerously
low, and she had come to depend a good deal on the
food brought by this queer raven at prices more corresponding
to his gratitude than to market value. She still peddled her
goats’ milk for a trifle among her neighbours, the abundant
blackberries gave her fruit (though she could not afford the sugar
for jam), she had gathered nuts as industriously as a squirrel,
she ensured jelly for her grandfather by making it out of her
own apples, while by exchanging the bad apples with a neighbour
who kept pigs, she got Methusalem some “green fodder” in the
shape of tares. But it was an unceasing strain to keep things
going in the old style, and Uncle Lilliwhyte’s spoils were more
than welcome, for his activities varied from codling-fishing to
eel-spearing, and from fowling on the saltings to collecting glass-wort
for pickling. His rabbits and hares came with suspiciously
injured legs, and Jinny seeing the bloody-blobbed eyes could
only hope they had not been long in his wire loops. As she felt
the long, warm, beautiful bodies, she had to tell herself how
pernicious they were to the root-crops or the young apple-trees.
More legitimate spoils arrived when the old man was well
enough to crawl to the nearest salt-marsh with his ancient fowling-piece,
for, when the ebb bared the mud, countless sea-birds came
to feed, and more than once a brace of mallards offered Jinny a
vivid image of her inferiority to the rival carrier, so gorgeously
shimmering was the male’s head, so drab the female’s. For
while the driver of the Flynt Flyer had been blossoming out in
the frock-coat he had first sported for the Flippance wedding,
Jinny had been refraining even from her furbished-up gown,
reserving it mentally for a last resource and feeling herself lucky
that it was still unpawned. But one day when the vehicles met—for
despite the heaviness of the going Jinny foolishly and
extravagantly continued to plod her miry rounds—she caught
Will looking down so compassionately at her spotting shoes that
she straightway resolved to buy another pair at any sacrifice.
Savage satisfaction at her defeat she could have borne, but this
pity she would not brook. Better sell the goats, especially as
Gran’fer would need a new flannel shirt for the winter. The
animals were not very lucrative, and one out of the three would
suffice to supply milk for herself and—by its bleat—her grandfather’s
sense of stability. But she had reckoned insufficiently
with this last: he admitted he had no great stomach for her
goats’ cheese, and felt a middling need for flannel, but he clung
to his nannies as though without them his world would fall to
pieces. That her shoes were doing so, he did not remark.
In the end—though she shrank from the three golden balls on
her own behalf—there was nothing for it but to pledge her
wedding-frock under pretence it was a customer’s. But in her
dread lest the pawnbroker should recognize the dress, the sharpness
which extracted the utmost from him for her distressed
clients was replaced by a diffident acceptance of barely enough
for the shoes.
This discussion about her live stock, however, gave her an idea.
She carted part of her poultry to and fro in a crate, and their
clucking and fluttering gave an air of liveliness to the business
and made even Will Flynt believe it had woke up again, especially
as he saw the smart new shoes on the little feet, supplemented
presently by a new winter bonnet, which, despite his experience
with his own mother’s bonnet, he did not divine was merely an
old one, whitened and remodelled by Miss Gentry.
Thus the equinoctial season found the little Carrier still upon
her seat, defiant of competition and radiating prosperity from
the crown of her bonnet to the sole of her shoe. Even the plainness
of her skirt and shawl seemed only an adaptation to the
weather. But she would have been better off by her log fire,
making the local variety of Limerick lace with which she was on
other days trying to eke out her infrequent sixpences. Though
the rain abated towards the end of October, halcyon days and
even hours alternated with hours and days of turbulent winds
and hailstorms, and the sky would change in almost an instant
from a keen blue, with every perspective standing out clear and
sun-washed, to a lowering roof of clouds spitting hailstones, and
a gentle wind would be succeeded by half a gale that stripped
their flames from the poplars and sent the reddened beech-leaves
whirling fantastically. In November these blasts grew more
biting, Nip cowered in his basket within the cart, and the calves
in the fields sheltered themselves behind the blown-down trunks
of elms. Shivering, Jinny reminded herself that the real object
of her rounds was the bi-weekly gorge at Mother Gander’s.
They were indeed more generous than ever, these midday meals,
so relieved was Jinny’s hostess to find she had not really been
baptized into Mr. Fallow’s church. Mrs. Mott even had the
Gaffer’s beer-barrel replenished gratis. Not that she had any
suspicion of the girl’s straits. Though parcels were no longer
left at the bar for Jinny, the poor woman was too taken up with
her own troubles to draw the deduction from that. Beneath her
imposing blue silk bodice beat a wounded heart, and in Jinny’s
society she found consolation for the lack of her husband’s.
For a quarrel had begun between the Motts which was destined
to shake all Chipstone with its reverberations. Mr. Charles
Mott had profanely refused to be “Peculiar” any longer. The
endeavour to draw him to the Wednesday services had proved
the last straw. To him religion and Sunday were synonyms, and
he had been willing to concede the day to boredom. He was a
sportsman and was ready to play fair. But his wife was not
playing fair, he considered, when she pretended that ratting,
coursing, and dicing remained reprehensible even on weekdays.
Expostulatory elders had vainly pointed out to him that it was
only the Churchman who made so much of Sunday and so little
of every other day, and Deacon Mawhood had been compelled
to order several goes of rum at “The Black Sheep” to find
opportunities of explaining to its landlord that his cravat-pin
and plethora of rings were an offence. Let him note how his
admirable wife had given up her gold chain. “Well, I don’t
want no chain,” Charley had retorted, and his cronies still
acclaimed the repartee. He had, in fact, broken his chain and
would not even go to the Sunday chapel.
“You and me have both got our cross to bear,” Deacon Mawhood
sighed sympathetically to the distraught lady. “There’s
saints among us as won’t even keep a cat or a bird because the
thought of them may come ’twixt the soul and chapel. Oi sometimes
suspicion it’s a failing in roighteousness to keep a husband or
a wife—partic’lar when they riots on your hard-earned savings.”
The grievances which the poor hostess of “The Black Sheep”—now
become a keeper of one—poured into Jinny’s ear, fully
confirmed all the Spelling-Book had told her of the wickedness
of man—its preoccupation with the male gender had left woman
unimpugned. But it was more under Mr. Mawhood’s encouragement
than Jinny’s that this female pillar of the chapel now sent
the Bellman round Chipstone with his bell and his cocked hat
and his old French cry, to inform all and sundry that she would
not be responsible for her husband’s debts.
It was a procedure which scandalized Chipstone. Since the
day when a neighbouring village had set up its “cage” for
drunken men in the pound, with the other strayed beasts, no
such blow had been dealt at the dignity of man. But Charley
and his crew met it with derisory laughter. All Mrs. Mott’s
property was his—or rather theirs: he could sell the lease of
“The Black Sheep” over her head, if she did not behave herself.
Nay, he could sell her very self at the market cross, the bolder
maintained, not without citing precedent. By many the Bellman
was blamed for compromising the dignity of his sex: by
none so contemptuously as by Bundock. For the Crier, not
taking his own announcement seriously, had embellished it with
facetious gags that set the street roaring. “I wouldn’t say if
they were funny,” complained Bundock. “Anybody can play
on the word ‘Peculiar,’ and certainly peculiar it is to put your
husband in the stocks, so to speak. I don’t deny Charley’s legs
sometimes need that support. But what can you expect if you
marry your pot-boy? You must take pot-luck. He, he, he!”
To which the bulk of Chipstone Christendom added that however
prodigal the ex-potman, he did not waste so much money
as his wife lavished on that ridiculous sect of hers. A hundred
pounds for the bishop at his jubilee birthday, it was said with
bated breath—“a noice fortune!” Really, Charley was only
too long-suffering not to take his property, including his wife,
more strictly in hand, and when it was learnt that lawyers’
letters were actually passing between the bedrooms of the parties
there was general satisfaction. In short, public opinion was as
outraged by Mrs. Mott’s treatment of her husband as by her
original acquisition of him. The only difference was that Mr.
Mott was now a martyr.
The insult to the male sex was especially resented by the
tradesmen to whom the martyr stood so profitably indebted,
and under their incitement a new ban might have been put on
“The Black Sheep” but for the reluctance of Will Flynt, who,
though second to none in reprobation, refused to shift the headquarters
of his coach to the rival establishment. That would
only be hurting Charley’s business, he pointed out, and indirectly
themselves. The economic aspects of revenge had not occurred
to these muddle-heads, and they were grateful to the coach-driver
for the reminder. They did not know that his true
motive for sticking to “The Black Sheep” was that Jinny was
to be encountered in its courtyard on Tuesdays and Fridays.
Nor was Jinny herself aware how profusely she was repaying
Mrs. Mott for her meals.
As if this scandal among the “Peculiars” was not enough,
Deacon Mawhood himself came into ill odour more literally. For
in carrying out his agreement to clear the Gentry cottage of rats,
he had committed the crime of which Uncle Lilliwhyte had been
acquitted: he had operated by poison, to wit, and the stench
of the dead vermin in their holes nearly crazed the excellent
dressmaker, already sufficiently distracted by the silence of her
bosom friend, Mrs. Flippance, swallowed up in Boulogne as in a
grave. Miss Gentry, like Mother Gander, now wept on Jinny’s
shoulder, though it had to be done outside the garden gate, and
even there the wafts caught one. If it had not been for the
prediction that she would be drowned, did she ever set foot on
a boat, she would have been in Boulogne weeks ago with her
darling, but, like a ghost, she could not cross water. Indeed she
would already have been a ghost but for her strong smelling-salts,
her decoction of scabious against infection, and the fumigation
of the cottage. Jinny did not shrink from bearding her spiritual
superior in his bar and giving Mr. Joshua Mawhood a taste of
her tongue. If that was his notion of religion, he ought to be
cast out of his chapel, and she would let Mrs. Mott know of
what a hoggish “illusion” he had been guilty—(Illusion, Sham
or Cheat—“The Universal Spelling-Book”).
But the Deacon, standing on the letter of his bond, was impermeable
to reproach—nay, had a sense of righteousness, as having
incidentally punished a distributor of tracts no less offensive
than his dead rats. Not even the remonstrances of Mr. Fallow,
who had arranged the compromise over Mrs. Mawhood’s dress,
could bring the Deacon to a sense of sin, still less of compensation.
“Her rats were eating the pears like hollamy,” he said,
“and Oi’ve cleared cottage and orchard of ’em.” Mr. Fallow was
so interested to know what “hollamy” was, that he went away
with a diminished sense of failure. But neither dictionaries nor
octogenarians could throw any light on its etymology. The
most plausible conjecture he could reach was that it must be
“hogmanay,” gifts made at the year’s end.
But if the Peculiar Faith was thus involved in scandal, Churchmanship
did not fail to provide its quota of gossip to the months
that ended a fateful year. It was not only that Miss Blanche of
Foxearth Farm had collected the scalp of yet another suitor (and
one who, as Bundock’s own eyes had witnessed at the Flippance
wedding-feast, had been wantonly encouraged); it was that the
minx, whose brother Barnaby went about in October saying
Will Flynt was not good enough for her, became openly engaged
in November to that obviously inferior specimen, Mr. Elijah
Skindle. And old Giles Purley, tired of vagaries so incongruous
in a churchwarden’s family, was, said Bundock’s father, imperiously
hurrying on the match.
Although it was the postman who was the reference on the
liberties permitted to Will at the wedding breakfast, it was his
bedridden parent who became the leading authority on the new
Blanche engagement. That was because Barnaby, disappointed
of the wider life of the Tony Flip theatre, with no winter prospect
but that of chopping down undergrowth and laying it out in
long rows for hoops and hurdles, and receiving no consolation
from Jinny when their vehicles passed, had discovered in the
postman’s youngest sister a being even more beauteous, and,
when he had to take the trap into Chipstone, never failed in
devoted attendance on the sick-bed. It was thus that all the
world knew that the Flippances had not written once from
Boulogne, not even to send on the promised cheque for the
wedding-breakfast.
But even Bundock’s father had not the true history of the
engagement, constructing as he did from Barnaby’s chatter a
facile version of a “better match”: how dear ’Lijah was coining
money far quicker than Will with his petty fares and commissions,
and fast ousting Jorrow, and with what elegant furniture he was
fitting up the bridal bedchamber. Barnaby himself did not
know that with the gradual vanishing of his sister’s theatrical
and operatic hopes, Blanche, immeasurably more embittered and
disillusioned than himself, had sought in vain to win back Will,
and had thrown herself first strategically and then despairingly
into the arms of Elijah, who, summoned professionally to the Farm,
had found unhoped-for consolation for his lost Jinny. Tongues
would have wagged still more joyously had it been known that
Will for his part was trying to win back Jinny, who in her turn
was as adamantine to him as he to Blanche. The two Carriers
met not seldom on the miry, yellow-carpeted roads awhirl with
flying leaves, or in the rainy courtyard of “The Black Sheep,”
and for each the scene at once shifted to a sunny tangled fairyland
where the wood-pigeon purred, and oak, elm, beech, and
silver birch in ample leaf rose in a crescent, with crisp beech-nuts
underfoot, and baby bracken. But not even Nip could effect
any visible communication. Much more gracious was Jinny to
Barnaby, as soon as she was relieved of his “passing” adoration.
The weather improved for a space in mid-November. There
was a bite in the air and the sheep-bells tinkled keenly from the
pastures. The morning hoar-frosts held till noon. A great red
ball of sun and a pale yellow crescent moon would shine together
in the heavens, early sunsets seen through bare branches seemed
to fill them with a golden fruitage that changed slowly to lemon,
and the haystacks rose magically through enchanted hazes. But
the cold only made Jinny hungrier and the earth-beauty sadder.
It was as if she had already forgotten the blessing of Methusalem’s
return, and as if carrying was not after all the heart’s deepest
dream—especially with nothing to carry.
It was a relief to be blocked occasionally by Master Peartree’s
sheep, billowing along like a yellow Nile, and to exchange conversation
with the shepherd, now at the most leisured moment
of his year. Patiently she would hear how the sheep got
ravenous in the high cold winds, why he was driving them out
of yon danger-zone of rape and turnip, and how the only real
anxiety between now and Christmas was that one might fall on
its back, or the hunt frighten the ewes: for soon somehow he
would be speaking of his next-wall neighbours in Frog Farm, and
somehow the family would always narrow to Will. “A grumpy,
runty lad,” he described him once. “Sometimes he goos about
full o’ mum: other times you can yer him through the wall
grizzlin’ and growlin’ like my ould dog, time my poor missus had
her fust baiby. He’d ha’ torn the child to pieces,” he went on,
diverging into an exposition of how sheep-dogs had to be trained
to prepare for babies. But she cut it as short as she dared,
inquiring, “But who’d he be jealous of?” “The baiby—Oi’m
explainin’ to you!” he said. “No, I mean, who’s young Mr.
Flynt jealous of?” she asked, wondering how Will could know
that she had been shedding such gracious smiles on Barnaby.
And when the shepherd replied “ ’Lijah Skindle, in course,” she
winced perceptibly. But though the sting of the reply rankled,
she was not so sure as the rest of the world that it was true.
The abundance of black sloes, they said, foretold a hard winter,
and as the winter approached, Jinny’s outlook grew darker.
Even to keep a roof over their heads was not easy with the
thatch everywhere holed by starlings. Driblets came through
the old man’s bedroom ceiling and were caught in a pail. And
as for the walls, Daniel Quarles cursed the builder who had put
in such bad mortar that “big birds came and picked the grit
out o’ the lime.” The rain drove even through the closed
lattices. To keep the living-room dry, he had made Jinny
purchase putty, of which he daubed no less than three pounds
over the rotting woodwork of the window. A stumpy piece of
log he also nailed to the bottom of the window to block up the
crevices, though he could do nothing with the top of the kitchen
door through the little vine that grew over it, and which in some
years yielded several pounds of small white grapes.
And if it was high time that her Hall should be patched up, Jinny
often thought with commiseration of poor Uncle Lilliwhyte in
his leaky hut throughout all these rains. Even from a selfish
point of view, his health was a consideration. If he broke up, a
main source of supply would disappear, and any day he might
be at least temporarily paralysed by his rheumatism, and need
provender instead of supplying it. A frail reed indeed to rely
on, and Jinny began to wonder if she had been wise in training
Nip so carefully not to hunt rabbits. With food and shelter thus
alike insecure, Jinny, remembering the formula of her sect,
resolved to “ask in faith.” Perhaps too conscious a resolution
impaired the faith—at any rate Providence, even with an
accessory at court in the shape of the Angel-Mother, proved
stony, and the Angel-Mother herself appeared limited in her
powers, however limitless her sympathy. She could not even
make folks demand tambour lace. Jinny began to wonder if no
terrestrial powers remained to be invoked in the old man’s behalf.
What had become of all the children, whose names were recorded
in the fly-leaf of his hereditary Bible, and only some of whom had
their deaths chronicled? Cautiously she probed and pried into
corners she had never dared approach before, instinctively
feeling them full of cobwebs and grime. And her instinct was
justified—each child had been more “obstropolus” than the
others. One of the daughters was always “a slammacks” and
had married beneath her, another—a beauty even fairer than
Jinny’s mother—had, on the contrary, caught a London linen-draper
on his holidays and looked down on her father, who
would starve rather than eat a bit of her bread. One boy had
“ ’listed,” another been beguiled into the Navy by that “dirty
little Dap,” a third—a lanky youth nicknamed “Ladders”—had
gone to London to see the coronation of King William, and
had disappeared, while his devil-may-care younger brother had
shot a rabbit at night and been transported to “Wan Demon’s
Land,” a name that made Jinny shudder. This last was the
only son of whose present locality he was even vaguely aware,
though, oddly enough, the sailor son had once sent him word
that, landing with a boat’s crew upon an island called “Wan
Couver,” he had come upon “Ladders” in the service of the
Hudson Bay Company, living in a stockaded fort called after
the Queen, and surrounded by naked, painted Indians. But as
none of these children were ever to dare cross their father’s
doorstep again, there did not seem much help to be looked for
from any quarter of the globe that might contain them. And
Jinny was sorry she had not left the cobwebbed corners in their
original mystery, for as the stories multiplied, the old man began
to loom as a sort of sinister raven that drives out its own offspring,
though gradually she came to see behind all the stories
the same tale of a cast-iron religion against which the young
generation broke itself. Or was it only a cast-iron obstinacy, she
asked herself, after working out that the first at least of these
family jars must have occurred before her grandfather’s oft-narrated
encounter with John Wesley.
It was with a new astonishment that she learnt he had been
careful to make his will, lest Blackwater Hall should fall into the
hands of his youngest surviving rascal. “And who’ve you left
it to?” she inquired innocently.
“Why, who has the nat’ral right to it? Sidrach, in course,
as ought to has had it ’stead o’ me, he bein’ the eldest. He’s
been cut out o’ the wote, too, what goos with the property and
what’s worth pounds and pounds.”
He was so convinced of the righteousness of this will, and
appeared so genuinely fond of his brother, that Jinny was afraid
to suggest the strong probability of Sidrach predeceasing him.
Indeed Sidrach began now to play a larger and larger part in his
thoughts, his mind reverted to the early days of the “owler,”
and gradually the prosperity of those days shone again over the
patriarch in “Babylon.” Sidrach now loomed as a star of hope,
and Daniel spoke constantly of paying his long-projected visit
to him at Chelmsford, designing apparently to drive the cart
himself, and to inform his brother of the magnanimous bequest
that was coming to him—a legacy that would suggest to Sidrach
corresponding magnanimity in the living present. Afraid the
Gaffer would actually set forth on this dangerous and visionary
quest, Jinny did her best to discredit the notion of Sidrach’s
opulence, and quoted “Rolling stones gather no moss,” but the
Gaffer argued tenaciously that if his eldest brother had not been
comfortably off, he would have come to seek the shelter of their
roof-tree, or at least applied for their assistance, as he must be
getting old, or at least (he modified it) too old to work. Jinny
offered to write to Sidrach to inquire, but her grandfather could
not find the ten-year-old letter inviting the visit. No, he would
go over and find Sidrach instead, and Jinny was reduced to
pointing out from day to day how unfavourable the weather was
for the excursion. As the days grew shorter and shorter, the
project, finding no opposition to nourish it, seemed to subside.
Jinny was almost conscience-stricken when one Sunday after
church Mr. Fallow showed her a paragraph in the Chelmsford
Chronicle, stating that “another link with the past” had been
broken by the death “last Monday from a fall downstairs” in
the Chelmsford poorhouse of a centenarian named Sidrach
Quarles, who claimed to be a hundred and five, and who was
certainly well over the hundred, his recollections, which were a
source of entertainment to all visitors, going back to the days
when England was still ruled by a “furriner,” meaning thereby
George II.
The shock Jinny received at this was more of life than of
death. It made her realize she had never quite believed in
Sidrach’s existence, and this sense of his substantiality almost
swamped the minor fact of his decease. She saw no reason why
he should not remain substantial. Now that she had perhaps
been guilty of baulking her grandfather’s last chance of seeing
his beloved brother, she did not feel equal to robbing him of his
last hope of assistance. He might even agitate himself over
making a fresh will, and it was far better to let Providence or
the lawyer folk decide on his heir. No doubt when the dread
necessity arose, the youngest son would be raked up from somewhere.
But that dark moment still seemed far. The longer her
grandfather lived, the more she had got used to the idea of his
never dying. True, Sidrach had died, though his habit of living
had been even more ingrained, but they did not take proper care
of you in a workhouse, and besides he had died of an accident.
She would keep Daniel from that fate, even as she would keep
him from the poorhouse.
As she sat at his side by the fire that Sunday night, knitting
him a muffler, her thoughts were playing so pitifully over poor
old Sidrach in his bleak pauper’s grave, that she was not at all
surprised when her grandfather announced with sudden decision
that he would go to see Sidrach the very next day. With
a chill at her heart as though a dead hand had been placed on
it, she told him gently that it was nonsense and that he must
wait now till the spring.
But he shook his head obstinately. “Don’t seem as ef Oi’ll
last out till the spring.”
She laughed forcedly. “What an idea!”
“Not unless there’s an election and Oi can buy grub with my
wote-money,” he explained. “And Oi ain’t heerd as Parlyment
is considerin’ the likes of us.”
“You’ve always had plenty to eat!” she protested, colouring
up.
“That ain’t enough in the larder when Oi looks, ne yet for
Methusalem in the barn. Ye’ve got to have a store like the beer
in my barrel. Where’s my flitch? Where’s my cheeses?
Same as we’re snowbound, like the year Sidrach went away,
where would Oi get my Chris’mus dinner? ’Tis a middlin’ long
way to Babylon, but Oi’ll start with the daylight and be back
between the lights, and ef Oi’m longer, why the moon’s arly.
Oi’ll be proper pleased to see dear Sidrach again—he larnt me
my letters and Oi’ll bring him back to live with us, now he’s
gittin’ oldish. It ain’t good for a man to live alone, says the
Book, and that’ll be good for us too, he bein’ as full o’ suvrans
as a dog of fleas.”
“Nip isn’t full of fleas,” she said with mock anger, hoping to
make a diversion. “Why, you scrub him yourself!”
But he went on, unheeding. “Daniel Quarles has allus been
upright, and he’d sooner die than goo to his darter or the poorhouse.”
She thought miserably that the poorhouse was where he would
have to go to find any traces of his beloved Sidrach, and she set
herself by every device of logic or cajolery to discourage this revived
dream of the journey. He might not even find Sidrach in
such a big city, she now hinted, but he laughed at that. Everybody
knew Sidrach, “a bonkka, hansum chap with a mosey face
and a woice like the bull of Bashan and as strong too. Wery
short work he’d ha’ made of Master Will. Carry him in, indeed!
Carried him out—and with one hand—that’s what Sidrach
would ha’ done! Why, he’s tall enough to light the street-lamps
in Che’msford!”
These street-lamps, Jinny gathered, still figured in his mind
as of oil, and she was able by dexterous draughts on his reminiscences
to put off the evil day of his expedition. But whenever
there was visible dearth at table, the thought of his rich brother,
flared up again.
Could Blackwater Hall perhaps be sold, she thought desperately,
and the money spent on his declining years. The thought was
stimulated by a meeting of the Homage Court which came from
railhead in the “Flynt Flyer,” and before which Miss Gentry’s
landlady as a copyholder had to do “suit and service” in the
Moot Hall to the Lords of the Manor.
But Jinny ascertained that Beacon Chimneys, a ramshackle
place with much land, had been bought up recently by Farmer
Gale for his new bride at fifty shillings an acre, farm and buildings
thrown in; a rate at which Blackwater Hall would not even
yield the forty shillings supposed to be its annual value as a
voting concern—whereas the Gaffer’s view, cautiously extracted,
ran: “Ef you spread suvrans all over my land, each touchin’ the
tother, you pick up your pieces and Oi keep my land.” Moreover,
Mr. Fallow, to whom she had broached the idea, reminded
her feelingly that old people could not be moved. He was
keenly interested, however, to learn that the tenure was an
example of Borough English and hunted up the local Roll of
Customs (7th Edward IV) proclaiming that “Time out of the
Mind of Man” the “ould auncient Custom of the Bourow” had
been for the heritage to go to the “youngest Sonne of the first
wife.”
At heart Jinny was glad the idea of selling the Hall was
impracticable: for what would have become of Methusalem and
the business of “Daniel Quarles, Carrier”? To surrender before
the “Flynt Flyer” would have been a bitter pill indeed.
When all but the last swallows had departed, and Christmas
began to loom in the offing, the Sidrach obsession resurged, and
there being a spell of bright, clear weather, the only way she
could devise to stave off the expedition was to pretend to undertake
it herself. This was the more necessary as she was not
certain the scheme did not cover a crafty design to drive Methusalem
back to the knacker’s for the five pounds. She would
start very early and go, not to Chelmsford, but to “Brandy Hole
Creek.” Instead of waiting her Christmas letter to Commander
Dap, she would visit him personally. He was, after all, a relative
and would not like to see his brother-in-law starve—of course
she would accept nothing for herself. Already she had intended
to skirt the subject at Christmas, but to ask assistance openly
was painful, while if one was too reticent one might be misunderstood.
In conversation one could feel one’s way.
So on a misty morning of late November, when the peewits
were calling over the dark fields, she set out, the old man watching
her off with a lantern.
“And do ye bring back Sidrach,” he called after her, “sow we
can all live happy.”
For answer she blew her horn cheerily, feeling this was less a
lie than speech. She would come back with help of some sort—that
was certain. Whether she would confess that the help
came from Commander Dap or would attribute it to Sidrach, or
whether it would be wiser to come back with the discovery of
Sidrach’s death, trusting to its staleness to blunt the blow and
to the news of Dap’s assistance to overcome it, or whether it
would be imprudent to mention Dap at all, not merely because
it would be hard to explain how she had met the Commander of
the Watch Vessel at Chelmsford, but because her grandfather in
his inveterate venom against Dap was capable of refusing his
favours—on all these distracting alternatives she hoped to make
up her mind during the day. Here, too, she would perhaps have
to feel her way. But she now miserably realized the wisdom of
the Spelling-Book’s “writing-piece”: “Lying may be thought
convenient and profitable because not so soon discovered; but
pray remember, the Evil of it is perpetual: For it brings persons
under everlasting Jealousy and Suspicion; for they are not to
be believed when they speak the Truth, nor trusted, when
perhaps they mean honestly.” She meant honestly enough, God
knew, but into what a tangle she was getting. She consoled
herself with the thought that anyhow there would be no pretending
that day in her business—to spare Methusalem on so
long a journey the empty boxes had been left at home.
Single drops oozed upon her as she started, but as the mist
lifted, though it revealed sodden, blackened pastures on both
sides of her route, the underlying betterness of the weather
manifested itself, and soon under an arching blue Methusalem
was almost trotting over withering bracken and fallen leaves in
a world of browns and yellows, while an abnormally friendly
robin perching on the cart-shaft, and the scarlet-berried bryony
festooning the hedgerows, contributed with the gleaming holly-berries
to colour her darkling mood. There was a certain
refreshment, too, in going off by this new route, where she for
her part was as unknown. It was odd how the mere turning her
back on the Chipstone Road transformed everything. Even the
path—though this was not so pleasant for Methusalem—had at
first an upward tendency, and her mere passing evoked stares
and comments. This surprised her in turn till she remembered
Will’s disapprobation. She did not realize that the visible
emptiness of the cart, with its implication that she was not
plying, only driving it to some male headquarters, mitigated the
sensation, and she congratulated herself there was no old client
to observe the absence of cargo. In the first few miles she met
no soul she knew except the taciturn lout who had once directed
her to Master Peartree’s shearing-shed, and who was now preparing
a feeding-ground for the flock, pulling out mangolds with
a picker and hurling them over the hurdled field from a broken-pronged
fork. The sheep had to go to this higher ground for fear
of floods, he informed her in a burst of communicativeness, and it
wasn’t half as eatable.
Passing a row of thatched, black-tarred cottages at a moment
when the mothers were coming to the garden gates to speed
their broods to school, she offered lifts till her space was packed
with little ones. The old cart was now alive with youth and
laughter, and the flocks of rooks from the elms were out-chattered.
The road lay between great fields flanked by broad ditches, along
which argosies of yellow leaves went sailing, and there were
shooters with dogs, happy duck-ponds, old towers and steeples,
black barns, gabled old houses with verge-boards over the
windows, quaint inn-signs and mossy-tiled granges, and the
ground kept humping itself and dropping more erratically than
her home circuit, but never sufficiently to spoil the sublime flatness
in which single figures stooping to turn over the soil showed like
quadrupeds in a vast circle. She must needs go a bit out of her way
to reach the school, which lay in a little town on the estuary,
and it was a thrilling moment when from her seat she had her
first far-off glimpse of the very waters that had beglamoured her
childhood—outwardly it was only the gleam as of a white river
with hazy land beyond, and on the hither side a few black huts
looking almost like vessels; but over everything was wrapped a
dreamy peace, which the clamour of the actual children could
not penetrate, while in her nostrils—though it was surely too far
off to be wafted to her—there arose the strange, salty, putrid
odour of fenland, offensive and delectable. And as the road
curved slowly towards the shore, all the charm and mystery of
childhood seemed to be in those barges with the red-brown sails,
those grassy knolls and unlovely mud-flats, in which rotting
boats stuck half sunken.
Before she could deposit her charges in their classrooms
some had dropped off and were looking for treasure in the
flat, dyke-seamed fields. They had arrived too early for school,
they explained. But she felt rewarded for carrying them
to the waterside when she espied the long, low hull and great
brown sail of Bidlake’s barge. With a blast of her horn she
summoned the trio of females, but only the twins mounted to
the deck to wave hands at her as the broad wherry came tacking
and gliding past, the shaggy Ephraim explaining in an indecorous
shout that the missus was to be “laid aside” again, and this time he
was looking around for a nice quiet lodging on shore for her and the
girls. How handsome Sophy and Sally were growing, she
thought, how charmingly they had smiled, just as if she had
never left off bringing them presents. What a comfort they were
so grown up now; they should soon be fending for themselves.
After the barge was wafted away, she remained on the shore a
few minutes, fascinated by the lattice-work reflection of the
clouds on the water, which through their scudding over it against
the stream seemed to be going in opposite directions at once.
She did not know why this phenomenon was agitating the
recesses of her being; but suddenly there flashed up from the
obscure turmoil the lines of Miss Gentry in her sibylline mood:
When the Brad in opposite ways shall course,
Lo! Jinny’s husband shall come on a horse,
And Jinny shall then learn Passion’s force.
Of course this was not the Brad, nor was it really going two
ways at once, and in any case who wanted a husband or Passion?
Clucking so suddenly to Methusalem that his movement scattered
some poultry pecking around him amid golden straw, she turned
up through the High Street. At a fishmonger’s shop she got
down and bought a pennyworth of bloaters for her grandfather’s
supper, the man sliding them off a rod where they hung like
blackened corpses from a gibbet. She was half minded to
inspect the shop of the “Practical Tailor” next door, to see if
she could not pick up something cheap and serviceable for the
old man’s winter wear, but there was nothing in the little house-window,
not even a roll of cloth, except illustrations of men’s
clothing so ultra-fashionable and dear that she was frightened to
go in. “Pacha D’Orsay Chesterfields, Codringtons, Sylphides,
Peltoes, Zephyr Wrappers, etc., etc., every description of Winter
Coat”—here was assuredly what he needed. But one pound
five? Who was there behind the sea-wall that could rise to
such prices? Possibly it was here that Mr. Flippance had got
his wedding equipment. She returned sadly to her cart, not
even noticing that all these fashionable pictures were simply cut
out of the catalogue of the great Moses & Son, London.
The road now led again through great grass-lands under
shimmering clouds floating in a spacious blue, and with gentle
slopes and hillocks, though little streams had replaced the
broad ditches. There were rabbits taking the air that showed
white scuts at the approach of Nip. Far to the right she left
the saltings with their grazing cattle, but she could still see them
from her driving-board, and the marshes stretched, humped and
brown and infinitely interstreaked, a mud-maze with purple
herbage and motley sea-birds.
Then suddenly there was a thunder and clatter behind her,
and she pulled her horse mechanically to the left to avoid a
coach, not realizing till it slowed down that this was the “Flynt
Flyer’s” day for the district. Her heart beat fast, almost
painfully, and she went scarlet with the thought that Will would
think she had come purposely on his track. Why, oh why, had
she just chosen that day? There was no turning to be seen and
desperately she steered Methusalem’s nose towards a farm-gate,
prepared to trespass, but it proved to be only a “lift” for
wagons, opened by raising the rail from its slots, a feat which
Methusalem’s nose could not achieve. She leaped down and
tried to pull it up herself, but her fingers were trembling, and in
an instant Will was at her side, hat gracefully in hand, the rail
lifted up, and the gate held aside for her passing. Blushing still
more furiously under the gaze of the coach passengers, she led
Methusalem through, and as she passed she said with a sweet
smile: “Thank you.”
This was all the audience heard or saw, but what was really
said and substantially understood by both principals was:
Will: “Oh, my dear Jinny, how pretty and kissable you look
in that becoming new bonnet, and isn’t it silly to be trying to
compete with me along this road, when, though you get business
from goodness knows who, you can’t even keep your old customers
on your own route? You haven’t got the tiniest parcel,
I see, nor any hope of one. Really you would do better to
accept my offer of a partnership, or better still to get off the roads
altogether, for the winter is going to be a hard one, and perhaps
if we dropped our silly sullen silence and began to find out each
other’s good points again, who knows but what we might come
to another sort of partnership? Anyhow I am delighted to
open this lift for you, but what the devil you are going to do in
a field just being ploughed is what I shall watch with amusement.”
Jinny: “You perfectly unbearable Mr. Flynt! How mean
of you to come spying into my empty cart! If you want to
know, I am not out on business to-day at all, it’s a little friendly
call I am making on the farmer. I haven’t, like you, to work
all the week round to scrape together enough to feed my horses.
Two days a week keeps me in luxury—ay, and Gran’fer too. And
don’t pretend to be so gay and happy—I know what a grumpy,
runty chap you are at home, and how you’re still hankering after
that Blanche Jones who has thrown you away like an old shoe.
Or if it’s my refusal to be partners with you that’s rankling, and
you are even thinking after all of a closer partnership, then all
I can say is, you must be the village idiot if you fancy I’ll put
up with Blanche’s leavings. Don’t imagine that silly old coach
with the silly wanty-hook and skewers painted on it is very
attractive to me. Why, if you were to come to me in a coach
of gold like the Lord Mayor of London, with six milk-white
steeds spruced up with flowers and ribbons like Methusalem on
May Day, and say: ‘I love you, Jinny, come and sit in silks
and diamonds on my box-seat,’ I should up with my horn and
blow a blast of scorn, for I hate and despise you, and how dare
you come ogling me before all the coach?”
And still retaining her sweet smile, Jinny gazed at the shirt-sleeved
ploughmen, who though vaguely astonished at the
invasion of their field, continued their stolid operations. Jinny
arrested her cart to watch with equal stolidity the white whirls
and long lines of fluttering gulls that followed the slow-moving
ploughs, with such a twittering and circling and looking so
beautiful over the reddish earth and under the blue sky. There
was beauty, too, she felt, in the youth who from his white basket
sprinkled seeds with a graceful motion, and when he smiled at
her, she did not hesitate to remark in her sweetest tone on the
rainy autumn, spinning out the hygrometric conversation till
Will felt it almost a flirtation. Fuming and fumbling with the
top rail, he took as much time as possible to readjust it in its
slots. But in this game of patience he knew he must be beaten:
however amusedly he might pretend to watch her pretences, his
passengers would compel him to go on, and so, in no amused
state of mind, at a moment when the gulls as by a magic clearance
disappeared to a bird, he followed their example. When the
whirlwind of his passing had died in the distance, Jinny came
back again through the lift, with the feeling that Methusalem
must think her a fool, and wondering if he were not right.
Soon after, she fell in with a carter who was going her way
with sacks of flour for his master, and as they jogged along,
conversing pleasantly, after the failure of his attempt to chaff
and flirt, she was surprised to learn that he had till recently
plied as a carrier on this very road, but had been ousted by the
“Flynt Flyer.” It had never occurred to her that there were
other victims, but as he went on to denounce Will, she found
herself defending the rights of competition and pointing out
the service the coach rendered to the neighbourhood, and the
carter fell back upon another grievance about which he was even
more embittered. On one of his last journeys a man he had
carried from the Creek had got off without paying, and he had
foolishly let him go, thinking he was “a Brandy Hole chap”
and would be returning by the same vehicle. But he had
vanished from his ken. “Oi thought he was a Brandy Hole
chap,” he kept repeating plaintively.
She was glad to shed him at “The Jolly Bargee,” a small inn
with a sanded tap-room and no visible taps, where, amid a company
she saw already gathered over frothing mugs, he would doubtless
bewail the competition of the coach and the trickery of the fare
he had taken for “a Brandy Hole chap.”
Noon was tolling from the square church-tower when Jinny
espied again her treasured picture of it, rising from a harmony
of golden ricks and lichen-spotted tiles, just as on that happy,
enchanted day when she had journeyed to the funeral of her
mother’s Aunt Susannah. How quickly one came—she thought
with pleased astonishment—free of the detours and delays of
custom, or the pretence thereof! There would be ample time to
visit the grave of her father and mother before going on to the
Watch Vessel, especially as it was thus on her way. But,
remembering with a sad smile the dispute as to whether her
grandfather could go to his sister’s funeral in his cart, she
took care to draw up her shabby vehicle in a nook beyond the
lych-gate. Nip had vanished—like the “Brandy Hole chap”—she
found; probably he was also at “The Jolly Bargee.” Leaving
Methusalem to his well-earned if not well-filled nose-bag, she
returned to the gate.
The monkey-trees and weeping willows were unchanged,
though in the path leading to the church-porch there was an
avenue of young rose-bushes which she did not remember, and
screened by them, to the right, a freshly dug grave which made
her shudder. She hastened towards the crumbling tower—still
more crumbled now—which her memory connected with the
sacred spot. The blackberry-bushes still swathed it, though
they were now stripped of their fruit, and in its shadow she found
again, not without surprise, the familiar stone, the object of so
much whimsical wrangling. Still Roger Boldero lay “safely
neaped in Christ.” She was almost certain that her grandfather
had sent a couple of pounds to Commander Dap to have the
stone changed, since the inscription, it appeared, could not well
be emended otherwise. Yes, surely he had ordered that
“neaped” should be turned into “asleep,” for she remembered
counting the letters and rejoicing to find them the same in
number. But on the whole she was pleased the word had not
been changed: her Angel-Mother had wanted it, she remembered,
in memory of her happiness with Roger Boldero. As she stood
there, musing on these two, feeling her mother’s soft cheek
against hers and recalling that smoke-reeking, hairier, burlier, yet
somehow more shadowy figure, many pictures flashed and
waned, and most vividly of all came the vision of her grandfather’s
strong shoulder supporting the coffin, and the kindly
old Commander leading her off stealthily to this very spot, and
she heard the death-bell tolling again with its long solemn
pauses.
And then suddenly with a queer little thrill she awoke to the
fact that the death-bell was tolling, that a company in black was
bearing a coffin. She moved farther behind the tower, she was
not in black, and felt almost an interloper. Presently there
came from the rose-bushes the sonorous voice of a clergyman
intoning the great words. She did not want to be delayed
further, nor did she want to pass by the grief-stricken group,
which consisted—she saw as she peeped from her hiding-place—of
half a dozen men and women, all elderly and all weeping: with
a small band of sailors in the background, whose left arms bore
black silk handkerchiefs tied in a bow. She looked around for
another way out of the churchyard, and finding a side gate
escaped almost happily, jumped on her cart, and drove off
towards the shore, thinking pleasantly of the genial little Dap
and the dinner she would not be too late for; a meal which now,
after this long drive, began to seem the paramount consideration.
The village rose russet from the trees, and she curved round
exquisite corners of white cottages with Christmas roses in their
gardens, and presently she came out by the grass-covered sea-wall.
She hardly saw the sordidness of the shore—-the litter of
pigs, poultry, boats, sheds, barrels—so great a seascape burst
upon her, broken by a long narrow island, that added subtle
shades and hazes to the far-spreading shimmer and fantasy, the
water glinting and moving, dotted with red-sailed smacks and
barges. Even the slimy posts that stuck up from it near the
shore had a romantic air, being young tree-trunks that still
stretched odd limbs.
But all this glory faded into nothingness when, catching sight
of the Watch Vessel moored on the “hard” of gravel, at the
place where she had first patted Methusalem, she saw that the
flag was at half-mast. She scarcely needed to make the inquiry:
the flag, the funeral, the nautical handkerchiefs, all rushed into
a black unity. Dear old Commander Dap was dead.
A perverse imp kept telling her that the funeral meats would
be unusually abundant. But she had no heart to board the
Watch Vessel, to encounter these unknown fellow-mourners.
She wanted to mourn in solitude. And her quest had failed.
The last hope for her grandfather had been extinguished—Dap
had followed Sidrach—and the best thing to do was to get home
as quickly as poor Methusalem could manage it. He should
rest, not here where she might meet the returning Daps and
perhaps be recognized through Daniel Quarles’s cart, but when
they got to “The Jolly Bargee,” where she must have a bit of
bread and cheese brought out to her. Yet she could not tear
herself away from this squalid, sublime waterside, and driving
along the cart-route behind the sea-wall to a safe distance, she
got out near a little wooden pier and walked on the rough earth
of the sea-wall, which was luxuriant with pigweed and sea-beet,
strewn with wisps of hay and straw from passing carts, and
covered with dead little white-shelled crabs. There was something
akin to her mood in the pleasant pain of the acrid mud-smell.
At “The Jolly Bargee” she was jarred by the slow easy
laughter from the tap-room—the trickery of the “Brandy Hole
chap” was still under facetious debate. Before her set face, the
gorged Nip, rejoining her at the inn-door with conscious drooping
tail, turned on his back and grovelled guiltily: but she ignored
his abasement, and having gulped down her snack of bread and
cheese—an unwelcome and unforeseen expense—drove on with
the same brooding air. She was dazed by the wonder and
pathos of the little Commander’s death, the whole genial breathing
mass become as insensitive as his glass eye: would he get
that back at the Resurrection, she pondered, or would there be
his original eye? Thence she passed to the thought of the dead
Sidrach, the large handsome man of a hundred and five, strong
as a bull of Bashan, whom she was supposed to be visiting, and
she wondered dully what report of him she should bring back to
her grandfather. Abandoning herself as usual to Methusalem’s
guidance in this deep brooding, she discovered after an hour or
so that in his ignorance of these roads he had gone miles out of
their way, down Smugglers’ Lane, and when after half an hour
of readjustment she had got on the right homeward road, her
own subconscious gravitation to the waterside took her back to
it. And while she gave Methusalem a rest here, the white moon
and the early November sunset began to brood over the mud-flats,
transfiguring them with strange scintillant gold, and Jinny
felt a divine lesson in the transfiguration, and the solemn voice
of the clergyman echoed in her ears: “I am the Resurrection
and the Life.” Doubtless the Commander was already in
communion with the Angel-Mother.
The problem of Sidrach was still unsolved when the feeding-field
she had seen preparing in the morning loomed again on
her vision like a reminder of the urgency of that question. She
envied Master Peartree’s sheep munching so imperturbably in
their hurdles while she had been going through all these emotions
and perplexities. With their black noses and feet they looked,
she thought, as though they had been drinking from a pool of
ink, and her thoughts wandered again from her problem, and
she let Methusalem drink from a pool of water. Though it was
only four o’clock, the moon had turned a pale ochre and was
shining full and high in the heavens, its continents clearly
showing. There was no sound save the chewing of the sheep,
the gulping of her horse, the wistful tinkling of a wether’s bell,
and from afar the fainter clanging of a cow-bell. Even Nip,
feeling unforgiven, was subdued. Life was beautiful after all,
she felt, as she watched the great splashes of sunset below the
moon, the glimmering rose-tint on the horizon, the glint upon
the pool, the tangle of magical gold in the branches. Somehow
a way would be opened for her through this network of mendacity.
But by the time she got to her door, the Common was covered
again with a grey mist, just oozing rain, and Blackwater Hall
was a place of shrouded terrors. No light was showing through
the shutters or through the chinks in door or window, and she
had a sudden clammy intuition that her grandfather had solved
her problem for her by the simple process of dying like Sidrach
and the Commander. Silent and weird lay thatch and whitewash
under the moon. She hammered at the house-door and
then at the shutters, her heart getting colder and colder.
She tried the door again, then hearing Nip barking mysteriously
from within, she went round to the kitchen-door. To her joy and
amazement it was wide open, and a ray of moonlight resting on
a little pool of beer on the brick floor showed that the tap of the
beer-barrel which was kept there was dribbling. Even in that
anxious moment her economical instinct prevailed, and as she
was tightening the tap, there permeated through the living-room
door a heavenly snore—no lesser adjective could convey the
relief it brought. With a bound she was up the couple of stone
steps and, unlatching the door, she sent a faint blue glimmer
from the kitchen into the shuttered darkness, that was relieved
only by the flicker of an expiring lamp and a last spark from a
dying log. In that dim discord of lights she saw her grandfather’s
head on the thumb-holed tray, his hair and beard a dull
grey spread, dividing a darker jug from two beery glasses. The
absence of his Bible-pillow seemed symbolic of his degradation.
Who had been with him? she wondered. What boon companion
had tempted him from his habitual moderation? She could not
imagine. She shook him to awaken him, and lifted up his head.
But it fell back in a stupor, and under the draught from the
kitchen-door the lamp-flicker went out. She groped about,
replenishing the lamp and trying to light it with a spill from the
fire, but the greying log only charred the paper. She fumbled
in vain among the china shepherdesses on the mantelpiece for
her flint and the iron and steel gauntlet, and going out to get her
lighting-up matches from her cart, she overturned the other arm-chair
that stood in a novel situation at the table—probably the
guest had drawn it up there. But the noise left the Gaffer’s
snore unweakened. Well, at any rate he had solved her problem—at
least for the moment—she thought bitterly, as she groped
her way back to the glimmering grate. But even the chemical
matches would not light, whether by friction or when placed on
the charred log: evidently the long damp had impaired them,
and they even snapped under her fingers. How lucky it was
one need not rely on such new-fangled gewgaws, she thought
when—by a happy inspiration—she found the solid steel and
stone with the tinder-box in the Gaffer’s pockets; and soon the
lamp was lit and the fire glowing ruddily under the bellows.
Then she made herself some kettle-broth (hot water with bread
soaked in it), which, sipped before the fire, was almost as cheering
as the blazing logs, and resisting the temptation to cook one of
the bloaters, she fed the still subdued Nip from the bread.
When he was cosily couched in his basket, and with a last summoning
of her spent energies, she had rubbed down Methusalem,
she tried to fold her third charge, but the old man still snored
steadily, and when she sought again to raise his head from the tray,
he swore inarticulately in his sleep, and she was too worn out to
persist or even to remove the tray and glasses. She wanted to
sleep herself, after all these emotions and the long day in the
air, and her cracked mirror showed her a drawn face that yawned
and closed weary eyes against itself. But it now occurred to
her that she could not get to bed with Gran’fer in the room, she
must sleep in an arm-chair or on the settle, or stretched on
the floor with the cushion for pillow. But the floor through
her early start was unswept, the settle was too narrow, and the
chair soon got so hard that after a last attempt to rouse the
sleeper, she put an old cloak over his shoulders, a stout log on
the fire, turned out the lamp—setting her shadow leaping monstrously—and
dragged herself up the dark, fusty staircase to his
room, where she let herself fall dressed on his bed. She did not
dare get between the sheets, for fear he might wake up in the
night and come up to bed. Lying there, muttering the prayers
she was too tired to kneel for, she had an underthought that
Providence was giving her a hint: assuredly in the coming
winter nights she must leave him in the room that was warmed
all day by the fire, exchanging bedrooms, though not for the
reason he had once suggested—a reason that made her last
conscious thought a shame-faced memory. But her next thought
was one of pleasant wonder—sunshine splashing the whitewashed
sloping walls through the undrawn blind of a little
lattice. What was this strange spacious room? How came she
there in her clothes? Then memory resurged, and feeling she
had slept dangerously long, she sprang up, unhooked the casement,
and drew a deep breath of fresh air, as she gazed on this
unfamiliar morning view of the Common and the hoar-frosted
fields, dazzling her eye with floating colour-specks from the sun
that cut redly through the foliage of a fir-tree. Particularly she
relished the silver rim of the Brad now descried on the horizon.
It made her feel sickish to descend from that space and freshness
to the dark, airless, shuttered room with its musty, beery smell
and its all-pervading snore. Swiftly she threw open the shutters
and the casement, and let the light and air stream in.
The chill draught and the noise she made seemed to rouse the
Gaffer at last, for as she was returning from the kitchen with
some kindlings for the fire in her apron, he opened his eyes with
a start and stared at her.
“Where’s Sidrach?”
She was taken aback: she had not yet prepared her story.
Indeed the waking in the big attic and the puzzle of his condition
had driven her own problem out of her head.
“Sidrach?” she murmured. Should she out with his death
and be done with it?
“Ay, he got riled ’cause Oi wouldn’t let him smoke. Where’s
he got to?”
It was now her turn to stare at him. “Nonsense, Gran’fer,”
she said gently, “that’s a dream you’ve been having.”
“Mebbe.” He blinked in the sunlight, mystified. Suddenly
his face darkened. “Why do ye tell me lies agen? There’s his
tumbler!”
He pointed to one of the beery glasses she had left still standing.
Commonplace as the glass looked with its lees, she was
glad he had not pointed at it the evening before in the weird
moonlight with her brain full of the poor dead Dap.
“Don’t tell me!” she said in a voice she tried in vain to make
stern. “It wasn’t Sidrach that was drinking with you. Who
was it?”
“It was Sidrach, Oi’m tellin’ ye,” he protested. “Oi put out
his beer with his tumbler and his chair to be ready soon as ye
brought him back, he bein’ a rare one for his liquor. But the
hours passed slow as a funeral crawl, it got owl-light and you
not back, ne yet a rumble of your cart upon the road, so at last
molloncholy-like Oi lights the lamp and makes a roaring fire
and drinks by myself, and then Oi locks and bolts up and
stoops down to put on another log, and when Oi looks up,
there he sets in his chair in his best Sunday smock, all clean and
white.”
She thrilled again.
“But how could he get in, if you’d locked up?”
“That’s what Oi says to him. ‘Good Lord, Sidrach,’ Oi says,
‘how did you get here?’ ‘Come in the coach from Che’msford,’
says he. ‘The coach,’ says Oi, wexed, ‘ye didn’t want to back up
the jackanips what’s come competitioning here, and Jinny gone
to fetch ye, too. But how did ye get through the door?’ Oi says.
‘You draw me some beer, Danny,’ says he. ‘For Oi count ye’ve
finished the jug.’ So Oi goos to the kitchen with the jug, and
there sure enough stands the door wide open—happen Oi hadn’t
shut it good tightly—and there passin’ along the road by the
Common Oi catches sight of the coach, lookin’ all black in the
dusk and glidin’ away wery quiet, same as ashamed to be in
our cart-racks. ‘You pirate thief,’ Oi says, shakin’ my fist at
the driver, ‘ye’ll never come into this house save on your hands
and knees.’ But when Oi goos back with my jug brimmin’ over,
Sidrach warn’t there. ‘Sidrach!’ Oi calls, ‘Sidrach!’ No answer.
Oi goos about beat out and crazy ’twixt here and the kitchen
and then the clock strikes, and that remembers me to look in the
tother room, and there Oi hears him chucklin’ to hisself in one
of they big empty boxes ye left at home this marnin’. ‘Out ye
come,’ says Oi, laughin’ too, for he was allus up to his pranks,
was Sid. ‘And Oi’m proper glad to see you, old chap,’ Oi says.
With that he comes out of his box, with a little o’ the dust on
his white smock, and he hugs and coases me—wery cowld his
hands and face was from the long jarney—and Oi drinks his
health and he drinks mine, and we clinks they glasses together
and has rare sport gammickin’ of the times when Oi was in my
twenties and he taken me to see the cock-fightin’ and that old
Christmas Day his dog won the silver spoon in the bear-baitin’ at
‘The Black Sheep,’ and Oi told him as Annie were free now but
seein’ as he was come to stay, Oi dedn’t want nobody else and he
needn’t be afeared he’d be tarned out ef Oi died, bein’ as Oi’d
left the house to him by will and testament. ‘Little Danny,’ says
he, ‘you’re a forthright brother, but no fear o’ the poorhouse for
neither on us, for Oi was born with that silver spoon in my
mouth, and Oi’ve got a stockin’ chock-full o’ gold,’ and he shows
me it, hunderds of spade guineas, each with the head of Gearge III,
fit to warm the cockles of your heart, and we clinked glasses agen
and sang three-times-three, merry as grigs, and then the devil
possesses him to pull out his pipe and baccar. ‘No, ye don’t,’
says Oi, ‘not for all the gold in Babylon,’ and Oi runs to pocket
the flint and steel on the mantelpiece, and to block out the fire,
and he laughs and howds his pipe over the lamp and draws like
a demon. Oi rushes to the lamp and tarns it out and then back
to the fire, but aldoe that give a goodish light, Sidrach, he warn’t
there no more.” He was almost blubbering.
“But how did he look?” said Jinny, whose kindlings had long
since slid from her apron.
“A hansum bonkka man, Oi keep tellin’ ye. Ain’t ye seen
him nowhere? Where’s he got to? Just there he sat singin’
with his great old woice:
‘Two bony Frenchmen and one Portugee,
One jolly Englishman can lick all three.’ ”
The quavering melody ended with a big sneeze, and Jinny,
fearing the brothers would indeed be reunited, rushed to close
the window and light the fire. Though she felt confusedly that
her grandfather, waiting for Sidrach, and drinking too freely in
his melancholy, had probably dreamed it all, she was not sure
that he had not really seen Sidrach’s ghost. How else would
the flint and steel have got into his pocket? In any case she
was reminded that her secret was not safe. In concealing a
death one forgot to reckon with the ghost, and Sidrach’s might
at any time divulge it suddenly to his brother, even if the present
visitation was only a dream. Dap’s ghost, too, was another possibility
that must be taken into account. “I’ll tell you where
Sidrach’s got to,” she said desperately, as a yellow flame leapt up,
“he’s got to heaven.”
“To heaven?” repeated the old man vaguely.
“To heaven!” she said inexorably. “He hasn’t been in
Chelmsford for weeks. He was very old, you see, a hundred
and five.”
The Gaffer began to tremble. “Ye don’t really mean Sidrach’s
gone to heaven?”
She nodded her head sadly. “He fell down,” she explained.
“Fell down to heaven?” he asked dazedly.
“His body fell downstairs—his soul went up to God.”
“Then he come downstairs agen last night, dear Sidrach,” he
said solemnly; “he come to have a glass and a gammick with his
little brother.”
Jinny was not prepared to deny it, and though the idea jarred,
it was after all difficult to see snoring senectitude with the
poetry attaching to Angel-Mothers. She removed the dirty
glasses silently.
“And where’s his stockin’ o’ gold?” he inquired suddenly.
“Why didn’t ye bring back that?”
“There wasn’t any,” she said gently. “He died poorish.”
“They’ve stole it,” he cried. “They’ve robbed me. ’Twas
me he meant it for.”
“No, no—all he left was used up in the funeral.”
“Ay, they ain’t satisfied with carts nowadays,” he commented
bitterly. “Like that doddy little Dap. Did you goo to the
churchyard to see the grave?”
“Yes,” she replied unflinchingly, sustained by the verbal
accuracy. “I’ve got you a bloater for breakfast,” she added
cheerfully.
“That’s the cowld chill he caught as a cad, gatherin’ eggs on
the ma’shes,” he said musingly. “Ague they calls it—never got
over it. And tramped with his pack-horses in all weathers. And
rollin’ about here and there and everywheres. ‘You’ll never
make old bones, Sid,’ Oi says to him.”
“A hundred and five is pretty old, Gran’fer,” Jinny reminded
him. “King David only says seventy, that’s exactly one and a
half lives your brother had.”
“Give me the Book,” he said brokenly.
With trembling hands she brought the great Family Bible he
had inherited with the house. But his object seemed to be
neither verification of the text nor prayerful reading, for he
next asked for pen and ink, and then having ascertained the
exact date of Sidrach’s death, he adjusted his spectacles and
chronicled it with a quavering quill opposite Sidrach’s birth-date.
“He’s gone to heaven,” he said. “That’s more than some
folks’ll do—even on their hands and knees. Do ye warm my
beer for me this marnin’, dearie, for Oi fare to be cowld and
lonely in my innards, and Oi’d fain smoke a pipe myself, same as
Oi hadn’t promised the old man o’ God.”
The year ended gloomily for Jinny. December was cold. In
the mornings the fields looked almost snowy with hoar-frost, but
the actual snow did not come till near Christmas. Her grandfather
refused to be moved from his bedroom—one was safer from
thieves up there, he now urged—so a fire upstairs every evening
was added to her work. But the monotony of existence and of
the struggle therefor was broken by two letters and an episode,
albeit all interconnected.
Both letters were from Toby, the naval gunner, Dap’s eldest
son, and the one for her grandfather was enclosed in hers, as
Toby was not sure the old gentleman was still alive, one of his
sisters having heard that there was a piece in the paper about
his death at the age of a hundred and five. He had only found
her own address after the funeral, he wrote, a packet of letters
from her having come to hand in the clearing up. For although
his poor father with his last breath had asked that his telescope
be given to little Jinny Boldero as a token of love and remembrance,
he had died without telling them where to send it. It
would now be forwarded in due course. For two months he
had borne much pain with Christian resignation, she learnt with
sorrow and respect. The other letter, addressed “Mr. Daniel
Quarles,” she had no option but to hand over, but did so with
anxiety, for she had not yet broken the news of Dap’s death, and
whether he received it with regret or with unchristian satisfaction,
it would assuredly agitate him. As she watched him open it,
she saw a piece of paper flutter from it, and she caught it in
its fall.
“That’s mine!” he cried, snatching it from her fingers. “Pay
the person naimed——” he read out dazedly. “What’s that?”
“That must be a money order,” she explained, though with
no less surprise.
“A money order?” he repeated.
“You’ve seen post-office orders, surely,” she said, not realizing
that they had only become common a decade ago with the
introduction of penny postage, and that nobody—not even his
children—had ever sent him one before. “ ’Tis a way of sending
money—you can send as much as two pounds for threepence.
How much is yours for?”
Overlaid memories of his late eighties struggled to the surface.
“Oh, ay,” he said, not answering her. “That was a blow for
the carriers—that and the penny post. Folks began to write
to the shops; dedn’t matter so much here, but the Che’msford
carriers complained bitter as the tradesmen sent out their own
carts with the goods.”
“But how much is it for?” repeated Jinny impatiently.
He studied it afresh, holding it away from her like a dog with
its paw on a bone. “Three pound!” he announced with rapturous
defiance. “Ye took away my foiver. But this be for the person
naimed on the enwelope, and that’s Daniel Quarles.”
“But what’s it for?” she asked.
“It’s for me,” he said conclusively, and was going up to his
room like a magpie with its treasure.
“Yes, but read the letter,” she urged.
He consented to sit down and study it. “Good God!” he
blubbered soon. “Poor Dap’s dead.”
“Dead?” echoed Jinny mendaciously.
“You read it for yourself, dearie. An awful pity, a man in
the prime of life. ’Tis from his boy in the Navy as he ast to
send me three pounds what he owed me. That was wunnerful
honest of him, to remember, seein’ as Oi don’t, aldoe Oi count the
Lord put it into his heart, knowin’ Oi wanted money terrible
bad. But Oi allus felt he was a good chap underneath: ’twarn’t
his fault he had a glass eye. That made him look at the nose,
like, and git frownin’ and quarrelsome. Three pound! That’s
a good nest-egg.”
“Yes,” said Jinny, glad the death was passing off so peacefully,
“and he’s sending me his telescope.”
“He don’t say that,” he said, peering at the letter again.
She turned red. “I had a line too—didn’t you notice yours
had no stamp? I’ll change your order for you at the post office,”
she went on hurriedly. Mentally she had worked out that two
of the pounds represented the price of the new gravestone the
Commander had never purchased, and the third his idea of
interest for all these years. Doubtless he had been too tactful
to send them back in his lifetime. Anyhow she agreed with her
grandfather that it was really all the Lord’s doing, for nothing
could be timelier. Even her poultry was now being steadily
sacrificed, and this great sum would get her beautifully over
Christmas and New Year and start that with a handsome balance
in hand. But she had counted without her grandfather.
“No, you don’t!” The Gaffer’s hand closed grimly on the
precious paper. “That’s a nest-egg, Oi’m tellin’ ye.”
“But what are you going to do with it?” she inquired in
distress.
“That’s for Annie.”
“Mr. Skindle’s mother! But he’s rich as rich.”
“He don’t never buy her nawthen. He come here and told
me sow out of his own mouth, the hunks. Oi had to pay for her
packet o’ hairpins.”
“Well, anyhow she’ll have her Christmas dinner, and that’s
more than you’re sure of,” she risked threatening.
“You’ve got the telescope, hain’t ye?” he urged uneasily.
“I can’t sell that. That’s for remembrance.”
“Ye can remember him without a telescope. And ef he had
his faults, ’tain’t for you to remember ’em, seein’ as ye’d never
a-bin here at all ef he’d done his duty by Emma and King Gearge.
But Oi reckon he couldn’t see everythink with that glass eye,
and Oi ought to ha’ carried silks and brandy myself ’stead o’
parcels and culch. Did, Oi’d a-got a stockin’ like Sidrach’s and
not had to deny myself bite and sup for your sake.” And he
hobbled stairwards, the post-office order clutched in his skeleton
claw. “Do ye write to Dap’s buoy-oy and thank him for payin’ his
dues, and say as Oi hope he won’t put no fooleries on his father’s
stone, and he’d best copy what Oi had put on your father’s and
mother’s.”
Jinny duly wrote, if not in these terms. But when the telescope
came, she felt anything but thankful. For, welcome as
it was in itself, it came by the coach. She had been too
distraught to foresee this, though she recognized that it was
the natural way. And apart from the sting to her own pride,
it agitated her grandfather profoundly. He had been nodding
at the hearth, but the clamour of the coach aroused
him, and ere she could get to the door he had sprung up with
an oath.
“Don’t let him over my doorstep!” he cried, pursuing her.
“He’s got to come in on his hands and knees.” He jostled her
aside and seized the bolt, but his hand trembled so, he could not
shoot it.
“How can he crawl in, if you bolt the door?” she said tactfully.
He was staggered: the possibility of the opposition obstinacy
relaxing had never even occurred to him. Recovering, he urged
that the enemy would try to rush over the sill.
“No fear, Gran’fer. He’ll never cross our threshold unless
you carry him in!”
She spoke with unconscious admiration of Will’s tenacity.
Indeed the image of the young man crawling to her grandfather
or even to herself would have been repellent, had it been really
conceivable.
“Carry him in!” the Gaffer laughed explosively, and that
burst of derision made him almost good-humoured. He let
himself be pushed gently towards the inner room, while Jinny,
with her pulse at gallop, opened the door.
The tension and friction of nerves proved sheer waste. The
long narrow parcel was brought to the door by the hobbledehoy
guard, and the driver remained, imperturbably important, on his
box, looking almost as massive as an old stager in his new, caped
greatcoat and coloured muffler, though the face under the broad-brimmed
festively sprigged hat was very different from the
mottled malt-soused visages of the coaching breed. It seemed
but an idle glance that Jinny cast at it, or at the Christmas
congestion of the coach, overflowing with passengers and literal
Christmas boxes, and with hares pendent even from the driver’s
seat. Nevertheless, as ever when they met, long invisible
messages passed between Jinny and Will, and not all her defiance
could disguise her humiliation at this second triumph of the
coach, coming as it did when the fortunes of the cart were at
their blackest. For the Gaffer refused sullenly to part with his
piece of paper—she did not even know where he had hidden it—and
with Uncle Lilliwhyte too poorly to forage for her, she was
almost tempted to apply for the Christmas doles that were by
ancient bequest more abundant at Mr. Fallow’s church than applicants
for them. But her instinct of “uprightness” saved her:
better that the last of her poultry should be sacrificed for the
sacred repletions of the season. She did indeed dally with the
notion of keeping Christmas not with, but from, her grandfather—possibly
his failing memory might for once prove an advantage—but
she had a feeling that apart from the profanity of ignoring
it, the festival was too ingrained in the natural order to be overlooked,
for did not Christmas mark the pause in the year, when
with the crops in the ground and the little wheat-blades safely
tucked under the snow, and the beer brewed and the pigs killed
and salted, the whole world rests and draws happy frosted
breath? No, the old man’s instinct would surely trip her up, if
she tried to run Christmas as an ordinary day.
She might, of course, as he had originally suggested, sell or
at least pawn her telescope, but even if she could have brought
herself to that, she could not have got it away from him, for he
had annexed it from the first moment and sat peering out of it
from the vantage-point of his bedroom lattice. He was at his
spy-glass the moment he woke, enchanted when he could descry
people or incidents far-off—it was as if his long seclusion from
the outer world was over—and he would call out like a child
and tell Jinny what he had seen. Sometimes it was Master
Peartree and his dog, sometimes Bidlake ferrying on the Brad or
a couple seeking warmth in a cold lane; now a woodman cutting
holly branches with his billhook, anon Bundock bowed by his
bag or Mott with his fishing-rod, and once he cried out he could
see Annie coming out of Beacon Chimneys, though Jinny suspected
that the tall figure with the “wunnerful fine buzzom”
was really Farmer Gale’s new wife. Particularly protected did
her grandfather now feel against thieves, whose stealthy advent
he would henceforward detect from afar. Delighted as she was
in her turn with the new toy that kept him happy even on a
reduced diet, she had to keep his fire going all day now, and to
be up and down closing the window through which he would
stick the telescope. Sometimes he directed his tube heaven-ward,
though not for astronomical purposes. “Happen Oi’ll see
Sidrach coming down for a gossip,” he said.
Just before Christmas he informed her he had decided that the
right thing to do with the nest-egg was to purchase Sidrach a
gravestone with it, and he instructed her to write a letter of
inquiry to Babylon. But although this seemed to her a more
logical use of it than he knew, she disregarded his instruction.
The nest-egg was too precious. The time might come when he
would ask for bread, and was she to give him a stone?
Neglected on the coast in favour of New Year, Christmas was
celebrated in the inland valley of the Brad with the conventional
accessories, and every Christmas the mummers had been wont
to attend on the Master of Blackwater Hall; as well as the waits.
Jinny with no coin to offer to either, the last of her poultry doomed
for the Christmas dinner, and Uncle Lilliwhyte also on her
hands, had this year to beg both companies to refrain, alleging
her grandfather was too ill. The weather was seasonable, the
robin hopped as picturesquely on the snow as on the Christmas
card Jinny had enclosed with her thanksgiving letter to Gunner
Dap. The cottage, prankt with its holly and mistletoe, had a
fairylike air—everything was perfect, even to the Christmas
pudding. But only Nip and Methusalem were happy. To the
Gaffer the breach of an immemorial tradition gave a troubling
sense of void.
“Where’s the waits? Where’s Father Chris’mus? Where’s
St. Gearge?” he kept saying peevishly. Jinny put him off with
vague replies or none. Once he alarmed her by asking suddenly:
“Where’s the Doctor?” She was reassured when he began
spouting:
“Oi carry a bottle of alicampane.”
He passed on to imagine himself as St. George, and seizing the
poker for a sword declaimed vigorously, if imperfectly:
“Oi’ll fight the Russian Bear, he shall not fly,
 Oi’ll cut him down or else Oi’ll die.”
“Ain’t we a-gooin’ to see the mummers?” he inquired angrily
as Christmas Day waned.
“Perhaps they are ill or it’s too cold,” she suggested feebly.
“But they’re gooin’ around to other folk!” he protested.
“Oi seen ’em through my glass!”
“Well, then you have seen them,” she said still more feebly.
Inwardly she wondered if he had detected herself, on her way
to church, carrying off some Christmas dinner to Uncle Lilliwhyte’s
hut. The telescope was a new terror added to life.
She had wanted to invite the prop of her larder to take his
Christmas dinner with them, but her grandfather refused violently
to sit down with such a “ragamuffin.” His sense of caste was
acute, and as Jinny’s sense of smell was equally acute, she would
not have persisted, even had renewed rheumatism not confined
the ancient to his hut.
The day after Christmas that year was Friday, and after the
comparative festivity of the holiday it required no small force
of will to go round uselessly in the north wind, when one day a
week would have more than sufficed for such odd commissions
as still came her way. The snow had fallen thicker in the night,
and robins, starlings, finches, blackbirds, little blue-tits (pick-cheeses
she called them), and other breakfastless birds had all
been tapping at her window for crumbs. But the remains of
the feast made a good meal for her grandfather and he was in
the best of humours, praising the acting of the mummers, which
he did not now remember he had not seen this Christmas, and
remarking upon the “wunnerful fine woice” of old Ravens’
grandson among the waits. Apparently his memories of other
years had fused together into an illusion concerning the day
before. As Jinny set out, she found herself wishing he would
forget his quarrel with Will. Not, of course, that she could
forget hers!
There were grey snow-clouds in the sky, and as she ploughed
past the sheepfolds, scarring the purity of the road with her
cart-tracks, she beheld patriarchal sheep, standing almost silent
with round, snow-white beards: only a green shoot peeped here
and there from the speckless white expanse. Methusalem’s
muffled footsteps gave her a sense of dream, and, when the wind
was not in her face, she watched her breath rising white in the
air with some strange sense of exhaling her soul. But beneath
this mystic daze went an undercurrent of wonder as to how she
could meet the New Year.
Returned from her round—and she was glad, having shown
herself and got her meal, to creep home under cover of the early
darkness—she half expected to find the Gaffer as ill as she had
feigned, but though he was still peering out into the night, there
was no sign he was in the grip of the cold; on the contrary he
seemed to have found fresh strength and brightness, whether from
the nest-egg or this renewed ocular intercourse with his world.
“Oi seen you all along the road,” he chuckled. In this new
mood she was easily able to persuade him to exchange a goat
for Methusalem’s provender. He would not part with his three
pounds, but they gave him a sense of security, almost of gaiety.
Indeed their existence made as wonderful a difference to herself
as to him. Hidden away though the money order was, she felt
the old man would be forced to produce it if ever hunger got too
keen, and so the knowledge of it sustained her as the proximity
of a boat sustains a swimmer. It was scarcely a paradox that
without its assistance she could not have got through the
first month of the New Year. For January brought the “hard
winter” foretold by the sloes. Outwardly it was a bright
world enough, with children skating on the ponds and ditches:
indeed the frost brought out a veritable flamboyance of colour
in the animal creation, and at one of her moments of despair
when she had humbled herself in vain to offer lace to the new
Mrs. Gale, Jinny was redeemed by the motley pomp of the cocks
shining on the farmyard straw, and the glowing hues of the
calves that bestrode it with them, all overbrooded by the ancient
mellow thatch. Her heart sang again with the row of chaffinches
perched on the white stone wall, and looking at the trees
silhouetted so gracefully against the sky, she decided that winter
bareness was almost more beautiful than summer opulence.
But she changed her mind when she watched—with a new sympathy
born of fellow-anxiety—the struggle for food among the
birds. Coots had flocked in from the coast to add to the competition
of land-species, and frozen little forms or bloody half-feathered
fragments, but especially dead starlings with lovely shades of
green and purple, pathetically imponderable when picked up, all
skin and feather—sometimes decapitated by sparrow-hawks—abounded
on the hard white roads. As she began to feel the
same grim menace brooding over her grandfather and herself,
that social unrest which reached even Bradmarsh in faint vibrations
began to take possession of her, and she arrived at a revolutionary
notion which would have horrified Farmer Gale far more
than her outrageous demand for a law that nobody should
be paid less than ten shillings a week. She actually maintained
that every man should be pensioned off by the parish on reaching
the age of ninety! But the view found no sympathy in an age
of individualism, to which the poorhouse was the supreme
humiliation. Even Uncle Lilliwhyte, who was now on the mend
again—though too weak to fend for anybody but himself—told
her to her surprise that every man ought to put by for a rainy
day. It was this slavish sluggishness of the poor that was the
real stumbling-block to reform, she thought, though remembering
Uncle Lilliwhyte’s leaky habitation, she treasured up his reply as
a humorous example of the gap between precept and practice.
Even more unsympathetic was Mrs. Mott’s attitude. She
scoffed at the idea that every man should be pensioned off at
ninety. “Poisoned off at twenty,” was her emendation.
“Well, you do your best,” Jinny laughed.
Mrs. Mott’s blue silk bodice crackled. “What do you mean?”
“Don’t you sell them liquor?”
“It’s good liquor,” said Mrs. Mott, flushing.
“I was only joking. But joking apart, it doesn’t do them
much good.” And Jinny thought of how even her grandfather
had fuddled himself, with or without ghostly assistance.
“If I gave up my bar,” said Mrs. Mott hotly, “who would pay
the rent of our chapel?”
“Well, but the chapel got along before you joined,” Jinny
reminded her mildly.
“Heaping up debt!” shrilled Mrs. Mott, with flashing eyes.
“Then what’s the good of poisoning off the men?” argued
Jinny, smiling. “Where would your bar be without them?”
“Women could learn to drink,” said Mrs. Mott fiercely, “and
smoke too.”
But the latter accomplishment seemed so comically impossible
to Jinny—who had never seen Polly over her cigar and milk—that
she burst out laughing at the image of it, and her laughter
made Mrs. Mott fiercer, and that lady said for two pins she’d
wear pink pantaloons like the Bloomerites. As Jinny did not
offer the pins, but laughed even more merrily at the new picture
presented to her imagination, relations with Mrs. Mott became
strained, and when at their next meeting Jinny sensibly remarked
that if the law really gave Mr. Mott his wife’s possessions, it was
useless going to it, all that lady’s indomitable spirit turned
against her whilom confidante. “You take his part like everybody
else,” she cried bitterly. “But don’t think I haven’t seen
him ogling you!”
“Do you mean I’ve ogled him?” said Jinny, incensed.
“I don’t say that, but you can’t dislike his admiration—why
else are you on his side?”
“I am not on his side—I detest him.”
Mrs. Mott flew off at a tangent. “Then you ought to be
grateful to me for protecting you against him.”
Jinny was now as indignant as her hostess. “How have you
protected me?”
“Haven’t I kept you always out of his way?”
“Oh, is that why you’ve had me in the kitchen?”
“Of course.”
Jinny felt at once chilled and inflamed. “It’s not true,” she
cried recklessly. “When I first came to the kitchen, Mr. Mott
was still in love with you, and I only went there because you
didn’t like to show yourself.”
Such reminders are unforgivable, and Jinny would probably
never again have enjoyed Mrs. Mott’s hospitality, even had she
not then and there shaken it off. It was only with an effort she
could prevent herself declaring that Mrs. Mott would have to
carry her into the kitchen before she entered it again. But when
she got out in the cold air, she felt suddenly as foolish as Will
and her grandfather had been. With starvation bearing down
on Blackwater Hall like some grim iceberg, the loss of two
full meals a week was a disaster. She was not even sure that
the courtyard as well as the kitchen would not be closed to her,
for Mrs. Mott seemed a woman without measure, whether in her
religion, her affections, her politics, or her quarrels. Possibly,
however, the poor lady overlooked her use of it, for the cart
continued to draw up there with its air of immemorial and
invincible custom. But if Jinny thus still kept up appearances,
it was with a heart that grew daily heavier.
In looking back on this grim period, Jinny always regarded
the crawling up of the wounded hedgehog as marking the zero-point
in her fortunes. It was actually crawling over her doorstep
like Will in her grandfather’s imagination. What enemy
had bitten off its neck-bristles she never knew—she could only
hope it was not Nip—but catching sight of the dark, ugly gash,
she hastened to get a clean rag as well as some crumbs and goat-milk.
The poor creature allowed the wound to be dressed, and
seemed to nose among the crumbs, but it neither ate nor drank.
She packed it in straw in a little box and placed it in a warm
corner of the kitchen, instructing Nip sternly that it was tabu.
“Caught a pig?” said the Gaffer with satisfaction, stumbling
into the middle of this lesson in the higher ethics. “That’s a
wunnerful piece o’ luck, a change from rabbits, too.”
“You wouldn’t eat it?” she cried in horror.
“Why, what else?” he asked in surprise.
“There’s bread and there’s jelly,” she said, misunderstanding,
“and perhaps Uncle Lilliwhyte will be round with something—he’s
about again.”
“There ain’t nawthen better than hedgehog,” the Gaffer said
decisively. “And ’tis years since Oi tasted one. Sidrach doted
on ’em roasted, used to catch ’em in the ditch-brambles.”
“But we’ve got to cure this, not kill it,” she protested.
“Ye don’t cure pigs that size,” he laughed happily.
For once Jinny failed to appreciate a joke. “It threw itself
on our protection,” she insisted. “We can’t take advantage of
it like that. Besides, it’s been bitten and might be unhealthy.”
But he was contumacious, and it was only on her undertaking
to get him a chicken for his dinner that he consented to forgo the
dainty in hand.
To acquire this in the absence of coin involved the barter of
the remaining goats in a large and complex transaction with Miss
Gentry’s landlady, and although this set Jinny and Methusalem
up for weeks, yet since it meant the exhaustion of her last reserves,
the wounded hedgehog became to happier memory a sort of
symbol of desperation. True, there were still the telescope and
the money order, but one could not easily lay one’s hand on
them—they bristled even more fiercely than the poor hedgehog.
All Jinny’s care of that confiding beast proved wasted. In
vain she renewed the dressing on its neck, in vain Nip and her
grandfather were kept off. The third morning it was found on
its back, more helpless than Uncle Lilliwhyte, with its hind paws
close together but its front paws held up apart, as though crying
for mercy. Its nose and paws came up dark brown on the
lighter spines around, the eyes were closed and almost invisible,
buried like the ears amid the bristles. The rag still adorned
its neck.
Jinny gave her poor little patient a decent burial and a few
tears. “ ’Tain’t no use cryin’ over spilt milk,” the Gaffer
taunted her. “Ye’ve gone and wasted good food, and Oi count
the Lord’ll think twice afore He sends ye a present agen.”
The Gaffer was mistaken. Little Bradmarsh was about to
flow, if not with milk and honey, with hares and rabbits and
horses and sheep and haystacks and potatoes and mangolds and
even chairs, step-ladders, fences, gates, watering-pots, casks,
boxes, hurdles, hen-coops, and wheelbarrows. For after January
had ended in a crescendo of rain, wind, sleet and the heaviest
snowfall in his memory, came a diminuendo movement of sleet,
thaw, and rain, though the wind raged unabated, and after that—the
Deluge!
WRITTEN IN WATER
For, in a night, the best part of my power . . .
Were in the washes, all unwarily,
Devourèd by the unexpected flood.
Shakespeare, “King John.”
The floods of ’52 are still remembered in East Anglia. The
worst and most widespread were in November, but “February
Fill-Dyke” brought the more localized catastrophe in Little
Bradmarsh. The village, lying as it did along the left bank of
the Brad, was caught between two waters, the overflow of the
streams to the north that ran down silt-laden towards this bank,
and the backwash over the bank from the Brad itself, which,
already swollen by rain, and by the waters pumped into it from
the marsh-mills on its right bank, was prevented overflowing
southwards by the dyke that further protected Long Bradmarsh.
It was Nip that brought Jinny the news, though she did not
understand its purport till the service was over. For it was to
church that he brought it. That ancient building, standing
isolated on its green knoll flaked with gravestones, had begun to
appeal to him as much as to Jinny, and despite her efforts to
dodge or shake him off, he had become a regular churchgoer.
Nobody seemed to mind his sitting in her pew or squatting by
the stove: perhaps so exiguous a congregation could not be
exigent, and in that aching void even a canine congregant was
not unwelcome. But his mistress, despite the sense she shared
with Mr. Fallow of divine glimmerings in the animal creation,
had always an uneasy feeling of indecorum, especially when Nip
snored through the sermon like a Christian, and she was congratulating
herself that the “Fifthly and Finally” had been
safely reached without him, when in he trotted—far wetter and
muddier than on the day he had plumped on Will’s knees in the
chapel. The sight of him dripping steadily along the aisle
towards the stove did not interrupt the hymn: the worshippers,
though the morning had begun with a set-back to snow, were in
no wise surprised by a return to rain. Only that Saturday
night it had rained “cats and dogs”: one dripping dog was
therefore no alarming phenomenon. They did not realize that
Nip had largely swum to church.
But when, at the church-door, they began to fumble with their
umbrellas, they saw with wide eyes of astonishment and dismay
that though a mere sleety drizzle misted the air, below the lych-gate
a strange expanse of waters awaited their feet. Except
for one broad finger of land pointing along the centre of a vast
yellow lake, their world was suddenly turned to water, and
Jinny had a weird wonder as to what the dead would think
could they rise and see the transformation wrought in the earthy
spot where they had laid themselves so securely to sleep.
But the first impression of plumbless depth was contradicted
by the hedgerows standing up—despite their reflections—much
as before, still with a light powder of the morning’s snow, and
when Jinny advancing to the gate, amid a chaos of ejaculatory
comment that would have done credit to a full-sized congregation,
probed the lake with the point of her umbrella, she exhibited