# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	I. Zangwill, Dreamers of the Ghetto
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/29875/29875-h/29875-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Not even Lassalle's fascinations and persuasions could counteract the
pertinacious plash-plash of-the rain, and the chilling mist, and
perhaps the uneasy pricks of her awakening chaperon-conscience. Nor
could he extract a decisive "Yes" from his fluttering volatile
enchantress. At Kaltbad, where they said farewell, he pressed her
hands with passion. "For a little while! Be prudent and strong! You
have the goodness of a child—and a child's will. Oh, if I could pour
into these blue veins"—he kissed them fiercely—"only one drop of my
giant's will, of my Titanic energy. Grip my hands; perhaps I can do it
by magnetism. I will to join our lives. You must will too. Then there
are no difficulties. Only say 'Yes'—but definitely, unambiguously, of
your own free will—and I answer for the rest."
The thought of Janko resurged painfully when his giant's will was left
behind on the heights. How ill she would be using him—her pretty
delicate boy!
The giant's will left behind her? Never had Helene been more mistaken.
The very reverse! It went before her all day like a pillar of fire. At
the first stopping-place a letter already awaited her, brought by a
swift courier; lower down a telegram; as she got off her horse another
letter; at her hotel two copious telegrams; as she stepped on board
the lake steamer a final letter—all breathing [408]passion,
encouragement, solicitous instructions to wrap up well.
Wrap up well! He wrapped one up in himself!
Half fascinated, half panting for free air, but wholly flattered and
enamoured, she wrote at once to break off with Janko and surrender to
her Satanic Ferdinand.
"Yes, friend Satan, the child wills! A drop of your diabolical blood
has passed into her veins. I am yours for life. But first try
reasonable means. Make my parents' acquaintance, cover up your horns
and tail, try and win me like a bourgeois. If that fails, there is
always Egypt. But quick, quick: I cannot bear scenes and delays and
comments. Once we are married, let society stare. With you to lean on
I snap my fingers at the world. The obstacles are gigantic, but you
are also a giant, who with God's help smashes rocks to sand, that even
my breath can blow away. I must stab the beautiful dream of a noble
youth, but even this—frightfully painful for me as it is—I do for
you. I say nothing of the disappointment to my parents, of the pain of
all I love and respect. I am writing to Holthoff, my father-confessor.
We must have him for us, with us, near us. God has destined us for
each other."
A telegram replied: "Bravissimo! I am on my way to join you."
And to the Countess, fighting rheumatism at the waters of Wildbad in
the Black Forest, he wrote: "The rain has passed, the long fog has
gone. The mountains stand out mighty and dazzling, peak beyond peak,
like the heights of a life. What a sunset! The Eiger seemed wrapped in
a vapor of burning gold. My sufferings are nearly all wiped out. I am
joyous, full of life and love. And I have also finished at last with
that terrible correspondence for the Union. Seventy-six pages of
minute writing have I sent to Berlin yesterday and to-day, and I
breathe again. In my [409]yesterday's letter I broke Helene to you. It is
extraordinarily fortunate that on the verge of forty I should be able
to find a wife so beautiful, so sympathetic, who loves me so much, and
who, as you and I agreed was indispensable, is entirely absorbed in my
personality. In your last letter you throw cold water on my proposed
journey to Hamburg; and perhaps you are right in thinking the coup I
planned not so great and critical as I have been imagining. But how
you misunderstand my motives when you write: 'Cannot you, till your
health is re-established, find contentment for a while in science, in
friendship, in Nature?' You think politics the breath of my nostrils.
Ah, how little you are au fait with me! I desire nothing more
ardently than to be quite rid of all politics, and to devote myself to
science, friendship, and Nature. I am sick and tired of politics.
Truly I would burn as passionately for them as any one, if there were
anything serious to be done, or if I had the power or saw the means, a
means worthy of me; for without supreme power nothing can be done. For
child's play, however, I am too old and too great. That is why I very
reluctantly undertook the Presidentship. I only yielded to you, and
that is why it now weighs upon me terribly. If I were but rid of it,
this were the moment I should choose to go to Naples with you. But how
to get rid of it? For events, I fear, will develop slowly, so slowly,
and my burning soul finds no interest in these children's maladies and
petty progressions. Politics means actual, immediate activity.
Otherwise one can work just as well for humanity by writing. I shall
still try to exercise at Hamburg a pressure upon events. But up to
what point it will be effective I cannot say. Nor do I promise myself
much from it. Ah, could I but get out of it!
"Helene is a wonderful creature, the only personality I could wed. She
looks forward to your friendship. I know [410]it. For I am a good observer
of women without seeming to be. That dear enfant du diable, as
everybody calls her at Geneva, has a deep sympathy for you, because
she is, as Goethe puts it, an original nature. Only one fault—but
gigantic. She has no Will. But if we became husband and wife, that
would cease to be a fault. I have enough Will for two, and she would
be the flute in the hands of the artist. But till then—"
The Countess showed herself a kind Cassandra. His haste, she replied,
would ruin his cause. He had to deal with Philistines. The father was
a man of no small self-esteem—he had been the honored tutor of
Maximilian II., and was now in high favor at the Bavarian court, even
controlling university and artistic appointments. A Socialist would be
especially distasteful to him. Twenty years ago Varnhagen von Ense had
heard him lecture on Communism—good-humoredly, wittily, shrugging
shoulders at these poor, fantastic fools who didn't understand that
the world was excellently arranged centuries before they were born.
Helene herself, with her weak will, would be unable to outface her
family. Before approaching the parents, had he not better wait the
final developments of his law-case? If he had to leave Germany
temporarily to escape the imprisonment, would not that be a favorable
opportunity for prosecuting his love-affairs in Switzerland? And what
a pity to throw up his milk-cure! "Enfin, I wish you success, mon
cher enfant, though I will only put complete trust in my own eyes. In
feminine questions you have neither reason nor judgment."
Lassalle's response was to enclose a pretty letter from Helene,
pleading humbly for the Countess's affection. Together let them nurse
the sick eagle. She herself was but a child, and would lend herself to
any childish follies to drive the clouds from his brow. She would try
to [411]comprehend his magnificent soul, his giant mind, and in happiness
or in sorrow would remain faithful and firm at his side.
The Countess knit her brow. Then Lassalle was already with this Helena
in Berne.
It was a week of delicious happiness, niched amid the eternal
mountains, fused with skies and waters.
With an accommodating chaperon who knew no German, the couple could do
and say what they pleased. Lassalle, throwing off the heavy burdens of
prophet and politician, alternated between brilliant lover and
happy-hearted boy. It was almost a honeymoon. Now they were children
with all the overflowing endearments of plighted lovers. Now they were
on the heights of intellect, talking poetry and philosophy, and
reading Lassalle's works; now they were discussing Balzac's
Physiologie du Mariage. Anon Lassalle was a large dog, gambolling
before his capricious mistress. "Lie down, sir," she cried once, as he
was reading a poem to her. And with peals of Homeric laughter
Ferdinand declared she had found the only inoffensive way of silencing
him. "If ever I displease you in future, you have only to say, 'Lie
down, sir!'" And he began barking joyously.
And in the glow of this happiness his sense of political defeat
evaporated. He burgeoned, expanded, flung back his head in the old,
imperial way. "By God!" he said, marching up and down the room
feverishly, "you have chosen no mean destiny. Have you any idea of
what Ferdinand Lassalle's wife will be? Look at me!" He stood still.
"Do I look a man to be content with the second [412]rôle in the State? Do
you think I give the sleep of my nights, the marrow of my bones, the
strength of my lungs, to draw somebody else's chestnuts out of the
fire? Do I look like a political martyr? No! I wish to act, to fight,
and also to enjoy the crown of victory, to place it on your brow."
A vision of the roaring streets and floral arches of the Rhenish
cities flashed past him. "Chief of the People, President of the German
Republic,—there's the only true sovereignty. That was what kings were
once—giants of brain and brawn. King—one who knows, one who can!
Headship is for the head. What is this mock dignity that stands on the
lying breaths of winking courtiers? What is this farcical, factitious
glamour that will not bear the light of day? The Grace of God? Ay,
give me god-like manhood, and I will bend the knee. But to ask me to
worship a stuffed purple robe on a worm-eaten throne! 'Tis an insult
to manhood and reason. Hereditary kingship! When you can breed souls
as you breed racehorses it will be time to consider that. Stand here
by my side before this mirror. Is not that a proud, a royal couple?
Did not Nature fashion these two creatures in a holiday mood of joy
and intoxication? Vive la République and its Queen with the golden
locks!"
"Vive la République and its eagle King!" she cried, intoxicated, yet
with more of dramatic enjoyment than of serious conviction.
"Bravo! You believe in our star! Since I met you I see it shining
clearer over the heights. We mount, we mount, peak beyond peak. We
have enemies enough now, thick as the serpents in tropic forests.
Well, let them soil with their impure slaver the hem of our garments.
But how they will crawl fangless when Ferdinand—the Elect of the
People—makes his solemn entry into Berlin. And at [413]his side, drawn by
six white horses, his blonde darling, changed into the first woman of
Germany." He, too, though to him the fancy was real enough for the
moment, enjoyed it with a certain artistic aloofness.
In honor of the fiancés—for such they openly avowed themselves,
Geneva and Helene's family being sufficiently distant to be
temporarily forgotten—the American Consul at Berne gave a charming
dinner. There was a gallant old Frenchman, a honey-tongued Italian, a
pervasive air of complimentary congratulation. Helene returned to her
hotel, thrilling with pleasure and happy auguries. The night was soft
and warm. Before undressing she leaned out of the window of her room
on the ground floor, and gazed upon the eternal glaciers, sparkling
like silver under the full moon. Through every sense she drank in the
mystery and perfume of the night, till her spirit seemed at one with
the stars and the mountains. Suddenly she felt two mighty arms clasped
about her. Lassalle stood outside. Her heart throbbed violently.
"Hush!" he said, "don't be frightened. I will stay outside here, good
and quiet, till you are tired and say, 'Lie down, sir!' Then I will
go!"
"My gentle Romeo!" she whispered, and bent her fragrant lips to meet
his—the divine kiss of god and goddess in the divine night. "My
Ferdinand!" she breathed. "If we should be parted after all. I tremble
to think of it. My father will never consent."
"He shall consent. And you don't even need his consent. You are of
age."
"Then take me now, dear heart. I am yours—your [414]creature, your thing.
Fly away with me, my beautiful eagle, to Paris, to Egypt, where you
will. Let us be happy Bohemians. We do not need the world. We have
ourselves, and the moonlight, and the mountains."
She was maddening to-night, his enfant du diable. But he kept a last
desperate grip upon his common sense. What would his friends say if he
involved Helene in the scandal of an elopement? What would Holthoff
say, what Baron Korff? Surely this was not the conduct that would
commend itself to the chivalry and nobility of Berlin! And besides,
how could his political career survive a new scandal? He was already
sufficiently hampered by his old connection with the Countess, and not
even a public acquittal and twenty years had sufficed to lay that
accusation of instigating the stealing of a casket of papers from her
husband's mistress, which was perhaps the worst legacy of the great
Hatzfeldt case. No, he must win his bride honorably: the sanctities
and dignities of wedlock were seductive to the Bohemian in love.
"We shall have ourselves and the world, too," he urged gently. "Let us
enter our realm with the six white horses, not in a coach with drawn
blinds. Your father shall give you to me, I tell you, in the eye of
day. What, am I an advertisement canvasser to be shown the door? Shall
my darling not have as honorable nuptials as her father's wife. Shall
the Elect of the People confess that a petty diplomatist didn't
consider him good enough for a son-in-law? Think how Bismarck would
chuckle. After all I have said to him!"
Her confidence came back. Yes, one might build one's house on the rock
of such a Will! "What have you said to him?"
He laughed softly. "I've let slip a secret, little girl."
"Tell me."
[415]"Incredible! That baby with her little fingers,"—he seized
them—"with her fairy paws, she plunges boldly into my most precious
secrets, into my heart's casket, picks out the costliest jewel, and
asks for it."
"Well, do you like him? Is he an intellectual spirit?"
"Hum! If he is, we are not. He is iron, and of iron we make steel, and
of steel pretty weapons; but one can make nothing but weapons. I
prefer gold. Gold like my darling's hair"—he caressed it—"like my
own magic power over men. You shall see, darling, how your gold and
mine will triumph."
"But you also are always speaking of arms, of blood, of battles; and
Revolutions are scarcely forged without arms and iron."
"Child, child," he answered, drawing her golden locks to his lips,
"why do you wish to learn all in this beautiful starry night? The
conquests of thousands of years, the results of profound studies, you
ask for as for toys. To speak of battles, to call to arms, is by no
means the same thing as to sabre one's fellow, one's brother, with icy
heart and bloodstained hand. Don't you understand, sly little thing,
of what arms I speak, of the golden weapons of the spirit, eloquence,
the love of humanity, the effort to raise to manly dignity the poor,
the unfortunate, the workers. Above all, I mean—Will. These noble
weapons, these truly golden weapons, I count higher and more useful
than the rusted swords of Mediævalism."
Her eyes filled with tears. She felt herself upborne on waves of
religious emotion towards those shining stars. The temptation was
over.
"Good-night, my love," she said humbly.
He drew her face to his in passionate farewell, and seemed as if he
would never let her go. When her window closed he strode towards the
glaciers.
[416]An adventure next day came to show the conquered Helena that her
spiritual giant was no less king of men physically. At the American
Consul's dinner an expedition on the Niessen had been arranged. But as
the party was returning at nightfall across the fields, and laughing
over Lassalle's sprightly anecdotes, suddenly a dozen diabolical
gnomes burst upon them with savage roars and incomprehensible
inarticulate jabberings, and began striking at hazard with their
short, solid cudgels, almost ere the startled picnickers could
recognize in these bestial creatures, with their enormously swollen
heads and horrible hanging goitres, the afflicted idiot peasants of
the valley. The gallant Frenchman and the honey-tongued Italian
screamed with the women, and made even less play with umbrellas and
straps; but Lassalle fell like a thunderbolt with his Robespierre
stick upon the whole band of cretins, and reduced them to howls and
bloodstained tears. It was only then that Lassalle was able to extract
from them that the party had trampled over the hay in their fields,
and that they demanded compensation. Being given money, they departed,
growling and waving their cudgels. When the excursionists looked at
one another they found themselves all in rags, and Lassalle's face
disfigured by two heavy blows. Helene ran to him with a cry.
"You are wounded, bruised!"
"No, only one of the towers of the Bastille," he said, ruefully
surveying the stick; "the brutes have dinted it."
"And there are people who call him coward because he won't fight
duels," thought Helene adoringly.
The drama shifted to Geneva, where heroine preceded hero by a few
hours, charged to be silent till her parents had personally
experienced Lassalle's fascinations. He had scarcely taken possession
of his room in the Pension Bovet when a maidservant brought in a
letter from Helene, and ere he had time to do more than break the
envelope, Helene herself burst in.
"Take me away, take me away," she cried hysterically.
He flew to support her.
"What has happened?"
"I cannot bear it. I cannot fight them. Save me, my king, my master.
Let us fly across the frontier—to Paris." She clung to him wildly.
Sternness gathered on his brow.
"Then you have disobeyed me!" he said. "Why?"
"I have written you," she sobbed.
He laid her gently on the bed, and ran his eye through the long,
hysteric letter.
Unhappy coincidence! At Helene's arrival, her whole family had met her
joyously at the railway station, overbrimming with the happy news that
her little sister, Marguerite, had just been proposed to by Count
Kayserling.
Helene had thought this a heaven-sent opportunity of breaking her own
happiness to her radiant mother, foolishly forgetting that the Count
Kayserling would be the last man in the world to endure a Jew and a
demagogue as a brother-in-law. Terrible scenes had followed—the
mother's tears, the father's thunders, the general family wail and
supplication, sisters trembling for their prospects, brothers
anticipating the sneers of club-land. What! exchange Prince Janko for
a thief!
[418]Cross-examined by Lassalle, Helene admitted her mother was not so
furious as her father, and had even, weeping on her bosom, promised to
try and smooth the Baron down. But she knew that was impossible—her
father considered nothing but his egoistic plans. And so, when the
dinner-bell was sounding, informed with a mad courage by the thought
of her hero's proximity, she had flown to him.
Lassalle felt that the test-moment of his life had come, and the man
of action must rise to it. He scribbled three telegrams—one to his
mother, one to his sister, Frau Friedland, and one to the Countess,
asking all to come at once.
"You must have a chaperon," he interjected. "And till one of the three
arrives, who is there here?"
She sobbed out the address of Madame Rognon. Lassalle opened the door
to hand over the telegrams, and saw the woman who had brought Helene's
letter lingering uneasily, and he had the unhappiest yet not least
characteristic inspiration of his life. "These to the telegraph
office," he said aloud, and in a whisper: "Tell the Baroness von
Dönniges that we shall be at Madame Rognon's."
For, with lightning rapidity, his brain had worked out a subtle piece
of heroic comedy. He would restore Helene to her mother, he would play
the grand seigneur, the spotless Bayard, he, the Jew, the thief, the
demagogue, the Don Juan; his chivalry would shame this little
diplomatist. In no case could they refuse him the girl, she was too
hopelessly compromised. All the Pension had seen her—the mother would
be shrewd enough to understand that. She must allow the renunciation
to remain merely verbal, but the words would sound how magnificent!
The scene was duly played. The bewildered Helene, whom he left in the
dark, confused by the unexpected [419]appearance of her mother, was thrown
into the last stage of dazed distress by being recklessly restored to
the maternal bosom. He kissed her good-bye, and she vanished from his
sight for ever.
For he had reckoned without his Janko, always at hand to cover up a
scandal. The Will he had breathed into Helene had been exhausted in
the one supreme effort of her life. Sucked up again into the family
egotism, kept for weeks under a régime of terror and intercepted
letters, hurried away from Geneva; chagrined and outraged, too, by her
lover's incomprehensible repudiation of her, which only success could
have excused, and which therefore became more unpardonable as day
followed day without rescue from a giant, proved merely windbag; she
fell back with compunction into the tender keeping of the ever-waiting
Janko. The one letter her father permitted her to send formally
announced her eternal love and devotion for her former fiancé.
Profitless to tell the story of how the stricken giant, raving in
outer darkness, this Polyphemus who had gouged out his own eye, this
Hercules self-invested in the poisoned robe of Nessus, moved heaven
and earth to see her again. It was an earthquake, a tornado, a
nightmare. He had frenzies of tears, his nights were sleepless reviews
of his folly in throwing her away, and vain phantasms of her eyes and
lips. He poured out torrents of telegrams and letters, in which cries
of torture mingled with minute legal instructions. The correspondence
of the Working-Men's Union alone was neglected. He pressed everybody
and anybody into his feverish service—musicians, artists, soldiers,
antiquarians, aristocrats. Would not Wagner induce the King of Bavaria
to speak to von [420]Dönniges? Would not the Catholic Bishop Ketteler help
him?—he would become a Catholic. And ever present an insane belief in
the reality of her faithlessness, mockingly accompanied by a terribly
lucid recognition of the instability of character that made it
certain. The "No"—her first word to him at their first
meeting—resounded in his ears, prophetically ominous. The sunrise,
hidden by rain and mist, added its symbolic gloom. But he felt her
lips on his in the marvellous moonlight; a thousand times she clung to
him crying, "Take me away!" And now she was to be another's. She
refused even to see him. Incredible! Monstrous! If he could only get
an interview with her face to face. Then they would see if she was
resisting him of her own free will or under pressure illegal for an
adult. It was impossible his will-power over her should fail.
Helene evidently thought so too. By fair means and foul, by spies and
lawyers and friendly agents, Lassalle's frenzied energy had penetrated
through every defence to the inmost entrenchment where she sat
cowering. He had exacted the father's consent to an interview. Only
Helene's own consent was wanting. His friend Colonel Rustow brought
the sick Hercules the account of her refusal—a refusal which made
ridiculous his moving of mountains.
"But surely you owe Lassalle some satisfaction," he had protested.
"To what? To his wounded vanity?"
It was the last straw.
"Harlot!" cried Lassalle, and as in a volcanic jet, hurled her from
his burning heart.
A terrible calm settled upon him. It was as if fire should become ice.
Yes, he understood at last what Destiny had always been trying to tell
him—that love and happiness were not for him. He was consecrate to
great [421]causes: His Will, entangled with that of others, grew feeble,
fruitless. Women were truly enfants du diable. He had been within an
ace of abandoning his historical mission. Now he would arise, strong,
sublime: a mighty weapon forged by the gods, and tempered by fire and
tears.
spiritual Emperor, no Vicar of Christ, but Anti-Christ himself."
"Down with Anti-Christ!" yelled a pair of Corsican cut-throats.
"Down with Anti-Christ!" roared the crowd, the long-suppressed hatred
of the ruling power finding vent in a great wave of hysteric emotion.
"Captain, do thy duty!" cried the Judge.
"Nay, but the Friar speaks truth. Bear the old man away, Alessandro!"
"Is Rome demented? Haste for the City Guards, Jacopo!"
Fra Giuseppe swiftly tied the pallio to his crucifix, and, waving
the red cloth on high, "This is the true flag of Christ!" he cried.
"This, the symbol of our brethren's martyrdom! See, 'tis the color of
the blood He shed for us. Who is for Jesus, follow me!"
[62]"For Christ, for Jesus! Viva Gesú!" A far-rumbling thunder broke
from the swaying mob. His own fire caught extra flame from theirs.
"Follow me! This day we will bear witness to Christ, we will establish
His kingdom in Rome."
There was a wild rush, the soldiers spurred their horses, people fell
under their hoofs, and were trampled on. It was a moment of frenzy.
The Dominican ran on, waving the red pallio, his followers
contagiously swollen at every by-street. Unchecked he reached the
great Piazza, where a new statue of the Pope gleamed white and
majestic.
"Down with Anti-Christ!" shouted a cutpurse.
"Down with Anti-Christ!" echoed the mob.
The Friar waved his hand, and there was silence. He saw the yellow
gleam of a Jew's head in the crowd, and called upon him to fling him
his cap. It was hurled from hand to hand. Fra Giuseppe held it up in
the air. "Men of Rome, Sons of Holy Church, behold the contumelious
mark we set upon our fellow-men, so that every ruffian may spit upon
them. Behold the yellow—the color of shame, the stigma of women that
traffic in their womanhood—with which we brand the venerable brows of
rabbis and the heads of honorable merchants. Lo! I set it upon the
head of this Anti-Christ, a symbol of our hate for all that is not
Love." And raising himself on the captain's stirrup, he crowned the
statue with the yellow badge.
A great shout of derision rent the air. There was a multifarious
tumult of savage voices.
"Down with Anti-Christ! Down with the Pope! Down with Baccio Valori!
Down with the Princess Teresa!"
But in another moment all was a wild mêlée. A company of City
Guards—pikemen, musketeers, and horsemen with two-handed swords
dashed into the Piazza from one street, the Pope's troops from
another. They charged the crowd. [63]The soldiers of the revolting
captain, revolting in their turn, wheeled round and drove back their
followers. There was a babel of groans and shrieks and shouts, muskets
rang out, daggers flashed, sword and pike rang against armor, sparks
flew, smoke curled, and the mob broke and scurried down the streets,
leaving the wet, scarlet ground strewn with bodies.
And long ere the roused passions of the riffraff had assuaged
themselves by loot and outrage in the remoter streets, in the darkest
dungeon of the Nona Tower, on a piece of rotten mattress, huddled in
his dripping tinselled cloak, and bleeding from a dozen cuts, Joseph
the Dreamer lay prostrate, too exhausted from the fierce struggle with
his captors to think on the stake that awaited him.
He had not long to wait. To give the crowd an execution was to crown
the Carnival. Condemned criminals were often kept till Shrove Tuesday,
and keen was the disappointment when there was only the whipping of
courtesans caught masked. The whipping of a Jew, found badgeless, was
the next best thing to the execution of a Christian, for the
flagellator was paid double (at the cost of the culprit), and did not
fail to double his zeal. But the execution of a Jew was the best of
all. And that Fra Giuseppe was a Jew there could be no doubt. The only
question was whether he was a backslider or a spy. In either case
death was his due. And he had lampooned the Pope to boot—in itself
the unpardonable sin. The unpopular Pontiff sagely spared the
others—the Jew alone was to die.
The population was early astir. In the Piazza of the People—the
centre of the Carnival—where the stake had [64]been set up, a great
crowd fought for coigns of vantage—a joyous, good-humored tussle. The
great fountain sent its flashing silver spirts towards a blue heaven.
As the death-cart lumbered into the Piazza ribald songs from the
rabble saluted the criminal's ears, and his wild, despairing eyes
lighted on many a merry face that but a few hours before had followed
him to testify to righteousness; and, mixed with theirs, the faces of
his fellow-Jews, sinister with malicious glee. No brother friar droned
consolation to him or held the cross to his eyes—was he not a
pestilential infidel, an outcast from both worlds? The chief of the
Caporioni was present. Troops surrounded the stake lest, perchance,
the madman might have followers who would yet attempt a rescue. But
the precautions were superfluous. Not a face that showed sympathy;
those who, bewitched by the Friar, had followed his crucifix and
pallio now exaggerated their jocosity lest they should be
recognized; the Jews were joyous at the heavenly vengeance which had
overtaken the renegade.
The Dominican Jew was tied to the timber. They had dressed him in a
gaberdine and set the yellow cap on his shaven poll. Beneath it his
face was calm, but very sad. He began to speak.
"Gag him!" cried the Magistrate. "He is about to blaspheme."
"Prithee not," pleaded a bully in the crowd. "We shall lose the
rascal's shrieks."
"Nay, fear not. I shall not blaspheme," said Joseph, smiling
mournfully. "I do but confess my sin and my deserved punishment. I set
out to walk in the footsteps of the Master—to win by love, to resist
not evil. And lo, I have used force against my old brethren, the Jews,
and force against my new brethren, the Christians. I have urged the
Pope against the Jews, I have urged the [65]Christians against the Pope.
I have provoked bloodshed and outrage. It were better I had never been
born. Christ receive me into His infinite mercy. May He forgive me as
I forgive you!" He set his teeth and spake no more, an image of
infinite despair.
The flames curled up. They began to writhe about his limbs, but drew
no sound to vie with their crackling. But there was weeping heard in
the crowd. And suddenly from the unobservedly overcast heavens came a
flash of lightning and a peal of thunder followed by a violent shower
of rain. The flames were extinguished. The spring shower was as brief
as it was violent, but the wood would not relight.
But the crowd was not thus to be cheated. At the order of the
Magistrate the executioner thrust a sword into the criminal's bowels,
then, unbinding the body, let it fall upon the ground with a thud: it
rolled over on its back, and lay still for a moment, the white,
emaciated face staring at the sky. Then the executioner seized an axe
and quartered the corpse. Some sickened and turned away, but the bulk
remained gloating.
Then a Franciscan sprang on the cart, and from the bloody ominous text
patent to all eyes, passionately preached Christ and dissolved the mob
in tears.
In the house of Manasseh, the father of Joseph, there were great
rejoicings. Musicians had been hired to celebrate the death of the
renegade as tradition demanded, and all that the Pragmatic permitted
of luxury was at hand. And they danced, man with man and woman with
woman. Manasseh gravely handed fruits and wine to his guests, [66]but the
old mother danced frenziedly, a set smile on her wrinkled face, her
whole frame shaken from moment to moment by peals of horrible
laughter.
Miriam fled from the house to escape that laughter. She wandered
outside the Ghetto, and found the spot of unconsecrated ground where
the mangled remains of Joseph the Dreamer had been hastily shovelled.
The heap of stones thrown by pious Jewish hands, to symbolize that by
Old Testament Law the renegade should have been stoned, revealed his
grave. Great sobs swelled Miriam's throat. Her eyes were blind with
tears that hid the beauty of the world. Presently she became aware of
another bowed figure near hers—a stately female figure—and almost
without looking knew it for Helena de' Franchi.
"I, too, loved him, Signora de' Franchi," she said simply.
"Art thou Miriam? He hath spoken of thee." Helena's silvery voice was
low and trembling.
"Ay, Signora."
Helena's tears flowed unrestrainedly. "Alas! Alas! the Dreamer! He
should have been happy—happy with me, happy in the fulness of human
love, in the light of the sun, in the beauty of this fair world, in
the joy of art, in the sweetness of music."
"Nay, Signora, he was a Jew. He should have been happy with me, in the
light of the Law, in the calm household life of prayer and study, of
charity, and pity, and all good offices. I would have lit the Sabbath
candles for him and set our children on his knee that he might bless
them. Alas! Alas! the Dreamer!"
"Neither of these fates was to be his, Miriam. Kiss me, let us comfort
each other."
Their lips met and their tears mingled.
"Henceforth, Miriam, we are sisters."
[67]"Sisters," sobbed Miriam.
They clung to each other—the noble Pagan soul and the warm Jewish
heart at one over the Christian's grave.
Suddenly bells began to ring in the city. Miriam started and
disengaged herself.
"I must go," she said hurriedly.
"It is but Ave Maria," said Helena. "Thou hast no vespers to sing."
Miriam touched the yellow badge on her head. "Nay, but the gates will
be closing, sister."
"Alas, I had forgotten. I had thought we might always be together
henceforth. I will accompany thee so far as I may, sister."
They hastened from the lonely, unblessed grave, holding each other's
hand.
The shadows fell. It was almost dark by the time they reached the
Ghetto.
Miriam had barely slipped in when the gates shut with a harsh clang,
severing them through the long night.
Gabriel Da Costa pricked his horse gently with the spur, and dashing
down the long avenue of cork-trees, strove to forget the torment of
spiritual problems in the fury of physical movement, to leave theology
behind with the monasteries and chapels of Porto. He rode with grace
and fire, this beautiful youth with the flashing eyes, and the dark
hair flowing down the silken doublet, whom a poet might have feigned
an image of the passionate spring of the South, but for whose own soul
the warm blue sky of Portugal, the white of the almond blossoms, the
pink of the peach sprays, the delicate odors of buds, and the glad
clamor of birds made only a vague background to a whirl of thoughts.
No; it was impossible to believe that by confessing his sins as the
Church prescribed he could obtain a plenary absolution. If salvation
was to be secured only by particular rules, why, then, one might
despair of salvation altogether. And, perhaps, eternal damnation was
indeed his [69]destiny, were it only for his doubts, and in despite of
all his punctilious mechanical worship. Oh, for a deliverer—a
deliverer from the questionings that made the splendid gloom of
cathedrals a darkness for the captive spirit! Those cursed Jesuits,
zealous with the zealotry of a new order! His blood flamed as he
thought of their manœuvrings, and putting his hand to his holster,
where hung a pair of silver-mounted pistols marked with his initial,
he drew out one and took flying aim at a bird on a twig, pleasing
himself with the foolish fancy that 'twas Ignatius Loyola. But though
a sure marksman, he had not the heart to hurt any living thing, and
changing with the swiftness of a flash he shot at the twig instead,
snapping it off.
Why had his dead father set him to study ecclesiastical law? True, for
a wealthy youth of the upper middle classes 'twas the one road to
distinction, to social equality with the nobility—and whose fault but
his own that even after the first stirrings of scepticism he had
accepted semi-sacerdotal office as chief treasurer of a clerical
college? But how should he foresee that these uneasinesses of youth
would be aggravated rather than appeased by deeper study, more
passionate devotion? Strange! All around him, in college or cathedral,
was faith and peace; in his spirit alone a secret disquiet and a
suppressed ferment that not all the soaring music of fresh-voiced boys
could soothe or allay.
He felt his horse slacken suddenly under him, and had used his spurs
viciously without effect, ere he became conscious that he had come to
the steep, clayey bank of a ravine through which a tiny stream
trickled, and that the animal's flanks were stained with blood.
Instantly his eyes grew humid.
"Pobre!" he cried, leaping from the saddle and caressing [70]the
horse's nostrils. "To be shamed before men have I always dreaded, but
'tis worse to be shamed before myself."
And leading his steed by the bridle, the young cavalier turned back
towards Porto by winding grassy paths purpled with anemones and
bordered by gray olive-trees, with here and there the vivid gleam of
oranges peeping amid deep green foliage that tore the sky into a
thousand azure patches.
He remounted his horse as he approached the market-place, from which
the town climbed up; but he found his way blocked, for 'twas
market-day, and the great square, bordered with a colonnade that made
an Eastern bazaar, was thickly planted with stalls, whose white canvas
awnings struck a delicious note of coolness against the throbbing blue
sky and the flaming costumes of the peasants come up from the
environs. Through a corner of the praça one saw poplars and elms and
the fresh gleam of the river. The nasal hum of many voices sounded
blithe and busy. At the bazaar entrance, where old women vended
flowers and fruit, Gabriel reined in his horse.
"How happy these simple souls!" he mused. "How sure of their
salvation! To count their beads and mutter their Ave Marias; 'tis
all they need. Yon fisher, with his great gold ear-rings, who throws
his nets and cuddles his Juanita and carouses with his mates, hath
more to thank the saints for than miserable I, who, blessed with
wealth, am cursed with loneliness, and loving my fellow-men, yet know
they are but sheep. God's sheep, natheless, silly and deaf to the cry
of their true shepherd, and misled by priestly wolves."
[71]A cripple interrupted his reflections by a whining appeal. Gabriel
shuddered with pity at the sight of his sores, and, giving him a piece
of silver, lost himself in a new reverie on the mystery of suffering.
"Thine herbs sold out too!" cheerily grumbled a well-known voice, and,
turning his head, Gabriel saw that the burly old gentleman addressing
the wrinkled market-woman from the vantage-point of a mule's back was,
indeed, Dom Diego de Balthasar, late professor of the logics at the
University of Coimbra, and newly settled in Porto as a physician.
"Ay, indeed, ere noon!" the dried-up old dame mumbled. "All Porto
seems hungry for bitter herbs to-day. But thus it happens sometimes
about Eastertide, though I love not such salads myself."
"Naturally. They are good for the blood," laughed Dom Diego, as his
eye caught Gabriel's. "And thou hast none, good dame."
There seemed almost a wink in the professorial eye, and the young
horseman smiled in good-natured response to the physician's estimate
of the jest.
"Then are the eaters sensible," he said.
"Ay, the only sensible people in Portugal," rejoined Dom Diego,
changing his speech to Latin, but retaining his smile. "And the only
good blood, Da Costa," he added, with what was now an unmistakable
wink. But this time Gabriel failed to see the point.
"The only good blood?" he repeated. "Dost thou then hold with the
Trappists that meat is an evil?"
A strange, startled look flashed across the physician's face, sweeping
off its ruddy hue, and though his smile returned on the instant, it
was as though forced back.
"In a measure," he replied. "Too much flesh generateth humors and
distempers in the blood. Hence Holy [72]Church hath ordained Lent. She is
no friend to us physicians. Adeos!" and he ambled off on his mule,
waving the young horseman a laughing farewell.
But Gabriel, skirting the market, rode up the steep streets troubled
by a vague sense of a mystery, and later repeated the conversation to
a friar at the college.
A week later he heard in the town that Dom Diego de Balthasar had been
arrested by the Inquisition for Judaism. The news brought him a more
complex thrill than that shock of horror at the treacherous
persistence of a pestilent heresy which it excited in the breast of
his fellow-citizens. He recalled to mind now that there were
thirty-four traces by which the bloodhounds of the Holy Office scented
out the secret Jew, and that one of the tests ran: "If he celebrates
the Passover by eating bitter herbs and lettuces." But the shudder
which the thought of the Jew had once caused him was, to his own
surprise, replaced by a secret sympathy. In his slowly-matured,
self-evolved scepticism, he had forgotten that a whole race had
remained Protestant from the first, rejecting at any and every cost
the corner-stone of the Christian scheme. And this race—he remembered
suddenly with a leap of the heart and a strange tingling of the
blood—had once been his own! The knowledge that had lurked in the
background of consciousness, like the exiled memory of an ancient
shame, sprang up, strong and assertive. The far-off shadowy figures of
those base-born ancestors of his who had prayed in the ancient
synagogues in the days before the Great Expulsion, shook off the mists
of a hundred years and stood forth solid, heroic, appealing.
[73]And then recalling the dearth of bitter herbs in the market-place on
what he now understood was the eve of Passover, he had a sudden
intuition of a great secret brotherhood of the synagogue ramifying
beneath all the outward life of Church and State; of a society
honeycombed with Judaism that persisted tenaciously and eternally
though persecution and expulsion, not in stray units, such as the
Inquisition ferreted out, but in ineradicable communities. It was
because the incautious physician had mistaken him for a member of the
brotherhood of Israel that he had ventured upon his now transparent
jests. "Good God!" thought Da Costa, sickening as he remembered the
auto-da-fé he had seen at Lisbon in his boyhood, when De la Asunçao,
the Franciscan Jew monk, clothed in the Sanbenito, was solemnly burnt
in the presence of the king, the queen, the court, and the mob. "What
if 'twas my tale to Frei José that led to Dom Diego's arrest! But no,
that were surely evidence too trivial, and ambiguous at the best." And
he put the painful suspicion aside and hastened to shut himself up in
his study, sending down an excuse to his mother and brother by Pedro,
the black slave-boy.
In the beautiful house on the hilltop, built by Gabriel's grandfather,
and adorned with fine panelings and mosaics of many-colored woods from
the Brazils, this study, secluded by its position at the head of the
noble staircase, was not the least beautiful room. The floor and the
walls were of rich-hued tiles, the arched ceiling was ribbed with
polished woods to look like the scooped-out interior of a half-orange.
Costly hangings muffled the noise of the outer world, and large
shutters excluded, when necessary, the glare of the sun. The rays of
Reason alone could not be shut out, and in this haunt of peace the
young Catholic had known his bitterest hours of unrest. Here he now
[74]cast himself feverishly upon the perusal of the Old Testament,
neglected by him, as by the Church.
"This book, at least, must be true," ran his tumultuous thoughts. "For
this Testament do both creeds revere that wrangle over the later." He
had a Latin text, and first he turned to the fifty-third chapter of
Isaiah, and, reading it critically, he seemed to see that all these
passages of prediction he had taken on trust as prognostications of a
Redeemer might prophesy quite other and more intelligible things. And
long past midnight he read among the Prophets, with flushed cheek and
sparkling eye, as one drunk with new wine. What sublime truths, what
aspirations after peace and justice, what trumpet-calls to
righteousness!
He thrilled to the cry of Amos: "Take thou away from me the noise of
thy songs, for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But let
judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream."
And to the question of Micah: "What doth the Lord require of thee but
to do justly and to love mercy and to walk humbly with thy God?" Ay,
justice and mercy and humbleness—not paternosters and penances. He
was melted to tears, he was exalted to the stars.
He turned to the Pentateuch and to the Laws of Moses, to the tender
ordinances for the poor, the stranger, the beast. "Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself." "Thou shalt be unto me a holy people."
Why had his ancestors cut themselves off from this great people, whose
creed was once so sublime and so simple? There had reached down to him
some vague sense of the nameless tragedies of the Great Expulsion when
these stiff-necked heretics were confronted with the choice of
expatriation or conversion; but now he searched his book-shelves
eagerly for some chronicle of those days of [75]Torquemada. The native
historians had little, but that little filled his imagination with
horrid images of that second Exodus—famine, the plague, robbery,
slaughter, the violation of virgins.
And all on account of the pertinacious ambition of a Portuguese king
to rule Spain through an alliance with a Spanish princess—an ambition
as pertinaciously foiled by the irony of history. No, they were not
without excuse, those ancestors of his who had been left behind
clinging to the Church. Could they have been genuine converts, these
Marranos, or New Christians? he asked himself. Well, whatever his
great-grandfathers had felt, his father's faith had been ardent
enough, of that he could not doubt. He recalled the long years of
ritual; childish memories of paternal pieties. No, the secret
conspiracy had not embraced the Da Costa household. And he would fain
believe that his more distant progenitors, too, had not been
hypocrites; for aught he knew they had gone over to the Church even
before the Expulsion; at any rate he was glad to have no evidence for
an ancestry of deceit. None of the Da Costas had been cowards, thank
Heaven! And he—he was no coward, he told himself.
In the morning, though only a few hours of sleep had intervened, the
enthusiasm of the night had somewhat subsided. "Whence came the
inspiration of Moses?" flew up to his mind almost as soon as he opened
his eyes on the sunlit world. He threw open the protrusive casement of
his bedroom to the balmy air, tinged with a whiff of salt, and gazed
pensively at the white town rambling down towards the shining river.
Had God indeed revealed [76]Himself on Mount Sinai? But this fresh doubt
was banished by the renewed suspicion which, after having disturbed
his dreams in nebulous distortions, sprang up in daylight clearness.
It was his babbling about Dom Diego that had ruined the genial old
physician. After days of gathering uneasiness, being unable to gain
any satisfaction from the friar, he sought the secretary of the
Inquisition in his bureau at a monastery of the Dominicans. The
secretary rubbed his hands at the sight of the speechful face. "Aha!
What new foxes hast thou scented?" The greeting stung like a stab.
"None," he replied, with a tremor in his speech and in his limbs. "I
did but desire to learn if I am to blame for Dom Diego's arrest."
"To blame?" and the secretary looked askance at him. "Say, rather, to
praise."
"Nay, to blame," repeated Gabriel staunchly. "Mayhap I mistook or
misrendered his conversation. 'Tis scant evidence to imprison a man
on. I trust ye have found more."
"Ay, thou didst but set Frei José on the track. We did not even
trouble thee to appear before the Qualifiers."
"And he is, indeed, a Jew!"
"A Hebrew of Hebrews, by his stiff-neckedness. But 'twas not quite
proven; the fox is a cunning beast. Already he hath had the three
'first audiences,' but he will not confess and be made a Penitent.
This morning we try other means."
"Torture?" said Gabriel, paling. The secretary nodded.
"But if he is innocent."
"No fear of that; he will confess at the first twinge. Come, unknit
thy brow. Wouldst make sure thou hast served Heaven? Thou shalt hear
his confession—as a reward for thy zeal."
[77]"He will deem I have come to gloat."
"Here is a mask for thee."
Gabriel took it hesitatingly, repelled, but more strongly fascinated,
and after a feverish half-hour of waiting he found himself with the
secretary, the judge of the Inquisition, the surgeon, and another
masked man in an underground vault faintly lit by hanging lamps. On
one side were the massive doors studded with rusty knobs, of airless
cells; on the rough, spider-webbed wall opposite, against which leaned
an iron ladder, were fixed iron rings at varying heights. A thumbscrew
stood in the corner, and in the centre was a small writing-table, at
which the judge seated himself.
The secretary unlocked a dungeon door, and through the holes of his
mask Gabriel had a glimpse of the despondent figure of the burly
physician crouching in a cell nigh too narrow for turning room.
"Stand forth, Dom Abraham de Balthasar!" said the judge,
ostentatiously referring to a paper.
The physician blinked his eyes at the increased light, but did not
budge.
"My name is Dom Diego," he said.
"Thy baptismal name imports no more to us than to thee. Perchance I
should have said Dom Isaac. Stand forth!"
The physician straightened himself sullenly. "A pretty treatment for a
loyal son of Holy Church who hath served his Most Faithful and
Catholic Sovereign at the University," he grumbled. "Who accuses me of
Judaism? Confront me with the rogue!"
"'Tis against our law," said the secretary.
"Let me hear the specific charges. Read me the counts."
"In the audience-chamber. Anon."
[78]"Confess! confess!" snapped the judge testily.
"To confess needs a sin. I have none but those I have told the priest.
But I know my accuser—'tis Gabriel da Costa, a sober and studious
young senhor with no ear for a jest, who did not understand that I was
rallying the market-woman upon the clearance of her stock by these
stinking heretics. I am no more a Jew than Da Costa himself." But even
as he spoke, Gabriel knew that they were brother-Jews—he and the
prisoner.
"Thou hypocrite!" he cried involuntarily.
"Ha!" said the secretary, his eye beaming triumph.
"This persistent denial will avail thee naught," said the judge,
"'twill only bring thee torture."
"Torture an innocent man! 'Tis monstrous!" the physician protested.
"Any tyro in the logics will tell thee that the onus of proving lies
with the accuser."
"Tush! tush! This is no University. Executioner, do thy work."
The other masked man seized the old physician and stripped him to the
skin.
"Confess!" said the judge warningly.
"If I confessed I was a Jew, I should be doubly a bad Christian,
inasmuch as I should be lying."
"None of thy metaphysical quibbles. If thou expirest under the torture
(let the secretary take note), thy death shall not be laid at the door
of the Holy Office, but of thine own obstinacy."
"Christ will avenge His martyrs," said Dom Diego, with so sublime a
mien that Gabriel doubted whether, after all, instinct had not misled
him.
The judge made an impatient sign, and the masked man tied the victim's
hands and feet together with a thick cord, and winding it around the
breast, placed the hunched, nude figure upon a stool, while he passed
the ends of the [79]cord through two of the iron rings in the wall. Then,
kicking away the stool, he left the victim suspended in air by cords
that cut into his flesh.
"Confess!" said the judge.
But Dom Diego set his teeth. The executioner drew the cords tighter
and tighter, till the blood burst from under his victim's nails, and
ever and anon he let the sharp-staved iron ladder fall against his
naked shins.
"O Sancta Maria!" groaned the physician at length.
"These be but the beginning of thy tortures, an thou confessest not,"
said the judge, "Draw tighter."
"Nay," here interrupted the surgeon. "Another draw and he may expire."
Another tightening, and Gabriel da Costa would have fainted. Deadly
pale beneath his mask, he felt sick and trembling—the cords seemed to
be cutting into his own flesh. His heart was equally hot against the
torturers and the tortured, and he admired the physician's courage
even while he abhorred his cowardice. And while the surgeon was
busying himself to mend the victim for new tortures, Gabriel da Costa
had a shuddering perception of the tragedy of Israel—sublime and
sordid.
It was with equally mingled feelings, complicated by astonishment,
that he learned a week or so later that Dom Diego had been acquitted
of Judaism and set free. Impulse drove him to seek speech with the
sufferer. He crossed the river to the physician's house, but only by
extreme insistence did he procure access to the high vaulted room in
which the old man lay abed, surrounded by huge tomes on pillow and
counterpane, and overbrooded by an image of the Christ.
[80]"Pardon that I have been reluctant to go back without a sight of
thee," said Gabriel. "My anxiety to see how thou farest after thy
mauling by the hell-hounds must be my excuse."
Dom Diego cast upon him a look of surprise and suspicion.
"The hounds may follow a wrong scent; but they are of heaven, not
hell," he said rebukingly. "If I suffered wrongly, 'tis Christian to
suffer, and Christian to forgive."
"Then forgive me," said Gabriel, mazed by this persistent
masquerading, "for 'twas I who innocently made thee suffer. Rather
would I have torn out my tongue than injured a fellow Jew."
"I am no Jew," cried the physician fiercely.
"But why deny it to me when I tell thee I am one?"
"'In vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird,'" quoted Dom
Diego angrily. "Thou art as good a Christian as I,—and a worse
fowler. A Jew, indeed, who knows not of the herbs! Nay, the bird-lime
is smeared too thick, and there is no cord between the holes of the
net."
"True, I am neither Jew nor Christian," said the young man sadly. "I
was bred a Christian, but my soul is torn with questionings. See, I
trust my life in thy hand."
But Dom Diego remained long obdurate, even when Gabriel made the
candid admission that he was the masked man who had cried "Hypocrite!"
in the torture-vault; 'twas not till, limping from the bed, he had
satisfied himself that the young man had posted no auditors without,
that he said at last: "Well, 'tis my word against thine. Mayhap I am
but feigning so as to draw thee out." Then, winking, he took down the
effigy of the Christ and thrust it into a drawer, and filling two
wine-glasses from a decanter that stood at the bedside, he cried
jovially, "Come! Confusion to the Holy Office!"
[81]A great weight seemed lifted off the young man's breast. He smiled as
he quaffed the rich wine.
"Meseems thou hast already wrought confusion to the Holy Office."
"Ha! ha!" laughed the physician, expanding in the glow of the wine.
"Yea, the fox hath escaped from the trap, but not with a whole skin."
"No, alas! How feel thy wounds?"
"I meant not my corporeal skin," said the physician, though he rubbed
it with rueful recollection. "I meant the skin whereof my purse was
made. To prove my loyalty to Holy Church I offered her half my estate,
and the proof was accepted. 'Twas the surgeon of the Inquisition who
gave me the hint. He is one of us!"
"What! a Jew!" cried Gabriel, thunderstruck.
"Hush! hush! or we shall have him replaced by an enemy. 'Twas his
fellow-feeling to me, both as a brother and a medicus, that made him
declare me on the point of death when I was still as lusty as a false
credo. For the rest, I had sufficient science to hold in my breath
while the clown tied me with cords, else had I been too straitened to
breathe. But thou needest a biscuit with thy wine. Ianthe!"
A pretty little girl stepped in from an adjoining room, her dark eyes
drooping shyly at the sight of the stranger.
"Thou seest I have a witness against thee," laughed the physician;
"while the evidence against me which the fools could not find we will
eat up. The remainder of the Motsas, daughterling!" And drawing a
key from under his pillow, he handed it to her. "Soft, now, my little
one, and hide them well."
When the child had gone, the father grumbled, over another glass of
wine, at having to train her to a double life. "But it sharpens the
wits," said he. "Ianthe should [82]grow up subtle as the secret cupboard
within a cupboard which she is now opening. But a woman scarcely needs
the training." He was yet laughing over his jape when Ianthe returned,
and produced from under a napkin some large, thick biscuits,
peculiarly reticulated. Gabriel looked at them curiously.
"Knowest thou not Passover cakes?" asked Dom Diego.
Gabriel shook his head.
"Thou hast never eaten unleavened bread?"
"Unleavened bread! Ah, I was reading thereof in the Pentateuch but
yesterday. Stay, is it not one of the Inquisition's tests? But I
figured it not thus."
"'Tis the immemorial pattern, smuggled in from Amsterdam," said the
wine-flushed physician, throwing caution to the winds. "Taste! 'Tis
more palatable than the Host."
"Is Amsterdam, then, a Jewish town?"
"Nay, but 'tis the Jerusalem of the West. Little Holland, since she
shook off Papistry, hath no persecuting polity like the other nations.
And natural enough, for 'tis more a ship than a country. Half my old
friends have drifted thither—'tis a sad drain for our old Portuguese
community."
Gabriel's bosom throbbed. "Then why not join them?"
The old physician shook his head. "Nay, I love my Portugal. 'Tis here
that I was born, and here will I die. I love her—her mountains, her
rivers, her valleys, her medicinal springs—always love Portugal,
Ianthe—"
"Yes, father," said the little girl gravely.
"And, oh, her poets—her Rubeiro, her Falcão, her Camoëns—my own
grandfather was thought worthy of a place in the 'Cancioneiro Geral';
and I too have made a Portuguese poem on the first aphorism of
Hippocrates, though 'tis yet in manuscript."
[83]"But if thou darest not profess thy faith," said Gabriel, "'tis more
than all the rest. To live a daily lie—intolerable!"
"Hoity-toity! Thou art young and headstrong. The Catholic religion!
'Tis no more than fine manners; as we say in Hebrew, derech eretz,
the way of the country. Why do I wear breeches and a cocked hat—when
I am abroad, videlicet? Why does little Ianthe trip it in a
petticoat?"
"Because I am a girl," said Ianthe.
Dom Diego laughed. "There's the question rhetorical, my little one,
and the question interrogative. However, we'll not puzzle thee with
Quintilian. Run away to thy lute. And so it is, Senhor da Costa. I
love my Judaism more than my Portugal; but while I can keep both my
mistresses at the cost of a little finesse—"
"But the danger of being burnt alive!"
"'Tis like hell to the Christian sinner—dim and distant."
"Thou hast been singed, methinks."
"Like a blasted tree. The lightning will not strike twice. Help
thyself to more wine. Besides, my stomach likes not the Biscay Bay.
God made us for land animals."
But Gabriel was not to be won over to the worthy physician's view, and
only half to the man himself. Yet was not this his last visit, for he
clung to Dom Diego as to the only Jew he knew, and borrowed from him a
Hebrew Bible and a grammar, and began secretly to acquire the sacred
tongue, bringing toys and flowers to the little Ianthe, and once a
costlier lute than her own, in return for her father's help with the
idioms. Also he borrowed some of Dom Diego's own works, issued
anonymously from the printing presses of Amsterdam; and from his new
friend's "Paradise of Earthly Vanity," and other oddly entitled
volumes [84]of controversial theology, the young enthusiast sucked
instruction and confirmation of his doubts. To Dom Diego's Portuguese
fellow-citizens the old gentleman was the author of an erudite essay
on the treatment of phthisis, emphatically denouncing the implicit
reliance on milk.
But Gabriel could not imitate this comfortable self-adjustment to
surroundings. 'Twas but a half fight for the Truth, he felt, and
ceased to cultivate the semi-recreant physician. For as he grew more
and more in love with the Old Testament, with its simple doctrine of a
people, chosen and consecrate, so grew his sense of far-reaching
destinies, of a linked race sprung from the mysterious East and the
dawn of history, defying destruction and surviving persecution,
agonizing for its faith and its unfaith—a conception that touched the
springs of romance and the source of tears—and his vision turned
longingly towards Amsterdam, that city of the saints, the home of the
true faith, of the brotherhood of man, and the fatherhood of God.
"Mother," said Gabriel, "I have something to say to thee." They were
in the half-orange room, and she had looked in to give her good-night
kiss to the lonely student, but his words arrested her at the door.
She sat down and gazed lovingly at her handsome eldest-born, in whom
her dead husband lived as in his prime. "'Twill be of Isabella," she
thought, with a stir in her breast, rejoiced to think that the
brooding eyes of the scholar had opened at last to the beauty and
goodness of the highborn heiress who loved him.
"Mother, I have made a great resolution, and 'tis time to tell thee."
[85]Her eyes grew more radiant.
"My blessed Gabriel!"
"Nay, I fear thou wilt hate me."
"Hate thee!"
"Because I must leave thee."
"'Tis the natural lot of mothers to be left, my Gabriel."
"Ah, but this is most unnatural. Oh, my God! why am I thus tried?"
"What meanest thou? What has happened?" The old woman had risen.
"I must leave Portugal."
"Wherefore? in Heaven's name! Leave Portugal?"
"Hush, or the servants will hear. I would become," he breathed low, "a
Jew!"
Dona da Costa blenched, and stared at him breathless, a strange light
in her eyes, but not that which he had expected.
"'Tis the finger of God!" she whispered, awestruck.
"Mother!" He was thrilled with a wild suspicion.
"Yes, my father was a Jew. I was brought up as a Jewess."
"Hush! hush!" he cautioned her again, and going to the door peered
into the gloom. "But my father?" he asked, shutting the door
carefully.
She shook her head.
"His family, though likewise Marranos, were true believers. It was the
grief of my life that I dared never tell him. Often since his death,
memories from my girlhood have tugged at my heart. But I durst not
influence my children's faith—it would have meant deadly peril to
them. And now—O Heaven!—perchance torture—the stake—!"
"No, mother, I will fly to where faith is free."
"Then I shall lose thee all the same. O God of Israel, Thy vengeance
hath found me at last!" And she fell upon [86]the couch, sobbing,
overwrought. He stood by, helpless, distracted, striving to hush her.
"How did this thing happen to you?" she sobbed.
Briefly he told her of his struggles, of the episode of Dom Diego, of
his conviction that the Old Testament was the true and sufficient
guide to life.
"But why flee?" she asked. "Let us all return to Judaism; thy brother
Vidal is young and malleable, he will follow us. We will be secret;
from my girlhood I know how suspicion may be evaded. We will gradually
change all the servants save Pedro, and have none but blacks. Why
shouldst thou leave this beautiful home of thine, thy friends, thy
station in society, thy chances of a noble match?"
"Mother, thou painest me. What is all else beside our duty to truth,
to reason, to God? I must worship all these under the naked sky."
"My brave boy! forgive me!" And she sprang up to embrace him. "We will
go with thee; we will found a new home at Amsterdam."
"Nay, not at thy years, mother." And he smoothed her silver hair.
"Yea; I, too, have studied the Old Testament." And her eyes smiled
through their tears. "'Wherever thou goest, I will go. Thy country
shall be my country, and thy God my God.'"
He kissed her wet cheek.
Ere they separated in the gray dawn they had threshed out ways and
means; how to realize their property with as little loss and as little
observation as possible, and how secretly to ship for the Netherlands.
The slightest imprudence might betray them to the Holy Office, and so
Vidal was not told till 'twas absolutely essential.
The poor young man grew pale with fright.
[87]"Wouldst drive me to Purgatory?" he asked.
"Nay, Judaism hath no Purgatory." Then seeing the consolation was
somewhat confused, Gabriel added emphatically, to ease the distress of
one he loved dearly, "There is no Purgatory."
Vidal looked more frightened than ever. "But the Church says—" he
began.
"The Church says Purgatory is beneath the earth; but the world being
round, there is no beneath, and, mayhap, men like ourselves do inhabit
our Antipodes. And the Church holds with Aristotle that the heavens be
incorruptible, and contemns Copernicus his theory; yet have I heard
from Dom Diego de Balthasar, who hath the science of the University,
that a young Italian, hight Galileo Galilei, hath just made a wondrous
instrument which magnifies objects thirty-two times, and that
therewith he hath discovered a new star. Also doth he declare the
Milky Way to be but little stars; for the which the Holy Office is
wroth with him, men say."
"But what have I to make with the Milky Way?" whimpered Vidal, his own
face as milk.
Gabriel was somewhat taken aback. "'Tis the infallibility of the Pope
that is shaken," he explained. "But in itself the Christian faith is
more abhorrent to Reason than the Jewish. The things it teaches about
God have more difficulties."
"What difficulties?" quoth Vidal. "I see no difficulties."
But in the end the younger brother, having all Gabriel's
impressionability, and none of his strength to stand alone, consented
to accompany the refugees.
During those surreptitious preparations for flight, Gabriel had to go
about his semi-ecclesiastical duties and take part in Church
ceremonies as heretofore. This so chafed him [88]that he sometimes
thought of proclaiming himself; but though he did not shrink from the
thought of the stake, he shrank from the degradation of imprisonment,
from the public humiliation, foreseeing the horror of him in the faces
of all his old associates. And sometimes, indeed, it flashed upon him
how dear were these friends of his youth, despite reason and religion;
how like a cordial was the laughter in their eyes, the clasp of their
hands, the well-worn jests of college and monastery, market-place and
riding-school! How good it was, this common life, how sweet to sink
into the general stream and be borne along effortless! Even as he
knelt, in conscious hypocrisy, the emotion of all these worshippers
sometimes swayed him in magnetic sympathy, and the crowds of
holiday-makers in the streets, festively garbed, stirred him to
yearning reconciliation. And now that he was to tear himself away, how
dear was each familiar haunt—the woods and waters, the pleasant hills
strewn with grazing cattle! How caressingly the blue sky bent over him,
beseeching him to stay! And the town itself, how he loved its steep
streets, the massive Moorish gates, the palaces, the monasteries, the
whitewashed houses, the old-fashioned ones, quaint and windowless, and
the newer with their protrusive balcony-windows—ay, and the very
flavor of garlic and onion that pervaded everything; how oft he had
sauntered in the Rua das Flores, watching the gold-workers! And as he
moved about the old family home he had a new sense of its intimate
appeal. Every beautiful panel and tile, every gracious curve of the
great staircase, every statue in its niche, had a place, hitherto
unacknowledged, in his heart, and called to him.
But greater than the call of all these was the call of Reason.
With what emotion, as of a pilgrim reaching Palestine, Gabriel found
himself at last in the city where a synagogue stood in the eye of day!
The warmth at his heart annulled whatever of chill stole in at the
grayness of the canaled streets of the northern city after the color
and glow of Porto. His first care as soon as he was settled in the
great, marble-halled house which his mother's old friends and
relatives in the city had purchased on his behalf, was to betake
himself on the Sabbath with his mother and brother to the Portuguese
synagogue. Though his ignorance of his new creed was so great that he
doffed his hat on entering, nor knew how to don the praying-shawl lent
him by the beadle, and was rather disconcerted to find his mother
might not sit at his side, but must be relegated to a gallery behind a
grille, yet his attitude was too emotional to be critical. The
prayer-book interested him keenly, and though he strove to follow the
service, his conscious Hebrew could not at all keep pace with the
congregational speed, and he felt unreasonably shamed at his failures
to rise or bow. Vidal, who had as yet no Hebrew, interested himself in
picking out ancient denizens of Porto and communicating his
discoveries to his brother in a loud whisper, which excited Gabriel's
other neighbor to point out scions of the first Spanish families,
other members of which, at home, were props of Holy Church, bishops,
and even archbishops. A curious figure, this red-bearded,
gross-paunched neighbor, rocking automatically to and fro in his
taleth, but evidently far fainer to gossip than to pray.
[90]Friars and nuns of almost every monastic order were, said he, here
regathered to Judaism. He himself, Isaac Pereira, who sat there safe
and snug, had been a Jesuit in Spain.
"I was sick of the pious make-believe, and itched to escape over here.
But the fools had let me sell indulgences, and I had a goodly stock on
hand, and trade was slack"—here he interrupted himself with a
fervent "Amen!" conceded to the service—"in Spain just then. It's no
use carrying 'em over to the Netherlands, thinks I; they're too clever
over there. I must get rid of 'em in some country free for Jews, and
yet containing Catholics. So what should I do but slip over from
Malaga to Barbary, where I sold off the remainder of my stock to some
Catholics living among the Moors. No sooner had I pocketed
the—Amen!—money than I declared myself a Jew. God of Abraham! The
faces those Gentiles pulled when they found what a bad bargain they
had made with Heaven! They appealed to the Cadi against what they
called the imposition. But"—and here an irrepressible chuckle mingled
with the roar of the praying multitude—"I claimed the privilege of a
free port to sell any description of goods, and the Cadi had to give
his ruling in accordance with the law."
In the exhilaration of his mood this sounded amusing to Gabriel, an
answering of fools according to their folly. But 'twas not long before
it recurred to him to add to his disgust and his disappointment with
his new brethren and his new faith. For after he had submitted
himself, with his brother, to circumcision, replaced his baptismal
name by the Hebrew Uriel, and Vidal's by Joseph, Latinizing at the
same time the family name to Acosta, he found himself confronted by a
host of minute ordinances far more galling than those of the Church.
Eating, drinking, sleeping, [91]dressing, washing, working; not the
simplest action but was dogged and clogged by incredible imperatives.
Astonishment gave place to dismay, and dismay to indignation and
abhorrence, as he realized into what a network of ceremonial he had
entangled himself. The Pentateuch itself, with its complex codex of
six hundred and thirteen precepts, formed, he discovered, but the
barest framework for a parasitic growth insinuating itself with
infinite ramifications into the most intimate recesses of life.
What! Was it for this Rabbinic manufacture that he had exchanged the
stately ceremonial of Catholicism? Had he thrown off mental fetters
but to replace them by bodily?
Was this the Golden Age that he had looked to find—the simple Mosaic
theocracy of reason and righteousness?
And the Jews themselves, were these the Chosen People he had clothed
with such romantic glamour?—fat burghers, clucking comfortably under
the wing of the Protestant States-General; merchants sumptuously
housed, vivifying Dutch trade in the Indies; their forms and dogmas
alone distinguishing them from the heathen Hollanders, whom they aped
even to the very patronage of painters; or, at the other end of this
bastard brotherhood of righteousness, sore-eyed wretches trundling
their flat carts of second-hand goods, or initiating a squalid ghetto
of diamond-cutting and cigar-making in oozy alleys and on the
refuse-laden borders of treeless canals. Oh! he was tricked, trapped,
betrayed!
His wrath gathered daily, finding vent in bitter speeches. If this was
what had become of the Mosaic Law and the Holy People, the sooner a
son of Israel spoke out the better for his race. Was it not an
inspiration from on high that had given him the name of Uriel—"fire
of God"? So, when his private thunders had procured him a [92]summons
before the outraged Rabbinic court, he was in no wise to be awed by
the Chacham and his Rabbis in their solemn robes.
"Pharisees!" he cried, and, despite his lost Christianity, all the
scorn of his early training clung to the word.
"Epicurean!" they retorted, with contempt more withering still.
"Nay, Epicurus have I never read, and what I know of his doctrine by
hearsay revolteth me. I am for God and Reason, and a pure Judaism."
"Even so talked Elisha Ben Abuya in Palestine of old," put in the
second Rabbi more mildly. "He with his Greek culture, who stalked from
Sinai to Olympus, and ended in Atheism."
"I know not of Elisha, but I marvel not that your teaching drove him
to Atheism."
"Said I not 'twas Atheism, not Judaism, thou talkedst? And an Atheist
in our ranks we may not harbor: our community is young in Amsterdam.
'Tis yet on sufferance, and these Dutchmen are easily moved to riot.
We have won our ground with labor. Traitor! wouldst thou cut the
dykes?"
"Traitor thou!" retorted Uriel. "Traitor to God and His holy Law."
"Hold thy peace!" thundered the Chacham, "or the ban shall be laid
upon thee."
"Hold my peace!" answered Uriel scornfully. "Nay, I expatriated myself
for freedom; I shall not hold my peace for the sake of the ban."
Nor did he. At home and abroad he exhausted himself in invective, in
exhortation.
"Be silent, Uriel," begged his aged mother, dreading a breach of the
happiness her soul had found at last in its old spiritual swathings.
"This Judaism thou deridest is the [93]true, the pure Judaism, as I was
taught it in my girlhood. Let me go to my grave in peace."
"Be silent, Uriel," besought his brother Joseph. "If thou dost not
give over, old Manasseh and his cronies will bar me out from those
lucrative speculations in the Indies, wherein also I am investing thy
money for thee. They have already half a hundred privateers, and the
States-General wink at anything that will cripple Spain, so if we can
seize its silver fleet, or capture Portuguese possessions in South
America, we shall reap revenge on our enemies and big dividends. And
he hath a comely daughter, hath Manasseh, and methinks her eye is not
unkindly towards me. Give over, I beg of thee! This religion liketh me
much—no confession, no damnation, and 'tis the faith of our fathers."
"No damnation—ay, but no salvation either. They teach naught of
immortality; their creed is of the earth, earthy."
"Then why didst thou drag me from Portugal?" inquired Joseph angrily.
But Uriel—the fire of God—was not to be quenched; and so, not
without frequent warning, fell the fire of man. In a solemn conclave
in the black-robed synagogue, with awful symbolisms of extinguished
torches, the ban was laid upon Uriel Acosta, and henceforth no man,
woman, or child dared walk or talk with him. The very beggars refused
his alms, the street hawkers spat out as he passed by. His own mother
and brother, now completely under the sway of their new Jewish circle,
removed from the pollution of his presence, leaving him alone in the
great house with the black page. And this house was shunned as though
marked with the cross of the pestilence. The more high-spirited
Jew-boys would throw stones at its windows or rattle its doors, but it
was even keener sport to run after [94]its tenant himself, on the rare
occasions when he appeared in the streets, to spit out like their
elders at the sight of him, to pelt him with mud, and to shout after
him, "Epicurean!" "Bastard!" "Sinner in Israel!"
But although by this isolation the Rabbis had practically cut out the
heretic's tongue—for he knew no Dutch, nor, indeed, ever learned to
hold converse with his Christian neighbors—yet there remained his
pen, and in dread of the attack upon them which rumor declared him to
be inditing behind the shuttered windows of his great lonely house,
they instigated Samuel Da Silva, a physician equally skilled with the
lancet and the quill, to anticipate him by a counterblast calculated
to discredit the thunderer. He denied immortality, insinuated the
horrified Da Silva, in his elegant Portuguese treatise, Tradado da
Immortalide, probably basing his knowledge of Uriel's "bestial and
injurious opinions" on the confused reports of the heretic's brother,
but refraining from mentioning his forbidden name.
"False slanders!" cried Uriel in his reply—completed—since he had
been anticipated—at his leisure; but he only confirmed the popular
conception of his materialistic errors, seeming, indeed, of wavering
mind on the subject of the future life. His thought had marched on:
and whereas it had been his complaint to Joseph that Rabbinism laid no
stress on immortality, further investigation of the Pentateuch had
shown him that Moses himself had taken no account whatsoever of the
conception, nor striven to bolster up the morality of to-day by the
terrors of a posthumous to-morrow.
[95]So Uriel stood self-condemned, and the Rabbis triumphed, superfluously
justified in the eyes of their flock against this blaspheming
materialist. Nay, Uriel should fall into the pit himself had digged.
The elders of the congregation appealed to the magistrates; they
translated with bated breath passages from the baleful book,
Tradiçoens Phariseas conferidos con a Ley escrida. Uriel was
summoned before the tribunal, condemned to pay three hundred guldens,
imprisoned for eight days. The book was burnt.
No less destructive a flame burnt at the prisoner's heart, as,
writhing on his dungeon pallet, biting his lips, digging his nails
into his palms, he cursed these malignant perverters of pure Judaism,
who had shamed him even before the Hollanders. He, the proud and
fearless gentleman of Portugal, had been branded as a criminal by
these fish-blooded Dutchmen. Never would he hold intercourse with his
fellow-creatures again—never, never! Alone with God and his thoughts
he would live and die.
And so for year after year, though he lingered in the city that held
his dear ones, he abode in his cold marble-pillared house, save for
his Moorish servant, having speech with man nor woman. Nor did he ever
emerge, unless at hours when his childish persecutors were abed, so
that in time they turned to fresher sport. But at night he would
sometimes be met wandering by the dark canals, with eyes that kept the
inward look of the sequestered student, seeming to see nothing of the
sombre many-twinkling beauty of starlit waters, or the tender coloring
of mist and haze, but full only of the melancholy of the gray marshes,
and sometimes growing wet with bitter yearning for the sun and the
orange-trees and the warmth of friendly faces. And sometimes in the
cold dawn the early market-people met him riding madly in the
environs, in the silk doublet of a Portuguese grandee, his sword
clanking, and in his [96]hand a silver-mounted pistol, with which he
snapped off the twigs as he flew past. And when his beloved brother
was married to the daughter of Manasseh, the millionaire and the
president of the India Company—which in that wonderful year paid its
shareholders a dividend of seventy-five in the hundred—some of the
wedding-guests averred that they had caught a glimpse of Uriel's dark,
yearning face amid the motley crowd assembled outside the synagogue to
watch the arrival of Joseph Acosta and his beautiful bride; and there
were those who said that Uriel's hands were raised as in blessing. And
once on a moonless midnight, when the venerable Dona Acosta had passed
away, the watchman in the Jews' cemetery, stealing from his turret at
a suspicious noise, turned his lantern upon—no body-snatcher, but—O
more nefarious spectacle!—the sobbing figure of Uriel Acosta across a
new-dug grave, polluting the holy soil of the Beth-Chayim!
And so the seasons and the years wore on, each walling in the lonely
thinker with more solid ice, and making it only the more difficult
ever to break through or to melt his prison walls. Nigh fifteen long
winter years had passed in a solitude tempered by theological thought,
and Uriel, nigh forgotten by his people, had now worked his way even
from the religion of Moses. It was the heart alone that was the seat
of religion; wherefore, no self-styled Revelation that contradicted
Nature could be true. Right Religion was according to Right Reason;
but no religion was reasonable that could set brother against brother.
All ceremonies were opposed to Reason. Goodness was the only true
religion. Such bold conclusions sometimes affrighted [97]himself, being
alone in the world to hold them. "All evils," his note-book summed it
up in his terse Latin, "come from not following Right Reason and the
Law of Nature."
And thinking such thoughts in the dead language that befitted one cut
off from life, to whom Dutch was never aught but the unintelligible
jargon of an unspiritual race, he was leaving his house on a bleak
evening when one clapped him on the shoulder, and turning in amaze, he
was still more mazed to find, for the first time in fifteen years, a
fellow-creature tendering a friendly smile and a friendly hand. He
drew back instinctively, without even recognizing the aged,
white-bearded, yet burly figure.
"What, Senhor Da Costa! thou hast forgotten thy victim?"
With a strange thrill he felt the endless years in Amsterdam slip off
him like the coils of some icy serpent, as he recognized the genial
voice of the Porto physician, and though he was back again in the
dungeon of the Holy Office, it was not the gloom of the vault that he
felt, but sunshine and blue skies and spring and youth. Through the
soft mist of delicious tears he gazed at the kindly furrowed face of
the now hoary-headed physician, and clasped his great warm hand,
holding it tight, forgetting to drop it, as though it were drawing him
back to life and love and fellowship.
The first few words made it clear that Dom Diego had not heard of
Uriel's excommunication. He was new in the city, having been driven
there, pathetically enough, at the extreme end of his life by the
renewed activity of the Holy Office. "I longed to die in Portugal," he
said, with his burly laugh; "but not at the hands of the Inquisition."
Uriel choked back the wild impulse to denounce the crueller
Inquisition of Jewry, from the sudden recollection [98]that Dom Diego
might at once withdraw from him the blessed privilege of human speech.
"Didst make a good voyage?" he asked instead.
"Nay, the billows were in the Catholic League," replied the old man,
making a wry face. "However, the God of Israel neither slumbers nor
sleeps, and I rejoice to have chanced upon thee, were it only to be
guided back to my lodgings amid this water labyrinth."
On the way, Uriel gave what answers he could to the old man's
questionings. His mother was dead; his brother Vidal had married,
though his wife had died some years later in giving birth to a boy,
who was growing up beautiful as a cherub. Yes, he was prospering in
worldly affairs, having long since intrusted them to Joseph—that was
to say, Vidal—who had embarked all the family wealth in a Dutch
enterprise called the West India Company, which ran a fleet of
privateers, to prey upon the treasure-ships in the war with Spain. He
did not say that his own interests were paid to him by formal letter
through a law firm, and that he went in daily fear that his estranged
and pious brother, now a pillar of the synagogue, would one day
religiously appropriate the heretic's property, backed by who knew
what devilish provision of Church or State, leaving him to starve. But
he wondered throughout their walk why Dom Diego, who had such constant
correspondence with Amsterdam, had never heard of his excommunication,
and his bitterness came back as he realized that the ban had extended
to the mention of his name, that he was as one dead, buried, cast down
to oblivion. Even before he had accepted the physician's invitation to
cross his threshold, he had resolved to turn this silence to his own
profit: he, whose inward boast was his stainless honor, had resolved
to act a silent lie. Was it not fair to outwit the rogues with their
own weapon? He had faded [99]from human memory—let it be so. Was he to
be cut off from this sudden joy of friendship with one of his blood
and race, he whose soul was perishing with drought, though, until this
moment, he had been too proud to own it to himself?
But when he entered Dom Diego's lodging and saw the unexpected,
forgotten Ianthe—Ianthe grown from that sweet child to matchless
grace of early womanhood; Ianthe with her dark smiling eyes and her
caressing voice and her gentle movements—then this resolution of
passive silence was exchanged for a determination to fight desperately
against discovery. In the glow of his soul, in the stir of youth and
spring in his veins, in the melting rapture of his mood, that first
sight of a beautiful girl's face bent smilingly to greet her father's
guest had sufficed to set his heart aflame with a new emotion, sweet,
riotous, sacred. What a merry supper-party was that; each dish eaten
with the sauce of joyous memories! How gaily he rallied Ianthe on her
childish ways and sayings! Of course, she remembered him, she said,
and the toys and flowers, and told how comically he had puckered his
brow in argumentation with her father. Yes, he had the same funny
lines still, and once she touched his forehead lightly for an instant
with her slender fingers in facetious demonstration, and he trembled
in painful rapture. And she played on her lute, too, on the lute he
had given her of old, those slender fingers making ravishing music on
the many-stringed instrument, though her pose as she played was more
witching still. What a beautiful glimpse of white shoulders and dainty
lace her straight-cut black bodice permitted!
He left the house drunk, exalted, and as the cold night air smote the
forehead she had touched he was thrilled with fiery energy. He was
young still, thank God, though [100]fifteen years had been eaten out of
his life, and he had thought himself as old and gray as the marshes.
He was young still, he told himself fiercely, defiantly. At home his
note-book lay open, as usual, on his desk, like a friend waiting to
hear what thoughts had come to him in his lonely walk. How far off and
alien seemed this cold confidant now, how irrelevant, and yet, when
his eye glanced curiously at his last recorded sentence, how relevant!
"All evils come from not following Right Reason and the Law of
Nature." How true! How true! He had followed neither Right Reason nor
the Law of Nature.
In the morning, when the cold, pitiless eye of the thinker penetrated
through the sophisms of desire as clearly as his bodily eye saw the
gray in his hair and the premature age in his face, he saw how
impossible it was to keep the secret of his situation from Dom Diego.
Honor forbade it, though this, he did not shrink from admitting to
himself, might have counted little but for the certainty of discovery.
If he went to the physician's abode he could not fail to meet
fellow-Jews there. To some, perhaps, of the younger generation, his
forgotten name would convey no horrid significance; but then, Dom
Diego's cronies would be among the older men. No; he must himself warn
Dom Diego that he was a leper—a pariah. But not—since that might
mean final parting—not without a farewell meeting. He sent Pedro with
a note to the physician's lodgings, begging to be allowed the
privilege of returning his hospitality that same evening; and the
physician accepting for himself and daughter, a charwoman was sent
for, the great cobwebbed house was scrubbed and furbished in the
living [101]chambers, the ancient silver was exhumed from mildewed
cupboards, the heavy oil-paintings were dusted, a lively canary in a
bright cage was hung on a marble pillar of the dining-room, over the
carven angels; flowers were brought in, and at night, in the soft
light of the candles, the traces of year-long neglect being subdued
and hidden, a spirit of festivity and gaiety pervaded the house as of
natural wont, while the Moorish attendant's red knee-breeches,
gold-braided coat, and blue-feathered turban, hitherto so incongruous
in the general grayness, now seemed part of the normal color. And
Uriel, too, grown younger with the house, made a handsome be-ruffed
figure as he sat at the board, exchanging merry sallies with the
physician and Ianthe.
After the meal and the good wine that alone had not had its cobwebs
brushed shamefacedly away, Dom Diego fell conveniently asleep, looking
so worn and old when the light of his lively fancy had died out of his
face, that the speech of Uriel and Ianthe took a tenderer tone for
fear of disturbing him. Presently, too, their hands came together,
and—such was the swift sympathy between these shapely creatures—did
not dispart. And suddenly, kindled to passion by her warm touch and
breathing presence, stabbed with the fear that this was the last time
he would see her, he told her that for the first time in his life he
knew the meaning of love.
"Oh, if thou wouldst but return my love!" he faltered with dry throat.
"But no! that were too much for a man of my years to hope. But whisper
at least, that I am not repugnant to thee."
She was about to reply, when he dropped her hand and stayed her with a
gesture as abrupt as his avowal.
"Nay, answer me not. Not till I have told thee what honor forbids I
should withhold."
[102]And he told the story of his ban and his long loneliness, her face
flashing 'twixt terror and pity.
"Answer me, now," he said, almost sternly. "Couldst thou love such a
man, proscribed by his race, a byword and a mockery, to whom it is a
sin against Heaven even to speak?"
"They would not marry us," she breathed helplessly.
"But couldst thou love me?"
Her eyes drooped as she breathed, "The more for thy sufferings."
But even in the ecstasy of this her acknowledgment, he had a chill
undercurrent of consciousness that she did not understand; that, never
having lived in an unpersecuted Jewish community, she had no real
sense of its own persecuting power. Still, there was no need to remain
in Amsterdam now: they would live together in some lonely spot, in the
religion of Right Reason that he would teach her. So their hands came
together again, and once their lips met. But the father was yet to be
told of their sudden-born, sudden-grown love, and this with
characteristic impulse Uriel did as soon as the old physician awoke.
"God bless my soul!" said Dom Diego, "am I dreaming still?"
His sense of dream increased when Uriel went on to repeat the story of
his excommunication.
"And the ban—is it still in force?" he interrupted.
"It has not been removed," said Uriel sadly.
The burly graybeard sprang to his feet. "And with such a brand upon
thy brow thou didst dare speak to my daughter!"
"Father!" cried Ianthe.
"Father me not! He hath beguiled us here under false pretences. He
hath made us violate the solemn decree of the synagogue. He is
outlawed—he and his house and his [103]food.—Sinner! The viands thou
hast given us, what of them? Is thy meat ritually prepared?"
"Thou, a man of culture, carest for these childish things?"
"Childish things? Wherefore, then, have I left my Portugal?"
"All ceremonies are against Right Reason," said Uriel in low tones,
his face grown deadly white.
"Now I see that thou hast never understood our holy and beautiful
religion. Men of culture, forsooth! Is not our Amsterdam congregation
full of men of culture—grammarians, poets, exegetes, philosophers,
jurists, but flesh and blood, mark you, not diagrams, cut out of
Euclid? Whence the cohesion of our race? Ceremony! What preserves and
unifies its scattered atoms throughout the world? Ceremony! And what
is ceremony? Poetry. 'Tis the tradition handed down from hoary
antiquity; 'tis the color of life."
"'Tis a miserable thraldom," interposed Uriel more feebly.
"Miserable! A happy service. Hast never danced at the Rejoicing of the
Law? Who so joyous as our brethren? Where so cheerful a creed? The
trouble with thee is that thou hast no childish associations with our
glorious religion, thou camest to it in manhood with naught but the
cold eye of Reason."
"But thou dost not accept every invention of Rabbinism. Surely in
Porto thou didst not practise everything."
"I kept what I could. I believe what I can. If I have my private
doubts, why should I set them up to perplex the community withal?
There's a friend of mine in this very city—not to mention names—but
a greater heretic, I ween, than even thou. But doth he shatter the
peace of the vulgar? Nay, not he: he hath a high place in the
[104]synagogue, is a blessing to the Jewry, and confideth his doubts to me
in epistles writ in elegant Latin. Nay, nay, Senhor Da Costa, the
world loves not battering-rams."
And as the old physician spoke, Uriel began dimly to suspect that he
had misconceived human life, taken it too earnestly, and at his heart
was a hollow aching sense of futile sacrifice. And with it a suspicion
that he had mistaken Judaism, too—missed the poetry and humanity
behind the forms, and, as he gazed wistfully at Ianthe's tender
clouded face, he felt the old romantic sense of brotherhood stirring
again. How wonderful to be reabsorbed into his race, fused with
Ianthe!
But Right Reason resurged in relentless ascendency, and he knew that
his thought could never more go back on itself, that he could never
again place faith in any Revelation.
"I will be an ape among apes," he thought bitterly.
And the more he pondered upon this resolution, after Dom Diego had
indignantly shaken off the dust of his threshold, the more he was
confirmed in it. To outwit the Jewry would be the bitterest revenge,
to pay lip-service to its ideals and laugh at it in his sleeve. And
thus, too, he would circumvent its dreaded design to seize upon his
property. Deception? Ay, but the fault was theirs who drove him to it,
leaving him only a leper's life. In the Peninsula they had dissembled
among Christians; he would dissemble among Jews, aping the ancient
apes. He foresaw no difficulty in the recantation. And—famous
idea!—his brother Joseph, poor, dear fool, should bring it about
under the illusion that he was the instrument of Providence: [105]for to
employ Dom Diego as go-between were to risk the scenting of his real
motive. Then, when the Synagogue had taken him to its sanctimonious
arms, Ianthe—overwhelming thought!—would become his wife. He had
little doubt of that; her farewell glance, after her father's back was
turned, was sweet with promises and beseechments, and a brief note
from her early the next morning dissipated his last doubts.
"My poor Senhor Da Costa," she wrote, "I have lain awake all night
thinking of thee. Why ruin thy life for a mere abstraction? Canst thou
not make peace!—Thy friend, Ianthe."
He kissed the note; then, his wits abnormally sharpened, he set to
work to devise how to meet his brother, and even as he was meditating
how to trick him, his heart was full of affection for his little
Vidal. Poor Vidal! How he must have suffered to lose his beautiful
wife!
There were days on which Joseph's business or pleasure took him past
his brother's house, though he always walked on the further side, and
Uriel now set himself to keep watch at his study window from morning
to night, the pair of Dutch mirrors fixed slantingly outside the
window enabling him to see all the street life without being seen.
After three days, his patience was rewarded by the reflected image of
the portly pillar of the synagogue, and with him his little boy of
six. He ran downstairs and into the street and caught up the boy in
his arms—
"Oh, Vidal!" he said, real affection struggling in his voice.
"Thou!" said Joseph, staggering with the shock, and trembling at the
sound of his submerged name. Then, recovering himself, he said
angrily, "Pollute not my Daniel with thy touch."
"He is my nephew. I love him, too! How beautiful [106]he is!" And he
kissed the wondering little fellow. He refused to put him down. He ran
towards his own door. He begged Vidal to give him a word in pity of
his loneliness. Joseph looked fearfully up and down the street. No Jew
was in sight. He slipped hastily through the door. From that moment
Uriel played his portly brother like a chess-piece, which should make
complicated moves and think it made them of its own free will.
Gradually, by secret conversations, daily renewed, Joseph, fired with
enthusiasm and visions of the glory that would redound upon him in the
community—for he was now a candidate for the dignity of
treasurer—won Uriel back to Judaism. And when the faith of the revert
was quite fixed, Joseph made great talk thereof, and interceded with
the Rabbis.
Uriel Acosta was given a document of confession of his errors to sign;
he promised to live henceforward as a true Jew, and the ban was
removed. On the Sabbath he went to the synagogue, and was called up to
read in the Law. The elders came to shake him by the hand; a wave of
emotion traversed the congregation. Uriel, mentally blinking at all
this novel sunshine, had moments of forgetfulness of his sardonic
hypocrisy, thrilled to be in touch with humanity again, and moved by
its forgiving good-will. The half-circle of almond and lemon trees
from Portugal, planted in gaily-painted tubs before the Holy Ark,
swelled his breast with tender, tearful memories of youth and the
sun-lands. And as Ianthe's happy eyes smiled upon him from the
gallery, the words of the Prophet Joel sang in his ears: "And I will
restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten."
It was a glad night when Dom Diego and Ianthe sat again at his table,
religiously victualled this time, and with them his beloved brother
Joseph, not the least happy of the guests in the reconciliation with
Uriel and the near [107]prospect of the treasuryship. What a handsome
creature he was! thought Uriel fondly. How dignified in manners, yet
how sprightly in converse!—no graven lines of suffering on his brow,
no gray in his hair. The old wine gurgled, the old memories glowed.
Joseph was let into the secret of the engagement—which was not to be
published for some months—but was too sure of the part he had played
to suspect he had been played with. He sang the Hebrew grace
jubilantly after the meal, and Ianthe's sweet voice chimed in happily.
Ere the brothers parted, Uriel had extracted a promise that little
Daniel should be lent him for a few days to crown his happiness and
brighten the great lonely house for the coming of the bride.
Uriel Acosta sat at dinner with little Daniel, feasting his eyes on the
fresh beauty of the boy, whose prattle had made the last two days
delightful. Daniel had been greatly exercised to find that his great
big uncle could not talk Dutch, and that he must talk Portuguese—which
was still kept up in families—to be understood. He had hitherto
imagined that grown-up people knew everything. Pedro, his black face
agrin with delight, waited solicitously upon the little fellow.
He changed his meat plate now, and helped him lavishly to tart.
"Cream?" said Uriel, tendering the jug.
"No, no!" cried Daniel, with a look of horror and a violent movement
of repulsion.
Uriel chuckled. "What! Little boys not like cream! We shall find cats
shuddering at milk next." And pouring the contents of the jug lavishly
over his own triangle of tart, he went on with his meal.
[108]But little Daniel was staring at him with awe struck vision,
forgetting to eat.
"Uncle," he cried at last, "thou art not a Jew."
Uriel laughed uneasily. "Little boys should eat and not talk."
"But, Uncle! We may not eat milk after meat."
"Well, well, then, little Rabbi!" And Uriel pushed his plate away and
pinched the child's ear fondly.
But when the child went home he prattled of his uncle's
transgressions, and Joseph hurried down, storming at this misleading
of his boy, and this breach of promise to the synagogue. Uriel
retorted angrily with that native candor of his which made it
impossible for him long to play a part.
"I am but an ape among apes," he said, using his pet private sophism.
"Say rather an ape among lynxes, who will spy thee out," said Joseph,
more hotly. "Thy double-dealing will be discovered, and I shall become
the laughing-stock of the congregation."
It was the beginning of a second quarrel—fiercer, bitterer than the
first. Joseph denounced Uriel privily to Dom Diego, who thundered at
the heretic in his turn.
"I give not my daughter to an ape," he retorted, when Uriel had
expounded himself as usual.
"Ianthe loves the ape; 'tis her concern," Uriel was stung into
rejoining.
"Nay, 'tis my concern. By Heaven, I'll grandsire no gorillas!"
"Methinks in Porto thou wast an ape thyself," cried Uriel, raging.
"Dog!" shrieked the old physician, his venerable countenance
contorted; "dost count it equal to deceive the Christians and thine
own brethren?" And he flung from the house.
[109]Uriel wrote to Ianthe. She replied—
"I asked thee to make thy peace. Thou hast made bitterer war. I cannot
fight against my father and all Israel. Farewell!"
Uriel's face grew grim: the puckers in his brow that her fingers had
touched showed once more as terrible lines of suffering; his teeth
were clenched. The old look of the hunted man came back. He took out
her first note, which he kept nearest his heart, and re-read it
slowly—
"Why ruin thy life for a mere abstraction? Canst thou not make peace?"
A mere abstraction! Ah! Why had that not warned him of the woman's
calibre? Nay, why had he forgotten—and here he had a vivid vision of
a little girl bringing in Passover cakes—her training in a double
life? Not that woman needed that—Dom Diego was right. False, frail
creatures! No sympathy with principles, no recognition of the great
fight he had made. Tears of self-pity started to his eyes. Well, she
had, at least, saved him from cowardly surrender. The old fire flamed
in his veins. He would fight to the death.
And as he tore up her notes, a strange sense of relief mingled with
the bitterness and fierceness of his mood; relief to think that never
again would he be called upon to jabber with the apes, to grasp their
loathly paws, to join in their solemnly absurd posturings, never would
he be tempted from the peace and seclusion of his book-lined study.
The habits of fifteen years tugged him back like ropes of which he had
exhausted the tether.
He seated himself at his desk, and took up his pen to resume his
manuscript. "All evils come from not following Right Reason and the
Law of Nature." He wrote on for hours, pausing from time to time to
select his Latin phrases. Suddenly a hollow sense of the futility of
his [110]words, of Reason, of Nature, of everything, overcame him. What
was this dreadful void at his breast? He leaned his tired, aching head
on his desk and sobbed, as little Daniel had never sobbed yet.
To the congregation at large, ignorant of these inner quarrels, the
backsliding of Uriel was made clear by the swine-flesh which the
Christian butcher now openly delivered at the house. Horrified zealots
remonstrated with him in the streets, and once or twice it came to a
public affray. The outraged elders pressed for a renewal of the ban;
but the Rabbis hesitated, thinking best, perhaps, henceforward to
ignore the thorn in their sides.
It happened that a Spaniard and an Italian came from London to seek
admission into the Jewish fold, Christian sceptics not infrequently
finding peace in the bosom of the older faith. These would-be
converts, hearing the rumors anent Uriel Acosta, bethought themselves
of asking his advice. When the House of Judgment heard that he had
bidden them beware of the intolerable yoke of the Rabbis, its members
felt that this was too much. Uriel Acosta was again excommunicated.
And now began new years of persecution, more grievous, more determined
than ever. Again his house was stoned, his name a byword, his walks
abroad a sport to the little ones of a new generation. And now even
the worst he had feared came to pass. Gradually his brother, who had
refused on various pretexts to liberate his capital, encroached on his
property. Uriel dared not complain to the civil magistrates, by whom
he was already suspect as an Atheist; besides, he still knew no Dutch,
and in [111]worldly matters was as a child. Only his love for his brother
turned to deadly hate, which was scarcely intensified when Joseph led
Ianthe under the marriage canopy.
So seven terrible years passed, and Uriel, the lonely, prematurely
aged, found himself sinking into melancholia. He craved for human
companionship, and the thought that he could find it save among Jews
never occurred to him. And at last he humbled himself, and again
sought forgiveness of the synagogue.
But this time he was not to be readmitted into the fold so lightly.
Imitating the gloomy forms of the Inquisition, from which they had
suffered so much, the elders joined with the Rabbis in devising a
penance, which would brand the memory of the heretic's repentance upon
the minds of his generation.
Uriel consented to the penance, scarcely knowing what they asked of
him. Anything rather than another day of loneliness; so into the great
synagogue, densely filled with men and women, the penitent was led,
clothed in a black mourning garb and holding a black candle. He whose
earliest dread had been to be shamed before men, was made to mount a
raised stage, wherefrom he read a long scroll of recantation,
confessing all his ritual sins and all his intellectual errors, and
promising to live till death as a true Jew. The Chacham, who stood
near the sexton, solemnly intoned from the seventy-eighth Psalm: "But
He, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity and destroyed
them not: yea, many a time turned He his anger away and did not stir
up all his wrath. For He remembered that they were but flesh: a wind
that passeth away and cometh not again."
He whispered to Uriel, who went to a corner of the synagogue, stripped
as far as the girdle, and received with dumb lips thirty-nine lashes
from a scourge. Then, [112]bleeding, he sat on the ground, and heard the
ban solemnly removed. Finally, donning his garments, he stretched
himself across the threshold, and the congregation passed out over his
body, some kicking it in pious loathing, some trampling on it
viciously. The penitent remained rigid, his face pressed to the
ground. Only, when his brother Joseph trampled upon him, he knew by
subtle memories of his tread and breathing who the coward was.
When the last of the congregants had passed over his body, Uriel arose
and went through the pillared portico, speaking no word. The
congregants, standing in groups about the canal-bridge, still
discussing the terrible scene, moved aside, shuddering, silenced, as
like a somnambulist that strange figure went by, the shoulders thrown
back, the head high, in superb pride, the nostrils quivering, but the
face as that of the dead. Never more was he seen of men. Shut up in
his study, he worked feverishly day and night, writing his
autobiography. Exemplar Humanae Vitae—an Ensample of Human Life, he
called it, with tragic pregnancy. Scarcely a word of what the world
calls a man's life—only the dry account of his abstract thought, of
his progress to broader standpoints, to that great discovery—"All
evils come from not following Right Reason and the Law of Nature." And
therewith a virulent denunciation of Judaism and its Rabbis: "They
would crucify Jesus even now if He appeared again." And, garnering the
wisdom of his life-experience, he bade every man love his neighbor,
not because God bids him, but by virtue of being a man. What Judaism,
what Christianity contains of truth belongs not to revealed, but to
natural religion. Love is older than Moses; it binds men together. The
Law of Moses separates them: one brings harmony, the other discord
into human society.
His task was drawing to an end. His long fight with [113]the Rabbis was
ending, too. "My cause is as far superior to theirs as truth is more
excellent than falsehood: for whereas they are advocates for a fraud
that they may make a prey and slaves of men, I contend nobly in the
cause of Truth, and assert the natural rights of mankind, whom it
becomes to live suitably to the dignity of their nature, free from the
burden of superstitions and vain ceremonies."
It was done. He laid down his quill and loaded his pair of
silver-mounted pistols. Then he placed himself at the window as of
yore, to watch in his two mirrors for the passing of his brother
Joseph. He knew his hand would not fail him. The days wore on, but
each sunrise found him at his post, as it was reflected sanguinarily
in those fatal mirrors.
One afternoon Joseph came, but Daniel was with him. And Uriel laid
down his pistol and waited, for he yet loved the boy. And another time
Joseph passed by with Ianthe. And Uriel waited.
But the third time Joseph came alone. Gabriel's heart gave a great
leap of exultation. He turned, took careful aim, and fired. The shot
rang through the startled neighborhood, but Joseph fled in panic,
uninjured, shouting.
Uriel dropped his pistol, half in surprise at his failure, half in
despairing resignation.
"There is no justice," he murmured. How gray the sky was! What a cold,
bleak world!
He went to the door and bolted it. Then he took up the second pistol.
Irrelevantly he noted the "G." graven on it. Gabriel! Gabriel! What
memories his old name brought back! There were tears in his eyes. Why
had he changed to Uriel? Gabriel! Gabriel! Was that his mother's voice
calling him, as she had called him in sunny Portugal, amid the vines
and the olive-trees?
[114]Worn out, world-weary, aged far beyond his years, beaten in the long
fight, despairing of justice on earth and hopeless of any heaven,
Uriel Acosta leaned droopingly against his beloved desk, put the
pistol's cold muzzle to his forehead, pressed the trigger, and fell
dead across the open pages of his Exemplar Humanae Vitae, the thin,
curling smoke lingering a little ere it dissipated, like the futile
spirit of a passing creature—"a wind that passeth away and cometh not
again."
In the year of the world five thousand four hundred and eight, sixteen
hundred and forty-eight years after the coming of Christ, and in the
twenty-third year of his own life on earth, Sabbataï Zevi, men said,
declared himself at Smyrna to his disciples—the long-expected Messiah
of the Jews. They were gathered together in the winter midnight, a
little group of turbaned, long-robed figures, the keen stars
innumerable overhead, the sea stretching sombrely at their feet, and
the swarming Oriental city, a black mystery of roofs, minarets, and
cypresses, dominated by the Acropolis, asleep on the slopes of its
snow-clad hill.
Anxiously they had awaited their Prophet's emergence from his
penitential lustration in the icy harbor, and as he now stood before
them in naked majesty, the water dripping from his black beard and
hair, a perfect manly figure, scarred only by self-inflicted
scourgings, awe and wonder held them breathless with expectation.
Inhaling that strange fragrance of divinity that breathed from his
body, and penetrated by the kingliness of his mien, the passionate yet
spiritual beauty of his dark, dreamy face, they awaited the great
declaration. Some common instinct told [116]them that he would speak
to-night, he, the master of mystic silences.
The Zohar—that inspired book of occult wisdom—had long since
foretold this year as the first of the epoch of regeneration, and ever
since the shrill ram's horn had heralded its birth, the souls of
Sabbataï Zevi's disciples had been tense for the great moment. Surely
it was to announce himself at last that he had summoned them, blessed
partakers in the greatest moment of human and divine history.
What would he say?
Austere, silent, hedged by an inviolable sanctity, he stood long
motionless, realizing, his followers felt, the Cabalistic teaching as
to the Messiah, incarnating the Godhead through the primal Adam, pure,
sinless, at one with himself and elemental Nature. At last he raised
his luminous eyes heavenwards, and said in clear, calm tones one
word—
Yahweh!
He had uttered the dread, forbidden Name of God. For an instant the
turbaned figures stood rigid with awe, their blood cold with an
ineffable terror, then as they became conscious again of the stars
glittering on, the sea plashing unruffled, the earth still solid under
their feet, a great hoarse shout of holy joy flew up to the shining
stars. "Messhiach! Messhiach! The Messiah!"
The Kingdom was come.
The Messianic Era had begun.
How long, O Lord, how long?
That desolate cry of the centuries would be heard no more.
While Israel was dispersed and the world full of sin, the [117]higher and
lower worlds had been parted, and the four letters of God's name had
been dissevered, not to be pronounced in unison. For God Himself had
been made imperfect by the impeding of His moral purpose.
But the Messiah had pronounced the Tetragrammaton, and God and the
Creation were One again. O mystic transport! O ecstatic reunion! The
joyous shouts died into a more beatific silence.
From some near mosque there broke upon the midnight air the solemn
voice of the muëddin chanting the adán—
"God is most great. I testify that there is no God but God. I testify
that Mohammed is God's Prophet."
Sabbataï shivered. Was it the cold air or some indefinable foreboding?
It was the day of Messianic dreams. In the century that was over,
strange figures had appeared of prophets and martyrs and Hebrew
visionaries. From obscurity and the far East came David Reubeni,
journeying to Italy by way of Nubia to obtain firearms to rid
Palestine of the Moslem—a dark-faced dwarf, made a skeleton by fasts,
riding on his white horse up to the Vatican to demand an interview,
and graciously received by Pope Clement. In Portugal—where David
Reubeni, heralded by a silken standard worked with the Ten
Commandments, had been received by the King with an answering
pageantry of banners and processions—a Marrano maiden had visions of
Moses and the angels, undertook to lead her suffering kinsfolk to the
Holy Land, and was burnt by the Inquisition. Diogo Pires—handsome and
brilliant and young, and a Christian by birth—returned to the faith
of his fathers, and, under the name of Solomon Molcho, passed his
brief [118]life in quest of prophetic ecstasies and the pangs of
martyrdom. He sought to convert the Pope to Judaism, and predicting a
great flood at Rome, which came to pass, with destructive earthquakes
at Lisbon, was honored by the Vatican, only to meet a joyful death at
Mantua, where, by order of the Emperor, he was thrown upon the blazing
funeral pyre. And in these restless and terrible times for the Jews,
inward dreams mingled with these outward portents. The Zohar—the
Book of Illumination, composed in the thirteenth century—printed now
for the first time, shed its dazzling rays further and further over
every Ghetto.
The secrets reserved for the days of the Messiah had been revealed in
it: Elijah, all the celestial conclave, angels, spirits, higher souls,
and the Ten Spiritual Substances had united to inspire its composers,
teach them the bi-sexual nature of the World-Principle, and discover
to them the true significance of the Torah (Law), hitherto hidden in
the points and strokes of the Pentateuch, in its vowels and accents,
and even in the potential transmutations of the letters of its words.
Lurya, the great German Egyptian Cabalist, with Vital, the Italian
alchemist, sojourned to the grave of Simon bar Yochai, its fabled
author. Lurya himself, who preferred the silence and loneliness of the
Nile country to the noise of the Talmud-School, who dressed in white
on Sabbath, and wore a fourfold garment to signify the four letters of
the Ineffable Name, and who by permutating these, could draw down
spirits from Heaven, passed as the Messiah of the Race of Joseph,
precursor of the true Messiah of the Race of David. The times were
ripe. "The kingdom of heaven is at hand," cried the Cabalists with one
voice. The Jews had suffered so much and so long. Decimated for not
dying of the Black Death, pillaged and murdered by the Crusaders,
hounded remorselessly from Spain and Portugal, roasted [119]by thousands
at the autos-da-fé of the Inquisition, everywhere branded and
degraded, what wonder if they felt that their cup was full, that
redemption was at hand, that the Lord would save Israel and set His
people in triumph over the heathen! "I believe with a perfect faith
that the Messiah will come, and though His coming be delayed,
nevertheless will I daily expect Him."
So ran their daily creed.
In Turkey what time the Jews bore themselves proudly, rivalling the
Venetians in the shipping trade, and the Grand Viziers in the beauty
of their houses, gardens, and kiosks; when Joseph was Duke of Naxos,
and Solomon Ashkenazi Envoy Extraordinary to Venice; when Tiberias was
turned into a new Jerusalem and planted with mulberry-trees; when
prosperous physicians wrote elegant Latin verses; in those days the
hope of the Messiah was faint and dim. But it flamed up fiercely
enough when their strength and prestige died down with that of the
Empire, and the harem and the Janissaries divided power with the
Prætorians of the Spahis, and the Jews were the first objects of
oppression ready to the hand of the unloosed pashas, and the black
turban marked them off from the Moslem. It was a Rabbi of the Ottoman
Empire who wrote the religious code of "The Ordered Table" to unify
Israel and hasten the coming of the Messiah, and his dicta were
accepted far and wide.
And not only did Israel dream of the near Messiah, the rumor of Him
was abroad among the nations. Men looked again to the mysterious
Orient, the cradle of the Divine. In the far isle of England sober
Puritans were awaiting the Millennium and the Fifth Monarchy of the
Apocalypse—the four "beasts" of the Babylonian, Persian, Greek, and
Roman monarchies having already passed away—and when Manasseh ben
Israel of Amsterdam petitioned Cromwell to [120]readmit the Jews, his plea
was that thereby they might be dispersed through all nations, and the
Biblical prophecies as to the eve of the Messianic age be thus
fulfilled. Verily, the times were ripe for the birth of a Messiah.
He had been strange and solitary from childhood, this saintly son of
the Smyrniote commission agent. He had no playmates, none of the
habits of the child. He would wander about the city's steep bustling
alleys that seemed hewn in a great rock, or through the long,
wooden-roofed bazaars, seeming to heed the fantastically colored
spectacle as little as the garbage under foot, or the trains of
gigantic camels, at the sound of whose approaching bells he would
mechanically flatten himself against the wall. And yet he must have
been seeing, for if he chanced upon anything that suffered—a child, a
lean dog, a cripple, a leper—his eyes filled with tears. At times he
would stand on the brink of the green gulf and gaze seawards long and
yearningly, and sometimes he would lie for hours upon the sudden plain
that stretched lonely behind the dense port.
In the little congested school-room where hundreds of children
clamored Hebrew at once he was equally alone; and when, a brilliant
youth, he headed the lecture-class of the illustrious Talmudist,
Joseph Eskapha, his mental attitude preserved the same aloofness.
Quicker than his fellows he grasped the casuistical hair-splittings in
which the Rabbis too often indulged, but his contempt was as quick as
his comprehension. A note of revolt pierced early through his
class-room replies, and very soon he threw over these barren
subtleties to sink himself—at a tenderer age than tradition knew
of—in the spiritual mysticisms, [121]the poetic fervors, and the
self-martyrdoms of the Cabalistic literature. The transmigrations of
souls, mystic marriages, the summoning of spirits, the creation of the
world by means of attributes, or how the Godhead had concentrated
itself within itself in order to unfold the finite Many from the
infinite One; such were the favorite studies of the brooding youth of
fifteen.
"Learning shall be my life," he said to his father.
"Thy life! But what shall be thy livelihood?" replied Mordecai Zevi.
"Thy elder brothers are both at work."
"So much more need that one of thy family should consecrate himself to
God, to call down a blessing on the work of the others."
Mordecai Zevi shook his head. In his olden days, in the Morea, he had
known the bitterness of poverty. But he was beginning to prosper now,
like so many of his kinsmen, since Sultan Ibrahim had waged war
against the Venetians, and, by imperilling the trade of the Levant,
had driven the Dutch and English merchants to transfer their ledgers
from Constantinople to Smyrna. The English house of which Mordecai had
obtained the agency was waxing rich, and he in its wake, and so he
could afford to have a scholar-son. He made no farther demur, and even
allowed his house to become the seat of learning in which Sabbataï and
nine chosen companions studied the Zohar and the Cabalah from dawn to
darkness. Often they would desert the divan for the wooden
garden-balcony overlooking the oranges and the prune-trees. And the
richer Mordecai grew, the greater grew his veneration for his son, to
whose merits, and not to his own diligence and honesty, he ascribed
his good fortune.
"If the sins of the fathers are visited on the children," he was wont
to say, "then surely the good deeds of the children are repaid to the
fathers." His marked reverence [122]for his wonderful son spread outwards,
and Sabbataï became the object of a wistful worship, of a wild
surmise.
Something of that wild surmise seemed to the father to flash into his
son's own eyes one day when, returned from a great journey to his
English principals, Mordecai Zevi spoke of the Fifth Monarchy men who
foretold the coming of the Messiah and the Restoration of the Jews in
the year 1666.
"Father!" said the boy. "Will not the Messiah be born on the ninth of
Ab?"
"Of a surety," replied Mordecai, with beating heart. "He will be born
on the fatal date of the destruction of both our Temples, in token of
consolation, as it is written; 'and I will cause the captivity of
Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them, as
at the first.'"
The boy relapsed into his wonted silence. But one thought possessed
father and son. Sabbataï had been born on the ninth of Ab—on the
great Black Fast.
The wonder grew when the boy was divorced from his wife—the beautiful
Channah. Obediently marrying—after the custom of the day—the maiden
provided by his father, the young ascetic passionately denied himself
to the passion ripened precociously by the Eastern sun, and the
marvelling Beth-Din (House of Judgment) released the virgin from her
nominal husband. Prayer and self-mortification were the pleasures of
his youth. The enchanting Jewesses of Smyrna, picturesque in baggy
trousers and open-necked vests, had no seduction for him, though no
muslin veil hid their piquant countenances as with the Turkish women,
though no prescription silenced their sweet voices in the psalmody of
the table, as among the sin-fearing congregations of the West. In vain
the maidens stuck roses under their ear or wore honeysuckle in their
hair to denote their willingness to be led under the canopy. But
Mordecai, [123]anxious that he should fulfil the law, according to which
to be celibate is to live in sin, found him a second mate, even more
beautiful; but the youth remained silently callous, and was soon
restored afresh to his solitary state.
"Now shall the Torah (Law) be my only bride," he said.
Blind to the beauty of womanhood, the young, handsome, and now rich
Sabbataï, went his lonely, parsimonious way, and a wondering band
followed him, scarcely disturbing his loneliness by their reverential
companionship. When he entered the sea, morning and night, summer and
winter, all stood far off; by day he would pray at the fountain which
the Christians called Sancta Veneranda, near to the cemetery of the
Jews, and he would stretch himself at night across the graves of the
righteous in a silent agony of appeal, while the jackals barked in the
lonely darkness and the wind soughed in the mountain gorges.
But at times he would speak to his followers of the Divine mysteries
and of the rigorous asceticism by which alone these were to be reached
and men to be regenerated and the Kingdom to be won; and sometimes he
would sing to them Spanish songs in his sweet, troubling
voice—strange Cabalistic verses, composed by himself or Lurya, and
set to sad, haunting melodies yearning with mystic passion. And in
these songs the womanhood he had rejected came back in amorous strains
that recalled the Song of Songs, which is Solomon's, and seemed to his
disciples to veil as deep an allegory:—
And in the eyes of the tranced listeners were tears of worship for
Melisselda as for the Messiah's mystic Bride.
And while the silent Sabbataï said no word of Messiah or mission, no
word save the one word on the seashore, his disciples, first secret,
then bold, spread throughout Smyrna the news of the Messiah's advent.
They were not all young, these first followers of Sabbataï. No one
proclaimed him more ardently than the grave, elderly man of science,
Moses Pinhero. But the sceptics far outnumbered the believers.
Sabbataï was scouted as a madman. The Jewry was torn by dissensions
and disturbances. But Sabbataï took no part in them. He had no
communion with the bulk of his brethren, save in religious ceremonies,
and for these he would go to the poorest houses in the most noisome
courts. It was in a house of one room, the raised part of which,
covered with a strip of carpet, made the bed-and living-room, and the
unraised part the kitchen, that his next manifestation of occult power
was made. The ceremony was the [125]circumcision of the first-born son,
but as the Mohel (surgeon) was about to operate he asked him to stay
his hand awhile. Half an hour passed.
"Why are we waiting?" the guests ventured to ask of him at last.
"Elijah the Prophet has not yet taken his seat," he said.
Presently he made a sign that the proceedings might be resumed. They
stared in reverential awe at the untenanted chair, where only the
inspired vision of Sabbataï could perceive the celestial form of the
ancient Prophet.
But the ancient Talmudical college frowned upon the new Prophet,
particularly when his disciples bruited abroad his declaration on the
sea-shore. He was cited before the Chachamim (Rabbis).
"Thou didst dare pronounce the ineffable Name" cried Joseph Eskapha,
his old Master. "What! Shall thy unconsecrated lips pollute the sacred
letters that even in the time of Israel's glory only the High Priest
might breathe in the Holy of Holies on the Day of Atonement!"
"'Tis a divine mystery known to me alone," said Sabbataï.
But the Rabbis shook their heads and laid the ban upon him and his
disciples. A strange radiance came in Sabbataï's face. He betook
himself to the fountain and prayed.
"I thank Thee, O my Father," he said, "inasmuch as Thou hast revealed
myself to myself. Now I know that my own penances have not been in
vain."
But the excommunication of the Sabbatians did not quiet the commotion
in the Jewish quarter of Smyrna, fed by Millennial dreams from the
West. In England, indeed, a sect of Old Testament Christians had
arisen, working for the adoption of the Mosaic Code as the law of the
State.
[126]From land to land of Christendom, on the feverish lips of eager
believers, passed the rumor of the imminence of the Messiah of the
Jews. According to some he would appear before the Grand Seignior in
June, 1666, take from him his crown by force of music only, and lead
him in chains like a captive. Then for nine months he would disappear,
the Jews meanwhile enduring martyrdom, but he would return, mounted on
a Celestial Lion, with his bridle made of seven-headed serpents,
leading back the lost ten tribes from beyond the river Sambatyon, and
he should be acknowledged for Solomon, King of the Universe, and the
Holy Temple should descend from Heaven already built, that the Jews
might offer sacrifice therein for ever. But these hopes found no
lodgment in the breasts of the Jewish governors of the Smyrniote
quarter, where hard-headed Sephardim were busy in toil and traffic,
working with their hands, or shipping freights of figs or valonea; as
for the Schnorrers, the beggars who lived by other people's wits,
they were even more hard-headed than the workers. Hence constant
excitements and wordy wars, till at last the authorities banished the
already outlawed Sabbataï from Smyrna. When he heard the decree he
said, "Is Israel not in exile?" He took farewell of his brothers and
of his father, now grown decrepit in his body and full of the gout and
other infirmities.
"Thou hast brought me wealth," said old Mordecai, sobbing; "but now I
had rather lose my wealth than thee. Lo, I am on the brink of the
grave, and my saintly son will not close mine eyes, nor know when to
say Kaddish (mourning prayer) over my departed soul."
"Nay, weep not, my father," said Sabbataï. "The souls depart—but they
will return."
He wandered through the Orient, everywhere gaining followers,
everywhere discredited. Constantinople saw him, and Athens,
Thessalonica and Cairo.
For the Jew alone travel was easy in those days. The scatterings of
his race were everywhere. The bond of blood secured welcome: Hebrew
provided a common tongue. The scholar-guest, in especial, was hailed
in flowery Hebrew as a crown sent to decorate the head of his host.
Sumptuously entertained, he was laden with gifts on his departure, the
caravan he was to join found for him, the cost defrayed, and even his
ransom, should he unhappily be taken captive by robbers.
At the Ottoman capital the exile had a mingled reception. In the great
Jewish quarter of Haskeui, with its swarming population of small
traders, he found many adherents and many adversaries. Constantinople
was a nest of free-lances and adventurers. Abraham Yachiny, the
illustrious preacher, an early believer, was inspired to have a tomb
opened in the ancient "house of life." He asked the sceptical Rabbis
to dig up the earth. They found it exceedingly hard to the spade, but,
persevering, presently came upon an earthen pot and therein a
parchment which ran thus: "I, Abraham, was shut up for forty years in
a cave. I wondered that the time of miracles did not arrive. Then a
voice replied to me: 'A son shall be born in the year of the world
5386 and be called Sabbataï. He shall quell the great dragon; he is
the true Messiah, and shall wage war without weapons.'"
Verily without weapons did Sabbataï wage war, almost without words.
Not even the ancient Parchment convinced the scoffers, but Sabbataï
took note of it as little [128]as they. To none did he proclaim himself.
His tall, majestic figure, with its sweeping black beard, was
discerned in the dusk, passionately pleading at the graves of the
pious. He was seen at dawn standing motionless upon his bulging wooden
balcony that gave upon the Golden Horn. When he was not fasting, none
but the plainest food passed his lips. He flagellated himself daily.
Little children took to him, and he showered sweetmeats upon them and
winning smiles of love. When he walked the refuse-laden, deep-rutted
streets, slow and brooding, jostled by porters, asses, dervishes,
sheiks, scribes, fruit-pedlars, shrouded females, and beggars,
something more than the sombreness of his robes marked him out from
the medley of rainbow-colored pedestrians. Turkish beauties peered
through their yashmaks, cross-legged craftsmen smoking their narghiles
raised their heads as he passed through the arched aisles of the Great
Bazaar. Once he wandered into the slave-market, where fair Circassians
and Georgians were being stripped to furnish the Kiosks of the
Bosphorus, and he grew hot-eyed for the corrupt chaos of life in the
capital, with its gorgeous pachas and loathly cripples, its countless
mosques and brothels, its cruel cadis and foolish dancing dervishes.
And when an angry Mussulman, belaboring his ass, called it "Jew!" his
heart burnt with righteous anger. Verily, only Israel had chosen
Righteousness—one little nation, the remnant that would save the
world, and bring about the Kingdom of God. But alas! Israel herself
was yet full of sin, hard and unbelieving.
"Woe! woe!" he cried aloud to his brethren as he entered the Jewish
quarter. "Your sins shall be visited upon you. For know that when God
created the world, it was not from necessity but from pure love, and
to be recognized by men as their Creator and Master. But ye return Him
not love for love. Woe! woe! There shall [129]come a fire upon
Constantinople and a great burning upon your habitations and
substance."
Then his breast swelled with sobs; in a strange ecstasy his spirit
seemed to soar from his body, and hover lovingly over all the motley
multitude. All that night his followers heard him praying aloud with
passionate tears, and singing the Psalms of David in his sweet
melancholy voice as he strode irregularly up and down the room.
At Constantinople a messenger brought him a letter of homage from
Damascus from his foremost disciple, Nathan of Gaza.
Nathan was a youthful enthusiast, son of a Jerusalem begging-agent,
and newly married to the beautiful, but one-eyed daughter of a rich
Portuguese, who had migrated from Damascus to Gaza. Opulent and
zealous, he devoted himself henceforth to preaching the Messiah,
living and dying his apostle and prophet—no other in short than the
Elijah who was to be the Messiah's harbinger. Nor did he fail to work
miracles in proof of his mission. Merely on reading a man's name, he
would recount his life, defaults and sins, and impose just correction
and penance. Evil-doers shunned his eye. More readily than on Sabbataï
men believed on him, inasmuch as he claimed but the second place, and
an impostor, said they, would have claimed the first. Couched in the
tropes and metaphors of Rabbinical Hebrew, Nathan's letter ran thus:—
"22ND CHESVAN OF THIS YEAR.
"To the King, our King, Lord of our Lords, who gathers the Dispersed
of Israel, who redeems our Captivity, the Man elevated to the Height
of all sublimity, the Messiah [130]of the God of Jacob, the true Messiah,
the Celestial Lion, Sabbataï Zevi, whose honor be exalted and his
dominion raised in a short time, and for ever, Amen. After having
kissed thy hands and swept the dust from thy feet, as my duty is to
the King of Kings, whose Majesty be exalted and His Empire enlarged.
These are to make known to the Supreme Excellency of that Place, which
is adorned with the beauty of thy Sanctity, that the Word of the King
and of His Law hath enlightened our Faces; that day hath been a solemn
day unto Israel and a day of light unto our Rulers, for immediately we
applied ourselves to perform thy Commands as our duty is. And though
we have heard of many strange things, yet we are courageous, and our
heart is as the heart of a Lion; nor ought we to inquire or reason of
thy doings; for thy works are marvellous and past finding out. And we
are confirmed in our Fidelity without all exception, resigning up our
very souls for the Holiness of thy Name. And now we are come as far as
Damascus, intending shortly to proceed in our journey to Scanderone,
according as thou hast commanded us: that so we may ascend and see the
face of God in light, as the light of the face of the King of life.
And we, servants of thy servants, shall cleanse the dust from thy
feet, beseeching the majesty of thine excellency and glory to
vouchsafe from thy habitation to have a care of us, and help us with
the Force of thy Right Hand of Strength, and shorten our way which is
before us. And we have our eyes towards Jah, Jah, who will make haste
to help us and to save us, that the Children of Iniquity shall not
hurt us; and towards whom our hearts pant and are consumed within us:
who shall give us Talons of Iron to be worthy to stand under the
shadow of thine ass. These are the words of thy Servant of Servants,
who prostrates himself to be trod on by the soles of thy
feet.—Nathan Benjamin."
But it was at Thessalonica—now known as Salonica—that Sabbataï
gained the greatest following. For Thessalonica was the chief
stronghold of the Cabalah; and though the triangular battlemented
town, sloping down the mountain to the gulf, was in the hands of the
Turks, who had built four fortresses and set up twelve little cannons
against the Corsairs, yet Jews were largely in the ascendant, and
their thirty synagogues dominated the mosques of their masters and the
churches of the Greeks, even as the crowns they received for supplying
the cloths of the Janissaries far exceeded their annual tribute.
Castilians, Portuguese, Italians, they were further recruited by an
influx of students from all parts of the Empire, for here were two
great colleges teaching more than ten thousand scholars. In this
atmosphere of pious warmth Sabbataï found consolation for the apathy
of Constantinople. Not only men were of his devotees now, but women,
and maidens, in all their Eastern fervor, raising their face-veils and
putting off their shrouding izars as they sat at his feet. Virgins,
untaught to love or to dissemble, lifted adoring eyes. But Sabbataï's
vision was still inwards and heavenwards; and one day he made a great
feast, and invited all his friends to his wedding in the chief
synagogue. They came with dancing and music and lighted torches, but
racked by curiosity, full of guesses as to the bride. Through the
close lattice-work of the ladies' balcony peered a thousand eager
eyes. When the moment came, Sabbataï, in festal garments, took his
stand under the canopy. But no visible bride stood beside him. Moses
Pinhero reverently drew a Scroll of the Law from the ark, vested in
purple and gold broideries, and hung with golden chains and a
breastplate [132]and bells that made sweet music, and he bore it beneath
the canopy, and Sabbataï, placing a golden ring on a silver peak of
the Scroll, said solemnly:
"I betroth thee unto me according to the Law of Moses and Israel."
A buzz of astonishment swelled through the synagogue, blent with
heavier murmurs of protest from shocked pietists. But the more poetic
Cabalists understood. They explained that it was the union of the
Torah, the Daughter of Heaven, with the Messiah, the Son of Heaven,
who was never to mate with a mortal.
But a Chacham (Rabbi), unappeased, raised a loud plaint of
blasphemy.
"Nay, the blasphemy is thine," replied the Bridegroom of the law
quietly. "Say not your prophets that the Truth should be the spouse of
those who love the Truth?"
But the orthodox faction prevailed, and he was driven from the city.
He went to the Morea, to his father's relatives; he wandered to and
fro, and the years slipped by. Worn by fasts and penances, living in
inward dreams of righteousness and regeneration, he grew towards
middle age, and always on his sweet scholarly face an air of patient
waiting through the slow years. And his train of disciples grew and
changed; some died, some wearied of the long expectation. But Samuel
Primo, of Jerusalem, became his devoted secretary, and Abraham Rubio
was also ever at his side, a droll, impudent beggar, professing
unlimited faith in the Messiah, and feasting with unbounded appetite
on the good things sent by the worshippers, and put aside by the
persistent ascetic.
"Tis fortunate I shall be with thee when thou carvest the Leviathan,"
he said once. "Else would the heathen princesses who shall wait upon
us come in for thy pickings."
[133]"In those days of the Kingdom there shall be no more need for
abnegation," said Sabbataï. "As it is written, 'And thy fast-days
shall become feast-days.'"
"Nay, then, thy feast-days shall become my fast-days," retorted Rubio.
Sabbataï smiled. The beggar was the only man who could make him smile.
But he smiled—a grim, bitter smile—when he heard that the great fire
he had predicted had devastated Constantinople, and wrought fierce
mischief in the Jewish quarter.
"The fire will purify their hearts," he said.
Nathan the Prophet did not fail to enlarge upon the miraculous
prediction of his Master, and through all the lands of the Exile a
tremor ran.
It reached that hospitable table in Cairo where each noon half a
hundred learned Cabalists dined at the palace of the Saraph-Bashi, the
Jewish Master of the Mint, himself given to penances and visions, and
swathed in sackcloth below the purple robes with which he drove abroad
in his chariot of state.
"He who is sent thee," wrote Nathan to Raphael Joseph Chelebi, this
pious and open-handed Prince in Israel, "is the first man in the
world—I may say no more. Honor him, then, and thou shalt have thy
reward in his lifetime, wherein thou wilt witness miracles beyond
belief. Whatever thou shouldst see, be not astonied. It is a divine
mystery. When the time shall come I will give up all to serve him.
Would it were granted me to follow him now!"
Chelebi was prepared to follow Sabbataï forthwith; he went to meet
Sabbataï's vessel, and escorted him to his [134]palace with great honor.
But Sabbataï would not lodge therein.
"The time is not yet," he said, and sought shelter with a humble
vendor of holy books, whose stall stood among the money-changers'
booths, that led to the chief synagogue, and his followers distributed
themselves among the quaint high houses of the Jewry, and walked
prophetic in its winding alleys, amid the fantastic chaos of buyers
and sellers and donkeys, under the radiant blue strip of Egyptian sky.
Only at mid-day did they repair to the table of the Saraph-Bashi.
"Hadst any perils at sea?" asked the host on the first day. "Men say
the Barbary Corsairs are astir again."
Sabbataï remained silent, but Samuel Primo, his secretary, took up the
reply.
"Perils!" quoth he. "My Master will not speak of them, but the Captain
will tell thee a tale. We never thought to pass Rhodes!"
"Ay," chimed in Abraham Rubio, "we were pursued all night by two
pirates, one on either side of us like beggars."
"And the Captain," said Isaac Silvera, "despairing of escape, planned
to take to the boats with his crew, leaving the passengers to their
fate."
"But he did not?" quoth a breathless Cabalist.
"Alas, no," said Abraham Rubio, with a comical grimace. "Would he had
done so! For then we should have owned a goodly vessel, and the Master
would have saved us all the same."
"But righteousness must needs be rewarded," protested Samuel Primo.
"And inasmuch as the Captain wished to save the Master in the boats—"
"The Master was reading," put in Solomon Lagnado. "The Captain cries
out, 'The Corsairs are upon us!' 'Where?' says the Master. 'There!'
says the Captain. [135]The Master stretches out his hands, one towards
each vessel, and raises his eyes to heaven, and in a moment the ships
tack and sail away on the high sea."
Sabbataï sat eating his meagre meal in silence.
But when the rumor of his miracle spread, the sick and the crippled
hastened to him, and, protesting he could do naught, he laid his hands
on them, and many declared themselves healed. Also he touched the lids
of the sore-eyed and they said his fingers were as ointment. But
Sabbataï said nothing, made no pretensions, walking ever the path of
piety with meek and humble tread. Howbeit he could not linger in
Egypt. The Millennial Year was drawing nigh—the mystic 1666.
Sabbataï Zevi girded up his loins, and, regardless of the rumors of
Arab robbers, nay, wearing his phylacteries on his forehead as though
to mark himself out as a Jew, and therefore rich, joined a caravan for
Jerusalem, by way of Damascus.
O the ecstasy with which he prostrated himself to kiss for the first
time the soil of the sacred city! Tears rolled from his eyes, half of
rapture, half of passionate sorrow for the lost glories of Zion, given
over to the Moslem, its gates guarded by Turkish sentries, and even
the beauty of his first view of it—domes, towers, and bastions bathed
in morning sunlight—fading away in the squalor of its steep alleys.
Nathan the Prophet had apprised the Jews of the coming of their King,
and the believers welcomed him with every mark of homage, even
substituting Sabbataï Zevi for Sultan Mehemet in the Sabbath prayer
for the Sovereign, and at the Wailing Place the despairing sobs of the
Sons of the Law were tempered by a great hope.
[136]Poor, squeezed to famishing point by the Turkish officials, deprived
of their wonted subsidies from the pious Jews of Poland, who were
decimated by Cossack massacres, they had had their long expectation of
the Messiah intensified by the report which Baruch Gad had brought
back to them from Persia—how the Sons of Moses, living beyond the
river Sambatyon (that ceased to run on the Sabbath), were but
awaiting, amid daily miracles, the word of the Messiah to march back
to Jerusalem. The lost Ten Tribes would reassemble: at the blast of
the celestial horn the dispersed of Israel would be gathered together
from the four corners of the Earth. But Sabbataï deprecated the
homage; of Redemption he spake no word.
And verily his coming seemed to bode destruction rather than
salvation. For a greedy Pacha, getting wind of the disloyalty of the
synagogue to the Sultan, made it a pretext for an impossible fine.
The wretched community was dashed back to despair. Already reduced to
starvation, whence were they to raise this mighty sum? But,
recovering, all hearts turned at once to the strange sorrowful figure
that went humbly to and fro among them.
"Money?" said he. "Whence should I take so much money?"
"But thou art Messiah?"
"I Messiah?" He looked at them wistfully.
"Forgive us—we know the hour of thy revelation hath not yet struck.
But wilt thou not save us by thy human might?"
"How so?"
"Go for us, we pray thee, on a mission to the friendly Saraph-Bashi of
Cairo. His wealth alone can ransom us."
"All that man can do I will do," said Sabbataï.
[137]"May thy strength increase!" came the grateful ejaculation, and
white-bearded sages stooped to kiss the hem of his garment.
So Sabbataï journeyed back to Cairo by caravan through the desert,
preceded, men said, by a pillar of fire, and accompanied when he
travelled at night by myriads of armed men that disappeared in the
morning, and wheresoever he passed all the Jewish inhabitants flocked
to gaze upon him. In Hebron they kept watch all night around his
house.
unsipped. "But he who dispenses with woman lives in sin. It is the
duty of man to beget posterity, to [302]found a home; for what is
civilization but home, and what is home but religion?" The wanderer's
tones were earnest; he forgot his own sins of omission in the lucidity
with which his intellect saw the right thing.
"Ah, you are one of the canting ones," said the Schnorrer. "It
strikes me you and I could do something better together than quarrel.
What say you to a partnership?"
"In begging?"
"What else have I to offer? You are new to the country—you don't know
the roads—you haven't got any money."
"Pardon me! I have a thaler left."
"No, you haven't—you pay that to me for the partnership."
The metaphysical Maimon was tickled. "But what do I gain for my
thaler?"
"My experience."
"But if so, you gain nothing from my partnership."
"A thaler to begin with. Then, you see, your learning and morality
will draw when I am at a loss for quotations. In small villages we go
together and produce an impression of widespread misery: we speak of
the destruction of our town by fire, of persecution, what you will.
One beggar might be a liar: two together are martyrs."
"Then you beg only in villages?"
"Oh no. But in towns we divide. You do one half, I do another. Then we
exchange halves, armed with the knowledge of who are the beneficent in
either half. It is less fatiguing."
"Then the beneficent have to give twice over."
"They have double merit. Charity breeds charity."
"This is a rare fellow," thought Maimon. "How Lapidoth would delight
in him! And he speaks truth. I [303]know nothing of the country. If I
travel a little with him I may learn much. And he, too, may learn from
me. He has a good headpiece, and I may be able to instil into him more
seemly notions of duty and virtue. Besides, what else can I do?" So,
spinning his thaler in air, "Done!" he cried.
The beggar caught it neatly. "Herr Landlord," said he, "another glass
of your excellent whisky!" And, raising it to his lips when it came,
"Brother, here's to our partnership."
"What, none for me?" cried Maimon, crestfallen.
"Not till you had begged for it," chuckled the Schnorrer. "You have
had your first lesson. Herr Landlord, yet another glass of your
excellent whisky!"
And so the philosopher, whose brain was always twisting and turning
the universe and taking it to pieces, started wandering about Germany
with the beggar whose thoughts were bounded by his paunch. They
exploited but a small area, and with smaller success than either had
anticipated. Though now and then they were flush, there was never a
regular meal; and too often they had to make shift with mouldly bread
and water, and to lie on stale straw, and even on the bare earth.
"You don't curse enough," the beggar often protested.
"But why should one curse a man who refuses one's request?" the
philosopher would persist. "Besides, he is embittered thereby, and
only the more likely to refuse."
"Cork your philosophy, curse you!" the beggar would cry. "How often am
I to explain to you that cursing terrifies people."
"Not at all," Maimon would mutter, terrified.
"No? What is Religion, but Fear?"
"False religion, if you will. But true religion, as [304]Maimonides says,
is the attainment of perfection through the knowledge of God and the
imitation of His actions."
Nevertheless, when they begged together, Maimon produced an
inarticulate whine that would do either for a plea or a curse. When he
begged alone, all the glib formulæ he had learnt from the Schnorrer
dried up on his tongue. But his silence pleaded more pitifully than
his speech. For he was barefooted and almost naked. Yet amid all these
untoward conditions his mind kept up its interminable twisting and
turning of the universe; that acute analysis for which centuries of
over-subtlety had prepared the Polish Jew's brain, and which was now
for the first time applied scientifically to the actual world instead
of fantastically to the Bible. And it was perhaps when he was lying on
the bare earth that the riddle of existence—twinkling so defiantly in
the stars—tortured him most keenly.
Thus passed half a year. Maimon had not learnt to beg, nor had the
beggar acquired the rudiments of morality. How often the philosopher
longed for his old friend Lapidoth—the grave-digger's son-in-law—to
talk things over with, instead of this carnal vagabond. They had been
poverty-stricken enough, those two, but oh! how differently they had
taken the position. He remembered how merrily Lapidoth had pinned his
dropped-off sleeve to the back of his coat, crying, "Don't I look like
a Schlachziz (nobleman)?" and how he in return had vaunted the
superiority of his gaping shoes: "They don't squeeze at the toes." How
they had played the cynic, he and the grave-digger's son-in-law,
turning up with remorseless spade the hollow bones of human virtue! As
convincedly as synagogue-elders sought during fatal epidemics for the
secret sins of the congregation, so had they two striven to uncover
the secret sinfulness of self-deceived righteousness.
[305]"Bad self-analysis is the foundation of contentment," Lapidoth had
summed it up one day, as they lounged on the town-wall.
To which Maimon: "Then, friend, why are we so content to censure
others? Let us be fair and pass judgment on ourselves. But the
contemplative life we lead is merely the result of indolence, which we
gloss over by reflections on the vanity of all things. We are content
with our rags. Why? Because we are too lazy to earn better. We
reproach the unscholarly as futile people addicted to the pleasures of
sense. Why? Because, not being constituted like you and me, they live
differently. Where is our superiority, when we merely follow our
inclination as they follow theirs? Only in the fact that we confess
this truth to ourselves, while they profess to act, not to satisfy
their particular desires, but for the general utility."
"Friend," Lapidoth had replied, deeply moved, "you are perfectly
right. If we cannot now mend our faults, we will not deceive ourselves
about them, but at least keep the way open for amendment."
So they had encouraged each other to clearer vision and nobler living.
And from such companionship to have fallen to a Schnorrer's! Oh, it
was unendurable.
But he endured it till harvest-time came round, bringing with it the
sacred season of New Year and Atonement, and the long chilly nights.
And then he began to feel tremors of religion and cold.
As they crouched together in outhouses, the beggar snoozing placidly
in a stout blouse, the philosopher shivering in tatters, Maimon saw
his degradation more lucidly than ever. They had now turned their
steps towards Poland, every day bringing Maimon nearer to the
redeeming influence of early memories, and it was when sleeping in the
Jewish poorhouse at Posen—the master of which [306]eked out his
livelihood honorably as a jobbing tailor—that Maimon at length found
strength to resolve on a breach. He would throw himself before the
synagogue door, and either die there or be relieved. When his
companion awoke and began to plan out the day's campaign, "No, I
dissolve the partnership," said he firmly.
"But how are you going to live, you good-for-nothing?" asked his
astonished comrade, "you who cannot even beg."
"God will help," Maimon said stolidly.
"God help you!" said the beggar.
Maimon went off to the school-room. The master was away, and a noisy
rabble of boys ceased their games or their studies to question the
tatterdemalion, and to make fun of his Lithuanian accent—his s's
for sh's. Nothing abashed, the philosopher made inquiries after an
old friend of his who, he fortunately recollected, had gone to Posen
as the Chief Rabbi's secretary. The news that the Chief Rabbi had
proceeded to another appointment, taking with him his secretary,
reduced him to despair. A gleam of hope broke when he learnt that the
secretary's boy had been left behind in Posen with Dr. Hirsch Janow,
the new Chief Rabbi.
And in the event this boy brought salvation. He informed Dr. Hirsch
Janow that a great scholar and a pious man was accidentally fallen
into miserable straits; and lo! in a trice the good-hearted man had
sent for Maimon, sounded his scholarship and found it plumbless,
approved of his desire to celebrate the sacred festivals in Posen,
given him all the money in his pockets—the indurated beggar accepted
it without a blush—invited him to dine with him every Sabbath, and
sent the boy with him to procure him "a respectable lodging."
As he left the house that afternoon, Maimon could not help overhearing
the high-pitched reproaches of the Rabbitzin (Rabbi's wife).
[307]"There! You've again wasted my housekeeping money on scum and
riff-raff. We shall never get clear of debt."
"Hush! hush!" said the Rabbi gently. "If he hears you, you will wound
the feelings of a great scholar. The money was given to me to
distribute."
"That story has a beard," snapped the Rabbitzin.
"He is a great saint," the boy told Maimon on the way. "He fasts every
day of the week till nightfall, and eats no meat save on Sabbath. His
salary is small, but everybody loves him far and wide; he is named
'the keen scholar.'" Maimon agreed with the general verdict. The
gentle emaciated saint had touched old springs of religious feeling,
and brought tears of more than gratitude to his eyes.
His soul for a moment felt the appeal of that inner world created by
Israel's heart, that beautiful world of tenderest love and sternest
law, wherein The-Holy-One-Blessed-Be-He (who has chosen Israel to
preach holiness among the peoples), mystically enswathed with
praying-shawl and phylacteries, prays to Himself, "May it be My will
that My pity overcome My wrath."
And what was his surprise at finding himself installed, not in some
mean garret, but in the study of one of the leading Jews of the town.
The climax was reached when he handed some coppers to the housewife,
and asked her to get him some gruel for supper.
"Nay, nay," said the housewife, smiling. "The Chief Rabbi has not
recommended us to sell you gruel. My husband and my son are both
scholars, and so long as you choose to tarry at Posen they will be
delighted if you will honor our table."
Maimon could scarcely believe his ears; but the evidence of a
sumptuous supper was irrefusable. And after that he was conducted to a
clean bed! O the luxurious ache of stretching one's broken limbs on
melting feathers! the [308]nestling ecstasy of dainty-smelling sheets
after half a year of outhouses!
It was the supreme felicity of his life. To wallow in such a wave of
happiness had never been his before, was never to be his again.
Shallow pates might prate, he told himself, but what pleasure of the
intellect could ever equal that of the senses? Could it possibly
pleasure him as much even to fulfil his early Maimonidean ideal—the
attainment of Perfection? Perpending which problem, the philosopher
fell deliciously asleep.
Late, very late, the next morning he dragged himself from his snug
cocoon, and called, in response to a summons, upon his benefactor.
"Well, and how do you like your lodging?" said the gentle Rabbi.
Maimon burst into tears. "I have slept in a bed!" he sobbed, "I have
slept in a bed!"
Two days later, clad—out of the Rabbitzin's housekeeping money—in
full rabbinical vestments, with clean linen beneath, the metamorphosed
Maimon, cheerful of countenance, and godly of mien, presented himself
at the poorhouse, where the tailor and his wife, as well as his whilom
mate—all of them acquainted with his good fortune—expected him with
impatience. The sight of him transported them. The poor mother took
her babe in her arms, and with tears in her eyes begged the Rabbi's
blessings; the beggar besought his forgiveness for his rough
treatment, and asked for an alms.
Maimon gave the little one his blessing, and the Schnorrer all he
had in his pocket, and went back deeply affected.
Meantime his fame had spread: all the scholars of the town came to see
and chop theology with this illustrious travelling Rabbi. He became a
tutor in a wealthy family: his learning was accounted superhuman, and
he himself [309]almost divine. A doubt he expressed as to the healthiness
of a consumptive-looking child brought him at her death the honors of
a prophet. Disavowal was useless: a new prophet had arisen in Israel.
And so two happy years passed—honorably enough, unless the
philosopher's forgetfulness of his family be counted against him. But
little by little his restless brain and body began to weary of these
superstitious surroundings.
It began to leak out that he was a heretic: his rare appearances in
the synagogue were noted; daring sayings of his were darkly whispered;
Persecution looked to its weapons.
Maimon's recklessness was whetted in its turn. At the entrance to the
Common Hall in Posen there had been, from time immemorial, a stag-horn
fixed into the wall, and an equally immemorial belief among the Jews
that whoso touched it died on the spot. A score of stories in proof
were hurled at the scoffing Maimon. And so, passing the stag-horn one
day, he cried to his companions: "You Posen fools, do you think that
any one who touches this horn dies on the spot? See, I dare to touch
it."
Their eyes, dilating with horror, followed his sacrilegious hand. They
awaited the thud of his body. Maimon walked on, smiling.
What had he proved to them? Only that he was a hateful heretic, a
profaner of sanctuaries.
The wounded fanaticism that now shadowed him with its hatred provoked
him to answering excesses. The remnant of religion that clung, despite
himself, to his soul, irritated him. Would not further culture rid him
of the incubus? His dream of Berlin revived. True, bigotry barked
there too, but culture went on its serene course. The fame and
influence of Mendelssohn had grown steadily, and it was now at its
apogee, for Lessing had written Nathan Der [310]Weise, and in the
tempest that followed its production, and despite the ban placed on
the play and its author in both Catholic and Protestant countries, the
most fanatical Christian foes of the bold freelance could not cry that
the character was impossible.
For there—in the very metropolis—lived the Sage himself, the David
to the dramatist's Jonathan, the member of the Coffee-House of the
Learned, the friend of Prince Lippe-Schaumberg, the King's own
Protected Jew, in every line of whose countenance Lavater kept
insisting the unprejudiced phrenologist might read the soul of
Socrates.
And he, Maimon, no less blessed with genius, what had he been doing,
to slumber so long on these soft beds of superstition and barbarism,
deaf to that early call of Truth, that youthful dream of Knowledge?
Yes, he would go back to Berlin, he would shake off the clinging mists
of the Ghetto, he would be the pioneer of his people's emancipation.
His employers had remained throughout staunch admirers of his
intellect. But despite every protest he bade them farewell, and
purchasing a seat on the Frankfort post with his scanty savings set
out for Berlin. No mendicity committees lay in wait for the prosperous
passenger, and as the coach passed through the Rosenthaler gate, the
brave sound of the horn seemed to Maimon at once a flourish of triumph
over Berlin and of defiance to superstition and ignorance.
But superstition and ignorance were not yet unhorsed. The Jewish
police-officers, though they allowed coach-gentry to enter and take up
their quarters where they pleased, did not fail to pry into their
affairs the next day, as well for the protection of the Jewish
community against [311]equivocal intruders as in accordance with its
responsibility to the State.
In his modest lodging on the New-Market, Maimon had to face the
suspicious scrutiny of the most dreaded of these detectives, who was
puzzled and provoked by a belief he had seen him before, "evidently
looking on me," as Maimon put it afterwards, "as a comet, which comes
nearer to the earth the second time than the first, and so makes the
danger more threatening."
Of a sudden this lynx-eyed bully espied a Hebrew Logic by Maimonides,
annotated by Mendelssohn. "Yes! yes!" he shrieked; "that's the sort of
books for me!" and, glaring threateningly at the philosopher, "Pack,"
he said. "Pack out of Berlin as quick as you can, if you don't wish to
be led out with all the honors."
Maimon was once more in desperate case. His money was all but
exhausted by the journey, and the outside of the Rosenthaler gate
again menaced him. All his sufferings had availed him nothing: he was
back almost at his starting-point.
But fortune favors fools. In a countryman settled at Berlin he found a
protector. Then other admirers of talent and learning boarded and
lodged him. The way was now clear for Culture.
Accident determined the line of march. Maimon rescued Wolff's
Metaphysics from a butterman for two groschen. Wolff, he knew, was
the pet philosopher of the day. Mendelssohn himself had been inspired
by him—the great brother-Jew with whom he might now hope some day to
talk face to face.
Maimon was delighted with his new treasure—such mathematical
exposition, such serried syllogisms—till it came to theology. "The
Principle of Sufficient Reason"—yes, it was a wonderful discovery.
But as proving God? [312]No—for that there was not Sufficient Reason.
Nor could Maimon harmonize these new doctrines with his Maimonides or
his Aristotle. Happy thought! He would set forth his doubts in Hebrew,
he would send the manuscript to Herr Mendelssohn. Flushed by the hope
of the great man's acquaintance, he scribbled fervidly and posted the
manuscript.
He spent a sleepless night.
Would the lion of Berlin take any notice of an obscure Polish Jew?
Maimon was not left in suspense. Mendelssohn replied by return. He
admitted the justice of his correspondent's doubts, but begged him not
to be discouraged by them, but to continue his studies with unabated
zeal. O, judge in Israel! Nathan Der Weise, indeed.
Fired with such encouragement, Maimon flung himself into a Hebrew
dissertation that should shatter all these theological cobwebs, that
by an uncompromising Ontology should bring into doubt the foundations
of Revealed as well as of Natural Theology. It was a bold thing to do,
for since he was come to Berlin, and had read more of his books, he
had gathered that Mendelssohn still professed Orthodox Judaism. A
paradox this to Maimon, and roundly denied as impossible when he first
heard of it. A man who could enter the lists with the doughtiest
champions of Christendom, whose German prose was classical, who could
philosophize in Socratic dialogue after the fashion of Plato—such a
man a creature of the Ghetto! Doubtless he took his Judaism in some
vague Platonic way; it was impossible to imagine him the literal
bond-slave of that minute ritual, winding phylacteries round his left
arm or shaking himself in a praying-shawl. Anyhow here—in logical
lucid Hebrew—were Maimon's doubts and difficulties. If Mendelssohn
was sincere, let him resolve them, and earn the blessings of a truly
Jewish soul. If he was [313]unable to answer them, let him give up his
orthodoxy, or be proved a fraud and a time-server. Amicus Mendelssohn
sed magis amica veritas.
In truth there was something irritating to the Polish Jew in the great
German's attitude, as if it held some latent reproach of his own. Only
a shallow thinker, he felt, could combine culture and spiritual
comfort, to say nothing of worldly success. He had read the
much-vaunted Phœdon which Lutheran Germany hailed as a
counterblast to the notorious "Berlin religion," restoring faith to a
despondent world mocked out of its Christian hopes by the fashionable
French wits and materialists under the baneful inspiration of
Voltaire, whom Germany's own Frederick had set on high in his Court.
But what a curious assumption for a Jewish thinker to accept, that
unless we are immortal, our acts in this world are of no consequence!
Was not he, Maimon, leading a high-minded life in pursuit of Truth,
with no such hope? "If our soul were mortal, then Reason would be a
dream, which Jupiter has sent us in order that we might forget our
misery; and we should be like the beasts, only to seek food and die."
Nonsense! Rhetoric! True, his epistles to Lavater were effective
enough, there was courage in his public refusal of Christianity,
nobility in his sentiment that he preferred to shame anti-Jewish
prejudice by character rather than by controversy. He, Maimon, would
prefer to shame it by both. But this Jerusalem of Mendelssohn's!
Could its thesis really be sustained? Judaism laid no yoke upon
belief, only on conduct? was no reason-confounding dogma? only a
revealed legislation? A Jew gave his life to the law and his heart to
Germany! Or France, or Holland, or the Brazils as the case might be?
Palestine must be forgotten. Well, it was all bold and clever enough,
but was it more than a half-way house to assimilation with the
peoples? At any rate [314]here was a Polish brother's artillery to
meet—more deadly than that of Lavater, or the stupid Christians.
Again, but with acuter anxiety, he awaited Mendelssohn's reply.
It came—an invitation for next Saturday afternoon. Aha! The outworks
were stormed. The great man recognized in him a worthy foe, a brother
in soul. Gratitude and vanity made the visit a delightful
anticipation. What a wit-combat it would be! How he would marshal his
dialectic epigrams! If only Lapidoth could be there to hear!
As the servant threw open the door for him, revealing a suite of
beautiful rooms and a fine company of gentlefolks, men with powdered
wigs and ladies with elegant toilettes, Maimon started back with a
painful shock. An under-consciousness of mud-stained boots and a
clumsily cut overcoat, mixed itself painfully with this impression of
pretty, scented women, and the clatter of tongues and coffee-cups. He
stood rooted to the threshold in a sudden bitter realization that the
great world cared nothing about metaphysics. Ease, fine furniture, a
position in the world—these were the things that counted. Why had all
his genius brought him none of these things? Wifeless, childless,
moneyless, he stood, a solitary soul wrestling with problems. How had
Mendelssohn managed to obtain everything? Doubtless he had had a
better start, a rich father, a University training. His resentment
against the prosperous philosopher rekindled. He shrank back and
closed the door. But it was opened instantly again from within. A
little hunchback with shining eyes hurried towards him.
"Herr Maimon?" he said inquiringly, holding out his hand with a smile
of welcome.
Startled, Maimon laid his hand without speaking in that cordial palm.
So this was the man he had envied. No [315]one had ever told him that
"Nathan der Weise" was thus afflicted. It was as soul that he had
appealed to the imagination of the world; even vulgar gossip had been
silent about his body. But how this deformity must embitter his
success.
Mendelssohn coaxed him within, complimenting him profusely on his
writings: he was only too familiar with these half-shy,
half-aggressive young Poles, whose brains were bursting with heretical
ideas and sick fantasies. They brought him into evil odor with his
orthodox brethren, did these "Jerusalem Werthers," but who should deal
with them, if not he that understood them, that could handle them
delicately? What was to Maimon a unique episode was to his host an
everyday experience.
Mendelssohn led Maimon to the embrasure of a window: he brought him
refreshments—which the young man devoured uncouthly—he neglected his
fashionable guests, whose unceasing French babble proclaimed their
ability to get on by themselves, to gain an insight into this gifted
young man's soul. He regarded each new person as a complicated piece
of wheelwork, which it was the wise man's business to understand and
not be angry with. But having captured the secret of the mechanism, it
was one's duty to improve it on its own lines.
"Your dissertation displays extraordinary acumen, Herr Maimon," he
said. "Of course you still suffer from the Talmudic method or rather
want of method. But you have a real insight into metaphysical
problems. And yet you have only read Wolff! You are evidently not a
Chamor nosé Sefarim (a donkey bearing books)." He used the Hebrew
proverb to make the young Pole feel at home, and a half smile hovered
around his sensitive lips. Even his German took on a winning touch of
jargon in vocabulary and accentuation, though to kill the jargon was
one of the ideals of his life.
[316]"Nay, Herr Mendelssohn," replied Maimon modestly; "you must not forget
The Guide of the Perplexed. It was the inspiration of my youth!"
"Was it?" cried Mendelssohn delightedly. "So it was of mine. In fact I
tell the Berliners Maimonides was responsible for my hump, and some of
them actually believe I got it bending over him."
This charming acceptance of his affliction touched the sensitive
Maimon and put him more at ease than even the praise of his writings
and the fraternal vocabulary. "In my country," he said, "a perfect
body is thought to mark the fool of the family! They believe the
finest souls prefer to inhabit imperfect tenements."
Mendelssohn bowed laughingly. "An excellently turned compliment! At
this rate you will soon shine in our Berlin society. And how long is
it since you left Poland?"
"Alas! I have left Poland more than once. I should have had the honor
and the happiness of making your acquaintance earlier, had I not been
stopped at the Rosenthaler gate three years ago."
"At the Rosenthaler gate! If I had only known!"
The tears came into Maimon's eyes—tears of gratitude, of self-pity,
of regret for the lost years. He was on his feet now, he felt, and his
feet were on the right road. He had found a powerful protector at
last. "Think of my disappointment," he said tremulously, "after
travelling all the way from Poland."
"Yes, I know. I was all but stopped at the gate myself," said
Mendelssohn musingly.
"You?"
"Yes—when I was a lad."
"Aren't you a native of Berlin, then?"
"No, I was born in Dessau. Not so far to tramp from as Poland. But
still a goodish stretch. It took me five [317]days—I am not a Hercules
like you—and had I not managed to stammer out that I wished to enrol
myself among the pupils of Dr. Frankel, the new Chief Rabbi of the
city, the surly Cerberus would have slammed the gate in my face. My
luck was that Frankel had come from Dessau, and had been my teacher. I
remember standing on a hillock crying as he was leaving for Berlin,
and he took me in his arms and said I should also go to Berlin some
day. So when I appeared he had to make the best of it."
"Then you had nothing from your parents?"
"Only a beautiful handwriting from my father which got me copying jobs
for a few groschens and is now the joy of the printers. He was a
scribe, you know, and wrote the Scrolls of the Law. But he wanted me
to be a pedlar."
"A pedlar!" cried Maimon, open-eyed.
"Yes, the money would come in at once, you see. I had quite a fight to
persuade him I would do better as a Rabbi. I fear I was a very violent
and impatient youngster. He didn't at all believe in my Rabbinical
future. And he was right after all—for a member of a learned guild,
Jewish or Christian, have I never been."
"You had a hard time, then, when you came to Berlin?" said Maimon
sympathetically.
Mendelssohn's eyes had for an instant an inward look, then he quoted
gently, "Bread with salt shalt thou eat, water by measure shalt thou
drink, upon the hard earth shalt thou sleep, and a life of anxiousness
shalt thou live, and labor in the study of the law!"
Maimon thrilled at the quotation: the fine furniture and the fine
company faded, and he saw only the soul of a fellow-idealist to which
these things were but unregarded background.
"Ah yes," went on Mendelssohn. "You are thinking I don't look like a
person who once notched his loaf into [318]sections so as not to eat too
much a day. Well, let it console you with the thought that there's a
comfortable home in Berlin waiting for you, too."
Poor Maimon stole a glance at the buxom, blue-eyed matron doing the
honors of her salon so gracefully, assisted by two dazzling young
ladies in Parisian toilettes—evidently her daughters—and he groaned
at the thought of his peasant-wife and his uncouth, superstition-swaddled
children: decidedly he must give Sarah a divorce.
"I can't delude myself with such day-dreams," he said hopelessly.
"Wait! Wait! So long as you don't day-dream your time away. That is
the danger with you clever young Poles—you are such dreamers.
Everything in this life depends on steadiness and patience. When we
first set up hospitality, Fromet—my wife—and I, we had to count the
almonds and raisins for dessert. You see, we only began with a little
house and garden in the outskirts, the main furniture of which," he
said, laughing at the recollection, "was twenty china apes,
life-size."
"Twenty china apes!"
"Yes, like every Jewish bridegroom, I had to buy a quantity of china
for the support of the local manufactory, and that was what fell to
me. Ah, my friend, what have not the Jews of Germany to support! The
taxes are still with us, but the Rishus (malice)"—again he smiled
confidentially at the Hebrew-jargon word—"is less every day. Why, a
Jew couldn't walk the streets of Berlin without being hooted and
insulted, and my little ones used to ask, 'Father, is it wicked to be
a Jew?' I thank the Almighty that at the end of my days I have lived
to see the Jewish question raised to a higher plane."
"I should rather thank you," cried Maimon, with sceptical
enthusiasm.
[319]"Me?" said Mendelssohn, with the unfeigned modesty of the man who, his
every public utterance having been dragged out of him by external
compulsion, retains his native shyness and is alone in ignorance of
his own influence. "No, no, it is Montesquieu, it is Dohm, it is my
dear Lessing. Poor fellow, the Christian bigots are at him now like a
plague of stinging insects. I almost wish he hadn't written Nathan
der Weise. I am glad to reflect I didn't instigate him, nay, that he
had written a play in favor of the Jews ere we met."
"How did you come to know him?"
"I hardly remember. He was always fond of outcasts—a true artistic
temperament, that preferred to consort with actors and soldiers rather
than with the beer-swilling middle-class of Berlin. Oh yes, I think we
met over a game of chess. Then we wrote an essay on Pope together.
Dear Gotthold! What do I not owe him? My position in Berlin, my
feeling for literature—for we Jews have all stifled our love for the
beautiful and grown dead to poetry."
"Well, but what is a poet but a liar?"
"Ah, my dear Herr Maimon, you will grow out of that. I must lend you
Homer. Intellectual speculation is not everything. For my part, I have
never regretted withdrawing a portion of my love from the worthy
matron, philosophy, in order to bestow it on her handmaid,
belles-lettres. I am sorry to use a French word, but for once
there's no better. You smile to see a Jew more German than the
Germans."
"No, I smile to hear what sounds like French all round! I remember
reading in your Philosophical Conversations your appeal to the
Germans not to exchange their own gold for the tinsel of their
neighbors."
"Yes, but what can one do? It is a Berlin mania; and, [320]you know, the
King himself.... Our Jewish girls first caught it to converse with the
young gallants who came a-borrowing of their fathers, but the
influence of my dear daughters—there, the beautiful one is Dorothea,
the eldest, and that other, who takes more after me, is
Henrietta—their influence is doing much to counteract the wave of
flippancy and materialism. But fancy any one still reading my
Philosophical Conversations—my 'prentice work. I had no idea of
printing it. I lent the manuscript to Lessing, observing jestingly
that I, too, could write like Shaftesbury, the Englishman. And lo! the
next time I met him he handed me the proofs. Dear Gotthold."
"Is it true that the King—?"
"Sent for me to Potsdam to scold me? You are thinking of another
matter. That was in my young days." He smiled and lowered his voice.
"I ventured to hint in a review that His Majesty's French verses—I am
glad by the way he has lived to write some against Voltaire—were not
perfection. I thought I had wrapped up my meaning beyond royal
comprehension. But a malicious courtier, the preacher Justi, denounced
me as a Jew who had thrown aside all reverence for the most sacred
person of His Majesty. I was summoned to Sans-Souci and—with a touch
of Rishus (malice)—on a Saturday. I managed to be there without
breaking my Shabbos (Sabbath)."
"Then he does keep Sabbath!" thought Maimon, in amaze.
"But, as you may imagine, I was not as happy as a bear with honey.
However, I pleaded that he who makes verses plays at nine-pins, and he
who plays at nine-pins, be he monarch or peasant, must be satisfied
with the judgment of the boy who has charge of the bowls."
"And you are still alive!"
"To the annoyance of many people. I fancy His [321]Majesty was ashamed to
punish me before the French cynics of his court, and I know on good
authority that it was because the Marquis D'Argens was astonished to
learn that I could be driven out of Berlin at any moment by the police
that the King made me a Schutz-Jude (protected Jew). So I owe
something to the French after all. My friends had long been urging me
to sue for protection, but I thought, as I still think, that one ought
not to ask for any rights which the humblest Jew could not enjoy.
However, a king's gift horse one cannot look in the mouth. And now you
are to become my Schutz-Jude"—Maimon's heart beat gratefully—"and
the question is, what do you propose to do in Berlin? What is the
career that is to bring you a castle and a princess?"
"I wish to study medicine."
"Good. It is the one profession a Jew may enter here; though, you must
know, however great a practice you may attain—even among the
Christians—they will never publish your name in the medical list.
Still, we must be thankful for small mercies. In Frankfort the Jewish
doctors are limited to four, in other towns to none. We must hand you
over to Dr. Herz—there, that man who is laughing so, over one of his
own good things, no doubt—that is Dr. Herz, and the beautiful
creature is his wife, Henrietta, who is founding a Goethe salon. She
and my daughters are inseparable—a Jewish trinity. And so, Herr
Physician, I extend to you the envious congratulations of a
book-keeper."
"But you are not a book-keeper!"
"Not now, but that was what I began as—or rather, what I drifted
into, for I was Talmudical tutor in his family, when my dear Herr
Bernhardt proposed it to me. And I am not sorry. For it left me plenty
of time to learn Latin and Greek and mathematics, and finally landed
me [322]in a partnership. Still I have always been a race-horse burdened
with a pack, alas! I don't mean my hump, but the factory still steals
a good deal of my time and brains, and if I didn't rise at five—But
you have made me quite egoistic—it is the resemblance of our young
days that has touched the spring of memories. But come! let me
introduce you to my wife and my son Abraham. Ah, see, poor Fromet is
signalling to me. She is tired of being left to battle single-handed.
Would you not like to know M. de Mirabeau? Or let me introduce you to
Wessely—he will talk to you in Hebrew. It is Wessely who does all the
work for which I am praised—it is he who is elevating our Jewish
brethren, with whom I have not the heart nor the courage to strive. Or
there is Nicolai, the founder of 'The Library of the Fine Arts,' to
which," he added with a sly smile, "I hope yet to see you
contributing. Perhaps Fräulein Reimarus will convert you—that
charming young lady there talking with her brother-in-law, who is a
Danish state-councillor. She is the great friend of Lessing—as I
live, there comes Lessing himself. I am sure he would like the
pleasure of your acquaintance."
"Because he likes outcasts? No, no, not yet," and Maimon, whose mood
had been growing dark again, shrank back, appalled by these great
names. Yes, he was a dreamer and a fool, and Mendelssohn was a sage,
indeed. In his bitterness he distrusted even his own Dissertation, his
uncompromising logic, destructive of all theology. Perhaps Mendelssohn
was right: perhaps he had really solved the Jewish problem. To be a
Jew among Germans, and a German among Jews: to reconcile the old creed
with Culture: to hold up one's head, and assert oneself as an
honorable element in the nation—was not this catholic gathering a
proof of the feasibility of such an ideal? Good sense! What true
self-estimate as well as wit in the sage's famous [323]retort to the
swaggering German officer who asked him what commodity he dealt in.
"In that which you appear to need—good sense." Maimon roused himself
to listen to the conversation. It changed to German under the impulse
of the host, who from his umpire's chair controlled it with play of
eye, head, or hand; and when appealed to, would usually show that both
parties were fighting about words, not things. Maimon noted from his
semi-obscure retreat that the talk grew more serious and connected,
touched problems. He saw that for Mendelssohn as for himself nothing
really existed but the great questions. Flippant interruptions the
sage seemed to disregard, and if the topic dribbled out into
irrelevancies he fell silent. Maimon studied the noble curve of his
forehead, the decided nose, the prominent lips, in the light of Herr
Lavater's theories. Lessing said little: he had the air of a broken
man. The brilliant life of the culture-warrior was closing in
gloom—wife, child, health, money, almost reputation, gone: the
nemesis of genius.
At one point a lady strove to concentrate attention upon herself by
accusing herself of faults of character. Even Maimon understood she
was angling for compliments. But Mendelssohn gravely bade her mend her
faults, and Maimon saw Lessing's harassed eyes light up for the first
time with a gleam of humor. Then the poet, as if roused to
recollection, pulled out a paper, "I almost forgot to give you back
Kant's letter," he said. "You are indeed to be congratulated."
Mendelssohn blushed like a boy, and made a snatch at the letter, but
Lessing jestingly insisted on reading it to the company.
"I consider that in your Jerusalem you have succeeded in combining
our religion with such a degree of freedom of conscience, as was never
imagined possible, and of which [324]no other faith can boast. You have at
the same time so thoroughly and so clearly demonstrated the necessity
of unlimited liberty of conscience, that ultimately our Church will
also be led to reflect how it should remove from its midst everything
that disturbs and oppresses conscience, which will finally unite all
men in their view of the essential points of religion."
There was an approving murmur throughout the company. "Such a letter
would compensate me for many more annoyances than my works have
brought me," said Mendelssohn. "And to think," he added laughingly,
"that I once beat Kant in a prize competition. A proof of the power of
lucid expression over profound thought. And that I owe to your
stimulus, Lessing."
The poet made a grimace. "You accuse me of stimulating
superficiality!"
There was a laugh.
"Nay, I meant you have torn away the thorns from the roses of
philosophy! If Kant would only write like you—"
"He might understand himself," flashed the beautiful Henrietta Herz.
"And lose his disciples," added her husband. "That is really, Herr
Mendelssohn, why we pious Jews are so angry with your German
translation of the Bible—you make the Bible intelligible."
"Yes, they have done their best to distort it," sighed Mendelssohn.
"But the fury my translation arouses among the so-called wise men of
the day, is the best proof of its necessity. When I first meditated
producing a plain Bible in good German, I had only the needs of my own
children at heart, then I allowed myself to be persuaded it might
serve the multitude, now I see it is the Rabbis who need it most. But
centuries of crooked thinking have deadened them to the beauties of
the Bible: they have left [325]it behind them as elementary, when they
have not themselves coated it with complexity. Subtle
misinterpretation is everything, a beautiful text, nothing. And then
this corrupt idiom of theirs—than which nothing more corrupts a
nation—they have actually invested this German jargon with sanctity,
and I am a wolf in sheep's clothing for putting good German in Hebrew
letters. Even the French Jews, Cerf Berr tells me, think bad German
holy. To say nothing of Austria."
"Wait, wait!" said an eager-eyed man; "the laws of the Emperor Joseph
will change all that—once the Jews of Vienna are forced to go to
school with the sciences, they will become an honored element of the
nation."
Mendelssohn shook a worldly-wise head. "Not so fast, my dear Wessely,
not so fast. Your Hebrew Ode to the Austrian Emperor was unimpeachable
as poetry, but, I fear, visionary as history. Who knows that this is
more than a temporary political move?"
"And we pious Jews," put in Dr. Herz, smiling, "you forget, Herr
Wessely, we are not so easily schooled. We have never forgiven our
Mendelssohn for saying our glorious religion had accumulated cobwebs.
It is the cobwebs we love, not the port."
"Yes, indeed," broke in Maimon, so interested that he forgot his own
jargon, to say nothing of his attire. "When I was in Poland, I crawled
nicely into mud, through pointing out that they ought not to turn to
the east in praying, because Jerusalem, which, in accordance with
Talmudic law, they turned to, couldn't lie due east of everywhere. In
point of fact we were north-west, so that they should have
turned"—his thumbs began to turn and his voice to take on the
Talmudic sing-song—"south-east. I told them it was easy in each city
to compute the exact turning, by corners and circles—"
[326]"By spherical trigonometry, certainly," said Mendelssohn pleasantly.
Maimon, conscious of a correction, blushed and awoke to find himself
the centre of observation. His host made haste to add, "You remind me
of the odium I incurred by agreeing with the Duke of
Mecklenburg-Schwerin's edict, that we should not bury our dead before
the third day. And this in spite of my proofs from the Talmud! Dear,
dear, if the Rabbis were only as anxious to bury dead ideas as dead
bodies!" There was a general smile, but Maimon said boldly—
"I think you treat them far too tolerantly."
"What, Herr Maimon," and Mendelssohn smiled the half-sad smile of the
sage, who has seen the humors of the human spectacle and himself as
part of it—"would you have me rebuke intolerance by intolerance? I
will admit that when I was your age—and of an even hotter temper—I
could have made a pretty persecutor. In those days I contributed to
the mildest of sheets, 'The Moral Preacher,' we young blades called
it. But because it didn't reek of religion, on every page the pious
scented atheism. I could have whipped the dullards or cried with
vexation. Now I see intolerance is a proof of earnestness as well as
of stupidity. It is well that men should be alert against the least
rough breath on the blossoms of faith they cherish. The only criticism
that still has power to annoy me is that of the timid, who fear it is
provoking persecution for a Jew to speak out. But for the rest,
opposition is the test-furnace of new ideas. I do my part in the
world, it is for others to do theirs. As soon as I had yielded my
translation to friend Dubno, to be printed, I took my soul in my
hands, raised my eyes to the mountains, and gave my back to the
smiters. All the same I am sorry it is the Rabbi of Posen who is
launching these old-fashioned thunders against the German Pentateuch
of "Moses of Dessau," for [327]both as a Talmudist and mathematician
Hirsch Janow has my sincere respect. Not in vain is he styled 'the
keen scholar,' and from all I hear he is a truly good man."
"A saint!" cried Maimon enthusiastically, again forgetting his
shyness. His voice faltered as he drew a glowing panegyric of his
whilom benefactor, and pictured him as about to die in the prime of
life, worn out by vigils and penances. In a revulsion of feeling,
fresh stirrings of doubt of the Mendelssohnian solution agitated his
soul. Though he had but just now denounced the fanatics, he was
conscious of a strange sympathy with this lovable ascetic who fasted
every day, torturing equally his texts and himself, this hopeless
mystic for whom there could be no bridge to modern thought; all the
Polish Jew in him revolted irrationally against the new German
rationalism. No, no; it must be all or nothing. Jewish Catholicism was
not to be replaced by Jewish Protestantism. These pathetic zealots,
clinging desperately to the past, had a deeper instinct, a truer
prevision of the future, than this cultured philosopher.
"Yes, what you tell me of Hirsch Janow goes with all I have heard,"
said Mendelssohn calmly. "But I put my trust in time and the new
generation. I will wager that the translation I drew up for my
children will be read by his."
Maimon happened to be looking over Mendelssohn's shoulder at his
charming daughters in their Parisian toilettes. He saw them exchange a
curious glance that raised their eyebrows sceptically. With a flash of
insight he caught their meaning. Mendelssohn seeking an epigram had
stumbled into a dubious oracle.
"The translation I drew up for my children will be read by his."
By his, perhaps.
[328]But by my own?
Maimon shivered with an apprehension of tragedy. Perhaps it was his
Dissertation that Mendelssohn's children would read. He remembered
suddenly that Mendelssohn had said no word to its crushing logic.
As he was taking his leave, he put the question point-blank. "What
have you to say to my arguments?"
"You are not in the right road at present," said Mendelssohn, holding
his hand amicably, "but the course of your inquiries must not be
checked. Doubt, as Descartes rightly says, is the beginning of
philosophical speculation."
He left the Polish philosopher on the threshold, agitated by a medley
of feelings.
This mingled attitude of Maimon the Fool towards Nathan the Wise
continued till the death of the Sage plunged Berlin into mourning, and
the Fool into vain regrets for his fits of disrespect towards one, the
great outlines of whose character stood for ever fixed by the chisel
of death. "Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus tam cari capitis?" he
wrote in his autobiography.
Too often had he lost his temper—particularly when Spinoza was the
theme—and had all but accused Mendelssohn of dishonesty. Was not
Truth the highest ideal? And was not Spinoza as irrefutable as Euclid.
What! Could the emancipated intellect really deny that marvellous
thinker, who, after a century of unexampled obloquy, was the
acknowledged prophet of the God of the future, the inspirer of Goethe,
and all that was best in modern thought! But no, Mendelssohn held
stubbornly to his own life-system, never would admit that his long
spiritual happiness had been based on a lie. It was highly
unreasonable [329]and annoying of him, and his formula for closing
discussions, "We must hold fast not to words but to the things they
signify," was exasperatingly answerable. How strange that after the
restless Maimon had of himself given up Spinoza, the Sage's last years
should have been clouded by the alleged Spinozism of his dear dead
Lessing.
But now that the Sage himself was dead, the Fool remembered his
infinite patience—the patience not of bloodlessness, but of a
passionate soul that has conquered itself—not to be soured by a
fool's disappointing career, nor even by his bursts of profligacy.
For Maimon's life held many more vicissitudes, but the profession of
medicine was never of them. "I require of every man of sound mind that
he should lay out for himself a plan of action," said the philosopher;
and wandered to Breslau, to Amsterdam, to Potsdam, the parasite of
protectors, the impecunious hack of publishers, the rebel of manners,
the ingenious and honored metaphysician. When Kant declared he was the
only one of his critics that understood The Critique of Pure Reason,
Maimon returned to Berlin to devote himself to the philosophical work
that was to give him a pinnacle apart among the Kantians. Goethe and
Schiller made flattering advances to him. Berlin society was at his
feet. But he remained to the end, shiftless and feckless, uncouth and
unmanageable, and not seldom when the taverns he frequented were
closed, he would wander tipsily through the sleeping streets
meditating suicide, or arguing metaphysics with expostulant watchmen.
"For all his mathematics," a friend said of him, "he never seems to
think of the difference between plus and minus in money matters."
"People like you, there's no use trying to help," said another,
worn-out, when Maimon pleaded for only a few coppers. Yet he never
acquired the beggar's servility, nay, was often himself the patron of
some [330]poorer hanger-on, for whom he would sacrifice his last glass of
beer. Curt in his manners, he refused to lift his hat or embrace his
acquaintances in cold blood. Nor would he wear a wig. Pure Reason
alone must rule.
So, clad in an all-concealing overcoat, the unshaven philosopher might
be seen in a coffee-house or on an ale-house bench, scribbling at odd
moments his profound essays on Transcendental Philosophy, the leaves
flying about and losing themselves, and the thoughts as ill-arranged,
for the Hebrew Talmudical manner still clung to his German writing as
to his talking, so that the body swayed rhythmically, his thumb worked
and his voice chanted the sing-song of piety to ideas that would have
paralyzed the Talmud school. It was in like manner that when he lost a
game of chess or waxed hot in argument, his old Judean-Polish mother
jargon came back to him. His old religion he had shed completely, yet
a synagogue-tune could always move him to tears. Sometimes he might be
seen at the theatre, sobbing hysterically at tragedies or laughing
boisterously over comedies, for he had long since learned to love
Homer and the humane arts, though at first he was wont to contend that
no vigor of literary expression could possibly excel his
mother-in-law's curses. Not that he ever saw her again: his wife and
eldest son tracked him to Breslau, but only in quest of ducats and
divorce: the latter of which Maimon conceded after a legal rigmarole.
But he took no advantage of his freedom. A home of his own he never
possessed, save an occasional garret where he worked at an unsteady
table—one leg usually supported by a folio volume—surrounded by the
cats and dogs whom he had taken to solacing himself with. And even if
lodged in a nobleman's palace, his surroundings were no cleaner. In
Amsterdam he drove the Dutch to despair: even German housekeepers were
stung to remonstrance. Yet the charm of his [331]conversation, the
brilliancy of his intellect kept him always well-friended. And the
fortune which favors fools watched over his closing years, and sent
the admiring Graf Kalkreuth, an intellectual Silesian nobleman, to dig
him out of miserable lodgings, and instal him in his own castle near
Freistadt.
As he lay upon his luxurious death-bed in the dreary November dusk,
dying at forty-six of a neglected lung-trouble, a worthy Catholic
pastor strove to bring him to a more Christian frame of mind.
"What matters it?" protested the sufferer; "when I am dead, I am
gone."
"Can you say that, dear friend," rejoined the Pastor, with deep
emotion. "How? Your mind, which amid the most unfavorable
circumstances ever soared to higher attainments, which bore such fair
flowers and fruits—shall it be trodden in the dust along with the
poor covering in which it has been clothed? Do you not feel at this
moment that there is something in you which is not body, not matter,
not subject to the conditions of space and time?"
"Ah!" replied Maimon, "there are beautiful dreams and hopes—"
"Which will surely be fulfilled. Should you not wish to come again
into the society of Mendelssohn?"
Maimon was silent.
Suddenly the dying man cried out, "Ay me! I have been a fool, the most
foolish among the most foolish." The thought of Nathan the Wise was
indeed as a fiery scourge. Too late he realized that the passion for
Truth had destroyed him. Knowledge alone was not sufficient for life.
The will and the emotions demanded their nutriment and exercise as
well as the intellect. Man was not made merely to hunt an abstract
formula, pale ghost of living realities.
[332]"To seek for Truth"—yes, it was one ideal. But there remained
also—as the quotation went on which Mendelssohn's disciples had
chosen as their motto—"To love the beautiful, to desire the good, to
do the best." Mendelssohn with his ordered scheme of harmonious
living, with his equal grasp of thought and life, sanely balanced
betwixt philosophy and letters, learning and business, according so
much to Hellenism, yet not losing hold of Hebraism, and adjusting with
equal mind the claims of the Ghetto and the claims of Culture,
Mendelssohn shone before Maimon's dying eyes, as indeed the Wise.
The thinker had a last gleam of satisfaction in seeing so lucidly the
springs of his failure as a human being. Happiness was the child of
fixedness—in opinions, in space. Soul and body had need of a centre,
a pivot, a home.
He had followed the hem of Truth to the mocking horizon: he had in
turn fanatically adopted every philosophical system Peripatetic,
Spinozist, Leibnozist, Leibnitzian, Kantian—and what did he know now
he was going beyond the horizon? Nothing. He had won a place among the
thinkers of Germany. But if he could only have had his cast-off son to
close his dying eyes, and could only have believed in the prayers his
David would have sobbed out, how willingly would he have consented to
be blotted out from the book of fame. A Passover tune hummed in his
brain, sad, sweet tears sprang to his eyes—yea, his soul found more
satisfaction in a meaningless melody charged with tremulous memories
of childhood, than in all the philosophies.
A melancholy synagogue refrain quavered on his lips, his soul turned
yearningly towards these ascetics and mystics, whose life was a
voluntary martyrdom to a misunderstood righteousness, a passionate
sacrifice to a naïve conception of the cosmos. The infinite pathos of
their lives [333]touched him to forgetfulness of his own futility. His
soul went out to them, but his brain denied him the comfort of their
illusions.
He set his teeth and waited for death.
The Pastor spoke again: "Yes, you have been foolish. But that you say
so now shows your soul is not beyond redemption. Christ is ever on the
threshold."
Maimon made an impatient gesture. "You asked me if I should not like
to see Mendelssohn again. How do you suppose I could face him, if I
became a Christian?"
"You forget, my dear Maimon, he knows the Truth now. Must he not
rejoice that his daughters have fallen upon the bosom of the Church?"
Maimon sat up in bed with a sudden shock of remembrance that set him
coughing.
"Dorothea, but not Henrietta?" he gasped painfully.
"Henrietta too. Did you not know? And Abraham Mendelssohn also has
just had his boy Felix baptized—a wonder-child in music, I hear."
Maimon fell back on his pillow, overcome with emotions and thoughts.
The tragedy latent in that smile of the sisters had developed itself.
He had long since lost touch with Berlin, ceased to interest himself
in Judaism, its petty politics, but now his mind pieced together
vividly all that had reached him of the developments of the Jewish
question since Mendelssohn's death: the battle of old and new, grown
so fierce that the pietists denied the reformers Jewish burial; young
men scorning their fathers and crying, "Culture, Culture; down with
the Ghetto"; many in the reaction from the yoke of three thousand
years falling into braggart profligacy, many more into fashionable
Christianity. And the woman of the new generation no less apostate,
Henrietta Herz bringing beautiful Jewesses under the fascination of
[334]brilliant Germans and the romantic movement, so that Mendelssohn's own
daughter, Dorothea, had left her husband and children to live with
Schlegel, and the immemorial chastity of the Jewess was undermined.
And instead of the honorable estimation of his people Mendelssohn had
worked for, a violent reaction against the Jews, fomented spiritually
by Schleiermacher with his "transcendental Christianity," and
politically by Gentz with his cry of "Christian Germany": both men
lions of the Jewish-Christian Salon which Mendelssohn had made
possible. And the only Judaism that stood stable amid this flux, the
ancient rock of Rabbinism he had sought to dislodge, the Amsterdam
Jewry refusing even the civil rights for which he had fought.
"Poor Mendelssohn!" thought the dying Maimon. "Which was the Dreamer
after all, he or I? Well for him, perhaps, that his Phœdon is
wrong, that he will never know."
The gulf between them vanished, and in a last flash of remorseless
insight he saw himself and Mendelssohn at one in the common irony of
human destiny.
He murmured: "And how dieth the wise? As the fool."
"What do you say?" said the Pastor.
"It is a verse from the Bible."
"Then are you at peace?"
"I am at peace."
["I am a Jew, I am a Christian. I am tragedy, I am
comedy—Heraclitus and Democritus in one: a Greek, a Hebrew: an
adorer of despotism as incarnate in Napoleon, an admirer of
communism as embodied in Proudhon; a Latin, a Teuton; a beast, a
devil, a god."
"God's satire weighs heavily upon me. The Great Author of the
Universe, the Aristophanes of Heaven, was bent on demonstrating
with crushing force to me, the little earthly so-called German
Aristophanes, how my weightiest sarcasms are only pitiful
attempts at jesting in comparison with His, and how miserably I
am beneath Him in humor, in colossal mockery."]
The carriage stopped, and the speckless footman, jumping down,
inquired: "Monsieur Heine?"
The concierge, knitting beside the porte cochère, looked at him,
looked at the glittering victoria he represented, and at the grande
dame who sat in it, shielding herself with a parasol from the glory
of the Parisian sunlight. Then she shook her head.
"But this is number three, Avenue Matignon?"
"Yes, but Monsieur receives only his old friends. He is dying."
"Madame knows. Take up her name.'"
The concierge glanced at the elegant card. She saw "Lady"—which she
imagined meant an English Duchesse—and words scribbled on it in
pencil.
[336]"It is au cinquième," she said, with a sigh.
"I will take it up."
Ere he returned, Madame descended and passed from the sparkling
sunshine into the gloom of the portico, with a melancholy
consciousness of the symbolic. For her spirit, too, had its poetic
intuitions and insights, and had been trained by friendship with one
of the wittiest and tenderest women of her time to some more than
common apprehension of the greater spirit at whose living tomb she was
come to worship. Hers was a fine face, wearing the triple aristocracy
of beauty, birth, and letters. The complexion was of lustreless ivory,
the black hair wound round and round. The stateliness of her figure
completed the impression of a Roman matron.
"Monsieur Heine begs that your ladyship will do him the honor of
mounting, and will forgive him the five stories for the sake of the
view."
Her ladyship's sadness was tinctured by a faint smile at the message,
which the footman delivered without any suspicion that the view in
question meant the view of Heine himself. But then that admirable
menial had not the advantage of her comprehensive familiarity with
Heine's writings. She crossed the blank stony courtyard and curled up
the curving five flights, her mind astir with pictures and emotions.
She had scribbled on her card a reminder of her identity; but could he
remember, after all those years, and in his grievous sickness, the
little girl of eleven who had sat next to him at the Boulogne table
d'hôte? And she herself could now scarcely realize at times that the
stout, good-natured, short-sighted little man with the big white brow,
who had lounged with her daily at the end of the pier, telling her
stories, was the most mordant wit in Europe, "the German
Aristophanes"; and that those nursery tales, [337]grotesquely compact of
mermaids, water-sprites, and a funny old French fiddler with a poodle
that diligently took three baths a day, were the frolicsome
improvisations of perhaps the greatest lyric poet of his age. She
recalled their parting: "When you go back to England, you can tell
your friends that you have seen Heinrich Heine!"
To which the little girl: "And who is Heinrich Heine?"
A query which had set the blue-eyed little man roaring with laughter.
These things might be vivid still to her vision: they colored all she
had read since from his magic pen—the wonderful poems interpreting
with equal magic the romance of strange lands and times, or the modern
soul, naked and unashamed, as if clothed in its own complexity; the
humorous-tragic questionings of the universe; the delicious
travel-pictures and fantasies; the lucid criticisms of art, and
politics, and philosophy, informed with malicious wisdom, shimmering
with poetry and wit. But, as for him, doubtless she and her ingenuous
interrogation had long since faded from his tumultuous life.
The odors of the sick-room recalled her to the disagreeable present.
In the sombre light she stumbled against a screen covered with paper
painted to look like lacquer-work, and, as the slip-shod old nurse in
her serre-tête motioned her forward, she had a dismal sense of a
lodging-house interior, a bourgeois barrenness enhanced by two
engravings after Léopold Robert, depressingly alien from that dainty
boudoir atmosphere of the artist-life she knew.
But this sordid impression was swallowed up in the vast tragedy behind
the screen. Upon a pile of mattresses heaped on the floor lay the
poet. He had raised himself a little on his pillows, amid which showed
a longish, pointed, white face with high cheek-bones, a Grecian nose,
and a large pale mouth, wasted from the sensualism she [338]recollected in
it to a strange Christ-like beauty. The outlines of the shrivelled
body beneath the sheet seemed those of a child of ten, and the legs
looked curiously twisted. One thin little hand, as of transparent wax,
delicately artistic, upheld a paralyzed eyelid, through which he
peered at her.
"Lucy Liebchen!" he piped joyously. "So you have found out who
Heinrich Heine is!"
He used the familiar German "du"; for him she was still his little
friend. But to her the moment was too poignant for speech. The
terrible passages in the last writings of this greatest of
autobiographers, which she had hoped poetically colored, were then
painfully, prosaically true.
"Can it be that I still actually exist? My body is so shrunk that
there is hardly anything left of me but my voice, and my bed makes me
think of the melodious grave of the enchanter Merlin, which is in the
forest of Broceliand in Brittany, under high oaks whose tops shine
like green flames to heaven. Oh, I envy thee those trees, brother
Merlin, and their fresh waving. For over my mattress grave here in
Paris no green leaves rustle, and early and late I hear nothing but
the rattle of carriages, hammering, scolding, and the jingle of
pianos. A grave without rest, death without the privileges of the
departed, who have no longer any need to spend money, or to write
letters, or to compose books...."
And then she thought of that ghastly comparison of himself to the
ancient German singer—the poor clerk of the Chronicle of
Limburg—whose sweet songs were sung and whistled from morning to
night all through Germany; while the Minnesinger himself, smitten
with leprosy, hooded and cloaked, and carrying the lazarus-clapper,
moved through the shuddering city. God's satire weighed heavily [339]upon
him, indeed. Silently she held out her hand, and he gave her his
bloodless fingers; she touched the strangely satin skin, and felt the
fever beneath.
"It cannot be my little Lucy," he said reproachfully. "She used to
kiss me. But even Lucy's kiss cannot thrill my paralyzed lips."
She stooped and kissed his lips. His little beard felt soft and weak
as the hair of a baby.
"Ah, I have made my peace with the world and with God. Now He sends me
His death-angel."
She struggled with the lump in her throat. "You must be indeed a prey
to illusions, if you mistake an Englishwoman for Azrael."
"Ach, why was I so bitter against England? I was only once in
England, years ago. I knew nobody, and London seemed so full of fog
and Englishmen. Now England has avenged herself beautifully. She sends
me you. Others too mount the hundred and five steps. I am an annexe to
the Paris Exhibition. Remains of Heinrich Heine. A very pilgrimage of
the royal demi-monde! A Russian princess brings the hateful odor of
her pipe," he said with scornful satisfaction, "an Italian princess
babbles of her aches and pains, as if in competition with mine. But
the gold medal would fall to my nerves, I am convinced, if they were
on view at the Exhibition. No, no, don't cry; I meant you to laugh.
Don't think of me as you see me now; pretend to me I am as you first
knew me. But how fine and beautiful you have grown; even to my
fraction of an eye, which sees the sunlight as through black gauze.
Fancy little Lucy has a husband; a husband—and the poodle still takes
three baths a day. Are you happy, darling? are you happy?"
She nodded. It seemed a sacrilege to claim happiness.
"Das ist schön! Yes, you were always so merry. God [340]be thanked! How
refreshing to find one woman with a heart, and that her husband's.
Here the women have a metronome under their corsets, which beats time,
but not music. Himmel! What a whiff of my youth you bring me! Does
the sea still roll green at the end of Boulogue pier, and do the
sea-gulls fly? while I lie here, a Parisian Prometheus, chained to my
bed-post. Ah, had I only the bliss of a rock with the sky above me!
But I must not complain; for six years before I moved here I had
nothing but a ceiling to defy. Now my balcony gives sideways on the
Champs-Elysées, and sometimes I dare to lie outside on a sofa and peer
at beautiful, beautiful Paris, as she sends up her soul in sparkling
fountains, and incarnates herself in pretty women, who trip along like
dance music. Look!"
To please him she went to a window and saw, upon the narrow
iron-grilled balcony, a tent of striped chintz, like the awning of a
café, supported by a light iron framework. Her eyes were blurred by
unshed tears, and she divined rather than saw the far-stretching
Avenue, palpitating with the fevered life of the Great Exhibition
year; the intoxicating sunlight, the horse-chestnut trees dappling
with shade the leafy footways, the white fountain-spray and flaming
flower-beds of the Rond Point, the flashing flickering stream of
carriages flowing to the Bois with their freight of beauty and wealth
and insolent vice.
"The first time I looked out of that window," he said, "I seemed to
myself like Dante at the end of the Divine Comedy, when once again he
beheld the stars. You cannot know what I felt when after so many years
I saw the world again for the first time, with half an eye, for ever
so little a space. I had my wife's opera-glass in my hand, and I saw
with inexpressible pleasure a young vagrant vendor of pastry offering
his goods to two ladies in crinolines, with a small dog. I closed the
glass; I could see no more, for [341]I envied the dog. The nurse carried
me back to bed and gave me morphia. That day I looked no more. For me
the Divine Comedy was far from ended. The divine humorist has even
descended to a pun. Talk of Mahomet's coffin. I lie between the two
Champs-Elysées, the one where warm life palpitates, and that other,
where the pale ghosts flit."
Then it was not a momentary fantasy of the pen, but an abiding mood
that had paid blasphemous homage to the "Aristophanes of Heaven."
Indeed, had it not always run through his work, this conception of
humor in the grotesqueries of history, "the dream of an intoxicated
divinity"? But his amusement thereat had been genial. "Like a mad
harlequin," he had written of Byron, the man to whom he felt himself
most related, "he strikes a dagger into his own heart, to sprinkle
mockingly with the jetting black blood the ladies and gentlemen
around.... My blood is not so splenetically black; my bitterness comes
only from the gall-apples of my ink." But now, she thought, that
bitter draught always at his lips had worked into his blood at last.
"Are you quite incurable?" she said gently, as she returned from the
window to seat herself at his mattress graveside.
"No, I shall die some day. Gruby says very soon. But doctors are so
inconsistent. Last week, after I had had a frightful attack of cramp
in the throat and chest, 'Pouvez-vous siffler?' he said. 'Non, pas
méme une comédie de M. Scribe,' I replied. So you may see how bad I
was. Well, even that, he said, wouldn't hasten the end, and I should
go on living indefinitely! I had to caution him not to tell my wife.
Poor Mathilde! I have been unconscionably long a-dying. And now he
turns round again and bids me order my coffin. But I fear, despite his
latest bulletin, I [342]shall go on some time yet increasing my knowledge
of spinal disease. I read all the books about it, as well as
experiment practically. What clinical lectures I will give in heaven,
demonstrating the ignorance of doctors!"
She was glad to note the more genial nuance of mockery. Raillery
vibrated almost in the very tones of his voice, which had become clear
and penetrating under the stimulus of her presence, but it passed away
in tenderness, and the sarcastic wrinkles vanished from the corners of
his mouth as he made the pathetic jest anent his wife.
"So you read as well as write," she said.
"Oh, well, De Zichlinsky, a nice young refugee, does both for me most
times. My mother, poor old soul, wrote the other day to know why I
only signed my letters, so I had to say my eyes pained me, which was
not so untrue as the rest of the letter."
"Doesn't she know?"
"Know? God bless her, of course not. Dear old lady, dreaming so
happily at the Dammthor, too old and wise to read newspapers. No, she
does not know that she has a dying son, only that she has an undying!
Nicht Wahr?"
He looked at her with a shade of anxiety; that tragic anxiety of the
veteran artist scenting from afar the sneers of the new critics at his
life-work, and morbidly conscious of his hosts of enemies.
"As long as the German tongue lives."
"Dear old Germany," he said, pleased. "Yes, as I wrote to you, for
you are the liebe Kleine of the poem,
She was flattered, but thought sadly of the sequel:
as he went on:—
"That was why, though the German censorship forbade or mutilated my
every book, which was like sticking pins into my soul, I would not
become naturalized here. Paris has been my new Jerusalem, and I
crossed my Jordan at the Rhine; but as a French subject I should be
like those two-headed monstrosities they show at the fairs. Besides, I
hate French poetry. What measured glitter! Not that German poetry has
ever been to me more than a divine plaything. A laurel-wreath on my
grave, place or withhold, I care not; but lay on my coffin a sword,
for I was as brave a soldier as your Canning in the Liberation War of
Humanity. But my Thirty Years' War is over, and I die 'with sword
unbroken, and a broken heart.'" His head fell back in ineffable
hopelessness. "Ah," he murmured, "it was ever my prayer, 'Lord, let me
grow old in body, but let my soul stay young; let my voice quaver and
falter, but never my hope.' And this is how I end."
"But your work does not end. Your fight was not vain. You are the
inspirer of young Germany. And you are praised and worshipped by all
the world. Is that no pleasure?"
"No, I am not le bon Dieu!" He chuckled, his spirits revived by the
blasphemous mot." Ah, what a fate! To have the homage only of the
fools, a sort of celestial Victor Cousin. One compliment from Hegel
now must be sweeter than a churchful of psalms." A fearful fit of
coughing interrupted further elaboration of the blasphemous fantasia.
For five minutes it rent and shook him, the nurse bending fruitlessly
over him; but at its wildest he signed to his visitor not to go, and
when at last it lulled he went on calmly: "Donizetti ended mad in a
gala [344]dress, but I end at least sane enough to appreciate the joke—a
little long-drawn out, and not entirely original, yet replete with
ingenious irony. Little Lucy looks shocked, but I sometimes think,
little Lucy, the disrespect is with the goody-goody folks, who, while
lauding their Deity's strength and hymning His goodness, show no
recognition at all of His humor. Yet I am praised as a wit as well as
a poet. If I could take up my bed and walk, I would preach a new
worship—the worship of the Arch-Humorist. I should draw up the Ritual
of the Ridiculous. Three times a day, when the muezzin called from
the Bourse-top, all the faithful would laugh devoutly at the gigantic
joke of the cosmos. How sublime, the universal laugh! at sunrise,
noon, and sunset; those who did not laugh would be persecuted; they
would laugh, if only on the wrong side of the mouth. Delightful! As
most people have no sense of humor, they will swallow the school
catechism of the comic as stolidly as they now swallow the spiritual.
Yes, I see you will not laugh. But why may I not endow my Deity—as
everybody else does—with the quality which I possess or admire most?"
She felt some truth in his apology. He was mocking, not God, but the
magnified man of the popular creeds; to him it was a mere intellectual
counter with which his wit played, oblivious of the sacred aura that
clung round the concept for the bulk of the world. Even his famous
picture of Jehovah dying, or his suggestion that perhaps dieser
Parvenu des Himmels was angry with Israel for reminding Him of his
former obscure national relations—what was it but a lively rendering
of what German savants said so unreadably about the evolution of the
God-Idea? But she felt also it would have been finer to bear unsmiling
the smileless destinies; not to affront with the tinkle of vain
[345]laughter the vast imperturbable. She answered gently, "You are talking
nonsense."
"I always talked nonsense to you, little Lucy, for
Will you hear its melodious drip-drip, my last poem?—My manuscript,
Catherine; and then you can go take a nap. I am sure I gave you little
rest last night."
The old woman brought him some folio sheets covered with great
pathetically sprawling letters, and when she had retired, he began—
His voice went on, but after the first lines the listener's brain was
too troubled to attend. It was agitated with whirling memories of
those earlier outcries throbbing with the passion of life, flaming
records of the days when every instant held not an eternity of
ennui, but of sensibility. "Red life boils in my veins.... Every
woman is to me the gift of a world.... I hear a thousand
nightingales.... I could eat all the elephants of Hindostan and pick
my teeth with the spire of Strasburg Cathedral.... Life is the
greatest of blessings, and death the worst of evils...." But the poet
was still reading—she forced herself to listen.
He broke off suddenly. "No, it is too sad. A cry in the night from a
man buried alive; a new note in German [346]poetry—was sage ich?—in
the poetry of the world. No poet ever had such a lucky chance
before—voyez-vous—to survive his own death, though many a one has
survived his own immortality. Dici miser ante obitum nemo
debet—call no man wretched till he's dead. 'Tis not till the journey
is over that one can see the perspective truthfully and the tombstones
of one's hopes and illusions marking the weary miles. 'Tis not till
one is dead that the day of judgment can dawn; and when one is dead
one cannot see or judge at all. An exquisite irony. Nicht Wahr? The
wrecks in the Morgue, what tales they could tell! But dead men tell no
tales. While there's life there's hope; and so the worst cynicisms
have never been spoken. But I—I alone—have dodged the Fates. I am
the dead-alive, the living dead. I hover over my racked body like a
ghost, and exist in an interregnum. And so I am the first mortal in a
position to demand an explanation. Don't tell me I have sinned, and am
in hell. Most sins are sins of classification by bigots and poor
thinkers. Who can live without sinning, or sin without living? All
very well for Kant to say: 'Act so that your conduct may be a law for
all men under similar conditions.' But Kant overlooked that you are
part of the conditions. And when you are a Heine, you may very well
concede that future Heines should act just so. It is easy enough to be
virtuous when you are a professor of pure reason, a regular, punctual
mechanism, a thing for the citizens of Königsberg to set their watches
by. But if you happen to be one of those fellows to whom all the roses
nod and all the stars wink ... I am for Schelling's principle: the
highest spirits are above the law. No, no, the parson's explanation
won't do. Perhaps heaven holds different explanations, graduated to
rising intellects, from parsons upwards. Moses Lump will be satisfied
with a gold chair, and the [347]cherubim singing, 'holy! holy! holy!' in
Hebrew, and ask no further questions. Abdullah Ben Osman's mouth will
be closed by the kisses of houris. Surely Christ will not disappoint
the poor old grandmother's vision of Jerusalem the Golden seen through
tear-dimmed spectacles as she pores over the family Bible. He will
meet her at the gates of death with a wonderful smile of love; and, as
she walks upon the heavenly Jordan's shining waters, hand in hand with
Him, she will see her erst-wrinkled face reflected from them in
angelic beauty. Ah, but to tackle a Johann Wolfgang Goethe or a
Gotthold Ephraim Lessing—what an ordeal for the celestial Professor
of Apologetics! Perhaps that's what the Gospel means—only by becoming
little children can we enter the kingdom of heaven. I told my little
god-daughter yesterday that heaven is so pure and magnificent that
they eat cakes there all day—it is only what the parson says,
translated into child-language—and that the little cherubs wipe their
mouths with their white wings. 'That's very dirty,' said the child. I
fear that unless I become a child myself I shall have severer
criticisms to bring against the cherubs. O God," he broke off
suddenly, letting fall the sheets of manuscript and stretching out his
hands in prayer, "make me a child again, even before I die; give me
back the simple faith, the clear vision of the child that holds its
father's hand. Oh, little Lucy, it takes me like that sometimes, and I
have to cry for mercy. I dreamt I was a child the other night, and
saw my dear father again. He was putting on his wig, and I saw him as
through a cloud of powder. I rushed joyfully to embrace him; but, as I
approached him, everything seemed changing in the mist. I wished to
kiss his hands, but I recoiled with mortal cold. The fingers were
withered branches, my father himself a leafless tree, which the winter
had covered with hoar-frost. Ah, Lucy, Lucy, [348]my brain is full of
madness and my heart of sorrow. Sing me the ballad of the lady who
took only one spoonful of gruel, 'with sugar and spices so rich.'"
Astonished at his memory, she repeated the song of Ladye Alice and
Giles Collins, the poet laughing immoderately till at the end,
in his effort to repeat the line that so tickled him, he fell into a
fearful spasm, which tore and twisted him till his child's body lay
curved like a bow. Her tears fell at the sight.
"Don't pity me too much," he gasped, trying to smile with his eyes; "I
bend, but I do not break."
But she, terrified, rang the bell for aid. A jovial-looking
woman—tall and well-shaped—came in, holding a shirt she was sewing.
Her eyes and hair were black, and her oval face had the rude coloring
of health. She brought into the death-chamber at once a whiff of
ozone, and a suggestion of tragic incongruity. Nodding pleasantly at
the visitor, she advanced quickly to the bedside, and laid her hand
upon the forehead, sweating with agony.
"Mathilde," he said, when the spasm abated, "this is little Lucy of
whom I have never spoken to you, and to whom I wrote a poem about her
dark-brown eyes which you have never read."
Mathilde smiled amiably at the Roman matron.
"No, I have never read it," she said archly. "They tell me that Heine
is a very clever man, and writes very fine books; but I know nothing
about it, and must content myself with trusting to their word."
"Isn't she adorable?" cried Heine delightedly. "I have only two
consolations that sit at my bedside, my French wife and my German
muse, and they are not on speaking [349]terms. But it has its
compensations, for she is unable also to read what my enemies in
Germany say about me, and so she continues to love me."
"How can he have enemies?" said Mathilde, smoothing his hair. "He is
so good to everybody. He has only two thoughts—to hide his illness
from his mother, and to earn enough for my future. And as for having
enemies in Germany, how can that be, when he is so kind to every poor
German that passes through Paris?"
It moved the hearer to tears—this wifely faith. Surely the saint that
lay behind the Mephistopheles in his face must have as real an
existence, if the woman who knew him only as man, undazzled by the
glitter of his fame, unwearied by his long sickness, found him thus
without flaw or stain.
"Delicious creature," said Heine fondly. "Not only thinks me good, but
thinks that goodness keeps off enemies. What ignorance of life she
crams into a dozen words. As for those poor countrymen of mine, they
are just the people that carry back to Germany all the awful tales of
my goings-on. Do you know, there was once a poor devil of a musician
who had set my Zwei Grenadiere, and to whom I gave no end of help
and advice, when he wanted to make an opera on the legend of the
Flying Dutchman, which I had treated in one of my books. Now he curses
me and all the Jews together, and his name is Richard Wagner."
Mathilde smiled on vaguely. "You would eat those cutlets," she said
reprovingly.
"Well, I was weary of the chopped grass cook calls spinach. I don't
want seven years of Nebuchadnezzardom."
"Cook is angry when you don't eat her things, chéri. I find it
difficult to get on with her, since you praised her dainty style. One
would think she was the mistress and I the servant."
[350]"Ah, Nonotte, you don't understand the artistic temperament." Then a
twitch passed over his face. "You must give me a double dose of
morphia to-night, darling."
"No, no; the doctor forbids."
"One would think he were the employer and I the employee," he grumbled
smilingly. "But I daresay he is right. Already I spend 500 francs a
year on morphia, I must really retrench. So run away, dearest, I have
a good friend here to cheer me up."
She stooped down and kissed him.
"Ah, madame," she said, "it is very good of you to come and cheer him
up. It is as good as a new dress to me, to see a new face coming in,
for the old ones begin to drop off. Not the dresses, the friends," she
added gaily, as she disappeared.
"Isn't she divine?" cried Heine enthusiastically.
"I am glad you love her," his visitor replied simply.
"You mean you are astonished. Love? What is love? I have never loved."
"You!" And all those stories those countrymen of his had spread
abroad, all his own love-poems were in that exclamation.
"No—never mortal woman. Only statues and the beautiful dead
dream-women, vanished with the neiges d'antan. What did it matter
whom I married? Perhaps you would have had me aspire higher than a
grisette? To a tradesman's daughter? Or a demoiselle in society?
'Explain my position?'—a poor exile's position—to some
double-chinned bourgeois papa who can only see that my immortal
books are worth exactly two thousand marks banco; yes, that's the
most I can wring out of those scoundrels in wicked Hamburg. And to
think that if I had only done my writing in ledgers, the 'prentice
millionaire might have become the master millionaire, ungalled by
avuncular [351]advice and chary cheques. Ah, dearest Lucy, you can never
understand what we others suffer—you into whose mouths the larks drop
roasted. Should I marry fashion and be stifled? Or money and be
patronized? And lose the exquisite pleasure of toiling to buy my wife
new dresses and knick-knacks? Après tout, Mathilde is quite as
intelligent as any other daughter of Eve, whose first thought when she
came to reflective consciousness was a new dress. All great men are
mateless, 'tis only their own ribs they fall in love with. A more
cultured woman would only have misunderstood me more pretentiously.
Not that I didn't, in a weak moment, try to give her a little polish.
I sent her to a boarding-school to learn to read and write; my child
of nature among all the little school-girls—ha! ha! ha!—and I only
visited her on Sundays, and she could rattle off the Egyptian Kings
better than I, and once she told me with great excitement the story of
Lucretia, which she had heard for the first time. Dear Nonotte! You
should have seen her dancing at the school ball, as graceful and
maidenly as the smallest shrimp of them all. What gaieté de cœur!
What good humor! What mother-wit! And such a faithful chum. Ah, the
French women are wonderful. We have been married fifteen years, and
still, when I hear her laugh come through that door, my soul turns
from the gates of death and remembers the sun. Oh, how I love to see
her go off to Mass every morning with her toilette nicely adjusted and
her dainty prayer-book in her neatly gloved hand, for she's adorably
religious, is my little Nonotte. You look surprised; did you then
think religious people shock me!"
She smiled a little. "But don't you shock her?"
"I wouldn't for worlds utter a blasphemy she could understand. Do you
think Shakespeare explained himself to Ann Hathaway? But she doubtless
served well enough as [352]artist's model; raw material to be worked up
into Imogens and Rosalinds. Enchanting creatures! How you foggy
islanders could have begotten Shakespeare! The miracle of miracles.
And Sterne! Mais non, an Irishman like Swift, Ça s'explique. Is
Sterne read?"
"No; he is only a classic."
"Barbarians! Have you read my book on Shakespeare's heroines? It is
good; nicht wahr?"
"Admirable."
"Then, why shouldn't you translate it into English?"
"It is an idea."
"It is an inspiration. Nay, why shouldn't you translate all my books?
You shall; you must. You know how the French edition fait fureur.
French, that is the European hall-mark, for Paris is Athens. But
English will mean fame in ultima Thule; the isles of the sea, as the
Bible says. It isn't for the gold pieces, though, God knows, Mathilde
needs more friends, as we call them—perhaps because they leave us so
soon. I fear she doesn't treat them too considerately, the poor little
featherhead. Heaven preserve you from the irony of having to earn your
living on your death-bed! Ach, my publisher, Campe, has built
himself a new establishment; what a monument to me! Why should not
some English publisher build me a monument in London? The Jew's books,
like the Jew, should be spread abroad, so that in them all the nations
of the earth shall be blessed. For the Jew peddles, not only old clo',
but new ideas. I began life—tell it not in Gath—as a commission
agent for English goods; and I end it as an intermediary between
France and Germany, trying to make two great nations understand each
other. To that not unworthy aim has all my later work been devoted."
"So you really consider yourself a Jew still?"
[353]"Mein Gott! have I ever been anything else but an enemy of the
Philistines?"
She smiled: "Yes; but religiously?"
"Religiously! What was my whole fight to rouse Hodge out of his
thousand years' sleep in his hole? Why did I edit a newspaper, and
plague myself with our time and its interests? Goethe has created
glorious Greek statues, but statues cannot have children. My words
should find issue in deeds. Put me rather with poor Lessing. I am no
true Hellenist. I may have snatched at pleasure, but self-sacrifice
has always called to the depths of me. Like my ancestor, David, I have
been not only a singer, I have slung my smooth little pebbles at the
forehead of Goliath."
"Yes; but haven't you turned Catholic?"
"Catholic!" he roared like a roused lion, "they say that again! Has
the myth of death-bed conversion already arisen about me? How they
jump, the fools, at the idea of a man's coming round to their views
when his brain grows weak!"
"No, not death-bed conversion. Quite an old history. I was assured you
had married in a Catholic Church."
"To please Mathilde. Without that the poor creature wouldn't have
thought herself married in a manner sufficiently pleasing to God. It
is true we had been living together without any Church blessing at
all, but que voulez-vous? Women are like that. But for a duel I had
to fight, I should have been satisfied to go on as we were. I
understand by a wife something nobler than a married woman chained to
me by money-brokers and parsons, and I deemed my faux ménage far
firmer than many a "true" one. But since I was to be married, I
could not leave my beloved Nonotte a dubious widowhood. We even
invited a number of Bohemian couples to the wedding-feast, and bade
them follow our example in daring the last step of all. Ha! ha! [354]there
is nothing like a convert's zeal, you see. But convert to Catholicism,
that's another pair of sleeves. If your right eye offends you, pluck
it out; if your right arm offends you, cut it off. And if your reason
offends you, become a Catholic. No, no, Lucy, I may have worshipped
the Madonna in song, for how can a poet be insensible to the beauty of
Catholic symbol and ritual? But a Jew I have always been."
"Despite your baptism?"
The sufferer groaned, but not from physical pain.
"Ah, cruel little Lucy, don't remind me of my youthful folly. Thank
your stars you were born an Englishwoman. I was born under the fearful
conjunction of Christian bigotry and Jewish, in the Judenstrasse. In
my cradle lay my line of life marked out from beginning to end. My
God, what a life! You know how Germany treated her Jews—like pariahs
and wild beasts. At Frankfort for centuries the most venerable Rabbi
had to take off his hat if the smallest gamin cried: 'Jud', mach
mores!' I have myself been shut up in that Ghetto, I have witnessed a
Jew-riot more than once in Hamburg. Ah, Judaism is not a religion, but
a misfortune. And to be born a Jew and a genius! What a double
curse! Believe me, Lucy, a certificate of baptism was a necessary card
of admission to European culture. Neither my mother nor my money-bag
of an uncle sympathized with my shuddering reluctance to wade through
holy water to my doctor's degree. And yet no sooner had I taken the
dip than a great horror came over me. Many a time I got up at night
and looked in the glass, and cursed myself for my want of backbone!
Alas! my curses were more potent than those of the Rabbis against
Spinoza, and this disease was sent me to destroy such backbone as I
had. No wonder the doctors do not understand it. I learnt in the
Ghetto that if I didn't twine [355]the holy phylacteries round my arm,
serpents would be found coiled round the arm of my corpse. Alas!
serpents have never failed to coil themselves round my sins. The
Inquisition could not have tortured me more, had I been a Jew of
Spain. If I had known how much easier moral pain was to bear than
physical, I would have saved my curses for my enemies, and put up with
my conscience—twinges. Ah, truly said your divine Shakespeare that
the wisest philosopher is not proof against a toothache. When was any
spasm of pleasure so sustained as pain? Certain of our bones, I learn
from my anatomy books, only manifest their existence when they are
injured. Happy are the bones that have no history. Ugh! how mine are
coming through the skin, like ugly truth through fair romance. I shall
have to apologize to the worms for offering them nothing but bones.
Alas, how ugly bitter it is to die; how sweet and snugly we can live
in this snug, sweet nest of earth. What nice words; I must start a
poem with them. Yes, sooner than die I would live over again my
miserable boyhood in my uncle Salomon's office, miscalculating in his
ledgers like a Trinitarian, while I scribbled poems for the Hamburg
Wächter. Yes, I would even rather learn Latin again at the Franciscan
cloister, and grind law at Göttingen. For, after all, I shouldn't have
to work very hard; a pretty girl passes, and to the deuce with the
Pandects! Ah, those wild University days, when we used to go and sup
at the 'Landwehr,' and the rosy young Kellnerin, who brought us our
duck mit Apfelkompot, kissed me alone of all the Herren Studenten,
because I was a poet, and already as famous as the professors. And
then, after I should be re-rusticated from Göttingen, there would be
Berlin over again, and dear Rahel Levin and her salon, and the
Tuesdays at Elise von Hohenhausen's (at which I would read my Lyrical
Intermezzo), and the mad literary nights [356]with the poets in the
Behrenstrasse. And balls, theatres, operas, masquerades—shall I ever
forget the ball when Sir Walter Scott's son appeared as a Scotch
Highlander, just when all Berlin was mad about the Waverley Novels! I,
too, should read them over again for the first time, those wonderful
romances; yes, and I should write my own early books over again—oh,
the divine joy of early creation!—and I should set out again with
bounding pulses on my Harzreise: and the first night of Freischütz
would come once more, and I should be whistling the Jungfern and
sipping punch in the Casino, with Lottchen filling up my glass." His
eyes oozed tears, and suddenly he stretched out his arms and seized
her hand and pressed it frantically, his face and body convulsed, his
paralyzed eyelids dropping. "No, no!" he pleaded, in a hoarse, hollow
voice, as she strove to withdraw it, "I hear the footsteps of death, I
must cling on to life; I must, I must. O the warmth and the scent of
it!"
She shuddered. For an instant he seemed a vampire with shut eyes
sucking at her life-blood to sustain his; and when that horrible
fantasy passed, there remained the overwhelming tragedy of a dead man
lusting for life. Not this the ghost, who, as Berlioz put it, stood at
the window of his grave, regarding and mocking the world in which he
had no further part. But his fury waned, he fell back as in a stupor,
and lay silent, little twitches passing over his sightless face.
She bent over him, terribly distressed. Should she go? Should she ring
again? Presently words came from his lips at intervals, abrupt,
disconnected, and now a ribald laugh, and now a tearful sigh. And then
he was a student humming:
[357]and his death-mask lit up with the wild joys of living. And then
earlier memories still—of his childhood in Düsseldorf—seemed to flow
through his comatose brain; his mother and brothers and sisters; the
dancing-master he threw out of the window; the emancipation of the
Jewry by the French conquerors; the joyous drummer who taught him
French; the passing of Napoleon on his white horse; the atheist
school-boy friend with whom he studied Spinoza on the sly, and the
country louts from whom he bought birds merely to set them free, and
the blood-red hair of the hangman's niece who sang him folk-songs. And
suddenly he came to himself, raised his eyelid with his forefinger and
looked at her.
"Catholic!" he cried angrily. "I never returned to Judaism, because I
never left it. My baptism was a mere wetting. I have never put
Heinrich—only H—on my books, and never have I ceased to write
'Harry' to my mother. Though the Jews hate me even more than the
Christians, yet I was always on the side of my brethren."
"I know, I know," she said soothingly. "I am sorry I hurt you. I
remember well the passage in which you say that your becoming a
Christian was the fault of the Saxons who changed sides suddenly at
Leipzig; or else of Napoleon who had no need to go to Russia; or else
of his school-master who gave him instruction at Brienne in geography,
and did not tell him that it was very cold at Moscow in winter."
"Very well, then," he said, pacified. "Let them not say either that I
have been converted to Judaism on my death-bed. Was not my first poem
based on one in the Passover night Hagadah? Was not my first
tragedy, Almansor, really the tragedy of down-trodden Israel, that
great race which from the ruins of its second Temple knew to save, not
the gold and the precious stones, but its real treasure, the [358]Bible—a
gift to the world that would make the tourist traverse oceans to see a
Jew, if there were only one left alive. The only people that preserved
freedom of thought through the middle ages, they have now to preserve
God against the free-thought of the modern world. We are the Swiss
guards of Deism. God was always the beginning and end of my thought.
When I hear His existence questioned, I feel as I felt once in your
Bedlam when I lost my guide, a ghastly forlornness in a mad world. Is
not my best work, The Rabbi of Bacharach, devoted to expressing the
'vast Jewish sorrow,' as Börne calls it?"
"But you never finished it?"
"I was a fool to be persuaded by Moser. Or was it Gans? Ah, will not
Jehovah count it to me for righteousness, that New Jerusalem
Brotherhood with them in the days when I dreamt of reconciling Jew and
Greek—the goodness of beauty with the beauty of goodness! Oh, those
days of youthful dreams, whose winters are warmer than the summers of
the after years. How they tried to crush us, the Rabbis and the State
alike! O the brave Moser, the lofty-souled, the pure-hearted, who
passed from counting-house to laboratory, and studied Sanscrit for
recreation, moriturus te saluto. And thou, too, Markus, with thy
boy's body, and thy old man's look, and thy encyclopædic, inorganic
mind; and thou, O Gans, with thy too organic Hegelian hocus-pocus.
Yes, the Rabbis were right, and the baptismal font had us at last; but
surely God counts the will to do, and is more pleased with
great-hearted dreams than with the deeds of the white-hearted burghers
of virtue, whose goodness is essence of gendarmerie. And where,
indeed—if not in Judaism, broadened by Hellenism—shall one find the
religion of the future? Be sure of this, anyhow, that only a Jew will
find it. We have the gift of religion, the wisdom of the ages. You
others—young races [359]fresh from staining your bodies with woad—have
never yet got as far as Moses. Moses—that giant figure—who dwarfs
Sinai when he stands upon it, the great artist in life, who, as I
point out in my Confessions built human pyramids; who created
Israel; who took a poor shepherd family, and created a nation from
it—a great, eternal, holy people, a people of God, destined to
outlive the centuries, and to serve as a pattern to all other
nations—a statesman, not a dreamer, who did not deny the world and
the flesh, but sanctified it. Happiness, is it not implied in the very
aspiration of the Christian for postmundane bliss? And yet, 'the man
Moses was very meek'; the most humble and lovable of men. He
too—though it is always ignored—was ready to die for the sins of
others, praying, when his people had sinned, that his name might be
blotted out instead; and though God offered to make of him a great
nation, yet did he prefer the greatness of his people. He led them to
Palestine, but his own foot never touched the promised land. What a
glorious, Godlike figure, and yet so prone to wrath and error, so
lovably human. How he is modelled all round like a Rembrandt—while
your starveling monks have made of your Christ a mere decorative
figure with a gold halo. O Moshé Rabbenu, Moses our teacher indeed!
No, Christ was not the first nor the last of our race to wear a crown
of thorns. What was Spinoza but Christ in the key of meditation?"
"Wherever a great soul speaks out his thoughts, there is Golgotha,"
quoted the listener.
"Ah, you know every word I have written," he said, childishly pleased.
"Decidedly, you must translate me. You shall be my apostle to the
heathen. You are good apostles, you English. You turned Jews under
Cromwell, and now your missionaries are planting our Palestinian
doctrines in the South Seas, or amid the josses and pagodas of [360]the
East, and your young men are colonizing unknown continents on the
basis of the Decalogue of Moses. You are founding a world-wide
Palestine. The law goes forth from Zion, but by way of Liverpool and
Southampton. Perhaps you are indeed the lost Ten Tribes."
"Then you would make me a Jew, too," she laughed.
"Jew or Greek, there are only two religious
possibilities—fetish-dances and spinning dervishes don't count—the
Renaissance meant the revival of these two influences, and since the
sixteenth century they have both been increasing steadily. Luther was
a child of the Old Testament. Since the Exodus, Freedom has always
spoken with a Hebrew accent. Christianity is Judaism run divinely mad,
a religion without a drainage system, a beautiful dream dissevered
from life, soul cut adrift from body, and sent floating through the
empyrean, when it can only at best be a captive balloon. At the same
time, don't take your idea of Judaism from the Jews. It is only an
apostolic succession of great souls that understands anything in this
world. The Jewish mission will never be over till the Christians are
converted to the religion of Christ. Lassalle is a better pupil of the
Master than the priests who denounce socialism. You have met Lassalle!
No? You shall meet him here one day. A marvel. Me plus Will. He
knows everything, feels everything, yet is a sledge-hammer to act. He
may yet be the Messiah of the nineteenth century. Ah! when every man
is a Spinoza, and does good for the love of good, when the world is
ruled by justice and brotherhood, reason and humor, then the Jews may
shut up shop, for it will be the Holy Sabbath. Did you mark, Lucy, I
said, reason and humor? Nothing will survive in the long run but what
satisfies the sense of logic, and the sense of humor. Logic and
laughter—the two trumps of doom! Put not your trust in princes—the
really great of [361]the earth are always simple. Pomp and ceremonial,
popes and kings, are toys for children. Christ rode on an ass, now the
ass rides on Christ."
"And how long do you give your trumps to sound before your Millennium
dawns?" said "little Lucy," feeling strangely old and cynical beside
this incorrigible idealist.
"Alas, perhaps I am only another dreamer of the Ghetto, perhaps I have
fought in vain. A Jewish woman once came weeping to her Rabbi with her
son, and complained that the boy, instead of going respectably into
business like his sires, had developed religion, and insisted on
training for a Rabbi. Would not the Rabbi dissuade him? 'But,' said
the Rabbi, chagrined, 'why are you so distressed about it? Am I not
a Rabbi?' 'Yes,' replied the woman, 'but this little fool takes it
seriously,' Ach, every now and again arises a dreamer who takes the
world's lip-faith seriously, and the world tramples on another fool.
Perhaps there is no resurrection for humanity. If so, if there's no
world's Saviour coming by the railway, let us keep the figure of that
sublime Dreamer whose blood is balsam to the poor and the suffering."
Marvelling at the mental lucidity, the spiritual loftiness of his
changed mood, his visitor wished to take leave of him with this image
in her memory; but just then a half-paralyzed Jewish graybeard made
his appearance, and Heine's instant dismissal of him on her account
made it difficult not to linger a little longer.
"My chef de police!" he said, smiling. "He lives on me and I live on
his reports of the great world. He tells me what my enemies are up to.
But I have them in there," and he pointed to an ebony box on a chest
of drawers, and asked her to hand it to him.
"Pardon me before I forget," he said; and, seizing a pencil like a
dagger, he made a sprawling note, laughing [362]venomously. "I have them
here!" he repeated, "they will try to stop the publication of my
Memoirs, but I will outwit them yet. I hold them! Dead or alive,
they shall not escape me. Woe to him who shall read these lines, if he
has dared attack me. Heine does not die like the first comer. The
tiger's claws will survive the tiger. When I die, it will be for
them the Day of Judgment."
It was a reminder of the long fighting life of the freelance, of all
the stories she had heard of his sordid quarrels, of his blackmailing
his relatives, and besting his uncle. She asked herself his own
question, "Is genius, like the pearl in the oyster, only a splendid
disease?"
Aloud she said, "I hope you are done with Börne!"
"Börne?" he said, softening. "Ach, what have I against Börne? Two
baptized German Jews exiled in Paris should forgive each other in
death. My book was misunderstood. I wish to heaven I hadn't written
it. I always admired Börne, even if I could not keep up the ardor of
my St. Simonian days when my spiritual Egeria was Rahel von Varnhagen.
I had three beautiful days with him in Frankfort when he was full of
Jewish wit, and hadn't yet shrunk to a mere politician. He was a brave
soldier of humanity, but he had no sense of art, and I could not stand
the dirty mob around him with its atmosphere of filthy German tobacco
and vulgar tirades against tyrants. The last time I saw him he was
almost deaf, and worn to a skeleton by consumption. He dwelt in a
vast, bright silk dressing-gown, and said that if an Emperor shook his
hand he would cut it off. I said if a workman shook mine I should wash
it. And so we parted, and he fell to denouncing me as a traitor and a
persifleur, who would preach monarchy or republicanism, according to
which sounded better in the sentence. Poor Lob Baruch! Perhaps he was
wiser than I in his idea that his brother Jews should sink themselves
in [363]the nations. He was born, by the way, in the very year of old
Mendelssohn's death. What an irony! But I am sorry for those
insinuations against Mme. Strauss. I have withdrawn them from the new
edition, although, as you perhaps know, I had already satisfied her
husband's sense of justice by allowing him to shoot at me, whilst I
fired in the air. What can I more?"
"I am glad you have withdrawn them," she said, moved.
"Yes; I have no Napoleonic grip, you see. A morsel of conventional
conscience clings to me."
"Therefore I could never understand your worship of Napoleon."
"There speaks the Englishwoman. You Pharisees—forgive me—do not
understand great men, you and your Wellington! Napoleon was not of the
wood of which kings are made, but of the marble of the gods. Let me
tell you the "code Napoleon" carried light not only into the Ghettos,
but into many another noisome spider-clot of feudalism. The world
wants earthquakes and thunderstorms, or it grows corrupt and stagnant.
This Paris needs a scourge of God, and the moment France gives Germany
a pretext, there will be sackcloth and ashes, or prophecy has died out
of Israel."
"Qui vivra verra," ran heedlessly off her tongue. Then, blushing
painfully, she said quickly, "But how do you worship Napoleon and
Moses in the same breath?"
"Ah, my dear Lucy, if your soul was like an Aladdin's palace with a
thousand windows opening on the human spectacle! Self-contradiction
the fools call it, if you will not shut your eyes to half the show. I
love the people, yet I hate their stupidity and mistrust their
leaders. I hate the aristocrats, yet I love the lilies that toil not,
neither do they spin, and sometimes bring their perfume and their
white robes into a sick man's chamber. Who would [364]harden with work the
white fingers of Corysande, or sacrifice one rustle of Lalage's silken
skirts? Let the poor starve; I'll have no potatoes on Parnassus. My
socialism is not barracks and brown bread, but purple robes, music,
and comedies.
"Yes, I was born for Paradox. A German Parisian, a Jewish German, a
hated political exile who yearns for dear homely old Germany, a
sceptical sufferer with a Christian patience, a romantic poet
expressing in classic form the modern spirit, a Jew and poor—think
you I do not see myself as lucidly as I see the world? 'My mind to me
a kingdom is' sang your old poet. Mine is a republic, and all moods
are free, equal and fraternal, as befits a child of light. Or if there
is a despot, 'tis the king's jester, who laughs at the king as well
as all his subjects. But am I not nearer Truth for not being caged in
a creed or a clan? Who dares to think Truth frozen—on this
phantasmagorical planet, that whirls in beginningless time through
endless space! Let us trust, for the honor of God, that the
contradictory creeds for which men have died are all true. Perhaps
humor—your right Hegelian touchstone to which everything yields up
its latent negation, passing on to its own contradiction—gives truer
lights and shades than your pedantic Philistinism. Is Truth really in
the cold white light, or in the shimmering interplay of the rainbow
tints that fuse in it? Bah! Your Philistine critic will sum me up
after I am dead in a phrase; or he will take my character to pieces
and show how they contradict each other, and adjudge me, like a
schoolmaster, so many good marks for this quality, and so many bad
marks for that. Biographers will weigh me grocerwise, as Kant weighed
the Deity. Ugh! You can only be judged by your peers or by your
superiors, by the minds that circumscribe yours, not by those that are
smaller than yours. I tell you that [365]when they have written three tons
about me, they shall as little understand me as the Cosmos I reflect.
Does the pine contradict the rose or the lotusland the iceberg? I am
Spain, I am Persia, I am the North Sea, I am the beautiful gods of old
Greece, I am Brahma brooding over the sun-lands, I am Egypt, I am the
Sphinx. But oh, dear Lucy, the tragedy of the modern, all-mirroring
consciousness that dares to look on God face to face, not content,
with Moses, to see the back parts; nor, with the Israelites, to gaze
on Moses. Ach, why was I not made four-square like Moses
Mendelssohn, or sublimely one-sided like Savonarola; I, too, could
have died to save humanity, if I did not at the same time suspect
humanity was not worth saving. To be Don Quixote and Sancho Panza in
one, what a tragedy! No, your limited intellects are happier: those
that see life in some one noble way, and in unity find strength. I
should have loved to be a Milton—like one of your English cathedrals,
austere, breathing sacred memories, resonant with the roll of a great
organ, with painted windows, on which the shadows of the green boughs
outside wave and flicker, and just hint of Nature. Or one of your
aristocrats with a stately home in the country, and dogs and horses,
and a beautiful wife. In short, I should like to be your husband. Or,
failing that, my own wife, a simple, loving creature, whose idea of
culture is cabbages. Ach, why was my soul wider than the Ghetto I
was born in? why did I not mate with my kind?" He broke into a fit of
coughing, and "little Lucy" thought suddenly of the story that all his
life-sadness and song-sadness was due to his rejection by some Jewish
girl in his own family circle.
"I tire you," she said. "Do not talk to me. I will sit here a little
longer."
"Nay, I have tired you. But I could not but tell you [366]my thoughts;
for you are at once a child who loves and a woman who understands me.
And to be understood is rarer than to be loved. My very parents never
understood me. Nay, were they my parents—the mild man of business,
the clever, clear-headed, romance-disdaining Dutchwoman, God bless
her? No, my father was Germany, my mother was the Ghetto. The brooding
spirit of Israel breathes through me that engendered the tender humor
of her sages, the celestial fantasies of her saints. Perhaps I should
have been happier had I married the first black-eyed Jewess whose
father would put up with a penniless poet. I might have kept a kitchen
with double crockery and munched Passover cakes at Easter. Every
Friday night I should have come home from the labors of the week and
found the table-cloth shining like my wife's face, and the Sabbath
candles burning, and the Angels of Peace sitting hidden beneath their
great invisible wings, and my wife, piously conscious of having thrown
the dough on the fire, would have kissed me tenderly, and I should
have recited in an ancient melody: 'A virtuous woman, who can find
her? Her price is far above rubies.' There would have been little
children with great candid eyes, on whose innocent heads I should have
laid my hands in blessing, praying that God might make them like
Ephraim and Manasseh, Rachel and Leah—persons of dubious
exemplariness—and we should have sat down and eaten Schalet, which
is the divinest dish in the world, pending the Leviathan that awaits
the blessed at Messiah's table. And, instead of singing of cocottes
and mermaids, I should have sung, like Jehuda Halévi, of my
Herzensdame, Jerusalem. Perhaps—who knows?—my Hebrew verses would
have been incorporated in the festival liturgy, and pious old men
would have snuffled them helter-skelter through their noses. The
letters of my name would have run [367]acrosticwise down the verses, and
the last verse would have inspired the cantor to jubilant roulades or
tremolo wails while the choir boomed in 'Pom'; and perhaps many a
Jewish banker, to whom my present poems make so little appeal, would
have wept and beat his breast and taken snuff to the words of them.
And I should have been buried honorably in the 'House of Life,' and my
son would have said Kaddish. Ah me, it is, after all, so much better
to be stupid and walk in the old laid-out, well-trimmed paths, than to
wander after the desires of your own heart and your own eyes over the
blue hills. True, there are glorious vistas to explore, and streams of
living silver to bathe in, and wild horses to catch by the mane, but
you are in a chartless land without stars and compass. One false step
and you are over a precipice, or up to your neck in a slough. Ah, it
is perilous to throw over the old surveyors. I see Moses ben Amram,
with his measuring-chain and his graving-tools, marking on those stone
tables of his the deepest abysses and the muddiest morasses. When I
kept swine with the Hegelians, I used to say, or rather, I still say,
for, alas! I cannot suppress what I have published: 'teach man he's
divine; the knowledge of his divinity will inspire him to manifest
it.' Ah me, I see now that our divinity is like old Jupiter's, who
made a beast of himself as soon as he saw pretty Europa. Would to God
I could blot out all my book on German Philosophy! No, no, humanity is
too weak and too miserable. We must have faith, we cannot live without
faith, in the old simple things, the personal God, the dear old Bible,
a life beyond the grave."
Fascinated by his talk, which seemed to play like lightning round a
cliff at midnight, revealing not only measureless heights and
soundless depths, but the greasy wrappings and refuse bottles of a
picnic, the listener had an intuition [368]that Heine's mind did indeed,
as he claimed, reflect or rather refract the All. Only not sublimely
blurred as in Spinoza's, but specifically colored and infinitely
interrelated, so that he might pass from the sublime to the ridiculous
with an equal sense of its value in the cosmic scheme. It was the
Jewish artist's proclamation of the Unity, the humorist's "Hear, O
Israel."
"Will it never end, this battle of Jew and Greek?" he said, half to
himself, so that she did not know whether he meant it personally or
generally. Then, as she tore herself away, "I fear I have shocked
you," he said tenderly. "But one thing I have never blasphemed—Life.
Is not enjoyment an implicit prayer, a latent grace? After all, God is
our Father, not our drill-master. He is not so dull and solemn as the
parsons make out. He made the kitten to chase its tail and my Nonotte
to laugh and dance. Come again, dear child, for my friends have grown
used to my dying, and expect me to die for ever—an inverted
immortality. But one day they will find the puppet-show shut up and
the jester packed in his box. Good-bye. God bless you, little Lucy,
God bless you."
The puppet-show was shut up sooner than he expected; but the jester
had kept his most wonderful mot for the last.
"Dieu me pardonnera," he said. "C'est son métier."
Such is the Marseillaise the Social Democrats of Germany sing, as they
troop out when the police break up their meetings.
This Lassalle, whose bold lead they profess to follow, lies at rest in
the Jewish cemetery of his native Breslau under the simple epitaph
"Thinker and Fighter," and at his death the extraordinary popular
manifestations seemed to inaugurate the cult of a modern Messiah—the
Saviour of the People.
But no man is a hero to his valet or his relatives, and on the spring
morning when Lassalle stood at the parting of the ways—where the
Thinker's path debouched on the Fighter's—his brother-in-law from
Prague, being in Berlin on business, took the opportunity of
remonstrating.
"I can't understand what you mean by such productions," he cried,
excitedly waving a couple of pamphlets.
"That is not my fault, my dear Friedland," said Lassalle [370]suavely. "It
takes some brain to follow even what I have put so clearly. What
have you there?"
"The lecture to the artisans, for which you have to go to gaol for
four months," said the outraged ornament of Prague society, which he
illumined as well as adorned, having, in fact, the town's
gas-contract.
"Not so fast. There is my appeal yet before the Kammergericht. And
take care that you are not in gaol first; that pamphlet is either one
of the suppressed editions, or has been smuggled in from Zürich, a
proof in itself of that negative concept of the State which the
pamphlet aims at destroying. Your State is a mere night-watchman—it
protects the citizen but it does nothing to form him. It keeps off
ideas, but it has none of its own. But the State, as friend Bœckh
puts it, should be the institution in which the whole virtue of
mankind realizes itself. It should sum up human experience and wisdom,
and fashion its members in accordance therewith. What is history but
the story of man's struggle with nature? And what is a State but the
socialization of this struggle, the stronger helping the weaker?"
"Nonsense! Why should we help the lower classes?"
"Pardon me," said Lassalle, "it is they who help us. We are the
weaker, they are the stronger. That is the point of the other pamphlet
you have there, explaining what is a Constitution."
"Don't try your legal quibbles on me."
"Legal quibbles! Why the very point of my pamphlet is to ignore verbal
definitions. A Constitution is what constitutes it, and the
working-class being nine-tenths of the population must be nine-tenths
of the German Constitution."
"Then it's true what they say, that you wish to lead a Revolution!"
exclaimed Friedland, raising his coarse glittering hands in horror.
[371]"Follow a Revolution, you mean," said Lassalle. "Here again I do away
with mere words. Real Revolutions make themselves, and we only become
conscious of them. The introduction of machinery was a greater
Revolution than the French, which, since it did not express ideals
that were really present among the masses, was bound to be followed by
the old thing over again. Indeed, sometimes, as I showed in Franz von
Sickingen (my drama of the sixteenth-century war of the Peasants), a
Revolution may even be reactionary, an attempt to re-establish an
order of things that has hopelessly passed away. Hence it is your
sentiments that are revolutionary."
Friedland's face had the angry helplessness of a witness in the hands
of a clever lawyer. "A pretty socialist you are!" he broke out, as
his arm swept with an auctioneer's gesture over the luxurious villa in
the Bellevuestrasse. "Why don't you call in the first sweep from the
street and pour him out your champagne?"
"My dear Friedland! Delighted. Help yourself," said Lassalle
imperturbably.
The Prague dignitary purpled.
"You call your sister's husband a sweep!"
"Forgive me. I should have said 'gas-fitter.'"
"And who are you?" shrieked Friedland; "you gaol-bird!"
"The honor of going to gaol for truth and justice will never be yours,
my dear brother-in-law."
Although he was scarcely taller than the gross-paunched parvenu who
had married his only sister, his slim form seemed to tower over him in
easy elegance. An aristocratic insolence and intelligence radiated
from the handsome face that so many women had found irresistible,
uniting, as it did, three universal types of beauty—the Jewish, the
ancient Greek, and the Germanic. The Orient gave [372]complexion and fire,
the nose was Greek, the shape of the head not unlike Goethe's. The
spirit of the fighter who knows not fear flashed from his sombre blue
eyes. The room itself—Lassalle's cabinet—seemed in its simple
luxuriousness to give point at once to the difference between the two
men and to the parvenu's taunt. It was of moderate size, with a large
work-table thickly littered with papers, and a comfortable
writing-chair, on the back of which Lassalle's white nervous hand
rested carelessly. The walls were a mass of book-cases, gleaming with
calf and morocco, and crammed with the literature of many ages and
races. Precious folios denoted the book-lover, ancient papyri the
antiquarian. It was the library of a seeker after the encyclopædic
culture of the Germany of his day. The one lighter touch in the room
was a small portrait of a young woman of rare beauty and nobility. But
this sober cabinet gave on a Turkish room—a divan covered with rich
Oriental satins, inlaid whatnots, stools, dainty tables, all laden
with costly narghiles, chibouques, and opium-pipes with enormous amber
tips, Damascus daggers, tiles, and other curios brought back by him
from the East—and behind this room one caught sight of a little
winter-garden full of beautiful plants.
"Truth and justice!" repeated Friedland angrily. "Fiddlesticks! A
crazy desire for notoriety. That's the truth. And as for
justice—well, that was what was meted out to you."
"Prussian justice!" Lassalle's hand rose dramatically heavenwards. His
brow grew black and his voice had the vibration of the great orator or
the great actor. "When I think of this daily judicial murder of ten
long years that I passed through, then waves of blood seem to tremble
before my eyes, and it seems as if a sea of blood would choke me.
Galley-slaves appear to me very honorable persons [373]compared with our
judges. As for our so-called Liberal press, it is a harlot
masquerading as the goddess of liberty."
"And what are you masquerading as?" retorted Friedland. "If you were
really in earnest, you would share all your fine things with dirty
working-men, and become one of them, instead of going down to their
meetings in patent-leather boots."
"No, my dear man, it is precisely to show the dirty working-man what
he has missed that I exhibit to him my patent-leather boots. Humility,
contentment, may be a Christian virtue, but in economics 'tis a deadly
sin. What is the greatest misfortune for a people? To have no wants,
to be lazzaroni sprawling in the sun. But to have the greatest number
of needs, and to satisfy them honestly, is the virtue of to-day, of
the era of political economy. I have always been careful about my
clothes, because it is our duty to give pleasure to other people. If I
went down to my working-men in a dirty shirt, they would be the first
to cry out against my contempt for them. And as for becoming a
working-man, I choose to be a working-man in that sphere in which I
can do most good, and I keep my income in order to do it. At least it
was honorably earned."
"Honorably earned!" sneered Friedland. "That is the first time I have
heard it described thus." And he looked meaningly at the beautiful
portrait.
"I am quite aware you have not the privilege of conversing with my
friends," retorted Lassalle, losing his temper for the first time. "I
know I am kept by my mistress, the Countess Hatzfeldt; that all the
long years, all the best years of my life, I chivalrously devoted to
championing an oppressed woman count for nothing, and that it is
dishonorable for me to accept a small commission on the enormous
estates I won back for her from her brutal husband! Why, my mere fees
as lawyer would have [374]come to double. But pah! why do I talk with
you?" He began to pace the room. "The fact that I have such a
delightful home to exchange for gaol is just the thing that should
make you believe in my sincerity. No, my respected
brother-in-law"—and he made a sudden theatrical gesture, and his
voice leapt to a roar,—"understand I will carry on my life-mission as
I choose, and never—never to satisfy every fool will I carry the
ass." His voice sank. "You know the fable."
"Your mission! The Public Prosecutor was right in saying it was to
excite the non-possessing classes to hatred and contempt of the
possessing class."
"He was. I live but to point out to the working-man how he is
exploited by capitalists like you."
"And ruin your own sister!"
"Ha, ha! So you're afraid I shall succeed. Good!" His blue eyes
blazed. He stood still, an image of triumphant Will.
"You will succeed only in disgracing your relatives," said Friedland
sullenly.
His brother-in-law broke into Homeric laughter. "Ho, ho," he cried.
"Now I see. You are afraid that I'll come to Prague, that I'll visit
you and cry out to your fashionable circle: 'I, Ferdinand Lassalle,
the pernicious demagogue of all your journals, Governmental and
Progressive alike, the thief of the casket-trial, the Jew-traitor, the
gaol-bird, I am the brother-in-law of your host,' And so you've rushed
to Berlin to break off with me. Ho, ho, ho!"
Friedland gave him a black look and rushed from the room. Lassalle
laughed on, scarcely noticing his departure. His brain was busy with
that comical scene, the recall of which had put the enemy to flight.
On his migration from Berlin to Prague, when he got the gas-contract,
[375]Friedland, by a profuse display of his hospitality, and a careful
concealment of his Jewish birth, wormed his way among families of
birth and position, and finally into the higher governmental circles.
One day, when he was on the eve of dining the élite of Prague,
Lassalle's old father turned up accidentally on a visit to his
daughter and son-in-law. Each in turn besought him hurriedly not to
let slip that they were Jews. The old man was annoyed, but made no
reply. When all the guests were seated, old Lassalle rose to speak,
and when silence fell, he asked if they knew they were at a Jew's
table. "I hold it my duty to inform you," he said, "that I am a Jew,
that my daughter is a Jewess, and my son-in-law a Jew. I will not
purchase by deceit the honor of dining with you." The well-bred guests
cheered the old fellow, but the host was ghastly with confusion, and
never forgave him.
But Lassalle's laughter soon ceased. Another recollection stabbed him
to silence. The old man was dead—that beautiful, cheerful old man.
Never more would his blue eyes gaze in proud tenderness on his darling
brilliant boy. But a few months ago and he had seemed the very type of
ruddy old age. How tenderly he had watched over his poor broken-down
old wife, supporting her as she walked, cutting up her food as she
ate, and filling her eyes with the love-light, despite all her pain
and weakness. And now this poor, deaf, shrivelled little mother, had
to totter on alone. "Father, what have you to do to-day?" he
remembered asking him once. "Only to love you, my child," the old man
had answered cheerily, laying his hand on his son's shoulder.
[376]Yes, he had indeed loved him. What long patience from his childhood
upwards; patience with the froward arrogant boy, a law to himself even
in forging his parents' names to his school-notes, and meditating
suicide because his father had beaten him for demanding more elegant
clothes; patience with the emotional volcanic youth to whose grandiose
soul a synod of professors reprimanding him seemed unclean crows and
ravens pecking at a fallen eagle that had only to raise quivering
wings to fly towards the sun; patience with his refusal to enter a
commercial career, and carry on the prosperous silk business; patience
even with his refusal to study law and medicine. "But what then do you
wish to study, my boy? At sixteen one must choose decisively."
"The vastest study in the world, that which is most closely bound up
with the most sacred interests of humanity—History."
"But what will you live on, since, as a Jew, you can't get any post or
professorship in Prussia?"
"Oh, I shall live somehow."
"But why won't you study medicine or law?"
"Doctors, lawyers, and even savants, make a merchandise of their
knowledge. I will have nothing of the Jew. I will study for the sake
of knowledge and action."
"Do you think you are a poet?"
"No, I wish to devote myself to public affairs. The time approaches
when the most sacred ends of humanity must be fought for. Till the end
of the last century the world was held in the bondage of the stupidest
superstition. Then rose, at the mighty appeal of intellect, a material
force which blew the old order into bloody fragments. Intellectually
this revolt has gone on ever since. In every nation men have arisen
who have fought by the Word, and fallen or conquered. Börne says that
no European [377]sovereign is blind enough to believe his grandson will
have a throne to sit on. I wish I could believe so. For my part,
father, I feel that the era of force must come again, for these folk
on the thrones will not have it otherwise. But for the moment it is
ours not to make the peoples revolt, but to enlighten and raise them
up."
"What you say may not be altogether untrue, but why should you be a
martyr,—you, our hope, our stay? Spare us. One human being can change
nothing in the order of the world. Let those fight who have no
parents' hearts to break."
"Yes, but if every one talked like that—! Why offer myself as a
martyr? Because God has put in my breast a voice which calls me to the
struggle, has given me the strength that makes fighters. Because I can
fight and suffer for a noble cause. Because I will not disappoint the
confidence of God, who has given me this strength for His definite
purpose. In short, because I cannot do otherwise."
Yes, looking back, he saw he could not have done otherwise, though for
that old voice of God in his heart he now substituted mentally the
Hegelian concept of the Idea trying to realize itself through him,
Shakespeare's "prophetic soul of the wide world dreaming on things to
come." The Will of God was the Will of the Time-spirit, and what was
True for the age was whatever its greatest spirits could demonstrate
to it by reason and history. The world had had enough of merely
dithyrambic prophets, it was for the Modern Prophet to heat with his
fire the cannon-balls of logic and science; he must be a thinker among
prophets and a prophet among thinkers. Those he could not inspire
through emotion must be led through reason. There must be not one weak
link in his close-meshed chain of propositions. And who could doubt
that what the [378]Time-spirit was working towards among the Germans—the
Chosen People in the eternal plan of the universe for this new step in
human evolution—was the foundation of a true Kingdom of right, a
Kingdom of freedom and equality, a State which should stand for
justice on earth, and material and spiritual blessedness for all? But
his father had complained not unjustly. Why should he have been
chosen for the Man—the Martyr—through whom the Idea sought
self-realization? It was a terrible fate to be Moses, to be
Prometheus. No doubt that image of himself he read in the faces of his
friends, and in the loving eyes of the Countess Hatzfeldt—that
glorious wonder-youth gifted equally with genius and beauty—must seem
enviable enough, yet to his own heart how chill was this lonely
greatness. And youth itself was passing—was almost gone.
But he shook off this rare sombre mood, and awoke to the full
consciousness that Friedland was fled. Well, better so. The stupid
fool would come back soon enough, and to-day, with Prince
Puckler-Muskau, Baron Korff, General de Pfuel, and von Bülow the
pianist, coming to lunch, and perhaps Wagner, if he could finish his
rehearsal of "Lohengrin" in time, he was not sorry to see his table
relieved of the dull pomposity and brilliant watch-chain of the pillar
of Prague society. How mean to hide one's Judaism! What a burden to
belong to such a race, degenerate sons of a great but long-vanished
past, unable to slough the slave traits engendered by centuries of
slavery! How he had yearned as a boy to shake off the yoke of the
nations, even as he himself had shaken off the yoke of the Law of
Moses. Yes, the scaffold itself would have been [379]welcome, could he but
have made the Jews a respected people. How the persecution of the Jews
of Damascus had kindled the lad of fifteen! A people that bore such
things was hideous. Let them suffer or take vengeance. Even the
Christians marvelled at their sluggish blood, that they did not prefer
swift death on the battle-field to the long torture. Was the
oppression against which the Swiss had rebelled one whit greater?
Cowardly people! It merited no better lot. And he recalled how, when
the ridiculous story that the Jews make use of Christian blood cropped
up again at Rhodes and Lemnos, he had written in his diary that the
universal accusation was a proof that the time was nigh when the Jews
in very sooth would help themselves with Christian blood. Aide-toi,
le ciel t'aidera. And ever in his boyish imagination he had seen
himself at the head of an armed nation, delivering it from bondage,
and reigning over a free people. But these dreams had passed with
childhood. He had found a greater, grander cause, that of the
oppressed German people, ground down by capitalists and the Iron Law
of Wages, and all that his Judaism had brought him was a prejudice the
more against him, a cheap cry of Jew-demagogue, to hamper his larger
fight for humanity. And yet was it not strange?—they were all Jews,
his friends and inspirers; Heine and Börne in his youth, and now in
his manhood, Karl Marx. Was it perhaps their sense of the great Ghetto
tragedy that had quickened their indignation against all wrong?
Well, human injustice was approaching its term at last. The Kingdom of
Heaven on earth was beginning to announce itself by signs and
portents. The religion of the future was dawning—the Church of the
People. "O father, father!" he cried, "if you could have lived to see
my triumph!"
There was a knock at the door.
His man appeared, but, instead of announcing the Countess Hatzfeldt,
as Lassalle's face expected, he tendered a letter.