# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2005
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, The Grey Wig:	Stories and Novelettes
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/16408/16408-h/16408-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI

Nelly O'Neill had her day in those earlier and quieter reaches of the
Victorian era when the privilege of microscopic biography was reserved
for the great and the criminal classes, and when the Bohemian celebrity
(who is perhaps a cross between the two) was permitted to pass—like a
magic-lantern slide—from obscurity to oblivion through an illuminated
moment.
Thus even her real name has not hitherto leaked out, and to this day the
O'Keeffes are unaware of their relative's reputation and believe their
one connection with the stage to be a dubious and undesirable
consanguinity with O'Keeffe, the actor and fertile farce-writer whose
Wild Oats made a sensation at Covent Garden at the end of the
eighteenth century. To her many brothers and sisters, Eileen was just the
baby, and always remained so, even in the eyes of the eminent civil
engineer who was only her senior by a year. Among the peasantry—subtly
prescient of her freakish destinies—she was dubbed "a fairy child":
which was by no means a compliment. A bad uncanny creature for all the
colleen's winsome looks. The later London whispers of a royal origin had
a travestied germ of truth in her father's legendary descent from Brian
Boru. He himself seemed scarcely less legendary, this highly coloured
squire of the old Irish school, surviving into the Victorian era, like a
Georgian caricature; still inhabiting a turreted castle romantically out
of repair, infested with ragged parasites: still believing in high living
and deep drinking: still receiving the reverence if not the rent of a
feudal tenantry, and the affection of a horsey and bibulous countryside.
When in liquor there was nothing the O'Keeffe might not do except pay off
his mortgages. "He looked like an elephant when he put his trousers on
wrong—you know elephants have their knees the wrong way," Eileen once
told the public in a patter-song. She did not tell the public it was her
father, but like a true artist she learned in suffering what she taught
in song. One of her childish memories was to be stood in a row of
brothers and sisters against a background of antlers, fishing-rods, and
racing prints, and solemnly sworn at for innumerability by a ruddy-faced
giant in a slovenly surtout. "Bad luck to ye, ye gomerals, make up your
minds whether ye're nine or eleven," he would say. "A man ought to know
the size of his family: Mother in heaven, I never thought mine was half
so large!" These attempts to take a census of his children generally
occurred after a peasant had brought him up the drive—"hat in one hand,
and Squire in the other," as the patter-song had it. At the moment of
assisted entry his paternal dignity was always at its stateliest, and it
was not till he had gravely hung his cocked hat upon an imaginary
door-peg in the middle of the hall and seen it flop floorward that he
lost his calm. "Blood and 'ouns, ye've the door taken away again."
Sometimes—though this was scarcely a relief—another befuddled gentleman
would be left at the uninhabited lodge in his stead. That was chiefly
after hunt dinners or card and claret parties, when a new coachman would
take a quartet of gentry home, all clouded as to their identities. "Arrah
now! they've got thimselves mixed! let thim sort thimselves." And the
coachman would grab at the nearest limb, extricate it and its belongings
from the tangle, and prop the total mass against the first gate he
passed. And so with the rest.
Eileen's mother, who was as remarkable for her microscopic piety as for
the beauty untarnished by a copious maternity, figured in the child's
memories as a stout saint who moved with a rustle of silken skirts and
heaved an opulent black silk bosom relieved by a silver cross.
"Who are you?" her spouse would inquire with an oath.
"It's your wife I am, Bagenal dear," she would reply cheerfully. For she
had grown up in the four-bottle tradition, and intoxication appeared as
natural for the superior sex as sleep. Both were temporary phases, and
did not prevent men from being the best of husbands and creatures when
clear. And when the marketwomen or the beggarwomen respectfully inquired
of her, "How is your good provider?" she made her reply with no sense of
irony, though she had been long paying the piper herself. And the piper
figured literally in the household accounts, as well as the fiddler, for
the O'Keeffe was what the mud cabins called a "ginthleman to the
backbone."
Family tradition necessitated that Eileen should at least complete her
education at a convent in the outskirts of Paris, and her first communion
was delayed till she should "make" it in that more pious atmosphere. The
O'Keeffe convoyed her across the two Channels, and took the opportunity
of visiting a "variety" theatre in Montmartre, where he was delighted
to find John Bull and his inelegant womenkind so faithfully delineated.
So exhilarated was he by this excellent take-off and a few bocks on the
Boulevard, that he refused to get down from the omnibus at its terminus.
"Jamais je ne descendrai, jamais," he vociferated. Eileen was, however,
spared the sight of this miniature French revolution. She was lying
sleepless in the strange new dormitory, watching the nun walking up and
down in the dim weird room reading her breviary, now lost in deep shadow
with the remoter beds, now lucidly outlined in purple dress with creamy
cross as she came under the central night-light. Eileen wondered how she
could see to read, and if she were not just posing picturesquely, but
from the fervency with which she occasionally kissed the crucifix
hanging to the rosary at her side Eileen concluded she must know the
office by heart. Her own Irish home seemed on another planet, and her
turret-bedroom was already far more shadowy than this: presently both
were swallowed up into nothingness.
She commenced her convent career characteristically enough by making a
sensation. For on rising in the morning she felt ineffably feeble and
forlorn; she seemed to have scarcely closed her eyes, when she must be up
and doing. The tiny hand-basin scarcely held enough water to cool her
brow, still giddy from the sea-passage; to do her hair she had to borrow
a minute hand-glass from her neighbour, and when after early mass in the
chapel she found other prayers postponing breakfast, she fainted most
alarmingly and dramatically. She was restored and refreshed with
balm-mint water, but it took some days to reconcile her to the rigid
life. To some aspects of it, indeed, she was never reconciled. The
atmosphere of suspicious supervision was asphyxiating, after the
disorderliness and warm humanity of her Irish home, after the run of the
stables and the kennels, and the freedom of the village, after the chats
with the pedlars and the beggars, and the borrowing and blowing of the
postman's bugle, after the queenship of a host of barefooted gossoons,
her loyal messenger-boys. Now her mere direct glance under reproof
was considered "hardi." "Droop your eyes, you bold child," said the
shocked Madame Agathe. A fancy she took to a French girl was checked.
"On defend les amities particulières," she was told to her
astonishment. But on this one point Eileen was recalcitrant. She would
even walk with her arm in Marcelle's, and somehow her will prevailed.
Perhaps Eileen was trusted as a foreigner: perhaps Marcelle, being a
day-boarder, weighed less upon the convent's conscience. There came a
time when even their desks adjoined and were not put asunder. For by this
time Madame La Supèrieure herself, at the monthly reading of the marks,
had often beamed upon Eileen. The maîtresse de classe had permitted
her to kiss her crucifix, and the music-mistress was enchanted with her
skill upon the piano and her rich contralto voice, such a godsend for the
choir. In her very first term she was allowed to run up to the dormitory
for something, unescorted by an Enfant de Marie. "Ascend, my child,"
said Madame Agathe, smiling sweetly, for Eileen had outstripped all her
classmates that morning in geography, and Eileen, with a prim "Oui, ma
mere," rose and sailed with drooping eyelashes to the other end of the
schoolroom, and courtesied herself out of the door, knowing herself the
focus of envy and humorously conscious of her goodness. She had learned
to love this soothing sensation of goodness, as she sat in her blue
pelerine on a hard tabouret before her desk, her hands folded in front of
her, her little feet demurely crossed. The sweeping courtesy of entrance
and exit dramatised this pleasant sense of virtue. Later her aspirant's
ribbon painted it in purple.
She worked hard for her examinations. "Elle est si sage, cet enfant,"
she heard Madame Ursule say to Madame Hortense, and she had a delicious
sense of overwork. But she was not always sage. Once when her school
desk was ransacked in her absence—one of the many forms of
espionage—she refused to rearrange its tumbled contents, and when she
was given a bad mark for disorder, she cried defiantly, "It is Madame
Rosaline who deserves that bad mark." And the pleasure of seeing herself
as rebel and phrasemaker was no less keen than the pleasure of goodness.
One other institution found her regularly rebellious, and that was the
pious reading which came punctually at half-past eight every morning. She
was bored by all the holy heroines who seemed to have taken vows of
celibacy at the age of four. "Devil take them all," she thought
whimsically one morning. "But I dare say these good little people have no
more reality than our 'little good people' who dance reels with the dead
on November Eve. I wish Dan O'Leary had taught them all to shake their
feet," and at the picture of jiggling little saints Eileen nearly gave
herself away by a peal of laughter. For she had learned to conceal her
unshared contempt for the holy heroines, and found a compensating
pleasure in the sense of amused superiority, and the secret duality which
it gave to her consciousness. She even went so far as to ransack the
library for these beatific biographies, and when she found herself
rewarded for "diligent reading" her amusement was at its apogee. And
thus, when the first awe and interest of the strange life receded, Eileen
was left standing apart as on a little rock, criticising, satirising, and
even circulating verses among the few cronies who were not sneaks. The
dowerless "sisters" who scrubbed the floors, the portioned Mesdames,
with their more dignified humility, the Refectory readers, the Father
Confessors, the little Enfants de Jésus, the big Enfants de Marie,
who sometimes owed their blue ribbon to their birth or their money rather
than to their exemplary behaviour, all had their humours, and all figured
in Eileen's French couplets. The difficulty of passing these from hand to
hand only made the reading—and the writing—the spicier. Literature did
not interfere with lessons, for Eileen composed not during "preparation,"
but while she sat embroidering handkerchiefs, as demure as a sleeping
kitten.
When the kitten was not thus occupied, she was playing with skeins of
logic and getting herself terribly tangled.
She put her difficulties to her favourite nun as they walked in the
quaint arcades of the lovely old garden, and their talk was punctuated
by the flippant click of croquet-balls in the courtyard beyond.
"Madame Agathe is pleased with me to-day," said Eileen. "To-morrow she
will be displeased. But how can I help the colour of my soul any more
than the colour of my hair?"
"Hush, my child; if you talk like that you will lose your faith. Nobody
is pleased or vexed with anybody for the colour of their hair."
"Yes, where I come from a peasant girl suffers a little for having red
hair. Also a man with a hump, he cannot marry unless he owns many pigs."
"Eileen! Who has put such dreadful thoughts into your head?"
"That is what I ask myself, ma mère. Many things are done to me and I
sit in the centre looking on, like the weathercock on our castle at home,
who sees himself turning this way and that way and can only creak."
"A weathercock is dead—you are alive."
"Not at night, ma mère. At home in my bedroom I used to put out my
candle every night by clapping the extinguisher upon it. Who is it puts
the extinguisher upon me?"
The good sister almost wished it could be she.
But she replied gently, "It is God who gives us sleep—we can't be always
awake."
"Then I am not responsible for my dreams anyhow?"
"I hope you don't have bad dreams," said the nun, affrighted.
"Oh, I dream—what do I not dream? Sometimes I fly—oh, so high, and all
the people look up at me, they marvel. But I laugh and kiss my hand to
them down there."
"Well, there's no harm in flying," said the nun. "The angels fly."
"Oh, but I am not always an angel in my dreams. Is it God who sends these
bad dreams, too?"
"No—that is the devil."
"Then it is sometimes he who puts the extinguisher on?"
"That is when you have not said your prayers properly."
Eileen opened wide eyes of protest. "Oh, but, dear mother, I always say
my prayers properly."
"You think so? That is already a sin in you—the sin of spiritual pride."
"But, ma mere, devil-dreams or angel-dreams—it is always the same in
the morning. Every morning one finds oneself ready on the pillow, like a
clock that has been wound up. One did not make the works."
"But one can keep them clean."
Eileen burst into a peal of laughter.
"Qu'avez-vous donc?" said the good creature in vexation.
"I thought of a clock washing its face with its hands."
"You are a naughty child—one cannot talk seriously to you."
"Oh, dear mother, I am just as serious when I am laughing as when I am
crying."
"My child, we must never cultivate the mocking spirit. Leave me. I am
vexed with you."
As her first communion approached, however, all these simmerings of
scepticism and revolt died down into the recommended recueillement. Her
days of retreat, passed in holy exercises, were an ecstasy of absorption
into the divine, and the pious readings began to assume a truer
complexion as the experiences of sister-souls, deep crying unto deep. Oh,
how she yearned to take the vows, to leave the trivial distracting life
of the outer world for the peace of self-sacrificial love!
As she sat in the chapel, all white muslin and white veil, her hair
braided under a little cap, the new rosary of amethyst—a gift from
home—at her side, her hands clasped, exalted by incense and flowers and
the sweet voices of the choir, chanting Gounod's Canticle, "Le Ciel a
visité la terre," she felt that never more would she let this celestial
visitant go. When after the communion she pulled the last piece of
veiling over her face, she felt that it was for ever between her and the
crude world of sense; the "Hymn of Thanksgiving" was the apt expression
of her emotions.
But next time she came under these aesthetic, devotional influences—even
as her own voice was soaring heavenward in the choir—she thought to
herself, "How delicious to have an emotion which you feel will last for
ever and which you know won't!" And a gleam of amusement flitted over her
rapt features.
When Eileen returned to the Convent after her first summer vacation in
Ireland she was richer by a surreptitious correspondent. He wrote to her,
care of Marcelle, who had a careless mother. He was a young officer from
the neighbouring barracks who, invited to make merry with the hospitable
O'Keeffe, had fallen a victim to Eileen's girlish charms and mature
appearance, for Eileen carried herself as if her years were three more
and her inches six higher. Her face had the winsome Irish sweetness; it,
too, looked lovelier than a scientific survey would have determined. Her
nose was straightish, her mouth small, her lashes were long and dark and
conspired with her dark hair to trick a casual observer into thinking her
eyes dark, but they were grey with little flecks of golden light if you
looked closelier than you should. Her hands were large but finely shaped,
with long fingers somewhat turned back at the tips, and pretty pink
nails—the hands were especially noticeable, because even when Eileen was
not playing the pianoforte, she was prone to extend her thumb as though
stretching an octave and to flick it as though striking a note.
It was not love-letters, though, that Lieutenant Doherty sent Eileen,
for the schoolgirl had always taken him in a motherly way, and indeed
signed herself "Your Mother-Confessor." But the mystery and difficulty
of smuggling the letters to and fro lent colour to the drab Convent
days, far vivider colour than the whilom passing of verses. So long
as Marcelle's desk remained next to Eileen's it was comparatively
easy—though still risky—while one's head was studiously buried in
"Greek roots," for one's automatic hand to pass or receive the letter
beneath the desks through the dangerous space of daylight between the
two. "Let not your right hand know what your left hand doeth," Eileen
once quoted when Marcelle's conscience pricked. For Marcelle imagined
an amour of the darkest dye, and could not understand Eileen's calmness
any more than Eileen could understand Marcelle's romantic palpitations
alternating with suggestive sniggerings.
But when Marcelle was at length separated from Eileen by a suspicious
management, a much more breathless plan was necessary. For Marcelle would
deposit the Doherty letter in Eileen's compartment in the curtained row
of little niches—where one kept one's work-bag, atlas, and other
educational reserves—or Eileen would slip the reply into Marcelle's, and
there it would lie, exposed to inspectorial ransacking, till such times
as Eileen or Marcelle could transfer it to her bosom. Poor Marcelle lived
with her heart in her mouth, trembling, at every rustle of the curtain,
for her purple ribbon. However, luck favoured the bold, while the only
bad moment in which Eileen was on the verge of detection she surmounted
by a stroke of genius.
"What are you hiding there?" said the music-mistress, more sharply than
she was wont to address her pet pupil. Eileen put her hand to her bosom.
'Twas as if she were protecting the young lieutenant from pursuing foes,
and he became romantically dear to her in that perilous moment, pregnant
with swift invention.
She looked round with dramatic mysteriousness. "Hush, ma mère," she
breathed; "the Mother Superior might hear."
"Ah, it concerns the Reverend Mother's fête," cried the music-mistress,
falling into the trap and even saving Eileen from the lie direct. "Good,
my child," and she smiled tenderly upon her. For the birthday of the Lady
Superior which was imminent was heralded by infinite mysteriousness. The
Reverend Mother was taken by surprise, regularly and punctually. The
girls all subscribed, their parents were invited to send plants and
flowers. The air vibrated with sublime secrecy, amid which the Reverend
Mother walked guilelessly. And when the great day came and the fête was
duly sprung upon her, and the pupils all dressed in white overwhelmed her
with bouquets and courtesies, how exquisite was her pleased astonishment!
That night talking was allowed in the Refectory, and how the girls
jabbered! It was like the rolling of ceaseless thunder—one would have
thought they had never talked before and never would talk again, and that
they were anxious to unload themselves once for all.
"How the ordinary becomes the extraordinary by being forbidden,"
philosophised Eileen. "At the Castle I can do a hundred things, which
here become enormous privileges, even if I am allowed to do them at all.
Is it so with everything they say is wrong? Is all sin artificial, and do
people sin so zestfully only because they are cramped? Or is there a
residue of real wickedness?" Thus she thought, struggling against the
obsession of an inquisitorial system which merely clouded her perceptions
of real right and wrong. And alone she ate silently, a saintly figure
amid the laughing, chattering crew.
She wrote her maternal admonitions to young Doherty during the
preparation-time, and far keener than her sense of the lively,
good-looking young officer was her sense of the double life she led
through him in this otherwise monotonous Convent. When she achieved the
blue ribbon of the Enfants de Marie, for which she had worked with true
devotion, it added poignancy to her pious pleasure to think that one
false step in her secret life would have marred her overt life.
As the end of her conventual period drew nigh Eileen resolved never to
go back to the spotted world, but to ask her father to pay her dowry as
Bride to the Church, and she had just placed in Marcelle's niche the
letter informing Lieutenant Doherty of her call to the higher life (and
pointing out how apter than ever his confessions would now be) when
Marcelle's signal warned her to look in her own niche. There she found a
letter which she could not read till bread-and-chocolate time, but which
then took the flavour out of these refreshments. Her lover—he leaped to
that verbal position in her thought in this moment of crisis—was ordered
off in haste to Afghanistan. The geographical proficiency which had won
her so many marks served her only too well, but she hastened to extract
her atlas from the fatal niche, and to pore over her geographical misery.
She felt she ought to withdraw her own letter for revision, but she could
not get at Marcelle or even make her understand. In her perturbation she
gave Cabul and Candahar as Kings of Navarre, and Marcelle, implacable as
a pillar-box, went away in the evening like a mail-cart.
But the very same night the Superior handed Eileen an opened cablegram
which banished Lieutenant Doherty much farther than Afghanistan. Her
father was very ill, and called her to his bedside. Things had a way of
happening simultaneously to Eileen, these coincidences dogged her life,
so that she came to think of them as the rival threads of her life
getting tangled at certain points and then going off separately again.
After all, if you have several strings to your life, she told herself,
it would be more improbable that they should always remain separate than
that they should sometimes intertwine.
Eileen reached the Castle through a tossing avenue of villagers, weeping
and blessing, and divined from their torment of sympathy that "his
honour" was already in his grave. Poor feckless father, how she had loved
him spite all his rollicking ways, or perhaps because of them. Through
her tears she saw him counting—on his entry into Paradise—the children
who had preceded him, and more than ever fuzzled by the flapping of their
wings. Oh, poor dearest, how unhomely it would all be to him, this other
world where his jovial laugh would shock the nun-like spirits, where
there was no more claret, cold, mulled, or buttered, and no sound of horn
or tally-ho.
Perhaps it was as well that so many of his brood had gone before him, for
with his departure the Castle fell metaphorically about the ears of the
survivors. Creditors gave quarter no longer, and Mrs. O'Keeffe found
herself reduced to a modest red-gabled farmhouse, with nothing saved from
the crash save that part of her dowry which was invested in trustees for
the education of her boys. There was no question of Eileen returning to
the Convent as a pupil: her desire to take the veil failed at the thought
that now she could only be a dowerless working-sister, not a teacher. And
for teaching, especially music-teaching, she felt she had a real gift. By
a natural transition arose the idea of becoming a music-teacher or a
governess outside a Convent, and since her stay at home only helped to
diminish her mother's resources, she resolved to augment them by leaving
her. Family pride forbade the neighbourhood witnessing a deeper decline.
The O'Keeffes were still "the Quality"; it would be better to seek her
fortunes outside Ireland and retain her prestige at home. The dual
existence would give relish and variety.
Eileen's mind worked so quickly that she communicated these ideas to her
mother, ere that patient lady had quite realised that never more would
she say, "It's your wife I am, Bagenal dear."
"No, no, you are not to be going away," cried Mrs. O'Keeffe, in alarm.
"Why wouldn't I?" asked Eileen.
Mrs. O'Keeffe could not tell, but looked mysterious meanings. This
excited Eileen, so that the poor woman had no rest till she answered
plainly, "Because, mavourneen, it's married you are going to be,
please the saints."
"Married! Me!"
"It was your father's dying wish, God keep his soul."
"But to whom?"
"You should be asking the priest how good he is. Didn't you notice that
the chapel is being white-washed afresh and how clear the Angelus bell
rings? Not that it matters much to him, for he has lashings of money as
well as a heart of gold."
"Hasn't he a name, too?"
"Don't jump down my throat, Eileen darling. I shouldn't be thinking of
O'Flanagan if your father—"
"O'Flanagan! Do you mean the man that bought our Castle at the auction?"
"And isn't it beautifully repaired he's having it for you? He saw you
when you were home for the holidays, and he asked us for your hand, all
so humble, but your father told him he must wait till you came home for
good."
"O'Flanagan!" Eileen flicked him away with her thumb. "A half-mounted
gentleman like that."
"Eileen aroon, beggars can't be choosers."
Eileen flushed all over her body. "No more can beggars on horseback."
"Your father will be sorry you take it like that, mavourneen." And the
stout saint burst into tears.
Eileen winced. She could almost have flung her arms round her mother and
promised to think of it. Suddenly she remembered Lieutenant Doherty. How
dared they tear her away from the man she loved! They had not even
consulted her. She flicked her thumb agitatedly on the back of her
mother's chair. Let her weep! Did they want to sell her, to exchange her
for a castle, as if she were a chess-piece? The thought made her smile
again.
Her mother said no more, but she could not have employed a more
convincing eloquence. The reticence wrought upon Eileen's nerves. After a
couple of months of maternal meekness and family poverty, the suggested
sacrifice began to appeal to her. A letter from Doherty on his steamer
(forwarded to her from Paris by Marcelle), passionately protesting
against her intention to take the vows, came to remind her that sacrifice
was what she yearned for. The coming of the letter was providential, she
told herself: if Marcelle had not posted hers against her will, she might
not have had this monition. To return to the Castle as a bride, martyred
for the family redemption, was really only a way of returning to the
Convent. It meant a life of penance for the good of others. To think
of her mother sunning herself again upon the battlemented terrace, or
sleeping—if only as guest—in the great panelled bedroom, brought a lump
to her throat; her poor tenantry, too, should bless her name; she would
glide among them like a spirit, very sad, yet with such healing in her
smile and in her touch. "Sure the misthress is the swatest angel God iver
sint, so she is." At home she would sit and spin in the old tapestried
room, her own life as faded, and sometimes she would dream in the hall,
among the antlers and beast-skins, and watch the great burning logs, so
much more poetic than this peat smoke which hurt one's eyes. Ah, but then
there was O'Flanagan. Well, he would not be much in the way. He liked
riding over his new estate in his buckskin breeches, cracking his great
loaded whip. She had met him herself once or twice, and the great shy
creature had blushed furiously and ridden off down the first bridle-path.
"I turn his horse's head as well as his," she had thought with a smile.
Yes, she must sacrifice herself. How strange that the nuns should
imagine you only renounced by giving up earthly life. Why, earthly life
might be the most celestial renunciation of all. But Lieutenant Doherty,
what of him? Had she the right to sacrifice him, too? But then she had
never given him any claim upon her—she had been merely his little
mother-confessor. If he had dared to love her—as his passionate protest
against the veil seemed to suggest—it was at his own risk. Poor Doherty,
how grieved he would be in far Afghanistan. He would probably rush upon
the assegais and die, murmuring her name. Her eyes filled with delicious
tears. She sat down and scribbled him a letter hastily, announcing her
impending marriage, and posted it at once, so as to put herself beyond
temptation to draw back. Then she dashed to her mother's room and sobbed
out, "Dear heart, I consent to be martyred."
"What?" said Mrs. O'Keeffe, opening her eyes.
"I consent to be married," Eileen corrected hastily.
"Do you mean to Mr. O'Flanagan?" Mrs. O'Keeffe's face became red as the
sun in mist. The cross heaved convulsively on her black silk bosom.
"To whom else? You haven't forgotten he wanted to marry me."
"No, but he has, I am fearing."
"What?" It was now Eileen's turn to open her eyes, and the tears dried on
her lashes as she listened. Mrs. O'Keeffe explained, amid the ebb and
flow of burning blood, that she had waited in vain for Mr. O'Flanagan to
renew his proposal. At first she thought he was waiting for a decent
interval to elapse, or for the Castle to be ready for his bride, but
gradually she had become convinced by his silence and by the way he
avoided her eye when they met and turned his horse down the nearest
boreen, that Eileen had been right in calling him half-mounted. He had
proposed when he imagined the Squire's fortunes were as of yore, but now
he feared he would have to support the ruined family. Well, he needn't
fear. The family wouldn't touch him with a forty-foot pole.
"If only your poor father had been alive," wound up Mrs. O'Keeffe, "the
dirty upstart would never have dared to put such an insult on his
orphaned daughter, that he wouldn't, and if Dan O'Leary should hear of
it—which the saints forbid—it's not the jig that his foot would be
teaching Mr. O' Flanagan."
The bathos of this anti-climax to martyrdom was too grotesque. Eileen
burst into a peal of laughter, which was taken by her mother as a tribute
to her lively vituperation. Decidedly, life was deliciously odd. Suddenly
she remembered her posted letter to Doherty, and she laughed louder.
Should she send another on its heels? No, it would be rather difficult to
explain. Besides, it would be so interesting to see how he replied.
Holly Hall—Eileen's first place—was in the English midlands, towards
the North: a sombre stone house looking down on a small manufacturing
town, whose very grass seemed dingied with coal-dust. "A dromedary town,"
Eileen dubbed it; for it consisted of a long level with two humps,
standing in a bleak desert. On one of the humps she found herself
perched. Below—between the humps—lay the town proper, with its savour
of grime and gain. The Black Hole was Eileen's name for this quarter;
and indeed you might leave your hump, bathed in sunlight, dusty but still
sunlight, and as you came down the old wagon-road you would plunge deeper
and deeper into the yellowish fog which the poor townspeople mistook for
daylight. The streets of the Black Hole bristled with public-houses,
banks, factories, and dissenting chapels. The population was given over
to dogs and football, and medical men abounded. Arches, blank walls, and
hoardings were flamboyant with ugly stage-beauties, melodramatic
tableaux, and the advertisements of tailors. After the Irish glens and
the Convent garden the Black Hole was not exhilarating.
Mr. Maper, the proprietor of Holly Hall, was a mill-owner, a big-boned,
kindly man, who derived his Catholicism from an Irish mother, and had
therefore been pleased to find an Irish girl among the candidates for the
post of companion to his wife.
As he drove her from the station up the steep old wagon-road he explained
the situation, in more than one sense. Eileen's girlish intuition helped
his lame sentences over the stiles. Briefly, she was to polish the
quondam mill-hand, whom he had married when he, too, was a factory
operative, but who had not been able to rise with him. He was an alderman
and a J.P. That made things difficult enough. But how if he became Mayor?
An alderman has no necessary feminine, not even alderwoman, but Mayor
makes Mayoress. And a Mayoress is not safe from the visits of royalty
itself. Of course the Mayoress was not to suspect she was being refined;
"made a Lady Mayoress," as Eileen put it to herself.
She entered with a light heart upon a task she soon found heavy. For
the mistress of Holly Hall had no sense of imperfections. She was a
tall and still good-looking person, and this added to her fatal
complacency. Eileen saw that she imagined God made the woman and money
the lady, and that between a female in a Paris bonnet and a female in a
head-shawl there was a natural gap as between a crested cockatoo and a
hedge-sparrow. Mrs. Maper indeed suffered badly from swelled self, for it
had subconsciously expanded with its surroundings. The wide rooms of the
Hall were her spacious skirts, bedecked with the long glitter of the
glass-houses; her head reached the roof and wore the weathercock as a
feather in her bonnet. All those whirring engines in the misty valley
below were her demon-slaves, and the chimneys puffed up incense at her.
When she drove out, her life-blood coursed pleasurably through the
ramping, glossy horses.
Mrs. Maper, in short, saw herself an empress. It was simply impossible
for her to realise that there were eyes which could still see the
head-shawl, not the crown. Her one touch of dignity was grotesque—it
consisted of extending her arm like a stiff sceptre, in moments of
emphasis, and literally pointing her remarks with her forefinger.
Sometimes she pointed to the ceiling, sometimes to the carpet, sometimes
to the walls. This digital punctuation appeared to be not only
superfluous but irrelevant, for Heaven might be invoked from the floor.
With this bejewelled lady Eileen passed her days either on the Hump, or
in the Black Hole, or in the environs, and but for her sense of humour
and her power of leading a second life above or below her first, her
tenure of the post would have been short. The most delicate repetitions
of mispronounced words, the subtlest substitution of society phrases for
factory idioms, fell blunted against an impenetrable ignorance and
self-sufficiency. Short of dropping the pose of companion and boldly
rapping a pupil on the knuckles, there seemed to her no way of modifying
her mistress. "Who can refine what Fortune has gilded?" she asked herself
in humorous despair. The appearance of Mr. Maper at dinner brought little
relief. It was a strange meal in the lordly dining room—three covers
laid at one end of the long mahogany table, under the painted stare of
somebody else's ancestors. Eileen's girlish enjoyment of the prodigal
fare was spoiled by her furtive watch on the hostess's fork. Nor did the
alderman contribute ease, for he was on pins lest the governess should
reveal her true mission, and on needles lest his wife should reveal her
true depths. Likewise he worried Eileen to drink his choicest wines.
Vintages that she felt her father would have poised on his tongue in
mystic clucking ecstasy stood untasted in a regiment of little glasses
at her elbow.
She repaid them, however, by adroit educational remarks.
"How stupid of me again!" she said once. "I held out my hock glass for
the champagne! Do tell me again which is which, dear Mrs. Maper."
"I suppose you never had a drink of champagne in your life afore you come
here," said Mrs. Maper, beamingly. And she indicated the port glass.
"No, no, Lucy, don't play pranks on a stranger," her husband put in
tactfully. "It's this glass, Miss O'Keeffe."
"Oh, thank you!" Eileen gushed. "And this is what? Sherry?"
"No, port," replied Mr. Maper, scarcely able to repress a wink.
"You'll have to tell me again to-morrow night," said Eileen, enjoying her
own comedy powers. "My poor father tried to teach me the difference
between bird's-eye and shag, but I could never remember."
"Ah, Bob's the boy for teaching you that," guffawed the mill owner. "I
stick to half-crown cigars myself." His wife shot him a dignified rebuke,
as though he were forgetting his station in undue familiarity.
Afterwards Eileen wondered who Bob was, but at the moment she could think
of nothing but the farcical complications arising from the idea of Mrs.
Maper's providing Mr. Maper with a male companion secretly to improve
his manners. Of course the two companions would fall in love with
each other.
After dinner things usually woke up a little, for Eileen was made to play
and even sing from the scores of "Madame Angot" and other recent comic
operas—a form of music that had not hitherto come her way, though it was
the only form the music-racks held to feed the grand piano with. Not till
the worthy couple had retired, could she permit herself her old Irish
airs, or the sonatas and sacred pieces of the Convent.
Accident—the key to all great inventions—supplied Eileen with a new way
of educating her mistress. The cook had been impertinent, Mrs. Maper
complained. "Why don't you hunt her?" Eileen replied. Mrs. Maper
corrected the Irishism by saying, "Do you mean dismiss?" Eileen hastened
to accuse herself of Irish imperfections, and henceforward begged to
learn the correct phrases or pronunciations. Sometimes she ventured
apologetically to wonder if the Irish way was not more approved of the
dictionary. Then they would wander into the library in the apparently
unoccupied wing, and consult dictionary after dictionary till Eileen
hoped Mrs. Maper's brain had received an indelible impression.
One Sunday afternoon a friendly orthoepical difference of this nature
arose even as Mrs. Maper sat in her palatial drawing room waiting for
callers, and they repaired to the library, Mrs. Maper arguing the point
with loud good humour. A glass door giving by corkscrew iron steps on the
garden, banged hurriedly as they made their chattering entry. The rows of
books—that had gone with the Hall like the family portraits—stretched
silently away, but amid the smell of leather and learning, Eileen's
lively nostrils detected the whiff of the weed, and sure enough on the
top of a stepladder reposed a plain briar pipe beside an unclosed Greek
folio.
"The scent is hot," she thought, touching the still warm bowl. "Bob seems
as scared as a rabbit and as learned as an owl." Suddenly she had
difficulty in repressing a laugh. What if Bob were the corresponding
male companion!
"I see Mr. Robert has forgotten his pipe," she said audaciously.
Mrs. Maper was taken aback. "The—the boy is shy," she stammered.
What! Was there a son lying perdu in the house all this while? What
fun! A son who did not even go to church or to his mother's receptions.
But how had he managed to escape her? And why did nobody speak of him?
Ah, of course, he was a cripple, or facially disfigured, morbidly
dreading society, living among his books. She had read of such things.
Poor young man!
After dinner she found herself examining the family album inquisitively,
but beyond a big-browed and quite undistorted baby nursing a kitten,
there did not seem anything remotely potential, and she smiled at herself
as she thought of the difficulty of evolving bibs into briar pipes and
developing Greek folios out of kittens.
From Mrs. Maper's keenness about the University Boat Race as it drew
near, and from her wearing on the day itself a dark blue gown trimmed
profusely with ribbons of the same hue, Eileen divined that Bob was an
Oxford man. This gave the invisible deformed a new touch of interest, but
long ere this Eileen had found a much larger interest—the theatre.
She had never been to the play, and the Theatre Royal of the Black Hole
was the scene of her induction into this enchantment. In those days the
touring company system had not developed to its present complexity, and
the theatre had been closed during the first month or so of Eileen's
residence in Dromedary Town. But at length, to Mrs. Maper's delight, a
company arrived with a melodrama, and as part of her duties, Eileen, no
less excited over the new experience (which her Confessor had permitted
her), drove with her mistress behind a pair of spanking steeds to the
Wednesday matinee. Mrs. Maper alleged her inability to leave her
homekeeping husband as the cause of her daylight playgoing, but Eileen
maliciously ascribed it to the pomp of the open carriage.
They occupied a box and Eileen was glad they did. For instead of
undergoing the illusion of the drama, she found it killingly comic as
soon as she understood that it was serious. It was all she could do to
hide her amusement from her entranced companion, and somehow this box at
the theatre reminded her of the Convent room in which she used to sit
listening to the pious readings anent infant prodigies. One afternoon it
came upon her that here Mrs. Maper had learned her strange pump handle
gestures. Here it was that ladies worked arms up and down and pointed
denunciatory forefingers, albeit the direction had more reference to the
sentiment.
It was not till a comic opera came along that Eileen was able to take the
theatre seriously. Then she found some of the melodies of the drawing
room scores wedded to life and diverting action, sometimes even to poetic
dancing; the first gleam of poetry the stage gave her. When these airs
were lively, Mrs. Maper's feet beat time and Eileen lived in the fear
that she would arise and prance in her box. It was an effervescence of
joyous life—the factory girl recrudescent—and Eileen's hand would lie
lightly on Mrs. Maper's shoulder, feeling like a lid over a kettle about
to boil.
When they came home Eileen would gratify her mistress by imitations of
comedians. Presently she ventured on the tragedians, without being seen
through. She even raised her arm towards the ceiling or shot it towards
the centre of the carpet pattern, and Mrs. Maper followed it spellbound.
But from all these monkey tricks she found relief in her real music. When
she crooned the old Irish songs, the Black Hole was washed away as by the
soft Irish rain, and the bogs stretched golden with furze-blossom and
silver with fluffy fairy cotton, and at the doors of the straggling
cabins overhung by the cloud-shadowed mountains, blue-cloaked women
sat spinning, and her eyes filled with tears as though the peat smoke
had got into them.
In such a mood she was playing one Saturday evening in the interval
before dinner, when she became aware that somebody was listening, and
turning her head, she saw through the Irish mist a man's figure standing
in the conservatory. The figure was vanishing when she cried out a whit
huskily, "Oh, pray, don't let me drive you away."
He stood still. "If I am not interrupting your music," he murmured.
"Not at all," she said, breaking it off altogether.
As the mist cleared she had a vivid impression of a tall, fair young
man against a background of palms. "Eyes burning under a white marble
mantel-piece," she summed up his face. Could this uncrippled, rather
good-looking person be Bob?
"Won't you come in, Mr. Robert?" she said riskily.
"I only wished to thank you," he said, sliding a step or two into the
room.
"There is nothing to thank me for," she said, whirling her stool to face
him. "It's my way of amusing myself." She was glad she was in her evening
frock.
"Amusing yourself!" He looked aghast.
"What else? I am alone—I have nothing better in the world to do."
"Does it amuse you?" He was flushed now, even the marble mantel-piece
ruddied by the flame. "I wish it amused me."
Now it was Eileen's turn to gasp. "Then why do you listen?"
"I don't listen—I bury myself as far away as I can."
"So I have understood. Then what are you thanking me for?"
"For what you are doing for—." his hesitation was barely
perceptible—"my mother."
"Oh!" Eileen looked blank. "I thought you meant for my music."
His face showed vast relief. "Oh, you were talking of your music! Of
course, of course, how stupid of me! That is what has drawn me from my
hole, like a rat to the Pied Piper, and I do thank you most sincerely.
But being drawn, what I most wished to thank the Piper for was—"
"Your mother pays the Piper for that," she broke in.
He smiled but tossed his head. "Money! what is that?"
"It is more than I deserve for mere companionship—pleasant drives and
theatres."
He did not accept her delicate reticence.
"But you have altered her wonderfully!" he cried.
"Oh, I have not," she cried, doubly startled. "It's just nothing that I
have done—nothing." Then she felt her modesty had put her foot in a
bog-hole. Unseeingly he helped her out.
"It is most kind of you to put it like that. But I see it in every
movement, every word. She imitates you unconsciously—I became curious to
see so excellent a model, though I had resolved not to meet you. No, no,
please, don't misunderstand."
"I don't," she said mischievously. "You have now given me three reasons
for seeing me. You need give me none for not seeing me."
"But you must understand," he said, colouring again, "how painful all
this has been for me—"
"Not seeing me?" she interpolated innocently.
"The—the whole thing," he stammered.
"Yes, parents are tiresome," she said sympathetically.
He came nearer the music-stool.
"Are they not? They came down every year for the Eights."
"Is that at Oxford?"
"Yes."
She was silent; her thumb flicked at a note on the keyboard behind her.
"But that's not what I mind in them most—"
She wondered at the rapidity with which his shyness was passing into
effusiveness. But then was she not the "Mother-Confessor"? Had not even
her favourite nuns told her things about their early lives, even when
there was no moral to be pointed? "They're very good-hearted," she
murmured apologetically. "I'm often companion—in charity expeditions."
"It's easy to be good-hearted when you don't know what to do with your
money. This place is full of such people. But I look in vain for the
diviner impulse."
Eileen wondered if he were a Dissenter. But then "the place was full of
such people."
"You don't think there's enough religion?" she murmured.
"There's certainly plenty of churches and chapels. But I find myself
isolated here. You see, I'm a Socialist."
Eileen crossed herself instinctively.
"You don't believe in God!" she cried in horror. For the good nuns had
taught her that "les socialistes" were synonymous with "les athées."
He laughed. "Not, if by God you mean Mammon. I don't believe in
Property—we up here in the sun and the others down there in the soot."
"But you are up here," said Eileen, naively.
"I can't help it. My mother would raise Cain." He smiled wistfully. "She
couldn't bear to see a stranger helping father in the factory
management."
"Then you are down there."
"Quite so. I work as hard as any one even if my labour isn't manual. I
dress like an ordinary hand, too, though my mother doesn't know that, for
I change at the office."
"But what good does that do?"
"It satisfies my conscience."
"And I suppose the men like it?"
"No, that's the strange part. They don't. And father only laughs. But one
must persist. At Oxford I worked under Ruskin."
"Oh, you're an artist!"
"No, I didn't mean that part of Ruskin's work. His gospel of labour—we
had a patch for digging."
"What—real spades!"
"Did you imagine we called a spoon a spade?" he said, a whit resentfully.
Eileen smiled. "No, but I can't imagine you using a common or garden
spade."
"You are thinking of my hands." He looked at them, not without
complacency, Eileen thought, as she herself wondered where he had got his
long white fingers from. "But it is a couple of years ago," he explained.
"It was hard work, I assure you."
"Did your mother know?" Eileen asked with a little whimsical look.
"Of course not. She would have been horrified."
"Well, but most people would be surprised."
"Yes. Put your muscle into an oar or a cricket bat and you are a hero;
put your muscle into a spade and you are a madman."
"You think it's vice versa?" queried Eileen, ingenuously.
"Much more. At least," he stammered and coloured again, "I don't pose as
a hero but simply—"
"As what?" Eileen still looked innocent.
"I simply think work is the noblest function of man," he burst forth.
"Don't you?"
"I do not," answered Eileen. "Work is a curse. If the serpent had not
tempted Eve to break God's commandment, we should still be basking in
Paradise."
He looked at her curiously. "You believe that?"
"Isn't it in the Bible?" she answered, seriously astonished.
"Whatever the primitive Semitic allegorist may have thought, work is a
blessing, not a curse."
"Then you are an atheist!" Eileen recoiled from this strange young man.
"Ah, you shrink back!" he said in tones of bitter pleasure. "I told you I
lived in isolation."
Eileen's humour shot forth candidly. "You'll not be isolated when you
die."
His bitterness passed into genial superiority. "You mean I'll go to hell.
How can you believe anything so horrible?"
"Why is that horrible for me to believe? For you—" And she filled up the
sentence with a smile.
"I don't believe you do believe it."
"There's nothing you seem to believe. I do honestly think that you can't
be saved if you don't believe."
"I accept that. The question, however, is what kind of belief and what
kind of saving. Do you suppose Plato is in hell?"
"I don't know. He invented Platonic love, didn't he? So that might save
him." She looked at him with her great grey eyes—he couldn't tell
whether she was quizzing him or not.
"Is that all you know of Plato?"
"I know he was a Greek philosopher. But I only learned Greek roots at the
Convent. So Plato is Greek to me."
"He has been beautifully Englished by the Master of my College. I wish
you'd read him."
"Is the translation in the library?"
"Of course—with lots of other interesting books, and such queer folios
and quartos and first editions. The collector was a man of taste. Why do
you never come and let me show them you?"
"You'd run away."
"No, I wouldn't," he smiled encouragingly.
"Yes, you would. And leave your pipe on Plato!"
He laughed. "Was I rude? But I didn't know you then. Come to-morrow
afternoon and show you've forgiven me."
The new interest was sufficiently tempting. But her maidenliness held
back. "I'll come with your mother."
Disgust lent him wit. "You're her companion—not she yours."
"True. Nor I yours."
"Then I'll come here."
"Bringing the Plato and the folios—?"
"Why not? You can't forbid me my own drawing-room."
"I can run away and leave my crochet-hook behind."
"You'll find me hooked on whenever you return."
"Well, if you're determined—by hook or by crook! But you're not going to
convert me to Socialism?"
"I won't promise."
"You must. I don't mind reading Plato."
"He's worse. He isn't a Christian at all."
"I don't mind that. He's B.C. He couldn't help it. But you Socialists
came after Christ."
"How do you know Socialism isn't a return to Him?"
"Is it?"
"Aha! You are getting interested.... But I hear my mother coming down to
dinner. To be continued in our next. À demain, is it not?"
He held out his shapely white hand, and hastened through the conservatory
into the garden.
"Going to dig?" Eileen called after him maliciously.
Eileen became interested in Robert Maper, for the old books he opened
up to her were quite new and enlarging. She had imagined the Church
replacing Paganism as light replaced darkness. Now she felt that it was
only as gas replaced candle-light. The darkness was less Egyptian than
the nuns insinuated. Plato in particular was a veritable chandelier. It
occurred to her suddenly that he might be on the black list. But she was
afraid to ask her Confessor for fear of hearing her doubt confirmed. To
tell the good father of the semi-secret meetings in the library would
have been superfluous, since there was nothing to conceal even from Mrs.
Maper, though that lady did not happen to know of them. Eileen did not
even use the garden door. Besides, there was never a formal appointment,
not infrequently, indeed, a disappointment, when the library held nothing
but books. Robert Maper merely provided that possibility of an innocent
double life, without which existence would have been too savourless for
Eileen. Even a single line of railway always appeared dismal to her; she
liked the great junctions with their bewildering intertanglements, their
possibilities of collision. And now that Lieutenant Doherty had faded
away into Afghanistan and silence—he did not even acknowledge the letter
announcing her approaching marriage—Robert Maper proved a useful
substitute.
One day Mr. Maper senior invited her to drive down with him and go over
the factory, and as Mrs. Maper was not averse from impressing her
employée by the sight of the other employes, she was permitted to go.
Nothing, however, would induce Mrs. Maper to adventure herself in these
scenes of her early life, touching which she professed a sovereign
ignorance. "Machines are so clattery," she said. "My head wouldn't stand
them. I once went to that exhibition in London and I said to myself,
never no more for this gal."
"And you never did go any more since you were a girl?" asked the
companion, with professional pointedness.
"No, never no more," replied Mrs. Maper, serenely, "once is too often, as
the gal said when the black man kissed her."
Eileen laughed dutifully at this quotation from the latest comic opera,
and went off, delighted to companion the husband by way of change. He
proved quite a new man, too, in his own element, bringing the most
complicated machinery to the level of her understanding. Room after room
they passed through, department after department full of tireless
machinery, and tired men and women, who seemed slaves to the whims of
fantastic iron monsters, all legs and arms and wheels. It took a morning
to see everything, down to the pasting and drying and packing rooms, and
as a last treat Mr. Maper took her to the engine-room, whence he said
came the power that turned those myriad wheels, moved those myriad
levers, in whatever department they might be and whatever their function.
Eileen gazed long at the mighty engine, rapt in reverie. She could
scarcely tear herself away, and when at last Mr. Maper brought her into
the counting-house, she had forgotten that she must meet his son there.
The white-browed clerk in corduroys did not, however, raise his eyes from
his ledger, and Eileen was grateful to him for preserving the piquancy of
their relation.
She did not find it so piquant, though, in the library next Sunday
afternoon when he was clutching at her hand and asking her to be his
wife. She awoke as from a dream to the perception of a solemn and
grotesque fact.
"Oh, please!" and she tried to tear her hand away.
He clung on desperately. "Eileen—don't say you don't care at all."
"I'm not Eileen, and I particularly dislike you at this moment. Let me
have my hand, please."
He dropped it like a stinging nettle. "I was hoping you'd let me keep
it," he murmured.
"Why?" She was simple and pitiless. "Because we read Plato together? That
was platonic enough, wasn't it?"
"You can jest about what breaks my heart?"
"I am very sorry. I like you."
His breathing changed, "like a fish thrown back into the water," Eileen
thought. She hastened to add, "But it's not what a wife should feel."
"How do you know what a wife should feel?"
Eileen screwed up her forehead. "If I felt it, I should know, I suppose."
"No, you mightn't. You've liked to come here and talk to me."
"Because I like books. And you talk like a book."
"That was before I fell in love. I didn't talk like a book just now."
"When you took my hand! More like a book than ever. I've read it
all—lots of times."
"Oh, Eil—Miss O'Keeffe—you are very cruel."
Eileen smiled. "I am not—I'm very kind—I threw you back into the
water."
He gasped, as though out of it again. "Do you mean I am not grown
enough?"
She flushed and improvised on his theme. "Not quite that. You hooked
yourself, as you threatened to do. But suppose I had landed you. You know
the next step—hot water. What a lot you would have got into, too!"
"You are thinking of my mother?"
"Yes, raising Cain, I think you said once. Oh, dear, swim about and be
thankful." And a vision of Mrs. Maper's amazement twitched the corners of
her lips and made them more enchanting.
"I'm not so cold-blooded as all that. But if you do throw me back, let it
be with the promise to take me again, when I am grown. I don't say it
to tempt you, but you know I shall be very rich."
"Indigestible, do you mean?"
"Oh, please let us drop that metaphor! Metaphors can never go on all
fours."
"Certainly not when they have fins."
"Don't jest, Eil—Miss O'Keeffe! Let me redeem you from your sordid
life."
"Why is it sordid? You said work was divine."
"You can work in a higher sphere."
"And this is the Socialist! I really thought you'd want me to turn
factory lass."
"You are laughing at me."
"I am perfectly serious. I won't drag you down from Socialism, and a
head-shawl wouldn't become me."
"Why, you'd look sweet in it. Dear, dear, Miss O'Keeffe—"
"Good-by."
"No, you shan't go." He barred her way. Her airiness had given him new
hope.
"If you don't behave sensibly, I'll go altogether—give notice."
"Then I'll follow you to your next place."
"No followers allowed. Seriously, I'll leave if you are foolish."
"Very well," he said abruptly. "Let's go on reading Plato," and he turned
to the book.
"No, no more Dialogues, in or out of Plato."
She was smiling but stern. He opened the library door and bowed as she
passed out.
"Remember," he said. "I will remain foolish for ever."
"You have too long an opinion of yourself," was Eileen's parting flash.
The next evening she sat in the drawing-room before dinner, softly
playing an accompaniment to her thoughts. Why didn't she feel anything
about Robert Maper except a mild irritation at the destruction of so
truly platonic a converse? In a book, of which his proposal savoured, she
would have found him quite a romantic person. In the actuality she felt
as frigid as if his marble forehead was chilling her, and what she
remembered most acutely was his fishlike gasping. Then, too, the
contradictoriness of his social attitude, his desire to make her a rich
drone, his shame at his mother, his reclusive shyness—all the weaknesses
of the man—came to obscure her sense of his literary idealism, if not,
indeed, to reveal it as a mere coquetry with fine ideas and coarse
clothes. And then for a moment the humour of being Mrs. Maper's
daughter-in-law appealed to her, and she laughed to herself in soft
duet with the music.
And in the middle of the duet Mrs. Maper herself burst in, with her
bodice half hooked and her hair half done.
"What's this I hear, Miss Hirish Himpudence, of your goings-on with my
son?"
Eileen swung round on her stool. "I beg your pardon," she said.
"Oh, you can't get out of it by beggin' my pardon, creepin' into the
library like a mouse—and it's a nice sly mouse you are, too, but there's
never a mouse without its cat—"
"She'd have done better to do your hair and mind her business," said
Eileen, calmly.
Mrs. Maper's forefinger shot heavenwards. "It was you as ought to have
minded your business. I didn't pay you like a lady and feed you like a
duchess to set your cap at your betters. But I told Mr. Maper what 'ud
come of it if we let you heat with us, though I didn't dream what a sly
little mouse—"
The torrent went on and on. Eileen as in a daze watched the theatric
forefinger—now pointed at the floor as if to the mouse-hole, now leaping
ceilingwards like the cat,—and her main feeling was professional. She
was watching her pupil, storing up in her memory the mispronunciations
and vulgarisms for later insinuative improvement. Only a tithe of her was
aware of the impertinence. But suddenly she heard herself interrupting
quietly.
"I shall not sleep under your roof another night." Mrs. Maper paused so
abruptly that her forefinger fell limp. She was not sure she meant to
give her companion notice, and have the trouble of training another, and
she certainly did not wish to be dismissed instead of dismissing.
"Silly chit!" she said in more conciliatory tones. "And where will you
sleep?"
But Eileen now felt she must obey her own voice—the voice of her
outraged pride, perhaps even of Brian Boru himself. "Good-by. I'll take
some things in a handbag and send for my box in the morning."
Mrs. Maper's hand pointed to the ceiling. "And is that the way you treat
a lady—you're no lady, I tell you that. I demand a month's notice or I
shall summons you."
At this juncture it occurred to Eileen that this might have been her
mother-in-law, and a smile danced into her eyes.
"Himpudent Hirish hussy! Oh, but I'll have the lore of you. Don't forget
I'm the wife of a Justice of the Peace."
"Very well; you get Justice, I want Peace." And Eileen fled to her room.
She had hardly begun packing her handbag when she heard the door locked
from the outside with a savage snap and a cry of, "I'll learn you who's
mistress here, my lady."
Eileen smiled. She was only on the second floor, and captivity revived
all her girlish prankishness. She now began to enjoy the whole episode.
That she was out of place, out of character, out of lodging even, was
nothing beside the humour of this incursion into real life of the
melodrama she had mocked at. Was she not the innocent heroine entrapped
by the villain? Fortunately, she would not need the hero to rescue her.
She went on packing. When her handbag was ready she looked about for
means to escape. She opened her windows and studied the drop and the odd
bits of helpful rainpipe. Descent was not so easy as she had imagined.
Short of tearing the sheets into strips (and that might really bring her
within the J.P.'s purview) or of picking the lock (which seemed even more
burglarious, not to mention more difficult) she might really remain
trapped. However, there would be time to think properly when she had
packed her big box. Half an hour passed cheerfully in the folding of
dresses to an underplay of planned escapes, and she had just locked the
box, when Mrs. Maper's voice pierced the door panel.
"Well, are you ready to come to supper?"
The governess's instinct corrected "dinner." Mrs. Maper when excited was
always tripping into this betrayal of auld lang syne, but she preserved a
disdainful silence.
"Eileen, why don't you hanser?"
Still silence. The key grated in the lock.
Eileen looked round desperately. The thought of meeting Mrs. Maper again
was intolerable. The mirrored door of the rifled wardrobe stood ajar,
revealing an enticing emptiness. Snatching up her handbag and her hat,
she crept inside and closed the door noiselessly upon herself. "The
wardrobe mouse," she thought, smiling.
"Well, my lady!" Mrs. Maper dashed through the door, in her dinner-gown
and diamonds, her forefinger hovering, balanced, between earth and
heaven. She saw nothing but an answering figure ribboned and jewelled,
that dashed at her and pointed its forefinger menacingly.
The appearance of this figure as from behind the glass shut out from
her mind the idea of another figure behind it. The packed box, neat and
new-labelled, the absence of the handbag and of any sign of occupancy,
the open windows, the silence, all told their lying tale.
"The Hirish witch!" she screamed.
She ran from one window to the other seeking for a sign of the escaped or
the escapade. She was relieved to find no batter of brains and blood
spoiling the green lawn. How had the trick been done? It did not even
occur to her to look under the bed, so hypnotised was she by the sense of
a flown bird. Eileen almost betrayed herself by giggling, as at the real
stage melodrama.
When Mrs. Maper ran downstairs to interrogate the servants—eruption into
the kitchen was one of her incurable habits—Eileen slipped through the
wide-flung door, down the staircase, and then, seeing the butler ahead,
turned sharp off to the little-used part of the corridor and so into the
library. She made straight for the iron staircase to the grounds, and
came face to face with Robert Maper.
Twilight was not his hour for the library—she saw even through her
perturbation that he was pacing it in fond memory. His face lighted up
with amazement, as though the dead had come up through a tombstone.
"Good-by!" she said, shifting her handbag to her left hand and holding
out her right. Her self-possession pleased her.
"What!" he cried. And again he had the gasp of a fish out of water.
"Yes, I came to say good-by."
"You are leaving us?"
"Yes."
"Oh, and it is I that have driven you away!"
"No, no, don't reproach yourself, please don't. Good-by."
He gasped in silence. She gave a little laugh. "Now that I offer you my
hand, it is you who won't take it."
He seized it. "Oh, Eil—Miss O'Keeffe—let me keep it."
"Please! we settled that."
"It will never be settled till you are my wife."
"Listen!" said Eileen, dramatically. "In a few minutes your mother and
father will be seated at dinner. Your mother will have told your father
I've left the house in disgrace. Don't interrupt. Would you be prepared
to walk in upon them with me on your arm and to say, 'Mother, father,
Miss O'Keeffe has done me the honour of consenting to be my wife'?"
With her warm hand still in his, how could he hesitate? "Oh, Eileen, if
you'd only let me!"
The imagination of the tableau was only less tempting to Eileen. It was
procurable—she had only to move her little finger, or rather not to move
it. But the very facility of production lessened the tableau's
temptingness. The triumph was complete without the vulgar actuality.
"I can't," she said, withdrawing her hand. "But you are a good fellow.
Good-by." She moved towards the garden steps. He was incredulous of the
utter end. "I shall write to you," he said.
"This is a short cut," she murmured, descending. As her feet touched the
grass she smiled. How they had both tried to stop her, mother and son!
She hurried through the shrubbery, and by a side gate was out on the old
wagon road. More slowly, but still at a good pace, she descended towards
the Black Hole, now beginning to twinkle and glimmer with lights, and far
less grimy and prosaic than in the crude day.
While packing her big box, she had decided to try to lodge that night
with a programme-girl she had got to know at the Theatre Royal, and the
motive that set her pace was the desire to find her before she had
started for the theatre.
The girl usually hovered about Mrs. Maper's box. Once Eileen had asked
her why she wasn't in evidence the week before. "Lord, miss," she said,
"didn't you recognise me on the stage?"
Eileen thus discovered that the girl sometimes figured as a super, when
travelling companies came with sensational pieces, relying upon local
talent, hastily drilled, for the crowds. Mary became a Greek slave, or a
Billingsgate fishwife, with amusing unexpectedness.
Eileen's next discovery about the girl was that she supported a paralysed
mother, though the bed-ridden creature on inspection proved to be more
cheerful than the visitors she depressed. Mr. Maper had sent her grapes
from his hothouse only a few days before, and in taking them to the
little house Eileen had noticed a "Bedroom to Let."
To her relief, when she reached the bleak street, she could see that
though the blind was down, the bill was still in the window. Her spirits
bubbled up again. Ere she could knock at the door, the programme-girl
bounced through it, hatted and cloaked for the theatre.
"Miss O'Keeffe!" She almost staggered backward. Eileen's face worked
tragically in the gloom.
"There are villains after me!" Eileen gasped. "Take this bag, it contains
the family jewels. That bedroom of yours, it is still to let?"
"Yes, miss."
"I take it for to-night, perhaps for ever. The avenger is on my
footsteps. The law may follow me, but I shall defy its myrmidons in my
trackless eyrie."
"Oh, Miss O'Keeffe! You frighten me. I shouldn't like to have all these
jewels in my house, and with my mother tied to her bed."
Eileen burst into a laugh. "Oh, miss!" she said, mimicking the
programme-girl. "Didn't you recognise me on the stage?"
"Mary Murchison!" gasped the programme-girl. "Oh, Miss O'Keeffe, how
wonderful! You nearly made my heart stop—"
"I am sorry, but I do want to take your bedroom. I've left Mrs. Maper,
and you are not to ask any questions."
"I haven't time, I'm late already. Fortunately, I only come on in the
second act."
"That's nice; put my bag in and I'll come to the theatre with you." The
thought was impromptu, an evening with a bed-ridden woman was not
exhilarating at such a crisis.
"You ought to be an actress yourself," the programme-girl remarked
admiringly on the way.
Eileen shuddered. "No, thank you. Scream the same thing night after
night—like a parrot with not even one's own words—I should die of
monotony."
"Oh, it isn't at all monotonous. It's a different audience every night,
and even the laughs come in different places. My parts have mostly been
thinking parts—to-night I'm a prince without a word—but still it's
fun."
"But how can you bear strange men staring at you?"
"One gets used to it. The first time they put me in tights I blushed all
through the piece, but they had painted me so thick it wasn't visible."
"In short, you blushed unseen."
Eileen wished to go to the pit, but her new friend would not hear of her
not occupying her habitual box, since she knew that the management would
be glad to have it occupied if it were empty. This proved to be the case,
and put the seal upon Eileen's enjoyment of the situation. To spend her
evening in Mrs. Maper's box was indeed a climax.
She borrowed theatre-paper and scribbled a note to her ex-employer,
giving the address for her trunk. An orange and some biscuits sufficed
for her dinner.
Not till she was in her little bedroom, surrounded by pious texts, did
she break down in tears.
The next morning, as she sat answering advertisements, the programme-girl
knocked at the door of the bedroom and announced that Mr. Maper had
called.
Eileen turned red. It was too disconcerting. Would he never take "no" for
an answer? "I won't see him. I can't see him," she cried.
The girl departed and returned. "Oh, Miss O'Keeffe, he begs so for only
one word."
"The word is 'no.'"
"After he's been so kind as to bring your box down!"
"Oh, has he? Then the word is 'thanks.'"
"Please, miss, would you mind giving it to him yourself?"
"Who's Irish, you or I? I won't speak to him at all, I tell you."
"But I don't like to send him away like that, when he's been so kind
to mother."
"When has he been kind to your mother?"
"Those grapes you brought—"
"That was old Mr. Maper."
"So is this."
"Oh!" Eileen was quite taken aback, for once. "All right, I'll go into
the parlour."
He was infinitely courteous and apologetic. He had been very anxious
about her. Why had she been so unkind as to leave, and without ever
a good-by to him?
"Oh, hasn't your wife told you, then?"
"She has told me you were rude, and that you left without notice, and
she wants me to prosecute you. I suppose you lost your temper. You
found her rather difficult."
"I found her impossible," said Eileen, frigidly.
"Yes, yes, I understand." He was flushed and unhappy. "You found her
impossible to live with?"
Eileen nodded; she would have added "or to make a lady of," but he
looked so purple and agitated that she charitably forbore. She was
wondering whether Mrs. Maper could really have been so mean as to omit
her share in the quarrel, but he went on eagerly:—
"Quite so, quite so. And what do you think it has been for me?"
She murmured inarticulate sympathy.
"Ah, if you only knew! Oh, my dear Miss O'Keeffe, while you've been in
the house, it's been like heaven."
"I'm glad I've given satisfaction," she said drily.
"Then what do you give by going? I assure you the day you came to the
works it was like heaven there too."
"You forget the temperature," Eileen smiled. "However, it was a very
nice day, and I thank you. But I can't come back after—"
"Who asks you to come back?" he broke in. "No, I should be sorry to see
you again in a menial position, you with your divine gifts of beauty and
song. The idea of your getting a new place," he added with a fall into
prose, "makes me feel sick."
"I value your sympathy, but it is misplaced," she replied freezingly.
"Sympathy! It isn't sympathy! It's jealousy. Oh, my dear Miss O'Keeffe!"
He seized her limp hand. "Eileen! Let me help you—"
As the true significance of his visit, and of the purple agitation,
dawned upon her, the grim humour of the position overbore every other
feeling. Her hand still in his, she began to laugh, and no biting of her
lips could do more than change the laugh into an undignified snigger.
Instead of profiting by his grip of her, he dropped her hand suddenly as
if a hose had been turned on his passion, and this surrender of her hand
reduced Eileen to a passable gravity.
"I'm very sorry, Mr. Maper. But really, life is too horribly amusing."
"I'm very sorry it's me that affords you amusement," he said stiffly.
"No, it isn't you at all, it's just the whole thing. You've been most
kind all along. And I dare say you mean to be kind now. But I don't
really need any help. Your wife's threats of prosecution are ridiculous,
she made my longer stay impossible. I could more justly claim a month's
notice from her."
"That's what I thought. I've brought you a month's salary." He fumbled in
his pocket-book.
"Don't trouble. I shall not accept it."
"You shall," he said sternly. "Or I'll prosecute you."
Eileen's laugh rang out clear. This time he laughed too.
"Now, don't you call life amusing?" she said. "Here am I to take a cheque
under penalty of having to pay it."
"Well, which shall it be?"
"Such a cheque is charming." And she held out her hand. He put the cheque
in it and shook both warmly. They parted, the best of friends.
"Come to me for a character, of course," he said.
"Don't you come to me," replied Eileen, with a roguish smile.
Eileen's next place was—as if by contrast—with a much more genteel
family, and a much poorer, though it flew higher socially. It lived in a
house, half in a fashionable London terrace, half in a shabby side
street, and its abode was typical of its ambitions and its means. Mrs.
Lee Carter drew the line clearly between herself and her governess, which
was a blessing, for it meant Eileen's total exclusion from her social
life, and Eileen's consequent enjoyment of her own evenings at home or
abroad, as she wished. This unusual freedom compensated for the hard
work of teaching children in various stages of growth and ignorance how
to talk French and play the piano. Her salary was small, for Mrs. Lee
Carter's ambition to live beyond her neighbours' means was only achieved
by pinching whomever she could. She was not bad-hearted; she simply could
not afford anything but luxuries. Eileen wondered at not being asked
sometimes to perform at her parties, till she found that only celebrities
ever did anything in that house.
This was a period of much mental activity in Eileen's life. The tossing
ocean of London life, the theatres that played Shakespeare, the world of
new books and new thought, her recent perusal of Plato and of man, all
produced fermentation. But every night she knelt by her bedside and said
her "Ave Maria" with a voluptuous sense of spiritual peace, and every
morning she woke with a certain joy in existence and a certain surprise
to find herself again existing. Her old convent-thought recurred. "We
are worked from without—marionettes who can watch their own performance.
And it is very amusing." Once she read of a British action in Afghanistan
against border-tribes, and she wondered if Lieutenant Doherty was in the
fighting. Since she had ceased to be his mother-confessor he had become
very shadowy; his image now rose substantial from the newspaper lines,
and she was surprised to find in herself a little palpitation at his
probable perils. "One's heartstrings, too, are pulled," she thought.
"I don't like it. Marionettes should move, not feel." These reflections,
however, came to her more often anent her family, and the struggles of
her kin for a livelihood touched her more deeply than any love. "We are
like bits of the same shattered body," she thought. "In these cold
English families everybody is another body." She sent most of her salary
to Ireland, and her pocket-money came from singing in the choir on
Sunday.
The bass chorister was a very amusing man. His voice was sepulchral but
his conversation skittish. Eileen's repartees smote him to almost the
only serious respect of his life, and one day he said: "Why, there's
a future in you. Why don't you go on the stage?"
"What nonsense!" But the blood was secretly stirred in her veins. She saw
herself walking along the Black Hole with the programme-girl, but her
point of view had been modified since she had received a similar
suggestion with a shudder. If she could play Rosalind to a great London
audience, the staring men-folk would matter little.
"Why not?" went on the bass tempter. "A humour like yours with such a
voice and such a face!"
"The stage is full of better voices and better faces."
"No, indeed. Why, there isn't a girl at the Half-and-Half—" He stopped
and almost blushed.
She smiled. "Oh, I don't mind your going to such places. What is the
Half-and-Half, a place where they drink beer?"
"Oh, it's just our slang name for a little music-hall that's just between
the East End and the West End, with a corresponding programme."
"Our slang name?"
"Well—" he paused. "If you'll keep it very dark—but of course you
will—I appear there myself."
"You! What do you do?"
"I sing patriotic songs and drinking-songs—"
"Aren't they the same thing in England?"
"Don't say that on the stage or they'll throw pewter pots. They're very
patriotic."
"That's just what I said. What's your name—I suppose you change it?"
"Yes—as I hope you will yours—some day."
"I shan't take yours."
"Nobody arxed you, miss," he said. "And, besides, mine is
copyright—Jolly Jack Jenkins. I make a fiver a week by it."
"A fiver!" The bass chorister suddenly took on an air of Arabian nights.
At this rate she could buy back the family castle. Her struggling
brothers—how they would bless their magician sister—Mick should have
a London practice, Miles a partnership in an engineering firm.
"You come with me and see Fossy," continued Jolly Jack Jenkins.
Eileen declined with thanks. It took a week of Sundays to argue away her
objections—religious, moral, and social. To play Rosalind to fashionable
London was one thing: to appear at a variety theatre or low-class
music-hall, which nobody in her world or Mrs. Lee Carter's had ever heard
of, was another pair of shoes. Yet strange to say, it was the last
consideration that decided her to try. Even if admitted to the boards,
she could make her failure in secure obscurity. It would simply be
another girlish escapade, and she was ripe for mischief after her
long sobriety.
"But even your Mr. Fossy mustn't know my real name or address," she
stipulated.
"Who shall I say you are?"
"Nelly O'Neill."
"Ripping. Flows from the tongue like music."
"Then it's rippling you mean."
"What a tongue! Wait till Fossy sees you."
"Will he ask me to stick it out?"
"Oh, Lord, I wish I had your repartee. But I'm thinking—Nelly
O'Neill—doesn't it give you away a bit?"
"Keeps me a bit, too. I shouldn't like to lose myself altogether—gain
reputation for another woman."
Fossy proved to be a gentleman named Josephs, who in a tiny triangular
room near the stage of the Half-and-Half listened critically to her comic
singing, shook his head and said he would let her know. Eileen left the
room with leaden heart and feet.
"Wait for me a moment, please," Jolly Jack Jenkins called after her,
and she hung about timidly, jostled by dirty attendants and painted
performers. She was reading a warning to artistes that any improper
songs or lines would lead to their instant dismissal, and regretting more
than ever her incompetence for this innocent profession, when she heard
the bass chorister's big breathing behind her.
"Bravo! You knocked him all of a heap."
"Rubbish! Don't try to cheer me."
"You!" Jolly Jack Jenkins opened his eyes. "You taken in by Fossy! He'll
suggest your doing a trial turn next Saturday night when the public are
least critical, you'll make a furore, and he'll offer you two guineas a
week."
"A pleasing picture, but quite visionary. Why, he didn't even ask for an
address to write to!"
"Oh, I dare say he thought care of me would find you. No, don't glower at
me—I don't mean anything wrong."
"I hope you didn't let him misunderstand—"
"You asked me not to let him know too much. Fossy has to do so much with
queer folk—"
"Yes, I saw he had to warn them against improper songs."
Jolly Jack Jenkins exploded in a guffaw.
"I'm sorry I came," said Eileen, in vague distress.
"Fossy isn't," he retorted. "He was clean bowled over. In that Irish
fox-hunting song all the gallery will be shouting 'Tally-ho!' Where did
you pick it up?"
"I didn't pick it up, I made it up for the occasion."
"By Jove! I have to pay a guinea to a bloodsucking composer when I want
a song. Oh, Fossy's spotted a winner this time."
"Why is he called Fossy?"
"I don't know. Nobody knows. I found the name, I pass it on."
"Perhaps it's a corruption of Foxy."
"There! I never thought of that! You are a—!"
The jolly chorister's mouth remained open. But the prophecy that had
already issued from it came true in every detail.
Despite her private stage-fright, Nelly O'Neill, the new serio-comic,
made a big hit. Her innocent roguery was captivating; her virginal
freshness floated over the footlights, like a spring breeze through the
smoky Hall.
"Well, you are an all-round success," cried Jolly Jack Jenkins, pumping
her hand off at the wings, amid a thunder of applause, encores, and
whistles.
"You mean a Half-and-Half!" laughed Nelly through Eileen's tears. She had
given herself to the audience, but how it had given itself in return,
flashing back to her in electric waves its monstrous vitality, its
apparently single life.
The Half-and-Half was one of those early Victorian halls of the people,
with fixed stars and only a few meteors. The popular favourites changed
their songs and their clothes at periodic intervals, but they would
have lost favour if they had not remained the same throughout everything.
A chairman with a hammer announced the turns, and condescendingly
took champagne with anybody who paid for it. Eileen soon became an
indispensable part of this smoky world. She signed an agreement at three
guineas a week for three years, to perform only at the Half-and-Half.
Fossy saw far. Eileen did not. She jumped for joy when she got beyond
eyeshot. She felt herself jumping out of the governess-life. Second
thoughts and soberer footsteps brought doubt. She had intended telling
Mrs. Lee Carter as soon as the trial-performance was over, but now she
hesitated and was lost. Half the charm lay in the secret adventure, the
dare-devilry. Besides, as a governess she had a comfortable home and a
respectable status, and she had already seen and divined enough of the
world behind the footlights to shrink from being absorbed into it. What
fun in the double life! She had never found a single life worth living.
She would belong to two worlds—be literally Half-and-Half. Nelly O'Neill
must only be born at twilight. But she felt she could not be out
uniformly every evening without some explanation.
"Mrs. Lee Carter," she said, "I have to tell you of a peculiar chance of
augmenting my income that has come to me."
Mrs. Lee Carter, wearing plumes and train for a court reception, paled.
"You are not going to leave me!"
The naïve exclamation strengthened Eileen's hand.
"I don't quite see how to do otherwise," she said boldly.
"Oh, dear, I wish I could afford more. I know you're worth it."
Eileen thought, "If you'd only give your guests good claret instead of
bad champagne!" But she said, "You are very kind—you have always been
most considerate."
The plumes wagged.
"I try to please all parties."
Nelly O'Neill thought, "And to give too many." Eileen said, "Yes, you've
given me my evenings to myself as it is, and considering the new work is
only in the evenings, I did think of running the two, but I'm afraid—"
"If we lightened your work a little—" interrupted Mrs. Lee Carter,
eagerly.
"I shouldn't so much ask that as to have perfect freedom like a young
man—a latch-key even." Never had Eileen looked more demure and Puritan.
"Oh, I hope you won't be working too late—"
"The people who go there are engaged in the daytime. I'd better be frank
with you; it's an extremely unfashionable place towards the East End, and
I quite understand you may not like me to take it. At the same time I
shall never meet anybody who knows me. In fact, it's a dancing and
singing place."
"Oh!" said Mrs. Lee Carter, blankly. "I didn't know you could teach
dancing, too."
"You never asked me.... Of course, if you prefer it, I could come here as
a day governess and leave after tea.... You see it's a longish journey
home: I'm bound to be late...."
"What's the difference? Come and go as you please.... Of course, you
won't mind using the back door when there's a party ... the
servants...."
For the deception Eileen at first salved her conscience Irish-wise by
sending every farthing to her mother under the deceiving pretext of rich
private pupils. She would not even deduct for cabs. Sometimes she could
not get an omnibus, but she almost preferred to walk till she was
footsore, for both riding and walking were forms of penance. The stuffy
omnibus interior after the smoky Hall was nauseating, and in those days
no lady thought of climbing the steep ladder to the slanting roof. But it
sometimes happened that a crawling cabman coming westward would invite
her to a free ride, and Eileen would accept gratefully, and, moreover,
gain from conversations with her drivers new material for her songs.
This period of her life was almost as amusing as she had anticipated; her
only depressions came from the children of the footlights, and the
necessity of adjusting herself superficially to her environment, under
pain of unpopularity. Her isolation and the privacy of her home-life
already made sufficiently for that. And to be disliked even by those she
disliked Eileen disliked. Her nature needed to wallow in warm admiration.
She got plenty.
When, fifteen months later, she agreed to pay Fossy a hundred pounds
for modifying her contract so as to enable her to appear at other Halls,
she said with a smile, "You deserve it. You are the only man at the
Half-and-Half who hasn't made love to me."
Fossy grinned. "If I had known that, I should have demanded a larger
compensation."
Even the bass chorister had not been able to resist proposing, though his
grief at being refused was short-lived, for he died soon after by a fall
from one of those giant wheels that were the saurians of the modern
cycle. Eileen shed many a tear over Jolly Jack Jenkins.
With the growth of her popularity before and behind the footlights came
heavier calls upon her geniality, and, like a hostess who tries to pay
off her debts in one social lump sum, Eileen got "a Sunday out," and
Nelly gave a lunch at a riverside hotel to a motley company of popular
favourites. It was expensive; for the profession, even in those days,
expected champagne. It was appallingly protracted; for the party, having
no work to do that evening, showed no disposition to break up, and
brandies-and-sodas succeeded one another in an aroma of masculine cigars
and feminine cigarettes. It was noisy and hilarious, and gradually it
became rowdy. The Singing Sisters sang, but not in duet. The Lion
Comique, whose loyal melodies were on every barrel-organ, argued
Republicanism and flourished that day's copy of Reynolds's Newspaper, The
Beauteous Bessie Bilhook—"the Queen of Serio-Comics" was scandalously
autobiographic, and the old plantation songster—looking unreal with his
washed face—was with difficulty dissuaded from displaying his ability to
dance on the table without smashing anything. The climax was reserved for
the demure one-legged gymnast, who suddenly produced a pistol and
discharged it in the air. When the panic subsided, he explained to the
landlord and the company that he was "paying his shot."
"That's a hint for me to discharge the bill," said Nelly, adroitly, and,
thanking everybody effusively for the happiness afforded her, she hurried
home to Oxbridge Terrace, to wash it all away in nursery tea. The young
Lee Carters made a restful spectacle with their shining innocent faces,
and she almost wished they would never grow up.
As her success grew, offers from the pantomimes and even the legitimate
stage began to reach her. But now she would not make the step. At the
Halls she was her own mistress, able to arrange at her own convenience
with orchestras. Even Rosalind would have meant long rehearsals and a
complex interference with her governess-life.
At the theatres, too, to judge by all she heard, a sordid side of the
profession was accentuated. The players played for their own hands, and
even the greatest did not disdain to "queer" the effects of their
subordinates, whenever such effects did not heighten their own. Hamlet
had been known to be jealous of the ghost, and the success of his
sepulchral bass. It was in fact a world of jostling jealousies, as hidden
from the public as the prompter. In the Halls she was her own company and
her own playwright and her own composer. She had her elbows free.
And even here Bessie Bilhook, whose vanity was a byword in Lower Bohemia,
and who had arrogantly assumed the sovereignty of the Serio-Comics,
refused to appear on the same programmes unless her name was printed
twice as large as Nelly O'Neill's, and was further displayed on a board
outside, alone in its nine-inch glory. Again, actresses were recognised
by the newspapers; the Halls had as yet no status. Their performers were
not so photographed; indeed, Eileen refused to sit. She desired this
obscurer form of celebrity. If her fame should ever reach Mrs. Lee
Carter, the game would be nearly up. Her poor mother might even suffer
the shock of it; perhaps the professional future of her brothers would be
injured. Her sedate life had grown as dear as her noisy life, she loved
the transition to the innocent home circle.
Yet in this very domesticity lay a danger. It provoked her to an
ever broader humour on the stage. She let herself go, like a swimmer
emboldened by a boat behind. Eileen O'Keeffe she felt would rescue Nelly
O'Neill if licence carried her too near the falls. It was so irresistibly
seductive, this swift response of the audience to the wink of suggestion.
Like a vast lyre, the Hall vibrated to the faintest breath of
roguishness. Almost in contemptuous mockery one was tempted to
experiment....
One day, in a sudden horror of herself, she pleaded illness and hurried
back to her mother for a holiday.
The straggling village looked much the same, the same pigs and turkeys
rooted and strutted, the same stinging turf-smoke came from the doors and
windows (save from one or two cabins unroofed by the Castle tyrant), the
same weeds grew in the potato-patches, the same old men in patched
brogues pulled their caubeens from their heads and their dudeens from
their mouths, as she went past, half-consciously studying the humours for
stage reproduction. It was hard for her to remember she wasn't "the
Quality" in London, or that the Half-and-Half existed simultaneously with
these beloved woods and waters. In only one particular was the village
changed. Golf links had been discovered near it, a club-house had sprung
up and the peasants found themselves enriched by the employment of their
gossoons as caddies. The O'Keeffes were prospering equally—thanks to her
subsidies—although she hadn't yet bought them back their castle. "All's
for the best in the greenest of isles," she told herself, as she sat
basking in family affection.
And yet the wave of melancholia refused to ebb. Indeed, it swelled and
grew blacker. The remedy seemed to intensify the disease; a holiday but
gave her time to possess her soul, and brood upon its stains, her
childhood's scene but enabled her to measure the realities of her
achievement against the visions of girlhood. Life seemed too hopeless,
too absurd. To amuse the gross adult, to instruct the innocent
child—what did it all mean to her own life? She was tired of doing,
she wanted to be something; something for herself. She was always
observing, imitating, caricaturing, but what was she? A nothing, a
phantasm, an emptiness.
"Eileen avourneen," said her mother, suddenly. "I wish you were married."
Eileen opened her eyes. "Dear heart, is this another offer from the
castle?" And she laughed gently.
Mrs. O'Keeffe's fingers played uneasily with her bosom's cross. "No, but
I should feel happier about you. It—it settles people."
"It certainly does," Eileen laughed, and her celebrated ditty, "The
Marriage Settlement," flashed upon her. "Oh, dear," and her laugh changed
to a sigh. "The marriages I see around me!"
"What! Isn't Mrs. Lee Carter happy?"
Eileen flushed. "I shouldn't like to be in her shoes," she said
evasively.
"Officers seem to make the best husbands," said Mrs. O'Keeffe.
"Because they are so much away?" queried Eileen, with a vague memory of
her Lieutenant Doherty.
That night the melancholia was heavy as a nightmare, without the partial
unconsciousness of sleep. This blackness must be "the horrors" she had
heard women of her stage-world speak of. She wanted to spring out of bed,
to run to her mother's room. But that would have meant hysteric
confession, so she bit her lips and stuck her nails into the sheet.
Perhaps suicide would be simplest. She was nothing; it would not even be
blowing out a light. No, she was something, she was a retailer of gross
humours, a vile sinner; it might be kindling more than a light, an
eternal flame. "Child of Mary," indeed! She deserved to be strangled with
her white ribbon. And she exaggerated everything with that morbid
mendacity of the confessional.
Two days later she went for a walk along the springy turf of the valley.
The sun shone overhead, but from her spirit the mist had not quite
lifted. Suddenly a small white ball came scudding towards her feet. She
looked round and saw herself amid little flags sticking in the ground.
Distant voices came to her ear.
"This must be the new game that's creeping in from Scotland," she
thought. "Perhaps I ought to have a song ready if ever it catches on. Ah,
here comes one of the young fools—I'll watch him—"
He came, clothed as in a grey skin that showed the beautiful modelling
of his limbs. His face glowed.
"Ouidà's Apollo," she thought, but in the very mockery she trembled,
struck as by a lightning shaft. The blackness was sucked up into fire
and light. "Am I in the way?" she said with her most bewitching smile.
He raised his hat. "I was afraid you might have been struck."
"Perhaps I was," she could not help saying.
"Oh, gracious, are you hurt?" His voice was instantly caressing.
"Do I look an object for ambulances?"
He smiled dazzlingly. "You look awfully jolly." Later Eileen
remembered how she had taken this reply for a line of poetry.
A week later the Hon. Reginald Winsor, younger brother of an English
Earl, was teaching Eileen golf.
It had been a week of ecstasy.
She thought of Reginald the last thing at night and the first thing in
the morning and dreamed of him all night.
Now she knew what her life had lacked—to be caught up into another's
personality, to lose one's petty individuality in—in what? Surely not
in a larger; she couldn't be so blind as that. In what then? Ah, yes, in
Nature. He was gloriously elemental. He wasn't himself. He was the
masculine. Yes, that was the correlative element her being needed. The
mere manliness of his pipe made its aroma in his clothes adorable. Or was
it his big simplicity, in which she could bury all her torturing
complexity? Oh, to nestle in it and be at rest. Yet she held him at arm's
length. When they shook hands her nerves thrilled, but she was the colder
outwardly for very fear of herself.
On the ninth day he proposed.
Eileen knew it would be that day. Lying in bed that morning, she found
herself caught by her old impersonal whimsy. "I'm a fever, and on the
ninth day of me the man comes out in a rash proposal." Ah, but this
time she was in a tertian, too. What a difference from those other
proposals—proper or improper. Her mind ran over half a dozen, with a
touch of pity she had not felt at the time. Poor Bob Maper, poor Jolly
Jack Jenkins, if it was like this they felt! But was it her fault? No man
could say she had led him on—except, perhaps, the Hon. Reginald, and
towards him her intentions were honourable, she told herself smiling. But
the jest carried itself farther and more stingingly. Could he make an
"honourable" she told herself her? Ah, God, was she worthy of him, of his
simple manhood? And would he continue proposing, if she told him she was
Nelly O'Neill? And what of his noble relatives? No, no, she must not run
risks. She was only Eileen O'Keeffe, she had never left Ireland save for
the Convent. The rest was a nightmare. How glad she was that nobody knew!
The proposal duly took place in a bunker, while Eileen was whimsically
vituperating her ball. The fascination of her virginal diablerie was
like a force compelling the victim to seize her in his arms after the
fashion of the primitive bridegroom. However the poor Honourable
refrained, said boldly, "Try it with this," and under pretence of
changing her golfsticks possessed himself of her hand. For the first time
his touch left her apathetic.
"Now it is coming," she thought, and suddenly froze to a spectator of
the marionette show. As the Hon. Reginald went through his performance,
she felt with a shudder of horror over what brink she had nearly stepped.
The man was merely a magnificent animal! She, with her heart, her soul,
her brain, mated to that! Like a convict chained to a log. Not worthy of
him forsooth! "There's a gulf between us," she thought, "and I nearly
fell down it." And the Half-and-Half rose before her, clamouring,
pungent, deliciously seductive.
"Dear Mr. Winsor," she listened with no less interest to her own part
in the marionette performance, "it's really too bad of you. Just as I
was getting on so nicely, too!"
"Is that all you feel about—about our friendship?"
"All? Didn't you undertake to teach me golf? I haven't the faintest
desire not to go on ... as soon as we have escaped from this wretched
bunker. Come! Did you say the niblick?"
Reginald's manners were too good to permit him to swear, even at golf.
"One's body is like an Irish mud-cabin," Eileen reflected. "It shelters
both a soul and a pig."
Nelly O'Neill threw herself into her work with greater ardour than
ever. But her triumphs were shadowed by worries. She was nervous lest
the Hon. Reginald should turn up at one of her Halls—she had three now;
she was afraid her voice was spoiling in the smoky atmosphere; sometimes
the image of the Hon. Reginald came back reproachfully, sometimes
tantalisingly. Oh, why was he so stupid? Or was it she who had been
stupid?
Then there was the apprehension of the end of her career at the Lee
Carters'. The young generation was nearly grown up. The eldest boy she
even suspected of music-halls. He might stumble upon her.
Her popularity, too, was beginning to frighten her. Adventurous young
gentlemen followed her in cabs—cabs were now a necessity of her triple
appearance—and she never dared drive quite to her door or even the
street. Bracelets she always returned, if the address was given; flowers
she sent to hospitals, anonymous gifts to her family. Nobody ever saw her
wearing his badge.
A sketch of her even found its way to one of Mrs. Lee Carter's journals.
"Why, she looks something like me!" Eileen said boldly.
"You flatter yourself," said Mrs. Lee Carter. "You're both Irish, that's
all. But I don't see why these music-hall minxes should be pictured in
respectable household papers."
"Some people say that the only real talent is now to be found in the
Halls," said Eileen.
"Well, I hope it'll stay there," rejoined her mistress, tartly. Eileen
recalled this conversation a few nights later, when she met Master
Harold Lee Carter outside the door at midnight with a rival latch-key.
"Been to a theatre, Miss O'Keeffe?" asked her whilom pupil.
"No; have you?"
"Well, not exactly a theatre!"
"Why, what do you mean?"
"Sort of half-and-half place, you know."
By the icy chill at her heart at his innocent phrase, she knew how she
dreaded discovery and clung to her social status.
"What is a half-and-half place?" she asked smiling.
"Oh, comic songs and tumblers and you can smoke."
"No? You're not really allowed to smoke in a theatre?"
"Yes, we are. They call it a music-hall—it's great fun. But don't tell
the mater."
"You naughty boy!"
"I don't see it. All the chaps go."
She shook her head. "Not the nicest."
"Oh, that's tommyrot," he said disrespectfully. "Their women folk don't
know—that's all."
Eileen now began to feel like a criminal round whom the toils thicken.
In the most fashionable of her three Halls, she sang a little French
song. And she had taught Master Harold his French.
Of course, even if Nelly were seen by Eileen's friends or acquaintances,
detection was not sure. Eileen was always in such sedate gowns, never
low-cut, her manners were so suppressed, her hair done so differently,
and what a difference hair made! In fact, it was in her private life that
she felt herself more truly the actress. On the boards her real secret
self seemed to flash forth, full of verve, dash, roguery, devilry. Should
she take to a wig, or to character songs in appropriate costumes? No, she
would run the risk. It gave more spice to life. Every evening now was an
adventure, nay three adventures, and when she snuggled herself up at
midnight in her demure white bed, overlooked by the crucifix, she felt
like the hunted were-wolf, safely back in human shape. And she became
more audacious, letting herself go, so as to widen the chasm between
Nelly and Eileen, and make anybody who should suspect her be sure he was
wrong. And occasionally she paid for all this fever and gaiety by fits of
the blackest melancholy.
She had gradually dropped her habit of prayer, but in one of her dark
moods she found herself slipping to her knees and crying: "Oh, Holy
Mother, look down on Thy distressed daughter, and deliver her from the
body of this death. So many wooers and no spark of love in herself; a
woman who sings love-songs with lips no man has touched, a lone-of-soul
who can live neither with the respectable nor with the Bohemians, who
loves you, sanctissima Maria, without being sure you exist. Oh, Holy
Mother of God, advocate of sinners, pray for me. If I had only something
solid to cling to—a babe to suckle with its red grotesque little face.
You will say cling to the cross, but is not my whole life also a
crucifixion? I am rent in twain that a thousand fools may laugh nightly.
Oh, Holy Mother, make me at one with myself; it is the atonement I
need. Send me the child's heart, and I will light a hundred candles to
you.... Or do you now prefer electricity? Oh, Maria mavourneen, I cannot
pray to you, for there is a mocking devil within me, and you will not
cast her out." And she burst into hysteric tears.
As she was about to start one evening for her round, Mrs. Lee Carter's
maid brought up a bombshell. Superficially it looked like a letter with
foreign stamps, marked "Private" and readdressed with an English stamp
from Ireland. But that one line of unerased writing, her name, threw her
into heats and colds, for she remembered the long-forgotten hand of
Lieutenant Doherty. She had to sit down on her bed and finish trembling
before she broke the seal and set free this voice from the past.
"DEAR MOTHER-CONFESSOR,—You will be wondering why I have been silent all
these years and why I write now. Well, I will tell you the truth. It
wasn't that I believed you had really gone into the Convent you wrote me
you were joining, it was the new and exciting life and duties that opened
up before me when I got to Afghanistan, far from post-offices. Afterwards
I was drafted to India and had a lot of skirmishing and tiger-shooting,
and your image—forgive me!—became faint, and I excused myself for not
writing by making myself believe you were buried in the Convent. ["So,
after all, he never got the letter telling him I was going to marry back
the Castle!" Eileen mused joyfully through her agitation.] But now that I
am at last coming home in a few months, no longer a minor, but nearer a
major (that's like one of your old jokes)—somehow your face seems to be
the only thing I am coming back for. It's no use trying to explain it
all, or even apologising. It's just like that. I've confessed, you
see, though it is hopeless to get straight with my arrears, so I won't
attempt it. And when I found out how I felt, of course came the horrible
thought that you might be in the Convent after all, or, worse still,
married and done for, so what do you think I did? I just sent this cable
to your mother: 'Is Eileen free? Reply paid. Colonel Doherty.' Wasn't it
clever and economical of me to think of the word 'free,' meaning such a
lot—not married, not a nun, not even engaged to another fellow? Imagine
my joy when I got back the monosyllable, meaning all that lot. I
instantly cabled back 'Thanks, don't tell her of this.' ["So that's what
mother was hinting at," thought Eileen, with a smile.] It was all I could
do not to cable to you: 'Will you marry me? Reply paid.' ["What a good
idea for a song!" murmured Nelly.] Put me out of my agony as soon as you
can, won't you, dearest Eileen? Your face is floating before me as I
write, with its black Irish eyes and its roguish dimples...."
She could read no more. She sat long on her bed, dazed by the rush
of bitter-sweet memories. The Convent, her father, her early years,
this dear boy ... all was washed together in tears. There was something
so bizarre, unexpected and ingenuous about it all; it touched the
elemental in her. If he had excused himself even, she would have
tossed him off impatiently. But his frank exposure of his own
self-contradictoriness appealed subtly to her. Was this the want in her
life, was it for him she had been yearning, below the surface of her
consciousness, even as she had remained below the surface of his? Here,
indeed, was salvation—providential salvation. A hand was stretched to
save her—snatch her from spiritual destruction. The dear brown manly
hand that had potted tigers while she had been gesticulating on
platforms—a performing lioness. Distance, imagination, early memories,
united to weave a glamour round him. It was many minutes before she
could read the postscript: "I think it right to say that my complexion is
not yellow nor my liver destroyed. I know this is how we are represented
on your stage. I have sat for a photograph, especially to send you."
The stage! Why should he just stumble upon the word, to chill her with
the awful question whether she would have to tell him. She was late at
her engagements, her performance was perfunctory—she was no longer with
"the boys," but seated in a howdah on an elephant's back, side by side
with a mighty hunter, or walking with a tall flaxen-haired lieutenant
between the honeysuckled hedges of an Irish boreen. It struck her as
almost miraculous—though it was probably only because her attention
was now drawn to the name—that she read of Colonel Doherty in the
evening paper the gasman tendered her that very evening, as she waited at
the wing. It was a little biography full of deeds of derringdo. "My
Bayard!" she murmured, and her eyes filled with tears.
She wrote and tore up many replies. The first commenced: "What a strange
way of proposing! You begin by giving me two black eyes to prove you've
forgotten me. I am so different in other people's eyes as well as in my
own it would be unfair to accept you. You are in love with a shadow."
The word-play about her eyes seemed to savour of the "Half-and-Half."
She struck it out. But "you are in love with a shadow," remained the
Leit-motif of all the letters. And if he was grasping at a shadow it
would be unfair for her to grasp at the substance.
The correspondence continued by every Indian mail after his receipt of
her guarded refusal; he Quixotic, devoted, no matter how she had changed.
He loved the mere scent of her letter paper. Was she only a governess?
Had she been a charwoman, he would have kissed her cheeks white. The
boyish extravagance of his passion worked upon her, troubling her to her
sincerest core. She would hide nothing from him. She wrote a full account
of her stage career, morbidly exaggerating the vulgarity of her
performance and the degradation of her character. She was blacker than
any charwoman, she said with grim humour. The moment she dropped the
letter into the box, a trembling seized on all her limbs. She spent three
days of torture; her fear of losing him seeming to have heightened her
love for him.
Then Mrs. Lee Carter handed her a cable.
"Sailing unexpectedly S.S. Colombo to-morrow—Doherty." She nearly fell
fainting in dual joy. He was coming home, and he would cross her letter.
Before it could return they would be safely married. It should be
destroyed unread.
"Is anything wrong?" said her mistress.
"No, quite the contrary."
"I am glad, because I had rather unpleasant news to tell you. But you
must have seen that when Kenneth goes to Winchester, there will
practically be nothing for you to do."
"How lucky! For I am going to be married."
"Oh, my dear, I am so glad," gushed Mrs. Lee Carter.
Afterwards Eileen marvelled at the obvious finger of Providence
unravelling her problems. She had never relished the idea of finding
another place, not easily would she find one so dovetailing into her
second life; she might have been tempted to burn her boats.
She prepared now to burn her ships instead. Her contracts with the Halls
were now only monthly; Nelly O'Neill could easily slip out of existence.
She would not say she was going to be married—that would concentrate
attention on herself. Illness seemed the best excuse. For the one week
after the Colombo's arrival she could send conscience money. The
Saturday it was due found her still starred; she did not believe his ship
would get in till late, and managers would particularly dislike being
done out of her Saturday night turn. Perhaps she ought to have left the
previous week, she thought. It was foolish to rush things so close. But
it was not so easy to give up the habits of years, and activity allayed
the fever of waiting. She had sent an ardent letter to meet the ship at
Southampton, saying he was to call at the Lee Carters' in Oxbridge
Terrace on Sunday afternoon, which she had to herself. Being only a poor
governess, she would be unable to meet him at the station or receive him
at the house on Saturday night, even if he got in so early. He must be
resigned to her situation, she added jestingly. On the Saturday afternoon
she received a wire full of their own hieroglyphic love-words, grumbling
but obeying. How could he live till Sunday afternoon? Why hadn't she
resigned her situation?
As she was starting for the Halls for the last time, in the dusk of a
Spring day, a special messenger put into her hand a letter he had
scribbled in the train. He was in London then. Her heart thumped with
a medley of emotions as she tore open the letter:
"Oh, my darling, I shall see you at last face to face—" But she had no
time to spend under the hall-light reading it. In her cab she struck a
match and read another scrap. "But, oh, cruel one, not to let me come
to-night!" She winced. That gave her a pause. If she had let him come—to
the Half-and-Half! He would turn from her, shuddering. And was it not
precisely to the Half-and-Half that honour should have invited him? The
Half-and-Half arrived at the cab window ere she had finished pondering.
She thrust the letter into her pocket.
Would she ever get through her three Halls? It did not seem as if she had
strength for the Half-and-Half itself. She nerved herself to the task,
and knew, not merely from the shrieks of delight, that she had surpassed
herself. Happy and flushed she flung herself into her waiting cab.
She had the 9.45 turn at her second and most fashionable Hall—a Hall
where the chairman had been replaced by programme numbers—and then would
come her third and last appearance at 10.35. It was strange to think that
in another hour Nelly O'Neill's career would be over. It seemed like
murdering her. Yes, Eileen O'Keeffe would be her murderess. Well, why not
murder what lay between one and happiness? As she waited at the wings,
just before going on, while the orchestra played her opening bars, she
glanced diagonally at the packed stalls, and her heart stood still.
There in the second row sat Colonel Doherty, smoking a big cheroot.
Instinctively she made the sign of the cross; then swayed back and was
caught by the man who changed the programme-numbers.
"Is No. 9 come?" she gasped.
"I think so; aren't you well, Miss O'Neill?"
"For God's sake, give me breathing space," she said, with a last wild
peep at the Colonel. Yes, there was no mistaking him after the three new
portraits he had sent her. He was in cheerful conversation with a stout,
sallow gentleman of the Anglo-Indian stage-type. Both were in immaculate
evening-dress and wore white orchids. How fortunate she had refused to
send any photograph in return, pleading ugliness but really afraid of
theatrical sketches that might find their way to the officers' mess!
The band stopped, changed its tune, No. 9 appeared on the board; there
was a murmur of confusion.
"No, by Heaven, I'll face the music," she said with grim humour. She
almost hustled the hastening juggler out of the way. She was in a
whirlwind of excitement. So he was there—well, so much the better. He
had saved her from lying. He had given her an easy way of confessing.
Words were so inadequate, he should see the reality: the stage to-night
would be her confessional. She would extenuate nothing. She would throw
herself furiously into the fun and racket; go to her broadest limits,
else the confession would be inadequate. Then ... if he survived the
shock ... why then, perhaps, she'd insist on going on with this double
life...! He had risen in his seat. No, no, he must not go away, she could
not risk the juggler boring him.
"I'm better; I mustn't be late at my next shop," she murmured
apologetically as the number and the music were changed back.
"Ah, she's come—she was late," came the murmurs of the audience as it
stirred in excited expectation.
She flung on roguish, feverish, diabolical, seductive in low-cut bodice
pranked with flowers. It was a frenzy of impromptu extravagance, dazzling
even the orchestra; each line accentuated by new gesture, the verses
supplemented by new monologue; a miracle of chic and improvisation, and
the house rose at it. Out of the mist before her eyes thunder seemed to
come in great roars and crashes. She almost groped her way to the wing.
She was recalled. The mist cleared. She bowed direct at him, smiling
defiance from her sparkling eyes. He was applauding with his hands, his
stick, his lungs! Was it possible?—yes, he had not recognised her!
Now came a new revulsion. Again she felt herself saved. She sang her
other songs straight at him, and exaggerated them equally, half to tempt
Providence, half as a bold way of keeping Eileen still concealed. She
heard his companion chuckling, "By Jove, Willie, she's mashed on you,"
as she threw a farewell kiss towards him. Then she hurried to her
dressing-room and took out his letter. She had transferred it to the
pocket of her theatrical gown, but had not as yet found time to finish
it. Even before she re-perused it, another emotion had begun to possess
her, a rush of resentment. So this was how he amused himself while
waiting to clasp her in his arms! How would he ever live through the
hours till Sunday afternoon, forsooth! She was jealous of the applause he
lavished on Nelly O'Neill, incensed at his levity, at his immaculate
evening-dress, at his white orchid. How dare he be so gay and debonair?
Her anger rose as she read his protestations, his romantic professions.
"O my darling, I shall sit up all night, thinking of you, re-reading all
your dear letters, recalling our past, picturing our future. In short, as
old Landor puts it:—
She crumpled the paper in her hand. There was a knock at the door; Fossy
poked his head in. He had risen in the world of Halls, even as Nelly
O'Neill.
"Might I present two friends of mine? They want so much to know you."
"You know I never see anybody, and that I have to hurry off."
"Then, I was to give you this bouquet."
He handed in a costly floral mass. Amid it lay a card, "Colonel Doherty."
She crumpled his letter more viciously.
"Tell them I can give them ten minutes only. Oh, Fossy, it's an amusing
Show, isn't it?"
"It was a rattling good show," said Fossy, half puzzled. "Come in, boys."
Entered the Anglo-Indian twain with shining faces and shirt-fronts,
cheroots politely lowered.
"Oh, smoke away, gentlemen," cried Nelly O'Neill, facing them in all
the dazzle of her flesh and the crudity of her stage-paint, and her
over-lustrous eyes, "don't mind me. Which of you is the Colonel?"
The stout, sallow gentleman jocosely pushed his tall flaxen-haired
companion forward. "Oh, I knew the Major was out of it," he grinned.
"Not at all, Major," said Nelly. "I only wanted to know which I had to
thank for these lovely flowers."
"You have yourself to thank," said the Colonel, smartly. "By Jove! You
gave us a treat. London was worth coming back to."
"Ah, you've been away from London?"
"Just back this very day from India—"
"And of course the first thing after a good dinner is the good old
Friv—" put in the Major.
"Thank you, Major," said Fossy. "That's handsome of you. And now I'll
leave you to Miss O'Neill."
"That's handsomer still," said the Colonel. And the three men guffawed.
Eileen felt sick.
The Major began to talk of the music-halls of India; the Colonel chimed
in. They treated her as a comrade, told her anecdotes of the coulisses
of Calcutta. The Colonel retailed a jest of the bazaars.
"I permit smoke, not smoking-room stories," she said severely. At which
the twain poked each other shriekingly in the ribs. After that Eileen let
the Colonel have rope enough to hang himself with, though she felt it
cutting cruelly into her own flesh. It was an orgie of the eternal
masculine, spiced with the aroma of costly cigars.
"I'm so sorry," she said, when she had let them have a quarter of an
hour's run. "I really must fly." And she seized the bouquet, and
carefully adjusted his card in the glowing mass. "Won't you come
and have tea with me to-morrow? About four."
The Colonel winced. "I fear I have another appointment."
"Oh, rot! I'll bring him," said the Major. "Where do you hang out?"
"22 Oxbridge,"—her hesitation was barely perceptible—"Crescent."
The Colonel started. "Do you know it, Colonel?" She looked at him
ingenuously.
"No, but how odd! My other appointment is at 22 Oxbridge Terrace."
"How funny!" laughed Eileen. "Just round the corner. Then you'll be
able to kill two ladies with one cab." And she fled from the Major's
cachinnation.
She had missed her turn at the third Hall, but she did not care. She went
on and gave a spiritless performance. It fell dead, but she cared less.
Her head throbbed with a dozen possibilities. She was still undiscovered.
As she sat resting on her couch ere resuming her work-a-day gown, her
nerves stretched to snapping point, and old Irish songs crooning
themselves irrelevantly in her brain, a telegram was handed her.
"He has found out," she thought, going hot and cold. She tore open the
pink envelope... and burst into a shriek of laughter. The dresser rushed
in, wondering. Nelly O'Neill merely held her sides, jollity embodied.
"Oh, the Show, the Show!" she gasped, the tears streaking her painted
cheeks.
The telegram that hung between her fingers in two sheets ran: "Reply
prepaid. I don't know the ways of the stage so I send you this as a sure
way of reaching you to ask when and where I may have the pleasure of
calling upon your friend, Miss O'Keeffe, and renewing the study of
Plato.—Robert Maper, Hotel Belgravia."
"Any answer, miss?" said the imperturbable doorkeeper.
The answer flashed irresistibly into her mind as he spoke. Oh, she would
play up to Bob Maper. Doubtless he imagined her fallen to the level of
her métier, though he wasn't insulting. She scribbled hastily: "Robert
Maper, Hotel Belgravia. I am waiting at the Hall for you. Come and take
me to supper.—EILEEN O'NEILL." She gave instructions he was to be
admitted. Then she relapsed into her hysteric amusement. "Oh, the merry
master of marionettes, the night my love comes from beyond the seas, you
send me to supper with Robert Maper." She waited with impatience. Now
that the long-dreaded discovery had come, she was consumed with curiosity
as to its effect upon the discoverer. At last she remembered to wash off
the rouge and the messes necessary for stage-perspective. Her winsome
face came back to her in the mirror, angelic by contrast, and while she
was looking wonderingly at this mystic flashing mask of hers, there was a
knock, and in another instant she was looking into the eyes burning
unchanged under the white marble mantel-piece.
"Ah, there you are!" she said gaily, and shook his hand as though they
had met the evening before. "Where shall we go?"
He accepted the situation. "I don't know—I thought you would know."
"I don't—I never supped with a man in my life."
He flushed with complex pleasure and surprise. "Really! Oh, Eileen!"
"Hush! Call me Nelly, if you must be Christian. I suppose you think you
may, now."
"I—I beg your pardon," he stammered, disconcerted.
"Don't look so gaspy—poor little thing! It shall be thrown back into the
water. Will you carry my bouquet?"
"With pleasure." He grasped it eagerly, and carried it towards the stage
door and a hansom.
"It wanted only that," she said. "Oh, the Show, the Show!"
"I don't understand you."
"Do I understand myself?" They got into the hansom. "Where shall we go?"
she repeated.
"Places all close at twelve on Saturday night."
"Ah, do they? Your hotel also?"
"No, of course one may eat at one's own hotel. If you don't mind going
there—"
"If you don't mind, rather."
"I? Who is my censor?"
"Ah, the word admits I'm discreditable. Never mind, Bob. See how
Christian I am."
"No, no, I've felt it was all my doing. Indirectly I drove you to
it—oh, how you have weighed on me!"
"Really, I'd quite forgotten you."
He winced and gasped. "Hotel Belgravia," he called up through the
trap-door.
"Very strange you should find me," she said, as they glided through the
flashing London night.
"Not in the least. I knew you blindfold, so to speak. You forget how I
used to stand outside the drawing-room, listening to your singing."
"Eavesdropper!" she murmured. But he struck a tender chord—all the
tender chords of her twilight playing that now rose up softly and floated
around her.
"Eavesdropper if you like, who heard nothing that was not beautiful. And
so I hadn't to look for you. As a matter of fact, I wasn't looking but
consulting my programme to know who number eleven was, when you began to
sing."
"If you had looked you wouldn't have recognised me," she said, smiling.
"Probably not. The stage get-up would have blurred my memories."
She began to like him again: the oddness of it all was appealing.
"Nevertheless," she said, "it is strange you should just find me
to-night, for I—"
"No, it isn't," he interrupted eagerly. "I've been every night this
week."
"Ah, eavesdropping again," she said, touched.
"I wanted to be absolutely sure—and then I couldn't pluck up courage to
write to you."
"But you did to-night?"
"You looked so tired—I felt I wanted to protect you."
A sob came into her throat, but she managed to say coldly, "Was I very
bad?"
"To one who had seen you the other nights," he said with complimentary
candour.
She laughed. "How is your mother?"
"Oh, she's very well, thank you. She lives in London now."
"Then your father has retired from—"
"He is dead,—didn't you hear?"
"No." Eileen sat in shocked silence. "I am sorry," she murmured at
length. But underneath this mild shock she was conscious—as they rolled
on without speaking—of a new ease that had come into her life: some
immense relaxation of tension. "A hunted criminal must breathe more
calmly when he is caught," she thought.
"Lucky I'm in evening dress," she said, loosening her cloak as they went
through a corridor, shimmering with dresses and diamonds, to a crowded
supper-room.
"But you're always in evening dress, surely."
"I might have been in tights." And she had a malicious self-wounding
pleasure in watching him gasp. She hurried into a revelation of her exact
position, as soon as they had secured a just-vacated little table in a
window niche. She omitted only Colonel Doherty.
He listened breathlessly. "And nobody knows you are Eileen O'Keeffe, I
mean Nelly O'Neill?"
She laughed. "You see you don't know which I am."
"It's incredible."
"So much the worse for your theories of credibility. The longer I live,
the less the Show surprises me."
"What show?"
"Oh, it's too long to explain. Say Vanity Fair." Her thumb fell into its
old habit of flicking the table. There was a silence.
"I am sorry you told me," he said slowly.
"Why?"
A waiter loomed over them.
"Supper, Sir Robert?"
She glanced quickly at her companion.
"Yes," he said. "Ma buonissima! I leave it to you. And champagne."
"Prestissimo, Sir Robert." He smirked himself off.
"Why does he call you that?" she asked.
"Oh, didn't you know my poor father was made a Baronet, after we
entertained Royalty?"
"No; how strange your lives should have been going on all the time!" The
pop of a cork at her elbow startled her. Then she lifted her frothing
glass. "Sir—to you!"
He clinked his against it. "To the lady of my dreams."
"Still?" She sipped the wine: her eyes sparkled.
"Yes; I've still a long opinion of myself."
She put out her hand quickly and pressed his an instant.
"Thank you!" he said huskily. "That was why I said I was sorry to know
that to the world you were still a governess. Of course I was glad,
too."
"I don't understand. I always said you were more Irish than I."
"I was glad you had kept yourself unspotted from the stage-world."
"Good God! You call that unspotted! What are men made of?"
"You were in a bad atmosphere. Your lips caught phrases."
"Nonsense. I'm a crow, not a parrot; a thoroughly sooty bird."
"It was your whiteness that attracted—your morning freshness. You don't
know what vulgarity is."
"You don't know what I am."
"I know you to your delicious finger-tips. And that's why I am sorry you
told me so much. I wanted to ask Nelly O'Neill to marry me. Now she'll
think I'm only asking Eileen O'Keeffe, the daughter of the Irish
gentleman."
Her eyes filled with tears. "No, they both believe you capable of any
folly. Besides, somebody would find out Nelly all the same." And a smile
made a rainbow across her tears.
The arrival of the soup relaxed the tension of emotion. In mid-plate she
suddenly put down her spoon and laughed softly.
"What is it?" he said, not without alarm at her transitions.
"Why, it would be one of those stock theatrical marriages, into which we
entrap titles! Fascinated by a Serio-Comic, poor silly young man. She
played her cards well, that Nelly. Ha! ha! ha! Who would dream of Plato's
dialogues? And you talk of incredible!"
"I am content to be called silly." He tried to take her hand.
"Well, don't be it in public. You will rank with Lord Tippleton who
married Bessie Bilhook, and made a Lady of her—the only ladyhood she's
ever known."
"No, I can't rank with him," he smiled back. "I'm only a Baronet."
"It sounds the same. Lady Maper!" she murmured. "But, oh, how funny!
There'd be two Lady Mapers."
"My mother would be the Dowager Lady—"
"That's funnier still."
He ate in silence. Eileen mused on the picture of the Dowager, her
forefinger to heaven.
"The Royalty—how did that go off?" she said, as he carved the chicken.
"With fireworks. For the reception father built a new house and furnished
it with old furniture. Royalty stopped an hour and a quarter. Oh, she was
wonderful. I mean my mother. Copied your phrases—see what an impression
you made."
"And what have you been doing since you came into the title?"
"Looking for you."
"Nonsense!" She dropped her fork. "But you knew I had people in Ireland."
"I never knew exactly where."
"But what put you on the track of the music-halls?"
"Nothing. I never dreamed of looking for you there. I just went." Master
Harold Lee Carter's phrase flashed back to her memory, "All the chaps
go."
"But what about the Black Hole—I mean the works?"
"They go on," he said. "I just get the profits."
"And how about your Socialism?"
"You taught me the fallacy of it."
"I? Well, that's the cream of the joke."
"Yes. Don't laugh at me, please. When you came into my life, or rather
when you went out of it—yes, I am Irish—I saw that money and station
are the mere veneer of life: the central reality is—Love."
Again her eyes filled with tears, but she remained silent.
"And I saw that I, the master, was really poorer than the majority of my
serfs, with their wives and bairns."
"You are a good fellow," she murmured. "I—I meant to say," she corrected
herself, "what have you done with your clothes?"
"My clothes!" he echoed vaguely, looking down at his spotless
shirt-front.
"Your factory clothes! Wouldn't it be fun to wear them at supper here? Do
you think they could turn you out? I don't see how, legally. Do test the
question. Yes, do. Please do." And she laid her hand on his black sleeve.
"I won't marry you if you don't."
"I did think you were serious to-night, Eileen," he said, disappointed.
"How could you think that, if you read the programme, as you say? 'Nelly
O'Neill, Serio-Comic.' Allons, ne faites cette tête mine de hibou.
Admit the world is entirely ridiculous and give me some more champagne."
Her eyes glittered strangely.
A clock struck twelve.
"What, midnight!" she cried, starting up. "I must go."
"No, no;" he took her hand.
"Yes, yes; don't you know, at the stroke of midnight I change back to a
governess."
"Well, the magic didn't work, for that clock's very slow. Sit down,
please."
"You have spoken the omen. I remain Nelly O'Neill and drop Eileen for
ever. Vogue la galère."
"Absit omen!" He shuddered.
"Why not? What do you offer me? The love of one man. But my public loves
me as one man—with a much more voluminous love—I love it in return. Why
should I change?"
"Shall we say merely because the public changes? I am constant."
"Yes, you are very wonderful.... And if it's to-morrow already, my fate
will be settled to-day. Drink to my destiny."
"I drink to our destiny," he said, raising his glass.
"No. Only to mine. It will be decided this afternoon."
"You will give me your answer this afternoon?" he cried joyfully.
"I don't say that. It's my answer I shall know this afternoon. Yours you
shall have to-morrow afternoon. You don't mind giving me one day's option
of your hand?"
"One day's! When you have had—"
She interrupted impatiently. "Let bygones be bygones. You shall have a
letter by Monday afternoon. But, oh, Heavens! how could we marry? You
believe in nothing!"
"There's the Registrar."
She pouted: "Dry legality. No flowers, no organ, no feeling sweet and
virginal in a long veil. Oh, dear! Besides, there's mother—"
"I don't object to the church ceremony."
"I'm glad. The law may end marriage. Marriage shouldn't begin with law.
It ought to look beautiful at the start, at least, though one may know
it's a shaky scraw."
"A shaky what?"
"Oh, it's an Irish term for a bit of black bog that looks like lovely
green meadow. You step out so gaily on the glittering grass, and then
squish! squash! down you go to choke in the ooze."
"Don't be so pessimistic. It would be much more sensible to think of
marriage as solid meadow-land after your present scramble over a shaky
what-d'ye-call it."
"True for you! I give you the stage as the shakiest of all scraws. But
where is solid footing to be found? The world itself is only a vast bog
that sucks in the generations."
"I am sorry I asked you to be serious," he said glumly. "You're such a
quick-change artiste."
"I must quickly assume the governess or I'll lose my character," she
said, rising resolutely.
He put her cloak tenderly round her.
"You know I'll take you without a character," he said lightly.
"If I had no character I might be tempted to take you," she retorted
dispiritingly. "Thank you so much for my first supper."
Eileen slept little. The dramatic possibilities of the interview with
Colonel Doherty were too agitating and too numerous. This time the
marionette-play needed writing. Who should receive him when he called?
Eileen O'Keeffe or Nelly O'Neill?
Either possibility offered exquisite comedy.
Eileen—as plain as possible—with a high, black dress, drooped lids,
stiffly brushed hair, even eyeglasses perhaps, with a deportment redolent
of bread-and-butter and five-finger exercises, could perhaps disenchant
him sufficiently to make him moderate his matrimonial ardour, even to
hurry off apologetically to his serio-comic Circe round the corner. What
a triumph of acting if she could drive him to her rival! Then as he went
through the door—to loosen her hair, throw off her glasses and whistle
him back to Nelly O'Neill!
The part was tempting; it bristled with opportunities. But it was also
too trying. He might begin by taking lover's liberties, and the strain of
repulsing him would be too great. Besides, she wasn't clear how to play
the opening of the scene. But then there was another star part open to
her.
Nelly O'Neill's rôle was much easier: it played itself. She had only
to go on with the episode. And the way the episode went on would also
serve to determine finally her attitude when the moment came to throw off
the mask and turn to governess. The only difficult moment would be the
first—to obfuscate him immediately with the notion that he had mixed up
the two addresses. Even if she failed and he realised his ghastlier
blunder, it would only precipitate the dramatic duel which she must face
sooner or later. All these high-strung possibilities deadened the
horrible pain she knew her soul held for her, as soldiers carry wounds to
be felt when the charge is over. She fell asleep near morning, her battle
planned, and slept late, a sleep full of strange dreams, in one of which
her drunken father counted her, and couldn't decide how many she was.
"It's two I am, father asthore, only two, Eileen and Nelly," she kept
crying. But he counted on.
Towards four in the afternoon she posted herself at the window. It was
absolutely necessary to the comedy that she should open the door to him
herself. At last a cab containing him halted at the door. She
flew down, just supplanting the butler.
"How good of you, Colonel!" she cried. "But where is the Major?"
It was exquisitely calculated. She had pulled the string and the
marionette moved with precision. A daze, a flash, a stammer—all the
embarrassment of a man who believes that in a day-dream he has given
a second address first.
"Miss—Miss O'Neill," he stuttered, mechanically removing his hat.
"Nelly to my friends," she smiled fascinatingly. "Come in!" Christopher
Sly was not more bewildered when he opened his eyes on the glories of his
Court.
"What—what is this address?" he blurted, as she prisoned him by closing
the door.
"Why?... Oh, I know. Ha! ha! ha! You've come to the Crescent instead of
the Terrace."
"That confounded cabman! I'm sure I told him the Terrace."
"Don't swear. He's more accustomed to the Crescent. So many pros coming
home late, and all that!"
He hesitated at the foot of the stairs. "I really think I ought to call
there first...."
Now all the coquette in Nelly O'Neill rose to detain him, subtly tangled
with the actress. She pouted adorably. "Oh, now you're here, can't you
put her second for once?"
"I didn't say it was a her."
"A she," corrected the governess, instinctively. Nelly hastened to add,
"No man leaves a woman for a man."
"This is such an old appointment," he pleaded in distress.
"I see. You want to be off with the old love before you are on with the
new."
"Nothing of the kind, I assure you."
"What! Not even the new?"
"Oh, that part!" He smiled and followed her up. "You won't mind my going
soon?"
"The sooner the better if you talk like that!" She threw open the door of
her little sitting-room. How well the Show was going!
"A soda and whisky, Colonel? I suppose that's your idea of tea." She
had the scene ready. She had got it all up like a little play, writing
down the articles on a sheet of paper headed "Property List": "Cigars,
cigarettes, syphons, spirits, sporting-papers," all borrowed from Master
Harold Lee Carter to entertain a visitor.
But at the height of the play's prosperity, while the Colonel clinked
tumblers with Nelly, came a contretemps, and all the farce darkened
swiftly to drama as the gay landscape is overgloomed by a thundercloud.
It all came from Mrs. Lee Carter's benevolent fussiness, her interest in
the man who had come to marry her governess. A servant knocked at the
door, stuck her head in, and said, "Mrs. Lee Carter's compliments, and
would you like some tea?"
"No, thank you," said Eileen, hurriedly.
But as the door closed, the Colonel's glass fell to the ground, and he
rose to his feet. His bronzed face was working wildly.
"Mrs. Lee Carter!" he gasped. "You—you are Eileen!"
"Here's a mess," she said coolly, stooping to wipe up the carpet.
"Eileen! Explain!" he said piteously.
"It's you that ought to be explaining. I've all I can do to pick up the
nasty little bits of glass."
"My brain reels. Who are you? What are you? For God's sake."
"Hush! Who are you? What are you?"
"I know what I was—your lover."
"Whose? Mine or Nelly's?"
"Good God, Eileen! You saw how anxious I was to get to you. That I was
subtly drawn to Nelly is only a proof of how you were in my blood. But
you're not really Nelly O'Neill. This is some stupid practical joke.
Don't torture me longer."
"It tortures you that I should be Nelly O' Neill!" All the confessed
sweetness of her position came up into clear consciousness: the lights,
the laughter, the very smell of the smoke endeared by a thousand
triumphs. How dared he speak of Nelly O'Neill as though she couldn't be
touched with a pitchfork! Yes, and Bob Maper, too—her anger ricocheted
to him—with his priggish notions of saving her from black bogs! And
who was it that now stood over her like a fuddled accusing angel? She
pulled out his letter and read viciously:—
"I was dying to rush to you—you wouldn't see me. And the Major dragged
me—"
"Through all that mud? All those Indian escapades?"
He groaned, "And you listened—!"
"Am I not your mother-confessor?"
He seized her by the wrists. "Don't madden me! You're not really on
the Halls? You are living here as governess. It is some prank, some
masquerade! Say it is!" He shook her. She tried to wrest her hands away.
"Not till you tell me the truth! You haven't been lying to me all these
months?"
A sudden remembrance came to give her strength and scorn. "I have told
you the truth, only my letter crossed you on the ocean. When it returns
to England, you will see."
His grip relaxed, he staggered back. "Come," she said, pursuing her
unforeseen advantage. "We will talk this thing over quietly. I always
said you were in love with a shadow. But I find it was I who imagined a
Bayard."
"And what have I done and said worse than other men?" Again Master Harold
Lee Carter's complacent sentiment came to her. Men were all alike, only
their women folk didn't know.
"Worse than other men!" She laughed bitterly. "I wanted you better—all
the seven heavens better—saint as well as hero, with no thought but for
me, and no one before me or after me. Oh, yes, it sounds a large order,
but that's what we women want. Don't speak! I know what you're going to
say. Skip me. Talk of yourself."
"You get what you want. The other's only make-believe. It passes like
water from a duck's back. You women don't understand. The white fire of
your purity cleanses us, and that is why we will have nothing less—"
"Ah, now you have skipped to me. I'm not pretending there isn't an evil
spirit in me to match yours. It split away from me and became Nelly
O'Neill. You asked which I was? I am both. Here, I am a respectable
governess. Let me ring for Mrs. Lee Carter. She'll give you my character.
The white fire and all that." She pressed the bell.
"Don't be so absurd. Give me time to collect my senses."
"All right, pick up the pieces, while I collect these." She stooped over
the bits of glass.
"But for Heaven's sake don't bring that woman into it—"
The door opened. "Yes, miss?"
"Another glass, please." The servant disappeared.
"I do hope you won't break this one. In what country is it that the
bridegroom breaks a glass in the marriage ceremonial? Oh, yes, I
remember. Fossy told me. Among the Jews. There's a lot in the profession.
Not that it's such a marrying profession. And to think I might have been
a regular bride! But I've lost you, my dear boy, hero of a hundred
hill-fights, I know it—and the moment you've picked your little
bits of senses together, you'll know it, too. Alas, we shall never go
tiger-hunting together.
"I don't say I won't keep my promise," he said sulkily.
"Your promise! Hoity toity! Upon my word! I'm no breach-of-promise
lady—Chops and tomato sauce indeed! I recognise that we could never
marry. There would always be that between us!"
Her fascination gripped him in proportion as she let him go.
"I don't know that I should mind if nobody really knows," he began.
"You! It's I that would mind. And I really know. Could I marry a man who
had told me smoking-room stories? No, Eileen is done with you. Good-by!"
"Good-by? No, I can't go. I can't face the emptiness. You've filled me
and fooled me with love all these weeks. Good God! Do you owe me
nothing?"
"I leave you something—Nelly O'Neill! Go and see her. Now you're off
with the old love. You mark what a prophetess I was. Nelly'll receive you
very differently. No cant of superiority. You'll be just a pair of jolly
good fellows. You'll sit up drinking whisky together and yarning
anecdotes. No uncomfortable pretences; no black bog posing as white
fire; no driven snow business, London snow nicely trodden, in. And
the tales of the world you tell me—how useful they'll come in for
stage-patter! Oh, we shall be happy enough! We can still pick up the
pieces!"
"Eileen! Eileen! you will drive me mad. What do you mean? You know I
could never have a wife on the Halls. It would ruin me in the clubs, it
would—"
"In the clubs! Ha! ha! ha! Every member of which would be delighted to
have tea with me! But who's proposing to you a wife on the Halls? You
said I owed you myself, and it's true, but you don't suppose I could
marry a man I didn't respect? I told you we're not a marrying
profession. Come, let's kiss and be friends."
He drew back as in horror. "No, no, Eileen, I respect you too much for
that."
She looked at him long and curiously. "Yes, the sexes don't understand
each other. Well, good-by. I almost could marry you, after all. But I'm
too wise. Please go. I have a headache and it is quite possible I shall
scream. Good-by, dear. I was never more than a phantom to you—a boyish
memory, and a bad one at that. Don't you know you gave me a pair of black
eyes? Good-by: you'll marry a dear, sweet girl in white muslin who'll
never know. God bless you."
Sir Robert Maper simply could not get up on the Monday morning. The agony
of suspense was too keen, and he lay with closed eyes, trying to drowse
his consciousness, and exchanging it in his fitful snatches of sleep for
oppressive dreams, in one of which Eileen figured as a Lorelei, combing
her locks on a rock as she sang her siren song.
But she did not prolong his agony beyond mid-day.
"MY DEAR SIR ROBERT,—Both of us are dead and gone, so, alas! neither can
marry you. Don't be alarmed, we are only dead to the world, and gone
to the Continent. 'Get thee to a nunnery.' Hamlet knew best. If I could
have married any man it would have been you. You are the only gentleman
I have ever known. But I don't love you. It's a miserable pity. I wish I
did. I wonder why 'love' is an active verb in all languages. It ought to
have a passive form, like 'loquor' (though that passive should be
reserved for parrots). Forgive the governess! I seem to have undergone
'love' for two men, but one was a fool and the other not quite a rogue,
and I dare say I never really loved anybody but myself (and there the
verb is very active)! I love to coquet, but the moment a man comes too
close, I feel hunted. I dare say I was secretly pleased to find my hero
tripping, so as to send him packing. Was ever hero in such a comic
plight? Poor, unlucky hero! But this will be Greek to you—the kind you
can't read. Oh, the men I could have married! It is curious, when you
think of it, the men one little woman might marry and be dutifully
absorbed in. I could have been a bass chorister's wife or a Baronet's
wife, the wife of an Honourable dolt, and the wife of a dishonourable
dramatist. J'en passe et des meilleurs. I could have lived in Calcutta
or in Clerkenwell, been received in Belgravia or in Boulogne. Good Lord!
the parts one woman is supposed to be fit for, while the man remains his
stolid, stupid self. Talk of the variety stage! Or is it that they all
want the same thing of her?
"Talking of the variety stage, there would have been the danger, too, of
my thirsting for it, even with a Dowager Lady for a stepmother. The
nostalgia of the boards is a disease your love might not have warded off.
You are well rid of both of us.
"You said—at my first and last supper—that money and station are the
mere veneer of life, the central reality is love. That is true, if by
love you read the love of God, of Christ. Do you remember my going one
day over the works with your poor father? Well, after I had been through
rooms and rooms of whirring machinery infinitely ingenious and
diversified—that made my head ache—they took me to a shed where stood
in a sort of giant peace the great engine that moved it all. 'God!' was
my instant thought, and somehow my headache fled. And ever since then,
when I have been oppressed by the complex clatter of life, my thought has
gone back to that power-room, to the great simple force behind it all. I
rested in the thought as a swimmer on a placid ocean. But the ocean is
cold and infinite, and of late I have longed for a more human God that
loved and forgave, and so I come back to the Christ. You see Plato never
satisfied me. Your explanation of the B.C. glories was sown on barren
soil. I grant you a nobility in your Plato as of Greek pillars, soaring
in the sunlight, but somehow I want the Gothic—I long for 'dim religious
light' and windows stained with saints. Oh, to find my soul again! If I
could tell you how the Convent rises before me as a vision of
blessedness—after life's 'shaky scraw'—the cool cloisters, the rows of
innocent beds, the delicious old garden. There are tears at my heart, as
I think of it. What flowers I will bring to my favourite nun.... God
grant she is still alive! What altar-cloths I will weave with my silver
and gold! Yes, the wages of sin shall not be death, I will pay them to
the life eternal; my dowry as the bride of Christ. I, too, shall be laid
on the altar, my complex corrupt soul shall be simplified and purified,
and the Holy Mother will lead me by the hand like a little child. But all
this will be caviare to you. Adieu. I will pray for you.
"Eileen.
"P.S.—It is a convent that trains the young, so I shall still be a
Governess."
"And perhaps still a Serio-Comic," thought the Baronet, bitterly.

This Volume embraces my newest and oldest work, and includes—for the
sake of uniformity of edition—a couple of shilling novelettes that are
out of print.
I.Z.
Mentone,
February, 1903.

THE GREY WIG
CHASSÉ-CROISÉ
THE WOMAN BEATER
THE ETERNAL FEMININE
THE SILENT SISTERS
THE BIG BOW MYSTERY
MERELY MARY ANN
THE SERIO-COMIC GOVERNESS
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV

They both styled themselves "Madame," but only the younger of the old
ladies had been married. Madame Valière was still a demoiselle, but
as she drew towards sixty it had seemed more convenable to possess
a mature label. Certainly Madame Dépine had no visible matrimonial
advantages over her fellow-lodger at the Hôtel des Tourterelles,
though in the symmetrical cemetery of Montparnasse (Section 22)
wreaths of glass beads testified to a copious domesticity in the far
past, and a newspaper picture of a chasseur d'Afrique pinned over
her bed recalled—though only the uniform was the dead soldier's—the
son she had contributed to France's colonial empire. Practically it
was two old maids—or two lone widows—whose boots turned pointed toes
towards each other in the dark cranny of the rambling, fusty corridor
of the sky-floor. Madame Dépine was round, and grew dumpier with age;
"Madame" Valière was long, and grew slimmer. Otherwise their lives ran
parallel. For the true madame of the establishment you had to turn to
Madame la Propriétaire, with her buxom bookkeeper of a daughter and
her tame baggage-bearing husband. This full-blooded, jovial creature,
with her swart moustache, represented the only Parisian success of
three provincial lives, and, in her good-nature, had permitted her
decayed townswomen—at as low a rent as was compatible with
prudence—to shelter themselves under her roof and as near it as
possible. Her house being a profitable warren of American
art-students, tempered by native journalists and decadent poets, she
could, moreover, afford to let the old ladies off coffee and candles.
They were at liberty to prepare their own déjeuner in winter or to
buy it outside in summer; they could burn their own candles or sit in
the dark, as the heart in them pleased; and thus they were as cheaply
niched as any one in the gay city. Rentières after their meticulous
fashion, they drew a ridiculous but regular amount from the mysterious
coffers of the Crédit Lyonnais.
But though they met continuously in the musty corridor, and even
dined—when they did dine—at the same crémerie, they never spoke to
each other. Madame la Propriétaire was the channel through which they
sucked each other's history, for though they had both known her in
their girlish days at Tonnerre, in the department of Yonne, they had
not known each other. Madame Valière (Madame Dépine learnt, and it
seemed to explain the frigidity of her neighbour's manner) still
trailed clouds of glory from the service of a Princess a quarter of a
century before. Her refusal to wink at the Princess's goings-on, her
austere, if provincial, regard for the convenances, had cost her
the place, and from these purpureal heights she had fallen lower and
lower, till she struck the attic of the Hôtel des Tourterelles.
But even a haloed past does not give one a licence to annoy one's
neighbours. Madame Dépine felt resentfully, and she hated Madame
Valière as a haughty minion of royalty, who kept a cough, which barked
loudest in the silence of the night.
"Why doesn't she go to the hospital, your Princess?" she complained to
Madame la Propriétaire.
"Since she is able to nurse herself at home," the opulent-bosomed
hostess replied with a shrug.
"At the expense of other people," Madame Dépine retorted bitterly. "I
shall die of her cough, I am sure of it."
Madame showed her white teeth sweetly. "Then it is you who should go
to the hospital."
Time wrote wrinkles enough on the brows of the two old ladies, but
his frosty finger never touched their glossy brown hair, for both wore
wigs of nearly the same shade. These wigs were almost symbolic of
the evenness of their existence, which had got beyond the reach of
happenings. The Church calendar, so richly dyed with figures of saints
and martyrs, filled life with colour enough, and fast-days were almost
as welcome as feast-days, for if the latter warmed the general air,
the former cloaked economy with dignity. As for Mardi Gras, that
shook you up for weeks, even though you did not venture out of your
apartment; the gay serpentine streamers remained round one's soul as
round the trees.
At intervals, indeed, secular excitements broke the even tenor. A
country cousin would call upon the important Parisian relative, and
be received, not in the little bedroom, but in state in the mustily
magnificent salon of the hotel—all gold mirrors and mouldiness—which
the poor country mouse vaguely accepted as part of the glories of
Paris and success. Madame Dépine would don her ponderous gold brooch,
sole salvage of her bourgeois prosperity; while, if the visitor were
for Madame Valière, that grande dame would hang from her yellow,
shrivelled neck the long gold chain and the old-fashioned watch, whose
hands still seemed to point to regal hours.
Another break in the monotony was the day on which the lottery was
drawn—the day of the pagan god of Luck. What delicious hopes of
wealth flamed in these withered breasts, only to turn grey and cold
when the blank was theirs again, but not the less to soar up again,
with each fresh investment, towards the heaven of the hundred thousand
francs! But if ever Madame Dépine stumbled on Madame Valière buying a
section of a billet at the lottery agent's, she insisted on having
her own slice cut from another number. Fortune itself would be robbed
of its sweet if the "Princess" should share it. Even their common
failure to win a sou did not draw them from their freezing depths
of silence, from which every passing year made it more difficult to
emerge. Some greater conjuncture was needed for that.
It came when Madame la Propriétaire made her début one fine morning
in a grey wig.
Hitherto that portly lady's hair had been black. But now, as suddenly
as darkness vanishes in a tropic dawn, it was become light. No gradual
approach of the grey, for the black had been equally artificial. The
wig is the region without twilight. Only in the swart moustache
had the grey crept on, so that perhaps the growing incongruity had
necessitated the sudden surrender to age.
To both Madame Dépine and Madame Valière the grey wig came like a blow
on the heart.
It was a grisly embodiment of their secret griefs, a tantalising
vision of the unattainable. To glide reputably into a grey wig had
been for years their dearest desire. As each saw herself getting older
and older, saw her complexion fade and the crow's-feet gather, and her
eyes grow hollow, and her teeth fall out and her cheeks fall in,
so did the impropriety of her brown wig strike more and more
humiliatingly to her soul. But how should a poor old woman ever
accumulate enough for a new wig? One might as well cry for the
moon—or a set of false teeth. Unless, indeed, the lottery—?
And so, when Madame Dépine received a sister-in-law from Tonnerre, or
Madame Valière's nephew came up by the excursion train from that same
quiet and incongruously christened townlet, the Parisian personage
would receive the visitor in the darkest corner of the salon, with her
back to the light, and a big bonnet on her head—an imposing figure
repeated duskily in the gold mirrors. These visits, instead of
a relief, became a terror. Even a provincial knows it is not
convenable for an old woman to wear a brown wig. And Tonnerre kept
strict record of birthdays.
Tears of shame and misery had wetted the old ladies' hired pillows, as
under the threat of a provincial visitation they had tossed sleepless
in similar solicitude, and their wigs, had they not been wigs, would
have turned grey of themselves. Their only consolation had been that
neither outdid the other, and so long as each saw the other's brown
wig, they had refrained from facing the dread possibility of having to
sell off their jewellery in a desperate effort of emulation. Gradually
Madame Dépine had grown to wear her wig with vindictive endurance, and
Madame Valière to wear hers with gentle resignation. And now, here
was Madame la Propriétaire, a woman five years younger and ten years
better preserved, putting them both to the public blush, drawing the
hotel's attention to what the hotel might have overlooked, in its long
habituation to their surmounting brownness.
More morbidly conscious than ever of a young head on old shoulders,
the old ladies no longer paused at the bureau to exchange the news
with Madame or even with her black-haired bookkeeping daughter. No
more lounging against the newel under the carved torch-bearer, while
the journalist of the fourth floor spat at the Dreyfusites, and the
poet of the entresol threw versified vitriol at perfidious Albion.
For the first time, too—losing their channel of communication—they
grew out of touch with each other's microscopic affairs, and their
mutual detestation increased with their resentful ignorance. And so,
shrinking and silent, and protected as far as possible by their big
bonnets, the squat Madame Dépine and the skinny Madame Valière toiled
up and down the dark, fusty stairs of the Hôtel des Tourterelles,
often brushing against each other, yet sundered by icy infinities. And
the endurance on Madame Dépine's round face became more vindictive,
and gentler grew the resignation on the angular visage of Madame
Valière.
"Tiens! Madame Dépine, one never sees you now." Madame la
Propriétaire was blocking the threshold, preventing her exit. "I was
almost thinking you had veritably died of Madame Valière's cough."
"One has received my rent, the Monday," the little old lady replied
frigidly.
"Oh! là! là!" Madame waved her plump hands. "And La Valière, too,
makes herself invisible. What has then happened to both of you? Is it
that you are doing a penance together?"
"Hist!" said Madame Dépine, flushing.
For at this moment Madame Valière appeared on the pavement outside
bearing a long French roll and a bag of figs, which made an excellent
lunch at low water. Madame la Propriétaire, dominatingly bestriding
her doorstep, was sandwiched between the two old ladies, her wig
aggressively grey between the two browns. Madame Valière halted
awkwardly, a bronze blush mounting to match her wig. To be seen
by Madame Dépine carrying in her meagre provisions was humiliation
enough; to be juxtaposited with a grey wig was unbearable.
"Maman, maman, the English monsieur will not pay two francs for
his dinner!" And the distressed bookkeeper, bill in hand, shattered
the trio.
"And why will he not pay?" Fire leapt into the black eyes.
"He says you told him the night he came that by arrangement he could
have his dinners for one franc fifty."
Madame la Propriétaire made two strides towards the refractory English
monsieur. "I told you one franc fifty? For déjeuner, yes, as many
luncheons as you can eat. But for dinner? You eat with us as one of
the family, and vin compris and café likewise, and it should
be all for one franc fifty! Mon Dieu! it is to ruin oneself. Come
here." And she seized the surprised Anglo-Saxon by the wrist and
dragged him towards a painted tablet of prices that hung in a dark
niche of the hall. "I have kept this hotel for twenty years, I have
grown grey in the service of artists and students, and this is the
first time one has demanded dinner for one franc fifty!"
"She has grown grey!" contemptuously muttered Madame Valière.
"Grey? She!" repeated Madame Dépine, with no less bitterness. "It is
only to give herself the air of a grande dame!"
Then both started, and coloured to the roots of their wigs.
Simultaneously they realised that they had spoken to each other.
As they went up the stairs together—for Madame Dépine had quite
forgotten she was going out—an immense relief enlarged their souls.
Merely to mention the grey wig had been a vent for all this morbid
brooding; to abuse Madame la Propriétaire into the bargain was to pass
from the long isolation into a subtle sympathy.
"I wonder if she did say one franc fifty," observed Madame Valière,
reflectively.
"Without doubt," Madame Dépine replied viciously. "And fifty centimes
a day soon mount up to a grey wig."
"Not so soon," sighed Madame Valière.
"But then it is not only one client that she cheats."
"Ah! at that rate wigs fall from the skies," admitted Madame Valière.
"Especially if one has not to give dowries to one's nieces," said
Madame Dépine, boldly.
"And if one is mean on New Year's Day," returned Madame Valière, with
a shade less of mendacity.
They inhaled the immemorial airlessness of the staircase as if they
were breathing the free air of the forests depicted on its dirty-brown
wall-paper. It was the new atmosphere of self-respect that they were
really absorbing. Each had at last explained herself and her brown wig to
the other. An immaculate honesty (that would scorn to overcharge fifty
centimes even to un Anglais), complicated with unwedded nieces in
one case, with a royal shower of New Year's gifts in the other, had
kept them from selfish, if seemly, hoary-headedness.
"Ah! here is my floor," panted Madame Valière at length, with an air
of indicating it to a thorough stranger. "Will you not come into my
room and eat a fig? They are very healthy between meals."
Madame Dépine accepted the invitation, and entering her own corner
of the corridor with a responsive air of foreign exploration, passed
behind the door through whose keyhole she had so often peered. Ah! no
wonder she had detected nothing abnormal. The room was a facsimile
of her own—the same bed with the same quilt over it and the same
crucifix above it, the same little table with the same books of
devotion, the same washstand with the same tiny jug and basin, the
same rusted, fireless grate. The wardrobe, like her own, was merely a
pair of moth-eaten tartan curtains, concealing both pegs and garments
from her curiosity. The only sense of difference came subtly from the
folding windows, below whose railed balcony showed another view of the
quarter, with steam-trams—diminished to toy trains—puffing past
to the suburbs. But as Madame Dépine's eyes roved from these to the
mantel-piece, she caught sight of an oval miniature of an elegant young
woman, who was jewelled in many places, and corresponded exactly with
her idea of a Princess!
To disguise her access of respect, she said abruptly, "It must be very
noisy here from the steam-trams."
"It is what I love, the bustle of life," replied Madame Valière,
simply.
"Ah!" said Madame Dépine, impressed beyond masking-point, "I suppose
when one has had the habit of Courts—"
Madame Valière shuddered unexpectedly. "Let us not speak of it. Take a
fig."
But Madame Dépine persisted—though she took the fig. "Ah! those were
brave days when we had still an Emperor and an Empress to drive to the
Bois with their equipages and outriders. Ah, how pretty it was!"
"But the President has also"—a fit of coughing interrupted Madame
Valière—"has also outriders."
"But he is so bourgeois—a mere man of the people," said Madame
Dépine.
"They are the most decent sort of folk. But do you not feel cold? I
will light a fire." She bent towards the wood-box.
"No, no; do not trouble. I shall be going in a moment. I have a large
fire blazing in my room."
"Then suppose we go and sit there," said poor Madame Valière.
Poor Madame Dépine was seized with a cough, more protracted than any
of which she had complained.
"Provided it has not gone out in my absence," she stammered at last.
"I will go first and see if it is in good trim."
"No, no; it is not worth the trouble of moving." And Madame Valière
drew her street-cloak closer round her slim form. "But I have lived so
long in Russia, I forget people call this cold."
"Ah! the Princess travelled far?" said Madame Dépine, eagerly.
"Too far," replied Madame Valière, with a flash of Gallic wit. "But
who has told you of the Princess?"
"Madame la Propriétaire, naturally."
"She talks too much—she and her wig!"
"If only she didn't imagine herself a powdered marquise in it! To see
her standing before the mirror in the salon!"
"The beautiful spectacle!" assented Madame Valière.
"Ah! but I don't forget—if she does—that her mother wheeled a
fruit-barrow through the streets of Tonnerre!"
"Ah! yes, I knew you were from Tonnerre—dear Tonnerre!"
"How did you know?"
"Naturally, Madame la Propriétaire."
"The old gossip!" cried Madame Dépine—"though not so old as
she feigns. But did she tell you of her mother, too, and the
fruit-barrow?"
"I knew her mother—une brave femme."
"I do not say not," said Madame Dépine, a whit disconcerted.
"Nevertheless, when one's mother is a merchant of the four seasons—"
"Provided she sold fruit as good as this! Take another fig, I beg of
you."
"Thank you. These are indeed excellent," said Madame Dépine. "She owed
all her good fortune to a coup in the lottery."
"Ah! the lottery!" Madame Valière sighed. Before the eyes of both rose
the vision of a lucky number and a grey wig.
The acquaintanceship ripened. It was not only their common grievances
against fate and Madame la Propriétaire: they were linked by the sheer
physical fact that each was the only person to whom the other could
talk without the morbid consciousness of an eye scrutinising the
unseemly brown wig. It became quite natural, therefore, for Madame
Dépine to stroll into her "Princess's" room, and they soon slid into
dividing the cost of the fire. That was more than an economy, for
neither could afford a fire alone. It was an easy transition to the
discovery that coffee could be made more cheaply for two, and that
the same candle would light two persons, provided they sat in the same
room. And if they did not fall out of the habit of companionship even
at the crémerie, though "two portions for one" were not served,
their union at least kept the sexagenarians in countenance. Two brown
wigs give each other a moral support, are on the way to a fashion.
But there was more than wigs and cheese-parings in their
camaraderie. Madame Dépine found a fathomless mine of edification
in Madame Valière's reminiscences, which she skilfully extracted from
her, finding the average ore rich with noble streaks, though the old
tirewoman had an obstinate way of harking back to her girlhood, which
made some delvings result in mere earth.
On the Day of the Dead Madame Dépine emerged into importance, taking
her friend with her to the Cemetery Montparnasse to see the glass
flowers blooming immortally over the graves of her husband and
children. Madame Dépine paid the omnibus for both (inside places), and
felt, for once, superior to the poor "Princess," who had never known
the realities of love and death.
Two months passed. Another of Madame Valière's teeth fell out. Madame
Dépine's cheeks grew more pendulous. But their brown wigs remained as
fadeless as the cemetery flowers.
One day they passed the hairdresser's shop together. It was indeed
next to the tobacconist's, so not easy to avoid, whenever one wanted
a stamp or a postcard. In the window, amid pendent plaits of divers
hues, bloomed two wax busts of females—the one young and coquettish
and golden-haired, the other aristocratic in a distinguished grey wig.
Both wore diamond rosettes in their hair and ropes of pearls round
their necks. The old ladies' eyes met, then turned away.
"If one demanded the price!" said Madame Dépine (who had already done
so twice).
"It is an idea!" agreed Madame Valière.
"The day will come when one's nieces will be married."
"But scarcely when New Year's Day shall cease to be," the "Princess"
sighed.
"Still, one might win in the lottery!"
"Ah! true. Let us enter, then."
"One will be enough. You go." Madame Dépine rather dreaded the
coiffeur, whom intercourse with jocose students had made severe.
But Madame Valière shrank back shyly. "No, let us both go." She added,
with a smile to cover her timidity, "Two heads are better than one."
"You are right. He will name a lower price in the hope of two orders."
And, pushing the "Princess" before her like a turret of defence,
Madame Dépine wheeled her into the ladies' department.
The coiffeur, who was washing the head of an American girl, looked
up ungraciously. As he perceived the outer circumference of Madame
Dépine projecting on either side of her turret, he emitted a glacial
"Bon jour, mesdames."
"Those grey wigs—" faltered Madame Valière
"I have already told your friend." He rubbed the American head
viciously.
Madame Dépine coloured. "But—but we are two. Is there no reduction on
taking a quantity?"
"And why then? A wig is a wig. Twice a hundred francs are two hundred
francs."
"One hundred francs for a wig!" said Madame Valière, paling. "I did
not pay that for the one I wear."
"I well believe it, madame. A grey wig is not a brown wig."
"But you just said a wig is a wig."
The coiffeur gave angry rubs at the head, in time with his explosive
phrases. "You want real hair, I presume—and to your measure—and to
look natural—and convenable!" (Both old ladies shuddered at the
word.) "Of course, if you want it merely for private theatricals—"
"Private theatricals!" repeated Madame Dépine, aghast.
"A comédienne's wig I can sell you for a bagatelle. That passes at a
distance."
Madame Valière ignored the suggestion. "But why should a grey wig cost
more than any other?"
The coiffeur shrugged his shoulders. "Since there are less grey
hairs in the world—"
"Comment!" repeated Madame Valière, in amazement.
"It stands to reason," said the coiffeur. "Since most persons do
not live to be old—or only live to be bald." He grew animated,
professorial almost, seeing the weight his words carried to unthinking
bosoms. "And since one must provide a fine hair-net for a groundwork,
to imitate the flesh-tint of the scalp, and since each hair of the
parting must be treated separately, and since the natural wave of the
hair must be reproduced, and since you will also need a block for it
to stand on at nights to guard its shape—"
"But since one has already blocks," interposed Madame Dépine.
"But since a conscientious artist cannot trust another's block!
Represent to yourself also that the shape of the head does not remain
as fixed as the dome of the Invalides, and that—"
"Eh bien, we will think," interrupted Madame Valière, with dignity.
They walked slowly towards the Hôtel des Tourterelles.
"If one could share a wig!" Madame Dépine exclaimed suddenly.
"It is an idea," replied Madame Valière. And then each stared
involuntarily at the other's head. They had shared so many things
that this new possibility sounded like a discovery. Pleasing pictures
flitted before their eyes—the country cousin received (on a Box
and Cox basis) by a Parisian old gentlewoman sans peur and sans
reproche; a day of seclusion for each alternating with a day of
ostentatious publicity.
But the light died out of their eyes, as Madame Dépine recognised
that the "Princess's" skull was hopelessly long, and Madame Valière
recognised that Madame Dépine's cranium was hopelessly round.
Decidedly either head would be a bad block for the other's wig to
repose on.
"It would be more sensible to acquire a wig together, and draw lots
for it," said Madame Dépine.
The "Princess's" eyes rekindled. "Yes, and then save up again to buy
the loser a wig."
"Parfaitement" said Madame Dépine. They had slid out of pretending
that they had large sums immediately available. Certain sums still
existed in vague stockings for dowries or presents, but these, of
course, could not be touched. For practical purposes it was understood
that neither had the advantage of the other, and that the few francs
a month by which Madame Dépine's income exceeded Madame Valière's were
neutralised by the superior rent she paid for her comparative immunity
from steam-trams. The accumulation of fifty francs apiece was thus a
limitless perspective.
They discussed their budget. It was really almost impossible to cut
down anything. By incredible economies they saw their way to saving
a franc a week each. But fifty weeks! A whole year, allowing for
sickness and other breakdowns! Who can do penance for a whole year?
They thought of moving to an even cheaper hotel; but then in the
course of years Madame Valière had fallen three weeks behind with the
rent, and Madame Dépine a fortnight, and these arrears would have to
be paid up. The first council ended in despair. But in the silence of
the night Madame Dépine had another inspiration. If one suppressed the
lottery for a season!
On the average each speculated a full franc a week, with scarcely
a gleam of encouragement. Two francs a week each—already the year
becomes six months! For six months one can hold out. Hardships shared
are halved, too. It will seem scarce three months. Ah, how good are
the blessed saints!
But over the morning coffee Madame Valière objected that they might
win the whole hundred francs in a week!
It was true; it was heartbreaking.
Madame Dépine made a reckless reference to her brooch, but the
Princess had a gesture of horror. "And wear your heart on your shawl
when your friends come?" she exclaimed poetically. "Sooner my watch
shall go, since that at least is hidden in my bosom!"
"Heaven forbid!" ejaculated Madame Dépine. "But if you sold the other
things hidden in your bosom!"
"How do you mean?"
"The Royal Secrets."
The "Princess" blushed. "What are you thinking of?"
"The journalist below us tells me that gossip about the great sells
like Easter buns."
"He is truly below us," said Madame Valière, witheringly. "What! sell
one's memories! No, no; it would not be convenable. There are even
people living—"
"But nobody would know," urged Madame Dépine.
"One must carry the head high, even if it is not grey."
It was almost a quarrel. Far below the steam-tram was puffing past.
At the window across the street a woman was beating her carpet with
swift, spasmodic thwacks, as one who knew the legal time was nearly
up. In the tragic silence which followed Madame Valière's rebuke,
these sounds acquired a curious intensity.
"I prefer to sacrifice the lottery rather than honour," she added, in
more conciliatory accents.
The long quasi-Lenten weeks went by, and unflinchingly the two old
ladies pursued their pious quest of the grey wig. Butter had vanished
from their bread, and beans from their coffee. Their morning brew
was confected of charred crusts, and as they sipped it solemnly they
exchanged the reflection that it was quite equal to the coffee at the
crémerie. Positively one was safer drinking one's own messes. Figs,
no longer posing as a pastime of the palate, were accepted seriously
as pièces de résistance. The Spring was still cold, yet fires could
be left to die after breakfast. The chill had been taken off, and by
mid-day the sun was in its full power. Each sustained the other by
a desperate cheerfulness. When they took their morning walk in the
Luxembourg Gardens—what time the blue-aproned Jacques was polishing
their waxed floors with his legs for broom-handles—they went into
ecstasies over everything, drawing each other's attention to the
sky, the trees, the water. And, indeed, of a sunshiny morning it was
heartening to sit by the pond and watch the wavering sheet of beaten
gold water, reflecting all shades of green in a restless shimmer
against the shadowed grass around. Madame Valière always had a bit
of dry bread to feed the pigeons withal—it gave a cheerful sense of
superfluity, and her manner of sprinkling the crumbs revived Madame
Dépine's faded images of a Princess scattering New Year largess.
But beneath all these pretences of content lay a hollow sense of
desolation. It was not the want of butter nor the diminished meat; it
was the total removal from life of that intangible splendour of hope
produced by the lottery ticket. Ah! every day was drawn blank now.
This gloom, this gnawing emptiness at the heart, was worse than either
had foreseen or now confessed. Malicious Fate, too, they felt, would
even crown with the grand prix the number they would have chosen.
But for the prospective draw for the Wig—which reintroduced the
aleatory—life would scarcely have been bearable.
Madame Dépine's sister-in-law's visit by the June excursion train was
a not unexpected catastrophe. It only lasted a day, but it put back
the Grey Wig by a week, for Madame Choucrou had to be fed at Duval's,
and Madame Valière magnanimously insisted on being of the party:
whether to run parallel with her friend, or to carry off the
brown wig, she alone knew. Fortunately, Madame Choucrou was both
short-sighted and colour-blind. On the other hand, she liked a petit
verre with her coffee, and both at a separate restaurant. But never
had Madame Valière appeared to Madame Dépine's eyes more like the
"Princess," more gay and polished and debonair, than at this little
round table on the sunlit Boulevard. Little trills of laughter came
from the half-toothless gums; long gloved fingers toyed with the
liqueur glass or drew out the old-fashioned watch to see that Madame
Choucrou did not miss her train; she spent her sou royally on a hawked
journal. When they had seen Madame Choucrou off, she proposed to dock
meat entirely for a fortnight so as to regain the week. Madame Dépine
accepted in the same heroic spirit, and even suggested the elimination
of the figs: one could lunch quite well on bread and milk, now the
sunshine was here. But Madame Valière only agreed to a week's trial of
this, for she had a sweet tooth among the few in her gums.
The very next morning, as they walked in the Luxembourg Gardens,
Madame Dépine's foot kicked against something. She stooped and saw a
shining glory—a five-franc piece!
"What is it?" said Madame Valière.
"Nothing," said Madame Dépine, covering the coin with her foot. "My
bootlace." And she bent down—to pick up the coin, to fumble at her
bootlace, and to cover her furious blush. It was not that she wished
to keep the godsend to herself,—one saw on the instant that le bon
Dieu was paying for Madame Choucrou,—it was an instantaneous dread
of the "Princess's" quixotic code of honour. La Valière was capable of
flying in the face of Providence, of taking the windfall to a bureau
de police. As if the inspector wouldn't stick to it himself! A
purse—yes. But a five-franc piece, one of a flock of sheep!
The treasure-trove was added to the heap of which her stocking was
guardian, and thus honestly divided. The trouble, however, was that,
as she dared not inform the "Princess," she could not decently back
out of the meatless fortnight. Providence, as it turned out, was
making them gain a week. As to the figs, however, she confessed on the
third day that she hungered sore for them, and Madame Valière readily
agreed to make this concession to her weakness.
This little episode coloured for Madame Dépine the whole dreary period
that remained. Life was never again so depressingly definite; though
curiously enough the "Princess" mistook for gloom her steady earthward
glance, as they sauntered about the sweltering city. With anxious
solicitude Madame Valière would direct her attention to sunsets, to
clouds, to the rising moon; but heaven had ceased to have attraction,
except as a place from which five-francs fell, and as soon as the
"Princess's" eye was off her, her own sought the ground again. But
this imaginary need of cheering up Madame Dépine kept Madame Valière
herself from collapsing. At last, when the first red leaves began
to litter the Gardens and cover up possible coins, the francs in the
stocking approached their century.
What a happy time was that! The privations were become second nature;
the weather was still fine. The morning Gardens were a glow of pink
and purple and dripping diamonds, and on some of the trees was the
delicate green of a second blossoming, like hope in the heart of age.
They could scarcely refrain from betraying their exultation to
the Hôtel des Tourterelles, from which they had concealed their
sufferings. But the polyglot population seething round its malodorous
stairs and tortuous corridors remained ignorant that anything was
passing in the life of these faded old creatures, and even on the
day of drawing lots for the Wig the exuberant hotel retained its
imperturbable activity.
Not that they really drew lots. That was a figure of speech, difficult
to translate into facts. They preferred to spin a coin. Madame Dépine
was to toss, the "Princess" to cry pile ou face. From the stocking
Madame Dépine drew, naturally enough, the solitary five-franc piece.
It whirled in the air; the "Princess" cried face. The puff-puff of
the steam-tram sounded like the panting of anxious Fate. The great
coin fell, rolled, balanced itself between two destinies, then
subsided, pile upwards. The poor "Princess's" face grew even longer;
but for the life of her Madame Dépine could not make her own face
other than a round red glow, like the sun in a fog. In fact, she
looked so young at this supreme moment that the brown wig quite became
her.
"I congratulate you," said Madame Valière, after the steam-tram had
become a far-away rumble.
"Before next summer we shall have yours too," the winner reminded her
consolingly.
They had not waited till the hundred francs were actually in the
stocking. The last few would accumulate while the wig was making. As
they sat at their joyous breakfast the next morning, ere starting for
the hairdresser's, the casement open to the October sunshine, Jacques
brought up a letter for Madame Valière—an infrequent incident.
Both old women paled with instinctive distrust of life. And as the
"Princess" read her letter, all the sympathetic happiness died out of
her face.
"What is the matter, then?" breathed Madame Dépine.
The "Princess" recovered herself. "Nothing, nothing. Only my nephew
who is marrying."
"Soon?"
"The middle of next month."
"Then you will need to give presents!"
"One gives a watch, a bagatelle, and then—there is time. It is
nothing. How good the coffee is this morning!"
They had not changed the name of the brew: it is not only in religious
evolutions that old names are a comfort.
They walked to the hairdresser's in silence. The triumphal procession
had become almost a dead march. Only once was the silence broken.
"I suppose they have invited you down for the wedding?" said Madame
Dépine.
"Yes," said Madame Valière.
They walked on.
The coiffeur was at his door, sunning his aproned stomach, and
twisting his moustache as if it were a customer's. Emotion overcame
Madame Dépine at the sight of him. She pushed Madame Valière into the
tobacconist's instead.
"I have need of a stamp," she explained, and demanded one for five
centimes. She leaned over the counter babbling aimlessly to the
proprietor, postponing the great moment. Madame Valière lost the clue
to her movements, felt her suddenly as a stranger. But finally Madame
Dépine drew herself together and led the way into the coiffeurs. The
proprietor, who had reëntered his parlour, reëmerged gloomily.
Madame Valière took the word. "We are thinking of ordering a wig."
"Cash in advance, of course," said the coiffeur.
"Comment!" cried Madame Valière, indignantly. "You do not trust my
friend!"
"Madame Valière has moved in the best society," added Madame Dépine.
"But you cannot expect me to do two hundred francs of work and then be
left planted with the wigs!"
"But who said two hundred francs?" cried Madame Dépine. "It is only
one wig that we demand—to-day at least."
He shrugged his shoulders. "A hundred francs, then."
"And why should we trust you with one hundred francs?" asked Madame
Dépine. "You might botch the work."
"Or fly to Italy," added the "Princess."
In the end it was agreed he should have fifty down and fifty on
delivery.
"Measure us, while we are here," said Madame Dépine. "I will bring you
the fifty francs immediately."
"Very well," he murmured. "Which of you?"
But Madame Valière was already affectionately untying Madame Dépine's
bonnet-strings. "It is for my friend," she cried. "And let it be as
chic and convenable as possible!"
He bowed. "An artist remains always an artist."
Madame Dépine removed her wig and exposed her poor old scalp, with
its thin, forlorn wisps and patches of grey hair, grotesque, almost
indecent, in its nudity. But the coiffeur measured it in sublime
seriousness, putting his tape this way and that way, while Madame
Valière's eyes danced in sympathetic excitement.
"You may as well measure my friend too," remarked Madame Dépine, as
she reassumed her glossy brown wig (which seemed propriety itself
compared with the bald cranium).
"What an idea!" ejaculated Madame Valière. "To what end?"
"Since you are here," returned Madame Dépine, indifferently. "You may
as well leave your measurements. Then when you decide yourself—Is it
not so, monsieur?"
The coiffeur, like a good man of business, eagerly endorsed the
suggestion. "Perfectly, madame."
"But if one's head should change!" said Madame Valière, trembling with
excitement at the vivid imminence of the visioned wig.
"Souvent femme varie, madame," said the coiffeur. "But it is the
inside, not the outside of the head."
"But you said one is not the dome of the Invalides," Madame Valière
reminded him.
"He spoke of our old blocks," Madame Dépine intervened hastily. "At
our age one changes no more."
Thus persuaded, the "Princess" in her turn denuded herself of her
wealth of wig, and Madame Dépine watched with unsmiling satisfaction
the stretchings of tape across the ungainly cranium.
"C'est bien," she said. "I return with your fifty francs on the
instant."
And having seen her "Princess" safely ensconced in the attic, she
rifled the stocking, and returned to the coiffeur.
When she emerged from the shop, the vindictive endurance had vanished
from her face, and in its place reigned an angelic exaltation.
Eleven days later Madame Valière and Madame Dépine set out on
the great expedition to the hairdresser's to try on the Wig. The
"Princess's" excitement was no less tense than the fortunate winner's.
Neither had slept a wink the night before, but the November morning
was keen and bright, and supplied an excellent tonic. They conversed
with animation on the English in Egypt, and Madame Dépine recalled the
gallant death of her son, the chasseur.
The coiffeur saluted them amiably. Yes, mesdames, it was a beautiful
morning. The wig was quite ready. Behold it there—on its block.
Madame Valière's eyes turned thither, then grew clouded, and returned
to Madame Dépine's head and thence back to the Grey Wig.
"It is not this one?" she said dubiously.
"Mais, oui." Madame Dépine was nodding, a great smile
transfiguring the emaciated orb of her face. The artist's eyes
twinkled.
"But this will not fit you," Madame Valière gasped.
"It is a little error, I know," replied Madame Dépine.
"But it is a great error," cried Madame Valière, aghast. And her angry
gaze transfixed the coiffeur.
"It is not his fault—I ought not to have let him measure you."
"Ha! Did I not tell you so?" Triumph softened her anger. "He has mixed
up the two measurements!"
"Yes. I suspected as much when I went in to inquire the other day; but
I was afraid to tell you, lest it shouldn't even fit you."
"Fit me!" breathed Madame Valière.
"But whom else?" replied Madame Dépine, impatiently, as she whipped
off the "Princess's" wig. "If only it fits you, one can pardon him.
Let us see. Stand still, ma chère," and with shaking hands she
seized the grey wig.
"But—but—" The "Princess" was gasping, coughing, her ridiculous
scalp bare.
"But stand still, then! What is the matter? Are you a little infant?
Ah! that is better. Look at yourself, then, in the mirror. But it is
perfect!" "A true Princess," she muttered beatifically to herself.
"Ah, how she will show up the fruit-vendor's daughter!"
As the "Princess" gazed at the majestic figure in the mirror, crowned
with the dignity of age, two great tears trickled down her pendulous
cheeks.
"I shall be able to go to the wedding," she murmured chokingly.
"The wedding!" Madame Dépine opened her eyes. "What wedding?"
"My nephew's, of course!"
"Your nephew is marrying? I congratulate you. But why did you not tell
me?"
"I did mention it. That day I had a letter!"
"Ah! I seem to remember. I had not thought of it." Then briskly:
"Well, that makes all for the best again. Ah! I was right not to scold
monsieur le coiffeur too much, was I not?"
"You are very good to be so patient," said Madame Valière, with a sob
in her voice.
Madame Dépine shot her a dignified glance. "We will discuss our
affairs at home. Here it only remains to say whether you are satisfied
with the fit."
Madame Valière patted the wig, as much in approbation as in
adjustment. "But it fits me to a miracle!"
"Then we will pay our friend, and wish him le bon jour." She
produced the fifty francs—two gold pieces, well sounding, for which
she had exchanged her silver and copper, and two five-franc pieces.
"And voilà," she added, putting down a franc for pourboire, "we
are very content with the artist."
The "Princess" stared at her, with a new admiration.
"Merci bien," said the coiffeur, fervently, as he counted the
cash. "Would that all customers' heads lent themselves so easily to
artistic treatment!"
"And when will my friend's wig be ready?" said the "Princess."
"Madame Valière! What are you saying there? Monsieur will set to work
when I bring him the fifty francs."
"Mais non, madame. I commence immediately. In a week it shall be
ready, and you shall only pay on delivery."
"You are very good. But I shall not need it yet—not till the
winter—when the snows come," said Madame Dépine, vaguely. "Bon
jour, monsieur;" and, thrusting the old wig on the new block, and
both under her shawl, she dragged the "Princess" out of the shop.
Then, looking back through the door, "Do not lose the measurement,
monsieur," she cried. "One of these days!"
The grey wig soon showed its dark side. Its possession, indeed,
enabled Madame Valière to loiter on the more lighted stairs, or dawdle
in the hall with Madame la Propriétaire; but Madame Dépine was not
only debarred from these dignified domestic attitudes, but found a new
awkwardness in bearing Madame Valière company in their walks
abroad. Instead of keeping each other in countenance—duoe contra
mundum—they might now have served as an advertisement for the
coiffeur and the convenable. Before the grey wig—after the grey
wig.
Wherefore Madame Dépine was not so very sorry when, after a few weeks
of this discomforting contrast, the hour drew near of the "Princess's"
departure for the family wedding; especially as she was only losing
her for two days. She had insisted, of course, that the savings for
the second wig were not to commence till the return, so that Madame
Valière might carry with her a present worthy of her position and her
port. They had anxious consultations over this present. Madame Dépine
was for a cheap but showy article from the Bon Marché; but Madame
Valière reminded her that the price-lists of this enterprising firm
knocked at the doors of Tonnerre. Something distinguished (in
silver) was her own idea. Madame Dépine frequently wept during these
discussions, reminded of her own wedding. Oh, the roundabouts at
Robinson, and that delicious wedding-lunch up the tree! One was gay
then, my dear.
At last they purchased a tiny metal Louis Quinze timepiece for eleven
francs seventy-five centimes, congratulating themselves on the surplus
of twenty-five centimes from their three weeks' savings. Madame
Valière packed it with her impedimenta into the carpet-bag lent her by
Madame la Propriétaire. She was going by a night train from the Gare
de Lyon, and sternly refused to let Madame Dépine see her off.
"And how would you go back—an old woman, alone in these dark November
nights, with the papers all full of crimes of violence? It is not
convenable, either."
Madame Dépine yielded to the latter consideration; but as Madame
Valière, carrying the bulging carpet-bag, was crying "La porte, s'il
vous plaît" to the concierge, she heard Madame Dépine come tearing
and puffing after her like the steam-tram, and, looking back, saw
her breathlessly brandishing her gold brooch. "Tiens!" she panted,
fastening the "Princess's" cloak with it. "That will give thee an
air."
"But—it is too valuable. Thou must not." They had never "thou'd" each
other before, and this enhanced the tremulousness of the moment.
"I do not give it thee," Madame Dépine laughed through her tears. "Au
revoir, mon amie."
"Adieu, ma chérie! I will tell my dear ones of my Paris comrade."
And for the first time their lips met, and the brown wig brushed the
grey.
Madame Dépine had two drearier days than she had foreseen. She kept
to her own room, creeping out only at night, when, like all cats, all
wigs are grey. After an eternity of loneliness the third day dawned,
and she went by pre-arrangement to meet the morning train. Ah, how
gaily gleamed the kiosks on the boulevards through the grey mist! What
jolly red faces glowed under the cabmen's white hats! How blithely the
birds sang in the bird-shops!
The train was late. Her spirits fell as she stood impatiently at the
barrier, shivering in her thin clothes, and morbidly conscious of all
those eyes on her wig. At length the train glided in unconcernedly,
and shot out a medley of passengers. Her poor old eyes strained
towards them. They surged through the gate in animated masses, but
Madame Valière's form did not disentangle itself from them, though
every instant she expected it to jump at her eyes. Her heart
contracted painfully—there was no "Princess." She rushed round to
another exit, then outside, to the gates at the end of the drive; she
peered into every cab even, as it rumbled past. What had happened? She
trudged home as hastily as her legs could bear her. No, Madame Valière
had not arrived.
"They have persuaded her to stay another day," said Madame la
Propriétaire. "She will come by the evening train, or she will write."
Madame Dépine passed the evening at the Gare de Lyon, and came home
heavy of heart and weary of foot. The "Princess" might still arrive
at midnight, though, and Madame Dépine lay down dressed in her bed,
waiting for the familiar step in the corridor. About three o'clock she
fell into a heavy doze, and woke in broad day. She jumped to her feet,
her overwrought brain still heavy with the vapours of sleep, and threw
open her door.
"Ah! she has already taken in her boots," she thought confusedly. "I
shall be late for coffee." She gave her perfunctory knock, and turned
the door-handle. But the door would not budge.
"Jacques! Jacques!" she cried, with a clammy fear at her heart. The
garçon, who was pottering about with pails, opened the door with his
key. An emptiness struck cold from the neat bed, the bare walls, the
parted wardrobe-curtains that revealed nothing. She fled down the
stairs, into the bureau.
"Madame Valière is not returned?" she cried.
Madame la Propriétaire shook her head.
"And she has not written?"
"No letter in her writing has come—for anybody."
"O mon Dieu! She has been murdered. She would go alone by night."
"She owes me three weeks' rent," grimly returned Madame la
Propriétaire.
"What do you insinuate?" Madame Dépine's eyes flared.
Madame la Propriétaire shrugged her shoulders. "I am not at my first
communion. I have grown grey in the service of lodgers. And this is
how they reward me." She called Jacques, who had followed uneasily in
Madame Dépine's wake. "Is there anything in the room?"
"Empty as an egg-shell, madame."
"Not even the miniature of her sister?"
"Not even the miniature of her sister."
"Of her sister?" repeated Madame Dépine.
"Yes; did I never tell you of her? A handsome creature, but she threw
her bonnet over the mills."
"But I thought that was the Princess."
"The Princess, too. Her bonnet will also be found lying there."
"No, no; I mean I thought the portrait was the Princess's."
Madame la Propriétaire laughed. "She told you so?"
"No, no; but—but I imagined so."
"Without doubt, she gave you the idea. Quelle farceuse! I don't
believe there ever was a Princess. The family was always inflated."
All Madame Dépine's world seemed toppling. Somehow her own mistake
added to her sense of having been exploited.
"Still," said Madame la Propriétaire with a shrug, "it is only three
weeks' rent."
"If you lose it, I will pay!" Madame Dépine had an heroic burst of
faith.
"As you please. But I ought to have been on my guard. Where did she
take the funds for a grey wig?"
"Ah, the brown wig!" cried Madame Dépine, joyfully. "She must have
left that behind, and any coiffeur will give you three weeks' rent
for that alone."
"We shall see," replied Madame la Propriétaire, ambiguously.
The trio mounted the stairs, and hunted high and low, disturbing the
peaceful spider-webs. They peered under the very bed. Not even the
old block was to be seen. As far as Madame Valière's own chattels were
concerned, the room was indeed "empty as an egg-shell."
"She has carried it away with the three weeks' rent," sneered Madame
la Propriétaire. "In my own carpet-bag," she added with a terrible
recollection.
"She wished to wear it at night against the hard back of the carriage,
and guard the other all glossy for the wedding." Madame Dépine
quavered pleadingly, but she could not quite believe herself.
"The wedding had no more existence than the Princess," returned Madame
la Propriétaire, believing herself more and more.
"Then she will have cheated me out of the grey wig from the first,"
cried Madame Dépine, involuntarily. "And I who sacrificed myself to
her!"
"Comment! It was your wig?"
"No, no." She flushed and stammered. "But enfin—and then, oh,
heaven! my brooch!"
"She has stolen your brooch?"
Great tears rolled down the wrinkled, ashen cheeks. So this was
her reward for secretly instructing the coiffeur to make the
"Princess's" wig first. The Princess, indeed! Ah, the adventuress! She
felt choking; she shook her fist in the air. Not even the brooch to
show when her family came up from Tonnerre, to say nothing of the wig.
Was there a God in the world at all? Oh, holy Mother! No wonder the
trickstress would not be escorted to the station—she never went to
the station. No wonder she would not sell the royal secrets to the
journalist—there were none to sell. Oh! it was all of a piece.
"If I were you I should go to the bureau of police!" said Madame la
Propriétaire.
Yes, she would go; the wretch should be captured, should be haled to
gaol. Even her half of the Louis Quinze timepiece recurred to poor
Madame Dépine's brain.
"Add that she has stolen my carpet-bag."
The local bureau telegraphed first to Tonnerre.
There had been the wedding, but no Madame Valière. She had accepted
the invitation, had given notice of her arrival; one had awaited the
midnight train. The family was still wondering why the rich aunt had
turned sulky at the last hour. But she was always an eccentric; a
capricious and haughty personage.
Poor Madame Dépine's recurrent "My wig! my brooch!" reduced the
official mind to the same muddle as her own.
"No doubt a sudden impulse of senescent kleptomania," said the
superintendent, sagely, when he had noted down for transference to
headquarters Madame Dépine's verbose and vociferous description of
the traits and garments of the runagate. "But we will do our best
to recover your brooch and your wig." Then, with a spasm of supreme
sagacity, "Without doubt they are in the carpet-bag."
Madame Dépine left the bureau and wandered about in a daze. That
monster of ingratitude! That arch-adventuress, more vicious even than
her bejewelled sister! All the long months of more than Lenten
rigour recurred to her self-pitiful mood, that futile half-year of
semi-starvation. How Madame Valière must have gorged on the sly, the
rich eccentric! She crossed a bridge to the Ile de la Cité, and came
to the gargoyled portals of Notre Dame, and let herself be drawn
through the open door, and all the gloom and glory of the building
fell around her like a soothing caress. She dropped before an altar
and poured out her grief to the Mother of Sorrows. At last she arose,
and tottered up the aisle, and the great rose-window glowed like
the window of heaven. She imagined her husband and the dead children
looking through it. Probably they wondered, as they gazed down, why
her head remained so young.
Ah! but she was old, so very old. Surely God would take her soon. How
should she endure the long years of loneliness and social ignominy?
As she stumbled out of the Cathedral, the cold, hard day smote her
full in the face. People stared at her, and she knew it was at the
brown wig. But could they expect her to starve herself for a whole
year?
"Mon Dieu! Starve yourselves, my good friends. At my age, one needs
fuel."
She escaped from them, and ran, muttering, across the road, and almost
into the low grey shed.
Ah! the Morgue! Blessed idea! That should be the end of her. A
moment's struggle, and then—the rose-window of heaven! Hell? No, no;
the Madonna would plead for her; she who always looked so beautiful,
so convenable.
She would peep in. Let her see how she would look when they found her.
Would they clap a grey wig upon her, or expose her humiliation even in
death?
"A-a-a-h!" A long scream tore her lips apart. There, behind the glass,
in terrible waxen peace, a gash on her forehead, lay the "Princess,"
so uncanny-looking without any wig at all, that she would not
have recognised her but for that moment of measurement at the
hairdresser's. She fell sobbing before the cold glass wall of the
death-chamber. Ah, God! Her first fear had been right; her brooch had
but added to the murderer's temptation. And she had just traduced this
martyred saint to the police.
"Forgive me, ma chérie, forgive me," she moaned, not even conscious
that the attendant was lifting her to her feet with professional
interest.
For in that instant everything passed from her but the great yearning
for love and reconciliation, and for the first time a grey wig seemed
a petty and futile aspiration.



I. SET TO PARTNERS
II. CHASSÉ
III. BALANCEZ
IV. CROISÉ

"Oh, look, dear, there's that poor Walter Bassett."
Amber Roan looked down from the roof of the drag at the crossing
restless shuttles, weaving with feminine woof and masculine warp
the multi-coloured web of Society in London's cricket Coliseum.
"Where?" she murmured, her eye wandering over the little tract of
sunlit green between the coaches with their rival Eton and Harrow
favours. Before Lady Chelmer had time to bend her pink parasol a
little more definitely, a thunder of applause turned Amber Roan's
face back towards the wickets, with a piqued expression.
"It's real mean," she said. "What have I missed now?"
"Only a good catch," said the Hon. Tolshunt Darcy, whose eyes had
never faltered from her face.
"My, that's just the one thing I've been dying for," she pouted
self-mockingly.
"Poor Walter Bassett," Lady Chelmer repeated. "I knew his mother."
"Where?" Amber asked again.
"In Huntingdonshire, before the property went to Algy—"
"No, no, Lady Chelmer; I mean, where is poor Walter Whatsaname now?"
"Why, right here," said Lady Chelmer, involuntarily borrowing from the
vocabulary of her young American protégée.
"Walter Bassett!" said the Hon. Tolshunt, languidly. "Isn't that the
chap that's always getting chucked out of Parliament?"
"But his name doesn't sound Irish?" queried Amber.
"What are you talking about, Amber!" cried Lady Chelmer. "Why, he
comes of a good old Huntingdon family. If he had been his own elder
brother, he'd have got in long ago."
"Oh, you mean he never gets into Parliament," said Amber.
"Serve him right. I believe he's one of those independent nuisances,"
said the old Marquis of Woodham. "How is one ever to govern the
country, if every man is a party unto himself?" He said "one," but
only out of modesty; for having once accepted a minor post in a
Ministry that the Premier in posse had not succeeded in forming, he
had retained a Cabinet air ever since.
"Well, the beggar will scarcely come up at Highmead for a third
licking," observed the Hon. Tolshunt.
"No, poor Walter," said Lady Chelmer. "He thought he'd be sure to
get in this time, but he's quite crushed now. Wasn't it actually two
thousand votes less than last time?"
"Two thousand and thirty-three," replied Lord Woodham, with
punctilious inaccuracy.
Involuntarily Amber's eyes turned in search of the crushed candidate
whom she almost saw flattened beneath the 2033 votes, and whom it
would scarcely have been a surprise to find asquat under a carriage,
humbly assisting the footmen to pack the dirty plates. But before
she had time to decide which of the unlively men, loitering round
the carriages or helping stout old dowagers up slim iron ladders,
was sufficiently lugubrious to be identified as the martyr of the
ballot-box, she was absorbed by a tall, masterful figure, whose face
had the radiance of easeful success, and whose hands were clapping at
some nuance of style which had escaped the palms of the great circular
mob.
"I can't see any Walter Bassett," she murmured absently.
"Why, you are staring straight at him," said Lady Chelmer.
Miss Roan did not reply, but her face was eloquent of her astonishment,
and when her face spoke, it was with that vivacity which is the American
accent of beauty. What wonder if the Hon. Tolshunt Darcy paid heed to it,
although he liked what it said less than the form of expression! As he
used to put it in after days, "She gave one look, and threw herself away
from the top of that drag." The more literal truth was that she drew
Walter Bassett up to the top of that drag.
Lady Chelmer protested in vain that she could not halloo to the man.
"You knew his mother," Amber replied. "And he's got no seat."
"Quite symbolical! He, he, he!" and the old Marquis chuckled and
cackled in solitary amusement. "Let's offer him one," he went on, half
to enjoy the joke a little longer, half to utilise the opportunity of
bringing his Ministerial wisdom to bear upon this erratic young man.
"I don't see where there's room," said the Hon. Tolshunt Darcy,
sulkily.
"There's room on the front bench," cackled the Marquis, shaking his
sides.
"Oh, I don't want you to roll off for him," said Miss Roan, who
treated Ministerial Marquises with a contempt that bred in them a
delightful sense of familiarity. "Tolshunt can sit opposite me—he's
stared at the cricket long enough."
Tolshunt blushed with apparent irrelevance. But even the prospect
of staring at Amber more comfortably did not reconcile him to
displacement. "It's so awkward meeting a fellow who's had a tumble,"
he grumbled. "It's like having to condole with a man fresh from a
funeral."
"There doesn't seem much black about Walter Bassett," Amber laughed.
And at this moment—the dull end of a "maiden over"—the radiant
personage in question turned his head, and perceiving Lady Chelmer's
massive smile, acknowledged her recognition with respectful superiority,
whereupon her Ladyship beckoned him with her best parasol manner.
"I want to introduce you to my friend, Miss Roan," she said, as he
climbed to her side.
"I've been reading so much about you," said that young lady, with
a sweet smile. "But you shouldn't be so independent, you know, you
really shouldn't."
He smiled back. "I'm only independent till they come to my way of
thinking."
Lady Chelmer gasped. "Then you still have hopes of Highmead!"
"I won a moral victory there each time, Lady Chelmer."
"How so, sir?" put in the Marquis. "Your opponent increased the
Government majority—"
"And my reputation. A tiresome twaddler. Unfortunately," and he smiled
again, "two moral victories are as bad as a defeat. On the other hand,
a defeat at a bye-election equals a victory at a general. You play a
solo—and on your own trumpet." A burst of cheering rounded off these
remarks. This time Amber did not even inquire what it indicated—she
was almost content to take it as an endorsement of Walter Bassett's
epigrams. But Lord Woodham eagerly improved the situation. "A fine
stroke that," he said, "but a batsman outside a team doesn't play the
game."
"It will be a good time for the country, Lord Woodham," Mr. Bassett
returned quietly, "when people cease to regard the Parliamentary
session as a cricket match, one side trying to bowl over or catch out
the other. But then England always has been a sporting nation."
"Ah, you allow some good in the old country," said Lady Chelmer,
pleased. "Look at the trouble we all take to come here to encourage
the dear boys;" and the words ended with a tired sigh.
"Yes, of course, that is the side on which they need encouragement,"
he rejoined drily. "Majuba was lost on the playing-field of Lord's."
There was a moment of shocked surprise. Lady Chelmer, herself a martyr
to the religion of sport thus blasphemed—of which she understood
as little as of any other religion—hastily tried to pour tea on the
troubled waters. But they had been troubled too deeply. For full
eight minutes the top of the drag became a political platform for
Marquis-Ministerial denunciations of Mr. Gladstone, to a hail of
repartee from the profane young man.
At the end of those eight minutes—when Lady Chelmer was at last able
to reinsinuate tea into the discussion—Miss Amber Roan realised with
a sudden shock that she had not "chipped in" once, and that "poor
Walter Bassett" had commanded her ear for all that time without
pouring into it a single compliment, or, indeed, addressing to it
any observation whatever. For the first time since her début in the
Milwaukee parlour at the age of five, this spoiled daughter of the
dollar had lost sight of herself. As they walked towards the tea-tent,
through the throng of clergymen and parasols and tanned men with
field-glasses, and young bloods and pretty girls, she noted uneasily
that his eyes wandered from her to these types of English beauty,
these flower-faces under witching hats. Indeed, he had led her out of
the way to plough past a row of open carriages. "The shortest cut," he
said, "is past the prettiest woman."
But he had to face her at the tea-table, where she blocked his view of
the tables beyond and plied him with strawberries and smiles under the
sullen glances of the Hon. Tolshunt Darcy and the timid cough of her
chaperon.
"I wonder you waste your time on the silly elections," she said. "We
don't take much stock in Senators in America."
"It's just because M.P.'s are at such a discount that I want to get
in. In the realm of the blind the one-eyed is a king."
"They must be blind not to let you in," she answered with equal
frankness.
"No, they see too well, if you mean the voters. They've got their eye
on the price of their vote."
"What!" she cried. "You can't buy votes in England!"
"Oh, can't you—"
"But I'm sure I read about it in the English histories—it was all
abolished."
"A good many things were abolished by the Decalogue even earlier,"
he replied grimly. "Half an hour before the poll closed I could have
bought a thousand votes at a shilling each."
"Well, that seems reasonable enough," said Lady Chelmer.
"It was beyond my pocket."
"What! Fifty pounds?" cried Amber, incredulously.
The blush that followed was hers, not his. "But what became of the
thousand votes?" she asked hurriedly.
He laughed. "Half an hour before the poll closed they had gone down to
sixpence apiece—like fish that wouldn't keep."
"My! And were they all wasted?"
"No. My rival bought them up. Vide the newspapers—'the polling was
unusually heavy towards the close.'"
"Really!" intervened Lady Chelmer. "Then at that rate you can unseat
him for bribery."
"At that rate—or higher," he replied drily. "To unseat another is
even more expensive than to seat oneself."
"Why, it seems all a question of money," said Miss Amber Roan,
naively.
Lady Chelmer was glad when the season came to an end and the dancing
mice had no longer to spin dizzyingly in their gilded cage. "The
Prisoner of Pleasure" was Walter Bassett's phrase for her. Even now
she was a convict on circuit. Some of the dungeons were in ancient
castles, from which Bassett was barred, but all of which opened to
Amber's golden keys, though only because Lady Chelmer knew how to turn
them. He, however, penetrated the ducal doors through the letter-box.
The Hon. Tolshunt and Lord Woodham, in their apprehension of the
common foe, began to find each other endurable. If it was politics
that attracted her, Tolshunt felt he too could stoop to a career. As
for the Marquis, he began to meditate resuming office. Both had freely
hinted to her Ladyship that to give a millionaire bride to a man who
hadn't a penny savoured of Socialism.
Galled by such terrible insinuations, Lady Chelmer had dared to sound
the girl.
"I love his letters," gushed Amber, bafflingly. "He writes such cute
things."
"He doesn't dress very well," said Lady Chelmer, feebly fighting.
"Oh, of course, he doesn't bother as much as Tolly, who looks as if he
had been poured into his clothes—"
"Yes, the mould of fashion," quoted Lady Chelmer, vaguely.
An eruption of Walter Bassett in the Press did not tend to allay her
Ladyship's alarm, especially as Amber began to dally with the morning
paper and the evening.
Opening a new People's Library at Highmead—in the absence abroad
of the successful candidate—he had contrived to set the newspapers
sneering. He had told the People that although they might temporarily
accept such gifts as "Capital's conscience-money," yet it was as much
the duty of the parish to supply light as to supply street-lamps;
which was considered both ungracious and unsound. The donor he
described as "a millionaire of means," which was considered wilfully
paradoxical by those who did not know how great capitals are locked up
in industries. But what worked up the Press most was his denunciation
of modern journalism, in malodorous comparison with the literature
this Library would bring the People. "The journalist," he said
tersely, "is Satan's secretary." No shorter cut to notoriety could
have been devised, for it was the "Silly Season," and Satan found
plenty of mischief for his idle hands to do.
"Oh, you poor man!" Amber wrote Walter. "Why don't you say you were
thinking of America—yellow journalism, and all that? The yellow
is, of course, Satan's sulphur. You would hardly believe what his
secretaries have written even of poor little me! And you should see
the pictures of 'The Milwaukee Millionairess' in the Sunday numbers!"
Walter Bassett did not reply regularly and punctually to Amber's
letters, and it was a novel sensation to the jaded beauty who had
often thrown aside masculine missives after a glance at the envelope,
to find herself eagerly shuffling her morning correspondence in the
hope of turning up a trump-card. A card, indeed, it often proved,
though never a postcard, and Amber meekly repaid it fourfold. She
found it delicious to pour herself out to him; it had the pleasure
of abandonment without its humiliation. Verbally, this was the least
flirtatious correspondence she had ever maintained with the opposite
sex.
So when at last, towards the end of the holiday season, the pair met
in the flesh at a country house (Lady Chelmer still protests it was
a coincidence), Walter Bassett had no apprehension of danger, and his
expression of pleasure at the coincidence was unfeigned, for he felt
his correspondence would be lightened. In nothing did he feel the want
of pence more keenly than in his inability to keep a secretary for his
public work. "Money is time," he used to complain; "the millionaire is
your only Methuselah."
The house had an old-world garden, and it was here they had their
first duologue. Amber had quickly discovered that Walter was
interested in the apiaries that lay at the foot of its slope, and so
he found her standing in poetic grace among the tall sweet-peas, with
their whites and pinks and faint purples, a basket of roses in one
hand and a pair of scissors in the other.
As he came to her under the quaint trellised arch, "I always feel like
a croquet ball going through the hoop," he said.
"But the ball is always driven," she said.
"Oh, I dare say it has the illusion of freewill. Doubtless the pieces
in that chess game, which Eastern monarchs are said to play with human
figures, come to think they move of themselves. The knight chuckles as
he makes his tortuous jump at the queen, and the bishop swoops down on
the castle with holy joy."
She came imperceptibly closer to him. "Then you don't think any of us
move of ourselves?"
"One or two of us in each generation. They make the puppets dance."
"You admire Bismarck, I see."
"Yes. A pity he didn't emigrate to your country, like so many Germans."
"Do you think we need him? But he couldn't have been President. You
must be born in America."
"True. Then I shall remain on here."
"You're terrible ambitious, Mr. Bassett."
"Yes, terrible," he repeated mockingly.
"Then come and help me pick blackberries," she said, and caught him by
his own love of the unexpected. They left the formal garden, and came
out into the rabbit-warren, and toiled up and down hillocks in search
of ripe bushes, paying, as Walter said, "many pricks to the pint."
And when Amber urged him to scramble to the back of tangled bushes,
through coils of bristling briars, "You were right," he laughed; "this
is terrible ambitious." The best of the blackberries plucked, Amber
began a new campaign against mushrooms, and had frequent opportunities
to rebuke his clumsiness in crumbling the prizes he uprooted. She
knelt at his side to teach him, and once laid her deft fingers
instructively upon his.
And just at that moment he irritatingly discovered a dead mole, and
fell to philosophising upon it and its soft, velvet, dainty skin—as
if a girl's fingers were not softer and daintier! "Look at its poor
little pale-red mouth," he went on, "gaspingly open, as in surprise at
the strange great forces that had made and killed it."
"I dare say it had a good time," said Amber, pettishly.
After the harvest had been carried indoors they scarcely exchanged a
word till she found him watching the bees the next morning.
"Are you interested in bees?" she inquired in tones of surprise.
"Yes," he said. "They are the most striking example of Nature's
Bismarckism—her habit of using her creatures to work her will through
their own. Sic vos non vobis."
"I learnt enough Latin at College to understand that," she said; "but
I don't see how one finds out anything by just watching them hover
over their hives. I've never even been able to find the queen bee.
Won't you come and see what beautiful woods there are behind the
house? Lady Chelmer is walking there, and I ought to be joining her."
"You ought to be taking her an umbrella," he said coldly. Amber looked
up at the sky. Had it been blue, she would have felt it grey. As it
was grey, she felt it black.
"Oh, if you're afraid of a drop of rain—" And Amber walked on
witheringly. It was a clever move.
Walter followed in silence. Amber did not become aware of him till she
was in the middle of an embryonic footpath through tall bracken that
made way, courtseying, for the rare pedestrian.
"Oh!" She gave a little scream. "I thought you were studying the
bees—or the moles."
"I have only been studying your graceful back."
"How mean! Behind my back!" She laughed, pleased. "I hope you haven't
discovered anything Bismarckian about my back."
"Only in the sense that I followed it, and must follow—till the path
widens."
"Ah, how you must hate following—you, so terrible ambitious."
"The path will widen," he said composedly.
She planted her feet firm on Mother Earth—as though it were literally
her own mother—and turned a mocking head over a tantalising shoulder.
"I shall stay still right here."
He smiled maliciously. "And I, too; I follow you no farther."
"Oh, you are just too cute," she said with a laugh of vexation and
pleasure. "You make me go on just to make you follow; but it is really
you that make me lead. That's what you mean by Bismarckism, isn't it?"
"You put it beautifully."
She swung round to face him. "Is there nothing you admire but Force?"
"Not Force—Power!"
"What's the difference?"
"Force is blind."
"So is love," she said. "Do you scorn that?" And her smile was daring
and dazzling.
Ere he could reply Nature outdid her in dazzlement, and superadded a
crash of thunder.
"Yes," he said, as though there had been no interruption. "I scorn
all that is blind—even this storm that may strike you and me. Ah! the
rain," as the great drops began to fall. "Poor Lady Chelmer—without
an umbrella."
"We can shelter by these shrubs." In an instant she was crouching amid
the ferns on a carpet of autumn leaves, making space for him beside
her.
"Thank you—I will stand," he said coldly. "But I don't know if you're
aware these are oak-shrubs."
"What of it?"
"I was only thinking of the Swiss proverb about lightning, 'Vor den
Eichen sollst du weichen.' We ought to make for the beeches."
"I'm not going to leave my umbrella. I am sorry you won't accept a bit
of it." And she bent the tall ferns invitingly towards him.
"I don't like cowering even before the rain," he laughed. "How it
brings out the beautiful earthy smell."
"One enjoys the beautiful earthy smell the better for being nearer to
the earth."
He did not reply.
"Oh, you dear fool," she thought. Hadn't she had heaps of Power from
childhood—over her stern old father, over her weakling mother, over
her governesses, and later over the whole tribe of "the boys," and now
in Europe over Marquises and Honourables—and could it all compare in
intensity to this delicious, poignant sense of being caught up into
a masterful personality! No, not Power but Powerlessness was life's
central reality; not to turn with iron hand the great wheels of Fate,
but to faint at a dear touch, to be sucked up as a moth in the flame.
And for him, too, it were surely as sweet to leave this strenuous
quest for dominance, or to be content with dominating her alone. Oh,
she would bring him to clear vision, to live for nothing but her, even
as she asked for nothing but him.
The harsh scream of a bluejay struck a discord through her reverie.
She remembered that he had yet to be won.
"But didn't you tell me people can't get power without money?" she
said, forgetting the hiatus in the conversation.
"Nor with it generally," he replied, without surprise. "Money is but
a lever. You cannot move the earth unless you have force and fulcrum,
too."
"But I guess a man like you must get real mad to see so many levers
lying about idle."
"Oh, I shall get on without a lever, like primitive man. I have
muscles."
"But it seems too bad not to be able to afford machinery."
"I shall be hand-made."
"Yes, and by your own hand. But won't it be slow?"
"It will be sure."
Every one of his speeches rang like the stroke of a hammer. Yes,
indeed he had muscles.
"But how much surer with money! You ought to turn your career into a
company. Surely it would pay a dividend to its promoters."
"The directors would interfere."
"You could be chairman—with a veto."
He shook his head. "The rain is dripping through your umbrella. Don't
you think we might run to the house?"
"It's only an old hat." It was fresh from Paris, broad-brimmed,
beautiful, and bewitching. "Why don't you find"—she smiled
nervously—"a millionaire of means?"
"And what would be his reward?"
"Just Virtue's. Won't you be a light to England? And isn't it the
duty of parishes and millionaires to supply light?" She was plucking
a fern-leaf to pieces.
"Millionaires' minds don't run that way."
"Not male millionaires, perhaps," she said, turning her face from him
so jerkily that she shook the oak-shrub and it became a shower-bath.
He looked at her, slightly startled. It was the first emotion she had
ever provoked in him, and her heart beat faster.
"I really do think it is giving over now," he said, gazing at her
sopping hat.
'Twas as if he had shaken the shrub again and drenched her with cold
water. He was mocking her, her and her dollars and her love.
"It is quite over," she said savagely, springing up, and growing
even angrier when she found the rain had really stopped, so that her
indignation sounded only like acquiescence. She strode ahead of him,
silent, through the wet bracken, her frock growing a limp rag as it
brushed aside the glistening ferns.
As she struck the broader path to the house, the cackling laugh of a
goat chained to a roadside log followed her cynically. Where had she
heard this bleat before? Ah, yes, from the Marquis of Woodham.
Walter Bassett had spoken truly. He did not admire love—that blind
force. Women seemed to him delightfully aesthetic objects—to be
kept at a distance, however closely one embraced them. They were
unreasoning beings at the best, even when unbiassed by that supreme
prejudice—love.
It was not his conception of the strong man that he must needs become
as water at some woman's touch and go dancing and babbling like a
sylvan brook. Women were the light of life—he was willing enough to
admit it, but one must be able to switch the light on and off at will.
All these were reasons for not falling in love—they were not reasons
for not marrying. And so, Amber being determined to marry him, there
was really less difficulty than if it had been necessary for him to
fall in love with her.
It took, however, many letters and interviews, full of the subtlest
comedy, infinite advancing and retiring, and recrossing and bowing,
and courtesying and facing and half-turning, before this leap-year
dance could end in the solemn Wedding March.
"You know," she said once, "how I should love the fun of seeing you
plough your way through all the mediocrities."
"That is the means, not the end," he reminded her, rebukingly. "One
only wants the world to swallow one's pills for the world's sake."
"I don't believe you," she said frankly. "Else you'd move mountains
to get the money for the pills, not turn up your nose at the mountain
when it comes to you."
He laughed heartily. "What a delightful confusion of metaphors! I'm
sure you've got Irish blood somewhere."
"Of course I have. Did I never tell you I am descended from the kings
of Ireland?"
He took off his hat mockingly. "I salute Miss Brian Boru."
"You're an awfully good fellow," he told her on a later occasion. "I
almost believe I'd take your money if you were not a woman." "If I
were not a woman I should not offer it to you—I should want a career
of my own."
"And my career would content you?" he asked, touched.
"Absolutely," she lied. "The interest I should take in it—wouldn't
that be sufficient interest on the loan?"
"There is one thing you have taught me," he said slowly—"how
conventional I am! But every prejudice in me shrinks from your
proposition, much as I admire your manliness."
"Perhaps it could be put on more conventional lines—superficially,"
she suggested in a letter that harked back to this conversation. "One
might go through conventional forms. That adorable Disraeli—I have
just been reading his letters. How right he was not to marry for
love!"
The penultimate stage of the pre-nuptial comedy was reached in the
lobby of the Opera, while Society was squeezing to its carriage. It
was after the Rheingold, and poor Lady Chelmer could hardly keep
her eyes open, and actually dozed off as she leaned against a wall, in
patient martyrdom. Walter Bassett had been specially irritating, for
he had not come up to the box once, and everybody knows (as the Hon.
Tolshunt had said, with unwonted brilliance) the Rheingold is in
heavy bars.
"I didn't know you admired Wagner so much," Amber said scathingly, as
Walter pushed through the grooms. "Such a rapt devotee!"
"Wagner is the greatest man of the century. He alone has been able to
change London's dinner-hour."
Amber could not help smiling. "Poor Lady Chelmer!" she said, nodding
towards the drowsing dowager. "Since half-past six!"
"Is that our carriage?" said the "Prisoner of Pleasure," opening her
eyes.
"No, dear—I guess we are some fifty behind. Tolly and the Marquis are
watching from the pavement."
The poor lady sighed and went to sleep again.
"Behold the compensations of poverty," observed Walter Bassett.
"The gallery-folk have to wait and squeeze before the opera; the
carriage-folk after the opera."
"You forget the places they occupy during the opera. Poor Wagner!
What a fight! I wish I could have helped his career." And Amber set a
wistful smile in the becoming frame of her white hood.
"The form of the career appears to be indifferent to you," he said,
with a little laugh.
"As indifferent as the man," she replied, meeting his eyes calmly.
The faint scent of her hair mingled with his pleasurable sense of her
frank originality. For the first time the bargain really appealed
to him. He could not but see that she was easily the fairest of that
crush of fair women, and to have her prostrated at the foot of his
career was more subtly delicious than to have her surrender to his
person. The ball was at his foot in surely the most tempting form that
a ball could take. And the fact that he must leave her hurriedly to
write the musical criticism that was the price of his stall, was not
calculated to diminish his appreciation of all the kingdoms of the
world which his temptress was showing him from her high mountain.
"Alas! I must go and write a notice," he sighed.
"Satan's Secretary?" she queried mischievously.
He started. Had he not been just thinking of her as a Satan in skirts?
"En attendant that I become Satan's master," he replied ambiguously,
as he raised his hat.
"Oh, to drive off with him into the peace and solitude of Love—away
from the grinding paths of ambition," thought Amber, when the horses
pranced up.
"Women, not measures," said the reigning wit anent the administration
which Amber's Salon held together, and in which her husband occupied a
position quite disproportionate to his nominal office, and still
more so to the almost unparalleled brevity of his career as a private
member.
Few, indeed, were the recalcitrants who could resist Amber's smiles,
or her still more seductive sulkiness. Walter Bassett's many enemies
declared that the young Cabinet Minister owed his career entirely to
his wife. His admirers indignantly pointed out that he had represented
Highmead for two sessions before he met Miss Roan. The germ of truth
in this was that he had stipulated to himself that he would not accept
the contract unless Amber, too, must admit "Value received," and in
contributing a career already self-launched, and a good old Huntingdon
name, his pride was satisfied. This, however, had wasted a year or
so, while the Government was getting itself turned out, and it never
entered his brain that his crushing victory at the General
Election could owe anything to a corner in votes—at five dollars a
head—secretly made by a fair American financier.
It was in the thick of the season, and Amber had just said good-bye
to the Bishop, the last of her dinner-guests. "I always say grace when
the church goes," she laughed, as she turned to her budget of unread
correspondence and shuffled the letters, as in the old days, when she
hoped to draw a letter of Walter's. But her method had become more
scientific. Recognising the writers by their crests or mottoes, she
would arrange the letters in order of precedence, alleging it was
to keep her hand in, otherwise she would always be making the most
horrible mistakes in "your Mediæval British etiquette."
"Who goes first to-night?" said her husband, watching her movements
from a voluptuous arm-chair.
"Only Lady Chelmer," Amber yawned, as she broke the seal.
"Didn't I see the scrawl of the Honourable Tolly?"
"Yes, poor dear. I do so want to know if he is happy in British
Honduras. But he must take his turn."
"If he had taken his turn," Walter laughed, "he never would have got
the appointment there."
"No, poor dear; it was very good of you."
"Of me?" Walter's tone was even more amused. His eyes roved round the
vast drawing-room, as if with the thought that he had as little to
do with its dignified grandeur. Then his gaze rested once more on his
wife; she seemed a delicious harmony of silks and flowers and creamy
flesh-tones.
"Mrs. Bassett," he said softly, lingering on the proprietorial term.
"Yes, Walter," she said, not looking up from her letter.
"Do you realise this is the first time we have been alone together
this month?"
"No? Really?" She glanced up absently.
"Never mind that muddle-headed old Chelmer. I dare say she only wants
another hundred or two." He came over, took the letter and her hand
with it. "I have a great secret to tell you."
Now he had captured her attention as well as her hand. Her eyes
sparkled. "A Cabinet Secret?" she said.
"Yes. At this moment every newspaper office is in a fever—to-morrow
all England will be ringing with the news. It is a thunderbolt."
She started up, snatching her hand away, every nerve a-quiver with
excitement. "And you kept this from me all through dinner?"
"I hadn't a chance, darling—I came straight from the scrimmage."
"You won't gloss it over by calling me novel names. I hate stale
thunderbolts. You might have breathed a word in my ear."
"I shall make amends by beginning with the part that is only for your
ear. Do you know what next Monday is?"
"The day you address your constituents, of course. Oh, I see, this
thunderbolt is going to change your speech."
"Is going to change my speech altogether. Next Monday is the seventh
anniversary of our wedding."
"Is it? But what has that to do with your speech at Highmead?"
"Everything." He smiled mysteriously, then went on softly, "Amber, do
you remember our honeymoon?"
She smiled faintly. "Oh, I haven't quite forgotten."
"If you had quite forgotten the misery of it, I should be glad."
"I have quite forgotten."
"You are kinder than I deserve. But I was so startled to find my
career was less to you than a kiss that I was more churlish than I
need have been. I even wished that you might have a child, so that you
might be taken up with it instead of with me."
She blushed. "Yes, I dare say I showed my hand clumsily as soon as it
held all the aces."
"Ah, Amber, you were an angel and I was a beast. How gallantly you
swallowed your disappointment in your bargain, how loyally you worked
heart and soul that I might gain my one ideal—Power!"
"It was a labour of love," she said deprecatingly.
"My noble Amber. But did you think, selfishly engrossed though I have
been with the Fight for Power, that this love-labour of yours was lost
on me? No, 'terrible ambitious' as I was, I could still see I got the
blackberries and you little more than the scratches, and the less you
began to press your claim upon my heart, the more my heart was opening
out with an answering passion. I began to watch the play of your eyes,
the shimmer of light across your cheek, the roguish pout of your lips,
the lock that strayed across your temple—as it is straying now."
She pushed it back impatiently. "But what has all this to do with the
Cabinet Secret?"
"Patience, darling! How much nicer to listen to you than to the
Opposition."
"I shall be in the Opposition unless you get along faster."
"That is what I want—your face opposite me always, instead of
bald-headed babblers. Ah, if you knew how often, of late, it has
floated before me in the House, reducing historic wrangles to
the rocking of children's boats in stormy ponds, accentuating the
ponderous futility." He took her hand again, and a great joy filled
him as he felt its gentle responsive pressure.
"Ponderous, perhaps," she said, smiling faintly; "but not futile,
Walter."
"Futile, so far as I am concerned, dearest. Ah, you are right. Love
is the only reality—everything else a game played with counters. What
are our winnings? A few cheers drowned in the roar that greets
the winning jockey, a few leading articles, stale as yesterday's
newspaper."
"But the good to the masses—" she reminded him.
"Don't mock me with my own phrases, darling. The masses have done me
more good than I can ever do them. Next Monday, dear Amber Roan, we'll
try our honeymoon over again." And his lips sought hers.
She drew back. "Yes, yes, after the Speech. But now—the Secret!"
"There will be no speech—that is the secret."
She drew away from him altogether. "No speech!" she gasped.
"None save to your adorable ear—and the moonlit waters. Woodham has
lent us his yacht—"
"In the middle of a Cabinet Crisis?"
"Which concerns me less than anybody." And he beamed happily.
"Less than anybody?" she repeated.
"Yes—since it is my resignation that makes the crisis."
She fell back into a chair, white and trembling. "You have resigned!"
"For ever. And now, hey for the great round, wonderful world! Don't
you hear our keel cutting the shimmering waters?"
"No," she said savagely. "I hear only Woodham's mocking
laughter!... And it sounds like a goat bleating."
"Darling!" he cried in amaze.
"I told you not to 'darling' me. How dared you change our lives
without a word of consultation?"
"Amber!" His voice was pained now. "I prepared a surprise for the
anniversary of our wedding. One can't consult about surprises."
"Keep your quibbles for the House! But perhaps there is no House,
either."
"Naturally. I have done with it all. I have written for the Chiltern
Hundreds."
"You are mad, Walter. You must take it all back."
"I can't, Amber. I have quarrelled hopelessly with the Party. The
Prime Minister will never forgive what I said at the Council to-day.
The luxury of speaking one's mind is expensive. I ought never to have
joined any Party. I am only fit to be Independent."
"Independence leads nowhere." She rose angrily. "And this is to be the
end of your Career! The Career you married me for!"
"I did wrong, Amber. But before one finds the true God, one worships
idols."
"And what is the true God, pray?"
"The one whose angel and minister you have always been, Amber"—he
lowered his voice reverently—"Love."
"Love!" Her voice was bitter. "Any bench in the Park, any alley in
Highmead, swarms with Love." 'Twas as if Cæsar had skipped from his
imperial chariot to a sociable.
All her childish passion for directing the life of the household,
all her girlish relish in keeping lovers in leading strings, all
that unconscious love of Power which—inversely—had attracted her
to Walter Bassett, and which had found so delightful a scope in her
political activities, leapt—now that her Salon was threatened with
extinction—into agonised consciousness of itself.
Through this brilliant husband of hers, she had touched the destinies
of England, pulled the strings of Empire. Oh, the intoxication of the
fight—the fight for which she had seconded and sponged him! Oh,
the rapture of intriguing against his enemies—himself included—the
feminine triumph of managing Goodman Waverer or Badman Badgerer!
And now—oh, she could no longer control her sobs!
He tried to soothe her, to caress her, but she repulsed him.
"Go to your yacht—to your miserable shimmering waters. I shall spend
my honeymoon here alone.... You discovered I was Irish."



I
II
III
IV
V
VI

She came "to meet John Lefolle," but John Lefolle did not know he was
to meet Winifred Glamorys. He did not even know he was himself the
meeting-point of all the brilliant and beautiful persons, assembled in
the publisher's Saturday Salon, for although a youthful minor poet, he
was modest and lovable. Perhaps his Oxford tutorship was sobering.
At any rate his head remained unturned by his precocious fame, and
to meet these other young men and women—his reverend seniors on
the slopes of Parnassus—gave him more pleasure than the receipt of
"royalties." Not that his publisher afforded him much opportunity of
contrasting the two pleasures. The profits of the Muse went to provide
this room of old furniture and roses, this beautiful garden a-twinkle
with Japanese lanterns, like gorgeous fire-flowers blossoming under
the white crescent-moon of early June.
Winifred Glamorys was not literary herself. She was better than
a poetess, she was a poem. The publisher always threw in a few
realities, and some beautiful brainless creature would generally be
found the nucleus of a crowd, while Clio in spectacles languished in a
corner. Winifred Glamorys, however, was reputed to have a tongue that
matched her eye; paralleling with whimsies and epigrams its freakish
fires and witcheries, and, assuredly, flitting in her white gown
through the dark balmy garden, she seemed the very spirit of
moonlight, the subtle incarnation of night and roses.
When John Lefolle met her, Cecilia was with her, and the first
conversation was triangular. Cecilia fired most of the shots; she was
a bouncing, rattling beauty, chockful of confidence and high spirits,
except when asked to do the one thing she could do—sing! Then she
became—quite genuinely—a nervous, hesitant, pale little thing.
However, the suppliant hostess bore her off, and presently her rich
contralto notes passed through the garden, adding to its passion
and mystery, and through the open French windows, John could see her
standing against the wall near the piano, her head thrown back, her
eyes half-closed, her creamy throat swelling in the very abandonment
of artistic ecstasy.
"What a charming creature!" he exclaimed involuntarily.
"That is what everybody thinks, except her husband," Winifred laughed.
"Is he blind then?" asked John with his cloistral naïveté.
"Blind? No, love is blind. Marriage is never blind."
The bitterness in her tone pierced John. He felt vaguely the passing
of some icy current from unknown seas of experience. Cecilia's voice
soared out enchantingly.
"Then, marriage must be deaf," he said, "or such music as that would
charm it."
She smiled sadly. Her smile was the tricksy play of moonlight among
clouds of faëry.
"You have never been married," she said simply.
"Do you mean that you, too, are neglected?" something impelled him to
exclaim.
"Worse," she murmured.
"It is incredible!" he cried. "You!"
"Hush! My husband will hear you."
Her warning whisper brought him into a delicious conspiracy with her.
"Which is your husband?" he whispered back.
"There! Near the casement, standing gazing open-mouthed at Cecilia.
He always opens his mouth when she sings. It is like two toys moved by
the same wire."
He looked at the tall, stalwart, ruddy-haired Anglo-Saxon. "Do you
mean to say he—?"
"I mean to say nothing."
"But you said—"
"I said 'worse.'"
"Why, what can be worse?"
She put her hand over her face. "I am ashamed to tell you." How
adorable was that half-divined blush!
"But you must tell me everything." He scarcely knew how he had leapt
into this rôle of confessor. He only felt they were "moved by the
same wire."
Her head drooped on her breast. "He—beats—me."
"What!" John forgot to whisper. It was the greatest shock his recluse
life had known, compact as it was of horror at the revelation, shamed
confusion at her candour, and delicious pleasure in her confidence.
This fragile, exquisite creature under the rod of a brutal bully!
Once he had gone to a wedding reception, and among the serious
presents some grinning Philistine drew his attention to an uncouth
club—"a wife-beater" he called it. The flippancy had jarred upon
John terribly: this intrusive reminder of the customs of the slums. It
grated like Billingsgate in a boudoir. Now that savage weapon recurred
to him—for a lurid instant he saw Winifred's husband wielding it.
Oh, abomination of his sex! And did he stand there, in his immaculate
evening dress, posing as an English gentleman? Even so might some
gentleman burglar bear through a salon his imperturbable swallow-tail.
Beat a woman! Beat that essence of charm and purity, God's best gift
to man, redeeming him from his own grossness! Could such things
be? John Lefolle would as soon have credited the French legend that
English wives are sold in Smithfield. No! it could not be real that
this flower-like figure was thrashed.
"Do you mean to say—?" he cried. The rapidity of her confidence alone
made him feel it all of a dreamlike unreality.
"Hush! Cecilia's singing!" she admonished him with an unexpected
smile, as her fingers fell from her face.
"Oh, you have been making fun of me." He was vastly relieved. "He
beats you—at chess—or at lawn-tennis?"
"Does one wear a high-necked dress to conceal the traces of chess, or
lawn-tennis?"
He had not noticed her dress before, save for its spiritual whiteness.
Susceptible though he was to beautiful shoulders, Winifred's
enchanting face had been sufficiently distracting. Now the thought
of physical bruises gave him a second spasm of righteous horror. That
delicate rose-leaf flesh abraded and lacerated!
"The ruffian! Does he use a stick or a fist?"
"Both! But as a rule he just takes me by the arms and shakes me like a
terrier. I'm all black and blue now."
"Poor butterfly!" he murmured poetically.
"Why did I tell you?" she murmured back with subtler poetry.
The poet thrilled in every vein. "Love at first sight," of which he
had often read and often written, was then a reality! It could be
as mutual, too, as Romeo's and Juliet's. But how awkward that Juliet
should be married and her husband a Bill Sykes in broadcloth!
Mrs. Glamorys herself gave "At Homes," every Sunday afternoon, and so,
on the morrow, after a sleepless night mitigated by perpended sonnets,
the love-sick young tutor presented himself by invitation at the
beautiful old house in Hampstead. He was enchanted to find his heart's
mistress set in an eighteenth-century frame of small-paned windows and
of high oak-panelling, and at once began to image her dancing minuets
and playing on virginals. Her husband was absent, but a broad band
of velvet round Winifred's neck was a painful reminder of his
possibilities. Winifred, however, said it was only a touch of sore
throat caught in the garden. Her eyes added that there was nothing in
the pathological dictionary which she would not willingly have caught
for the sake of those divine, if draughty moments; but that, alas! it
was more than a mere bodily ailment she had caught there.
There were a great many visitors in the two delightfully quaint
rooms, among whom he wandered disconsolate and admired, jealous of her
scattered smiles, but presently he found himself seated by her side on
a "cosy corner" near the open folding-doors, with all the other guests
huddled round a violinist in the inner room. How Winifred had managed
it he did not know, but she sat plausibly in the outer room, awaiting
new-comers, and this particular niche was invisible, save to a
determined eye. He took her unresisting hand—that dear, warm hand,
with its begemmed artistic fingers, and held it in uneasy beatitude.
How wonderful! She—the beautiful and adored hostess, of whose
sweetness and charm he heard even her own guests murmur to one
another—it was her actual flesh-and-blood hand that lay in
his—thrillingly tangible. Oh, adventure beyond all merit, beyond
all hoping!
But every now and then, the outer door facing them would open on some
new-comer, and John had hastily to release her soft magnetic fingers
and sit demure, and jealously overhear her effusive welcome to those
innocent intruders, nor did his brow clear till she had shepherded
them within the inner fold. Fortunately, the refreshments were in this
section, so that once therein, few of the sheep strayed back, and
the jiggling wail of the violin was succeeded by a shrill babble
of tongues and the clatter of cups and spoons. "Get me an ice,
please—strawberry," she ordered John during one of these forced
intervals in manual flirtation; and when he had steered laboriously
to and fro, he found a young actor beside her their hands dispart. He
stood over them with a sickly smile, while Winifred ate her ice. When
he returned from depositing the empty saucer, the player-fellow was
gone, and in remorse for his mad suspicion he stooped and reverently
lifted her fragrant finger-tips to his lips. The door behind his back
opened abruptly.
"Good-by," she said, rising in a flash. The words had the calm
conventional cadence, and instantly extorted from him—amid all his
dazedness—the corresponding "Good-by." When he turned and saw it was
Mr. Glamorys who had come in, his heart leapt wildly at the
nearness of his escape. As he passed this masked ruffian, he nodded
perfunctorily and received a cordial smile. Yes, he was handsome and
fascinating enough externally, this blonde savage.
"A man may smile and smile and be a villain," John thought. "I wonder
how he'd feel, if he knew I knew he beats women."
Already John had generalised the charge. "I hope Cecilia will keep him
at arm's length," he had said to Winifred, "if only that she may not
smart for it some day."
He lingered purposely in the hall to get an impression of the brute,
who had begun talking loudly to a friend with irritating bursts of
laughter, speciously frank-ringing. Golf, fishing, comic operas—ah,
the Boeotian! These were the men who monopolised the ethereal
divinities.
But this brusque separation from his particular divinity was
disconcerting. How to see her again? He must go up to Oxford in the
morning, he wrote her that night, but if she could possibly let him
call during the week he would manage to run down again.
"Oh, my dear, dreaming poet," she wrote to Oxford, "how could you
possibly send me a letter to be laid on the breakfast-table beside
The Times! With a poem in it, too. Fortunately my husband was in
a hurry to get down to the City, and he neglected to read my
correspondence. ('The unchivalrous blackguard,' John commented. 'But
what can be expected of a woman beater?') Never, never write to me
again at the house. A letter, care of Mrs. Best, 8A Foley Street,
W.C., will always find me. She is my maid's mother. And you must not
come here either, my dear handsome head-in-the-clouds, except to my
'At Homes,' and then only at judicious intervals. I shall be walking
round the pond in Kensington Gardens at four next Wednesday, unless
Mrs. Best brings me a letter to the contrary. And now thank you for
your delicious poem; I do not recognise my humble self in the dainty
lines, but I shall always be proud to think I inspired them. Will it
be in the new volume? I have never been in print before; it will be
a novel sensation. I cannot pay you song for song, only feeling for
feeling. Oh, John Lefolle, why did we not meet when I had still my
girlish dreams? Now, I have grown to distrust all men—to fear the
brute beneath the cavalier...."
Mrs. Best did bring her a letter, but it was not to cancel the
appointment, only to say he was not surprised at her horror of the
male sex, but that she must beware of false generalisations. Life was
still a wonderful and beautiful thing—vide poem enclosed. He was
counting the minutes till Wednesday afternoon. It was surely a popular
mistake that only sixty went to the hour.
This chronometrical reflection recurred to him even more poignantly in
the hour that he circumambulated the pond in Kensington Gardens.
Had she forgotten—had her husband locked her up? What could have
happened? It seemed six hundred minutes, ere, at ten past five she
came tripping daintily towards him. His brain had been reduced to
insanely devising problems for his pupils—if a man walks two strides
of one and a half feet a second round a lake fifty acres in area,
in how many turns will he overtake a lady who walks half as fast and
isn't there?—but the moment her pink parasol loomed on the horizon,
all his long misery vanished in an ineffable peace and uplifting.
He hurried, bare-headed, to clasp her little gloved hand. He had
forgotten her unpunctuality, nor did she remind him of it.
"How sweet of you to come all that way," was all she said, and it was
a sufficient reward for the hours in the train and the six hundred
minutes among the nursemaids and perambulators. The elms were in their
glory, the birds were singing briskly, the water sparkled, the sunlit
sward stretched fresh and green—it was the loveliest, coolest moment
of the afternoon. John instinctively turned down a leafy avenue.
Nature and Love! What more could poet ask?
"No, we can't have tea by the Kiosk," Mrs. Glamorys protested. "Of
course I love anything that savours of Paris, but it's become so
fashionable. There will be heaps of people who know me. I suppose
you've forgotten it's the height of the season. I know a quiet little
place in the High Street." She led him, unresisting but bemused,
towards the gate, and into a confectioner's. Conversation languished
on the way.
"Tea," he was about to instruct the pretty attendant.
"Strawberry ices," Mrs. Glamorys remarked gently. "And some of those
nice French cakes."
The ice restored his spirits, it was really delicious, and he had
got so hot and tired, pacing round the pond. Decidedly Winifred was
a practical person and he was a dreamer. The pastry he dared not
touch—being a genius—but he was charmed at the gaiety with which
Winifred crammed cake after cake into her rosebud of a mouth. What an
enchanting creature! How bravely she covered up her life's tragedy!
The thought made him glance at her velvet band—it was broader than
ever.
"He has beaten you again!" he murmured furiously. Her joyous eyes
saddened, she hung her head, and her fingers crumbled the cake. "What
is his pretext?" he asked, his blood burning.
"Jealousy," she whispered.
His blood lost its glow, ran cold. He felt the bully's blows on his
own skin, his romance turning suddenly sordid. But he recovered his
courage. He, too, had muscles. "But I thought he just missed seeing me
kiss your hand."
She opened her eyes wide. "It wasn't you, you darling old dreamer."
He was relieved and disturbed in one.
"Somebody else?" he murmured. Somehow the vision of the player-fellow
came up.
She nodded. "Isn't it lucky he has himself drawn a red-herring across
the track? I didn't mind his blows—you were safe!" Then, with one of
her adorable transitions, "I am dreaming of another ice," she cried
with roguish wistfulness.
"I was afraid to confess my own greediness," he said, laughing. He
beckoned the waitress. "Two more."
"We haven't got any more strawberries," was her unexpected reply.
"There's been such a run on them to-day."
Winifred's face grew overcast. "Oh, nonsense!" she pouted. To John the
moment seemed tragic.
"Won't you have another kind?" he queried. He himself liked any kind,
but he could scarcely eat a second ice without her.
Winifred meditated. "Coffee?" she queried.
The waitress went away and returned with a face as gloomy as
Winifred's. "It's been such a hot day," she said deprecatingly. "There
is only one ice in the place and that's Neapolitan."
"Well, bring two Neapolitans," John ventured.
"I mean there is only one Neapolitan ice left."
"Well, bring that. I don't really want one."
He watched Mrs. Glamorys daintily devouring the solitary ice, and felt
a certain pathos about the parti-coloured oblong, a something of
the haunting sadness of "The Last Rose of Summer." It would make
a graceful, serio-comic triolet, he was thinking. But at the last
spoonful, his beautiful companion dislocated his rhymes by her sudden
upspringing.
"Goodness gracious," she cried, "how late it is!"
"Oh, you're not leaving me yet!" he said. A world of things sprang to
his brain, things that he was going to say—to arrange. They had said
nothing—not a word of their love even; nothing but cakes and ices.
"Poet!" she laughed. "Have you forgotten I live at Hampstead?" She
picked up her parasol. "Put me into a hansom, or my husband will be
raving at his lonely dinner-table."
He was so dazed as to be surprised when the waitress blocked his
departure with a bill. When Winifred was spirited away, he remembered
she might, without much risk, have given him a lift to Paddington. He
hailed another hansom and caught the next train to Oxford. But he was
too late for his own dinner in Hall.
He was kept very busy for the next few days, and could only exchange a
passionate letter or two with her. For some time the examination
fever had been raging, and in every college poor patients sat with wet
towels round their heads. Some, who had neglected their tutor all the
term, now strove to absorb his omniscience in a sitting.
On the Monday, John Lefolle was good-naturedly giving a special
audience to a muscular dunce, trying to explain to him the political
effects of the Crusades, when there was a knock at the sitting-room
door, and the scout ushered in Mrs. Glamorys. She was bewitchingly
dressed in white, and stood in the open doorway, smiling—an
embodiment of the summer he was neglecting. He rose, but his tongue
was paralysed. The dunce became suddenly important—a symbol of the
decorum he had been outraging. His soul, torn so abruptly from history
to romance, could not get up the right emotion. Why this imprudence of
Winifred's? She had been so careful heretofore.
"What a lot of boots there are on your staircase!" she said gaily.
He laughed. The spell was broken. "Yes, the heap to be cleaned is
rather obtrusive," he said, "but I suppose it is a sort of tradition."
"I think I've got hold of the thing pretty well now, sir." The dunce
rose and smiled, and his tutor realised how little the dunce had to
learn in some things. He felt quite grateful to him.
"Oh, well, you'll come and see me again after lunch, won't you, if one
or two points occur to you for elucidation," he said, feeling vaguely
a liar, and generally guilty. But when, on the departure of the dunce,
Winifred held out her arms, everything fell from him but the sense of
the exquisite moment. Their lips met for the first time, but only for
an instant. He had scarcely time to realise that this wonderful thing
had happened before the mobile creature had darted to his book-shelves
and was examining a Thucydides upside down.
"How clever to know Greek!" she exclaimed. "And do you really talk it
with the other dons?"
"No, we never talk shop," he laughed. "But, Winifred, what made you
come here?"
"I had never seen Oxford. Isn't it beautiful?"
"There's nothing beautiful here," he said, looking round his sober
study.
"No," she admitted; "there's nothing I care for here," and had left
another celestial kiss on his lips before he knew it. "And now you
must take me to lunch and on the river."
He stammered, "I have—work."
She pouted. "But I can't stay beyond to-morrow morning, and I want so
much to see all your celebrated oarsmen practising."
"You are not staying over the night?" he gasped.
"Yes, I am," and she threw him a dazzling glance.
His heart went pit-a-pat. "Where?" he murmured.
"Oh, some poky little hotel near the station. The swell hotels are
full."
He was glad to hear she was not conspicuously quartered.
"So many people have come down already for Commem," he said. "I
suppose they are anxious to see the Generals get their degrees. But
hadn't we better go somewhere and lunch?"
They went down the stone staircase, past the battalion of boots, and
across the quad. He felt that all the windows were alive with
eyes, but she insisted on standing still and admiring their ivied
picturesqueness. After lunch he shamefacedly borrowed the dunce's
punt. The necessities of punting, which kept him far from her, and
demanded much adroit labour, gradually restored his self-respect, and
he was able to look the uncelebrated oarsmen they met in the eyes,
except when they were accompanied by their parents and sisters, which
subtly made him feel uncomfortable again. But Winifred, piquant under
her pink parasol, was singularly at ease, enraptured with the changing
beauty of the river, applauding with childish glee the wild flowers on
the banks, or the rippling reflections in the water.
"Look, look!" she cried once, pointing skyward. He stared upwards,
expecting a balloon at least. But it was only "Keats' little rosy
cloud," she explained. It was not her fault if he did not find the
excursion unreservedly idyllic.
"How stupid," she reflected, "to keep all those nice boys cooped up
reading dead languages in a spot made for life and love."
"I'm afraid they don't disturb the dead languages so much as you
think," he reassured her, smiling. "And there will be plenty of
love-making during Commem."
"I am so glad. I suppose there are lots of engagements that week."
"Oh, yes—but not one per cent come to anything."
"Really? Oh, how fickle men are!"
That seemed rather question-begging, but he was so thrilled by
the implicit revelation that she could not even imagine feminine
inconstancy, that he forebore to draw her attention to her inadequate
logic.
So childish and thoughtless indeed was she that day that nothing would
content her but attending a "Viva," which he had incautiously informed
her was public.
"Nobody will notice us," she urged with strange unconsciousness of her
loveliness. "Besides, they don't know I'm not your sister."
"The Oxford intellect is sceptical," he said, laughing. "It cultivates
philosophical doubt."
But, putting a bold face on the matter, and assuming a fraternal air,
he took her to the torture-chamber, in which candidates sat dolefully
on a row of chairs against the wall, waiting their turn to come before
the three grand inquisitors at the table. Fortunately, Winifred and he
were the only spectators; but unfortunately they blundered in at
the very moment when the poor owner of the punt was on the rack. The
central inquisitor was trying to extract from him information about
à Becket, almost prompting him with the very words, but without
penetrating through the duncical denseness. John Lefolle breathed more
freely when the Crusades were broached; but, alas, it very soon became
evident that the dunce had by no means "got hold of the thing." As the
dunce passed out sadly, obviously ploughed, John Lefolle suffered more
than he. So conscience-stricken was he that, when he had accompanied
Winifred as far as her hotel, he refused her invitation to come in,
pleading the compulsoriness of duty and dinner in Hall. But he could
not get away without promising to call in during the evening.
The prospect of this visit was with him all through dinner, at once
tempting and terrifying. Assuredly there was a skeleton at his
feast, as he sat at the high table, facing the Master. The venerable
portraits round the Hall seemed to rebuke his romantic waywardness. In
the common-room, he sipped his port uneasily, listening as in a daze
to the discussion on Free Will, which an eminent stranger had stirred
up. How academic it seemed, compared with the passionate realities
of life. But somehow he found himself lingering on at the academic
discussion, postponing the realities of life. Every now and again, he
was impelled to glance at his watch; but suddenly murmuring, "It is
very late," he pulled himself together, and took leave of his learned
brethren. But in the street the sight of a telegraph office drew his
steps to it, and almost mechanically he wrote out the message: "Regret
detained. Will call early in morning."
When he did call in the morning, he was told she had gone back to
London the night before on receipt of a telegram. He turned away with
a bitter pang of disappointment and regret.
Their subsequent correspondence was only the more amorous. The reason
she had fled from the hotel, she explained, was that she could not
endure the night in those stuffy quarters. He consoled himself with
the hope of seeing much of her during the Long Vacation. He did see
her once at her own reception, but this time her husband wandered
about the two rooms. The cosy corner was impossible, and they could
only manage to gasp out a few mutual endearments amid the buzz and
movement, and to arrange a rendezvous for the end of July. When the
day came, he received a heart-broken letter, stating that her husband
had borne her away to Goodwood. In a postscript she informed him that
"Quicksilver was a sure thing." Much correspondence passed without
another meeting being effected, and he lent her five pounds to pay a
debt of honour incurred through her husband's "absurd confidence in
Quicksilver." A week later this horsey husband of hers brought her on
to Brighton for the races there, and hither John Lefolle flew. But her
husband shadowed her, and he could only lift his hat to her as they
passed each other on the Lawns. Sometimes he saw her sitting pensively
on a chair while her lord and thrasher perused a pink sporting-paper.
Such tantalising proximity raised their correspondence through the
Hove Post Office to fever heat. Life apart, they felt, was impossible,
and, removed from the sobering influences of his cap and gown, John
Lefolle dreamed of throwing everything to the winds. His literary
reputation had opened out a new career. The Winifred lyrics alone had
brought in a tidy sum, and though he had expended that and more
on despatches of flowers and trifles to her, yet he felt this
extravagance would become extinguished under daily companionship,
and the poems provoked by her charms would go far towards their daily
maintenance. Yes, he could throw up the University. He would rescue
her from this bully, this gentleman bruiser. They would live openly
and nobly in the world's eye. A poet was not even expected to be
conventional.
She, on her side, was no less ardent for the great step. She raged
against the world's law, the injustice by which a husband's cruelty
was not sufficient ground for divorce. "But we finer souls must take
the law into our own hands," she wrote. "We must teach society
that the ethics of a barbarous age are unfitted for our century of
enlightenment." But somehow the actual time and place of the elopement
could never get itself fixed. In September her husband dragged her to
Scotland, in October after the pheasants. When the dramatic day was
actually fixed, Winifred wrote by the next post deferring it for
a week. Even the few actual preliminary meetings they planned for
Kensington Gardens or Hampstead Heath rarely came off. He lived in a
whirling atmosphere of express letters of excuse, and telegrams that
transformed the situation from hour to hour. Not that her passion in
any way abated, or her romantic resolution really altered: it was only
that her conception of time and place and ways and means was dizzily
mutable.
But after nigh six months of palpitating negotiations with the
adorable Mrs. Glamorys, the poet, in a moment of dejection, penned
the prose apophthegm, "It is of no use trying to change a changeable
person."
But at last she astonished him by a sketch plan of the elopement, so
detailed, even to band-boxes and the Paris night route viâ Dieppe,
that no further room for doubt was left in his intoxicated soul, and
he was actually further astonished when, just as he was putting his
handbag into the hansom, a telegram was handed to him saying: "Gone
to Homburg. Letter follows."
He stood still for a moment on the pavement in utter distraction. What
did it mean? Had she failed him again? Or was it simply that she had
changed the city of refuge from Paris to Homburg? He was about to name
the new station to the cabman, but then, "letter follows." Surely that
meant that he was to wait for it. Perplexed and miserable, he
stood with the telegram crumpled up in his fist. What a ridiculous
situation! He had wrought himself up to the point of breaking with the
world and his past, and now—it only remained to satisfy the cabman!
He tossed feverishly all night, seeking to soothe himself, but really
exciting himself the more by a hundred plausible explanations. He was
now strung up to such a pitch of uncertainty that he was astonished
for the third time when the "letter" did duly "follow."
"Dearest," it ran, "as I explained in my telegram, my husband became
suddenly ill"—("if she had only put that in the telegram," he
groaned)—"and was ordered to Homburg. Of course it was impossible to
leave him in this crisis, both for practical and sentimental reasons.
You yourself, darling, would not like me to have aggravated his
illness by my flight just at this moment, and thus possibly have his
death on my conscience." ("Darling, you are always right," he said,
kissing the letter.) "Let us possess our souls in patience a little
longer. I need not tell you how vexatious it will be to find myself
nursing him in Homburg—out of the season even—instead of the
prospect to which I had looked forward with my whole heart and soul.
But what can one do? How true is the French proverb, 'Nothing happens
but the unexpected'! Write to me immediately Poste Restante, that I
may at least console myself with your dear words."
The unexpected did indeed happen. Despite draughts of Elizabethbrunnen
and promenades on the Kurhaus terrace, the stalwart woman beater
succumbed to his malady. The curt telegram from Winifred gave no
indication of her emotions. He sent a reply-telegram of sympathy with
her trouble. Although he could not pretend to grieve at this sudden
providential solution of their life-problem, still he did sincerely
sympathise with the distress inevitable in connection with a death,
especially on foreign soil.
He was not able to see her till her husband's body had been brought
across the North Sea and committed to the green repose of the old
Hampstead churchyard. He found her pathetically altered—her face wan
and spiritualised, and all in subtle harmony with the exquisite black
gown. In the first interview, he did not dare speak of their love at
all. They discussed the immortality of the soul, and she quoted George
Herbert. But with the weeks the question of their future began to
force its way back to his lips.
"We could not decently marry before six months," she said, when
definitely confronted with the problem.
"Six months!" he gasped.
"Well, surely you don't want to outrage everybody," she said, pouting.
At first he was outraged himself. What! She who had been ready
to flutter the world with a fantastic dance was now measuring her
footsteps. But on reflection he saw that Mrs. Glamorys was right once
more. Since Providence had been good enough to rescue them, why should
they fly in its face? A little patience, and a blameless happiness lay
before them. Let him not blind himself to the immense relief he
really felt at being spared social obloquy. After all, a poet could be
unconventional in his work—he had no need of the practical outlet
demanded for the less gifted.
They scarcely met at all during the next six months—it had,
naturally, in this grateful reaction against their recklessness,
become a sacred period, even more charged with tremulous emotion
than the engagement periods of those who have not so nearly scorched
themselves. Even in her presence he found a certain pleasure in
combining distant adoration with the confident expectation of
proximity, and thus she was restored to the sanctity which she had
risked by her former easiness. And so all was for the best in the best
of all possible worlds.
When the six months had gone by, he came to claim her hand. She was
quite astonished. "You promised to marry me at the end of six months,"
he reminded her.
"Surely it isn't six months already," she said.
He referred her to the calendar, recalled the date of her husband's
death.
"You are strangely literal for a poet," she said. "Of course I said
six months, but six months doesn't mean twenty-six weeks by the clock.
All I meant was that a decent period must intervene. But even to
myself it seems only yesterday that poor Harold was walking beside me
in the Kurhaus Park." She burst into tears, and in the face of them he
could not pursue the argument.
Gradually, after several interviews and letters, it was agreed that
they should wait another six months.
"She is right," he reflected again. "We have waited so long, we may
as well wait a little longer and leave malice no handle."
The second six months seemed to him much longer than the first. The
charm of respectful adoration had lost its novelty, and once again
his breast was racked by fitful fevers which could scarcely calm
themselves even by conversion into sonnets. The one point of repose
was that shining fixed star of marriage. Still smarting under
Winifred's reproach of his unpoetic literality, he did not intend to
force her to marry him exactly at the end of the twelve-month. But he
was determined that she should have no later than this exact date
for at least "naming the day." Not the most punctilious stickler for
convention, he felt, could deny that Mrs. Grundy's claim had been paid
to the last minute.
The publication of his new volume—containing the Winifred lyrics—had
served to colour these months of intolerable delay. Even the reaction
of the critics against his poetry, that conventional revolt against
every second volume, that parrot cry of over-praise from the very
throats that had praised him, though it pained and perplexed him,
was perhaps really helpful. At any rate, the long waiting was over at
last. He felt like Jacob after his years of service for Rachel.
The fateful morning dawned bright and blue, and, as the towers of
Oxford were left behind him he recalled that distant Saturday when
he had first gone down to meet the literary lights of London in his
publisher's salon. How much older he was now than then—and yet
how much younger! The nebulous melancholy of youth, the clouds of
philosophy, had vanished before this beautiful creature of sunshine
whose radiance cut out a clear line for his future through the
confusion of life.
At a florist's in the High Street of Hampstead he bought a costly
bouquet of white flowers, and walked airily to the house and rang the
bell jubilantly. He could scarcely believe his ears when the maid told
him her mistress was not at home. How dared the girl stare at him so
impassively? Did she not know by what appointment—on what errand—he
had come? Had he not written to her mistress a week ago that he would
present himself that afternoon?
"Not at home!" he gasped. "But when will she be home?"
"I fancy she won't be long. She went out an hour ago, and she has an
appointment with her dressmaker at five."
"Do you know in what direction she'd have gone?"
"Oh, she generally walks on the Heath before tea."
The world suddenly grew rosy again. "I will come back again," he said.
Yes, a walk in this glorious air—heathward—would do him good.
As the door shut he remembered he might have left the flowers, but he
would not ring again, and besides, it was, perhaps, better he should
present them with his own hand, than let her find them on the hall
table. Still, it seemed rather awkward to walk about the streets with
a bouquet, and he was glad, accidentally to strike the old Hampstead
Church, and to seek a momentary seclusion in passing through its
avenue of quiet gravestones on his heathward way.
Mounting the few steps, he paused idly a moment on the verge of this
green "God's-acre" to read a perpendicular slab on a wall, and his
face broadened into a smile as he followed the absurdly elaborate
biography of a rich, self-made merchant who had taught himself to
read. "Reader, go thou and do likewise," was the delicious bull at the
end. As he turned away, the smile still lingering about his lips, he
saw a dainty figure tripping down the stony graveyard path, and though
he was somehow startled to find her still in black, there was no
mistaking Mrs. Glamorys. She ran to meet him with a glad cry, which
filled his eyes with happy tears.
"How good of you to remember!" she said, as she took the bouquet from
his unresisting hand, and turned again on her footsteps. He followed
her wonderingly across the uneven road towards a narrow aisle of
graves on the left. In another instant she had stooped before a
shining white stone, and laid his bouquet reverently upon it. As he
reached her side, he saw that his flowers were almost lost in the vast
mass of floral offerings with which the grave of the woman beater was
bestrewn.
"How good of you to remember the anniversary," she murmured again.
"How could I forget it?" he stammered, astonished. "Is not this the
end of the terrible twelve-month?"
The soft gratitude died out of her face. "Oh, is that what you were
thinking of?"
"What else?" he murmured, pale with conflicting emotions.
"What else! I think decency demanded that this day, at least, should
be sacred to his memory. Oh, what brutes men are!" And she burst into
tears.
His patient breast revolted at last. "You said he was the brute!" he
retorted, outraged.
"Is that your chivalry to the dead? Oh, my poor Harold, my poor
Harold!"
For once her tears could not extinguish the flame of his anger. "But
you told me he beat you," he cried.
"And if he did, I dare say I deserved it. Oh, my darling, my darling!"
She laid her face on the stone and sobbed.
John Lefolle stood by in silent torture. As he helplessly watched her
white throat swell and fall with the sobs, he was suddenly struck by
the absence of the black velvet band—the truer mourning she had worn
in the lifetime of the so lamented. A faint scar, only perceptible to
his conscious eye, added to his painful bewilderment.
At last she rose and walked unsteadily forward. He followed her in
mute misery. In a moment or two they found themselves on the outskirts
of the deserted heath. How beautiful stretched the gorsy rolling
country! The sun was setting in great burning furrows of gold and
green—a panorama to take one's breath away. The beauty and peace of
Nature passed into the poet's soul.
"Forgive me, dearest," he begged, taking her hand.
She drew it away sharply. "I cannot forgive you. You have shown
yourself in your true colours."
Her unreasonableness angered him again. "What do you mean? I only came
in accordance with our long-standing arrangement. You have put me off
long enough."
"It is fortunate I did put you off long enough to discover what you
are."
He gasped. He thought of all the weary months of waiting, all the long
comedy of telegrams and express letters, the far-off flirtations of
the cosy corner, the baffled elopement to Paris. "Then you won't marry
me?"
"I cannot marry a man I neither love nor respect."
"You don't love me!" Her spontaneous kiss in his sober Oxford study
seemed to burn on his angry lips.
"No, I never loved you."
He took her by the arms and turned her round roughly. "Look me in the
face and dare to say you have never loved me."
His memory was buzzing with passionate phrases from her endless
letters. They stung like a swarm of bees. The sunset was like
blood-red mist before his eyes.
"I have never loved you," she said obstinately.
"You—!" His grasp on her arms tightened. He shook her.
"You are bruising me," she cried.
His grasp fell from her arms as though they were red-hot. He had
become a woman beater.
He wore a curious costume, representing the devil carrying off his
corpse; but I recognised him at once as the lesser lion of a London
evening party last season. Then he had just returned from a Polar
expedition, and wore the glacier of civilisation on his breast.
To-night he was among the maddest of the mad, dancing savagely with
the Bacchantes of the Latin Quarter at the art students' ball, and
some of his fellow-Americans told me that he was the best marine
painter in the atelier which he had joined. More they did not pause
to tell me, for they were anxious to celebrate this night of nights,
when, in that fine spirit of equality born of belonging to two
Republics, the artist lowers himself to the level of his model.
The young Arctic explorer, so entirely at home in this more tropical
clime, had relapsed into respectability when I spoke to him. He was
sitting at a supper-table smoking a cigarette, and gazing somewhat
sadly—it seemed to me—at the pandemoniac phantasmagoria of screaming
dancers, the glittering cosmopolitan chaos that multiplied itself
riotously in the mirrored walls of the great flaring ball-room, where
under-dressed women, waving many-coloured paper lanterns, rode on the