# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2004
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Zangwill, Israel, 1864-1926, Children of the Ghetto: A Study of a Peculiar People, London (England) -- Fiction
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/12680.html.noimages
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Esther remarked cheerfully to Mrs. Belcovitch.

"No, he has a hard struggle," answered his mother-in-law, "but I have
seven grandchildren, God be thanked, and I expect an eighth. If my poor
lambkin had been alive now, she would have been a great-grandmother. My
eldest grandchild, Hertzel, has a talent for the fiddle. A gentleman is
paying for his lessons, God be thanked. I suppose you have heard I won
four pounds on the lotter_ee_. You see I have not tried thirty years for
nothing! If I only had my health, I should have little to grumble at.
Yes, four pounds, and what think you I have bought with it? You shall
see it inside. A cupboard with glass doors, such as we left behind in
Poland, and we have hung the shelves with pink paper and made loops for
silver forks to rest in—it makes me feel as if I had just cut off my
tresses. But then I look on my Becky and I remember that—go thou
inside, Becky, my life! Thou makest it too hard for him. Give him a
word while I speak with Esther."
Becky made a grimace and shrugged her shoulders, but disappeared through
the door that led to the real workshop.
"A fine maid!" said the mother, her eyes following the girl with pride.
"No wonder she is so hard to please. She vexes him so that he eats out
his heart. He comes every morning with a bag of cakes or an orange or a
fat Dutch herring, and now she has moved her machine to my bedroom,
where he can't follow her, the unhappy youth."
"Who is it now?" inquired Esther in amusement.
"Shosshi Shmendrik."
"Shosshi Shmendrik! Wasn't that the young man who married the Widow

Finkelstein?"

"Yes—a very honorable and seemly youth. But she preferred her first
husband," said Mrs. Belcovitch laughing, "and followed him only four
years after Shosshi's marriage. Shosshi has now all her money—a very
seemly and honorable youth."
"But will it come to anything?"
"It is already settled. Becky gave in two days ago. After all, she will
not always be young. The Tanaim will be held next Sunday. Perhaps you
would like to come and see the betrothal contract signed. The Kovna
Maggid will be here, and there will be rum and cakes to the heart's
desire. Becky has Shosshi in great affection; they are just suited. Only
she likes to tease, poor little thing. And then she is so shy. Go in and
see them, and the cupboard with glass doors."
Esther pushed open the door, and Mrs. Belcovitch resumed her loving
manipulation of the wig.
The Belcovitch workshop was another of the landmarks of the past that
had undergone no change, despite the cupboard with glass doors and the
slight difference in the shape of the room. The paper roses still
bloomed in the corners of the mirror, the cotton-labels still adorned
the wall around it. The master's new umbrella still stood unopened in a
corner. The "hands" were other, but then Mr. Belcovitch's hands were
always changing. He never employed "union-men," and his hirelings never
stayed with him longer than they could help. One of the present batch,
a bent, middle-aged man, with a deeply-lined face, was Simon Wolf, long
since thrown over by the labor party he had created, and fallen lower
and lower till he returned to the Belcovitch workshop whence he sprang.
Wolf, who had a wife and six children, was grateful to Mr. Belcovitch in
a dumb, sullen way, remembering how that capitalist had figured in his
red rhetoric, though it was an extra pang of martyrdom to have to listen
deferentially to Belcovitch's numerous political and economical
fallacies. He would have preferred the curter dogmatism of earlier days.
Shosshi Shmendrik was chatting quite gaily with Becky, and held her
finger-tips cavalierly in his coarse fist, without obvious objection on
her part. His face was still pimply, but it had lost its painful shyness
and its readiness to blush without provocation. His bearing, too, was
less clumsy and uncouth. Evidently, to love the Widow Finkelstein had
been a liberal education to him. Becky had broken the news of Esther's
arrival to her father, as was evident from the odor of turpentine
emanating from the opened bottle of rum on the central table. Mr.
Belcovitch, whose hair was gray now, but who seemed to have as much
stamina as ever, held out his left hand (the right was wielding the
pressing-iron) without moving another muscle.
"Nu, it gladdens me to see you are better off than of old," he said
gravely in Yiddish.
"Thank you. I am glad to see you looking so fresh and healthy," replied

Esther in German.

"You were taken away to be educated, was it not?"
"Yes."
"And how many tongues do you know?"
"Four or five," said Esther, smiling.
"Four or five!" repeated Mr. Belcovitch, so impressed that he stopped
pressing. "Then you can aspire to be a clerk! I know several firms where
they have young women now."
"Don't be ridiculous, father," interposed Becky. "Clerks aren't so grand
now-a-days as they used to be. Very likely she would turn up her nose at
a clerkship."
"I'm sure I wouldn't," said Esther.
"There! thou hearest!" said Mr. Belcovitch, with angry satisfaction.
"It is thou who hast too many flies in thy nostrils. Thou wouldst throw
over Shosshi if thou hadst thine own way. Thou art the only person in
the world who listens not to me. Abroad my word decides great matters.
Three times has my name been printed in The Flag of Judah. Little
Esther had not such a father as thou, but never did she make mock of
him."
"Of course, everybody's better than me," said Becky petulantly, as she
snatched her fingers away from Shosshi.
"No, thou art better than the whole world," protested Shosshi Shmendrik,
feeling for the fingers.
"Who spoke to thee?" demanded Belcovitch, incensed.
"Who spoke to thee?" echoed Becky. And when Shosshi, with empurpled
pimples, cowered before both, father and daughter felt allies again, and
peace was re-established at Shosshi's expense. But Esther's curiosity
was satisfied. She seemed to see the whole future of this domestic
group: Belcovitch accumulating gold-pieces and Mrs. Belcovitch
medicine-bottles till they died, and the lucky but henpecked Shosshi
gathering up half the treasure on behalf of the buxom Becky. Refusing
the glass of rum, she escaped.
The dinner which Debby (under protest) did not pay for, consisted of
viands from the beloved old cook-shop, the potatoes and rice of
childhood being supplemented by a square piece of baked meat, likewise
knives and forks. Esther was anxious to experience again the magic taste
and savor of the once coveted delicacies. Alas! the preliminary sniff
failed to make her mouth water, the first bite betrayed the inferiority
of the potatoes used. Even so the unattainable tart of infancy mocks the
moneyed but dyspeptic adult. But she concealed her disillusionment
bravely.
"Do you know," said Debby, pausing in her voluptuous scouring of the
gravy-lined plate with a bit of bread, "I can hardly believe my eyes. It
seems a dream that you are sitting at dinner with me. Pinch me, will
you?"
"You have been pinched enough," said Esther sadly. Which shows that one
can pun with a heavy heart. This is one of the things Shakspeare knew
and Dr. Johnson didn't.
In the afternoon, Esther went round to Zachariah Square. She did not
meet any of the old faces as she walked through the Ghetto, though a
little crowd that blocked her way at one point turned out to be merely
spectators of an epileptic performance by Meckisch. Esther turned away,
in amused disgust. She wondered whether Mrs. Meckisch still flaunted it
in satins and heavy necklaces, or whether Meckisch had divorced her, or
survived her, or something equally inconsiderate. Hard by the old Ruins
(which she found "ruined" by a railway) Esther was almost run over by an
iron hoop driven by a boy with a long swarthy face that irresistibly
recalled Malka's.
"Is your grandmother in town?" she said at a venture.
"Y—e—s," said the driver wonderingly. "She is over in her own house."
Esther did not hasten towards it.
"Your name's Ezekiel, isn't it?"
"Yes," replied the boy; and then Esther was sure it was the Redeemed Son
of whom her father had told her.
"Are your mother and father well?"
"Father's away travelling." Ezekiel's tone was a little impatient, his
feet shuffled uneasily, itching to chase the flying hoop.
"How's your aunt—your aunt—I forget her name."
"Aunt Leah. She's gone to Liverpool."
"What for?"
"She lives there; she has opened a branch store of granma's business.

Who are you?" concluded Ezekiel candidly.

"You won't remember me," said Esther. "Tell me, your aunt is called Mrs.

Levine, isn't she?"

"Oh yes, but," with a shade of contempt, "she hasn't got any children."
"How many brothers and sisters have you got?" said Esther with a
little laugh.
"Heaps. Oh, but you won't see them if you go in; they're in school, most
of 'em."
"And why aren't you at school?"
The Redeemed Son became scarlet. "I've got a bad leg," ran mechanically
off his tongue. Then, administering a savage thwack to his hoop, he set
out in pursuit of it. "It's no good calling on mother," he yelled back,
turning his head unexpectedly. "She ain't in."
Esther walked into the Square, where the same big-headed babies were
still rocking in swings suspended from the lintels, and where the same
ruddy-faced septuagenarians sat smoking short pipes and playing nap on
trays in the sun. From several doorways came the reek of fish frying.
The houses looked ineffably petty and shabby. Esther wondered how she
could ever have conceived this a region of opulence; still more how she
could ever have located Malka and her family on the very outskirt of the
semi-divine classes. But the semi-divine persons themselves had long
since shrunk and dwindled.
She found Malka brooding over the fire; on the side-table was the
clothes-brush. The great events of a crowded decade of European history
had left Malka's domestic interior untouched. The fall of dynasties,
philosophies and religions had not shaken one china dog from its place;
she had not turned a hair of her wig; the black silk bodice might have
been the same; the gold chain at her bosom was. Time had written a few
more lines on the tan-colored equine face, but his influence had been
only skin deep. Everybody grows old: few people grow. Malka was of the
majority.
It was only with difficulty that she recollected Esther, and she was
visibly impressed by the young lady's appearance.
"It's very good of you to come and see an old woman," she said in her
mixed dialect, which skipped irresponsibly from English to Yiddish and
back again. "It's more than my own Kinder do. I wonder they let you
come across and see me."
"I haven't been to see them yet," Esther interrupted.
"Ah, that explains it," said Malka with satisfaction. "They'd have told
you, 'Don't go and see the old woman, she's meshuggah, she ought to be
in the asylum.' I bring children into the world and buy them husbands
and businesses and bed-clothes, and this is my profit. The other day my
Milly—the impudent-face! I would have boxed her ears if she hadn't been
suckling Nathaniel. Let her tell me again that ink isn't good for the
ring-worm, and my five fingers shall leave a mark on her face worse than
any of Gabriel's ring-worms. But I have washed my hands of her; she can
go her way and I'll go mine. I've taken an oath I'll have nothing to do
with her and her children—no, not if I live a thousand years. It's all
through Milly's ignorance she has had such heavy losses."
"What! Mr. Phillips's business been doing badly? I'm so sorry."
"No, no! my family never does bad business. It's my Milly's children.
She lost two. As for my Leah, God bless her, she's been more unfortunate
still; I always said that old beggar-woman had the Evil Eye! I sent her
to Liverpool with her Sam."
"I know," murmured Esther.
"But she is a good daughter. I wish I had a thousand such. She writes to
me every week and my little Ezekiel writes back; English they learn them
in that heathen school," Malka interrupted herself sarcastically, "and
it was I who had to learn him to begin a letter properly with 'I write
you these few lines hoping to find you in good health as, thank God, it
leaves me at present;' he used to begin anyhow—"
She came to a stop, having tangled the thread of her discourse and
bethought herself of offering Esther a peppermint. But Esther refused
and bethought herself of inquiring after Mr. Birnbaum.
"My Michael is quite well, thank God," said Malka, "though he is still
pig-headed in business matters! He buys so badly, you know; gives a
hundred pounds for what's not worth twenty."
"But you said business was all right?"
"Ah, that's different. Of course he sells at a good profit,—thank God.
If I wanted to provoke Providence I could keep my carriage like any of
your grand West-End ladies. But that doesn't make him a good buyer. And
the worst of it is he always thinks he has got a bargain. He won't
listen to reason, at all," said Malka, shaking her head dolefully. "He
might be a child of mine, instead of my husband. If God didn't send him
such luck and blessing, we might come to want bread, coal, and meat
tickets ourselves, instead of giving them away. Do you know I found out
that Mrs. Isaacs, across the square, only speculates her guinea in the
drawings to give away the tickets she wins to her poor relations, so
that she gets all the credit of charity and her name in the papers,
while saving the money she'd have to give to her poor relations all the
same! Nobody can say I give my tickets to my poor relations. You should
just see how much my Michael vows away at Shool—he's been Parnass
for the last twelve years straight off; all the members respect him so
much; it isn't often you see a business man with such fear of Heaven.
Wait! my Ezekiel will be Barmitzvah in a few years; then you shall see
what I will do for that Shool. You shall see what an example of
Yiddshkeit I will give to a link generation. Mrs. Benjamin, of the
Ruins, purified her knives and forks for Passover by sticking them
between the boards of the floor. Would you believe she didn't make them
red hot first? I gave her a bit of my mind. She said she forgot. But not
she! She's no cat's head. She's a regular Christian, that's what she is.
I shouldn't wonder if she becomes one like that blackguard, David
Brandon; I always told my Milly he was not the sort of person to allow
across the threshold. It was Sam Levine who brought him. You see what
comes of having the son of a proselyte in the family! Some say Reb
Shemuel's daughter narrowly escaped being engaged to him. But that story
has a beard already. I suppose it's the sight of you brings up Olov
Hashotom times. Well, and how are you?" she concluded abruptly,
becoming suddenly conscious of imperfect courtesy.
"Oh, I'm very well, thank you," said Esther.
"Ah, that's right. You're looking very well, imbeshreer. Quite a grand
lady. I always knew you'd be one some day. There was your poor mother,
peace be upon him! She went and married your father, though I warned her
he was a Schnorrer and only wanted her because she had a rich family;
he'd have sent you out with matches if I hadn't stopped it. I remember
saying to him, 'That little Esther has Aristotle's head—let her learn
all she can, as sure as I stand here she will grow up to be a lady; I
shall have no need to be ashamed of owning her for a cousin.' He was not
so pig-headed as your mother, and you see the result."
She surveyed the result with an affectionate smile, feeling genuinely
proud of her share in its production. "If my Ezekiel were only a few
years older," she added musingly.
"Oh, but I am not a great lady," said Esther, hastening to disclaim
false pretensions to the hand of the hero of the hoop, "I've left the
Goldsmiths and come back to live in the East End."
"What!" said Malka. "Left the West End!" Her swarthy face grew darker;
the skin about her black eyebrows was wrinkled with wrath.
"Are you Meshuggah?" she asked after an awful silence. "Or have you,
perhaps, saved up a tidy sum of money?"
Esther flushed and shook her head.
"There's no use coming to me. I'm not a rich woman, far from it; and I
have been blessed with Kinder who are helpless without me. It's as I
always said to your father. 'Méshe,' I said, 'you're a Schnorrer and
your children'll grow up Schnorrers.'"
Esther turned white, but the dwindling of Malka's semi-divinity had
diminished the old woman's power of annoying her.
"I want to earn my own living," she said, with a smile that was almost
contemptuous. "Do you call that being a Schnorrer?"
"Don't argue with me. You're just like your poor mother, peace be upon
him!" cried the irate old woman. "You God's fool! You were provided for
in life and you have no right to come upon the family."
"But isn't it Schnorring to be dependent on strangers?" inquired

Esther with bitter amusement.

"Don't stand there with your impudence-face!" cried Malka, her eyes
blazing fire. "You know as well as I do that a Schnorrer is a person
you give sixpences to. When a rich family takes in a motherless girl
like you and clothes her and feeds her, why it's mocking Heaven to run
away and want to earn your own living. Earn your living. Pooh! What
living can you earn, you with your gloves? You're all by yourself in the
world now; your father can't help you any more. He did enough for you
when you were little, keeping you at school when you ought to have been
out selling matches. You'll starve and come to me, that's what you'll
do."
"I may starve, but I'll never come to you," said Esther, now really
irritated by the truth in Malka's words. What living, indeed, could she
earn! She turned her back haughtily on the old woman; not without a
recollection of a similar scene in her childhood. History was repeating
itself on a smaller scale than seemed consistent with its dignity. When
she got outside she saw Milly in conversation with a young lady at the
door of her little house, diagonally opposite. Milly had noticed the
strange visitor to her mother, for the rival camps carried on a system
of espionage from behind their respective gauze blinds, and she had come
to the door to catch a better glimpse of her when she left. Esther was
passing through Zachariah Square without any intention of recognizing
Milly. The daughter's flaccid personality was not so attractive as the
mother's; besides, a visit to her might be construed into a mean revenge
on the old woman. But, as if in response to a remark of Milly's, the
young lady turned her face to look at Esther, and then Esther saw that
it was Hannah Jacobs. She felt hot and uncomfortable, and half reluctant
to renew acquaintance with Levi's family, but with another impulse she
crossed over to the group, and went through the inevitable formulae.
Then, refusing Milly's warm-hearted invitation to have a cup of tea, she
shook hands and walked away.
"Wait a minute, Miss Ansell," said Hannah. "I'll come with you."
Milly gave her a shilling, with a facetious grimace, and she rejoined

Esther.

"I'm collecting money for a poor family of Greeners just landed," she
said. "They had a few roubles, but they fell among the usual sharks at
the docks, and the cabman took all the rest of their money to drive them
to the Lane. I left them all crying and rocking themselves to and fro in
the street while I ran round to collect a little to get them a lodging."
"Poor things!" said Esther.
"Ah, I can see you've been away from the Jews," said Hannah smiling. "In
the olden days you would have said Achi-nebbich."
"Should I?" said Esther, smiling in return and beginning to like Hannah.
She had seen very little of her in those olden days, for Hannah had been
an adult and well-to-do as long as Esther could remember; it seemed
amusing now to walk side by side with her in perfect equality and
apparently little younger. For Hannah's appearance had not aged
perceptibly, which was perhaps why Esther recognized her at once. She
had not become angular like her mother, nor coarse and stout like other
mothers. She remained slim and graceful, with a virginal charm of
expression. But the pretty face had gained in refinement; it looked
earnest, almost spiritual, telling of suffering and patience, not
unblent with peace.
Esther silently extracted half-a-crown from her purse and handed it to

Hannah.

"I didn't mean to ask you, indeed I didn't," said Hannah.
"Oh, I am glad you told me," said Esther tremulously.
The idea of her giving charity, after the account of herself she had
just heard, seemed ironical enough. She wished the transfer of the coin
had taken place within eyeshot of Malka; then dismissed the thought as
unworthy.
"You'll come in and have a cup of tea with us, won't you, after we've
lodged the Greeners?" said Hannah. "Now don't say no. It'll brighten
up my father to see 'Reb Moshe's little girl.'"
Esther tacitly assented.
"I heard of all of you recently," she said, when they had hurried on a
little further. "I met your brother at the theatre."
Hannah's face lit up.
"How long was that ago?" she said anxiously.
"I remember exactly. It was the night before the first Seder night."
"Was he well?"
"Perfectly."
"Oh, I am so glad."
She told Esther of Levi's strange failure to appear at the annual family
festival. "My father went out to look for him. Our anxiety was
intolerable. He did not return until half-past one in the morning. He
was in a terrible state. 'Well,' we asked, 'have you seen him?' 'I have
seen him,' he answered. 'He is dead.'"
Esther grew pallid. Was this the sequel to the strange episode in Mr.

Henry Goldsmith's library?

"Of course he wasn't really dead," pursued Hannah to Esther's relief.
"My father would hardly speak a word more, but we gathered he had seen
him doing something very dreadful, and that henceforth Levi would be
dead to him. Since then we dare not speak his name. Please don't refer
to him at tea. I went to his rooms on the sly a few days afterwards, but
he had left them, and since then I haven't been able to hear anything of
him. Sometimes I fancy he's gone off to the Cape."
"More likely to the provinces with a band of strolling players. He told
me he thought of throwing up the law for the boards, and I know you
cannot make a beginning in London."
"Do you think that's it?" said Hannah, looking relieved in her turn.
"I feel sure that's the explanation, if he's not in London. But what in

Heaven's name can your father have seen him doing?"

"Nothing very dreadful, depend upon it," said Hannah, a slight shade of
bitterness crossing her wistful features. "I know he's inclined to be
wild, and he should never have been allowed to get the bit between his
teeth, but I dare say it was only some ceremonial crime Levi was caught
committing."
"Certainly. That would be it," said Esther. "He confessed to me that he
was very link. Judging by your tone, you seem rather inclined that way
yourself," she said, smiling and a little surprised.
"Do I? I don't know," said Hannah, simply. "Sometimes I think I'm very
froom."
"Surely you know what you are?" persisted Esther. Hannah shook her head.
"Well, you know whether you believe in Judaism or not?"
"I don't know what I believe. I do everything a Jewess ought to do, I
suppose. And yet—oh, I don't know."
Esther's smile faded; she looked at her companion with fresh interest.
Hannah's face was full of brooding thought, and she had unconsciously
come to a standstill. "I wonder whether anybody understands herself,"
she said reflectively. "Do you?"
Esther flushed at the abrupt question without knowing why. "I—I don't
know," she stammered.
"No, I don't think anybody does, quite," Hannah answered. "I feel sure I
don't. And yet—yes, I do. I must be a good Jewess. I must believe my
life."
Somehow the tears came into her eyes; her face had the look of a saint.
Esther's eyes met hers in a strange subtle glance. Then their souls were
knit. They walked on rapidly.
"Well, I do hope you'll hear from him soon," said Esther.
"It's cruel of him not to write," replied Hannah, knowing she meant

Levi; "he might easily send me a line in a disguised hand. But then, as

Miriam Hyams always says, brothers are so selfish."

"Oh, how is Miss Hyams? I used to be in her class."
"I could guess that from your still calling her Miss," said Hannah with
a gentle smile.
"Why, is she married?"
"No, no; I don't mean that. She still lives with her brother and his
wife; he married Sugarman the Shadchan's daughter, you know."
"Bessie, wasn't it?"
"Yes; they are a devoted couple, and I suspect Miriam is a little
jealous; but she seems to enjoy herself anyway. I don't think there is a
piece at the theatres she can't tell you about, and she makes Daniel
take her to all the dances going."
"Is she still as pretty?" asked Esther. "I know all her girls used to
rave over her and throw her in the faces of girls with ugly teachers.
She certainly knew how to dress."
"She dresses better than ever," said Hannah evasively.
"That sounds ominous," observed Esther, laughingly.
"Oh, she's good-looking enough! Her nose seems to have turned up more;
but perhaps that's an optical illusion; she talks so sarcastically
now-a-days that I seem to see it." Hannah smiled a little. "She doesn't
think much of Jewish young men. By the way, are you engaged yet,
Esther?"
"What an idea!" murmured Esther, blushing beneath her spotted veil.
"Well, you're very young," said Hannah, glancing down at the smaller
figure with a sweet matronly smile.
"I shall never marry," Esther said in low tones.
"Don't be ridiculous, Esther! There's no happiness for a woman without
it. You needn't talk like Miriam Hyams—at least not yet. Oh yes, I know
what you're thinking—"
"No, I'm not," faintly protested Esther
"Yes, you are," said Hannah, smiling at the paradoxical denial. "But
who'd have me? Ah, here are the Greeners!" and her smile softened to
angelic tenderness.
It was a frowzy, unsightly group that sat on the pavement, surrounded by
a semi-sympathetic crowd—the father in a long grimy coat, the mother
covered, as to her head, with a shawl, which also contained the baby.
But the elders were naively childish and the children uncannily elderly;
and something in Esther's breast seemed to stir with a strange sense of
kinship. The race instinct awoke to consciousness of itself. Dulled by
contact with cultured Jews, transformed almost to repulsion by the
spectacle of the coarsely prosperous, it leaped into life at the appeal
of squalor and misery. In the morning the Ghetto had simply chilled her;
her heart had turned to it as to a haven, and the reality was dismal.
Now that the first ugliness had worn off, she felt her heart warming.
Her eyes moistened. She thrilled from head to foot with the sense of a
mission—of a niche in the temple of human service which she had been
predestined to fill. Who could comprehend as she these stunted souls,
limited in all save suffering? Happiness was not for her; but service
remained. Penetrated by the new emotion, she seemed to herself to have
found the key to Hannah's holy calm.
With the money now in hand, the two girls sought a lodging for the poor
waifs. Esther suddenly remembered the empty back garret in No. 1 Royal
Street, and here, after due negotiations with the pickled-herring dealer
next door, the family was installed. Esther's emotions at the sight of
the old place were poignant; happily the bustle of installation, of
laying down a couple of mattresses, of borrowing Dutch Debby's
tea-things, and of getting ready a meal, allayed their intensity. That
little figure with the masculine boots showed itself but by fits and
flashes. But the strangeness of the episode formed the undercurrent of
all her thoughts; it seemed to carry to a climax the irony of her
initial gift to Hannah.
Escaping from the blessings of the Greeners, she accompanied her new
friend to Reb Shemuel's. She was shocked to see the change in the
venerable old man; he looked quite broken up. But he was chivalrous as
of yore: the vein of quiet humor was still there, though his voice was
charged with gentle melancholy. The Rebbitzin's nose had grown sharper
than ever; her soul seemed to have fed on vinegar. Even in the presence
of a stranger the Rebbitzin could not quite conceal her dominant
thought. It hardly needed a woman to divine how it fretted Mrs. Jacobs
that Hannah was an old maid; it needed a woman like Esther to divine
that Hannah's renunciation was voluntary, though even Esther could not
divine her history nor understand that her mother's daily nagging was
the greater because the pettier part of her martyrdom.
       *       *       *       *       *
They all jumbled themselves into grotesque combinations, the things of
to-day and the things of endless yesterdays, as Esther slept in the
narrow little bed next to Dutch Debby, who squeezed herself into the
wall, pretending to revel in exuberant spaciousness. It was long before
she could get to sleep. The excitement of the day had brought on her
headache; she was depressed by restriking the courses of so many narrow
lives; the glow of her new-found mission had already faded in the
thought that she was herself a pauper, and she wished she had let the
dead past lie in its halo, not peered into the crude face of reality.
But at bottom she felt a subtle melancholy joy in understanding herself
at last, despite Hannah's scepticism; in penetrating the secret of her
pessimism, in knowing herself a Child of the Ghetto.
And yet Pesach Weingott played the fiddle merrily enough when she went
to Becky's engagement-party in her dreams, and galoped with Shosshi
Shmendrik, disregarding the terrible eyes of the bride to be: when
Hannah, wearing an aureole like a bridal veil, paired off with Meckisch,
frothing at the mouth with soap, and Mrs. Belcovitch, whirling a
medicine-bottle, went down the middle on a pair of huge stilts, one a
thick one and one a thin one, while Malka spun round like a teetotum,
throwing Ezekiel in long clothes through a hoop; what time Moses Ansell
waltzed superbly with the dazzling Addie Leon, quite cutting out Levi
and Miriam Hyams, and Raphael awkwardly twisted the Widow Finkelstein,
to the evident delight of Sugarman the Shadchan, who had effected the
introduction. It was wonderful how agile they all were, and how
dexterously they avoided treading on her brother Benjamin, who lay
unconcernedly in the centre of the floor, taking assiduous notes in a
little copy-book for incorporation in a great novel, while Mrs. Henry
Goldsmith stooped down to pat his brown hair patronizingly.
Esther thought it very proper of the grateful Greeners to go about
offering the dancers rum from Dutch Debby's tea-kettle, and very selfish
of Sidney to stand in a corner, refusing to join in the dance and making
cynical remarks about the whole thing for the amusement of the earnest
little figure she had met on the stairs.
Esther woke early, little refreshed. The mattress was hard, and in her
restricted allowance of space she had to deny herself the luxury of
tossing and turning lest she should arouse Debby. To open one's eyes on
a new day is not pleasant when situations have to be faced. Esther felt
this disagreeable duty could no longer be shirked. Malka's words rang in
her ears. How, indeed, could she earn a living? Literature had failed
her; with journalism she had no point of contact save The Flag of
Judah, and that journal was out of the question. Teaching—the last
resort of the hopeless—alone remained. Maybe even in the Ghetto there
were parents who wanted their children to learn the piano, and who would
find Esther's mediocre digital ability good enough. She might teach as
of old in an elementary school. But she would not go back to her
own—all the human nature in her revolted at the thought of exposing
herself to the sympathy of her former colleagues. Nothing was to be
gained by lying sleepless in bed, gazing at the discolored wallpaper and
the forlorn furniture. She slipped out gently and dressed herself, the
absence of any apparatus for a bath making her heart heavier with
reminders of the realities of poverty. It was not easy to avert her
thoughts from her dainty bedroom of yesterday. But she succeeded; the
cheerlessness of the little chamber turned her thoughts backwards to the
years of girlhood, and when she had finished dressing she almost
mechanically lit the fire and put the kettle to boil. Her childish
dexterity returned, unimpaired by disuse. When Debby awoke, she awoke to
a cup of tea ready for her to drink in bed—an unprecedented luxury,
which she received with infinite consternation and pleasure.
"Why, it's like the duchesses who have lady's-maids," she said, "and
read French novels before getting up." To complete the picture, her
hand dived underneath the bed and extracted a London Journal, at the
risk of upsetting the tea. "But it's you who ought to be in bed, not
me."
"I've been a sluggard too often," laughed Esther, catching the contagion
of good spirits from Debby's radiant delight. Perhaps the capacity for
simple pleasures would come back to her, too.
At breakfast they discussed the situation.
"I'm afraid the bed's too small," said Esther, when Debby kindly
suggested a continuance of hospitality.
"Perhaps I took up too much room," said the hostess.
"No, dear; you took up too little. We should have to have a wider bed
and, as it is, the bed is almost as big as the room."
"There's the back garret overhead! It's bigger, and it looks on the back
yard just as well. I wouldn't mind moving there," said Debby, "though I
wouldn't let old Guggenheim know that I value the view of the back yard,
or else he'd raise the rent."
"You forget the Greeners who moved in yesterday."
"Oh, so I do!" answered Debby with a sigh.
"Strange," said Esther, musingly, "that I should have shut myself out of
my old home."
The postman's knuckles rapping at the door interrupted her reflections.
In Royal Street the poor postmen had to mount to each room separately;
fortunately, the tenants got few letters. Debby was intensely surprised
to get one.
"It isn't for me at all," she cried, at last, after a protracted
examination of the envelope; "it's for you, care of me."
"But that's stranger still." said Esther. "Nobody in the world knows my
address."
The mystery was not lessened by the contents. There was simply a blank
sheet of paper, and when this was unfolded a half-sovereign rolled out.
The postmark was Houndsditch. After puzzling herself in vain, and
examining at length the beautiful copy-book penmanship of the address,
Esther gave up the enigma. But it reminded her that it would be
advisable to apprise her publishers of her departure from the old
address, and to ask them to keep any chance letter till she called. She
betook herself to their offices, walking. The day was bright, but
Esther walked in gloom, scarcely daring to think of her position. She
entered the office, apathetically hopeless. The junior partner welcomed
her heartily.
"I suppose you've come about your account," he said. "I have been
intending to send it you for some months, but we are so busy bringing
out new things before the dead summer season comes on." He consulted his
books. "Perhaps you would rather not be bothered," he said, "with a
formal statement. I have it all clearly here—the book's doing fairly
well—let me write you a cheque at once!"
She murmured assent, her cheeks blanching, her heart throbbing with
excitement and surprise.
"There you are—sixty-two pounds ten," he said. "Our profits are just
one hundred and twenty-five. If you'll endorse it, I'll send a clerk to
the bank round the corner and get it cashed for you at once."
The pen scrawled an agitated autograph that would not have been accepted
at the foot of a cheque, if Esther had had a banking account of her own.
"But I thought you said the book was a failure," she said.
"So it was," he answered cheerfully, "so it was at first. But gradually,
as its nature leaked out, the demand increased. I understand from
Mudie's that it was greatly asked for by their Jewish clients. You see,
when there's a run on a three-volume book, the profits are pretty fair.
I believed in it myself, or I should never have given you such good
terms nor printed seven hundred and fifty copies. I shouldn't be
surprised if we find ourselves able to bring it out in one-volume form
in the autumn. We shall always be happy to consider any further work of
yours; something on the same lines, I should recommend."
The recommendation did not convey any definite meaning to her at the
moment. Still in a pleasant haze, she stuffed the twelve five-pound
notes and the three gold-pieces into her purse, scribbled a receipt, and
departed. Afterwards the recommendation rang mockingly in her ears. She
felt herself sterile, written out already. As for writing again on the
same lines, she wondered what Raphael would think if he knew of the
profits she had reaped by bespattering his people. But there! Raphael
was a prig like the rest. It was no use worrying about his opinions.
Affluence had come to her—that was the one important and exhilarating
fact. Besides, had not the hypocrites really enjoyed her book? A new
wave of emotion swept over her—again she felt strong enough to defy the
whole world.
When she got "home," Debby said, "Hannah Jacobs called to see you."
"Oh, indeed, what did she want?"
"I don't know, but from something she said I believe I can guess who
sent the half-sovereign."
"Not Reb Shemuel?" said Esther, astonished.
"No, your cousin Malka. It seems that she saw Hannah leaving Zachariah
Square with you, and so went to her house last night to get your
address."
Esther did not know whether to laugh or be angry; she compromised by
crying. People were not so bad, after all, nor the fates so hard to her.
It was only a little April shower of tears, and soon she was smiling and
running upstairs to give the half-sovereign to the Greeners. It would
have been ungracious to return it to Malka, and she purchased all the
luxury of doing good, including the effusive benedictions of the whole
family, on terms usually obtainable only by professional almoners.
Then she told Debby of her luck with the publishers. Profound was
Debby's awe at the revelation that Esther was able to write stories
equal to those in the London Journal. After that, Debby gave up the
idea of Esther living or sleeping with her; she would as soon have
thought of offering a share of her bed to the authoresses of the tales
under it. Debby suffered scarce any pang when her one-night companion
transferred herself to Reb Shemuel's.
For it was to suggest this that Hannah had called. The idea was her
father's; it came to him when she told him of Esther's strange position.
But Esther said she was going to America forthwith, and she only
consented on condition of being allowed to pay for her keep during her
stay. The haggling was hard, but Esther won. Hannah gave up her room to
Esther, and removed her own belongings to Levi's bedroom, which except
at Festival seasons had been unused for years, though the bed was always
kept ready for him. Latterly the women had had to make the bed from time
to time, and air the room, when Reb Shemuel was at synagogue. Esther
sent her new address to her brothers and sisters, and made inquiries as
to the prospects of educated girls in the States. In reply she learned
that Rachel was engaged to be married. Her correspondents were too taken
up with this gigantic fact to pay satisfactory attention to her
inquiries. The old sense of protecting motherhood came back to Esther
when she learned the news. Rachel was only eighteen, but at once Esther
felt middle-aged. It seemed of the fitness of things that she should go
to America and resume her interrupted maternal duties. Isaac and Sarah
were still little more than children, perhaps they had not yet ceased
bickering about their birthdays. She knew her little ones would jump for
joy, and Isaac still volunteer sleeping accommodation in his new bed,
even though the necessity for it had ceased. She cried when she received
the cutting from the American Jewish paper; under other circumstances
she would have laughed. It was one of a batch headed "Personals," and
ran: "Sam Wiseberg, the handsome young drummer, of Cincinnati, has
become engaged to Rachel Ansell, the fair eighteen-year-old type-writer
and daughter of Moses Ansell, a well-known Chicago Hebrew. Life's
sweetest blessings on the pair! The marriage will take place in the
Fall." Esther dried her eyes and determined to be present at the
ceremony. It is so grateful to the hesitant soul to be presented with a
landmark. There was nothing to be gained now by arriving before the
marriage; nay, her arrival just in time for it would clench the
festivities. Meantime she attached herself to Hannah's charitable
leading-strings, alternately attracted to the Children of the Ghetto by
their misery, and repulsed by their failings. She seemed to see them now
in their true perspective, correcting the vivid impressions of childhood
by the insight born of wider knowledge of life. The accretion of pagan
superstition was greater than she had recollected. Mothers averted
fever by a murmured charm and an expectoration, children in new raiment
carried bits of coal or salt in their pockets to ward off the evil-eve.
On the other hand, there was more resourcefulness, more pride of
independence. Her knowledge of Moses Ansell had misled her into too
sweeping a generalization. And she was surprised to realize afresh how
much illogical happiness flourished amid penury, ugliness and pain.
After school-hours the muggy air vibrated with the joyous laughter of
little children, tossing their shuttlecocks, spinning their tops,
turning their skipping-ropes, dancing to barrel-organs or circling
hand-in-hand in rings to the sound of the merry traditional chants of
childhood. Esther often purchased a pennyworth of exquisite pleasure by
enriching some sad-eyed urchin. Hannah (whose own scanty surplus was
fortunately augmented by an anonymous West-End Reform Jew, who
employed her as his agent) had no prepossessions to correct, no
pendulum-oscillations to distract her, no sentimental illusions to
sustain her. She knew the Ghetto as it was; neither expected gratitude
from the poor, nor feared she might "pauperize them," knowing that the
poor Jew never exchanges his self-respect for respect for his
benefactor, but takes by way of rightful supplement to his income. She
did not drive families into trickery, like ladies of the West, by being
horrified to find them eating meat. If she presided at a stall at a
charitable sale of clothing, she was not disheartened if articles were
snatched from under her hand, nor did she refuse loans because borrowers
sometimes merely used them to evade the tallyman by getting their
jewelry at cash prices. She not only gave alms to the poor, but made
them givers, organizing their own farthings into a powerful auxiliary of
the institutions which helped them. Hannah's sweet patience soothed
Esther, who had no natural aptitude for personal philanthropy; the
primitive, ordered pieties of the Reb's household helping to give her
calm. Though she accepted the inevitable, and had laughed in melancholy
mockery at the exaggerated importance given to love by the novelists
(including her cruder self), she dreaded meeting Raphael Leon. It was
very unlikely her whereabouts would penetrate to the West; and she
rarely went outside of the Ghetto by day, or even walked within it in
the evening. In the twilight, unless prostrated by headache, she played
on Hannah's disused old-fashioned grand piano. It had one cracked note
which nearly always spoiled the melody; she would not have the note
repaired, taking a morbid pleasure in a fantastic analogy between the
instrument and herself. On Friday nights after the Sabbath-hymns she
read The Flag of Judah. She was not surprised to find Reb Shemuel
beginning to look askance at his favorite paper. She noted a growing
tendency in it to insist mainly on the ethical side of Judaism,
salvation by works being contrasted with the salvation by spasm of
popular Christianity. Once Kingsley's line, "Do noble things, not dream
them all day long," was put forth as "Judaism versus Christianity in a
nut-shell;" and the writer added, "for so thy dreams shall become noble,
too." Sometimes she fancied phrases and lines of argument were aimed at
her. Was it the editor's way of keeping in touch with her, using his
leaders as a medium of communication—a subtly sweet secret known only
to him and her? Was it fair to his readers? Then she would remember his
joke about the paper being started merely to convert her, and she would
laugh. Sometimes he repeated what he already said to her privately, so
that she seemed to hear him talking.
Then she would shake her head, and say, "I love you for your blindness,
but I have the terrible gift of vision."
Mrs. Henry Goldsmith's newest seaside resort had the artistic charm
which characterized everything she selected. It was a straggling, hilly,
leafy village, full of archaic relics—human as well as
architectural—sloping down to a gracefully curved bay, where the blue
waves broke in whispers, for on summer days a halcyon calm overhung this
magic spot, and the great sea stretched away, unwrinkled, ever young.
There were no neutral tones in the colors of this divine picture—the
sea was sapphire, the sky amethyst. There were dark-red houses nestling
amid foliage, and green-haired monsters of gray stone squatted about on
the yellow sand, which was strewn with quaint shells and mimic
earth-worms, cunningly wrought by the waves. Half a mile to the east a
blue river rippled into the bay. The white bathing tents which Mrs.
Goldsmith had pitched stood out picturesquely, in harmonious contrast
with the rich boscage that began to climb the hills in the background.
Mrs. Goldsmith's party lived in the Manse; it was pretty numerous, and
gradually overflowed into the bedrooms of the neighboring cottages. Mr.
Goldsmith only came down on Saturday, returning on Monday. One Friday
Mr. Percy Saville, who had been staying for the week, left suddenly for
London, and next day the beautiful hostess poured into her husband's
projecting ears a tale that made him gnash his projecting teeth, and cut
the handsome stockbroker off his visiting-list for ever. It was only an
indiscreet word that the susceptible stockbroker had spoken—under the
poetic influences of the scene. His bedroom came in handy, for Sidney
unexpectedly dropped down from Norway, via London, on the very Friday.
The poetic influences of the scene soon infected the newcomer, too. On
the Saturday he was lost for hours, and came up smiling, with Addie on
his arm. On the Sunday afternoon the party went boating up the river—a
picturesque medley of flannels and parasols. Once landed, Sidney and
Addie did not return for tea, prior to re-embarking. While Mr. Montagu
Samuels was gallantly handing round the sugar, they were sitting
somewhere along the bank, half covered with leaves, like babes in the
wood. The sunset burned behind the willows—a fiery rhapsody of crimson
and orange. The gay laughter of the picnic-party just reached their
ears; otherwise, an almost solemn calm prevailed—not a bird twittered,
not a leaf stirred.
"It'll be all over London to-morrow," said Sidney in a despondent tone.
"I'm afraid so," said Addie, with a delicious laugh.
The sweet English meadows over which her humid eyes wandered were
studded with simple wild-flowers. Addie vaguely felt the angels had
planted such in Eden. Sidney could not take his eyes off his terrestrial
angel clad in appropriate white. Confessed love had given the last touch
to her intoxicating beauty. She gratified his artistic sense almost
completely. But she seemed to satisfy deeper instincts, too. As he
looked into her limpid, trustful eyes, he felt he had been a weak fool.
An irresistible yearning to tell her all his past and crave forgiveness
swept over him.
"Addie," he said, "isn't it funny I should be marrying a Jewish girl,
after all?"
He wanted to work round to it like that, to tell her of his engagement
to Miss Hannibal at least, and how, on discovering with whom he was
really in love, he had got out of it simply by writing to the Wesleyan
M.P. that he was a Jew—a fact sufficient to disgust the disciple of
Dissent and the claimant champion of religious liberty. But Addie only
smiled at the question.
"You smile," he said: "I see you do think it funny."
"That's not why I am smiling."
"Then why are you smiling?" The lovely face piqued him; he kissed the
lips quickly with a bird-like peck.
"Oh—I—no, you wouldn't understand."
"That means you don't understand. But there! I suppose when a girl is
in love, she's not accountable for her expression. All the same, it is
strange. You know, Addie dear, I have come to the conclusion that
Judaism exercises a strange centrifugal and centripetal effect on its
sons—sometimes it repulses them, sometimes it draws them; only it never
leaves them neutral. Now, here had I deliberately made up my mind not to
marry a Jewess."
"Oh! Why not?" said Addie, pouting.
"Merely because she would be a Jewess. It's a fact."
"And why have you broken your resolution?" she said, looking up naively
into his face, so that the scent of her hair thrilled him.
"I don't know." he said frankly, scarcely giving the answer to be
expected. "C'est plus fort que moi. I've struggled hard, but I'm
beaten. Isn't there something of the kind in Esther—in Miss Ansell's
book? I know I've read it somewhere—and anything that's beastly subtle
I always connect with her."
"Poor Esther!" murmured Addie.
Sidney patted her soft warm hand, and smoothed the finely-curved arm,
and did not seem disposed to let the shadow of Esther mar the moment,
though he would ever remain grateful to her for the hint which had
simultaneously opened his eyes to Addie's affection for him, and to his
own answering affection so imperceptibly grown up. The river glided on
softly, glorified by the sunset.
"It makes one believe in a dogged destiny," he grumbled, "shaping the
ends of the race, and keeping it together, despite all human volition.
To think that I should be doomed to fall in love, not only with a Jewess
but with a pious Jewess! But clever men always fall in love with
conventional women. I wonder what makes you so conventional, Addie."
Addie, still smiling, pressed his hand in silence, and gazed at him in
fond admiration.
"Ah, well, since you are so conventional, you may as well kiss me."
Addie's blush deepened, her eyes sparkled ere she lowered them, and
subtly fascinating waves of expression passed across the lovely face.
"They'll be wondering what on earth has become of us," she said.
"It shall be nothing on earth—something in heaven," he answered. "Kiss
me, or I shall call you unconventional."
She touched his cheek hurriedly with her soft lips.
"A very crude and amateur kiss," he said critically. "However, after
all, I have an excuse for marrying you—which all clever Jews who marry
conventional Jewesses haven't got—you're a fine model. That is another
of the many advantages of my profession. I suppose you'll be a model
wife, in the ordinary sense, too. Do you know, my darling, I begin to
understand that I could not love you so much if you were not so
religious, if you were not so curiously like a Festival Prayer-Book,
with gilt edges and a beautiful binding."
"Ah, I am so glad, dear, to hear you say that," said Addie, with the
faintest suspicion of implied past disapproval.
"Yes," he said musingly. "It adds the last artistic touch to your
relation to me."
"But you will reform!" said Addie, with girlish confidence.
"Do you think so? I might commence by becoming a vegetarian—that would
prevent me eating forbidden flesh. Have I ever told you my idea that
vegetarianism is the first step in a great secret conspiracy for
gradually converting the world to Judaism? But I'm afraid I can't be
caught as easily as the Gentiles, Addie dear. You see, a Jewish sceptic
beats all others. Corruptio optimi pessima, probably. Perhaps you
would like me to marry in a synagogue?"
"Why, of course! Where else?"
"Heavens!" said Sidney, in comic despair. "I feared it would come to
that. I shall become a pillar of the synagogue when I am married, I
suppose."
"Well, you'll have to take a seat," said Addie seriously, "because
otherwise you can't get buried."
"Gracious, what ghoulish thoughts for an embryo bride! Personally, I
have no objection to haunting the Council of the United Synagogue till
they give me a decently comfortable grave. But I see what it will be! I
shall be whitewashed by the Jewish press, eulogized by platform orators
as a shining light in Israel, the brilliant impressionist painter, and
all that. I shall pay my synagogue bill and never go. In short, I shall
be converted to Philistinism, and die in the odor of respectability. And
Judaism will continue to flourish. Oh, Addie, Addie, if I had thought of
all that, I should never have asked you to be my wife."
"I am glad you didn't think of it," laughed Addie, ingenuously.
"There! You never will take me seriously!" he grumbled. "Nobody ever
takes me seriously—I suppose because I speak the truth. The only time
you ever took me seriously in my life was a few minutes ago. So you
actually think I'm going to submit to the benedictions of a Rabbi."
"You must," said Addie.
"I'll be blest If I do," he said.
"Of course you will," said Addie, laughing merrily.
"Thanks—I'm glad you appreciate my joke. You perhaps fancy it's yours.
However, I'm in earnest. I won't be a respectable high-hatted member of
the community—not even for your sake, dear. Why, I might as well go
back to my ugly real name, Samuel Abrahams, at once."
"So you might, dear," said Addie boldly, and smiled into his eyes to
temper her audacity.
"Ah, well, I think it'll be quite enough if you change your name," he
said, smiling back.
"It's just as easy for me to change it to Abrahams as to Graham," she
said with charming obstinacy.
He contemplated her for some moments in silence, with a whimsical look
on his face. Then he looked up at the sky—the brilliant color harmonies
were deepening into a more sober magnificence.
"I'll tell you what I will do. Ill join the Asmoneans. There! that's a
great concession to your absurd prejudices. But you must make a
concession to mine. You know how I hate the Jewish canvassing of
engagements. Let us keep ours entirely entre nous a fortnight—so that
the gossips shall at least get their material stale, and we shall be
hardened. I wonder why you're so conventional," he said again, when she
had consented without enthusiasm. "You had the advantage of Esther—of
Miss Ansell's society."
"Call her Esther if you like; I don't mind," said Addie.
"I wonder Esther didn't convert you," he went on musingly. "But I
suppose you had Raphael on your right hand, as some prayer or other
says. And so you really don't know what's become of her?"
"Nothing beyond what I wrote to you. Mrs. Goldsmith discovered she had
written the nasty book, and sent her packing. I have never liked to
broach the subject myself to Mrs. Goldsmith, knowing how unpleasant it
must be to her. Raphael's version is that Esther went away of her own
accord; but I can't see what grounds he has for judging."
"I would rather trust Raphael's version," said Sidney, with an
adumbration of a wink in his left eyelid. "But didn't you look for her?"
"Where? If she's in London, she's swallowed up. If she's gone to another
place, it's still more difficult to find her."
"There's the Agony Column!"
"If Esther wanted us to know her address, what can prevent her sending
it?" asked Addie, with dignity.
"I'd find her soon enough, if I wanted to," murmured Sidney.
"Yes; but I'm not sure we want to. After all, she cannot be so nice as I
thought. She certainly behaved very ungratefully to Mrs. Goldsmith. You
see what becomes of wild opinions."
"Addie! Addie!" said Sidney reproachfully, "how can you be so
conventional?"
"I'm not conventional!" protested Addie, provoked at last. "I always
liked Esther very much. Even now, nothing would give me greater pleasure
than to have her for a bridesmaid. But I can't help feeling she deceived
us all."
"Stuff and nonsense!" said Sidney warmly. "An author has a right to be
anonymous. Don't you think I'd paint anonymously if I dared? Only, if I
didn't put my name to my things no one would buy them. That's another of
the advantages of my profession. Once make your name as an artist, and
you can get a colossal income by giving up art."
"It was a vulgar book!" persisted Addie, sticking to the point.
"Fiddlesticks! It was an artistic book—bungled."
"Oh, well!" said Addie, as the tears welled from her eyes, "if you're so
fond of unconventional girls, you'd better marry them."
"I would," said Sidney, "but for the absurd restriction against
polygamy."
Addie got up with an indignant jerk. "You think I'm a child to be played
with!"
She turned her back upon him. His face changed instantly; he stood
still a moment, admiring the magnificent pose. Then he recaptured her
reluctant hand.
"Don't be jealous already, Addie," he said. "It's a healthy sign of
affection, is a storm-cloud, but don't you think it's just a wee, tiny,
weeny bit too previous?"
A pressure of the hand accompanied each of the little adjectives. Addie
sat down again, feeling deliriously happy. She seemed to be lapped in a
great drowsy ecstasy of bliss.
The sunset was fading into sombre grays before Sidney broke the silence;
then his train of thought revealed itself.
"If you're so down on Esther, I wonder how you can put up with me! How
is it?"
Addie did not hear the question.
"You think I'm a very wicked, blasphemous boy," he insisted. "Isn't that
the thought deep down in your heart of hearts?"
"I'm sure tea must be over long ago," said Addie anxiously.
"Answer me," said Sidney inexorably.
"Don't bother. Aren't they cooeying for us?"
"Answer me."
"I do believe that was a water-rat. Look! the water is still eddying."
"I'm a very wicked, blasphemous boy. Isn't that the thought deep down in
your heart of hearts?"
"You are there, too," she breathed at last, and then Sidney forgot her
beauty for an instant, and lost himself in unaccustomed humility. It
seemed passing wonderful to him—that he should be the deity of such a
spotless shrine. Could any man deserve the trust of this celestial soul?
Suddenly the thought that he had not told her about Miss Hannibal after
all, gave him a chilling shock. But he rallied quickly. Was it really
worth while to trouble the clear depths of her spirit with his turbid
past? No; wiser to inhale the odor of the rose at her bosom, sweeter to
surrender himself to the intoxicating perfume of her personality, to the
magic of a moment that must fade like the sunset, already grown gray.
So Addie never knew.
On the Friday that Percy Saville returned to town, Raphael, in a state
of mental prostration modified by tobacco, was sitting in the editorial
chair. He was engaged in his pleasing weekly occupation of discovering,
from a comparison with the great rival organ, the deficiencies of The
Flag of Judah in the matter of news, his organization for the
collection of which partook of the happy-go-lucky character of little
Sampson. Fortunately, to-day there were no flagrant omissions, no
palpable shortcomings such as had once and again thrown the office of
the Flag into mourning when communal pillars were found dead in the
opposition paper.
The arrival of a visitor put an end to the invidious comparison.
"Ah, Strelitski!" cried Raphael, jumping up in glad surprise. "What an
age it is since I've seen you!" He shook the black-gloved hand of the
fashionable minister heartily; then his face grew rueful with a sudden
recollection. "I suppose you have come to scold me for not answering the
invitation to speak at the distribution of prizes to your religion
class?" he said; "but I have been so busy. My conscience has kept up a
dull pricking on the subject, though, for ever so many weeks. You're
such an epitome of all the virtues that you can't understand the
sensation, and even I can't understand why one submits to this
undercurrent of reproach rather than take the simple step it exhorts one
to. But I suppose it's human nature." He puffed at his pipe in humorous
sadness.
"I suppose it is," said Strelitski wearily.
"But of course I'll come. You know that, my dear fellow. When my
conscience was noisy, the advocatus diaboli used to silence it by
saying, 'Oh, Strelitski'll take it for granted.' You can never catch the
advocatus diaboli asleep," concluded Raphael, laughing.
"No," assented Strelitski. But he did not laugh.
"Oh!" said Raphael, his laugh ceasing suddenly and his face growing
long. "Perhaps the prize-distribution is over?"
Strelitski's expression seemed so stern that for a second it really
occurred to Raphael that he might have missed the great event. But
before the words were well out of his mouth he remembered that it was an
event that made "copy," and little Sampson would have arranged with him
as to the reporting thereof.
"No; it's Sunday week. But I didn't come to talk about my religion class
at all," he said pettishly, while a shudder traversed his form. "I came
to ask if you know anything about Miss Ansell."
Raphael's heart stood still, then began to beat furiously. The sound of
her name always affected him incomprehensibly. He began to stammer, then
took his pipe out of his mouth and said more calmly;
"How should I know anything about Miss Ansell?"
"I thought you would," said Strelitski, without much disappointment in
his tone.
"Why?"
"Wasn't she your art-critic?"
"Who told you that?"
"Mrs. Henry Goldsmith."
"Oh!" said Raphael.
"I thought she might possibly be writing for you still, and so, as I was
passing, I thought I'd drop in and inquire. Hasn't anything been heard
of her? Where is she? Perhaps one could help her."
"I'm sorry, I really know nothing, nothing at all," said Raphael
gravely. "I wish I did. Is there any particular reason why you want to
know?"
As he spoke, a strange suspicion that was half an apprehension came into
his head. He had been looking the whole time at Strelitski's face with
his usual unobservant gaze, just seeing it was gloomy. Now, as in a
sudden flash, he saw it sallow and careworn to the last degree. The eyes
were almost feverish, the black curl on the brow was unkempt, and there
was a streak or two of gray easily visible against the intense sable.
What change had come over him? Why this new-born interest in Esther?
Raphael felt a vague unreasoning resentment rising in him, mingled with
distress at Strelitski's discomposure.
"No; I don't know that there is any particular reason why I want to
know," answered his friend slowly. "She was a member of my congregation.
I always had a certain interest in her, which has naturally not been
diminished by her sudden departure from our midst, and by the knowledge
that she was the author of that sensational novel. I think it was cruel
of Mrs. Henry Goldsmith to turn her adrift; one must allow for the
effervescence of genius."
"Who told you Mrs. Henry Goldsmith turned her adrift?" asked Raphael
hotly.
"Mrs. Henry Goldsmith," said Strelitski with a slight accent of wonder.
"Then it's a lie!" Raphael exclaimed, thrusting out his arms in intense
agitation. "A mean, cowardly lie! I shall never go to see that woman
again, unless it is to let her know what I think of her."
"Ah, then you do know something about Miss Ansell?" said Strelitski,
with growing surprise. Raphael in a rage was a new experience. There
were those who asserted that anger was not among his gifts.
"Nothing about her life since she left Mrs. Goldsmith; but I saw her
before, and she told me it was her intention to cut herself adrift.
Nobody knew about her authorship of the book; nobody would have known to
this day if she had not chosen to reveal it."
The minister was trembling.
"She cut herself adrift?" he repeated interrogatively. "But why?"
"I will tell you," said Raphael in low tones. "I don't think it will be
betraying her confidence to say that she found her position of
dependence extremely irksome; it seemed to cripple her soul. Now I see
what Mrs. Goldsmith is. I can understand better what life in her society
meant for a girl like that."
"And what has become of her?" asked the Russian. His face was agitated,
the lips were almost white.
"I do not know," said Raphael, almost in a whisper, his voice failing in
a sudden upwelling of tumultuous feeling. The ever-whirling wheel of
journalism—that modern realization of the labor of Sisyphus—had
carried him round without giving him even time to remember that time was
flying. Day had slipped into week and week into month, without his
moving an inch from his groove in search of the girl whose unhappiness
was yet always at the back of his thoughts. Now he was shaken with
astonished self-reproach at his having allowed her to drift perhaps
irretrievably beyond his ken.
"She is quite alone in the world, poor thing!" he said after a pause.
"She must be earning her own living, somehow. By journalism, perhaps.
But she prefers to live her own life. I am afraid it will be a hard
one." His voice trembled again. The minister's breast, too, was laboring
with emotion that checked his speech, but after a moment utterance came
to him—a strange choked utterance, almost blasphemous from those
clerical lips.
"By God!" he gasped. "That little girl!"
He turned his back upon his friend and covered his face with his hands,
and Raphael saw his shoulders quivering. Then his own vision grew dim.
Conjecture, resentment, wonder, self-reproach, were lost in a new and
absorbing sense of the pathos of the poor girl's position.
Presently the minister turned round, showing a face that made no
pretence of calm.
"That was bravely done," he said brokenly. "To cut herself adrift! She
will not sink; strength will be given her even as she gives others
strength. If I could only see her and tell her! But she never liked me;
she always distrusted me. I was a hollow windbag in her eyes—a thing of
shams and cant—she shuddered to look at me. Was it not so? You are a
friend of hers, you know what she felt."
"I don't think it was you she disliked," said Raphael in wondering pity.

"Only your office."

"Then, by God, she was right!" cried the Russian hoarsely. "It was
this—this that made me the target of her scorn." He tore off his white
tie madly as he spoke, threw it on the ground, and trampled upon it.
"She and I were kindred in suffering; I read it in her eyes, averted as
they were at the sight of this accursed thing! You stare at me—you
think I have gone mad. Leon, you are not as other men. Can you not guess
that this damnable white tie has been choking the life and manhood out
of me? But it is over now. Take your pen, Leon, as you are my friend,
and write what I shall dictate."
Silenced by the stress of a great soul, half dazed by the strange,
unexpected revelation, Raphael seated himself, took his pen, and wrote:
"We understand that the Rev. Joseph Strelitski has resigned his position
in the Kensington Synagogue."
Not till he had written it did the full force of the paragraph overwhelm
his soul.
"But you will not do this?" he said, looking up almost incredulously at
the popular minister.
"I will; the position has become impossible. Leon, do you not
understand? I am not what I was when I took it. I have lived, and life
is change. Stagnation is death. Surely you can understand, for you, too,
have changed. Cannot I read between the lines of your leaders?"
"Cannot you read in them?" said Raphael with a wan smile. "I have
modified some opinions, it is true, and developed others; but I have
disguised none."
"Not consciously, perhaps, but you do not speak all your thought."
"Perhaps I do not listen to it," said Raphael, half to himself. "But
you—whatever your change—you have not lost faith in primaries?"
"No; not in what I consider such."
"Then why give up your platform, your housetop, whence you may do so
much good? You are loved, venerated."
Strelitski placed his palms over his ears.
"Don't! don't!" he cried. "Don't you be the advocatus diaboli! Do you
think I have not told myself all these things a thousand times? Do you
think I have not tried every kind of opiate? No, no, be silent if you
can say nothing to strengthen me in my resolution: am I not weak enough
already? Promise me, give me your hand, swear to me that you will put
that paragraph in the paper. Saturday. Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday—in six days I shall change a hundred times. Swear
to me, so that I may leave this room at peace, the long conflict ended.
Promise me you will insert it, though I myself should ask you to cancel
it."
"But—" began Raphael.
Strelitski turned away impatiently and groaned.
"My God!" he cried hoarsely. "Leon, listen to me," he said, turning
round suddenly. "Do you realize what sort of a position you are asking
me to keep? Do you realize how it makes me the fief of a Rabbinate that
is an anachronism, the bondman of outworn forms, the slave of the
Shulcan Aruch (a book the Rabbinate would not dare publish in
English), the professional panegyrist of the rich? Ours is a generation
of whited sepulchres." He had no difficulty about utterance now; the
words flowed in a torrent. "How can Judaism—and it alone—escape going
through the fire of modern scepticism, from which, if religion emerge at
all, it will emerge without its dross? Are not we Jews always the first
prey of new ideas, with our alert intellect, our swift receptiveness,
our keen critical sense? And if we are not hypocrites, we are
indifferent—which is almost worse. Indifference is the only infidelity
I recognize, and it is unfortunately as conservative as zeal.
Indifference and hypocrisy between them keep orthodoxy alive—while they
kill Judaism."
"Oh, I can't quite admit that," said Raphael. "I admit that scepticism
is better than stagnation, but I cannot see why orthodoxy is the
antithesis to Judaism Purified—and your own sermons are doing something
to purify it—orthodoxy—"
"Orthodoxy cannot be purified unless by juggling with words,"
interrupted Strelitski vehemently. "Orthodoxy is inextricably entangled
with ritual observance; and ceremonial religion is of the ancient world,
not the modern."
"But our ceremonialism is pregnant with sublime symbolism, and its
discipline is most salutary. Ceremony is the casket of religion."
"More often its coffin," said Strelitski drily. "Ceremonial religion is
so apt to stiffen in a rigor mortis. It is too dangerous an element;
it creates hypocrites and Pharisees. All cast-iron laws and dogmas do.
Not that I share the Christian sneer at Jewish legalism. Add the Statute
Book to the New Testament, and think of the network of laws hampering
the feet of the Christian. No; much of our so-called ceremonialism is
merely the primitive mix-up of everything with religion in a theocracy.
The Mosaic code has been largely embodied in civil law, and superseded
by it."
"That is just the flaw of the modern world, to keep life and religion
apart," protested Raphael; "to have one set of principles for week-days
and another for Sundays; to grind the inexorable mechanism of supply and
demand on pagan principles, and make it up out of the poor-box."
Strelitski shook his head.
"We must make broad our platform, not our phylacteries. It is because I
am with you in admiring the Rabbis that I would undo much of their work.
Theirs was a wonderful statesmanship, and they built wiser than they
knew; just as the patient labors of the superstitious zealots who
counted every letter of the Law preserved the text unimpaired for the
benefit of modern scholarship. The Rabbis constructed a casket, if you
will, which kept the jewel safe, though at the cost of concealing its
lustre. But the hour has come now to wear the jewel on our breasts
before all the world. The Rabbis worked for their time—we must work
for ours. Judaism was before the Rabbis. Scientific criticism shows its
thoughts widening with the process of the suns—even as its God, Yahweh,
broadened from a local patriotic Deity to the ineffable Name. For
Judaism was worked out from within—Abraham asked, 'Shall not the Judge
of all the earth do right?'—the thunders of Sinai were but the
righteous indignation of the developed moral consciousness. In every age
our great men have modified and developed Judaism. Why should it not be
trimmed into concordance with the culture of the time? Especially when
the alternative is death. Yes, death! We babble about petty minutiae of
ritual while Judaism is dying! We are like the crew of a sinking ship,
holy-stoning the deck instead of being at the pumps. No, I must speak
out; I cannot go on salving my conscience by unsigned letters to the
press. Away with all this anonymous apostleship!"
He moved about restlessly with animated gestures as he delivered his
harangue at tornado speed, speech bursting from him like some dynamic
energy which had been accumulating for years, and could no longer be
kept in. It was an upheaval of the whole man under the stress of pent
forces. Raphael was deeply moved. He scarcely knew how to act in this
unique crisis. Dimly he foresaw the stir and pother there would be in
the community. Conservative by instinct, apt to see the elements of good
in attacked institutions—perhaps, too, a little timid when it came to
take action in the tremendous realm of realities—he was loth to help
Strelitski to so decisive a step, though his whole heart went out to him
in brotherly sympathy.
"Do not act so hastily," he pleaded. "Things are not so black as you see
them—you are almost as bad as Miss Ansell. Don't think that I see them
rosy: I might have done that three months ago. But don't you—don't all
idealists—overlook the quieter phenomena? Is orthodoxy either so
inefficacious or so moribund as you fancy? Is there not a steady,
perhaps semi-conscious, stream of healthy life, thousands of cheerful,
well-ordered households, of people neither perfect nor cultured, but
more good than bad? You cannot expect saints and heroes to grow like
blackberries."
"Yes; but look what Jews set up to be—God's witnesses!" interrupted

Strelitski. "This mediocrity may pass in the rest of the world."

"And does lack of modern lights constitute ignorance?" went on Raphael,
disregarding the interruption. He began walking up and down, and
thrashing the air with his arms. Hitherto he had remained comparatively
quiet, dominated by Strelitski's superior restlessness. "I cannot help
thinking there is a profound lesson in the Bible story of the oxen who,
unguided, bore safely the Ark of the Covenant. Intellect obscures more
than it illumines."
"Oh, Leon, Leon, you'll turn Catholic, soon!" said Strelitski
reprovingly.
"Not with a capital C," said Raphael, laughing a little. "But I am so
sick of hearing about culture, I say more than I mean. Judaism is so
human—that's why I like it. No abstract metaphysics, but a lovable way
of living the common life, sanctified by the centuries. Culture is all
very well—doesn't the Talmud say the world stands on the breath of the
school-children?—but it has become a cant. Too often it saps the moral
fibre."
"You have all the old Jewish narrowness," said Strelitski.
"I'd rather have that than the new Parisian narrowness—the cant of
decadence. Look at my cousin Sidney. He talks as if the Jew only
introduced moral-headache into the world—in face of the corruptions of
paganism which are still flagrant all over Asia and Africa and
Polynesia—the idol worship, the abominations, the disregard of human
life, of truth, of justice."
"But is the civilized world any better? Think of the dishonesty of
business, the self-seeking of public life, the infamies and hypocrisies
of society, the prostitutions of soul and body! No, the Jew has yet to
play a part in history. Supplement his Hebraism by what Hellenic ideals
you will, but the Jew's ideals must ever remain the indispensable ones,"
said Strelitski, becoming exalted again. "Without righteousness a
kingdom cannot stand. The world is longing for a broad simple faith that
shall look on science as its friend and reason as its inspirer. People
are turning in their despair even to table-rappings and Mahatmas. Now,
for the first time in history, is the hour of Judaism. Only it must
enlarge itself; its platform must be all-inclusive. Judaism is but a
specialized form of Hebraism; even if Jews stick to their own special
historical and ritual ceremonies, it is only Hebraism—the pure
spiritual kernel—that they can offer the world."
"But that is quite the orthodox Jewish idea on the subject," said

Raphael.

"Yes, but orthodox ideas have a way of remaining ideas," retorted
Strelitski. "Where I am heterodox is in thinking the time has come to
work them out. Also in thinking that the monotheism is not the element
that needs the most accentuation. The formula of the religion of the
future will be a Jewish formula—Character, not Creed. The provincial
period of Judaism is over though even its Dark Ages are still lingering
on in England. It must become cosmic, universal. Judaism is too timid,
too apologetic, too deferential. Doubtless this is the result of
persecution, but it does not tend to diminish persecution. We may as
well try the other attitude. It is the world the Jewish preacher should
address, not a Kensington congregation. Perhaps, when the Kensington
congregation sees the world is listening, it will listen, too," he said,
with a touch of bitterness.
"But it listens to you now," said Raphael.
"A pleasing illusion which has kept me too long in my false position.
With all its love and reverence, do you think it forgets I am its
hireling? I may perhaps have a little more prestige than the bulk of my
fellows—though even that is partly due to my congregants being rich and
fashionable—but at bottom everybody knows I am taken like a house—on a
three years' agreement. And I dare not speak, I cannot, while I wear the
badge of office; it would be disloyal; my own congregation would take
alarm. The position of a minister is like that of a judicious
editor—which, by the way, you are not; he is led, rather than leads. He
has to feel his way, to let in light wherever he sees a chink, a cranny.
But let them get another man to preach to them the echo of their own
voices; there will be no lack of candidates for the salary. For my part,
I am sick of this petty jesuitry; in vain I tell myself it is spiritual
statesmanship like that of so many Christian clergymen who are silently
bringing Christianity back to Judaism."
"But it is spiritual statesmanship," asserted Raphael.
"Perhaps. You are wiser, deeper, calmer than I. You are an Englishman, I
am a Russian. I am all for action, action, action! In Russia I should
have been a Nihilist, not a philosopher. I can only go by my feelings,
and I feel choking. When I first came to England, before the horror of
Russia wore off, I used to go about breathing in deep breaths of air,
exulting in the sense of freedom. Now I am stifling again. Do you not
understand? Have you never guessed it? And yet I have often said things
to you that should have opened your eyes. I must escape from the house
of bondage—must be master of myself, of my word and thought. Oh, the
world is so wide, so wide—and we are so narrow! Only gradually did the
web mesh itself about me. At first my fetters were flowery bands, for I
believed all I taught and could teach all I believed. Insensibly the
flowers changed to iron chains, because I was changing as I probed
deeper into life and thought, and saw my dreams of influencing English
Judaism fading in the harsh daylight of fact. And yet at moments the
iron links would soften to flowers again. Do you think there is no
sweetness in adulation, in prosperity—no subtle cajolery that soothes
the conscience and coaxes the soul to take its pleasure in a world of
make-believe? Spiritual statesmanship, forsooth!" He made a gesture of
resolution. "No, the Judaism of you English weighs upon my spirits. It
is so parochial. Everything turns on finance; the United Synagogue keeps
your community orthodox because it has the funds and owns the
burying-grounds. Truly a dismal allegory—a creed whose strength lies in
its cemeteries. Money is the sole avenue to distinction and to
authority; it has its coarse thumb over education, worship, society. In
my country—even in your own Ghetto—the Jews do not despise money, but
at least piety and learning are the titles to position and honor. Here
the scholar is classed with the Schnorrer; if an artist or an author
is admired, it is for his success. You are right; it is oxen that carry
your Ark of the Covenant—fat oxen. You admire them, Leon; you are an
Englishman, and cannot stand outside it all. But I am stifling under
this weight of moneyed mediocrity, this régime of dull respectability.
I want the atmosphere of ideas and ideals."
He tore at his high clerical collar as though suffocating literally.
Raphael was too moved to defend English Judaism. Besides, he was used
to these jeremiads now—had he not often heard them from Sidney? Had he
not read them in Esther's book? Nor was it the first time he had
listened to the Russian's tirades, though he had lacked the key to the
internal conflict that embittered them.
"But how will you live?" he asked, tacitly accepting the situation. "You
will not, I suppose, go over to the Reform Synagogue?"
"That fossil, so proud of its petty reforms half a century ago that it
has stood still ever since to admire them! It is a synagogue for
snobs—who never go there."
Raphael smiled faintly. It was obvious that Strelitski on the war-path
did not pause to weigh his utterances.
"I am glad you are not going over, anyhow. Your congregation would—"
"Crucify me between two money-lenders?"
"Never mind. But how will you live?"'
"How does Miss Ansell live? I can always travel with cigars—I know the
line thoroughly." He smiled mournfully. "But probably I shall go to
America—the idea has been floating in my mind for months. There Judaism
is grander, larger, nobler. There is room for all parties. The dead
bones are not worshipped as relics. Free thought has its vent-holes—it
is not repressed into hypocrisy as among us. There is care for
literature, for national ideals. And one deals with millions, not petty
thousands. This English community, with its squabbles about rituals, its
four Chief Rabbis all in love with one another, its stupid Sephardim,
its narrow-minded Reformers, its fatuous self-importance, its invincible
ignorance, is but an ant-hill, a negligible quantity in the future of
the faith. Westward the course of Judaism as of empire takes its
way—from the Euphrates and Tigris it emigrated to Cordova and Toledo,
and the year that saw its expulsion from Spain was the year of the
Discovery of America. Ex Oriente lux. Perhaps it will return to you
here by way of the Occident. Russia and America are the two strongholds
of the race, and Russia is pouring her streams into America, where they
will be made free men and free thinkers. It is in America, then, that
the last great battle of Judaism will be fought out; amid the temples of
the New World it will make its last struggle to survive. It is there
that the men who have faith in its necessity must be, so that the
psychical force conserved at such a cost may not radiate uselessly away.
Though Israel has sunk low, like a tree once green and living, and has
become petrified and blackened, there is stored-up sunlight in him. Our
racial isolation is a mere superstition unless turned to great purposes.
We have done nothing as Jews for centuries, though our Old Testament
has always been an arsenal of texts for the European champions of civil
and religious liberty. We have been unconsciously pioneers of modern
commerce, diffusers of folk-lore and what not. Cannot we be a conscious
force, making for nobler ends? Could we not, for instance, be the link
of federation among the nations, acting everywhere in favor of Peace?
Could we not be the centre of new sociologic movements in each country,
as a few American Jews have been the centre of the Ethical Culture
movement?"
"You forget," said Raphael, "that, wherever the old Judaism has not been
overlaid by the veneer of Philistine civilization, we are already
sociological object-lessons in good fellowship, unpretentious charity,
domestic poetry, respect for learning, disrespect for respectability.
Our social system is a bequest from the ancient world by which the
modern may yet benefit. The demerits you censure in English Judaism are
all departures from the old way of living. Why should we not revive or
strengthen that, rather than waste ourselves on impracticable novelties?
And in your prognostications of the future of the Jews have you not
forgotten the all-important factor of Palestine?"
"No; I simply leave it out of count. You know how I have persuaded the
Holy Land League to co-operate with the movements for directing the
streams of the persecuted towards America. I have alleged with truth
that Palestine is impracticable for the moment. I have not said what I
have gradually come to think—that the salvation of Judaism is not in
the national idea at all. That is the dream of visionaries—and young
men," he added with a melancholy smile. "May we not dream nobler dreams
than political independence? For, after all, political independence is
only a means to an end, not an end in itself, as it might easily become,
and as it appears to other nations. To be merely one among the
nations—that is not, despite George Eliot, so satisfactory an ideal.
The restoration to Palestine, or the acquisition of a national centre,
may be a political solution, but it is not a spiritual idea. We must
abandon it—it cannot be held consistently with our professed attachment
to the countries in which our lot is cast—and we have abandoned it. We
have fought and slain one another in the Franco-German war, and in the
war of the North and the South. Your whole difficulty with your pauper
immigrants arises from your effort to keep two contradictory ideals
going at once. As Englishmen, you may have a right to shelter the exile;
but not as Jews. Certainly, if the nations cast us out, we could, draw
together and form a nation as of yore. But persecution, expulsion, is
never simultaneous; our dispersal has saved Judaism, and it may yet save
the world. For I prefer the dream that we are divinely dispersed to
bless it, wind-sown seeds to fertilize its waste places. To be a nation
without a fatherland, yet with a mother-tongue, Hebrew—there is the
spiritual originality, the miracle of history. Such has been the real
kingdom of Israel in the past—we have been 'sons of the Law' as other
men have been sons of France, of Italy, of Germany. Such may our
fatherland continue, with 'the higher life' substituted for 'the law'—a
kingdom not of space, not measured by the vulgar meteyard of an
Alexander, but a great spiritual Republic, as devoid of material form as
Israel's God, and congruous with his conception of the Divine. And the
conquest of this kingdom needs no violent movement—if Jews only
practised what they preach, it would be achieved to-morrow; for all
expressions of Judaism, even to the lowest, have common sublimities. And
this kingdom—as it has no space, so it has no limits; it must grow till
all mankind, are its subjects. The brotherhood of Israel will be the
nucleus of the brotherhood of man."
"It is magnificent," said Raphael; "but it is not Judaism. If the Jews
have the future you dream of, the future will have no Jews. America is
already decimating them with Sunday-Sabbaths and English Prayer-Books.
Your Judaism is as eviscerated as the Christianity I found in vogue when
I was at Oxford, which might be summed up: There is no God, but Jesus
Christ is His Son. George Eliot was right. Men are men, not pure spirit.
A fatherland focusses a people. Without it we are but the gypsies of
religion. All over the world, at every prayer, every Jew turns towards
Jerusalem. We must not give up the dream. The countries we live in can
never be more than 'step-fatherlands' to us. Why, if your visions were
realized, the prophecy of Genesis, already practically fulfilled, 'Thou
shalt spread abroad to the west and to the east, and to the north and to
the south; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the
earth be blessed,' would be so remarkably consummated that we might
reasonably hope to come to our own again according to the promises."
"Well, well," said Strelitski, good-humoredly, "so long as you admit it
is not within the range of practical politics now."
"It is your own dream that is premature," retorted Raphael; "at any
rate, the cosmic part of it. You are thinking of throwing open the
citizenship of your Republic to the world. But to-day's task is to make
its citizens by blood worthier of their privilege."
"You will never do it with the old generation," said Strelitski. "My
hope is in the new. Moses led the Jews forty years through the
wilderness merely to eliminate the old. Give me young men, and I will
move the world."
"You will do nothing by attempting too much," said Raphael; "you will
only dissipate your strength. For my part, I shall be content to raise
Judaea an inch."
"Go on, then," said Strelitski. "That will give me a barley-corn. But
I've wasted too much' of your time, I fear. Good-bye. Remember your
promise."
He held out his hand. He had grown quite calm, now his decision was
taken.
"Good-bye," said Raphael, shaking it warmly. "I think I shall cable to

America, 'Behold, Joseph the dreamer cometh.'"

"Dreams are our life," replied Strelitski. "Lessing was
right—aspiration is everything."
"And yet you would rob the orthodox Jew of his dream of Jerusalem! Well,
if you must go, don't go without your tie," said Raphael, picking it up,
and feeling a stolid, practical Englishman in presence of this
enthusiast. "It is dreadfully dirty, but you must wear it a little
longer."
"Only till the New Year, which is bearing down upon us," said
Strelitski, thrusting it into his pocket. "Cost what it may, I shall no
longer countenance the ritual and ceremonial of the season of
Repentance. Good-bye again. If you should be writing to Miss Ansell, I
should like her to know how much I owe her."
"But I tell you I don't know her address," said Raphael, his uneasiness
reawakening.
"Surely you can write to her publishers?"
And the door closed upon the Russian dreamer, leaving the practical
Englishman dumbfounded at his never having thought of this simple
expedient. But before he could adopt it the door was thrown open again
by Pinchas, who had got out of the habit of knocking through Raphael
being too polite to reprimand him. The poet, tottered in, dropped
wearily into a chair, and buried his face in his hands, letting an
extinct cigar-stump slip through his fingers on to the literature that
carpeted the floor.
"What is the matter?" inquired Raphael in alarm.
"I am miserable—vairy miserable."
"Has anything happened?"
"Nothing. But I have been thinking vat have I come to after all these
years, all these vanderings. Nothing! Vat vill be my end? Oh. I am so
unhappy."
"But you are better off than you ever were in your life. You no longer
live amid the squalor of the Ghetto; you are clean and well dressed: you
yourself admit that you can afford to give charity now. That looks as if
you'd come to something—not nothing."
"Yes," said the poet, looking up eagerly, "and I am famous through the
vorld. Metatoron's Flames vill shine eternally." His head drooped
again. "I have all I vant, and you are the best man in the vorld. But I
am the most miserable."
"Nonsense! cheer up," said Raphael.
"I can never cheer up any more. I vill shoot myself. I have realized the
emptiness of life. Fame, money, love—all is Dead Sea fruit."
His shoulders heaved convulsively; he was sobbing. Raphael stood by
helpless, his respect for Pinchas as a poet and for himself as a
practical Englishman returning. He pondered over the strange fate that
had thrown him among three geniuses—a male idealist, a female
pessimist, and a poet who seemed to belong to both sexes and categories.
And yet there was not one of the three to whom he seemed able to be of
real service. A letter brought in by the office-boy rudely snapped the
thread of reflection. It contained three enclosures. The first was an
epistle; the hand was the hand of Mr. Goldsmith, but the voice was the
voice of his beautiful spouse.
     "I have perceived many symptoms lately of your growing divergency
     from the ideas with which The Flag of Judah was started. It is
     obvious that you find yourself unable to emphasize the olden
     features of our faith—the questions of kosher meat, etc.—as
     forcibly as our readers desire. You no doubt cherish ideals which
     are neither practical nor within the grasp of the masses to whom we
     appeal. I fully appreciate the delicacy that makes you
     reluctant—in the dearth of genius and Hebrew learning—to saddle
     me with the task of finding a substitute, but I feel it is time for
     me to restore your peace of mind even at the expense of my own. I
     have been thinking that, with your kind occasional supervision, it
     might be possible for Mr. Pinchas, of whom you have always spoken
     so highly, to undertake the duties of editorship, Mr. Sampson
     remaining sub-editor as before. Of course I count on you to
     continue your purely scholarly articles, and to impress upon the
     two gentlemen who will now have direct relations with me my wish to
     remain in the background.
     "Yours sincerely,
     "P.S.—On second thoughts I beg to enclose a cheque for four
     guineas, which will serve instead of a formal month's notice, and
     will enable you to accept at once my wife's invitation, likewise
     enclosed herewith. Your sister seconds Mrs. Goldsmith in the hope
     that you will do so. Our tenancy of the Manse only lasts a few
     weeks longer, for of course we return for the New Year holidays."
This was the last straw. It was not so much the dismissal that staggered
him, but to be called a genius and an idealist himself—to have his own
orthodoxy impugned—just at this moment, was a rough shock.
"Pinchas!" he said, recovering himself. Pinchas would not look up. His
face was still hidden in his hands. "Pinchas, listen! You are appointed
editor of the paper, instead of me. You are to edit the next number."
Pinchas's head shot up like a catapult. He bounded to his feet, then
bent down again to Raphael's coat-tail and kissed it passionately.
"Ah, my benefactor, my benefactor!" he cried, in a joyous frenzy. "Now
vill I give it to English Judaism. She is in my power. Oh, my
benefactor!"
"No, no," said Raphael, disengaging himself. "I have nothing to do with
it."
"But de paper—she is yours!" said the poet, forgetting his English in
his excitement.
"No, I am only the editor. I have been dismissed, and you are appointed
instead of me."
Pinchas dropped back into his chair like a lump of lead. He hung his
head again and folded his arms.
"Then they get not me for editor," he said moodily.
"Nonsense, why not?" said Raphael, flushing.
"Vat you think me?" Pinchas asked indignantly. "Do you think I have a
stone for a heart like Gideon M.P. or your English stockbrokers and
Rabbis? No, you shall go on being editor. They think you are not able
enough, not orthodox enough—they vant me—but do not fear. I shall not
accept."
"But then what will become of the next number?" remonstrated Raphael,
touched. "I must not edit it."
"Vat you care? Let her die!" cried Pinchas, in gloomy complacency. "You
have made her; vy should she survive you? It is not right another should
valk in your shoes—least of all, I."
"But I don't mind—I don't mind a bit," Raphael assured him. Pinchas
shook his head obstinately. "If the paper dies, Sampson will have
nothing to live upon," Raphael reminded him.
"True, vairy true," said the poet, patently beginning to yield. "That
alters things. Ve cannot let Sampson starve."
"No, you see!" said Raphael. "So you must keep it alive."
"Yes, but," said Pinchas, getting up thoughtfully, "Sampson is going off
soon on tour vith his comic opera. He vill not need the Flag."
"Oh, well, edit it till then."
"Be it so," said the poet resignedly. "Till Sampson's comic-opera tour."
"Till Sampson's comic-opera tour," repeated Raphael contentedly.
Raphael walked out of the office, a free man. Mountains of
responsibility seemed to roll off his shoulders. His Messianic emotions
were conscious of no laceration at the failure of this episode of his
life; they were merged in greater. What a fool he had been to waste so
much time, to make no effort to find the lonely girl! Surely, Esther
must have expected him, if only as a friend, to give some sign that he
did not share in the popular execration. Perchance she had already left
London or the country, only to be found again by protracted knightly
quest! He felt grateful to Providence for setting him free for her
salvation. He made at once for the publishers' and asked for her
address. The junior partner knew of no such person. In vain Raphael
reminded him that they had published Mordecai Josephs. That was by Mr.
Edward Armitage. Raphael accepted the convention, and demanded this
gentleman's address instead. That, too, was refused, but all letters
would be forwarded. Was Mr. Armitage in England? All letters would be
forwarded. Upon that the junior partner stood, inexpugnable.
Raphael went out, not uncomforted. He would write to her at once. He got
letter-paper at the nearest restaurant and wrote, "Dear Miss Ansell."
The rest was a blank. He had not the least idea how to renew the
relationship after what seemed an eternity of silence. He stared
helplessly round the mirrored walls, seeing mainly his own helpless
stare. The placard "Smoking not permitted till 8 P.M.," gave him a
sudden shock. He felt for his pipe, and ultimately found it stuck, half
full of charred bird's eye, in his breast-pocket. He had apparently not
been smoking for some hours. That completed his perturbation. He felt he
had undergone too much that day to be in a fit state to write a
judicious letter. He would go home and rest a bit, and write the
letter—very diplomatically—in the evening. When he got home, he found
to his astonishment it was Friday evening, when letter-writing is of the
devil. Habit carried him to synagogue, where he sang the Sabbath hymn,
"Come, my beloved, to meet the bride," with strange sweet tears and a
complete indifference to its sacred allegorical signification. Next
afternoon he haunted the publishers' doorstep with the brilliant idea
that Mr. Armitage sometimes crossed it. In this hope, he did not write
the letter; his phrases, he felt, would be better for the inspiration of
that gentleman's presence. Meanwhile he had ample time to mature them,
to review the situation in every possible light, to figure Esther under
the most poetical images, to see his future alternately radiant and
sombre. Four long summer days of espionage only left him with a
heartache, and a specialist knowledge of the sort of persons who visit
publishers. A temptation to bribe the office-boy he resisted as
unworthy.
Not only had he not written that letter, but Mr. Henry Goldsmith's
edict and Mrs. Henry Goldsmith's invitation were still unacknowledged.
On Thursday morning a letter from Addie indirectly reminded him both of
his remissness to her hostess, and of the existence of The Flag of
Judah. He remembered it was the day of going to press; a vision of the
difficulties of the day flashed vividly upon his consciousness; he
wondered if his ex-lieutenants were finding new ones. The smell of the
machine-room was in his nostrils; it co-operated with the appeal of his
good-nature to draw him to his successor's help. Virtue proved its own
reward. Arriving at eleven o'clock, he found little Sampson in great
excitement, with the fountain of melody dried up on his lips.—
"Thank God!" he cried. "I thought you'd come when you heard the news."
"What news?"
"Gideon the member for Whitechapel's dead. Died suddenly, early this
morning."
"How shocking!" said Raphael, growing white.
"Yes, isn't it?" said little Sampson. "If he had died yesterday, I
shouldn't have minded it so much, while to-morrow would have given us a
clear week. He hasn't even been ill," he grumbled. "I've had to send
Pinchas to the Museum in a deuce of a hurry, to find out about his early
life. I'm awfully upset about it, and what makes it worse is a telegram
from Goldsmith, ordering a page obituary at least with black rules,
besides a leader. It's simply sickening. The proofs are awful enough as
it is—my blessed editor has been writing four columns of his
autobiography in his most original English, and he wants to leave out
all the news part to make room for 'em. In one way Gideon's death is a
boon; even Pinchas'll see his stuff must be crowded out. It's frightful
having to edit your editor. Why wasn't he made sub?"
"That would have been just as trying for you," said Raphael with a
melancholy smile. He took up a galley-proof and began to correct it. To
his surprise he came upon his own paragraph about Strelitski's
resignation: it caused him fresh emotion. This great spiritual crisis
had quite slipped his memory, so egoistic are the best of us at times.
"Please be careful that Pinchas's autobiography does not crowd that
out," he said.
Pinchas arrived late, when little Sampson was almost in despair. "It is
all right." he shouted, waving a roll of manuscript. "I have him from
the cradle—the stupid stockbroker, the Man-of-the-Earth, who sent me
back my poesie, and vould not let me teach his boy Judaism. And vhile I
had the inspiration I wrote the leader also in the Museum—it is
here—oh, vairy beautiful! Listen to the first sentence. 'The Angel of
Death has passed again over Judaea; he has flown off vith our visest and
our best, but the black shadow of his ving vill long rest upon the House
of Israel.' And the end is vordy of the beginning. He is dead: but he
lives for ever enshrined in the noble tribute to his genius in
Metatoron's Flames."
Little Sampson seized the "copy" and darted with it to the
composing-room, where Raphael was busy giving directions. By his joyful
face Raphael saw the crisis was over. Little Sampson handed the
manuscript to the foreman, then drawing a deep breath of relief, he
began to hum a sprightly march.
"I say, you're a nice chap!" he grumbled, cutting himself short with a
staccato that was not in the music.
"What have I done?" asked Raphael.
"Done? You've got me into a nice mess. The guvnor—the new guvnor, the
old guvnor, it seems—called the other day to fix things with me and
Pinchas. He asked me if I was satisfied to go on at the same screw. I
said he might make it two pound ten. 'What, more than double?' says he.
'No, only nine shillings extra,' says I, 'and for that I'll throw in
some foreign telegrams the late editor never cared for.' And then it
came out that he only knew of a sovereign, and fancied I was trying it
on."
"Oh, I'm so sorry," said Raphael, in deep scarlet distress.
"You must have been paying a guinea out of your own pocket!" said little

Sampson sharply.

Raphael's confusion increased. "I—I—didn't want it myself," he
faltered. "You see, it was paid me just for form, and you really did the
work. Which reminds me I have a cheque of yours now," he ended boldly.
"That'll make it right for the coming month, anyhow."
He hunted out Goldsmith's final cheque, and tendered it sheepishly.
"Oh no, I can't take it now," said little Sampson. He folded his arms,
and drew his cloak around him like a toga. No August sun ever divested
little Sampson of his cloak.
"Has Goldsmith agreed to your terms, then?" inquired Raphael timidly.
"Oh no, not he. But—"
"Then I must go on paying the difference," said Raphael decisively. "I
am responsible to you that you get the salary you're used to; it's my
fault that things are changed, and I must pay the penalty," He crammed
the cheque forcibly into the pocket of the toga.
"Well, if you put it in that way," said little Sampson, "I won't say I
couldn't do with it. But only as a loan, mind."
"All right," murmured Raphael.
"And you'll take it back when my comic opera goes on tour. You won't
back out?"
"No."
"Give us your hand on it," said little Sampson huskily. Raphael gave him
his hand, and little Sampson swung it up and down like a baton.
"Hang it all! and that man calls himself a Jew!" he thought. Aloud he
said: "When my comic opera goes on tour."
They returned to the editorial den, where they found Pinchas raging, a
telegram in his hand.
"Ah, the Man-of-the-Earth!" he cried. "All my beautiful peroration he

spoils." He crumpled up the telegram and threw it pettishly at little

Sampson, then greeted Raphael with effusive joy and hilarity. Little

Sampson read the telegram. It ran as follows:

"Last sentence of Gideon leader. 'It is too early yet in this moment of
grief to speculate as to his successor in the constituency. But,
difficult as it will be to replace him, we may find some solace in the
thought that it will not be impossible. The spirit of the illustrious
dead would itself rejoice to acknowledge the special qualifications of
one whose name will at once rise to every lip as that of a brother Jew
whose sincere piety and genuine public spirit mark him out as the one
worthy substitute in the representation of a district embracing so many
of our poor Jewish brethren. Is it too much to hope that he will be
induced to stand?' Goldsmith."
"That's a cut above Henry," murmured little Sampson, who knew nearly
everything, save the facts he had to supply to the public. "He wired to
the wife, and it's hers. Well, it saves him from writing his own puffs,
anyhow. I suppose Goldsmith's only the signature, not intended to be the
last word on the subject. Wants touching up, though; can't have 'spirit'
twice within four lines. How lucky for him Leon is just off the box
seat! That queer beggar would never have submitted to any dictation any
more than the boss would have dared show his hand so openly."
While the sub-editor mused thus, a remark dropped from the editor's
lips, which turned Raphael whiter than the news of the death of Gideon
had done.
"Yes, and in the middle of writing I look up and see the maiden—oh,
vairy beautiful! How she gives it to English Judaism sharp in that
book—the stupid heads,—the Men-of-the-Earth! I could kiss her for it,
only I have never been introduced. Gideon, he is there! Ho! ho!" he
sniggered, with purely intellectual appreciation of the pungency.
"What maiden? What are you talking about?" asked Raphael, his breath
coming painfully.
"Your maiden," said Pinchas, surveying him with affectionate
roguishness. "The maiden that came to see you here. She was reading; I
walk by and see it is about America."
"At the British Museum?" gasped Raphael. A thousand hammers beat "Fool!"
upon his brain. Why had he not thought of so likely a place for a
littérateur?
He rushed out of the office and into a hansom. He put his pipe out in
anticipation. In seven minutes he was at the gates, just in time—heaven
be thanked!—to meet her abstractedly descending the steps. His heart
gave a great leap of joy. He studied the pensive little countenance for
an instant before it became aware of him; its sadness shot a pang of
reproach through him. Then a great light, as of wonder and joy, came
into the dark eyes, and glorified the pale, passionate face. But it was
only a flash that faded, leaving the cheeks more pallid than before, the
lips quivering.
"Mr. Leon!" she muttered.
He raised his hat, then held out a trembling hand that closed upon hers
with a grip that hurt her.
"I'm so glad to see you again!" he said, with unconcealed enthusiasm. "I
have been meaning to write to you for days—care of your publishers. I
wonder if you will ever forgive me!"
"You had nothing to write to me," she said, striving to speak coldly.
"Oh yes, I had!" he protested.
She shook her head.
"Our journalistic relations are over—there were no others."
"Oh!" he said reproachfully, feeling his heart grow chill. "Surely we
were friends?"
She did not answer.
"I wanted to write and tell you how much," he began desperately, then
stammered, and ended—"how much I liked Mordecai Josephs."
This time the reproachful "Oh!" came from her lips. "I thought better of
you," she said. "You didn't say that in The Flag of Judah; writing it
privately to me wouldn't do me any good in any case."
He felt miserable; from the crude standpoint of facts, there was no
answer to give. He gave none.
"I suppose it is all about now?" she went on, seeing him silent.
"Pretty well," he answered, understanding the question. Then, with an
indignant accent, he said, "Mrs. Goldsmith tells everybody she found it
out; and sent you away."
"I am glad she says that," she remarked enigmatically. "And, naturally,
everybody detests me?"
"Not everybody," he began threateningly.
"Don't let us stand on the steps," she interrupted. "People will be
looking at us." They moved slowly downwards, and into the hot, bustling
streets. "Why are you not at the Flag? I thought this was your busy
day." She did not add, "And so I ventured to the Museum, knowing there
was no chance of your turning up;" but such was the fact.
"I am not the editor any longer, he replied.
"Not?" She almost came to a stop. "So much for my critical faculty; I
could have sworn to your hand in every number."
"Your critical faculty equals your creative," he began.
"Journalism has taught you sarcasm."
"No, no! please do not be so unkind. I spoke in earnestness. I have only
just been dismissed."
"Dismissed!" she echoed incredulously. "I thought the Flag was your
own?"
He grew troubled. "I bought it—but for another. We—he—has dispensed
with my services."
"Oh, how shameful!"
The latent sympathy of her indignation cheered him again.
"I am not sorry," he said. "I'm afraid I really was outgrowing its
original platform."
"What?" she asked, with a note of mockery in her voice. "You have left
off being orthodox?"
"I don't say that, it seems to me, rather, that I have come to
understand I never was orthodox in the sense that the orthodox
understand the word. I had never come into contact with them before. I
never realized how unfair orthodox writers are to Judaism. But I do not
abate one word of what I have ever said or written, except, of course,
on questions of scholarship, which are always open to revision."
"But what is to become of me—of my conversion?" she said, with mock
piteousness.
"You need no conversion!" he answered passionately, abandoning without a
twinge all those criteria of Judaism for which he had fought with
Strelitski. "You are a Jewess not only in blood, but in spirit. Deny it
as you may, you have all the Jewish ideals,—they are implied in your
attack on our society."
She shook her head obstinately.
"You read all that into me, as you read your modern thought into the old
naïve books."
"I read what is in you. Your soul is in the right, whatever your brain
says." He went on, almost to echo Strelitski's words, "Selfishness is
the only real atheism; aspiration, unselfishness, the only real
religion. In the language of our Hillel, this is the text of the Law;
the rest is commentary. You and I are at one in believing that, despite
all and after all, the world turns on righteousness, on justice"—his
voice became a whisper—"on love."
The old thrill went through her, as when first they met. Once again the
universe seemed bathed in holy joy. But she shook off the spell almost
angrily. Her face was definitely set towards the life of the New World.
Why should he disturb her anew?
"Ah, well, I'm glad you allow me a little goodness," she said
sarcastically. "It is quite evident how you have drifted from orthodoxy.
Strange result of The Flag of Judah! Started to convert me, it has
ended by alienating you—its editor—from the true faith. Oh, the irony
of circumstance! But don't look so glum. It has fulfilled its mission
all the same; it has converted me—I will confess it to you." Her face
grew grave, her tones earnest "So I haven't an atom of sympathy with
your broader attitude. I am full of longing for the old impossible
Judaism."
His face took on a look of anxious solicitude. He was uncertain whether
she spoke ironically or seriously. Only one thing was certain—that she
was slipping from him again. She seemed so complex, paradoxical,
elusive—and yet growing every moment more dear and desirable.
"Where are you living?" he asked abruptly. "It doesn't matter where,"
she answered. "I sail for America in three weeks."
The world seemed suddenly empty. It was hopeless, then—she was almost
in his grasp, yet he could not hold her. Some greater force was
sweeping her into strange alien solitudes. A storm of protest raged in
his heart—all he had meant to say to her rose to his lips, but he only
said, "Must you go?"
"I must. My little sister marries. I have timed my visit so as to arrive
just for the wedding—like a fairy godmother." She smiled wistfully.
"Then you will live with your people, I suppose?"
"I suppose so. I dare say I shall become quite good again. Ah, your new
Judaisms will never appeal like the old, with all its imperfections.
They will never keep the race together through shine and shade as that
did. They do but stave off the inevitable dissolution. It is
beautiful—that old childlike faith in the pillar of cloud by day and
the pillar of fire by night, that patient waiting through the centuries
for the Messiah who even to you, I dare say, is a mere symbol." Again
the wistful look lit up her eyes. "That's what you rich people will
never understand—it doesn't seem to go with dinners in seven courses,
somehow."
"Oh, but I do understand," he protested. "It's what I told Strelitski,
who is all for intellect in religion. He is going to America, too," he
said, with a sudden pang of jealous apprehension.
"On a holiday?"
"No; he is going to resign his ministry here."
"What! Has he got a better offer from America?"
"Still so cruel to him," he said reprovingly. "He is resigning for
conscience' sake."
"After all these years?" she queried sarcastically.
"Miss Ansell, you wrong him! He was not happy in his position. You were
right so far. But he cannot endure his shackles any longer. And it is
you who have inspired him to break them."
"I?" she exclaimed, startled.
"Yes, I told him why you had left Mrs. Henry Goldsmith's—it seemed to
act like an electrical stimulus. Then and there he made me write a
paragraph announcing his resignation. It will appear to-morrow."
Esther's eyes filled with soft light. She walked on in silence; then,
noticing she had automatically walked too much in the direction of her
place of concealment, she came to an abrupt stop.
"We must part here," she said. "If I ever come across my old shepherd in
America, I will be nicer to him. It is really quite heroic of him—you
must have exaggerated my own petty sacrifice alarmingly if it really
supplied him with inspiration. What is he going to do in America?"
"To preach a universal Judaism. He is a born idealist; his ideas have
always such a magnificent sweep. Years ago he wanted all the Jews to
return to Palestine."
Esther smiled faintly, not at Strelitski, but at Raphael's calling
another man an idealist. She had never yet done justice to the strain of
common-sense that saved him from being a great man; he and the new
Strelitski were of one breed to her.
"He will make Jews no happier and Christians no wiser," she said
sceptically. "The great populations will sweep on, as little affected by
the Jews as this crowd by you and me. The world will not go back on
itself—rather will Christianity transform itself and take the credit.
We are such a handful of outsiders. Judaism—old or new—is a forlorn
hope."
"The forlorn hope will yet save the world," he answered quietly, "but it
has first to be saved to the world."
"Be happy in your hope," she said gently. "Good-bye." She held out her
little hand. He had no option but to take it.
"But we are not going to part like this," he said desperately. "I shall
see you again before you go to America?"
"No, why should you?"
"Because I love you," rose to his lips. But the avowal seemed too plump.

He prevaricated by retorting, "Why should I not?"

"Because I fear you," was in her heart, but nothing rose to her lips. He
looked into her eyes to read an answer there, but she dropped them. He
saw his opportunity.
"Why should I not?" he repeated.
"Your time is valuable," she said faintly.
"I could not spend it better than with you," he answered boldly.
"Please don't insist," she said in distress.
"But I shall; I am your friend. So far as I know, you are lonely. If you
are bent upon going away, why deny me the pleasure of the society I am
about to lose for ever?"
"Oh, how can you call it a pleasure—such poor melancholy company as I
am!"
"Such poor melancholy company that I came expressly to seek it, for some
one told me you were at the Museum. Such poor melancholy company that if
I am robbed of it life will be a blank."
He had not let go her hand; his tones were low and passionate; the
heedless traffic of the sultry London street was all about them.
Esther trembled from head to foot; she could not look at him. There was
no mistaking his meaning now; her breast was a whirl of delicious pain.
But in proportion as the happiness at her beck and call dazzled her, so
she recoiled from it. Bent on self-effacement, attuned to the peace of
despair, she almost resented the solicitation to be happy; she had
suffered so much that she had grown to think suffering her natural
element, out of which she could not breathe; she was almost in love with
misery. And in so sad a world was there not something ignoble about
happiness, a selfish aloofness from the life of humanity? And,
illogically blent with this questioning, and strengthening her recoil,
was an obstinate conviction that there could never be happiness for her,
a being of ignominious birth, without roots in life, futile, shadowy,
out of relation to the tangible solidities of ordinary existence. To
offer her a warm fireside seemed to be to tempt her to be false to
something—she knew not what. Perhaps it was because the warm fireside
was in the circle she had quitted, and her heart was yet bitter against
it, finding no palliative even in the thought of a triumphant return.
She did not belong to it; she was not of Raphael's world. But she felt
grateful to the point of tears for his incomprehensible love for a
plain, penniless, low-born girl. Surely, it was only his chivalry. Other
men had not found her attractive. Sidney had not; Levi only fancied
himself in love. And yet beneath all her humility was a sense of being
loved for the best in her, for the hidden qualities Raphael alone had
the insight to divine. She could never think so meanly of herself or of
humanity again. He had helped and strengthened her for her lonely
future; the remembrance of him would always be an inspiration, and a
reminder of the nobler side of human nature.
All this contradictory medley of thought and feeling occupied but a few
seconds of consciousness. She answered him without any perceptible
pause, lightly enough.
"Really, Mr. Leon, I don't expect you to say such things. Why should
we be so conventional, you and I? How can your life be a blank, with
Judaism yet to be saved?"
"Who am I to save Judaism? I want to save you," he said passionately.
"What a descent! For heaven's sake, stick to your earlier ambition!"
"No, the two are one to me. Somehow you seem to stand for Judaism, too.
I cannot disentwine my hopes; I have come to conceive your life as an
allegory of Judaism, the offspring of a great and tragic past with the
germs of a rich blossoming, yet wasting with an inward canker, I have
grown to think of its future as somehow bound up with yours. I want to
see your eyes laughing, the shadows lifted from your brow; I want to see
you face life courageously, not in passionate revolt nor in passionless
despair, but in faith and hope and the joy that springs from them. I
want you to seek peace, not in a despairing surrender of the intellect
to the faith of childhood, but in that faith intellectually justified.
And while I want to help you, and to fill your life with the sunshine it
needs, I want you to help me, to inspire me when I falter, to complete
my life, to make me happier than I had ever dreamed. Be my wife, Esther.
Let me save you from yourself."
"Let me save you from yourself, Raphael. Is it wise to wed with the gray
spirit of the Ghetto that doubts itself?"
And like a spirit she glided from his grasp and disappeared in the
crowd.
The New Year dawned upon the Ghetto, heralded by a month of special
matins and the long-sustained note of the ram's horn. It was in the
midst of the Ten Days of Repentance which find their awful climax in the
Day of Atonement that a strange letter for Hannah came to startle the
breakfast-table at Reb Shemuel's. Hannah read it with growing pallor and
perturbation.
"What is the matter, my dear?" asked the Reb, anxiously.
"Oh, father," she cried, "read this! Bad news of Levi."
A spasm of pain contorted the old man's furrowed countenance.
"Mention not his name!" he said harshly "He is dead."
"He may be by now!" Hannah exclaimed agitatedly. "You were right,
Esther. He did join a strolling company, and now he is laid up with
typhoid in the hospital in Stockbridge. One of his friends writes to
tell us. He must have caught it in one of those insanitary
dressing-rooms we were reading about."
Esther trembled all over. The scene in the garret when the fatal
telegram came announcing Benjamin's illness had never faded from her
mind. She had an instant conviction that it was all over with poor Levi.
"My poor lamb!" cried the Rebbitzin, the coffee-cup dropping from her
nerveless hand.
"Simcha," said Reb Shemuel sternly, "calm thyself; we have no son to
lose. The Holy One—blessed be He!—hath taken him from us. The Lord
giveth, and the Lord taketh. Blessed be the name of the Lord."
Hannah rose. Her face was white and resolute. She moved towards the
door.
"Whither goest thou?" inquired her father in German.
"I am going to my room, to put on my hat and jacket," replied Hannah
quietly.
"Whither goest thou?" repeated Reb Shemuel.
"To Stockbridge. Mother, you and I must go at once."
The Reb sprang to his feet. His brow was dark; his eyes gleamed with
anger and pain.
"Sit down and finish thy breakfast," he said.
"How can I eat? Levi is dying," said Hannah, in low, firm tones. "Will
you come, mother, or must I go alone?"
The Rebbitzin began to wring her hands and weep. Esther stole gently to
Hannah's side and pressed the poor girl's hand. "You and I will go," her
clasp said.
"Hannah!" said Reb Shemuel. "What madness is this? Dost thou think thy
mother will obey thee rather than her husband?"
"Levi is dying. It is our duty to go to him." Hannah's gentle face was
rigid. But there was exaltation rather than defiance in the eyes.
"It is not the duty of women," said Reb Shemuel harshly. "I will go to
Stockbridge. If he dies (God have mercy upon his soul!) I will see that
he is buried among his own people. Thou knowest women go not to
funerals." He reseated himself at the table, pushing aside his scarcely
touched meal, and began saying the grace. Dominated by his will and by
old habit, the three trembling women remained in reverential silence.
"The Lord will give strength to His people; the Lord will bless His
people with Peace," concluded the old man in unfaltering accents. He
rose from the table and strode to the door, stern and erect "Thou wilt
remain here, Hannah, and thou, Simcha," he said. In the passage his
shoulders relaxed their stiffness, so that the long snow-white beard
drooped upon his breast. The three women looked at one another.
"Mother," said Hannah, passionately breaking the silence, "are you going
to stay here while Levi is dying in a strange town?"
"My husband wills it," said the Rebbitzin, sobbing. "Levi is a sinner in
Israel. Thy father will not see him; he will not go to him till he is
dead."
"Oh yes, surely he will," said Esther. "But be comforted. Levi is young
and strong. Let us hope he will pull through."
"No, no!" moaned the Rebbitzin. "He will die, and my husband will but
read the psalms at his death-bed. He will not forgive him; he will not
speak to him of his mother and sister."
"Let me go. I will give him your messages," said Esther.
"No, no," interrupted Hannah. "What are you to him? Why should you risk
infection for our sakes?"
"Go, Hannah, but secretly," said the Rebbitzin in a wailing whisper.
"Let not thy father see thee till thou arrive; then he will not send
thee back. Tell Levi that I—oh, my poor child, my poor lamb!" Sobs
overpowered her speech.
"No, mother," said Hannah quietly, "thou and I shall go. I will tell
father we are accompanying him."
She left the room, while the Rebbitzin fell weeping and terrified into a
chair, and Esther vainly endeavored to soothe her. The Reb was changing
his coat when Hannah knocked at the door and called "Father."
"Speak not to me, Hannah," answered the Reb, roughly. "It is useless."
Then, as if repentant of his tone, he threw open the door, and passed
his great trembling hand lovingly over her hair. "Thou art a good
daughter," he said tenderly. "Forget that thou hast had a brother."
"But how can I forget?" she answered him in his own idiom. "Why should I
forget? What hath he done?"
He ceased to smooth her hair—his voice grew sad and stern.
"He hath profaned the Name. He hath lived like a heathen; he dieth like
a heathen now. His blasphemy was a by-word in the congregation. I alone
knew it not till last Passover. He hath brought down my gray hairs in
sorrow to the grave."
"Yes, father, I know," said Hannah, more gently. "But he is not all to
blame!"
"Thou meanest that I am not guiltless; that I should have kept him at my
side?" said the Reb, his voice faltering a little.
"No, father, not that! Levi could not always be a baby. He had to walk
alone some day."
"Yes, and did I not teach him to walk alone?" asked the Reb eagerly. "My
God, thou canst not say I did not teach him Thy Law, day and night." He
uplifted his eyes in anguished appeal.
"Yes, but he is not all to blame," she repeated. "Thy teaching did not
reach his soul; he is of another generation, the air is different, his
life was cast amid conditions for which the Law doth not allow."
"Hannah!" Reb Shemuel's accents became harsh and chiding again. "What
sayest thou? The Law of Moses is eternal; it will never be changed. Levi
knew God's commandments, but he followed the desire of his own heart and
his own eyes. If God's Word were obeyed, he should have been stoned with
stones. But Heaven itself hath punished him; he will die, for it is
ordained that whosoever is stubborn and disobedient, that soul shall
surely be cut off from among his people. 'Keep My commandments, that thy
days may be long in the land,' God Himself hath said it. Is it not
written: 'Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart and
in the sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these things the
Lord will bring thee into judgment'? But thou, my Hannah," he started
caressing her hair again, "art a good Jewish maiden. Between Levi and
thee there is naught in common. His touch would profane thee. Sadden not
thy innocent eyes with the sight of his end. Think of him as one who
died in boyhood. My God! why didst thou not take him then?" He turned
away, stifling a sob.
"Father," she put her hand on his shoulder, "we will go with thee to

Stockbridge—I and the mother."

He faced her again, stern and rigid.
"Cease thy entreaties. I will go alone."
"No, we will all go."
"Hannah," he said, his voice tremulous with pain and astonishment, "dost
thou, too, set light by thy father?"
"Yes," she cried, and there was no answering tremor in her voice. "Now
thou knowest! I am not a good Jewish maiden. Levi and I are brother and
sister. His touch profane me, forsooth!" She laughed bitterly.
"Thou wilt take this journey though I forbid thee?" he cried in acrid
accents, still mingled with surprise.
"Yes; would I had taken the journey thou wouldst have forbidden ten
years ago!"
"What journey? thou talkest madness."
"I talk truth. Thou hast forgotten David Brandon; I have not. Ten years
last Passover I arranged to fly with him, to marry him, in defiance of
the Law and thee."
A new pallor overspread the Reb's countenance, already ashen. He
trembled and almost fell backwards.
"But thou didst not?" he whispered hoarsely.
"I did not, I know not why," she said sullenly; "else thou wouldst never
have seen me again. It may be I respected thy religion, although thou
didst not dream what was in my mind. But thy religion shall not keep me
from this journey."
The Reb had hidden his face in his hands. His lips were moving; was it
in grateful prayer, in self-reproach, or merely in nervous trembling?
Hannah never knew. Presently the Reb's arms dropped, great tears rolled
down towards the white beard. When he spoke, his tones were hushed as
with awe.
"This man—tell me, my daughter, thou lovest him still?"
She shrugged her shoulders with a gesture of reckless despair.
"What does it matter? My life is but a shadow."
The Reb took her to his breast, though she remained stony to his touch,
and laid his wet face against her burning cheeks.
"My child, my poor Hannah; I thought God had sent thee peace ten years
ago; that He had rewarded thee for thy obedience to His Law."
She drew her face away from his.
"It was not His Law; it was a miserable juggling with texts. Thou alone
interpretedst God's law thus. No one knew of the matter."
He could not argue; the breast against which he held her was shaken by a
tempest of grief, which swept away all save human remorse, human love.
"My daughter," he sobbed, "I have ruined thy life!" After an agonized
pause, he said: "Tell me, Hannah, is there nothing I can do to make
atonement to thee?"
"Only one thing, father," she articulated chokingly; "forgive Levi."
There was a moment of solemn silence. Then the Reb spake.
"Tell thy mother to put on her things and take what she needs for the
journey. Perchance we may be away for days."
They mingled their tears in sweet reconciliation. Presently, the Reb
said:
"Go now to thy mother, and see also that the boy's room be made ready as
of old. Perchance God will hear my prayer, and he will yet be restored
to us."
A new peace fell upon Hannah's soul. "My sacrifice was not in vain after
all," she thought, with a throb of happiness that was almost exultation.
But Levi never came back. The news of his death arrived on the eve of
Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, in a letter to Esther who had been
left in charge of the house.
"He died quietly at the end," Hannah wrote, "happy in the consciousness
of father's forgiveness, and leaning trustfully upon his interposition
with Heaven; but he had delirious moments, during which he raved
painfully. The poor boy was in great fear of death, moaning prayers that
he might be spared till after Yom Kippur, when he would be cleansed of
sin, and babbling about serpents that would twine themselves round his
arm and brow, like the phylacteries he had not worn. He made father
repeat his 'Verse' to him over and over again, so that he might remember
his name when the angel of the grave asked it; and borrowed father's
phylacteries, the headpiece of which was much too large for him with his
shaven crown. When he had them on, and the Talith round him, he grew
easier, and began murmuring the death-bed prayers with father. One of
them runs: 'O may my death be an atonement for all the sins, iniquities
and transgressions of which I have been guilty against Thee!' I trust it
may be so indeed. It seems so hard for a young man full of life and high
spirits to be cut down, while the wretched are left alive. Your name was
often on his lips. I was glad to learn he thought so much of you. 'Be
sure to give Esther my love,' he said almost with his last breath, 'and
ask her to forgive me.' I know not if you have anything to forgive, or
whether this was delirium. He looks quite calm now—but oh! so worn.
They have closed the eyes. The beard he shocked father so by shaving
off, has sprouted scrubbily during his illness. On the dead face it
seems a mockery, like the Talith and phylacteries that have not been
removed."
A phrase of Leonard James vibrated in Esther's ears: "If the chappies
could see me!"
The morning of the Great White Fast broke bleak and gray. Esther, alone
in the house save for the servant, wandered from room to room in dull
misery. The day before had been almost a feast-day in the
Ghetto—everybody providing for the morrow. Esther had scarcely eaten
anything. Nevertheless she was fasting, and would fast for over
twenty-four hours, till the night fell. She knew not why. Her record was
unbroken, and instinct resented a breach now. She had always
fasted—even the Henry Goldsmiths fasted, and greater than the Henry
Goldsmiths! Q.C.'s fasted, and peers, and prize-fighters and actors. And
yet Esther, like many far more pious persons, did not think of her sins
for a moment. She thought of everything but them—of the bereaved family
in that strange provincial town; of her own family in that strange
distant land. Well, she would soon be with them now. Her passage was
booked—a steerage passage it was, not because she could not afford
cabin fare, but from her morbid impulse to identify herself with
poverty. The same impulse led her to choose a vessel in which a party of
Jewish pauper immigrants was being shipped farther West. She thought
also of Dutch Debby, with whom she had spent the previous evening; and
of Raphael Leon, who had sent her, via the publishers, a letter which
she could not trust herself to answer cruelly, and which she deemed it
most prudent to leave unanswered. Uncertain of her powers of resistance,
she scarcely ventured outside the house for fear of his stumbling across
her. Happily, every day diminished the chance of her whereabouts
leaking out through some unsuspected channel.
About noon, her restlessness carried her into the streets. There was a
festal solemnity about the air. Women and children, not at synagogue,
showed themselves at the doors, pranked in their best. Indifferently
pious young men sought relief from the ennui of the day-long service in
lounging about for a breath of fresh air; some even strolled towards the
Strand, and turned into the National Gallery, satisfied to reappear for
the twilight service. On all sides came the fervent roar of prayer which
indicated a synagogue or a Chevrah, the number of places of worship
having been indefinitely increased to accommodate those who made their
appearance for this occasion only.
Everywhere friends and neighbors were asking one another how they were
bearing the fast, exhibiting their white tongues and generally comparing
symptoms, the physical aspects of the Day of Atonement more or less
completely diverting attention from the spiritual. Smelling-salts passed
from hand to hand, and men explained to one another that, but for the
deprivation of their cigars, they could endure Yom Kippur with
complacency.
Esther passed the Ghetto school, within which free services were going
on even in the playground, poor Russians and Poles, fanatically
observant, fore-gathering with lax fishmongers and welshers; and without
which hulking young men hovered uneasily, feeling too out of tune with
religion to go in, too conscious of the terrors of the day to stay
entirely away. From the interior came from sunrise to nightfall a
throbbing thunder of supplication, now pealing in passionate outcry, now
subsiding to a low rumble. The sounds of prayer that pervaded the
Ghetto, and burst upon her at every turn, wrought upon Esther strangely;
all her soul went out in sympathy with these yearning outbursts; she
stopped every now and then to listen, as in those far-off days when the
Sons of the Covenant drew her with their melancholy cadences.
At last, moved by an irresistible instinct, she crossed the threshold of
a large Chevrah she had known in her girlhood, mounted the stairs and
entered the female compartment without hostile challenge. The reek of
many breaths and candles nearly drove her back, but she pressed forwards
towards a remembered window, through a crowd of be-wigged women, shaking
their bodies fervently to and fro.
This room had no connection with the men's; it was simply the room above
part of theirs, and the declamations of the unseen cantor came but
faintly through the flooring, though the clamor of the general masculine
chorus kept the pious au courant with their husbands. When weather or
the whims of the more important ladies permitted, the window at the end
was opened; it gave upon a little balcony, below which the men's chamber
projected considerably, having been built out into the back yard. When
this window was opened simultaneously with the skylight in the men's
synagogue, the fervid roulades of the cantor were as audible to the
women as to their masters.
Esther had always affected the balcony: there the air was comparatively
fresh, and on fine days there was a glimpse of blue sky, and a
perspective of sunny red tiles, where brown birds fluttered and cats
lounged and little episodes arose to temper the tedium of endless
invocation: and farther off there was a back view of a nunnery, with
visions of placid black-hooded faces at windows; and from the distance
came a pleasant drone of monosyllabic spelling from fresh young voices,
to relieve the ear from the monotony of long stretches of meaningless
mumbling.
Here, lost in a sweet melancholy, Esther dreamed away the long gray day,
only vaguely conscious of the stages of the service—morning dovetailing
into afternoon service, and afternoon into evening; of the heavy-jowled
woman behind her reciting a jargon-version of the Atonement liturgy to a
devout coterie; of the prostrations full-length on the floor, and the
series of impassioned sermons; of the interminably rhyming poems, and
the acrostics with their recurring burdens shouted in devotional frenzy,
voice rising above voice as in emulation, with special staccato phrases
flung heavenwards; of the wailing confessions of communal sin, with
their accompaniment of sobs and tears and howls and grimaces and
clenchings of palms and beatings of the breast. She was lapped in a
great ocean of sound that broke upon her consciousness like the waves
upon a beach, now with a cooing murmur, now with a majestic crash,
followed by a long receding moan. She lost herself in the roar, in its
barren sensuousness, while the leaden sky grew duskier and the twilight
crept on, and the awful hour drew nigh when God would seal what He had
written, and the annual scrolls of destiny would be closed, immutable.
She saw them looming mystically through the skylight, the swaying forms
below, in their white grave-clothes, oscillating weirdly backwards and
forwards, bowed as by a mighty wind.
Suddenly there fell a vast silence; even from without no sound came to
break the awful stillness. It was as if all creation paused to hear a
pregnant word.
"Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One!" sang the cantor
frenziedly.
And all the ghostly congregation answered with a great cry, closing
their eyes and rocking frantically to and fro:
"Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One!"
They seemed like a great army of the sheeted dead risen to testify to
the Unity. The magnetic tremor that ran through the synagogue thrilled
the lonely girl to the core; once again her dead self woke, her dead
ancestors that would not be shaken off lived and moved in her. She was
sucked up into the great wave of passionate faith, and from her lips
came, in rapturous surrender to an overmastering impulse, the
half-hysterical protestation:
"Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is One!"
And then in the brief instant while the congregation, with
ever-ascending rhapsody, blessed God till the climax came with the
sevenfold declaration, "the Lord, He is God," the whole history of her
strange, unhappy race flashed through her mind in a whirl of resistless
emotion. She was overwhelmed by the thought of its sons in every corner
of the earth proclaiming to the sombre twilight sky the belief for which
its generations had lived and died—the Jews of Russia sobbing it forth
in their pale of enclosure, the Jews of Morocco in their mellah, and
of South Africa in their tents by the diamond mines: the Jews of the
New World in great free cities, in Canadian backwoods, in South American
savannahs: the Australian Jews on the sheep-farms and the gold-fields
and in the mushroom cities; the Jews of Asia in their reeking quarters
begirt by barbarian populations. The shadow of a large mysterious
destiny seemed to hang over these poor superstitious zealots, whose
lives she knew so well in all their everyday prose, and to invest the
unconscious shunning sons of the Ghetto with something of tragic
grandeur. The gray dusk palpitated with floating shapes of prophets and
martyrs, scholars and sages and poets, full of a yearning love and pity,
lifting hands of benediction. By what great high-roads and queer by-ways
of history had they travelled hither, these wandering Jews, "sated with
contempt," these shrewd eager fanatics, these sensual ascetics, these
human paradoxes, adaptive to every environment, energizing in every
field of activity, omnipresent like sonic great natural force,
indestructible and almost inconvertible, surviving—with the incurable
optimism that overlay all their poetic sadness—Babylon and Carthage,
Greece and Rome; involuntarily financing the Crusades, outliving the
Inquisition, illusive of all baits, unshaken by all persecutions—at
once the greatest and meanest of races? Had the Jew come so far only to
break down at last, sinking in morasses of modern doubt, and
irresistibly dragging down with him the Christian and the Moslem; or was
he yet fated to outlast them both, in continuous testimony to a hand
moulding incomprehensibly the life of humanity? Would Israel develop
into the sacred phalanx, the nobler brotherhood that Raphael Leon had
dreamed of, or would the race that had first proclaimed—through Moses
for the ancient world, through Spinoza for the modern—
    "One God, one Law, one Element,"
become, in the larger, wilder dream of the Russian idealist, the main
factor in
            "One far-off divine event

    To which the whole Creation moves"?

The roar dwindled to a solemn silence, as though in answer to her
questionings. Then the ram's horn shrilled—a stern long-drawn-out note,
that rose at last into a mighty peal of sacred jubilation. The Atonement
was complete.
The crowd bore Esther downstairs and into the blank indifferent street.
But the long exhausting fast, the fetid atmosphere, the strain upon her
emotions, had overtaxed her beyond endurance. Up to now the frenzy of
the service had sustained her, but as she stepped across the threshold
on to the pavement she staggered and fell. One of the men pouring out
from the lower synagogue caught her in his arms. It was Strelitski.
       *       *       *       *       *
A group of three stood on the saloon deck of an outward-bound steamer.
Raphael Leon was bidding farewell to the man he reverenced without
discipleship, and the woman he loved without blindness.
"Look!" he said, pointing compassionately to the wretched throng of
Jewish emigrants huddling on the lower deck and scattered about the
gangway amid jostling sailors and stevedores and bales and coils of
rope; the men in peaked or fur caps, the women with shawls and babies,
some gazing upwards with lacklustre eyes, the majority brooding,
despondent, apathetic. "How could either of you have borne the sights
and smells of the steerage? You are a pair of visionaries. You could not
have breathed a day in that society. Look!"
Strelitski looked at Esther instead; perhaps he was thinking he could
have breathed anywhere in her society—nay, breathed even more freely in
the steerage than in the cabin if he had sailed away without telling
Raphael that he had found her.
"You forget a common impulse took us into such society on the Day of
Atonement," he answered after a moment. "You forget we are both Children
of the Ghetto."
"I can never forget that," said Raphael fervently, "else Esther would at
this moment be lost amid the human flotsam and jetsam below, sailing
away without you to protect her, without me to look forward to her
return, without Addie's bouquet to assure her of a sister's love."
He took Esther's little hand once more It lingered confidingly in his
own. There was no ring of betrothal upon it, nor would be, till Rachel
Ansell in America, and Addie Leon in England, should have passed under
the wedding canopy, and Raphael, whose breast pocket was bulging with a
new meerschaum too sacred to smoke, should startle the West End with his
eccentric choice, and confirm its impression of his insanity. The trio
had said and resaid all they had to tell one another, all the reminders
and the recommendations. They stood without speaking now, wrapped in
that loving silence which is sweeter than speech.
The sun, which, had been shining intermittently, flooded the serried
shipping with a burst of golden light, that coaxed the turbid waves to
brightness, and cheered the wan emigrants, and made little children leap
joyously in their mothers' arms. The knell of parting sounded insistent.
"Your allegory seems turning in your favor, Raphael," said Esther, with
a sudden memory.
The pensive smile that made her face beautiful lit up the dark eyes.
"What allegory is that of Raphael's?" said Strelitski, reflecting her
smile on his graver visage. "The long one in his prize poem?"
"No," said Raphael, catching the contagious smile. "It is our little
secret."
Strelitski turned suddenly to look at the emigrants. The smile faded
from his quivering mouth.
The last moment had come. Raphael stooped down towards the gentle
softly-flushing face, which was raised unhesitatingly to meet his, and
their lips met in a first kiss, diviner than it is given most mortals to
know—a kiss, sad and sweet, troth and parting in one: Ave et
vale—hail and farewell."
"Good-bye, Strelitski," said Raphael huskily. "Success to your dreams."
The idealist turned round with a start. His face was bright and
resolute; the black curl streamed buoyantly on the breeze.
"Good-bye," he responded, with a giant's grip of the hand. "Success to
your hopes."
Raphael darted away with his long stride. The sun was still bright, but
for a moment everything seemed chill and dim to Esther Ansell's vision.
With a sudden fit of nervous foreboding she stretched out her arms
towards the vanishing figure of her lover. But she saw him once again in
the tender, waving his handkerchief towards the throbbing vessel that
glided with its freight of hopes and dreams across the great waters
towards the New World.
H.  = Hebrew.
G.  = German.
Gk. = Greek.
R.  = Russian.
S.  = Spanish.
c.  = corrupt.
Achi-nebbich (etymology obscure),

  Alas, poor thing(s).

Afikuman (Hebraicized Gk.),

  portion of a Passover cake taken at the end of Sedermeal (q.v.).

Agadah (H.),

  narrative portion of the Talmud; Passover-eve ritual.

Amidah (H.),

  series of Benedictions said standing.

Arbah Kanfus (H.) lit.,

  four corners; a garment consisting of two shoulder straps supporting

  a front and back piece with fringes at each corner (Numbers xv.

  37-41).

Ashkenazim (H.)

  German; hence, also, Russian and Polish Jews.

Badchan (H.),

  professional jester.

Bensh (?),

  say grace.

Beth Din (H.),

  court of judgment.

Beth Medrash (H.),

  college.

Bube (G.),

  grandmother.

Cabbalah (H.), Cabbulah (c.), lit.,

  tradition; mystic lore.

Calloh (H.),

  bride; fiancée.

Chazan (H.),

  cantor.

Chevra (H.),

  small congregation; a society.

Chine (H.),

  playful humor; humorous anecdote.

Chocham (H.),

  wise man.

Chomutz (H.),

  leaven.

Chosan (H.),

  bridegroom; fiancé.

Chuppah (H.),

  wedding canopy.

Cohen (H.),

  priest.

Dayan (H.),

  rabbi who renders decisions.

Din (H.),

  law, decision.

Droshes (H.),

  sermons.

Epikouros (H. from Gk.),

  heretic, scoffer; Epicurean.

Froom (c. G.),

  pious.

Gelt (c.G.),

  money.

Gematriyah (Hebraicised Gk.),

  mystic, numerical interpretation of Scripture.

Gomorah (H.),

  part of the Talmud.

Gonof (H.),

  thief.

Goyah (H.),

  non-Jewess.

Halacha (H.),

  legal portion of the Talmud.

Havdolah (H.),

  ceremony separating conclusion of Sabbath or Festival from the

  subsequent days of toil.

Imbeshreer (c.G. ohne beschreien),

  without bewitching; unbeshrewn.

Kaddish (H.),

  prayer in praise of God; specially recited by male mourners.

Kehillah (H.),

  congregation.

Kind, Kinder (G.),

  child, children.

Kosher (H.),

  ritually clean.

Kotzon (H.),

  rich man.

Link (G.), lit.,

  left, i.e. not right; hence, lax, not pious.

Longë verachum (G. and c.H.), lit.,

  The long "and He being merciful." A long, extra prayer, said on

  Mondays and Thursdays.

Lulov (H.),

  palm branch dressed with myrtle and willow, and used at the Feast

  of Tabernacles.

Maaseh (H.),

  story, tale.

Machzor (H.),

  Festival prayer-book.

Maggid (H.),

  preacher.

Mazzoltov (H.),

  good luck, congratulations.

Megillah (H.), lit.,

  scroll. The Book of Esther.

Meshuggah, Meshuggene (H.),

  mad.

Meshumad (H.),

  apostate.

Metsiah (H.), lit.,

  finding; cp. Fr., trouvaille; bargain.

Mezuzah (H.),

  case containing a scroll, with Hebrew verses (Deuteronomy vi. 4-9,

  13-21) affixed to every door-post.

Midrash (H.),

  Biblical exposition.

Mincha (H.),

  afternoon prayer.

Minyan (H.),

  quorum of ten males, over thirteen, necessary for public worship.

Mishpochah (H.),

  family.

Mishna, Mishnayis (H.),

  collection of the Oral Law.

Misheberach (H.),

  synagogal benediction.

Mitzvah (H.),

  a commandment, i.e. a good deed.

Mizrach (H.),

  East; a sacred picture hung on the east wall in the direction of

  Jerusalem, to which the face is turned in praying.

Narrischkeit (c.G.),

  foolishness.

Nasch (c.G.),

  pilfer (dainties).

Nevirah (H.),

  sin.

Niddali (H.),

  Talmudical tractate on the purification of women.

Nu (R.),

  well.

Olov hasholom (H.),

   Peace be upon him! (loosely applied to deceased females also).

Omer (H.),

  the seven weeks between Passover and Pentecost.

Parnass (H.),

  president of the congregation.

Pesachdik (H.),

  proper for Passover.

Pidyun haben (H.),

  redemption of the first-born son.

Piyut (Hebraicized Gk.),

  liturgical poem.

Pollack (c.G.),

  Polish Jew.

Potch (c.G.),

  slap.

Rashi (H.),

  Rabbi Solomon ben Isaac, whose commentary is often printed under the

  Hebrew text of the Bible.

Schlemihl (H.),

  unlucky, awkward person.

Schmuck (c.G.),

  lubberly person.

Schmull (c.G. schmollen),

  pout, sulk.

Schnecks (? G. Schnake, gay nonsense),

  affectations.

Schnorrer (c.G.),

  beggar.

Seder (H.),

  Passover-eve ceremony.

Selaim (H.),

  old Jewish coins.

Sephardim (H.),

  Spanish and Portuguese Jews.

Shaaloth u tshuvoth (H.),

  questions and answers; casuistical treatise.

Shabbos (H.),

  Sabbath.

Shadchan (H.),

  professional match-maker.

Shaitel (c.G.),

  wig worn by married women.

Shammos (c.H.),

  beadle.

Shass (H. abbreviation),

  the six sections of the Talmud.

Shechitah (H.),

  slaughter.

Shemah beni (H.),

  Hear, my son! = Dear me!

Shemang (H.),

  confession of the Unity of God.

Shidduch (H.),

  match.

Shiksah (H.),

  non-Jewish girl.

Shnodar (H.),

  offer money to the synagogue. (An extraordinary instance of Jewish

  jargon,—a compound Hebrew word meaning "who vows,"—being turned

  into an English verb, and conjugated accordingly, in ed and ing.)

Shochet (H),

  official slaughterer.

Shofar (H.),

  trumpet of ram's horn, blown during the penitential season.

Shool (c. G.),

  synagogue.

Shulchan aruch (H.),

  a sixteenth-century compilation, codifying Jewish law.

Simchath Torah (H.),

  festival of the rejoicing of the Law.

Snoga (S.),

  Sephardic synagogue.

Spiel (G.),

  play.

Takif (H.),

  rich man, swell.

Talith (H.),

  a shawl with fringes, worn by men during prayer.

Tanaim (H.),

  betrothal contract or ceremony.

Térah, Torah (H.),

  Law of Moses.

Tephillin (H.),

  phylacteries.

Tripha (H.),

  ritually unclean.

Wurst (G.),

  sausage.

Yiddish, Yiddishkeit (c.G.),

  Jewish, Judaism.

Yigdal (H.),

  hymn summarizing the thirteen creeds drawn up by Maimonides.

Yom Kippur (H.),

  Day of Atonement.

Yom tof (H.), lit.,

  good day; Festival.

Yontovdik (hybrid H.),

  pertaining to the Festival.

Yosher-Kowach (c.H.),

  May your strength increase! = Thank you; a formula to express

  gratitude—especially at the end of a reading.

***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILDREN OF THE GHETTO***
******* This file should be named 12680-8.txt or 12680-8.zip *******
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/6/8/12680
Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions
will be renamed.
Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away—you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.
To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.
1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.
1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.
1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:
1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net
1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.
1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.
1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.
1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.
1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.
1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.
1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that
- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.
- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.
- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.
1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.
1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.
1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.
1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.
1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.
1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.
1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.
Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.
Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.
The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.
The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org
For additional contact information:

     Dr. Gregory B. Newby

     Chief Executive and Director

     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.
The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org
While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.
International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.
Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate
Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.
Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net
Title: Children of the Ghetto
Author: I. Zangwill
Release Date: June 22, 2004  [eBook #12680]
Last updated: April 1, 2012
Language: English
***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILDREN OF THE GHETTO***
E-text prepared by Charles Aldarondo and Project Gutenberg Distributed
Proofreaders
A Study of a Peculiar People
Author of "The Master," "The King of Schnorrers" "Dreamers of the

Ghetto," "Without Prejudice," etc.

1914
Preface to the Third Edition.
The issue of a one-volume edition gives me the opportunity of thanking
the public and the critics for their kindly reception of this chart of a
terra incognita, and of restoring the original sub-title, which is a
reply to some criticisms upon its artistic form. The book is intended as
a study, through typical figures, of a race whose persistence is the
most remarkable fact in the history of the world, the faith and morals
of which it has so largely moulded. At the request of numerous readers I
have reluctantly added a glossary of 'Yiddish' words and phrases, based
on one supplied to the American edition by another hand. I have omitted
only those words which occur but once and are then explained in the
text; and to each word I have added an indication of the language from
which it was drawn. This may please those who share Mr. Andrew Lang's
and Miss Rosa Dartle's desire for information. It will be seen that most
of these despised words are pure Hebrew; a language which never died off
the lips of men, and which is the medium in which books are written all
the world over even unto this day.
London, March, 1893.
Proem

I.      The Bread of Affliction

II.     The Sweater

III.    Malka

IV.     The Redemption of the Son and the Daughter

V.      The Pauper Alien

VI.     "Reb" Shemuel

VII.    The Neo-Hebrew Poet

VIII.   Esther and her Children

IX.     Dutch Debby

X.      A Silent Family

XI.     The Purim Ball

XII.    The Sons of the Covenant

XIII.   Sugarman's Barmitzvah Party

XIV.    The Hope of the Family

XV.     The Holy Land League

XVI.    The Courtship of Shosshi Shmendrik

XVII.   The Hyams's Honeymoon

XVIII.  The Hebrew's Friday Night

XIX.    With the Strikers

XX.     The Hope Extinct

XXI.    The Jargon Players

XXII.   "For Auld Lang Syne, My Dear"

XXIII.  The Dead Monkey

XXIV.   The Shadow of Religion

XXV.    Seder Night

I.      The Christmas Dinner

II.     Raphael Leon

III.    "The Flag of Judah"

IV.     The Troubles of an Editor

V.      A Woman's Growth

VI.     Comedy or Tragedy?

VII.    What the Years brought

VIII.   The Ends of a Generation

IX.     The "Flag" flutters

X.      Esther defies the Universe

XI.     Going Home

XII.    A Sheaf of Sequels

XIII.   The Dead Monkey again

XIV.    Sidney settles down

XV.     From Soul to Soul

XVI.    Love's Temptation

XVII.   The Prodigal Son

XVIII.  Hopes and Dreams

     Not here in our London Ghetto the gates and gaberdines of the olden
     Ghetto of the Eternal City; yet no lack of signs external by which
     one may know it, and those who dwell therein. Its narrow streets
     have no specialty of architecture; its dirt is not picturesque. It
     is no longer the stage for the high-buskined tragedy of massacre
     and martyrdom; only for the obscurer, deeper tragedy that evolves
     from the pressure of its own inward forces, and the long-drawn-out
     tragi-comedy of sordid and shifty poverty. Natheless, this London
     Ghetto of ours is a region where, amid uncleanness and squalor, the
     rose of romance blows yet a little longer in the raw air of English
     reality; a world which hides beneath its stony and unlovely surface
     an inner world of dreams, fantastic and poetic as the mirage of the
     Orient where they were woven, of superstitions grotesque as the
     cathedral gargoyles of the Dark Ages in which they had birth. And
     over all lie tenderly some streaks of celestial light shining from
     the face of the great Lawgiver.
     The folk who compose our pictures are children of the Ghetto; their
     faults are bred of its hovering miasma of persecution, their
     virtues straitened and intensified by the narrowness of its
     horizon. And they who have won their way beyond its boundaries must
     still play their parts in tragedies and comedies—tragedies of
     spiritual struggle, comedies of material ambition—which are the
     aftermath of its centuries of dominance, the sequel of that long
     cruel night in Jewry which coincides with the Christian Era. If
     they are not the Children, they are at least the Grandchildren of
     the Ghetto.
The particular Ghetto that is the dark background upon which our
pictures will be cast, is of voluntary formation.
People who have been living in a Ghetto for a couple of centuries, are
not able to step outside merely because the gates are thrown down, nor
to efface the brands on their souls by putting off the yellow badges.
The isolation imposed from without will have come to seem the law of
their being. But a minority will pass, by units, into the larger, freer,
stranger life amid the execrations of an ever-dwindling majority. For
better or for worse, or for both, the Ghetto will be gradually
abandoned, till at last it becomes only a swarming place for the poor
and the ignorant, huddling together for social warmth. Such people are
their own Ghetto gates; when they migrate they carry them across the sea
to lands where they are not. Into the heart of East London there poured
from Russia, from Poland, from Germany, from Holland, streams of Jewish
exiles, refugees, settlers, few as well-to-do as the Jew of the proverb,
but all rich in their cheerfulness, their industry, and their
cleverness. The majority bore with them nothing but their phylacteries
and praying shawls, and a good-natured contempt for Christians and
Christianity. For the Jew has rarely been embittered by persecution. He
knows that he is in Goluth, in exile, and that the days of the Messiah
are not yet, and he looks upon the persecutor merely as the stupid
instrument of an all-wise Providence. So that these poor Jews were rich
in all the virtues, devout yet tolerant, and strong in their reliance on
Faith, Hope, and more especially Charity.
In the early days of the nineteenth century, all Israel were brethren.
Even the pioneer colony of wealthy Sephardim—descendants of the Spanish
crypto-Jews who had reached England via Holland—had modified its
boycott of the poor Ashkenazic immigrants, now they were become an
overwhelming majority. There was a superior stratum of Anglo-German Jews
who had had time to get on, but all the Ashkenazic tribes lived very
much like a happy family, the poor not stand-offish towards the rich,
but anxious to afford them opportunities for well-doing. The Schnorrer
felt no false shame in his begging. He knew it was the rich man's duty
to give him unleavened bread at Passover, and coals in the winter, and
odd half-crowns at all seasons; and he regarded himself as the Jacob's
ladder by which the rich man mounted to Paradise. But, like all genuine
philanthropists, he did not look for gratitude. He felt that virtue was
its own reward, especially when he sat in Sabbath vesture at the head of
his table on Friday nights, and thanked God in an operatic aria for the
white cotton table-cloth and the fried sprats. He sought personal
interviews with the most majestic magnates, and had humorous repartees
for their lumbering censure.
As for the rich, they gave charity unscrupulously—in the same Oriental,
unscientific, informal spirit in which the Dayanim, those cadis of the
East End, administered justice. The Takif, or man of substance, was as
accustomed to the palm of the mendicant outside the Great Synagogue as
to the rattling pyx within. They lived in Bury Street, and Prescott
Street, and Finsbury—these aristocrats of the Ghetto—in mansions that
are now but congeries of "apartments." Few relations had they with
Belgravia, but many with Petticoat Lane and the Great Shool, the
stately old synagogue which has always been illuminated by candles and
still refuses all modern light. The Spanish Jews had a more ancient
snoga, but it was within a stone's throw of the "Duke's Place"
edifice. Decorum was not a feature of synagogue worship in those days,
nor was the Almighty yet conceived as the holder of formal receptions
once a week. Worshippers did not pray with bated breath, as if afraid
that the deity would overhear them. They were at ease in Zion. They
passed the snuff-boxes and remarks about the weather. The opportunities
of skipping afforded by a too exuberant liturgy promoted conversation,
and even stocks were discussed in the terrible longueurs induced by
the meaningless ministerial repetition of prayers already said by the
congregation, or by the official recitations of catalogues of purchased
benedictions. Sometimes, of course, this announcement of the offertory
was interesting, especially when there was sensational competition. The
great people bade in guineas for the privilege of rolling up the Scroll
of the Law or drawing the Curtain of the Ark, or saying a particular
Kaddish if they were mourners, and then thrills of reverence went
round the congregation. The social hierarchy was to some extent
graduated by synagogal contributions, and whoever could afford only a
little offering had it announced as a "gift"—a vague term which might
equally be the covering of a reticent munificence.
Very few persons, "called up" to the reading of the Law, escaped at the
cost they had intended, for one is easily led on by an insinuative
official incapable of taking low views of the donor's generosity and a
little deaf. The moment prior to the declaration of the amount was quite
exciting for the audience. On Sabbaths and festivals the authorities
could not write down these sums, for writing is work and work is
forbidden; even to write them in the book and volume of their brain
would have been to charge their memories with an illegitimate if not an
impossible burden. Parchment books on a peculiar system with holes in
the pages and laces to go through the holes solved the problem of
bookkeeping without pen and ink. It is possible that many of the
worshippers were tempted to give beyond their means for fear of losing
the esteem of the Shammos or Beadle, a potent personage only next in
influence to the President whose overcoat he obsequiously removed on the
greater man's annual visit to the synagogue. The Beadle's eye was all
over the Shool at once, and he could settle an altercation about seats
without missing a single response. His automatic amens resounded
magnificently through the synagogue, at once a stimulus and a rebuke. It
was probably as a concession to him that poor men, who were neither
seat-holders nor wearers of chimney-pot hats, were penned within an iron
enclosure near the door of the building and ranged on backless benches,
and it says much for the authority of the Shammos that not even the
Schnorrer contested it. Prayers were shouted rapidly by the
congregation, and elaborately sung by the Chazan. The minister was
Vox et praeterea nihil. He was the only musical instrument permitted,
and on him devolved the whole onus of making the service attractive. He
succeeded. He was helped by the sociability of the gathering—for the
Synagogue was virtually a Jewish Club, the focus of the sectarian life.
Hard times and bitter had some of the fathers of the Ghetto, but they
ate their dry bread with the salt of humor, loved their wives, and
praised God for His mercies. Unwitting of the genealogies that would be
found for them by their prosperous grandchildren, old clo' men plied
their trade in ambitious content. They were meek and timorous outside
the Ghetto, walking warily for fear of the Christian. Sufferance was
still the badge of all their tribe. Yet that there were Jews who held
their heads high, let the following legend tell: Few men could shuffle
along more inoffensively or cry "Old Clo'" with a meeker twitter than
Sleepy Sol. The old man crawled one day, bowed with humility and
clo'-bag, into a military mews and uttered his tremulous chirp. To him
came one of the hostlers with insolent beetling brow.
"Any gold lace?" faltered Sleepy Sol.
"Get out!" roared the hostler.
"I'll give you de best prices," pleaded Sleepy Sol.
"Get out!" repeated the hostler and hustled the old man into the street.
"If I catch you 'ere again, I'll break your neck." Sleepy Sol loved his
neck, but the profit on gold lace torn from old uniforms was high. Next
week he crept into the mews again, trusting to meet another hostler.
"Clo'! Clo'!" he chirped faintly.
Alas! the brawny bully was to the fore again and recognized him.
"You dirty old Jew," he cried. "Take that, and that! The next time I
sees you, you'll go 'ome on a shutter."
The old man took that, and that, and went on his way. The next day he
came again.
"Clo'! Clo'!" he whimpered.
"What!" said the ruffian, his coarse cheeks flooded with angry blood.
"Ev yer forgotten what I promised yer?" He seized Sleepy Sol by the
scruff of the neck.
"I say, why can't you leave the old man alone?"
The hostler stared at the protester, whose presence he had not noticed
in the pleasurable excitement of the moment. It was a Jewish young man,
indifferently attired in a pepper-and-salt suit. The muscular hostler
measured him scornfully with his eye.
"What's to do with you?" he said, with studied contempt.
"Nothing," admitted the intruder. "And what harm is he doing you?"
"That's my bizness," answered the hostler, and tightened his clutch of

Sleepy Sol's nape.

"Well, you'd better not mind it," answered the young man calmly. "Let
go."'
The hostler's thick lips emitted a disdainful laugh.
"Let go, d'you hear?" repeated the young man.
"I'll let go at your nose," said the hostler, clenching his knobby fist.
"Very well," said the young man. "Then I'll pull yours."
"Oho!" said the hostler, his scowl growing fiercer. "Yer means bizness,
does yer?" With that he sent Sleepy Sol staggering along the road and
rolled up his shirt-sleeves. His coat was already off.
The young man did not remove his; he quietly assumed the defensive. The
hostler sparred up to him with grim earnestness, and launched a terrible
blow at his most characteristic feature. The young man blandly put it on
one side, and planted a return blow on the hostler's ear. Enraged, his
opponent sprang upon him. The young Jew paralyzed him by putting his
left hand negligently into his pocket. With his remaining hand he closed
the hostler's right eye, and sent the flesh about it into mourning. Then
he carelessly tapped a little blood from the hostler's nose, gave him a
few thumps on the chest as if to test the strength of his lungs, and
laid him sprawling in the courtyard. A brother hostler ran out from the
stables and gave a cry of astonishment.
"You'd better wipe his face," said the young man curtly.
The newcomer hurried back towards the stables.
"Vait a moment," said Sleepy Sol "I can sell you a sponge sheap; I've
got a beauty in my bag."
There were plenty of sponges about, but the newcomer bought the
second-hand sponge.
"Do you want any more?" the young man affably inquired of his prostrate
adversary.
The hostler gave a groan. He was shamed before a friend whom he had
early convinced of his fistic superiority.
"No, I reckon he don't," said his friend, with a knowing grin at the
conqueror.
"Then I will wish you a good day," said the young man. "Come along,
father."
"Yes, ma son-in-law," said Sleepy Sol.
"Do you know who that was, Joe?" said his friend, as he sponged away the
blood.
Joe shook his head.
"That was Dutch Sam," said his friend in an awe-struck whisper.
All Joe's body vibrated with surprise and respect. Dutch Sam was the
champion bruiser of his time; in private life an eminent dandy and a
prime favorite of His Majesty George IV., and Sleepy Sol had a beautiful
daughter and was perhaps prepossessing himself when washed for the
Sabbath.
"Dutch Sam!" Joe repeated.
"Dutch Sam! Why, we've got his picter hanging up inside, only he's naked
to the waist."
"Well, strike me lucky! What a fool I was not to rekkernize 'im!" His
battered face brightened up. "No wonder he licked me!"
Except for the comparative infrequency of the more bestial types of men
and women, Judaea has always been a cosmos in little, and its
prize-fighters and scientists, its philosophers and "fences," its
gymnasts and money-lenders, its scholars and stockbrokers, its
musicians, chess-players, poets, comic singers, lunatics, saints,
publicans, politicians, warriors, poltroons, mathematicians, actors,
foreign correspondents, have always been in the first rank. Nihil
alienum a se Judaeus putat.
Joe and his friend fell to recalling Dutch Sam's great feats. Each
out-vied the other in admiration for the supreme pugilist.
Next day Sleepy Sol came rampaging down the courtyard. He walked at the
rate of five miles to the hour, and despite the weight of his bag his
head pointed to the zenith.
"Clo'!" he shrieked. "Clo'!"
Joe the hostler came out. His head was bandaged, and in his hand was
gold lace. It was something even to do business with a hero's
father-in-law.
But it is given to few men to marry their daughters to champion boxers:
and as Dutch Sam was not a Don Quixote, the average peddler or huckster
never enjoyed the luxury of prancing gait and cock-a-hoop business cry.
The primitive fathers of the Ghetto might have borne themselves more
jauntily had they foreseen that they were to be the ancestors of mayors
and aldermen descended from Castilian hidalgos and Polish kings, and
that an unborn historian would conclude that the Ghetto of their day was
peopled by princes in disguise. They would have been as surprised to
learn who they were as to be informed that they were orthodox. The great
Reform split did not occur till well on towards the middle of the
century, and the Jews of those days were unable to conceive that a man
could be a Jew without eating kosher meat, and they would have looked
upon the modern distinctions between racial and religious Jews as the
sophistries of the convert or the missionary. If their religious life
converged to the Great Shool, their social life focussed on Petticoat
Lane, a long, narrow thoroughfare which, as late as Strype's day, was
lined with beautiful trees: vastly more pleasant they must have been
than the faded barrows and beggars of after days. The Lane—such was its
affectionate sobriquet—was the stronghold of hard-shell Judaism, the
Alsatia of "infidelity" into which no missionary dared set foot,
especially no apostate-apostle. Even in modern days the new-fangled
Jewish minister of the fashionable suburb, rigged out, like the
Christian clergyman, has been mistaken for such a Meshumad, and pelted
with gratuitous vegetables and eleemosynary eggs. The Lane was always
the great market-place, and every insalubrious street and alley abutting
on it was covered with the overflowings of its commerce and its mud.
Wentworth Street and Goulston Street were the chief branches, and in
festival times the latter was a pandemonium of caged poultry, clucking
and quacking and cackling and screaming. Fowls and geese and ducks were
bought alive, and taken to have their throats cut for a fee by the
official slaughterer. At Purim a gaiety, as of the Roman carnival,
enlivened the swampy Wentworth Street, and brought a smile into the
unwashed face of the pavement. The confectioners' shops, crammed with
"stuffed monkeys" and "bolas," were besieged by hilarious crowds of
handsome girls and their young men, fat women and their children, all
washing down the luscious spicy compounds with cups of chocolate;
temporarily erected swinging cradles bore a vociferous many-colored
burden to the skies; cardboard noses, grotesque in their departure from
truth, abounded. The Purim Spiel or Purim play never took root in
England, nor was Haman ever burnt in the streets, but Shalachmonos, or
gifts of the season, passed between friend and friend, and masquerading
parties burst into neighbors' houses. But the Lane was lively enough on
the ordinary Friday and Sunday. The famous Sunday Fair was an event of
metropolitan importance, and thither came buyers of every sect. The
Friday Fair was more local, and confined mainly to edibles. The
Ante-Festival Fairs combined something of the other two, for Jews
desired to sport new hats and clothes for the holidays as well as to eat
extra luxuries, and took the opportunity of a well-marked epoch to
invest in new everythings from oil-cloth to cups and saucers. Especially
was this so at Passover, when for a week the poorest Jew must use a
supplementary set of crockery and kitchen utensils. A babel of sound,
audible for several streets around, denoted Market Day in Petticoat
Lane, and the pavements were blocked by serried crowds going both ways
at once.
It was only gradually that the community was Anglicized. Under the sway
of centrifugal impulses, the wealthier members began to form new
colonies, moulting their old feathers and replacing them by finer, and
flying ever further from the centre. Men of organizing ability founded
unrivalled philanthropic and educational institutions on British lines;
millionaires fought for political emancipation; brokers brazenly foisted
themselves on 'Change; ministers gave sermons in bad English; an English
journal was started; very slowly, the conventional Anglican tradition
was established; and on that human palimpsest which has borne the
inscriptions of all languages and all epochs, was writ large the
sign-manual of England. Judaea prostrated itself before the Dagon of its
hereditary foe, the Philistine, and respectability crept on to freeze
the blood of the Orient with its frigid finger, and to blur the vivid
tints of the East into the uniform gray of English middle-class life. In
the period within which our story moves, only vestiges of the old gaiety
and brotherhood remained; the full al fresco flavor was evaporated.
And to-day they are alt dead—the Takeefim with big hearts and bigger
purses, and the humorous Schnorrers, who accepted their gold, and the
cheerful pious peddlers who rose from one extreme to the other, building
up fabulous fortunes in marvellous ways. The young mothers, who suckled
their babes in the sun, have passed out of the sunshine; yea, and the
babes, too, have gone down with gray heads to the dust. Dead are the
fair fat women, with tender hearts, who waddled benignantly through
life, ever ready to shed the sympathetic tear, best of wives, and cooks,
and mothers; dead are the bald, ruddy old men, who ambled about in faded
carpet slippers, and passed the snuff-box of peace: dead are the
stout-hearted youths who sailed away to Tom Tiddler's ground; and dead
are the buxom maidens they led under the wedding canopy when they
returned. Even the great Dr. Sequira, pompous in white stockings,
physician extraordinary to the Prince Regent of Portugal, lies
vanquished by his life-long adversary and the Baal Shem himself, King of
Cabalists, could command no countervailing miracle.
Where are the little girls in white pinafores with pink sashes who
brightened the Ghetto on high days and holidays? Where is the beauteous
Betsy of the Victoria Ballet? and where the jocund synagogue dignitary
who led off the cotillon with her at the annual Rejoicing of the Law?
Worms have long since picked the great financier's brain, the
embroidered waistcoats of the bucks have passed even beyond the stage of
adorning sweeps on May Day, and Dutch Sam's fist is bonier than ever.
The same mould covers them all—those who donated guineas and those who
donated "gifts," the rogues and the hypocrites, and the wedding-drolls,
the observant and the lax, the purse-proud and the lowly, the coarse and
the genteel, the wonderful chapmen and the luckless Schlemihls, Rabbi
and Dayan and Shochet, the scribes who wrote the sacred scroll and
the cantors who trolled it off mellifluous tongues, and the betting-men
who never listened to it; the grimy Russians of the capotes and the
earlocks, and the blue-blooded Dons, "the gentlemen of the Mahamad," who
ruffled it with swords and knee-breeches in the best Christian society.
Those who kneaded the toothsome "bolas" lie with those who ate them; and
the marriage-brokers repose with those they mated. The olives and the
cucumbers grow green and fat as of yore, but their lovers are mixed with
a soil that is barren of them. The restless, bustling crowds that
jostled laughingly in Rag Fair are at rest in the "House of Life;" the
pageant of their strenuous generation is vanished as a dream. They died
with the declaration of God's unity on their stiffening lips, and the
certainty of resurrection in their pulseless hearts, and a faded Hebrew
inscription on a tomb, or an unread entry on a synagogue brass is their
only record. And yet, perhaps, their generation is not all dust.
Perchance, here and there, some decrepit centenarian rubs his purblind
eyes with the ointment of memory, and sees these pictures of the past,
hallowed by the consecration of time, and finds his shrivelled cheek wet
with the pathos sanctifying the joys that have been.
A dead and gone wag called the street "Fashion Street," and most of the
people who live in it do not even see the joke. If it could exchange
names with "Rotten Row," both places would be more appropriately
designated. It is a dull, squalid, narrow thoroughfare in the East End
of London, connecting Spitalfields with Whitechapel, and branching off
in blind alleys. In the days when little Esther Ansell trudged its
unclean pavements, its extremities were within earshot of the
blasphemies from some of the vilest quarters and filthiest rookeries in
the capital of the civilized world. Some of these clotted spiders'-webs
have since been swept away by the besom of the social reformer, and the
spiders have scurried off into darker crannies.
There were the conventional touches about the London street-picture, as
Esther Ansell sped through the freezing mist of the December evening,
with a pitcher in her hand, looking in her oriental coloring like a
miniature of Rebecca going to the well. A female street-singer, with a
trail of infants of dubious maternity, troubled the air with a piercing
melody; a pair of slatterns with arms a-kimbo reviled each other's
relatives; a drunkard lurched along, babbling amiably; an organ-grinder,
blue-nosed as his monkey, set some ragged children jigging under the
watery rays of a street-lamp. Esther drew her little plaid shawl tightly
around her, and ran on without heeding these familiar details, her
chilled feet absorbing the damp of the murky pavement through the worn
soles of her cumbrous boots. They were masculine boots, kicked off by
some intoxicated tramp and picked up by Esther's father. Moses Ansell
had a habit of lighting on windfalls, due, perhaps, to his meek manner
of walking with bent head, as though literally bowed beneath the yoke of
the Captivity. Providence rewarded him for his humility by occasional
treasure-trove. Esther had received a pair of new boots from her school
a week before, and the substitution, of the tramp's foot-gear for her
own resulted in a net profit of half-a-crown, and kept Esther's little
brothers and sisters in bread for a week. At school, under her teacher's
eye, Esther was very unobtrusive about the feet for the next fortnight,
but as the fear of being found out died away, even her rather morbid
conscience condoned the deception in view of the stomachic gain.
They gave away bread and milk at the school, too, but Esther and her
brothers and sisters never took either, for fear of being thought in
want of them. The superiority of a class-mate is hard to bear, and a
high-spirited child will not easily acknowledge starvation in presence
of a roomful of purse-proud urchins, some of them able to spend a
farthing a day on pure luxuries. Moses Ansell would have been grieved
had he known his children were refusing the bread he could not give
them. Trade was slack in the sweating dens, and Moses, who had always
lived from hand to mouth, had latterly held less than ever between the
one and the other. He had applied for help to the Jewish Board of
Guardians, but red-tape rarely unwinds as quickly as hunger coils
itself; moreover, Moses was an old offender in poverty at the Court of
Charity. But there was one species of alms which Moses could not be
denied, and the existence of which Esther could not conceal from him as
she concealed that of the eleemosynary breakfasts at the school. For it
was known to all men that soup and bread were to be had for the asking
thrice a week at the Institution in Fashion Street, and in the Ansell
household the opening of the soup-kitchen was looked forward to as the
dawn of a golden age, when it would be impossible to pass more than one
day without bread. The vaguely-remembered smell of the soup threw a
poetic fragrance over the coming winter. Every year since Esther's
mother had died, the child had been sent to fetch home the provender,
for Moses, who was the only other available member of the family, was
always busy praying when he had nothing better to do. And so to-night
Esther fared to the kitchen, with her red pitcher, passing in her
childish eagerness numerous women shuffling along on the same errand,
and bearing uncouth tin cans supplied by the institution. An
individualistic instinct of cleanliness made Esther prefer the family
pitcher. To-day this liberty of choice has been taken away, and the
regulation can, numbered and stamped, serves as a soup-ticket. There was
quite a crowd of applicants outside the stable-like doors of the kitchen
when Esther arrived, a few with well-lined stomachs, perhaps, but the
majority famished and shivering. The feminine element swamped the rest,
but there were about a dozen men and a few children among the group,
most of the men scarce taller than the children—strange, stunted,
swarthy, hairy creatures, with muddy complexions illumined by black,
twinkling eyes. A few were of imposing stature, wearing coarse, dusty
felt hats or peaked caps, with shaggy beards or faded scarfs around
their throats. Here and there, too, was a woman of comely face and
figure, but for the most part it was a collection of crones, prematurely
aged, with weird, wan, old-world features, slip-shod and draggle-tailed,
their heads bare, or covered with dingy shawls in lieu of bonnets—red
shawls, gray shawls, brick-dust shawls, mud-colored shawls. Yet there
was an indefinable touch of romance and pathos about the tawdriness and
witch-like ugliness, and an underlying identity about the crowd of
Polish, Russian, German, Dutch Jewesses, mutually apathetic, and
pressing forwards. Some of them had infants at their bare breasts, who
drowsed quietly with intervals of ululation. The women devoid of shawls
had nothing around their necks to protect them from the cold, the dusky
throats were exposed, and sometimes even the first hooks and eyes of the
bodice were unnecessarily undone. The majority wore cheap earrings and
black wigs with preternaturally polished hair; where there was no wig,
the hair was touzled.
At half-past five the stable-doors were thrown open, and the crowd
pressed through a long, narrow white-washed stone corridor into a
barn-like compartment, with a white-washed ceiling traversed by wooden
beams. Within this compartment, and leaving but a narrow, circumscribing
border, was a sort of cattle-pen, into which the paupers crushed,
awaiting amid discomfort and universal jabber the divine moment. The
single jet of gas-light depending from the ceiling flared upon the
strange simian faces, and touched them into a grotesque picturesqueness
that would have delighted Doré.
They felt hungry, these picturesque people; their near and dear ones
were hungering at home. Voluptuously savoring in imagination the
operation of the soup, they forgot its operation as a dole in aid of
wages; were unconscious of the grave economical possibilities of
pauperization and the rest, and quite willing to swallow their
independence with the soup. Even Esther, who had read much, and was
sensitive, accepted unquestioningly the theory of the universe that was
held by most people about her, that human beings were distinguished from
animals in having to toil terribly for a meagre crust, but that their
lot was lightened by the existence of a small and semi-divine class
called Takeefim, or rich people, who gave away what they didn't want.
How these rich people came to be, Esther did not inquire; they were as
much a part of the constitution of things as clouds and horses. The
semi-celestial variety was rarely to be met with. It lived far away from
the Ghetto, and a small family of it was said to occupy a whole house.
Representatives of it, clad in rustling silks or impressive broad-cloth,
and radiating an indefinable aroma of superhumanity, sometimes came to
the school, preceded by the beaming Head Mistress; and then all the
little girls rose and curtseyed, and the best of them, passing as
average members of the class, astonished the semi-divine persons by
their intimate acquaintance with the topography of the Pyrenees and the
disagreements of Saul and David, the intercourse of the two species
ending in effusive smiles and general satisfaction. But the dullest of
the girls was alive to the comedy, and had a good-humored contempt for
the unworldliness of the semi-divine persons who spoke to them as if
they were not going to recommence squabbling, and pulling one another's
hair, and copying one another's sums, and stealing one another's
needles, the moment the semi-celestial backs were turned.
To-night, semi-divine persons were to be seen in a galaxy of splendor,
for in the reserved standing-places, behind the white deal counter, was
gathered a group of philanthropists. The room was an odd-shaped polygon,
partially lined with eight boilers, whose great wooden lids were raised
by pulleys and balanced by red-painted iron balls. In the corner stood
the cooking-engine. Cooks in white caps and blouses stirred the steaming
soup with long wooden paddles. A tradesman besought the attention of the
Jewish reporters to the improved boiler he had manufactured, and the
superintendent adjured the newspaper men not to omit his name; while
amid the soberly-clad clergymen flitted, like gorgeous humming-birds
through a flock of crows, the marriageable daughters of an east-end
minister.
When a sufficient number of semi-divinities was gathered together, the
President addressed the meeting at considerable length, striving to
impress upon the clergymen and other philanthropists present that
charity was a virtue, and appealing to the Bible, the Koran, and even
the Vedas, for confirmation of his proposition. Early in his speech the
sliding door that separated the cattle-pen from the kitchen proper had
to be closed, because the jostling crowd jabbered so much and
inconsiderate infants squalled, and there did not seem to be any general
desire to hear the President's ethical views. They were a low material
lot, who thought only of their bellies, and did but chatter the louder
when the speech was shut out. They had overflowed their barriers by this
time, and were surging cruelly to and fro, and Esther had to keep her
elbows close to her sides lest her arms should be dislocated. Outside
the stable doors a shifting array of boys and girls hovered hungrily and
curiously. When the President had finished, the Rabbinate was invited to
address the philanthropists, which it did at not less length, eloquently
seconding the proposition that charity was a virtue. Then the door was
slid back, and the first two paupers were admitted, the rest of the
crowd being courageously kept at bay by the superintendent. The head
cook filled a couple of plates with soup, dipping a great pewter pot
into the cauldron. The Rabbinate then uplifted its eyes heavenwards, and
said the grace:
"Blessed art Thou, O Lord, King of the Universe, according to whose
word all things exist."
It then tasted a spoonful of the soup, as did also the President and
several of the visitors, the passage of the fluid along the palate
invariably evoking approving ecstatic smiles; and indeed, there was more
body in it this opening night than there would be later, when, in due
course, the bulk of the meat would take its legitimate place among the
pickings of office. The sight of the delighted deglutition of the
semi-divine persons made Esther's mouth water as she struggled for
breathing space on the outskirts of Paradise. The impatience which
fretted her was almost allayed by visions of stout-hearted Solomon and
gentle Rachel and whimpering little Sarah and Ikey, all gulping down
the delicious draught. Even the more stoical father and grandmother were
a little in her thoughts. The Ansells had eaten nothing but a slice of
dry bread each in the morning. Here before her, in the land of Goshen,
flowing with soup, was piled up a heap of halves of loaves, while
endless other loaves were ranged along the shelves as for a giant's
table. Esther looked ravenously at the four-square tower built of edible
bricks, shivering as the biting air sought out her back through a sudden
interstice in the heaving mass. The draught reminded her more keenly of
her little ones huddled together in the fireless garret at home. Ah!
what a happy night was in store. She must not let them devour the two
loaves to-night; that would be criminal extravagance. No, one would
suffice for the banquet, the other must be carefully put by. "To-morrow
is also a day," as the old grandmother used to say in her quaint jargon.
But the banquet was not to be spread as fast as Esther's fancy could
fly; the doors must be shut again, other semi-divine and wholly divine
persons (in white ties) must move and second (with eloquence and length)
votes of thanks to the President, the Rabbinate, and all other available
recipients; a French visitor must express his admiration of English
charity. But at last the turn of the gnawing stomachs came. The motley
crowd, still babbling, made a slow, forward movement, squeezing
painfully through the narrow aperture, and shivering a plate glass
window pane at the side of the cattle-pen in the crush; the semi-divine
persons rubbed their hands and smiled genially; ingenious paupers tried
to dodge round to the cauldrons by the semi-divine entrance; the
tropical humming-birds fluttered among the crows; there was a splashing
of ladles and a gurgling of cascades of soup into the cans, and a hubbub
of voices; a toothless, white-haired, blear-eyed hag lamented in
excellent English that soup was refused her, owing to her case not
having yet been investigated, and her tears moistened the one loaf she
received. In like hard case a Russian threw himself on the stones and
howled. But at last Esther was running through the mist, warmed by the
pitcher which she hugged to her bosom, and suppressing the blind impulse
to pinch the pair of loaves tied up in her pinafore. She almost flew up
the dark flight of stairs to the attic in Royal Street. Little Sarah was
sobbing querulously. Esther, conscious of being an angel of deliverance,
tried to take the last two steps at once, tripped and tumbled
ignominiously against the garret-door, which flew back and let her fall
into the room with a crash. The pitcher shivered into fragments under
her aching little bosom, the odorous soup spread itself in an irregular
pool over the boards, and flowed under the two beds and dripped down the
crevices into the room beneath. Esther burst into tears; her frock was
wet and greased, her hands were cut and bleeding. Little Sarah checked
her sobs at the disaster. Moses Ansell was not yet returned from evening
service, but the withered old grandmother, whose wizened face loomed
through the gloom of the cold, unlit garret, sat up on the bed and
cursed her angrily for a Schlemihl. A sense of injustice made Esther
cry more bitterly. She had never broken anything for years past. Ikey,
an eerie-looking dot of four and a half years, tottered towards her (all
the Ansells had learnt to see in the dark), and nestling his curly head
against her wet bodice, murmured:
"Neva mind, Estie, I lat oo teep in my new bed."
The consolation of sleeping in that imaginary new bed to the possession
of which Ikey was always looking forward was apparently adequate; for
Esther got up from the floor and untied the loaves from her pinafore. A
reckless spirit of defiance possessed her, as of a gambler who throws
good money after bad. They should have a mad revelry to-night—the two
loaves should be eaten at once. One (minus a hunk for father's supper)
would hardly satisfy six voracious appetites. Solomon and Rachel,
irrepressibly excited by the sight of the bread, rushed at it greedily,
snatched a loaf from Esther's hand, and tore off a crust each with their
fingers.
"Heathen," cried the old grandmother. "Washing and benediction."
Solomon was used to being called a "heathen" by the Bube. He put on
his cap and went grudgingly to the bucket of water that stood in a
corner of the room, and tipped a drop over his fingers. It is to be
feared that neither the quantity of water nor the area of hand covered
reached even the minimum enjoined by Rabbinical law. He murmured
something intended for Hebrew during the operation, and was beginning to
mutter the devout little sentence which precedes the eating of bread
when Rachel, who as a female was less driven to the lavatory ceremony,
and had thus got ahead of him, paused in her ravenous mastication and
made a wry face. Solomon took a huge bite at his crust, then he uttered
an inarticulate "pooh," and spat out his mouthful.
There was no salt in the bread.
The catastrophe was not complete. There were some long thin fibres of
pale boiled meat, whose juices had gone to enrich the soup, lying about
the floor or adhering to the fragments of the pitcher. Solomon, who was
a curly-headed chap of infinite resource, discovered them, and it had
just been decided to neutralize the insipidity of the bread by the
far-away flavor of the meat, when a peremptory knocking was heard at the
door, and a dazzling vision of beauty bounded into the room.
"'Ere! What are you doin', leavin' things leak through our ceiling?"
Becky Belcovitch was a buxom, bouncing girl, with cherry cheeks that
looked exotic in a land of pale faces. She wore a mass of black crisp
ringlets aggressively suggestive of singeing and curl-papers. She was
the belle of Royal Street in her spare time, and womanly triumphs dogged
even her working hours. She was sixteen years old, and devoted her youth
and beauty to buttonholes. In the East End, where a spade is a spade, a
buttonhole is a buttonhole, and not a primrose or a pansy. There are two
kinds of buttonhole—the coarse for slop goods and the fine for
gentlemanly wear. Becky concentrated herself on superior buttonholes,
which are worked with fine twist. She stitched them in her father's
workshop, which was more comfortable than a stranger's, and better
fitted for evading the Factory Acts. To-night she was radiant in silk
and jewelry, and her pert snub nose had the insolence of felicity which
Agamemnon deprecated. Seeing her, you would have as soon connected her
with Esoteric Buddhism as with buttonholes.
The Bube explained the situation in voluble Yiddish, and made Esther
wince again under the impassioned invective on her clumsiness. The old
beldame expended enough oriental metaphor on the accident to fit up a
minor poet. If the family died of starvation, their blood would be upon
their granddaughter's head.
"Well, why don't you wipe it up, stupid?" said Becky. "'Ow would you
like to pay for Pesach's new coat? It just dripped past his shoulder."
"I'm so sorry, Becky," said Esther, striving hard to master the tremor
in her voice. And drawing a house-cloth from a mysterious recess, she
went on her knees in a practical prayer for pardon.
Becky snorted and went back to her sister's engagement-party. For this
was the secret of her gorgeous vesture, of her glittering earrings, and
her massive brooch, as it was the secret of the transformation of the
Belcovitch workshop (and living room) into a hall of dazzling light.
Four separate gaunt bare arms of iron gas-pipe lifted hymeneal torches.
The labels from reels of cotton, pasted above the mantelpiece as indexes
of work done, alone betrayed the past and future of the room. At a long
narrow table, covered with a white table-cloth spread with rum, gin,
biscuits and fruit, and decorated with two wax candles in tall, brass
candlesticks, stood or sat a group of swarthy, neatly-dressed Poles,
most of them in high hats. A few women wearing wigs, silk dresses, and
gold chains wound round half-washed necks, stood about outside the inner
circle. A stooping black-bearded blear-eyed man in a long threadbare
coat and a black skull cap, on either side of which hung a corkscrew
curl, sat abstractedly eating the almonds and raisins, in the central
place of honor which befits a Maggid. Before him were pens and ink and
a roll of parchment. This was the engagement contract.
The damages of breach of promise were assessed in advance and without
respect of sex. Whichever side repented of the bargain undertook to pay
ten pounds by way of compensation for the broken pledge. As a nation,
Israel is practical and free from cant. Romance and moonshine are
beautiful things, but behind the glittering veil are always the stern
realities of things and the weaknesses of human nature. The high
contracting parties were signing the document as Becky returned. The
bridegroom, who halted a little on one leg, was a tall sallow man named
Pesach Weingott. He was a boot-maker, who could expound the Talmud and
play the fiddle, but was unable to earn a living. He was marrying Fanny
Belcovitch because his parents-in-law would give him free board and
lodging for a year, and because he liked her. Fanny was a plump, pulpy
girl, not in the prime of youth. Her complexion was fair and her manner
lymphatic, and if she was not so well-favored as her sister, she was
more amiable and pleasant. She could sing sweetly in Yiddish and in
English, and had once been a pantomime fairy at ten shillings a week,
and had even flourished a cutlass as a midshipman. But she had long
since given up the stage, to become her father's right hand woman in the
workshop. She made coats from morning till midnight at a big machine
with a massive treadle, and had pains in her chest even before she fell
in love with Pesach Weingott.
There was a hubbub of congratulation (Mazzoltov, Mazzoltov, good
luck), and a palsy of handshaking, when the contract was signed.
Remarks, grave and facetious, flew about in Yiddish, with phrases of
Polish and Russian thrown in for auld lang syne, and cups and jugs were
broken in reminder of the transiency of things mortal. The Belcovitches
had been saving up their already broken crockery for the occasion. The
hope was expressed that Mr. and Mrs. Belcovitch would live to see
"rejoicings" on their other daughter, and to see their daughters'
daughters under the Chuppah, or wedding-canopy.
Becky's hardened cheek blushed under the oppressive jocularity.
Everybody spoke Yiddish habitually at No. 1 Royal Street, except the
younger generation, and that spoke it to the elder.
"I always said, no girl of mine should marry a Dutchman." It was a
dominant thought of Mr. Belcovitch's, and it rose spontaneously to his
lips at this joyful moment. Next to a Christian, a Dutch Jew stood
lowest in the gradation of potential sons-in-law. Spanish Jews, earliest
arrivals by way of Holland, after the Restoration, are a class apart,
and look down on the later imported Ashkenazim, embracing both Poles
and Dutchmen in their impartial contempt. But this does not prevent the
Pole and the Dutchman from despising each other. To a Dutch or Russian
Jew, the "Pullack," or Polish Jew, is a poor creature; and scarce
anything can exceed the complacency with which the "Pullack" looks down
upon the "Litvok" or Lithuanian, the degraded being whose Shibboleth is
literally Sibboleth, and who says "ee" where rightly constituted persons
say "oo." To mimic the mincing pronunciation of the "Litvok" affords the
"Pullack" a sense of superiority almost equalling that possessed by the
English Jew, whose mispronunciation of the Holy Tongue is his title to
rank far above all foreign varieties. Yet a vein of brotherhood runs
beneath all these feelings of mutual superiority; like the cliqueism
which draws together old clo' dealers, though each gives fifty per cent,
more than any other dealer in the trade. The Dutch foregather in a
district called "The Dutch Tenters;" they eat voraciously, and almost
monopolize the ice-cream, hot pea, diamond-cutting, cucumber, herring,
and cigar trades. They are not so cute as the Russians. Their women are
distinguished from other women by the flaccidity of their bodices; some
wear small woollen caps and sabots. When Esther read in her school-books
that the note of the Dutch character was cleanliness, she wondered. She
looked in vain for the scrupulously scoured floors and the shining caps
and faces. Only in the matter of tobacco-smoke did the Dutch people she
knew live up to the geographical "Readers."
German Jews gravitate to Polish and Russian; and French Jews mostly stay
in France. Ici on ne parle pas Français, is the only lingual certainty
in the London Ghetto, which is a cosmopolitan quarter.
"I always said no girl of mine should marry a Dutchman." Mr. Belcovitch
spoke as if at the close of a long career devoted to avoiding Dutch
alliances, forgetting that not even one of his daughters was yet secure.
"Nor any girl of mine," said Mrs. Belcovitch, as if starting a separate
proposition. "I would not trust a Dutchman with my medicine-bottle, much
less with my Alte or my Becky. Dutchmen were not behind the door when
the Almighty gave out noses, and their deceitfulness is in proportion to
their noses."
The company murmured assent, and one gentleman, with a rather large
organ, concealed it in a red cotton handkerchief, trumpeting uneasily.
"The Holy One, blessed be He, has given them larger noses than us," said
the Maggid, "because they have to talk through them so much."
A guffaw greeted this sally. The Maggid's wit was relished even when
not coming from the pulpit. To the outsider this disparagement of the
Dutch nose might have seemed a case of pot calling kettle black. The
Maggid poured himself out a glass of rum, under cover of the laughter,
and murmuring "Life to you." in Hebrew, gulped it down, and added, "They
oughtn't to call it the Dutch tongue, but the Dutch nose."
"Yes, I always wonder how they can understand one another," said Mrs.
Belcovitch, "with their chatuchayacatigewesepoopa." She laughed
heartily over her onomatopoetic addition to the Yiddish vocabulary,
screwing up her nose to give it due effect. She was a small
sickly-looking woman, with black eyes, and shrivelled skin, and the wig
without which no virtuous wife is complete. For a married woman must
sacrifice her tresses on the altar of home, lest she snare other men
with such sensuous baits. As a rule, she enters into the spirit of the
self-denying ordinance so enthusiastically as to become hideous hastily
in every other respect. It is forgotten that a husband is also a man.
Mrs. Belcovitch's head was not completely shaven and shorn, for a lower
stratum of an unmatched shade of brown peeped out in front of the
shaitel, not even coinciding as to the route of the central parting.
Meantime Pesach Weingott and Alte (Fanny) Belcovitch held each other's
hand, guiltily conscious of Batavian corpuscles in the young man's
blood. Pesach had a Dutch uncle, but as he had never talked like him
Alte alone knew. Alte wasn't her real name, by the way, and Alte was the
last person in the world to know what it was. She was the Belcovitches'
first successful child; the others all died before she was born. Driven
frantic by a fate crueller than barrenness, the Belcovitches consulted
an old Polish Rabbi, who told them they displayed too much fond
solicitude for their children, provoking Heaven thereby; in future, they
were to let no one but themselves know their next child's name, and
never to whisper it till the child was safely married. In such wise,
Heaven would not be incessantly reminded of the existence of their dear
one, and would not go out of its way to castigate them. The ruse
succeeded, and Alte was anxiously waiting to change both her names under
the Chuppah, and to gratify her life-long curiosity on the subject.
Meantime, her mother had been calling her "Alte," or "old 'un," which
sounded endearing to the child, but grated on the woman arriving ever
nearer to the years of discretion. Occasionally, Mrs. Belcovitch
succumbed to the prevailing tendency, and called her "Fanny," just as
she sometimes thought of herself as Mrs. Belcovitch, though her name
was Kosminski. When Alte first went to school in London, the Head
Mistress said, "What's your name?" The little "old 'un" had not
sufficient English to understand the question, but she remembered that
the Head Mistress had made the same sounds to the preceding applicant,
and, where some little girls would have put their pinafores to their
eyes and cried, Fanny showed herself full of resource. As the last
little girl, though patently awe-struck, had come off with flying
colors, merely by whimpering "Fanny Belcovitch," Alte imitated these
sounds as well as she was able.
"Fanny Belcovitch, did you say?" said the Head Mistress, pausing with
arrested pen.
Alte nodded her flaxen poll vigorously.
"Fanny Belcovitch," she repeated, getting the syllables better on a
second hearing.
The Head Mistress turned to an assistant.
"Isn't it astonishing how names repeat themselves? Two girls, one after
the other, both with exactly the same name."
They were used to coincidences in the school, where, by reason of the
tribal relationship of the pupils, there was a great run on some
half-a-dozen names. Mr. Kosminski took several years to understand that
Alte had disowned him. When it dawned upon him he was not angry, and
acquiesced in his fate. It was the only domestic detail in which he had
allowed himself to be led by his children. Like his wife, Chayah, he was
gradually persuaded into the belief that he was a born Belcovitch, or at
least that Belcovitch was Kosminski translated into English.
Blissfully unconscious of the Dutch taint in Pesach Weingott, Bear
Belcovitch bustled about in reckless hospitality. He felt that
engagements were not every-day events, and that even if his whole
half-sovereign's worth of festive provision was swallowed up, he would
not mind much. He wore a high hat, a well-preserved black coat, with a
cutaway waistcoat, showing a quantity of glazed shirtfront and a massive
watch chain. They were his Sabbath clothes, and, like the Sabbath they
honored, were of immemorial antiquity. The shirt served him for seven
Sabbaths, or a week of Sabbaths, being carefully folded after each. His
boots had the Sabbath polish. The hat was the one he bought when he
first set up as a Baal Habaas or respectable pillar of the synagogue;
for even in the smallest Chevra the high hat comes next in sanctity to
the Scroll of the Law, and he who does not wear it may never hope to
attain to congregational dignities. The gloss on that hat was wonderful,
considering it had been out unprotected in all winds and weathers. Not
that Mr. Belcovitch did not possess an umbrella. He had two,—one of
fine new silk, the other a medley of broken ribs and cotton rags. Becky
had given him the first to prevent the family disgrace of the spectacle
of his promenades with the second. But he would not carry the new one on
week-days because it was too good. And on Sabbaths it is a sin to carry
any umbrella. So Becky's self-sacrifice was vain, and her umbrella stood
in the corner, a standing gratification to the proud possessor.
Kosminski had had a hard fight for his substance, and was not given to
waste. He was a tall, harsh-looking man of fifty, with grizzled hair, to
whom life meant work, and work meant money, and money meant savings. In
Parliamentary Blue-Books, English newspapers, and the Berner Street
Socialistic Club, he was called a "sweater," and the comic papers
pictured him with a protuberant paunch and a greasy smile, but he had
not the remotest idea that he was other than a God-fearing, industrious,
and even philanthropic citizen. The measure that had been dealt to him
he did but deal to others. He saw no reason why immigrant paupers should
not live on a crown a week while he taught them how to handle a
press-iron or work a sewing machine. They were much better off than in
Poland. He would have been glad of such an income himself in those
terrible first days of English life when he saw his wife and his two
babes starving before his eyes, and was only precluded from investing a
casual twopence in poison by ignorance of the English name for anything
deadly. And what did he live on now? The fowl, the pint of haricot
beans, and the haddocks which Chayah purchased for the Sabbath
overlapped into the middle of next week, a quarter of a pound of coffee
lasted the whole week, the grounds being decocted till every grain of
virtue was extracted. Black bread and potatoes and pickled herrings
made up the bulk of the every-day diet No, no one could accuse Bear
Belcovitch of fattening on the entrails of his employees. The furniture
was of the simplest and shabbiest,—no aesthetic instinct urged the
Kosminskis to overpass the bare necessities of existence, except in
dress. The only concessions to art were a crudely-colored Mizrach on
the east wall, to indicate the direction towards which the Jew should
pray, and the mantelpiece mirror which was bordered with yellow
scalloped paper (to save the gilt) and ornamented at each corner with
paper roses that bloomed afresh every Passover. And yet Bear Belcovitch
had lived in much better style in Poland, possessing a brass wash-hand
basin, a copper saucepan, silver spoons, a silver consecration beaker,
and a cupboard with glass doors, and he frequently adverted to their
fond memories. But he brought nothing away except his bedding, and that
was pawned in Germany on the route. When he arrived in London he had
with him three groschen and a family.
"What do you think, Pesach," said Becky, as soon as she could get at her
prospective brother-in-law through the barriers of congratulatory
countrymen. "The stuff that came through there"—she pointed to the
discolored fragment of ceiling—"was soup. That silly little Esther
spilt all she got from the kitchen."
"Achi-nebbich, poor little thing," cried Mrs. Kosminski, who was in a
tender mood, "very likely it hungers them sore upstairs. The father is
out of work."
"Knowest thou what, mother," put in Fanny. "Suppose we give them our
soup. Aunt Leah has just fetched it for us. Have we not a special supper
to-night?"
"But father?" murmured the little woman dubiously.
"Oh, he won't notice it. I don't think he knows the soup kitchen opens
to-night. Let me, mother."
And Fanny, letting Pesach's hand go, slipped out to the room that served
as a kitchen, and bore the still-steaming pot upstairs. Pesach, who had
pursued her, followed with some hunks of bread and a piece of lighted
candle, which, while intended only to illumine the journey, came in
handy at the terminus. And the festive company grinned and winked when
the pair disappeared, and made jocular quotations from the Old Testament
and the Rabbis. But the lovers did not kiss when they came out of the
garret of the Ansells; their eyes were wet, and they went softly
downstairs hand in hand, feeling linked by a deeper love than before.
Thus did Providence hand over the soup the Belcovitches took from old
habit to a more necessitous quarter, and demonstrate in double sense
that Charity never faileth. Nor was this the only mulct which Providence
exacted from the happy father, for later on a townsman of his appeared
on the scene in a long capote, and with a grimy woe-begone expression.
He was a "greener" of the greenest order, having landed at the docks
only a few hours ago, bringing over with him a great deal of luggage in
the shape of faith in God, and in the auriferous character of London
pavements. On arriving in England, he gave a casual glance at the
metropolis and demanded to be directed to a synagogue wherein to shake
himself after the journey. His devotions over, he tracked out Mr.
Kosminski, whose address on a much-creased bit of paper had been his
talisman of hope during the voyage. In his native town, where the Jews
groaned beneath divers and sore oppressions, the fame of Kosminski, the
pioneer, the Croesus, was a legend. Mr. Kosminski was prepared for these
contingencies. He went to his bedroom, dragged out a heavy wooden chest
from under the bed, unlocked it and plunged his hand into a large dirty
linen bag, full of coins. The instinct of generosity which was upon him
made him count out forty-eight of them. He bore them to the "greener" in
over-brimming palms and the foreigner, unconscious how much he owed to
the felicitous coincidence of his visit with Fanny's betrothal, saw
fortune visibly within his grasp. He went out, his heart bursting with
gratitude, his pocket with four dozen farthings. They took him in and
gave him hot soup at a Poor Jews' Shelter, whither his townsman had
directed him. Kosminski returned to the banqueting room, thrilling from
head to foot with the approval of his conscience. He patted Becky's
curly head and said:
"Well, Becky, when shall we be dancing at your wedding?"
Becky shook her curls. Her young men could not have a poorer opinion of
one another than Becky had of them all. Their homage pleased her, though
it did not raise them in her esteem. Lovers grew like blackberries—only
more so; for they were an evergreen stock. Or, as her mother put it in
her coarse, peasant manner. Chasanim were as plentiful as the
street-dogs. Becky's beaux sat on the stairs before she was up and
became early risers in their love for her, each anxious to be the first
to bid their Penelope of the buttonholes good morrow. It was said that
Kosminski's success as a "sweater" was due to his beauteous Becky, the
flower of sartorial youth gravitating to the work-room of this East
London Laban. What they admired in Becky was that there was so much of
her. Still it was not enough to go round, and though Becky might keep
nine lovers in hand without fear of being set down as a flirt, a larger
number of tailors would have been less consistent with prospective
monogamy.
"I'm not going to throw myself away like Fanny," said she confidentially
to Pesach Weingott in the course of the evening. He smiled
apologetically. "Fanny always had low views," continued Becky. "But I
always said I would marry a gentleman."
"And I dare say," answered Pesach, stung into the retort, "Fanny could
marry a gentlemen, too, if she wanted."
Becky's idea of a gentleman was a clerk or a school-master, who had no
manual labor except scribbling or flogging. In her matrimonial views
Becky was typical. She despised the status of her parents and looked to
marry out of it. They for their part could not understand the desire to
be other than themselves.
"I don't say Fanny couldn't," she admitted. "All I say is, nobody could
call this a luck-match."
"Ah, thou hast me too many flies in thy nose," reprovingly interposed

Mrs. Belcovitch, who had just crawled up. "Thou art too high-class."

Becky tossed her head. "I've got a new dolman," she said, turning to one
of her young men who was present by special grace. "You should see me in
it. I look noble."
"Yes," said Mrs. Belcovitch proudly. "It shines in the sun."
"Is it like the one Bessie Sugarman's got?" inquired the young man.
"Bessie Sugarman!" echoed Becky scornfully. "She gets all her things
from the tallyman. She pretends to be so grand, but all her jewelry is
paid for at so much a week."
"So long as it is paid for," said Fanny, catching the words and turning
a happy face on her sister.
"Not so jealous, Alte," said her mother. "When I shall win on the
lottery, I will buy thee also a dolman."
Almost all the company speculated on the Hamburg lottery, which, whether
they were speaking Yiddish or English, they invariably accentuated on
the last syllable. When an inhabitant of the Ghetto won even his money
back, the news circulated like wild-fire, and there was a rush to the
agents for tickets. The chances of sudden wealth floated like dazzling
Will o' the Wisps on the horizon, illumining the gray perspectives of
the future. The lottery took the poor ticket-holders out of themselves,
and gave them an interest in life apart from machine-cotton, lasts or
tobacco-leaf. The English laborer, who has been forbidden State
Lotteries, relieves the monotony of existence by an extremely indirect
interest in the achievements of a special breed of horses.
"Nu, Pesach, another glass of rum," said Mr. Belcovitch genially to
his future son-in-law and boarder.
"Yes, I will," said Pesach. "After all, this is the first time I've got
engaged."
The rum was of Mr. Belcovitch's own manufacture; its ingredients were
unknown, but the fame of it travelled on currents of air to the remotest
parts of the house. Even the inhabitants of the garrets sniffed and
thought of turpentine. Pesach swallowed the concoction, murmuring "To
life" afresh. His throat felt like the funnel of a steamer, and there
were tears in his eyes when he put down the glass.
"Ah, that was good," he murmured.
"Not like thy English drinks, eh?" said Mr. Belcovitch.
"England!" snorted Pesach in royal disdain. "What a country! Daddle-doo
is a language and ginger-beer a liquor."
"Daddle doo" was Pesach's way of saying "That'll do." It was one of the
first English idioms he picked up, and its puerility made him facetious.
It seemed to smack of the nursery; when a nation expressed its soul
thus, the existence of a beverage like ginger-beer could occasion no
further surprise.
"You shan't have anything stronger than ginger-beer when we're married,"
said Fanny laughingly. "I am not going to have any drinking.'"
"But I'll get drunk on ginger-beer," Pesach laughed back.
"You can't," Fanny said, shaking her large fond smile to and fro. "By my
health, not."
"Ha! Ha! Ha! Can't even get shikkur on it. What a liquor!"
In the first Anglo-Jewish circles with which Pesach had scraped
acquaintance, ginger-beer was the prevalent drink; and, generalizing
almost as hastily as if he were going to write a book on the country, he
concluded that it was the national beverage. He had long since
discovered his mistake, but the drift of the discussion reminded Becky
of a chance for an arrow.
"On the day when you sit for joy, Pesach," she said slily. "I shall send
you a valentine."
Pesach colored up and those in the secret laughed; the reference was to
another of Pesach's early ideas. Some mischievous gossip had heard him
arguing with another Greener outside a stationer's shop blazing with
comic valentines. The two foreigners were extremely puzzled to
understand what these monstrosities portended; Pesach, however, laid it
down that the microcephalous gentlemen with tremendous legs, and the
ladies five-sixths head and one-sixth skirt, were representations of the
English peasants who lived in the little villages up country.
"When I sit for joy," retorted Pesach, "it will not be the season for
valentines."
"Won't it though!" cried Becky, shaking her frizzly black curls. "You'll
be a pair of comic 'uns."
"All right, Becky," said Alte good-humoredly. "Your turn'll come, and
then we shall have the laugh of you."
"Never," said Becky. "What do I want with a man?"
The arm of the specially invited young man was round her as she spoke.
"Don't make schnecks," said Fanny.
"It's not affectation. I mean it. What's the good of the men who visit
father? There isn't a gentleman among them."
"Ah, wait till I win on the lottery," said the special young man.
"Then, vy not take another eighth of a ticket?" inquired Sugarman the
Shadchan, who seemed to spring from the other end of the room. He was
one of the greatest Talmudists in London—a lean, hungry-looking man,
sharp of feature and acute of intellect. "Look at Mrs. Robinson—I've
just won her over twenty pounds, and she only gave me two pounds for
myself. I call it a cherpah—a shame."
"Yes, but you stole another two pounds," said Becky.
"How do you know?" said Sugarman startled.
Becky winked and shook her head sapiently. "Never you mind."
The published list of the winning numbers was so complex in construction
that Sugarman had ample opportunities of bewildering his clients.
"I von't sell you no more tickets," said Sugarman with righteous
indignation.
"A fat lot I care," said Becky, tossing her curls.
"Thou carest for nothing," said Mrs. Belcovitch, seizing the opportunity
for maternal admonition. "Thou hast not even brought me my medicine
to-night. Thou wilt find, it on the chest of drawers in the bedroom."
Becky shook herself impatiently.
"I will go," said the special young man.
"No, it is not beautiful that a young man shall go into my bedroom in my
absence," said Mrs. Belcovitch blushing.
Becky left the room.
"Thou knowest," said Mrs. Belcovitch, addressing herself to the special
young man, "I suffer greatly from my legs. One is a thick one, and one a
thin one."
The young man sighed sympathetically.
"Whence comes it?" he asked.
"Do I know? I was born so. My poor lambkin (this was the way Mrs.

Belcovitch always referred to her dead mother) had well-matched legs. If

I had Aristotle's head I might be able to find out why my legs are

inferior. And so one goes about."

The reverence for Aristotle enshrined in Yiddish idiom is probably due
to his being taken by the vulgar for a Jew. At any rate the theory that
Aristotle's philosophy was Jewish was advanced by the mediaeval poet,
Jehuda Halevi, and sustained by Maimonides. The legend runs that when
Alexander went to Palestine, Aristotle was in his train. At Jerusalem
the philosopher had sight of King Solomon's manuscripts, and he
forthwith edited them and put his name to them. But it is noteworthy
that the story was only accepted by those Jewish scholars who adopted
the Aristotelian philosophy, those who rejected it declaring that
Aristotle in his last testament had admitted the inferiority of his
writings to the Mosaic, and had asked that his works should be
destroyed.
When Becky returned with the medicine, Mrs. Belcovitch mentioned that it
was extremely nasty, and offered the young man a taste, whereat he
rejoiced inwardly, knowing he had found favor in the sight of the
parent. Mrs. Belcovitch paid a penny a week to her doctor, in sickness
or health, so that there was a loss on being well. Becky used to fill up
the bottles with water to save herself the trouble of going to fetch the
medicine, but as Mrs. Belcovitch did not know this it made no
difference.
"Thou livest too much indoors," said Mr. Sugarman, in Yiddish.
"Shall I march about in this weather? Black and slippery, and the Angel
going a-hunting?"
"Ah!" said Mr. Sugarman, relapsing proudly into the vernacular, "Ve

English valk about in all vedders."

Meanwhile Moses Ansell had returned from evening service and sat down,
unquestioningly, by the light of an unexpected candle to his expected
supper of bread and soup, blessing God for both gifts. The rest of the
family had supped. Esther had put the two youngest children to bed
(Rachel had arrived at years of independent undressing), and she and
Solomon were doing home-lessons in copy-books, the candle saving them
from a caning on the morrow. She held her pen clumsily, for several of
her fingers were swathed in bloody rags tied with cobweb. The
grandmother dozed in her chair. Everything was quiet and peaceful,
though the atmosphere was chilly. Moses ate his supper with a great
smacking of the lips and an equivalent enjoyment. When it was over he
sighed deeply, and thanked God in a prayer lasting ten minutes, and
delivered in a rapid, sing-song manner. He then inquired of Solomon
whether he had said his evening prayer. Solomon looked out of the corner
of his eyes at his Bube, and, seeing she was asleep on the bed, said
he had, and kicked Esther significantly but hurtfully under the table.
"Then you had better say your night-prayer."
There was no getting out of that; so Solomon finished his sum, writing
the figures of the answer rather faint, in case he should discover from
another boy next morning that they were wrong; then producing a Hebrew
prayer-book from his inky cotton satchel, he made a mumbling sound, with
occasional enthusiastic bursts of audible coherence, for a length of
time proportioned to the number of pages. Then he went to bed. After
that, Esther put her grandmother to bed and curled herself up at her
side. She lay awake a long time, listening to the quaint sounds emitted
by her father in his study of Rashi's commentary on the Book of Job, the
measured drone blending not disagreeably with the far-away sounds of
Pesach Weingott's fiddle.
Pesach's fiddle played the accompaniment to many other people's
thoughts. The respectable master-tailor sat behind his glazed
shirt-front beating time with his foot. His little sickly-looking wife
stood by his side, nodding her bewigged head joyously. To both the music
brought the same recollection—a Polish market-place.
Belcovitch, or rather Kosminski, was the only surviving son of a widow.
It was curious, and suggestive of some grim law of heredity, that his
parents' elder children had died off as rapidly as his own, and that his
life had been preserved by some such expedient as Alte's. Only, in his
case the Rabbi consulted had advised his father to go into the woods and
call his new-born son by the name of the first animal that he saw. This
was why the future sweater was named Bear. To the death of his brothers
and sisters, Bear owed his exemption from military service. He grew up
to be a stalwart, well-set-up young baker, a loss to the Russian army.
Bear went out in the market-place one fine day and saw Chayah in maiden
ringlets. She was a slim, graceful little thing, with nothing obviously
odd about the legs, and was buying onions. Her back was towards him, but
in another moment she turned her head and Bear's. As he caught the
sparkle of her eye, he felt that without her life were worse than the
conscription. Without delay, he made inquiries about the fair young
vision, and finding its respectability unimpeachable, he sent a
Shadchan to propose to her, and they were affianced: Chayah's father
undertaking to give a dowry of two hundred gulden. Unfortunately, he
died suddenly in the attempt to amass them, and Chayah was left an
orphan. The two hundred gulden were nowhere to be found. Tears rained
down both Chayah's cheeks, on the one side for the loss of her father,
on the other for the prospective loss of a husband. The Rabbi was full
of tender sympathy. He bade Bear come to the dead man's chamber. The
venerable white-bearded corpse lay on the bed, swathed in shroud, and
Talith or praying-shawl.
"Bear," he said, "thou knowest that I saved thy life."
"Nay," said Bear, "indeed, I know not that."
"Yea, of a surety," said the Rabbi. "Thy mother hath not told thee, but
all thy brothers and sisters perished, and, lo! thou alone art
preserved! It was I that called thee a beast."
Bear bowed his head in grateful silence.
"Bear," said the Rabbi, "thou didst contract to wed this dead man's
daughter, and he did contract to pay over to thee two hundred gulden.''
"Truth." replied Bear.
"Bear," said the Rabbi, "there are no two hundred gulden."
A shadow flitted across Bear's face, but he said nothing.
"Bear," said the Rabbi again, "there are not two gulden."
Bear did not move.
"Bear," said the Rabbi, "leave thou my side, and go over to the other
side of the bed, facing me."
So Bear left his side and went over to the other side of the bed facing
him.
"Bear," said the Rabbi, "give me thy right hand."
The Rabbi stretched his own right hand across the bed, but Bear kept his
obstinately behind his back.
"Bear," repeated the Rabbi, in tones of more penetrating solemnity,
"give me thy right hand."
"Nay," replied Bear, sullenly. "Wherefore should I give thee my right
hand?"
"Because," said the Rabbi, and his tones trembled, and it seemed to him
that the dead man's face grew sterner. "Because I wish thee to swear
across the body of Chayah's father that thou wilt marry her."
"Nay, that I will not," said Bear.
"Will not?" repeated the Rabbi, his lips growing white with pity.
"Nay, I will not take any oaths," said Bear, hotly. "I love the maiden,
and I will keep what I have promised. But, by my father's soul, I will
take no oaths!"
"Bear," said the Rabbi in a choking voice, "give me thy hand. Nay, not
to swear by, but to grip. Long shalt thou live, and the Most High shall
prepare thy seat in Gan Iden."
So the old man and the young clasped hands across the corpse, and the
simple old Rabbi perceived a smile flickering over the face of Chayah's
father. Perhaps it was only a sudden glint of sunshine.
The wedding-day drew nigh, but lo! Chayah was again dissolved in tears.
"What ails thee?" said her brother Naphtali.
"I cannot follow the custom of the maidens," wept Chayah. "Thou knowest
we are blood-poor, and I have not the wherewithal to buy my Bear a
Talith for his wedding-day; nay, not even to make him a Talith-bag.
And when our father (the memory of the righteous for a blessing) was
alive, I had dreamed of making my chosan a beautiful velvet satchel
lined with silk, and I would have embroidered his initials thereon in
gold, and sewn him beautiful white corpse-clothes. Perchance he will
rely upon me for his wedding Talith, and we shall be shamed in the
sight of the congregation."
"Nay, dry thine eyes, my sister," said Naphtali. "Thou knowest that my
Leah presented me with a costly Talith when I led her under the
canopy. Wherefore, do thou take my praying-shawl and lend it to Bear for
the wedding-day, so that decency may be preserved in the sight of the
congregation. The young man has a great heart, and he will understand."
So Chayah, blushing prettily, lent Bear Naphtali's delicate Talith,
and Beauty and the Beast made a rare couple under the wedding canopy.
Chayah wore the gold medallion and the three rows of pearls which her
lover had sent her the day before. And when the Rabbi had finished
blessing husband and wife, Naphtali spake the bridegroom privily, and
said:
"Pass me my Talith back."
But Bear answered: "Nay, nay; the Talith is in my keeping, and there
it shall remain."
"But it is my Talith," protested Naphtali in an angry whisper. "I only
lent it to Chayah to lend it thee."
"It concerns me not." Bear returned in a decisive whisper. "The Talith
is my due and I shall keep it. What! Have I not lost enough by marrying
thy sister? Did not thy father, peace be upon him, promise me two
hundred gulden with her?"
Naphtali retired discomfited. But he made up his mind not to go without
some compensation. He resolved that during the progress of the wedding
procession conducting the bridegroom to the chamber of the bride, he
would be the man to snatch off Bear's new hat. Let the rest of the
riotous escort essay to snatch whatever other article of the
bridegroom's attire they would, the hat was the easiest to dislodge, and
he, Naphtali, would straightway reimburse himself partially with that.
But the instant the procession formed itself, behold the shifty
bridegroom forthwith removed his hat, and held it tightly under his arm.
A storm of protestations burst forth at his daring departure from
hymeneal tradition.
"Nay, nay, put it on," arose from every mouth.
But Bear closed his and marched mutely on.
"Heathen," cried the Rabbi. "Put on your hat."
The attempt to enforce the religious sanction failed too. Bear had spent
several gulden upon his head-gear, and could not see the joke. He
plodded towards his blushing Chayah through a tempest of disapprobation.
Throughout life Bear Belcovitch retained the contrariety of character
that marked his matrimonial beginnings. He hated to part with money; he
put off paying bills to the last moment, and he would even beseech his
"hands" to wait a day or two longer for their wages. He liked to feel
that he had all that money in his possession. Yet "at home," in Poland,
he had always lent money to the officers and gentry, when they ran
temporarily short at cards. They would knock him up in the middle of the
night to obtain the means of going on with the game. And in England he
never refused to become surety for a loan when any of his poor friends
begged the favor of him. These loans ran from three to five pounds, but
whatever the amount, they were very rarely paid. The loan offices came
down upon him for the money. He paid it without a murmur, shaking his
head compassionately over the poor ne'er do wells, and perhaps not
without a compensating consciousness of superior practicality.
Only, if the borrower had neglected to treat him to a glass of rum to
clench his signing as surety, the shake of Bear's head would become more
reproachful than sympathetic, and he would mutter bitterly: "Five pounds
and not even a drink for the money." The jewelry he generously lavished
on his womankind was in essence a mere channel of investment for his
savings, avoiding the risks of a banking-account and aggregating his
wealth in a portable shape, in obedience to an instinct generated by
centuries of insecurity. The interest on the sums thus invested was the
gratification of the other oriental instinct for gaudiness.
The Sunday Fair, so long associated with Petticoat Lane, is dying hard,
and is still vigorous; its glories were in full swing on the dull, gray
morning when Moses Ansell took his way through the Ghetto. It was near
eleven o'clock, and the throng was thickening momently. The vendors
cried their wares in stentorian tones, and the babble of the buyers was
like the confused roar of a stormy sea. The dead walls and hoardings
were placarded with bills from which the life of the inhabitants could
be constructed. Many were in Yiddish, the most hopelessly corrupt and
hybrid jargon ever evolved. Even when the language was English the
letters were Hebrew. Whitechapel, Public Meeting, Board School, Sermon,
Police, and other modern banalities, glared at the passer-by in the
sacred guise of the Tongue associated with miracles and prophecies,
palm-trees and cedars and seraphs, lions and shepherds and harpists.
Moses stopped to read these hybrid posters—he had nothing better to
do—as he slouched along. He did not care to remember that dinner was
due in two hours. He turned aimlessly into Wentworth Street, and studied
a placard that hung in a bootmaker's window. This was the announcement
it made in jargon:
    Riveters, Clickers, Lasters, Finishers,

      Wanted.

    BARUCH EMANUEL,

      Cobbler.

    Makes and Repairs Boots.

    Every Bit as Cheaply

      as

    MORDECAI SCHWARTZ,

      of 12 Goulston Street.

Mordecai Schwartz was written in the biggest and blackest of Hebrew
letters, and quite dominated the little shop-window. Baruch Emanuel was
visibly conscious of his inferiority, to his powerful rival, though
Moses had never heard of Mordecai Schwartz before. He entered the shop
and said in Hebrew "Peace be to you." Baruch Emanuel, hammering a sole,
answered in Hebrew:
"Peace be to you."
Moses dropped into Yiddish.
"I am looking for work. Peradventure have you something for me?"
"What can you do?"
"I have been a riveter."
"I cannot engage any more riveters."
Moses looked disappointed.
"I have also been a clicker," he said.
"I have all the clickers I can afford," Baruch answered.
Moses's gloom deepened. "Two years ago I worked as a finisher."
Baruch shook his head silently. He was annoyed at the man's persistence.

There was only the laster resource left.

"And before that I was a laster for a week," Moses answered.
"I don't want any!" cried Baruch, losing his temper.
"But in your window it stands that you do," protested Moses feebly.
"I don't care what stands in my window," said Baruch hotly. "Have you
not head enough to see that that is all bunkum? Unfortunately I work
single-handed, but it looks good and it isn't lies. Naturally I want
Riveters and Clickers and Lasters and Finishers. Then I could set up a
big establishment and gouge out Mordecai Schwartz's eyes. But the Most
High denies me assistants, and I am content to want."
Moses understood that attitude towards the nature of things. He went out
and wandered down another narrow dirty street in search of Mordecai
Schwartz, whose address Baruch Emanuel had so obligingly given him. He
thought of the Maggid's sermon on the day before. The Maggid had
explained a verse of Habakkuk in quite an original way which gave an
entirely new color to a passage in Deuteronomy. Moses experienced acute
pleasure in musing upon it, and went past Mordecai's shop without going
in, and was only awakened from his day-dream by the brazen clanging of a
bell It was the bell of the great Ghetto school, summoning its pupils
from the reeking courts and alleys, from the garrets and the cellars,
calling them to come and be Anglicized. And they came in a great
straggling procession recruited from every lane and by-way, big children
and little children, boys in blackening corduroy, and girls in
washed-out cotton; tidy children and ragged children; children in great
shapeless boots gaping at the toes; sickly children, and sturdy
children, and diseased children; bright-eyed children and hollow-eyed
children; quaint sallow foreign-looking children, and fresh-colored
English-looking children; with great pumpkin heads, with oval heads,
with pear-shaped heads; with old men's faces, with cherubs' faces, with
monkeys' faces; cold and famished children, and warm and well-fed
children; children conning their lessons and children romping
carelessly; the demure and the anaemic; the boisterous and the
blackguardly, the insolent, the idiotic, the vicious, the intelligent,
the exemplary, the dull—spawn of all countries—all hastening at the
inexorable clang of the big school-bell to be ground in the same great,
blind, inexorable Governmental machine. Here, too, was a miniature fair,
the path being lined by itinerant temptations. There was brisk traffic
in toffy, and gray peas and monkey-nuts, and the crowd was swollen by
anxious parents seeing tiny or truant offspring safe within the
school-gates. The women were bare-headed or be-shawled, with infants at
their breasts and little ones toddling at their sides, the men were
greasy, and musty, and squalid. Here a bright earnest little girl held
her vagrant big brother by the hand, not to let go till she had seen him
in the bosom of his class-mates. There a sullen wild-eyed mite in
petticoats was being dragged along, screaming, towards distasteful
durance. It was a drab picture—the bleak, leaden sky above, the sloppy,
miry stones below, the frowsy mothers and fathers, the motley children.
"Monkey-nuts! Monkey-nuts!" croaked a wizened old woman.
"Oppea! Oppea!" droned a doddering old Dutchman. He bore a great can of
hot peas in one hand and a lighthouse-looking pepper-pot in the other.
Some of the children swallowed the dainties hastily out of miniature
basins, others carried them within in paper packets for surreptitious
munching.
"Call that a ay-puth?" a small boy would say.
"Not enough!" the old man would exclaim in surprise. "Here you are,
then!" And he would give the peas another sprinkling from the
pepper-pot.
Moses Ansell's progeny were not in the picture. The younger children
were at home, the elder had gone to school an hour before to run about
and get warm in the spacious playgrounds. A slice of bread each and the
wish-wash of a thrice-brewed pennyworth of tea had been their morning
meal, and there was no prospect of dinner. The thought of them made
Moses's heart heavy again; he forgot the Maggid's explanation of the
verse in Habakkuk, and he retraced his steps towards Mordecai Schwartz's
shop. But like his humbler rival, Mordecai had no use for the many-sided
Moses; he was "full up" with swarthy "hands," though, as there were
rumors of strikes in the air, he prudently took note of Moses's address.
After this rebuff, Moses shuffled hopelessly about for more than an
hour; the dinner-hour was getting desperately near; already children
passed him, carrying the Sunday dinners from the bakeries, and there
were wafts of vague poetry in the atmosphere. Moses felt he could not
face his own children.
At last he nerved himself to an audacious resolution, and elbowed his
way blusterously towards the Ruins, lest he might break down if his
courage had time to cool.
"The Ruins" was a great stony square, partly bordered by houses, and
only picturesque on Sundays when it became a branch of the all-ramifying
Fair. Moses could have bought anything there from elastic braces to
green parrots in gilt cages. That is to say if he had had money. At
present he had nothing in his pocket except holes.
What he might be able to do on his way back was another matter; for it
was Malka that Moses Ansell was going to see. She was the cousin of his
deceased wife, and lived in Zachariah Square. Moses had not been there
for a month, for Malka was a wealthy twig of the family tree, to be
approached with awe and trembling. She kept a second-hand clothes store
in Houndsditch, a supplementary stall in the Halfpenny Exchange, and a
barrow on the "Ruins" of a Sunday; and she had set up Ephraim, her
newly-acquired son-in-law, in the same line of business in the same
district. Like most things she dealt in, her son-in-law was second-hand,
having lost his first wife four years ago in Poland. But he was only
twenty-two, and a second-hand son-in-law of twenty-two is superior to
many brand new ones. The two domestic establishments were a few minutes
away from the shops, facing each other diagonally across the square.
They were small, three-roomed houses, without basements, the ground
floor window in each being filled up with a black gauze blind (an
invariable index of gentility) which allowed the occupants to see all
that was passing outside, but confronted gazers with their own
rejections. Passers-by postured at these mirrors, twisting moustaches
perkily, or giving coquettish pats to bonnets, unwitting of the grinning
inhabitants. Most of the doors were ajar, wintry as the air was: for the
Zachariah Squareites lived a good deal on the door-step. In the summer,
the housewives sat outside on chairs and gossiped and knitted, as if the
sea foamed at their feel, and wrinkled good-humored old men played nap
on tea-trays. Some of the doors were blocked below with sliding barriers
of wood, a sure token of infants inside given to straying. More obvious
tokens of child-life were the swings nailed to the lintels of a few
doors, in which, despite the cold, toothless babes swayed like monkeys
on a branch. But the Square, with its broad area of quadrangular
pavement, was an ideal playing-ground for children, since other animals
came not within its precincts, except an inquisitive dog or a local cat.
Solomon Ansell knew no greater privilege than to accompany his father to
these fashionable quarters and whip his humming-top across the ample
spaces, the while Moses transacted his business with Malka. Last time
the business was psalm-saying. Milly had been brought to bed of a son,
but it was doubtful if she would survive, despite the charms hung upon
the bedpost to counteract the nefarious designs of Lilith, the wicked
first wife of Adam, and of the Not-Good Ones who hover about women in
childbirth. So Moses was sent for, post-haste, to intercede with the
Almighty. His piety, it was felt, would command attention. For an
average of three hundred and sixty-two days a year Moses was a miserable
worm, a nonentity, but on the other three, when death threatened to
visit Malka or her little clan, Moses became a personage of prime
importance, and was summoned at all hours of the day and night to
wrestle with the angel Azrael. When the angel had retired, worsted,
after a match sometimes protracted into days, Moses relapsed into his
primitive insignificance, and was dismissed with a mouthful of rum and a
shilling. It never seemed to him an unfair equivalent, for nobody could
make less demand on the universe than Moses. Give him two solid meals
and three solid services a day, and he was satisfied, and he craved more
for spiritual snacks between meals than for physical.
The last crisis had been brief, and there was so little danger that,
when Milly's child was circumcised, Moses had not even been bidden to
the feast, though his piety would have made him the ideal sandek or
god-father. He did not resent this, knowing himself dust—and that
anything but gold-dust.
Moses had hardly emerged from the little arched passage which led to the
Square, when sounds of strife fell upon his ears. Two stout women
chatting amicably at their doors, had suddenly developed a dispute. In
Zachariah Square, when you wanted to get to the bottom of a quarrel, the
cue was not "find the woman," but find the child. The high-spirited
bantlings had a way of pummelling one another in fistic duels, and of
calling in their respective mothers when they got the worse of it—which
is cowardly, but human. The mother of the beaten belligerent would then
threaten to wring the "year," or to twist the nose of the victorious
party—sometimes she did it. In either case, the other mother would
intervene, and then the two bantlings would retire into the background
and leave their mothers to take up the duel while they resumed their
interrupted game.
Of such sort was the squabble betwixt Mrs. Isaacs and Mrs. Jacobs. Mrs.
Isaacs pointed out with superfluous vehemence that her poor lamb had
been mangled beyond recognition. Mrs. Jacobs, per contra, asseverated
with superfluous gesture that it was her poor lamb who had received
irreparable injury. These statements were not in mutual contradiction,
but Mrs. Isaacs and Mrs. Jacobs were, and so the point at issue was
gradually absorbed in more personal recriminations.
"By my life, and by my Fanny's life, I'll leave my seal on the first
child of yours that comes across my way! There!" Thus Mrs. Isaacs.
"Lay a linger on a hair of a child of mine, and, by my husband's life,
I'll summons you; I'll have the law on you." Thus Mrs. Jacobs; to the
gratification of the resident populace.
Mrs. Isaacs and Mrs. Jacobs rarely quarrelled with each other, uniting
rather in opposition to the rest of the Square. They were English, quite
English, their grandfather having been born in Dresden; and they gave
themselves airs in consequence, and called their kinder "children,"
which annoyed those neighbors who found a larger admixture of Yiddish
necessary for conversation. These very kinder, again, attained
considerable importance among their school-fellows by refusing to
pronounce the guttural "ch" of the Hebrew otherwise than as an English
"k."
"Summons me, indeed," laughed back Mrs. Isaacs. "A fat lot I'd care for
that. You'd jolly soon expose your character to the magistrate.
Everybody knows what you are."
"Your mother!" retorted Mrs. Jacobs mechanically; the elliptical method
of expression being greatly in vogue for conversation of a loud
character. Quick as lightning came the parrying stroke.
"Yah! And what was your father, I should like to know?"
Mrs. Isaacs had no sooner made this inquiry than she became conscious of
an environment of suppressed laughter; Mrs. Jacobs awoke to the
situation a second later, and the two women stood suddenly dumbfounded,
petrified, with arms akimbo, staring at each other.
The wise, if apocryphal, Ecclesiasticus, sagely and pithily remarked,
many centuries before modern civilization was invented: Jest not with a
rude man lest thy ancestors be disgraced. To this day the oriental
methods of insult have survived in the Ghetto. The dead past is never
allowed to bury its dead; the genealogical dust-heap is always liable to
be raked up, and even innocuous ancestors may be traduced to the third
and fourth generation.
Now it so happened that Mrs. Isaacs and Mrs. Jacobs were sisters. And
when it dawned upon them into what dilemma their automatic methods of
carte and tierce had inveigled them, they were frozen with confusion.
They retired crestfallen to their respective parlors, and sported their
oaks. The resources of repartee were dried up for the moment. Relatives
are unduly handicapped in these verbal duels; especially relatives with
the same mother and father.
Presently Mrs. Isaacs reappeared. She had thought of something she ought
to have said. She went up to her sister's closed door, and shouted into
the key-hole: "None of my children ever had bandy-legs!"
Almost immediately the window of the front bedroom was flung up, and

Mrs. Jacobs leant out of it waving what looked like an immense streamer.

"Aha," she observed, dangling it tantalizingly up and down. "Morry
antique!"
The dress fluttered in the breeze. Mrs. Jacobs caressed the stuff
between her thumb and forefinger.
"Aw-aw-aw-aw-aw-awl silk," she announced with a long ecstatic quaver.
Mrs. Isaacs stood paralyzed by the brilliancy of the repartee.
Mrs. Jacobs withdrew the moiré antique and exhibited a mauve gown.
"Aw-aw-aw-aw-aw-awl silk."
The mauve fluttered for a triumphant instant, the next a puce and amber
dress floated on the breeze.
"Aw-aw-aw-aw-aw-awl silk." Mrs. Jacobs's fingers smoothed it lovingly,

then it was drawn within to be instantly replaced by a green dress.

Mrs. Jacobs passed the skirt slowly through her fingers.

"Aw-aw-aw-aw-aw-awl silk!" she quavered mockingly.

By this time Mrs. Isaacs's face was the color of the latest flag of
victory.
"The tallyman!" she tried to retort, but the words stuck in her throat.
Fortunately just then she caught sight of her poor lamb playing with the
other poor lamb. She dashed at her offspring, boxed its ears and crying,
"You little blackguard, if I ever catch you playing with blackguards
again, I'll wring your neck for you," she hustled the infant into the
house and slammed the door viciously behind her.
Moses had welcomed this every-day scene, for it put off a few moments
his encounter with the formidable Malka. As she had not appeared at door
or window, he concluded she was in a bad temper or out of London;
neither alternative was pleasant.
He knocked at the door of Milly's house where her mother was generally
to be found, and an elderly char-woman opened it. There were some
bottles of spirit, standing on a wooden side-table covered with a
colored cloth, and some unopened biscuit bags. At these familiar
premonitory signs of a festival, Moses felt tempted to beat a retreat.
He could not think for the moment what was up, but whatever it was he
had no doubt the well-to-do persons would supply him with ice. The
char-woman, with brow darkened by soot and gloom, told him that Milly
was upstairs, but that her mother had gone across to her own house with
the clothes-brush.
Moses's face fell. When his wife was alive, she had been a link of
connection between "The Family" and himself, her cousin having
generously employed her as a char-woman. So Moses knew the import of the
clothes-brush. Malka was very particular about her appearance and loved
to be externally speckless, but somehow or other she had no
clothes-brush at home. This deficiency did not matter ordinarily, for
she practically lived at Milly's. But when she had words with Milly or
her husband, she retired to her own house to sulk or schmull, as they
called it. The carrying away of the clothes-brush was, thus, a sign that
she considered the breach serious and hostilities likely to be
protracted. Sometimes a whole week would go by without the two houses
ceasing to stare sullenly across at each other, the situation in Milly's
camp being aggravated by the lack of a clothes-brush. In such moments of
irritation, Milly's husband was apt to declare that his mother-in-law
had abundance of clothes-brushes, for, he pertinently asked, how did she
manage during her frequent business tours in the country? He gave it as
his conviction that Malka merely took the clothes-brush away to afford
herself a handle for returning. But then Ephraim Phillips was a
graceless young fellow, the death of whose first wife was probably a
judgment on his levity, and everybody except his second mother-in-law
knew that he had a book of tickets for the Oxbridge Music Hall, and went
there on Friday nights. Still, in spite of these facts, experience did
show that whenever Milly's camp had outsulked Malka's, the old woman's
surrender was always veiled under the formula of: "Oh Milly, I've
brought you over your clothes-brush. I just noticed it, and thought you
might be wanting it." After this, conversation was comparatively easy.
Moses hardly cared to face Malka in such a crisis of the clothes-brush.
He turned away despairingly, and was going back through the small
archway which led to the Ruins and the outside world, when a grating
voice startled his ear.
"Well, Méshe, whither fliest thou? Has my Milly forbidden thee to see
me?"
He looked back. Malka was standing at her house-door. He retraced his
steps.
"N-n-o," he murmured. "I thought you still out with your stall."
That was where she should have been, at any rate, till half an hour ago.
She did not care to tell herself, much less Moses, that she had been
waiting at home for the envoy of peace from the filial camp summoning
her to the ceremony of the Redemption of her grandson.
"Well, now thou seest me," she said, speaking Yiddish for his behoof,
"thou lookest not outwardly anxious to know how it goes with me."
"How goes it with you?"
"As well as an old woman has a right to expect. The Most High is good!"
Malka was in her most amiable mood, to emphasize to outsiders the
injustice of her kin in quarrelling with her. She was a tall woman of
fifty, with a tanned equine gypsy face surmounted by a black wig, and
decorated laterally by great gold earrings. Great black eyes blazed
beneath great black eyebrows, and the skin between them was capable of
wrinkling itself black with wrath. A gold chain was wound thrice round
her neck, and looped up within her black silk bodice. There were
numerous rings on her fingers, and she perpetually smelt of peppermint.
"Nu, stand not chattering there," she went on. "Come in. Dost thou
wish me to catch my death of cold?"
Moses slouched timidly within, his head bowed as if in dread of knocking
against the top of the door. The room was a perfect fac-simile of
Milly's parlor at the other end of the diagonal, save that instead of
the festive bottles and paper bags on the small side-table, there was a
cheerless clothes-brush. Like Milly's, the room contained a round table,
a chest of drawers with decanters on the top, and a high mantelpiece
decorated with pendant green fringes, fastened by big-headed brass
nails. Here cheap china dogs, that had had more than their day squatted
amid lustres with crystal drops. Before the fire was a lofty steel
guard, which, useful enough in Milly's household, had survived its
function in Malka's, where no one was ever likely to tumble into the
grate. In a corner of the room a little staircase began to go upstairs.
There was oilcloth on the floor. In Zachariah Square anybody could go
into anybody else's house and feel at home. There was no visible
difference between one and another. Moses sat down awkwardly on a chair
and refused a peppermint. In the end he accepted an apple, blessed God
for creating the fruit of the tree, and made a ravenous bite at it.
"I must take peppermints," Malka explained. "It's for the spasms."
"But you said you were well," murmured Moses.
"And suppose? If I did not take peppermint I should have the spasms. My
poor sister Rosina, peace be upon him, who died of typhoid, suffered
greatly from the spasms. It's in the family. She would have died of
asthma if she had lived long enough. Nu, how goes it with thee?" she
went on, suddenly remembering that Moses, too, had a right to be ill. At
bottom, Malka felt a real respect for Moses, though he did not know it.
It dated from the day he cut a chip of mahogany out of her best round
table. He had finished cutting his nails, and wanted a morsel of wood to
burn with them in witness of his fulfilment of the pious custom. Malka
raged, but in her inmost heart there was admiration for such
unscrupulous sanctity.
"I have been out of work for three weeks," Moses answered, omitting to
expound the state of his health in view of more urgent matters.
"Unlucky fool! What my silly cousin Gittel, peace be upon him, could see
to marry in thee, I know not."
Moses could not enlighten her. He might have informed her that olov
hasholom, "peace be upon him," was an absurdity when applied to a
woman, but then he used the pious phrase himself, although aware of its
grammatical shortcomings.
"I told her thou wouldst never be able to keep her, poor lamb," Malka
went on. "But she was always an obstinate pig. And she kept her head
high up, too, as if she had five pounds a week! Never would let her
children earn money like other people's children. But thou oughtest not
to be so obstinate. Thou shouldst have more sense, Méshe; thou
belongest not to my family. Why can't Solomon go out with matches?"
"Gittel's soul would not like it."
"But the living have bodies! Thou rather seest thy children starve than
work. There's Esther,—an idle, lazy brat, always reading story-books;
why doesn't she sell flowers or pull out bastings in the evening?"
"Esther and Solomon have their lessons to do."
"Lessons!" snorted Malka. "What's the good of lessons? It's English, not
Judaism, they teach them in that godless school. I could never read or
write anything but Hebrew in all my life; but God be thanked, I have
thriven without it. All they teach them in the school is English
nonsense. The teachers are a pack of heathens, who eat forbidden things,
but the good Yiddishkeit goes to the wall. I'm ashamed of thee, Méshe:
thou dost not even send thy boys to a Hebrew class in the evening."
"I have no money, and they must do their English lessons. Else, perhaps,
their clothes will be stopped. Besides, I teach them myself every
Shabbos afternoon and Sunday. Solomon translates into Yiddish the
whole Pentateuch with Rashi."
"Yes, he may know Térah" said Malka, not to be baffled. "But he'll
never know Gemorah or Mishnayis." Malka herself knew very little of
these abstruse subjects beyond their names, and the fact that they were
studied out of minutely-printed folios by men of extreme sanctity.
"He knows a little Gemorah, too," said Moses. "I can't teach him at
home because I haven't got a Gemorah,—it's so expensive, as you know.
But he went with me to the Beth-Medrash, when the Maggid was
studying it with a class free of charge, and we learnt the whole of the
Tractate Niddah. Solomon understands very well all about the Divorce
Laws, and he could adjudicate on the duties of women to their husbands."
"Ah, but he'll never know Cabbulah," said Malka, driven to her last
citadel. "But then no one in England can study Cabbulah since the days
of Rabbi Falk (the memory of the righteous for a blessing) any more than
a born Englishman can learn Talmud. There's something in the air that
prevents it. In my town there was a Rabbi who could do Cabbulah; he
could call Abraham our father from the grave. But in this pig-eating
country no one can be holy enough for the Name, blessed be It, to grant
him the privilege. I don't believe the Shochetim kill the animals
properly; the statutes are violated; even pious people eat tripha
cheese and butter. I don't say thou dost, Méshe, but thou lettest thy
children."
"Well, your own butter is not kosher," said Moses, nettled.
"My butter? What does it matter about my butter? I never set up for a
purist. I don't come of a family of Rabbonim. I'm only a business woman.
It's the froom people that I complain of; the people who ought to set
an example, and are lowering the standard of Froomkeit. I caught a
beadle's wife the other day washing her meat and butter plates in the
same bowl of water. In time they will be frying steaks in butter, and
they will end by eating tripha meat out of butter plates, and the
judgment of God will come. But what is become of thine apple? Thou hast
not gorged it already?" Moses nervously pointed to his trousers pocket,
bulged out by the mutilated globe. After his first ravenous bite Moses
had bethought himself of his responsibilities.
"It's for the kinder," he explained.
"Nu, the kinder!" snorted Malka disdainfully. "And what will they
give thee for it? Verily, not a thank you. In my young days we trembled
before the father and the mother, and my mother, peace be upon him,
potched my face after I was a married woman. I shall never forget that
slap—it nearly made me adhere to the wall. But now-a-days our children
sit on our heads. I gave my Milly all she has in the world—a house, a
shop, a husband, and my best bed-linen. And now when I want her to call
the child Yosef, after my first husband, peace be on him, her own
father, she would out of sheer vexatiousness, call it Yechezkel."
Malka's voice became more strident than ever. She had been anxious to
make a species of vicarious reparation to her first husband, and the
failure of Milly to acquiesce in the arrangement was a source of real
vexation.
Moses could think of nothing better to say than to inquire how her
present husband was.
"He overworks himself," Malka replied, shaking her head. "The misfortune
is that he thinks himself a good man of business, and he is always
starting new enterprises without consulting me. If he would only take my
advice more!"
Moses shook his head in sympathetic deprecation of Michael Birnbaum's
wilfulness.
"Is he at home?" he asked.
"No, but I expect him back from the country every minute. I believe they
have invited him for the Pidyun Haben to-day."
"Oh, is that to-day?"
"Of course. Didst thou not know?"
"No, no one told me."
"Thine own sense should have told thee. Is it not the thirty-first day
since the birth? But of course he won't accept when he knows that my own
daughter has driven me out of her house."
"You say not!" exclaimed Moses in horror.
"I do say," said Malka, unconsciously taking up the clothes-brush and
thumping with it on the table to emphasize the outrage. "I told her that
when Yechezkel cried so much, it would be better to look for the pin
than to dose the child for gripes. 'I dressed it myself, Mother,' says
she. 'Thou art an obstinate cat's head. Milly,' says I. 'I say there
is a pin.' 'And I know better,' says she. 'How canst thou know better
than I?' says I. 'Why, I was a mother before thou wast born.' So I
unrolled the child's flannel, and sure enough underneath it just over
the stomach I found—"
"The pin," concluded Moses, shaking his head gravely.
"No, not exactly. But a red mark where the pin had been pricking the
poor little thing."
"And what did Milly say then?" said Moses in sympathetic triumph.
"Milly said it was a flea-bite! and I said, 'Gott in Himmel, Milly, dost
thou want to swear my eyes away? My enemies shall have such a
flea-bite.' And because Red Rivkah was in the room, Milly said I was
shedding her blood in public, and she began to cry as if I had committed
a crime against her in looking after her child. And I rushed out,
leaving the two babies howling together. That was a week ago."
"And how is the child?"
"How should I know? I am only the grandmother, I only supplied the
bed-linen it was born on."
"But is it recovered from the circumcision?"
"Oh, yes, all our family have good healing flesh. It's a fine, child,
imbeshreer. It's got my eyes and nose. It's a rare handsome baby,
imbeshreer. Only it won't be its mother's fault if the Almighty takes
it not back again. Milly has picked up so many ignorant Lane women who
come in and blight the child, by admiring it aloud, not even saying
imbeshreer. And then there's an old witch, a beggar-woman that
Ephraim, my son-in-law, used to give a shilling a week to. Now he only
gives her ninepence. She asked him 'why?' and he said, 'I'm married now.
I can't afford more.' 'What!' she shrieked, 'you got married on my
money!' And one Friday when the nurse had baby downstairs, the old
beggar-woman knocked for her weekly allowance, and she opened the door,
and she saw the child, and she looked at it with her Evil Eye! I hope to
Heaven nothing will come of it."
"I will pray for Yechezkel," said Moses.
"Pray for Milly also, while thou art about it, that she may remember
what is owing to a mother before the earth covers me. I don't know
what's coming over children. Look at my Leah. She will marry that Sam
Levine, though he belongs to a lax English family, and I suspect his
mother was a proselyte. She can't fry fish any way. I don't say anything
against Sam, but still I do think my Leah might have told me before
falling in love with him. And yet see how I treat them! My Michael made
a Missheberach for them in synagogue the Sabbath after the engagement;
not a common eighteen-penny benediction, but a guinea one, with
half-crown blessings thrown in for his parents and the congregation, and
a gift of five shillings to the minister. That was of course in our own
Chevrah, not reckoning the guinea my Michael shnodared at Duke's
Plaizer Shool. You know we always keep two seats at Duke's Plaizer as
well." Duke's Plaizer was the current distortion of Duke's Place.
"What magnanimity," said Moses overawed.
"I like to do everything with decorum," said Malka. "No one can say I
have ever acted otherwise than as a fine person. I dare say thou couldst
do with a few shillings thyself now."
Moses hung his head still lower. "You see my mother is so poorly," he
stammered. "She is a very old woman, and without anything to eat she may
not live long."
"They ought to take her into the Aged Widows' Home. I'm sure I gave her
my votes."
"God shall bless you for it. But people say I was lucky enough to get
my Benjamin into the Orphan Asylum, and that I ought not to have brought
her from Poland. They say we grow enough poor old widows here."
"People say quite right—at least she would have starved in, a Yiddishë
country, not in a land of heathens."
"But she was lonely and miserable out there, exposed to all the malice
of the Christians. And I was earning a pound a week. Tailoring was a
good trade then. The few roubles I used to send her did not always reach
her."
"Thou hadst no right to send her anything, nor to send for her. Mothers
are not everything. Thou didst marry my cousin Gittel, peace be upon
him, and it was thy duty to support her and her children. Thy mother
took the bread out of the mouth of Gittel, and but for her my poor
cousin might have been alive to-day. Believe me it was no Mitzvah."
Mitzvah is a "portmanteau-word." It means a commandment and a good
deed, the two conceptions being regarded as interchangeable.
"Nay, thou errest there," answered Moses. "'Gittel was not a phoenix
which alone ate not of the Tree of Knowledge and lives for ever. Women
have no need to live as long as men, for they have not so many
Mitzvahs to perform as men; and inasmuch as"—here his tones
involuntarily assumed the argumentative sing-song—"their souls profit
by all the Mitzvahs performed by their husbands and children, Gittel