# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Emile Zola, The Downfall
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13851/13851-h/13851-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

A loud knocking was heard at the kitchen door and Prosper, who was
      beginning to tire of his solitude, was holding a hesitating parley with
      the visitors. He did not like to admit strangers when the master was away,
      fearing he might be held responsible for any damage that might ensue. His
      good luck befriended him in this instance, however, for just then Father
      Fouchard's carriole came lumbering up the acclivity, the tramp of the
      horse's feet resounding faintly on the snow that covered the road. It was
      the old man who welcomed the newcomers.
    

      “Ah, good! it's you fellows. What have you on that wheelbarrow?”
     

      Sambuc, lean and hungry as a robber and wrapped in the folds of a blue
      woolen blouse many times too large for him, did not even hear the farmer;
      he was storming angrily at Prosper, his honest brother, as he called him,
      who had only then made up his mind to unbar the door.
    

      “Say, you! do you take us for beggars that you leave us standing in the
      cold in weather such as this?”
     

      But Prosper did not trouble himself to make any other reply than was
      expressed in a contemptuous shrug of the shoulders, and while he was
      leading the horse off to the stable old Fouchard, bending over the
      wheelbarrow, again spoke up.
    

      “So, it's two dead sheep you've brought me. It's lucky it's freezing
      weather, otherwise we should know what they are by the smell.”
     

      Cabasse and Ducat, Sambuc's two trusty henchmen, who accompanied him in
      all his expeditions, raised their voices in protest.
    

      “Oh!” cried the first, with his loud-mouthed Provencal volubility,
      “they've only been dead three days. They're some of the animals that died
      on the Raffins farm, where the disease has been putting in its fine work
      of late.”
     

      “Procumbit humi bos,” spouted the other, the ex-court officer whose
      excessive predilection for the ladies had got him into difficulties, and
      who was fond of airing his Latin on occasion.
    

      Father Fouchard shook his head and continued to disparage their
      merchandise, declaring it was too “high.” Finally he took the three men
      into the kitchen, where he concluded the business by saying:
    

      “After all, they'll have to take it and make the best of it. It comes just
      in season, for there's not a cutlet left in Raucourt. When a man's hungry
      he'll eat anything, won't he?” And very well pleased at heart, he called
      to Silvine, who just then came in from putting Charlot to bed: “Let's have
      some glasses; we are going to drink to the downfall of old Bismarck.”
     

      Fouchard maintained amicable relations with these francs-tireurs from
      Dieulet wood, who for some three months past had been emerging at
      nightfall from the fastnesses where they made their lurking place, killing
      and robbing a Prussian whenever they could steal upon him unawares,
      descending on the farms and plundering the peasants when there was a
      scarcity of the other kind of game. They were the terror of all the
      villages in the vicinity, and the more so that every time a provision
      train was attacked or a sentry murdered the German authorities avenged
      themselves on the adjacent hamlets, the inhabitants of which they accused
      of abetting the outrages, inflicting heavy penalties on them, carrying off
      their mayors as prisoners, burning their poor hovels. Nothing would have
      pleased the peasants more than to deliver Sambuc and his band to the
      enemy, and they were only deterred from doing so by their fear of being
      shot in the back at a turn in the road some night should their attempt
      fail of success.
    

      It had occurred to Fouchard to inaugurate a traffic with them. Roaming
      about the country in every direction, peering with their sharp eyes into
      ditches and cattle sheds, they had become his purveyors of dead animals.
      Never an ox or a sheep within a radius of three leagues was stricken down
      by disease but they came by night with their barrow and wheeled it away to
      him, and he paid them in provisions, most generally in bread, that Silvine
      baked in great batches expressly for the purpose. Besides, if he had no
      great love for them, he experienced a secret feeling of admiration for the
      francs-tireurs, a set of handy rascals who went their way and snapped
      their fingers at the world, and although he was making a fortune from his
      dealings with the Prussians, he could never refrain from chuckling to
      himself with grim, savage laughter as often as he heard that one of them
      had been found lying at the roadside with his throat cut.
    

      “Your good health!” said he, touching glasses with the three men. Then,
      wiping his mouth with the back of his hand: “Say, have you heard of the
      fuss they're making over the two headless uhlans that they picked up over
      there near Villecourt? Villecourt was burned yesterday, you know; they say
      it was the penalty the village had to pay for harboring you. You'll have
      to be prudent, don't you see, and not show yourselves about here for a
      time. I'll see the bread is sent you somewhere.”
     

      Sambuc shrugged his shoulders and laughed contemptuously. What did he care
      for the Prussians, the dirty cowards! And all at once he exploded in a fit
      of anger, pounding the table with his fist.
    

      “Tonnerre de Dieu! I don't mind the uhlans so much; they're not so
      bad, but it's the other one I'd like to get a chance at once—you
      know whom I mean, the other fellow, the spy, the man who used to work for
      you.”
     

      “Goliah?” said Father Fouchard.
    

      Silvine, who had resumed her sewing, dropped it in her lap and listened
      with intense interest.
    

      “That's his name, Goliah! Ah, the brigand! he is as familiar with every
      inch of the wood of Dieulet as I am with my pocket, and he's like enough
      to get us pinched some fine morning. I heard of him to-day at the Maltese
      Cross making his boast that he would settle our business for us before
      we're a week older. A dirty hound, he is, and he served as guide to the
      Prussians the day before the battle of Beaumont; I leave it to these
      fellows if he didn't.”
     

      “It's as true as there's a candle standing on that table!” attested
      Cabasse.
    

      “Per silentia amica lunoe,” added Ducat, whose quotations were not
      always conspicuous for their appositeness.
    

      But Sambuc again brought his heavy fist down upon the table. “He has been
      tried and adjudged guilty, the scoundrel! If ever you hear of his being in
      the neighborhood just send me word, and his head shall go and keep company
      with the heads of the two uhlans in the Meuse; yes, by G-d! I pledge you
      my word it shall.”
     

      There was silence. Silvine was very white, and gazed at the men with
      unwinking, staring eyes.
    

      “Those are things best not be talked too much about,” old Fouchard
      prudently declared. “Your health, and good-night to you.”
     

      They emptied the second bottle, and Prosper, who had returned from the
      stable, lent a hand to load upon the wheelbarrow, whence the dead sheep
      had been removed, the loaves that Silvine had placed in an old grain-sack.
      But he turned his back and made no reply when his brother and the other
      two men, wheeling the barrow before them through the snow, stalked away
      and were lost to sight in the darkness, repeating:
    

      “Good-night, good-night! an plaisir!”
     

      They had breakfasted the following morning, and Father Fouchard was alone
      in the kitchen when the door was thrown open and Goliah in the flesh
      entered the room, big and burly, with the ruddy hue of health on his face
      and his tranquil smile. If the old man experienced anything in the nature
      of a shock at the suddenness of the apparition he let no evidence of it
      escape him. He peered at the other through his half-closed lids while he
      came forward and shook his former employer warmly by the hand.
    

      “How are you, Father Fouchard?”
     

      Then only the old peasant seemed to recognize him.
    

      “Hallo, my boy, is it you? You've been filling out; how fat you are!”
     

      And he eyed him from head to foot as he stood there, clad in a sort of
      soldier's greatcoat of coarse blue cloth, with a cap of the same material,
      wearing a comfortable, prosperous air of self-content. His speech betrayed
      no foreign accent, moreover; he spoke with the slow, thick utterance of
      the peasants of the district.
    

      “Yes, Father Fouchard, it's I in person. I didn't like to be in the
      neighborhood without dropping in just to say how-do-you-do to you.”
     

      The old man could not rid himself of a feeling of distrust. What was the
      fellow after, anyway? Could he have heard of the francs-tireurs' visit to
      the farmhouse the night before? That was something he must try to
      ascertain. First of all, however, it would be best to treat him politely,
      as he seemed to have come there in a friendly spirit.
    

      “Well, my lad, since you are so pleasant we'll have a glass together for
      old times' sake.”
     

      He went himself and got a bottle and two glasses. Such expenditure of wine
      went to his heart, but one must know how to be liberal when he has
      business on hand. The scene of the preceding night was repeated, they
      touched glasses with the same words, the same gestures.
    

      “Here's to your good health, Father Fouchard.”
     

      “And here's to yours, my lad.”
     

      Then Goliah unbent and his face assumed an expression of satisfaction; he
      looked about him like a man pleased with the sight of objects that
      recalled bygone times. He did not speak of the past, however, nor, for the
      matter of that, did he speak of the present. The conversation ran on the
      extremely cold weather, which would interfere with farming operations;
      there was one good thing to be said for the snow, however: it would kill
      off the insects. He barely alluded, with a slightly pained expression, to
      the partially concealed hatred, the affright and scorn, with which he had
      been received in the other houses of Remilly. Every man owes allegiance to
      his country, doesn't he? It is quite clear he should serve his country as
      well as he knows how. In France, however, no one looked at the matter in
      that light; there were things about which people had very queer notions.
      And as the old man listened and looked at that broad, innocent,
      good-natured face, beaming with frankness and good-will, he said to
      himself that surely that excellent fellow had had no evil designs in
      coming there.
    

      “So you are all alone to-day, Father Fouchard?”
     

      “Oh, no; Silvine is out at the barn, feeding the cows. Would you like to
      see her?”
     

      Goliah laughed. “Well, yes. To be quite frank with you, it was on
      Silvine's account that I came.”
     

      Old Fouchard felt as if a great load had been taken off his mind; he went
      to the door and shouted at the top of his voice:
    

      “Silvine! Silvine! There's someone here to see you.”
     

      And he went away about his business without further apprehension, since
      the lass was there to look out for the property. A man must be in a bad
      way, he reflected, to let a fancy for a girl keep such a hold on him after
      such a length of time, years and years.
    

      When Silvine entered the room she was not surprised to find herself in
      presence of Goliah, who remained seated and contemplated her with his
      broad smile, in which, however, there was a trace of embarrassment. She
      had been expecting him, and stood stock-still immediately she stepped
      across the doorsill, nerving herself and bracing all her faculties. Little
      Charlot came running up and hid among her petticoats, astonished and
      frightened to see a strange man there. Then succeeded a few seconds of
      awkward silence.
    

      “And this is the little one, then?” Goliah asked at last in his most
      dulcet tone.
    

      “Yes,” was Silvine's curt, stern answer.
    

      Silence again settled down upon the room. He had known there was a child,
      although he had gone away before the birth of his offspring, but this was
      the first time he had laid eyes on it. He therefore wished to explain
      matters, like a young man of sense who is confident he can give good
      reasons for his conduct.
    

      “Come, Silvine, I know you cherish bitter feelings against me—and
      yet there is no reason why you should. If I went away, if I have been
      cause to you of so much suffering, you might have told yourself that
      perhaps it was because I was not my own master. When a man has masters
      over him he must obey them, mustn't he? If they had sent me off on foot to
      make a journey of a hundred leagues I should have been obliged to go. And,
      of course, I couldn't say a word to you about it; you have no idea how bad
      it made me feel to go away as I did without bidding you good-by. I won't
      say to you now that I felt certain I should return to you some day; still,
      I always fully expected that I should, and, as you see, here I am again—”
     

      She had turned away her head and was looking through the window at the
      snow that carpeted the courtyard, as if resolved to hear no word he said.
      Her persistent silence troubled him; he interrupted his explanations to
      say:
    

      “Do you know you are prettier than ever!”
     

      True enough, she was very beautiful in her pallor, with her magnificent
      great eyes that illuminated all her face. The heavy coils of raven hair
      that crowned her head seemed the outward symbol of the inward sorrow that
      was gnawing at her heart.
    

      “Come, don't be angry! you know that I mean you no harm. If I did not love
      you still I should not have come back, that's very certain. Now that I am
      here and everything is all right once more we shall see each other now and
      then, shan't we?”
     

      She suddenly stepped a pace backward, and looking him squarely in the
      face:
    

      “Never!”
     

      “Never!—and why? Are you not my wife, is not that child ours?”
     

      She never once took her eyes from off his face, speaking with impressive
      slowness:
    

      “Listen to me; it will be better to end that matter once for all. You knew
      Honore; I loved him, he was the only man who ever had my love. And now he
      is dead; you robbed me of him, you murdered him over there on the
      battlefield, and never again will I be yours. Never!”
     

      She raised her hand aloft as if invoking heaven to record her vow, while
      in her voice was such depth of hatred that for a moment he stood as if
      cowed, then murmured:
    

      “Yes, I heard that Honore was dead; he was a very nice young fellow. But
      what could you expect? Many another has died as well; it is the fortune of
      war. And then it seemed to me that once he was dead there would no longer
      be a barrier between us, and let me remind you, Silvine, that after all I
      was never brutal toward you—”
     

      But he stopped short at sight of her agitation; she seemed as if about to
      tear her own flesh in her horror and distress.
    

      “Oh! that is just it; yes, it is that which seems as if it would drive me
      wild. Why, oh! why did I yield when I never loved you? Honore's departure
      left me so broken down, I was so sick in mind and body that never have I
      been able to recall any portion of the circumstances; perhaps it was
      because you talked to me of him and appeared to love him. My God! the long
      nights I have spent thinking of that time and weeping until the fountain
      of my tears was dry! It is dreadful to have done a thing that one had no
      wish to do and afterward be unable to explain the reason of it. And he had
      forgiven me, he had told me that he would marry me in spite of all when
      his time was out, if those hateful Prussians only let him live. And you
      think I will return to you. No, never, never! not if I were to die for
      it!”
     

      Goliah's face grew dark. She had always been so submissive, and now he saw
      she was not to be shaken in her fixed resolve. Notwithstanding his
      easy-going nature he was determined he would have her, even if he should
      be compelled to use force, now that he was in a position to enforce his
      authority, and it was only his inherent prudence, the instinct that
      counseled him to patience and diplomacy, that kept him from resorting to
      violent measures now. The hard-fisted colossus was averse to bringing his
      physical powers into play; he therefore had recourse to another method for
      making her listen to reason.
    

      “Very well; since you will have nothing more to do with me I will take
      away the child.”
     

      “What do you mean?”
     

      Charlot, whose presence had thus far been forgotten by them both, had
      remained hanging to his mother's skirts, struggling bravely to keep down
      his rising sobs as the altercation waxed more warm. Goliah, leaving his
      chair, approached the group.
    

      “You're my boy, aren't you? You're a good little Prussian. Come along with
      me.”
     

      But before he could lay hands on the child Silvine, all a-quiver with
      excitement, had thrown her arms about it and clasped it to her bosom.
    

      “He, a Prussian, never! He's French, was born in France!”
     

      “You say he's French! Look at him, and look at me; he's my very image. Can
      you say he resembles you in any one of his features?”
     

      She turned her eyes on the big, strapping lothario, with his curling hair
      and beard and his broad, pink face, in which the great blue eyes gleamed
      like globes of polished porcelain; and it was only too true, the little
      one had the same yellow thatch, the same rounded cheeks, the same light
      eyes; every feature of the hated race was reproduced faithfully in him. A
      tress of her jet black hair that had escaped from its confinement and
      wandered down upon her shoulder in the agitation of the moment showed her
      how little there was in common between the child and her.
    

      “I bore him; he is mine!” she screamed in fury. “He's French, and will
      grow up to be a Frenchman, knowing no word of your dirty German language;
      and some day he shall go and help to kill the whole pack of you, to avenge
      those whom you have murdered!”
     

      Charlot, tightening his clasp about her neck, began to cry, shrieking:
    

      “Mammy, mammy, I'm 'fraid! take me away!”
     

      Then Goliah, doubtless because he did not wish to create a scandal,
      stepped back, and in a harsh, stern voice, unlike anything she had ever
      heard from his lips before, made this declaration:
    

      “Bear in mind what I am about to tell you, Silvine. I know all that
      happens at this farm. You harbor the francs-tireurs from the wood of
      Dieulet, among them that Sambuc who is brother to your hired man; you
      supply the bandits with provisions. And I know that that hired man,
      Prosper, is a chasseur d'Afrique and a deserter, and belongs to us by
      rights. Further, I know that you are concealing on your premises a wounded
      man, another soldier, whom a word from me would suffice to consign to a
      German fortress. What do you think: am I not well informed?”
     

      She was listening to him now, tongue-tied and terror-stricken, while
      little Charlot kept piping in her ear with lisping voice:
    

      “Oh! mammy, mammy, take me away, I'm 'fraid!”
     

      “Come,” resumed Goliah, “I'm not a bad fellow, and I don't like quarrels
      and bickering, as you are well aware, but I swear by all that's holy I
      will have them all arrested, Father Fouchard and the rest, unless you
      consent to admit me to your chamber on Monday next. I will take the child,
      too, and send him away to Germany to my mother, who will be very glad to
      have him; for you have no further right to him, you know, if you are going
      to leave me. You understand me, don't you? The folks will all be gone, and
      all I shall have to do will be to come and carry him away. I am the
      master; I can do what pleases me—come, what have you to say?”
     

      But she made no answer, straining the little one more closely to her
      breast as if fearing he might be torn from her then and there, and in her
      great eyes was a look of mingled terror and execration.
    

      “It is well; I give you three days to think the matter over. See to it
      that your bedroom window that opens on the orchard is left open. If I do
      not find the window open next Monday evening at seven o'clock I will come
      with a detail the following day and arrest the inmates of the house and
      then will return and bear away the little one. Think of it well; au
      revoir, Silvine.”
     

      He sauntered quietly away, and she remained standing, rooted to her place,
      her head filled with such a swarming, buzzing crowd of terrible thoughts
      that it seemed to her she must go mad. And during the whole of that long
      day the tempest raged in her. At first the thought occurred to her
      instinctively to take her child in her arms and fly with him, wherever
      chance might direct, no matter where; but what would become of them when
      night should fall and envelop them in darkness? how earn a livelihood for
      him and for herself? Then she determined she would speak to Jean, would
      notify Prosper, and Father Fouchard himself, and again she hesitated and
      changed her mind: was she sufficiently certain of the friendship of those
      people that she could be sure they would not sacrifice her to the general
      safety, she who was cause that they were menaced all with such misfortune?
      No, she would say nothing to anyone; she would rely on her own efforts to
      extricate herself from the peril she had incurred by braving that bad man.
      But what scheme could she devise; mon Dieu! how could she avert the
      threatened evil, for her upright nature revolted; she could never have
      forgiven herself had she been the instrument of bringing disaster to so
      many people, to Jean in particular, who had always been so good to
      Charlot.
    

      The hours passed, one by one; the next day's sun went down, and still she
      had decided upon nothing. She went about her household duties as usual,
      sweeping the kitchen, attending to the cows, making the soup. No word fell
      from her lips, and rising ever amid the ominous silence she preserved, her
      hatred of Goliah grew with every hour and impregnated her nature with its
      poison. He had been her curse; had it not been for him she would have
      waited for Honore, and Honore would be living now, and she would be happy.
      Think of his tone and manner when he made her understand he was the
      master! He had told her the truth, moreover; there were no longer
      gendarmes or judges to whom she could apply for protection; might made
      right. Oh, to be the stronger! to seize and overpower him when he came, he
      who talked of seizing others! All she considered was the child, flesh of
      her flesh; the chance-met father was naught, never had been aught, to her.
      She had no particle of wifely feeling toward him, only a sentiment of
      concentrated rage, the deep-seated hatred of the vanquished for the
      victor, when she thought of him. Rather than surrender the child to him
      she would have killed it, and killed herself afterward. And as she had
      told him, the child he had left her as a gift of hate she would have
      wished were already grown and capable of defending her; she looked into
      the future and beheld him with a musket, slaughtering hecatombs of
      Prussians. Ah, yes! one Frenchman more to assist in wreaking vengeance on
      the hereditary foe!
    

      There was but one day remaining, however; she could not afford to waste
      more time in arriving at a decision. At the very outset, indeed, a hideous
      project had presented itself among the whirling thoughts that filled her
      poor, disordered mind: to notify the francs-tireurs, to give Sambuc the
      information he desired so eagerly; but the idea had not then assumed
      definite form and shape, and she had put it from her as too atrocious, not
      suffering herself even to consider it: was not that man the father of her
      child? she could not be accessory to his murder. Then the thought
      returned, and kept returning at more frequently recurring intervals,
      little by little forcing itself upon her and enfolding her in its unholy
      influence; and now it had entire possession of her, holding her captive by
      the strength of its simple and unanswerable logic. The peril and calamity
      that overhung them all would vanish with that man; he in his grave, Jean,
      Prosper, Father Fouchard would have nothing more to fear, while she
      herself would retain possession of Charlot and there would be never a one
      in all the world to challenge her right to him. All that day she turned
      and re-turned the project in her mind, devoid of further strength to bid
      it down, considering despite herself the murder in its different aspects,
      planning and arranging its most minute details. And now it was become the
      one fixed, dominant idea, making a portion of her being, that she no
      longer stopped to reason on, and when finally she came to act, in
      obedience to that dictate of the inevitable, she went forward as in a
      dream, subject to the volition of another, a someone within her whose
      presence she had never known till then.
    

      Father Fouchard had taken alarm, and on Sunday he dispatched a messenger
      to the francs-tireurs to inform them that their supply of bread would be
      forwarded to the quarries of Boisville, a lonely spot a mile and a quarter
      from the house, and as Prosper had other work to do the old man sent
      Silvine with the wheelbarrow. It was manifest to the young woman that
      Destiny had taken the matter in its hands; she spoke, she made an
      appointment with Sambuc for the following evening, and there was no tremor
      in her voice, as if she were pursuing a course marked out for her from
      which she could not depart. The next day there were still other signs
      which proved that not only sentient beings, but inanimate objects as well,
      favored the crime. In the first place Father Fouchard was called suddenly
      away to Raucourt, and knowing he could not get back until after eight
      o'clock, instructed them not to wait dinner for him. Then Henriette, whose
      night off it was, received word from the hospital late in the afternoon
      that the nurse whose turn it was to watch was ill and she would have to
      take her place; and as Jean never left his chamber under any
      circumstances, the only remaining person from whom interference was to be
      feared was Prosper. It revolted the chasseur d'Afrique, the idea of
      killing a man that way, three against one, but when his brother arrived,
      accompanied by his faithful myrmidons, the disgust he felt for the
      villainous crew was lost in his detestation of the Prussians; sure he
      wasn't going to put himself out to save one of the dirty hounds, even if
      they did do him up in a way that was not according to rule; and he settled
      matters with his conscience by going to bed and burying his head under the
      blankets, that he might hear nothing that would tempt him to act in
      accordance with his soldierly instincts.
    

      It lacked a quarter of seven, and Charlot seemed determined not to go to
      sleep. As a general thing his head declined upon the table the moment he
      had swallowed his last mouthful of soup.
    

      “Come, my darling, go to sleep,” said Silvine, who had taken him to
      Henriette's room; “mamma has put you in the nice lady's big bed.”
     

      But the child was excited by the novelty of the situation; he kicked and
      sprawled upon the bed, bubbling with laughter and animal spirits.
    

      “No, no—stay, little mother—play, little mother.”
     

      She was very gentle and patient, caressing him tenderly and repeating:
    

      “Go to sleep, my darling; shut your eyes and go to sleep, to please
      mamma.”
     

      And finally slumber overtook him, with a happy laugh upon his lips. She
      had not taken the trouble to undress him; she covered him warmly and left
      the room, and so soundly was he in the habit of sleeping that she did not
      even think it necessary to turn the key in the door.
    

      Silvine had never known herself to be so calm, so clear and alert of mind.
      Her decision was prompt, her movements were light, as if she had parted
      company with her material frame and were acting under the domination of
      that other self, that inner being which she had never known till then. She
      had already let in Sambuc, with Cabasse and Ducat, enjoining upon them the
      exercise of the strictest caution, and now she conducted them to her
      bedroom and posted them on either side the window, which she threw open
      wide, notwithstanding the intense cold. The darkness was profound; barely
      a faint glimmer of light penetrated the room, reflected from the bosom of
      the snow without. A deathlike stillness lay on the deserted fields, the
      minutes lagged interminably. Then, when at last the deadened sound was
      heard of footsteps drawing near, Silvine withdrew and returned to the
      kitchen, where she seated herself and waited, motionless as a corpse, her
      great eyes fixed on the flickering flame of the solitary candle.
    

      And the suspense was long protracted, Goliah prowling warily about the
      house before he would risk entering. He thought he could depend on the
      young woman, and had therefore come unarmed save for a single revolver in
      his belt, but he was haunted by a dim presentiment of evil; he pushed open
      the window to its entire extent and thrust his head into the apartment,
      calling below his breath:
    

      “Silvine! Silvine!”
     

      Since he found the window open to him it must be that she had thought
      better of the matter and changed her mind. It gave him great pleasure to
      have it so, although he would rather she had been there to welcome him and
      reassure his fears. Doubtless Father Fouchard had summoned her away; some
      odds and ends of work to finish up. He raised his voice a little:
    

      “Silvine! Silvine!”
     

      No answer, not a sound. And he threw his leg over the window-sill and
      entered the room, intending to get into bed and snuggle away among the
      blankets while waiting, it was so bitter cold.
    

      All at once there was a furious rush, with the noise of trampling,
      shuffling feet, and smothered oaths and the sound of labored breathing.
      Sambuc and his two companions had thrown themselves on Goliah, and
      notwithstanding their superiority in numbers they found it no easy task to
      overpower the giant, to whom his peril lent tenfold strength. The panting
      of the combatants, the straining of sinews and cracking of joints,
      resounded for a moment in the obscurity. The revolver, fortunately, had
      fallen to the floor in the struggle. Cabasse's choking, inarticulate voice
      was heard exclaiming: “The cords, the cords!” and Ducat handed to Sambuc
      the coil of thin rope with which they had had the foresight to provide
      themselves. Scant ceremony was displayed in binding their hapless victim;
      the operation was conducted to the accompaniment of kicks and cuffs. The
      legs were secured first, then the arms were firmly pinioned to the sides,
      and finally they wound the cord at random many times around the Prussian's
      body, wherever his contortions would allow them to place it, with such an
      affluence of loops and knots that he had the appearance of being enmeshed
      in a gigantic net. To his unintermitting outcries Ducat's voice responded:
      “Shut your jaw!” and Cabasse silenced him more effectually by gagging him
      with an old blue handkerchief. Then, first waiting a moment to get their
      breath, they carried him, an inert mass, to the kitchen and deposited him
      upon the big table, beside the candle.
    

      “Ah, the Prussian scum!” exclaimed Sambuc, wiping the sweat from his
      forehead, “he gave us trouble enough! Say, Silvine, light another candle,
      will you, so we can get a good view of the d——d pig and see
      what he looks like.”
     

      Silvine arose, her wide-dilated eyes shining bright from out her colorless
      face. She spoke no word, but lit another candle and came and placed it by
      Goliah's head on the side opposite the other; he produced the effect, thus
      brilliantly illuminated, of a corpse between two mortuary tapers. And in
      that brief moment their glances met; his was the wild, agonized look of
      the supplicant whom his fears have overmastered, but she affected not to
      understand, and withdrew to the sideboard, where she remained standing
      with her icy, unyielding air.
    

      “The beast has nearly chewed my finger off,” growled Cabasse, from whose
      hand blood was trickling. “I'm going to spoil his ugly mug for him.”
     

      He had taken the revolver from the floor and was holding it poised by the
      barrel in readiness to strike, when Sambuc disarmed him.
    

      “No, no! none of that. We are not murderers, we francs-tireurs; we are
      judges. Do you hear, you dirty Prussian? we're going to try you; and you
      need have no fear, your rights shall be respected. We can't let you speak
      in your own defense, for if we should unmuzzle you you would split our
      ears with your bellowing, but I'll see that you have a lawyer presently,
      and a famous good one, too!”
     

      He went and got three chairs and placed them in a row, forming what it
      pleased him to call the court, he sitting in the middle with one of his
      followers on either hand. When all three were seated he arose and
      commenced to speak, at first ironically aping the gravity of the
      magistrate, but soon launching into a tirade of blood-thirsty invective.
    

      “I have the honor to be at the same time President of the Court and Public
      Prosecutor. That, I am aware, is not strictly in order, but there are not
      enough of us to fill all the roles. I accuse you, therefore, of entering
      France to play the spy on us, recompensing us for our hospitality with the
      most abominable treason. It is to you to whom we are principally indebted
      for our recent disasters, for after the battle of Nouart you guided the
      Bavarians across the wood of Dieulet by night to Beaumont. No one but a
      man who had lived a long time in the country and was acquainted with every
      path and cross-road could have done it, and on this point the conviction
      of the court is unalterable; you were seen conducting the enemy's
      artillery over roads that had become lakes of liquid mud, where eight
      horses had to be hitched to a single gun to drag it out of the slough. A
      person looking at those roads would hesitate to believe that an army corps
      could ever have passed over them. Had it not been for you and your
      criminal action in settling among us and betraying us the surprise of
      Beaumont would have never been, we should not have been compelled to
      retreat on Sedan, and perhaps in the end we might have come off
      victorious. I will say nothing of the disgusting career you have been
      pursuing since then, coming here in disguise, terrorizing and denouncing
      the poor country people, so that they tremble at the mention of your name.
      You have descended to a depth of depravity beyond which it is impossible
      to go, and I demand from the court sentence of death.”
     

      Silence prevailed in the room. He had resumed his seat, and finally,
      rising again, said:
    

      “I assign Ducat to you as counsel for the defense. He has been sheriff's
      officer, and might have made his mark had it not been for his little
      weakness. You see that I deny you nothing; we are disposed to treat you
      well.”
     

      Goliah, who could not stir a finger, bent his eyes on his improvised
      defender. It was in his eyes alone that evidence of life remained, eyes
      that burned intensely with ardent supplication under the ashy brow, where
      the sweat of anguish stood in big drops, notwithstanding the cold.
    

      Ducat arose and commenced his plea. “Gentlemen, my client, to tell the
      truth, is the most noisome blackguard that I ever came across in my life,
      and I should not have been willing to appear in his defense had I not a
      mitigating circumstance to plead, to wit: they are all that way in the
      country he came from. Look at him closely; you will read his astonishment
      in his eyes; he does not understand the gravity of his offense. Here in
      France we may employ spies, but no one would touch one of them unless with
      a pair of pincers, while in that country espionage is considered a highly
      honorable career and an extremely meritorious manner of serving the state.
      I will even go so far as to say, gentlemen, that possibly they are not
      wrong; our noble sentiments do us honor, but they have also the
      disadvantage of bringing us defeat. If I may venture to speak in the
      language of Cicero and Virgil, quos vult perdere Jupiter dementat.
      You will understand the allusion, gentlemen.”
     

      And he took his seat again, while Sambuc resumed:
    

      “And you, Cabasse, have you nothing to say either for or against the
      defendant?”
     

      “All I have to say,” shouted the Provencal, “is that we are wasting a deal
      of breath in settling that scoundrel's hash. I've had my little troubles
      in my lifetime, and plenty of 'em, but I don't like to see people trifle
      with the affairs of the law; it's unlucky. Let him die, I say!”
     

      Sambuc rose to his feet with an air of profound gravity.
    

      “This you both declare to be your verdict, then—death?”
     

      “Yes, yes! death!”
     

      The chairs were pushed back, he advanced to the table where Goliah lay,
      saying:
    

      “You have been tried and sentenced; you are to die.”
     

      The flame of the two candles rose about their unsnuffed wicks and
      flickered in the draught, casting a fitful, ghastly light on Goliah's
      distorted features. The fierce efforts he made to scream for mercy, to
      vociferate the words that were strangling him, were such that the
      handkerchief knotted across his mouth was drenched with spume, and it was
      a sight most horrible to see, that strong man reduced to silence,
      voiceless already as a corpse, about to die with that torrent of excuse
      and entreaty pent in his bosom.
    

      Cabasse cocked the revolver. “Shall I let him have it?” he asked.
    

      “No, no!” Sambuc shouted in reply; “he would be only too glad.” And
      turning to Goliah: “You are not a soldier; you are not worthy of the honor
      of quitting the world with a bullet in your head. No, you shall die the
      death of a spy and the dirty pig that you are.”
     

      He looked over his shoulder and politely said:
    

      “Silvine, if it's not troubling you too much, I would like to have a tub.”
     

      During the whole of the trial scene Silvine had not moved a muscle. She
      had stood in an attitude of waiting, with drawn, rigid features, as if
      mind and body had parted company, conscious of nothing but the one fixed
      idea that had possessed her for the last two days. And when she was asked
      for a tub she received the request as a matter of course and proceeded at
      once to comply with it, disappearing into the adjoining shed, whence she
      returned with the big tub in which she washed Charlot's linen.
    

      “Hold on a minute! place it under the table, close to the edge.”
     

      She placed the vessel as directed, and as she rose to her feet her eyes
      again encountered Goliah's. In the look of the poor wretch was a supreme
      prayer for mercy, the revolt of the man who cannot bear the thought of
      being stricken down in the pride of his strength. But in that moment there
      was nothing of the woman left in her; nothing but the fierce desire for
      that death for which she had been waiting as a deliverance. She retreated
      again to the buffet, where she remained standing in silent expectation.
    

      Sambuc opened the drawer of the table and took from it a large kitchen
      knife, the one that the household employed to slice their bacon.
    

      “So, then, as you are a pig, I am going to stick you like a pig.”
     

      He proceeded in a very leisurely manner, discussing with Cabasse, and
      Ducat the proper method of conducting the operation. They even came near
      quarreling, because Cabasse alleged that in Provence, the country he came
      from, they hung pigs up by the heels to stick them, at which Ducat
      expressed great indignation, declaring that the method was a barbarous and
      inconvenient one.
    

      “Bring him well forward to the edge of the table, his head over the tub,
      so as to avoid soiling the floor.”
     

      They drew him forward, and Sambuc went about his task in a tranquil,
      decent manner. With a single stroke of the keen knife he slit the throat
      crosswise from ear to ear, and immediately the blood from the severed
      carotid artery commenced to drip, drip into the tub with the gentle
      plashing of a fountain. He had taken care not to make the incision too
      deep; only a few drops spurted from the wound, impelled by the action of
      the heart. Death was the slower in coming for that, but no convulsion was
      to be seen, for the cords were strong and the body was utterly incapable
      of motion. There was no death-rattle, not a quiver of the frame. On the
      face alone was evidence of the supreme agony, on that terror-distorted
      mask whence the blood retreated drop by drop, leaving the skin colorless,
      with a whiteness like that of linen. The expression faded from the eyes;
      they became dim, the light died from out them.
    

      “Say, Silvine, we shall want a sponge, too.”
     

      She made no reply, standing riveted to the floor in an attitude of
      unconsciousness, her arms folded tightly across her bosom, her throat
      constricted as by the clutch of a mailed hand, gazing on the horrible
      spectacle. Then all at once she perceived that Charlot was there, grasping
      her skirts with his little hands; he must have awaked and managed to open
      the intervening doors, and no one had seen him come stealing in,
      childlike, curious to know what was going on. How long had he been there,
      half-concealed behind his mother? From beneath his shock of yellow hair
      his big blue eyes were fixed on the trickling blood, the thin red stream
      that little by little was filling the tub. Perhaps he had not understood
      at first and had found something diverting in the sight, but suddenly he
      seemed to become instinctively aware of all the abomination of the thing;
      he gave utterance to a sharp, startled cry:
    

      “Oh, mammy! oh, mammy! I'm 'fraid, take me away!”
     

      It gave Silvine a shock, so violent that it convulsed her in every fiber
      of her being. It was the last straw; something seemed to give way in her,
      the excitement that had sustained her for the last two days while under
      the domination of her one fixed idea gave way to horror. It was the
      resurrection of the dormant woman in her; she burst into tears, and with a
      frenzied movement caught Charlot up and pressed him wildly to her heart.
      And she fled with him, running with distracted terror, unable to see or
      hear more, conscious of but one overmastering need, to find some secret
      spot, it mattered not where, in which she might cast herself upon the
      ground and seek oblivion.
    

      It was at this crisis that Jean rose from his bed and, softly opening his
      door, looked out into the passage. Although he generally gave but small
      attention to the various noises that reached him from the farmhouse, the
      unusual activity that prevailed this evening, the trampling of feet, the
      shouts and cries, in the end excited his curiosity. And it was to the
      retirement of his sequestered chamber that Silvine, sobbing and
      disheveled, came for shelter, her form convulsed by such a storm of
      anguish that at first he could not grasp the meaning of the rambling,
      inarticulate words that fell from her blanched lips. She kept constantly
      repeating the same terrified gesture, as if to thrust from before her eyes
      some hideous, haunting vision. At last he understood, the entire
      abominable scene was pictured clearly to his mind: the traitorous ambush,
      the slaughter, the mother, her little one clinging to her skirts, watching
      unmoved the murdered father, whose life-blood was slowly ebbing; and it
      froze his marrow—the peasant and the soldier was sick at heart with
      anguished horror. Ah, hateful, cruel war! that changed all those poor
      folks to ravening wolves, bespattering the child with the father's blood!
      An accursed sowing, to end in a harvest of blood and tears!
    

      Resting on the chair where she had fallen, covering with frantic kisses
      little Charlot, who clung, sobbing, to her bosom, Silvine repeated again
      and again the one unvarying phrase, the cry of her bleeding heart.
    

      “Ah, my poor child, they will no more say you are a Prussian! Ah, my poor
      child, they will no more say you are a Prussian!”
     

      Meantime Father Fouchard had returned and was in the kitchen. He had come
      hammering at the door with the authority of the master, and there was
      nothing left to do but open to him. The surprise he experienced was not
      exactly an agreeable one on beholding the dead man outstretched on his
      table and the blood-filled tub beneath. It followed naturally, his
      disposition not being of the mildest, that he was very angry.
    

      “You pack of rascally slovens! say, couldn't you have gone outdoors to do
      your dirty work? Do you take my place for a shambles, eh? coming here and
      ruining the furniture with such goings-on?” Then, as Sambuc endeavored to
      mollify him and explain matters, the old fellow went on with a violence
      that was enhanced by his fears: “And what do you suppose I am to do with
      the carcass, pray? Do you consider it a gentlemanly thing to do, to come
      to a man's house like this and foist a stiff off on him without so much as
      saying by your leave? Suppose a patrol should come along, what a nice fix
      I should be in! but precious little you fellows care whether I get my neck
      stretched or not. Now listen: do you take that body at once and carry it
      away from here; if you don't, by G-d, you and I will have a settlement!
      You hear me; take it by the head, take it by the heels, take it any way
      you please, but get it out of here and don't let there be a hair of it
      remaining in this room at the end of three minutes from now!”
     

      In the end Sambuc prevailed on Father Fouchard to let him have a sack,
      although it wrung the old miser's heartstrings to part with it. He
      selected one that was full of holes, remarking that anything was good
      enough for a Prussian. Cabasse and Ducat had all the trouble in the world
      to get Goliah into it; it was too short and too narrow for the long, broad
      body, and the feet protruded at its mouth. Then they carried their burden
      outside and placed it on the wheelbarrow that had served to convey to them
      their bread.
    

      “You'll not be troubled with him any more, I give you my word of honor!”
       declared Sambuc. “We'll go and toss him into the Meuse.”
     

      “Be sure and fasten a couple of big stones to his feet,” recommended
      Fouchard, “so the lubber shan't come up again.”
     

      And the little procession, dimly outlined against the white waste of snow,
      started and soon was buried in the blackness of the night, giving no sound
      save the faint, plaintive creaking of the barrow.
    

      In after days Sambuc swore by all that was good and holy he had obeyed the
      old man's directions, but none the less the corpse came to the surface and
      was discovered two days afterward by the Prussians among the weeds at
      Pont-Maugis, and when they saw the manner of their countryman's murder,
      his throat slit like a pig, their wrath and fury knew no bounds. Their
      threats were terrible, and were accompanied by domiciliary visits and
      annoyances of every kind. Some of the villagers must have blabbed, for
      there came a party one night and arrested Father Fouchard and the Mayor of
      Remilly on the charge of giving aid and comfort to the francs-tireurs, who
      were manifestly the perpetrators of the crime. And Father Fouchard really
      came out very strong under those untoward circumstances, exhibiting all
      the impassability of a shrewd old peasant, who knew the value of silence
      and a tranquil demeanor. He went with his captors without the least sign
      of perturbation, without even asking them for an explanation. The truth
      would come out. In the country roundabout it was whispered that he had
      already made an enormous fortune from the Prussians, sacks and sacks of
      gold pieces, that he buried away somewhere, one by one, as he received
      them.
    

      All these stories were a terrible source of alarm to Henriette when she
      came to hear of them. Jean, fearing he might endanger the safety of his
      hosts, was again eager to get away, although the doctor declared he was
      still too weak, and she, saddened by the prospect of their approaching
      separation, insisted on his delaying his departure for two weeks. At the
      time of Father Fouchard's arrest Jean had escaped a like fate by hiding in
      the barn, but he was liable to be taken and led away captive at any moment
      should there be further searches made. She was also anxious as to her
      uncle's fate, and so she resolved one morning to go to Sedan and see the
      Delaherches, who had, it was said, a Prussian officer of great influence
      quartered in their house.
    

      “Silvine,” she said, as she was about to start, “take good care of our
      patient; see he has his bouillon at noon and his medicine at four
      o'clock.”
     

      The maid of all work, ever busy with her daily recurring tasks, was again
      the submissive and courageous woman she had been of old; she had the care
      of the farm now, moreover, in the absence of the master, while little
      Charlot was constantly at her heels, frisking and gamboling around her.
    

      “Have no fear, madame, he shall want for nothing. I am here and will look
      out for him.”
     

      
 
    

      Life had fallen back into something like its accustomed routine with the
      Delaherches at their house in the Rue Maqua after the terrible shock of
      the capitulation, and for nearly four months the long days had been slowly
      slipping by under the depressing influence of the Prussian occupation.
    

      There was one corner, however, of the immense structure that was always
      closed, as if it had no occupant: it was the chamber that Colonel de
      Vineuil still continued to inhabit, at the extreme end of the suite where
      the master and his family spent their daily life. While the other windows
      were thrown open, affording evidence by sight and sound of the activity
      that prevailed within, those of that room were dark and lifeless, their
      blinds invariably drawn. The colonel had complained that the daylight hurt
      his eyes; no one knew whether or not this was strictly true, but a lamp
      was kept burning at his bedside day and night to humor him in his fancy.
      For two long months he had kept his bed, although Major Bouroche asserted
      there was nothing more serious than a contusion of the ankle and a
      fragment of bone chipped away; the wound refused to heal and complications
      of various kinds had ensued. He was able to get up now, but was in such a
      state of utter mental prostration, his mysterious ailment had taken such
      firm hold upon his system, that he was content to spend his days in
      idleness, stretched on a lounge before a great wood fire. He had wasted
      away until he was little more than a shadow, and still the physician who
      was attending him could find no lesion to account for that lingering
      death. He was slowly fading away, like the flame of a lamp in which the
      supply of oil is giving out.
    

      Mme. Delaherche, the mother, had immured herself there with him on the day
      succeeding the occupation. No doubt they understood each other, and had
      expressed in two words, once for all, their common purpose to seclude
      themselves in that apartment so long as there should be Prussians
      quartered in the house. They had afforded compulsory hospitality to many
      of the enemy for various lengths of time; one, a Captain, M. Gartlauben,
      was there still, had taken up his abode with them permanently. But never
      since that first day had mention of those things passed the colonel's and
      the old lady's lips. Notwithstanding her seventy-eight years she was up
      every morning soon as it was day and came and took her position in the
      fauteuil that was awaiting her in the chimney nook opposite her old
      friend. There, by the steady, tranquil lamplight, she applied herself
      industriously to knitting socks for the children of the poor, while he,
      his eyes fixed on the crumbling brands, with no occupation for body or
      mind, was as one already dead, in a state of constantly increasing stupor.
      They certainly did not exchange twenty words in the course of a day;
      whenever she, who still continued to go about the house at intervals,
      involuntarily allowed some bit of news from the outer world to escape her
      lips, he silenced her with a gesture, so that no tidings of the siege of
      Paris, the disasters on the Loire and all the daily renewed horrors of the
      invasion had gained admission there. But the colonel might stop his ears
      and shut out the light of day as he would in his self-appointed tomb; the
      air he breathed must have brought him through key-hole and crevices
      intelligence of the calamity that was everywhere throughout the land, for
      every new day beheld him sinking, slowly dying, despite his determination
      not to know the evil news.
    

      While matters were in this condition at one end of the house Delaherche,
      who was never contented unless occupied, was bustling about and making
      attempts to start up his business once more, but what with the disordered
      condition of the labor market and the pecuniary embarrassment of many
      among his customers, he had so far only put a few looms in motion. Then it
      occurred to him, as a means of killing the time that hung heavy on his
      hands, to make a complete inventory of his business and perfect certain
      changes and improvements that he had long had in mind. To assist him in
      his labors he had just then at his disposal a young man, the son of an old
      business acquaintance, who had drifted in on him after the battle. Edmond
      Lagarde, who, although he was twenty-three years old, would not have been
      taken for more than eighteen, had grown to man's estate in his father's
      little dry-goods shop at Passy; he was a sergeant in the 5th line regiment
      and had fought with great bravery throughout the campaign, so much so that
      he had been knocked over near the Minil gate about five o'clock, when the
      battle was virtually ended, his left arm shattered by one of the last
      shots fired that day, and Delaherche, when the other wounded were removed
      from the improvised ambulance in the drying room, had good-naturedly
      received him as an inmate of his house. It was under these circumstances
      that Edmond was now one of the family, having an apartment in the house
      and taking his meals at the common table, and, now that his wound was
      healed, acting as a sort of secretary to the manufacturer while waiting
      for a chance to get back to Paris. He had signed a parole binding himself
      not to attempt to leave the city, and owing to this and to his protector's
      influence the Prussian authorities did not interfere with him. He was
      fair, with blue eyes, and pretty as a woman; so timid withal that his face
      assumed a beautiful hue of rosy red whenever anyone spoke to him. He had
      been his mother's darling; she had impoverished herself, expending all the
      profits of their little business to send him to college. And he adored
      Paris and bewailed his compulsory absence from it when talking to
      Gilberte, did this wounded cherub, whom the young woman had displayed
      great good-fellowship in nursing.
    

      Finally, their household had received another addition in the person of M.
      de Gartlauben, a captain in the German landwehr, whose regiment had been
      sent to Sedan to supply the place of troops dispatched to service in the
      field. He was a personage of importance, notwithstanding his comparatively
      modest rank, for he was nephew to the governor-general, who, from his
      headquarters at Rheims, exercised unlimited power over all the district.
      He, too, prided himself on having lived at Paris, and seized every
      occasion ostentatiously to show he was not ignorant of its pleasures and
      refinements; concealing beneath this film of varnish his inborn rusticity,
      he assumed as well as he was able the polish of one accustomed to good
      society. His tall, portly form was always tightly buttoned in a
      close-fitting uniform, and he lied outrageously about his age, never being
      able to bring himself to own up to his forty-five years. Had he had more
      intelligence he might have made himself an object of greater dread, but as
      it was his over-weening vanity, kept him in a continual state of
      satisfaction with himself, for never could such a thing have entered his
      mind as that anyone could dare to ridicule him.
    

      At a subsequent period he rendered Delaherche services that were of
      inestimable value. But what days of terror and distress were those that
      followed upon the heels of the capitulation! the city, overrun with German
      soldiery, trembled in momentary dread of pillage and conflagration. Then
      the armies of the victors streamed away toward the valley of the Seine,
      leaving behind them only sufficient men to form a garrison, and the quiet
      that settled upon the place was that of a necropolis: the houses all
      closed, the shops shut, the streets deserted as soon as night closed in,
      the silence unbroken save for the hoarse cries and heavy tramp of the
      patrols. No letters or newspapers reached them from the outside world;
      Sedan was become a dungeon, where the immured citizens waited in agonized
      suspense for the tidings of disaster with which the air was instinct. To
      render their misery complete they were threatened with famine; the city
      awoke one morning from its slumbers to find itself destitute of bread and
      meat and the country roundabout stripped naked, as if a devouring swarm of
      locusts had passed that way, by the hundreds of thousands of men who for a
      week past had been pouring along its roads and across its fields in a
      devastating torrent. There were provisions only for two days, and the
      authorities were compelled to apply to Belgium for relief; all supplies
      now came from their neighbors across the frontier, whence the customs
      guards had disappeared, swept away like all else in the general cataclysm.
      Finally there were never-ending vexations and annoyances, a conflict that
      commenced to rage afresh each morning between the Prussian governor and
      his underlings, quartered at the Sous-Prefecture, and the Municipal
      Council, which was in permanent session at the Hotel de Ville. It was all
      in vain that the city fathers fought like heroes, discussing, objecting,
      protesting, contesting the ground inch by inch; the inhabitants had to
      succumb to the exactions that constantly became more burdensome, to the
      whims and unreasonableness of the stronger.
    

      In the beginning Delaherche suffered great tribulation from the officers
      and soldiers who were billeted on him. It seemed as if representatives
      from every nationality on the face of the globe presented themselves at
      his door, pipe in mouth. Not a day passed but there came tumbling in upon
      the city two or three thousand men, horse, foot and dragoons, and although
      they were by rights entitled to nothing more than shelter and firing, it
      was often found expedient to send out in haste and get them provisions.
      The rooms they occupied were left in a shockingly filthy condition. It was
      not an infrequent occurrence that the officers came in drunk and made
      themselves even more obnoxious than their men. Such strict discipline was
      maintained, however, that instances of violence and marauding were rare;
      in all Sedan there were but two cases reported of outrages committed on
      women. It was not until a later period, when Paris displayed such
      stubbornness in her resistance, that, exasperated by the length to which
      the struggle was protracted, alarmed by the attitude of the provinces and
      fearing a general rising of the populace, the savage war which the
      francs-tireurs had inaugurated, they laid the full weight of their heavy
      hand upon the suffering people.
    

      Delaherche had just had an experience with a lodger who had been quartered
      on him, a captain of cuirassiers, who made a practice of going to bed with
      his boots on and when he went away left his apartment in an unmentionably
      filthy condition, when in the last half of September Captain de Gartlauben
      came to his door one evening when it was raining in torrents. The first
      hour he was there did not promise well for the pleasantness of their
      future relations; he carried matters with a high hand, insisting that he
      should be given the best bedroom, trailing the scabbard of his sword
      noisily up the marble staircase; but encountering Gilberte in the corridor
      he drew in his horns, bowed politely, and passed stiffly on. He was
      courted with great obsequiousness, for everyone was well aware that a word
      from him to the colonel commanding the post of Sedan would suffice to
      mitigate a requisition or secure the release of a friend or relative. It
      was not very long since his uncle, the governor-general at Rheims, had
      promulgated a particularly detestable and cold-blooded order, proclaiming
      martial law and decreeing the penalty of death to whomsoever should give
      aid and comfort to the enemy, whether by acting for them as a spy, by
      leading astray German troops that had been entrusted to their guidance, by
      destroying bridges and artillery, or by damaging the railroads and
      telegraph lines. The enemy meant the French, of course, and the citizens
      scowled and involuntarily doubled their fists as they read the great white
      placard nailed against the door of post headquarters which attributed to
      them as a crime their best and most sacred aspirations. It was so hard,
      too, to have to receive their intelligence of German victories through the
      cheering of the garrison! Hardly a day passed over their heads that they
      were spared this bitter humiliation; the soldiers would light great fires
      and sit around them, feasting and drinking all night long, while the
      townspeople, who were not allowed to be in the streets after nine o'clock,
      listened to the tumult from the depths of their darkened houses, crazed
      with suspense, wondering what new catastrophe had befallen. It was on one
      of these occasions, somewhere about the middle of October, that M. de
      Gartlauben for the first time proved himself to be possessed of some
      delicacy of feeling. Sedan had been jubilant all that day with renewed
      hopes, for there was a rumor that the army of the Loire, then marching to
      the relief of Paris, had gained a great victory; but how many times before
      had the best of news been converted into tidings of disaster! and sure
      enough, early in the evening it became known for certain that the
      Bavarians had taken Orleans. Some soldiers had collected in a house across
      the way from the factory in the Rue Maqua, and were so boisterous in their
      rejoicings that the Captain, noticing Gilberte's annoyance, went and
      silenced them, remarking that he himself thought their uproar ill-timed.
    

      Toward the close of the month M. de Gartlauben was in position to render
      some further trifling services. The Prussian authorities, in the course of
      sundry administrative reforms inaugurated by them, had appointed a German
      Sous-Prefect, and although this step did not put an end to the exactions
      to which the city was subjected, the new official showed himself to be
      comparatively reasonable. One of the most frequent among the causes of
      difference that were constantly springing up between the officers of the
      post and the municipal council was that which arose from the custom of
      requisitioning carriages for the use of the staff, and there was a great
      hullaballoo raised one morning that Delaherche failed to send his caleche
      and pair to the Sous-Prefecture: the mayor was arrested and the
      manufacturer would have gone to keep him company up in the citadel had it
      not been for M. de Gartlauben, who promptly quelled the rising storm.
      Another day he secured a stay of proceedings for the city, which had been
      mulcted in the sum of thirty thousand francs to punish it for its alleged
      dilatoriness in rebuilding the bridge of Villette, a bridge that the
      Prussians themselves had destroyed: a disastrous piece of business that
      was near being the ruin of Sedan. It was after the surrender at Metz,
      however, that Delaherche contracted his main debt of gratitude to his
      guest. The terrible news burst on the citizens like a thunderclap, dashing
      to the ground all their remaining hopes, and early in the ensuing week the
      streets again began to be encumbered with the countless hosts of the
      German forces, streaming down from the conquered fortress: the army of
      Prince Frederick Charles moving on the Loire, that of General Manteuffel,
      whose destination was Amiens and Rouen, and other corps on the march to
      reinforce the besiegers before Paris. For several days the houses were
      full to overflowing with soldiers, the butchers' and bakers' shops were
      swept clean, to the last bone, to the last crumb; the streets were
      pervaded by a greasy, tallowy odor, as after the passage of the great
      migratory bands of olden times. The buildings in the Rue Maqua, protected
      by a friendly influence, escaped the devastating irruption, and were only
      called on to give shelter to a few of the leaders, men of education and
      refinement.
    

      Owing to these circumstances, Delaherche at last began to lay aside his
      frostiness of manner. As a general thing the bourgeois families shut
      themselves in their apartments and avoided all communication with the
      officers who were billeted on them; but to him, who was of a sociable
      nature and liked to extract from life what enjoyment it had to offer, this
      enforced sulkiness in the end became unbearable. His great, silent house,
      where the inmates lived apart from one another in a chill atmosphere of
      distrust and mutual dislike, damped his spirits terribly. He began by
      stopping M. de Gartlauben on the stairs one day to thank him for his
      favors, and thus by degrees it became a regular habit with the two men to
      exchange a few words when they met. The result was that one evening the
      Prussian captain found himself seated in his host's study before the
      fireplace where some great oak logs were blazing, smoking a cigar and
      amicably discussing the news of the day. For the first two weeks of their
      new intimacy Gilberte did not make her appearance in the room; he affected
      to ignore her existence, although, at every faintest sound, his glance
      would be directed expectantly upon the door of the connecting apartment.
      It seemed to be his object to keep his position as an enemy as much as
      possible in the background, trying to show he was not narrow-minded or a
      bigoted patriot, laughing and joking pleasantly over certain rather
      ridiculous requisitions. For example, a demand was made one day for a
      coffin and a shroud; that shroud and coffin afforded him no end of
      amusement. As regarded other things, such as coal, oil, milk, sugar,
      butter, bread, meat, to say nothing of clothing, stoves and lamps—all
      the necessaries of daily life, in a word—he shrugged his shoulders:
      mon Dieu! what would you have? No doubt it was vexatious; he was
      even willing to admit that their demands were excessive, but that was how
      it was in war times; they had to keep themselves alive in the enemy's
      country. Delaherche, who was very sore over these incessant requisitions,
      expressed his opinion of them with frankness, pulling them to pieces
      mercilessly at their nightly confabs, in much the same way as he might
      have criticised the cook's kitchen accounts. On only one occasion did
      their discussion become at all acrimonious, and that was in relation to
      the impost of a million francs that the Prussian prefet at Rethel had
      levied on the department of the Ardennes, the alleged pretense of which
      was to indemnify Germany for damages caused by French ships of war and by
      the expulsion of Germans domiciled in French territory. Sedan's
      proportionate share of the assessment was forty-two thousand francs. And
      he labored strenuously with his visitor to convince him of the iniquity of
      the imposition; the city was differently circumstanced from the other
      towns, it had had more than its share of affliction, and should not be
      burdened with that new exaction. The pair always came out of their
      discussions better friends than when they went in; one delighted to have
      had an opportunity of hearing himself talk, the other pleased with himself
      for having displayed a truly Parisian urbanity.
    

      One evening Gilberte came into the room, with her air of thoughtless
      gayety. She paused at the threshold, affecting embarrassment. M. de
      Gartlauben rose, and with much tact presently withdrew, but on repeating
      his visit the following evening and finding Gilberte there again, he
      settled himself in his usual seat in the chimney-corner. It was the
      commencement of a succession of delightful evenings that they passed
      together in the study of the master of the house, not in the drawing-room—wherein
      lay a nice distinction. And at a later period when, yielding to their
      guest's entreaties, the young woman consented to play for him, she did not
      invite him to the salon, but entered the room alone, leaving the
      communicating door open. In those bitter winter evenings the old oaks of
      the Ardennes gave out a grateful warmth from the depths of the great
      cavernous fireplace; there was a cup of fragrant tea for them about ten
      o'clock; they laughed and chatted in the comfortable, bright room. And it
      did not require extra powers of vision to see that M. de Gartlauben was
      rapidly falling head over ears in love with that sprightly young woman,
      who flirted with him as audaciously as she had flirted in former days at
      Charleville with Captain Beaudoin's friends. He began to pay increased
      attention to his person, displayed a gallantry that verged on the
      fantastic, was raised to the pinnacle of bliss by the most trifling favor,
      tormented by the one ever-present anxiety not to appear a barbarian in her
      eyes, a rude soldier who did not know the ways of women.
    

      And thus it was that in the big, gloomy house in the Rue Maqua a twofold
      life went on. While at meal-times Edmond, the wounded cherub with the
      pretty face, lent a listening ear to Delaherche's unceasing chatter,
      blushing if ever Gilberte asked him to pass her the salt, while at evening
      M. de Gartlauben, seated in the study, with eyes upturned in silent
      ecstasy, listened to a sonata by Mozart performed for his benefit by the
      young woman in the adjoining drawing-room, a stillness as of death
      continued to pervade the apartment where Colonel de Vineuil and Madame
      Delaherche spent their days, the blinds tight drawn, the lamp continually
      burning, like a votive candle illuminating a tomb. December had come and
      wrapped the city in a winding-sheet of snow; the cruel news seemed all the
      bitterer for the piercing cold. After General Ducrot's repulse at
      Champigny, after the loss of Orleans, there was left but one dark, sullen
      hope: that the soil of France might avenge their defeat, exterminate and
      swallow up the victors. Let the snow fall thicker and thicker still, let
      the earth's crust crack and open under the biting frost, that in it the
      entire German nation might find a grave! And there came another sorrow to
      wring poor Madame Delaherche's heart. One night when her son was from
      home, having been suddenly called away to Belgium on business, chancing to
      pass Gilberte's door she heard within a low murmur of voices and smothered
      laughter. Disgusted and sick at heart she returned to her own room, where
      her horror of the abominable thing she suspected the existence of would
      not let her sleep: it could have been none other but the Prussian whose
      voice she heard; she had thought she had noticed glances of intelligence
      passing; she was prostrated by this supreme disgrace. Ah, that woman, that
      abandoned woman, whom her son had insisted on bringing to the house
      despite her commands and prayers, whom she had forgiven, by her silence,
      after Captain Beaudoin's death! And now the thing was repeated, and this
      time the infamy was even worse. What was she to do? Such an enormity must
      not go unpunished beneath her roof. Her mind was torn by the conflict that
      raged there, in her uncertainty as to the course she should pursue. The
      colonel, desiring to know nothing of what occurred outside his room,
      always checked her with a gesture when he thought she was about to give
      him any piece of news, and she had said nothing to him of the matter that
      had caused her such suffering; but on those days when she came to him with
      tears standing in her eyes and sat for hours in mournful silence, he would
      look at her and say to himself that France had sustained yet another
      defeat.
    

      This was the condition of affairs in the house in the Rue Maqua when
      Henriette dropped in there one morning to endeavor to secure Delaherche's
      influence in favor of Father Fouchard. She had heard people speak, smiling
      significantly as they did so, of the servitude to which Gilberte had
      reduced Captain de Gartlauben; she was, therefore, somewhat embarrassed
      when she encountered old Madame Delaherche, to whom she thought it her
      duty to explain the object of her visit, ascending the great staircase on
      her way to the colonel's apartment.
    

      “Dear madame, it would be so kind of you to assist us! My uncle is in
      great danger; they talk of sending him away to Germany.”
     

      The old lady, although she had a sincere affection for Henriette, could
      scarce conceal her anger as she replied:
    

      “I am powerless to help you, my child; you should not apply to me.” And
      she continued, notwithstanding the agitation on the other's face: “You
      have selected an unfortunate moment for your visit; my son has to go to
      Belgium to-night. Besides, he could not have helped you; he has no more
      influence than I have. Go to my daughter-in-law; she is all powerful.”
     

      And she passed on toward the colonel's room, leaving Henriette distressed
      to have unwittingly involved herself in a family drama. Within the last
      twenty-four hours Madame Delaherche had made up her mind to lay the whole
      matter before her son before his departure for Belgium, whither he was
      going to negotiate a large purchase of coal to enable him to put some of
      his idle looms in motion. She could not endure the thought that the
      abominable thing should be repeated beneath her eyes while he was absent,
      and was only waiting to make sure he would not defer his departure until
      some other day, as he had been doing all the past week. It was a terrible
      thing to contemplate: the wreck of her son's happiness, the Prussian
      disgraced and driven from their doors, the wife, too, thrust forth upon
      the street and her name ignominiously placarded on the walls, as had been
      threatened would be done with any woman who should dishonor herself with a
      German.
    

      Gilberte gave a little scream of delight on beholding Henriette.
    

      “Ah, how glad I am to see you! It seems an age since we met, and one grows
      old so fast in the midst of all these horrors!” Thus running on she
      dragged her friend to her bedroom, where she seated her on the lounge and
      snuggled down close beside her. “Come, take off your things; you must stay
      and breakfast with us. But first we'll talk a bit; you must have such lots
      and lots of things to tell me! I know that you are without news of your
      brother. Ah, that poor Maurice, how I pity him, shut up in Paris, with no
      gas, no wood, no bread, perhaps! And that young man whom you have been
      nursing, that friend of your brother's—oh! a little bird has told me
      all about it—isn't it for his sake you are here to-day?”
     

      Henriette's conscience smote her, and she did not answer. Was it not
      really for Jean's sake that she had come, in order that, the old uncle
      being released, the invalid, who had grown so dear to her, might have no
      further cause for alarm? It distressed her to hear his name mentioned by
      Gilberte; she could not endure the thought of enlisting in his favor an
      influence that was of so ambiguous a character. Her inbred scruples of a
      pure, honest woman made themselves felt, now it seemed to her that the
      rumors of a liaison with the Prussian captain had some foundation.
    

      “Then I'm to understand that it's in behalf of this young man that you
      come to us for assistance?” Gilberte insistently went on, as if enjoying
      her friend's discomfiture. And as the latter, cornered and unable to
      maintain silence longer, finally spoke of Father Fouchard's arrest: “Why,
      to be sure! What a silly thing I am—and I was talking of it only
      this morning! You did well in coming to us, my dear; we must go about your
      uncle's affair at once and see what we can do for him, for the last news I
      had was not reassuring. They are on the lookout for someone of whom to
      make an example.”
     

      “Yes, I have had you in mind all along,” Henriette hesitatingly replied.
      “I thought you might be willing to assist me with your advice, perhaps
      with something more substantial—”
     

      The young woman laughed merrily. “You little goose, I'll have your uncle
      released inside three days. Don't you know that I have a Prussian captain
      here in the house who stands ready to obey my every order? Understand, he
      can refuse me nothing!” And she laughed more heartily than ever, in the
      giddy, thoughtless triumph of her coquettish nature, holding in her own
      and patting the hands of her friend, who was so uncomfortable that she
      could not find words in which to express her thanks, horrified by the
      avowal that was implied in what she had just heard. But how to account for
      such serenity, such childlike gayety? “Leave it to me; I'll send you home
      to-night with a mind at rest.”
     

      When they passed into the dining room Henriette was struck by Edmond's
      delicate beauty, never having seen him before. She eyed him with the
      pleasure she would have felt in looking at a pretty toy. Could it be
      possible that that boy had served in the army? and how could they have
      been so cruel as to break his arm? The story of his gallantry in the field
      made him even more interesting still, and Delaherche, who had received
      Henriette with the cordiality of a man to whom the sight of a new face is
      a godsend, while the servants were handing round the cutlets and the
      potatoes cooked in their jackets, never seemed to tire of eulogizing his
      secretary, who was as industrious and well behaved as he was handsome.
      They made a very pleasant and homelike picture, the four, thus seated
      around the bright table in the snug, warm dining room.
    

      “So you want us to interest ourselves in Father Fouchard's case, and it's
      to that we owe the pleasure of your visit, eh?” said the manufacturer.
      “I'm extremely sorry that I have to go away to-night, but my wife will set
      things straight for you in a jiffy; there's no resisting her, she has only
      to ask for a thing to get it.” He laughed as he concluded his speech,
      which was uttered in perfect simplicity of soul, evidently pleased and
      flattered that his wife possessed such influence, in which he shone with a
      kind of reflected glory. Then turning suddenly to her: “By the way, my
      dear, has Edmond told you of his great discovery?”
     

      “No; what discovery?” asked Gilberte, turning her pretty caressing eyes
      full on the young sergeant.
    

      The cherub blushed whenever a woman looked at him in that way, as if the
      exquisiteness of his sensations was too much for him. “It's nothing,
      madame; only a bit of old lace; I heard you saying the other day you
      wanted some to put on your mauve peignoir. I happened yesterday to come
      across five yards of old Bruges point, something really handsome and very
      cheap. The woman will be here presently to show it to you.”
     

      She could have kissed him, so delighted was she. “Oh, how nice of you! You
      shall have your reward.”
     

      Then, while a terrine of foie-gras, purchased in Belgium, was being
      served, the conversation took another turn; dwelling for an instant on the
      quantities of fish that were dying of poison in the Meuse, and finally
      coming around to the subject of the pestilence that menaced Sedan when
      there should be a thaw. Even as early as November, there had been several
      cases of disease of an epidemic character. Six thousand francs had been
      expended after the battle in cleansing the city and collecting and burning
      clothing, knapsacks, haversacks, all the debris that was capable of
      harboring infection; but, for all that, the surrounding fields continued
      to exhale sickening odors whenever there came a day or two of warmer
      weather, so replete were they with half-buried corpses, covered only with
      a few inches of loose earth. In every direction the ground was dotted with
      graves; the soil cracked and split in obedience to the forces acting
      beneath its surface, and from the fissures thus formed the gases of
      putrefaction issued to poison the living. In those more recent days,
      moreover, another center of contamination had been discovered, the Meuse,
      although there had already been removed from it the bodies of more than
      twelve hundred dead horses. It was generally believed that there were no
      more human remains left in the stream, until, one day, a garde
      champetre, looking attentively down into the water where it was some
      six feet deep, discovered some objects glimmering at the bottom, that at
      first he took for stones; but they proved to be corpses of men, that had
      been mutilated in such a manner as to prevent the gas from accumulating in
      the cavities of the body and hence had been kept from rising to the
      surface. For near four months they had been lying there in the water among
      the eel-grass. When grappled for the irons brought them up in fragments, a
      head, an arm, or a leg at a time; at times the force of the current would
      suffice to detach a hand or foot and send it rolling down the stream.
      Great bubbles of gas rose to the surface and burst, still further
      empoisoning the air.
    

      “We shall get along well enough as long as the cold weather lasts,”
       remarked Delaherche, “but as soon as the snow is off the ground we shall
      have to go to work in earnest to abate the nuisance; if we don't we shall
      be wanting graves for ourselves.” And when his wife laughingly asked him
      if he could not find some more agreeable subject to talk about at the
      table, he concluded by saying: “Well, it will be a long time before any of
      us will care to eat any fish out of the Meuse.”
     

      They had finished their repast, and the coffee was being poured, when the
      maid came to the door and announced that M. de Gartlauben presented his
      compliments and wanted to know if he might be allowed to see them for a
      moment. There was a slight flutter of excitement, for it was the first
      time he had ever presented himself at that hour of the day. Delaherche,
      seeing in the circumstance a favorable opportunity for presenting
      Henriette to him, gave orders that he should be introduced at once. The
      doughty captain, when he beheld another young woman in the room, surpassed
      himself in politeness, even accepting a cup of coffee, which he took
      without sugar, as he had seen many people do at Paris. He had only asked
      to be received at that unusual hour, he said, that he might tell Madame he
      had succeeded in obtaining the pardon of one of her proteges, a poor
      operative in the factory who had been arrested on account of a squabble
      with a Prussian. And Gilberte thereon seized the opportunity to mention
      Father Fouchard's case.
    

      “Captain, I wish to make you acquainted with one of my dearest friends,
      who desires to place herself under your protection. She is the niece of
      the farmer who was arrested lately at Remilly, as you are aware, for being
      mixed up with that business of the francs-tireurs.”
     

      “Yes, yes, I know; the affair of the spy, the poor fellow who was found in
      a sack with his throat cut. It's a bad business, a very bad business. I am
      afraid I shall not be able to do anything.”
     

      “Oh, Captain, don't say that! I should consider it such a favor!”
     

      There was a caress in the look she cast on him, while he beamed with
      satisfaction, bowing his head in gallant obedience. Her wish was his law!
    

      “You would have all my gratitude, sir,” faintly murmured Henriette, to
      whose memory suddenly rose the image of her husband, her dear Weiss,
      slaughtered down yonder at Bazeilles, filling her with invincible
      repugnance.
    

      Edmond, who had discreetly taken himself off on the arrival of the
      captain, now reappeared and whispered something in Gilberte's ear. She
      rose quickly from the table, and, announcing to the company that she was
      going to inspect her lace, excused herself and followed the young man from
      the room. Henriette, thus left alone with the two men, went and took a
      seat by herself in the embrasure of a window, while they remained seated
      at the table and went on talking in a loud tone.
    

      “Captain, you'll have a petit verre with me. You see I don't stand
      on ceremony with you; I say whatever comes into my head, because I know
      you to be a fair-minded man. Now I tell you your prefet is all wrong in
      trying to extort those forty-two thousand francs from the city. Just think
      once of all our losses since the beginning of the war. In the first place,
      before the battle, we had the entire French army on our hands, a set of
      ragged, hungry, exhausted men; and then along came your rascals, and their
      appetites were not so very poor, either. The passage of those troops
      through the place, what with requisitions, repairing damages and expenses
      of all sorts, stood us in a million and a half. Add as much more for the
      destruction caused by your artillery and by conflagration during the
      battle; there you have three millions. Finally, I am well within bounds in
      estimating the loss sustained by our trade and manufactures at two
      millions. What do you say to that, eh? A grand total of five million
      francs for a city of thirteen thousand inhabitants! And now you come and
      ask us for forty-two thousand more as a contribution to the expense of
      carrying on the war against us! Is it fair, is it reasonable? I leave it
      to your own sense of justice.”
     

      M. de Gartlauben nodded his head with an air of profundity, and made
      answer:
    

      “What can you expect? It is the fortune of war, the fortune of war.”
     

      To Henriette, seated in her window seat, her ears ringing, and vague, sad
      images of every sort fleeting through her brain, the time seemed to pass
      with mortal slowness, while Delaherche asserted on his word of honor that
      Sedan could never have weathered the crisis produced by the exportation of
      all their specie had it not been for the wisdom of the local magnates in
      emitting an issue of paper money, a step that had saved the city from
      financial ruin.
    

      “Captain, will you have just a drop of cognac more?” and he skipped to
      another topic. “It was not France that started the war; it was the
      Emperor. Ah, I was greatly deceived in the Emperor. He need never expect
      to sit on the throne again; we would see the country dismembered first.
      Look here! there was just one man in this country last July who saw things
      as they were, and that was M. Thiers; and his action at the present time
      in visiting the different capitals of Europe is most wise and patriotic.
      He has the best wishes of every good citizen; may he be successful!”
     

      He expressed the conclusion of his idea by a gesture, for he would have
      considered it improper to speak of his desire for peace before a Prussian,
      no matter how friendly he might be, although the desire burned fiercely in
      his bosom, as it did in that of every member of the old conservative
      bourgeoisie who had favored the plebiscite. Their men and money were
      exhausted, it was time for them to throw up the sponge; and a deep-seated
      feeling of hatred toward Paris, for the obstinacy with which it held out,
      prevailed in all the provinces that were in possession of the enemy. He
      concluded in a lower tone, his allusion being to Gambetta's inflammatory
      proclamations:
    

      “No, no, we cannot give our suffrages to fools and madmen. The course they
      advocate would end in general massacre. I, for my part, am for M. Thiers,
      who would submit the questions at issue to the popular vote, and as for
      their Republic, great heavens! let them have it if they want it, while
      waiting for something better; it don't trouble me in the slightest.”
     

      Captain de Gartlauben continued to nod his head very politely with an
      approving air, murmuring:
    

      “To be sure, to be sure—”
     

      Henriette, whose feeling of distress had been increasing, could stand
      their talk no longer. She could assign no definite reason for the
      sensation of inquietude that possessed her; it was only a longing to get
      away, and she rose and left the room quietly in quest of Gilberte, whose
      absence had been so long protracted. On entering the bedroom, however, she
      was greatly surprised to find her friend stretched on the lounge, weeping
      bitterly and manifestly suffering from some extremely painful emotion.
    

      “Why, what is the matter? What has happened you?”
     

      The young woman's tears flowed faster still and she would not speak,
      manifesting a confusion that sent every drop of blood coursing from her
      heart up to her face. At last, throwing herself into the arms that were
      opened to receive her and concealing her face in the other's bosom, she
      stammered:
    

      “Oh, darling if you but knew. I shall never dare to tell you—and yet
      I have no one but you, you alone perhaps can tell me what is best to do.”
       A shiver passed through her frame, her voice was scarcely audible. “I was
      with Edmond—and then—and then Madame Delaherche came into the
      room and caught me—”
     

      “Caught you! What do you mean?”
     

      “Yes, we were here in the room; he was holding me in his arms and kissing
      me—” And clasping Henriette convulsively in her trembling arms she
      told her all. “Oh, my darling, don't judge me severely; I could not bear
      it! I know I promised you it should never happen again, but you have seen
      Edmond, you know how brave he is, how handsome! And think once of the poor
      young man, wounded, ill, with no one to give him a mother's care! And then
      he has never had the enjoyments that wealth affords; his family have
      pinched themselves to give him an education. I could not be harsh with
      him.”
     

      Henriette listened, the picture of surprise; she could not recover from
      her amazement. “What! you don't mean to say it was the little sergeant!
      Why, my dear, everyone believes the Prussian to be your lover!”
     

      Gilberte straightened herself up with an indignant air, and dried her
      eyes. “The Prussian my lover? No, thank you! He's detestable; I can't
      endure him. I wonder what they take me for? What have I ever done that
      they should suppose I could be guilty of such baseness? No, never! I would
      rather die than do such a thing!” In the earnestness of her protestations
      her beauty had assumed an angry and more lofty cast that made her look
      other than she was. And all at once, sudden as a flash, her coquettish
      gayety, her thoughtless levity, came back to her face, accompanied by a
      peal of silvery laughter. “I won't deny that I amuse myself at his
      expense. He adores me, and I have only to give him a look to make him
      obey. You have no idea what fun it is to bamboozle that great big man, who
      seems to think he will have his reward some day.”
     

      “But that is a very dangerous game you're playing,” Henriette gravely
      said.
    

      “Oh, do you think so? What risk do I incur? When he comes to see he has
      nothing to expect he can't do more than be angry with me and go away. But
      he will never see it! You don't know the man; I read him like a book from
      the very start: he is one of those men with whom a woman can do what she
      pleases and incur no danger. I have an instinct that guides me in these
      matters and which has never deceived me. He is too consumed by vanity; no
      human consideration will ever drive it into his head that by any
      possibility a woman could get the better of him. And all he will get from
      me will be permission to carry away my remembrance, with the consoling
      thought that he has done the proper thing and behaved himself like a
      gallant man who has long been an inhabitant of Paris.” And with her air of
      triumphant gayety she added: “But before he leaves he shall cause Uncle
      Fouchard to be set at liberty, and all his recompense for his trouble
      shall be a cup of tea sweetened by these fingers.”
     

      But suddenly her fears returned to her: she remembered what must be the
      terrible consequences of her indiscretion, and her eyes were again bedewed
      with tears.
    

      “Mon Dieu! and Madame Delaherche—how will it all end? She
      bears me no love; she is capable of telling the whole story to my
      husband.”
     

      Henriette had recovered her composure. She dried her friend's eyes, and
      made her rise from the lounge and arrange her disordered clothing.
    

      “Listen, my dear; I cannot bring myself to scold you, and yet you know
      what my sentiments must be. But I was so alarmed by the stories I heard
      about the Prussian, the business wore such an extremely ugly aspect, that
      this affair really comes to me as a sort of relief by comparison. Cease
      weeping; things may come out all right.”
     

      Her action was taken none too soon, for almost immediately Delaherche and
      his mother entered the room. He said that he had made up his mind to take
      the train for Brussels that afternoon and had been giving orders to have a
      carriage ready to carry him across the frontier into Belgium; so he had
      come to say good-by to his wife. Then turning and addressing Henriette:
    

      “You need have no further fears. M. de Gartlauben, just is he was going
      away, promised me he would attend to your uncle's case, and although I
      shall not be here, my wife will keep an eye to it.”
     

      Since Madame Delaherche had made her appearance in the apartment Gilberte
      had not once taken her anxious eyes from off her face. Would she speak,
      would she tell what she had seen, and keep her son from starting on his
      projected journey? The elder lady, also, soon as she crossed the
      threshold, had bent her fixed gaze in silence on her daughter-in-law.
      Doubtless her stern patriotism induced her to view the matter in somewhat
      the same light that Henriette had viewed it. Mon Dieu! since it was
      that young man, that Frenchman who had fought so bravely, was it not her
      duty to forgive, even as she had forgiven once before, in Captain
      Beaudoin's case? A look of greater softness rose to her eyes; she averted
      her head. Her son might go; Edmond would be there to protect Gilberte
      against the Prussian. She even smiled faintly, she whose grim face had
      never once relaxed since the news of the victory at Coulmiers.
    

      “Au revoir,” she said, folding her son in her arms. “Finish up your
      business quickly as you can and come back to us.”
     

      And she took herself slowly away, returning to the prison-like chamber
      across the corridor, where the colonel, with his dull gaze, was peering
      into the shadows that lay outside the disk of bright light which fell from
      the lamp.
    

      Henriette returned to Remilly that same evening, and one morning, three
      days afterward, had the pleasure to see Father Fouchard come walking into
      the house, as calmly as if he had merely stepped out to transact some
      business in the neighborhood. He took a seat by the table and refreshed
      himself with some bread and cheese, and to all the questions that were put
      to him replied with cool deliberation, like a man who had never seen
      anything to alarm him in his situation. What reason had he to be afraid?
      He had done nothing wrong; it was not he who had killed the Prussian, was
      it? So he had just said to the authorities: “Investigate the matter; I
      know nothing about it.” And they could do nothing but release him, and the
      mayor as well, seeing they had no proofs against them. But the eyes of the
      crafty, sly old peasant gleamed with delight at the thought of how nicely
      he had pulled the wool over the eyes of those dirty blackguards, who were
      beginning to higgle with him over the quality of the meat he furnished to
      them.
    

      December was drawing near its end, and Jean insisted on going away. His
      leg was quite strong again, and the doctor announced that he was fit to go
      and join the army. This was to Henriette a subject of profoundest sorrow,
      which she kept locked in her bosom as well as she was able. No tidings
      from Paris had reached them since the disastrous battle of Champigny; all
      they knew was that Maurice's regiment had been exposed to a murderous fire
      and had suffered severely. Ever that deep, unbroken silence; no letter,
      never the briefest line for them, when they knew that families in Raucourt
      and Sedan were receiving intelligence of their loved ones by circuitous
      ways. Perhaps the pigeon that was bringing them the so eagerly wished-for
      news had fallen a victim to some hungry bird of prey, perhaps the bullet
      of a Prussian had brought it to the ground at the margin of a wood. But
      the fear that haunted them most of all was that Maurice was dead; the
      silence of the great city off yonder in the distance, uttering no cry in
      the mortal hug of the investment, was become to them in their agonized
      suspense the silence of death. They had abandoned all hope of tidings, and
      when Jean declared his settled purpose to be gone, Henriette only gave
      utterance to this stifled cry of despair:
    

      “My God! then all is ended, and I am to be left alone!”
     

      It was Jean's desire to go and serve with the Army of the North, which had
      recently been re-formed under General Faidherbe. Now that General
      Manteuffel's corps had moved forward to Dieppe there were three
      departments, cut off from the rest of France, that this army had to
      defend, le Nord, le Pas-de-Calais, and la Somme, and Jean's plan, not a
      difficult one to carry into execution, was simply to make for Bouillon and
      thence complete his journey across Belgian territory. He knew that the 23d
      corps was being recruited, mainly from such old soldiers of Sedan and Metz
      as could be gathered to the standards. He had heard it reported that
      General Faidherbe was about to take the field, and had definitely
      appointed the next ensuing Sunday as the day of his departure, when news
      reached him of the battle of Pont-Noyelle, that drawn battle which came so
      near being a victory for the French.
    

      It was Dr. Dalichamp again in this instance who offered the services of
      his gig and himself as driver to Bouillon. The good man's courage and
      kindness were boundless. At Raucourt, where typhus was raging,
      communicated by the Bavarians, there was not a house where he had not one
      or more patients, and this labor was additional to his regular attendance
      at the two hospitals at Raucourt and Remilly. His ardent patriotism, the
      impulse that prompted him to protest against unnecessary barbarity, had
      twice led to his being arrested by the Prussians, only to be released on
      each occasion. He gave a little laugh of satisfaction, therefore, the
      morning he came with his vehicle to take up Jean, pleased to be the
      instrument of assisting the escape of another of the victims of Sedan,
      those poor, brave fellows, as he called them, to whom he gave his
      professional services and whom he aided with his purse. Jean, who knew of
      Henriette's straitened circumstances and had been suffering from lack of
      funds since his relapse, accepted gratefully the fifty francs that the
      doctor offered him for traveling expenses.
    

      Father Fouchard did things handsomely at the leave-taking, sending Silvine
      to the cellar for two bottles of wine and insisting that everyone should
      drink a glass to the extermination of the Germans. He was a man of
      importance in the country nowadays and had his “plum” hidden away
      somewhere or other; he could sleep in peace now that the francs-tireurs
      had disappeared, driven like wild beasts from their lair, and his sole
      wish was for a speedy conclusion of the war. He had even gone so far in
      one of his generous fits as to pay Prosper his wages in order to retain
      his services on the farm, which the young man had no thought of leaving.
      He touched glasses with Prosper, and also with Silvine, whom he at times
      was half inclined to marry, knowing what a treasure he had in his
      faithful, hard-working little servant; but what was the use? he knew she
      would never leave him, that she would still be there when Charlot should
      be grown and go in turn to serve his country as a soldier. And touching
      his glass to Henriette's, Jean's, and the doctor's, he exclaimed:
    

      “Here's to the health of you all! May you all prosper and be no worse off
      than I am!”
     

      Henriette would not let Jean go away without accompanying him as far as
      Sedan. He was in citizen's dress, wearing a frock coat and derby hat that
      the doctor had loaned him. The day was piercingly cold; the sun's rays
      were reflected from a crust of glittering snow. Their intention had been
      to pass through the city without stopping, but when Jean learned that his
      old colonel was still at the Delaherches' he felt an irresistible desire
      to go and pay his respects to him, and at the same time thank the
      manufacturer for his many kindnesses. His visit was destined to bring him
      an additional, a final sorrow, in that city of mournful memories. On
      reaching the structure in the Rue Maqua they found the household in a
      condition of the greatest distress and disorder, Gilberte wringing her
      hands, Madame Delaherche weeping great silent tears, while her son, who
      had come in from the factory, where work was gradually being resumed,
      uttered exclamations of surprise. The colonel had just been discovered,
      stone dead, lying exactly as he had fallen, in a heap on the floor of his
      chamber. The physician, who was summoned with all haste, could assign no
      cause for the sudden death; there was no indication of paralysis or heart
      trouble. The colonel had been stricken down, and no one could tell from
      what quarter the blow came; but the following morning, when the room was
      thrown open, a piece of an old newspaper was found, lying on the carpet,
      that had been wrapped around a book and contained the account of the
      surrender of Metz.
    

      “My, dear,” said Gilberte to Henriette, “as Captain de Gartlauben was
      coming downstairs just now he removed his hat as he passed the door of the
      room where my uncle's body is lying. Edmond saw it; he's an extremely
      well-bred man, don't you think so?”
     

      In all their intimacy Jean had never yet kissed Henriette. Before resuming
      his seat in the gig with the doctor he endeavored to thank her for all her
      devoted kindness, for having nursed and loved him as a brother, but
      somehow the words would not come at his command; he opened his arms and,
      with a great sob, clasped her in a long embrace, and she, beside herself
      with the grief of parting, returned his kiss. Then the horse started, he
      turned about in his seat, there was a waving of hands, while again and
      again two sorrowful voices repeated in choking accents:
    

      “Farewell! Farewell!”
     

      On her return to Remilly that evening Henriette reported for duty at the
      hospital. During the silent watches of the night she was visited by
      another convulsive attack of sobbing, and wept, wept as if her tears would
      never cease to flow, clasping her hands before her as if between them to
      strangle her bitter sorrow.
    

      
 
    

      On the day succeeding the battle of Sedan the mighty hosts of the two
      German armies, without the delay of a moment, commenced their march on
      Paris, the army of the Meuse coming in by the north through the valley of
      the Marne, while the third army, passing the Seine at
      Villeneuve-Saint-Georges, turned the city to the south and moved on
      Versailles; and when, on that bright, warm September morning, General
      Ducrot, to whom had been assigned the command of the as yet incomplete
      14th corps, determined to attack the latter force while it was marching by
      the flank, Maurice's new regiment, the 115th, encamped in the woods to the
      left of Meudon, did not receive its orders to advance until the day was
      lost. A few shells from the enemy sufficed to do the work; the panic
      started with a regiment of zouaves made up of raw recruits, and quickly
      spreading to the other troops, all were swept away in a headlong rout that
      never ceased until they were safe behind the walls of Paris, where the
      utmost consternation prevailed. Every position in advance of the southern
      line of fortifications was lost, and that evening the wires of the Western
      Railway telegraph, the city's sole remaining means of communicating with
      the rest of France, were cut. Paris was cut off from the world.
    

      The condition of their affairs caused Maurice a terrible dejection. Had
      the Germans been more enterprising they might have pitched their tents
      that night in the Place du Carrousel, but with the prudence of their race
      they had determined that the siege should be conducted according to rule
      and precept, and had already fixed upon the exact lines of investment, the
      position of the army of the Meuse being at the north, stretching from
      Croissy to the Marne, through Epinay, the cordon of the third army at the
      south, from Chennevieres to Chatillon and Bougival, while general
      headquarters, with King William, Bismarck, and General von Moltke, were
      established at Versailles. The gigantic blockade, that no one believed
      could be successfully completed, was an accomplished fact; the city, with
      its girdle of fortifications eight leagues and a half in length, embracing
      fifteen forts and six detached redoubts, was henceforth to be transformed
      into a huge prison-pen. And the army of the defenders comprised only the
      13th corps, commanded by General Vinoy, and the 14th, then in process of
      reconstruction under General Ducrot, the two aggregating an effective
      strength of eighty thousand men; to which were to be added fourteen
      thousand sailors, fifteen thousand of the francs corps, and a hundred and
      fifteen thousand mobiles, not to mention the three hundred thousand
      National Guards distributed among the sectional divisions of the ramparts.
      If this seems like a large force it must be remembered that there were few
      seasoned and trained soldiers among its numbers. Men were constantly being
      drilled and equipped; Paris was a great intrenched camp. The preparations
      for the defense went on from hour to hour with feverish haste; roads were
      built, houses demolished within the military zone; the two hundred siege
      guns and the twenty-five hundred pieces of lesser caliber were mounted in
      position, other guns were cast; an arsenal, complete in every detail,
      seemed to spring from the earth under the tireless efforts of Dorian, the
      patriotic war minister. When, after the rupture of the negotiations at
      Ferrieres, Jules Favre acquainted the country with M. von Bismarck's
      demands—the cession of Alsace, the garrison of Strasbourg to be
      surrendered, three milliards of indemnity—a cry of rage went up and
      the continuation of the war was demanded by acclaim as a condition
      indispensable to the country's existence. Even with no hope of victory
      Paris must defend herself in order that France might live.
    

      On a Sunday toward the end of September Maurice was detailed to carry a
      message to the further end of the city, and what he witnessed along the
      streets he passed through filled him with new hope. Ever since the defeat
      of Chatillon it had seemed to him that the courage of the people was
      rising to a level with the great task that lay before them. Ah! that Paris
      that he had known so thoughtless, so wayward, so keen in the pursuit of
      pleasure; he found it now quite changed, simple, earnest, cheerfully
      brave, ready for every sacrifice. Everyone was in uniform; there was
      scarce a head that was not decorated with the kepi of the National
      Guard. Business of every sort had come to a sudden standstill, as the
      hands of a watch cease to move when the mainspring snaps, and at the
      public meetings, among the soldiers in the guard-room, or where the crowds
      collected in the streets, there was but one subject of conversation,
      inflaming the hearts and minds of all—the determination to conquer.
      The contagious influence of illusion, scattered broadcast, unbalanced
      weaker minds; the people were tempted to acts of generous folly by the
      tension to which they were subjected. Already there was a taint of morbid,
      nervous excitability in the air, a feverish condition in which men's hopes
      and fears alike became distorted and exaggerated, arousing the worst
      passions of humanity at the slightest breath of suspicion. And Maurice was
      witness to a scene in the Rue des Martyrs that produced a profound
      impression on him, the assault made by a band of infuriated men on a house
      from which, at one of the upper windows, a bright light had been displayed
      all through the night, a signal, evidently, intended to reach the
      Prussians at Bellevue over the roofs of Paris. There were jealous citizens
      who spent all their nights on their house-tops, watching what was going on
      around them. The day before a poor wretch had had a narrow escape from
      drowning at the hands of the mob, merely because he had opened a map of
      the city on a bench in the Tuileries gardens and consulted it.
    

      And that epidemic of suspicion Maurice, who had always hitherto been so
      liberal and fair-minded, now began to feel the influence of in the altered
      views he was commencing to entertain concerning men and things. He had
      ceased to give way to despair, as he had done after the rout at Chatillon,
      when he doubted whether the French army would ever muster up sufficient
      manhood to fight again: the sortie of the 30th of September on l'Hay and
      Chevilly, that of the 13th of October, in which the mobiles gained
      possession of Bagneux, and finally that of October 21, when his regiment
      captured and held for some time the park of la Malmaison, had restored to
      him all his confidence, that flame of hope that a spark sufficed to light
      and was extinguished as quickly. It was true the Prussians had repulsed
      them in every direction, but for all that the troops had fought bravely;
      they might yet be victorious in the end. It was Paris now that was
      responsible for the young man's gloomy forebodings, that great fickle city
      that at one moment was cheered by bright illusions and the next was sunk
      in deepest despair, ever haunted by the fear of treason in its thirst for
      victory. Did it not seem as if Trochu and Ducrot were treading in the
      footsteps of the Emperor and Marshal MacMahon and about to prove
      themselves incompetent leaders, the unconscious instruments of their
      country's ruin? The same movement that had swept away the Empire was now
      threatening the Government of National Defense, a fierce longing of the
      extremists to place themselves in control in order that they might save
      France by the methods of '92; even now Jules Favre and his co-members were
      more unpopular than the old ministers of Napoleon III. had ever been.
      Since they would not fight the Prussians, they would do well to make way
      for others, for those revolutionists who saw an assurance of victory in
      decreeing the levee en masse, in lending an ear to those
      visionaries who proposed to mine the earth beneath the Prussians' feet, or
      annihilate them all by means of a new fashioned Greek fire.
    

      Just previous to the 31st of October Maurice was more than usually a
      victim to this malady of distrust and barren speculation. He listened now
      approvingly to crude fancies that would formerly have brought a smile of
      contempt to his lips. Why should he not? Were not imbecility and crime
      abroad in the land? Was it unreasonable to look for the miraculous when
      his world was falling in ruins about him? Ever since the time he first
      heard the tidings of Froeschwiller, down there in front of Mulhausen, he
      had harbored a deep-seated feeling of rancor in his breast; he suffered
      from Sedan as from a raw sore, that bled afresh with every new reverse;
      the memory of their defeats, with all the anguish they entailed, was ever
      present to his mind; body and mind enfeebled by long marches, sleepless
      nights, and lack of food, inducing a mental torpor that left them doubtful
      even if they were alive; and the thought that so much suffering was to end
      in another and an irremediable disaster maddened him, made of that
      cultured man an unreflecting being, scarce higher in the scale than a very
      little child, swayed by each passing impulse of the moment. Anything,
      everything, destruction, extermination, rather than pay a penny of French
      money or yield an inch of French soil! The revolution that since the first
      reverse had been at work within him, sweeping away the legend of
      Napoleonic glory, the sentimental Bonapartism that he owed to the epic
      narratives of his grandfather, was now complete. He had ceased to be a
      believer in Republicanism, pure and simple, considering the remedy not
      drastic enough; he had begun to dabble in the theories of the extremists,
      he was a believer in the necessity of the Terror as the only means of
      ridding them of the traitors and imbeciles who were about to slay the
      country. And so it was that he was heart and soul with the insurgents
      when, on the 31st of October, tidings of disaster came pouring in on them
      in quick succession: the loss of Bourget, that had been captured from the
      enemy only a few days before by a dashing surprise; M. Thiers' return to
      Versailles from his visit to the European capitals, prepared to treat for
      peace, so it was said, in the name of Napoleon III.; and finally the
      capitulation of Metz, rumors of which had previously been current and
      which was now confirmed, the last blow of the bludgeon, another Sedan,
      only attended by circumstances of blacker infamy. And when he learned next
      day the occurrences at the Hotel de Ville—how the insurgents had
      been for a brief time successful, how the members of the Government of
      National Defense had been made prisoners and held until four o'clock in
      the morning, how finally the fickle populace, swayed at one moment by
      detestation for the ministers and at the next terrified by the prospect of
      a successful revolution, had released them—he was filled with regret
      at the miscarriage of the attempt, at the non-success of the Commune,
      which might have been their salvation, calling the people to arms, warning
      them of the country's danger, arousing the cherished memories of a nation
      that wills it will not perish. Thiers did not dare even to set his foot in
      Paris, where there was some attempt at illumination to celebrate the
      failure of the negotiations.
    

      The month of November was to Maurice a period of feverish expectancy.
      There were some conflicts of no great importance, in which he had no
      share. His regiment was in cantonments at the time in the vicinity of
      Saint-Ouen, whence he made his escape as often as he could to satisfy his
      craving for news. Paris, like him, was awaiting the issue of events in
      eager suspense. The election of municipal officers seemed to have appeased
      political passion for the time being, but a circumstance that boded no
      good for the future was that those elected were rabid adherents of one or
      another party. And what Paris was watching and praying for in that
      interval of repose was the grand sortie that was to bring them victory and
      deliverance. As it had always been, so it was now; confidence reigned
      everywhere: they would drive the Prussians from their position, would
      pulverize them, annihilate them. Great preparations were being made in the
      peninsula of Gennevilliers, the point where there was most likelihood of
      the operation being attended with success. Then one morning came the
      joyful tidings of the victory at Coulmiers; Orleans was recaptured, the
      army of the Loire was marching to the relief of Paris, was even then, so
      it was reported, in camp at Etampes. The aspect of affairs was entirely
      changed: all they had to do now was to go and effect a junction with it
      beyond the Marne. There had been a general reorganization of the forces;
      three armies had been created, one composed of the battalions of National
      Guards and commanded by General Clement Thomas, another, comprising the
      13th and 14th corps, to which were added a few reliable regiments,
      selected indiscriminately wherever they could be found, was to form the
      main column of attack under the lead of General Ducrot, while the third,
      intended to act as a reserve, was made up entirely of mobiles and turned
      over to General Vinoy. And when Maurice laid him down to sleep in the wood
      of Vincennes on the night of the 28th of November, with his comrades of
      the 115th, he was without a doubt of their success. The three corps of the
      second army were all there, and it was common talk that their junction
      with the army of the Loire had been fixed for the following day at
      Fontainebleau. Then ensued a series of mischances, the usual blunders
      arising from want of foresight; a sudden rising of the river, which
      prevented the engineers from laying the pontoon bridge; conflicting
      orders, which delayed the movement of the troops. The 115th was among the
      first regiments to pass the river on the following night, and in the
      neighborhood of ten o'clock, with Maurice in its ranks, it entered
      Champigny under a destructive fire. The young man was wild with
      excitement; he fired so rapidly that his chassepot burned his fingers,
      notwithstanding the intense cold. His sole thought was to push onward,
      ever onward, surmounting every obstacle until they should join their
      brothers from the provinces over there across the river. But in front of
      Champigny and Bry the army fell up against the park walls of Coeuilly and
      Villiers, that the Prussians had converted into impregnable fortresses,
      more than a quarter of a mile in length. The men's courage faltered, and
      after that the action went on in a half-hearted way; the 3d corps was slow
      in getting up, the 1st and 2d, unable to advance, continued for two days
      longer to hold Champigny, which they finally abandoned on the night of
      December 2, after their barren victory. The whole army retired to the wood
      of Vincennes, where the men's only shelter was the snow-laden branches of
      the trees, and Maurice, whose feet were frost-bitten, laid his head upon
      the cold ground and cried.
    

      The gloom and dejection that reigned in the city, after the failure of
      that supreme effort, beggars the powers of description. The great sortie
      that had been so long in preparation, the irresistible eruption that was
      to be the deliverance of Paris, had ended in disappointment, and three
      days later came a communication from General von Moltke under a flag of
      truce, announcing that the army of the Loire had been defeated and that
      the German flag again waved over Orleans. The girdle was being drawn
      tighter and tighter about the doomed city all whose struggles were
      henceforth powerless to burst its iron fetters. But Paris seemed to
      accumulate fresh powers of resistance in the delirium of its despair. It
      was certain that ere long they would have to count famine among the number
      of their foes. As early as October the people had been restricted in their
      consumption of butcher's meat, and in December, of all the immense herds
      of beeves and flocks of sheep that had been turned loose in the Bois de
      Boulogne, there was not a single creature left alive, and horses were
      being slaughtered for food. The stock of flour and wheat, with what was
      subsequently taken for the public use by forced sale, it was estimated
      would keep the city supplied with bread for four months. When the flour
      was all consumed mills were erected in the railway stations to grind the
      grain. The supply of coal, too, was giving out; it was reserved to bake
      the bread and for use in the mills and arms factories. And Paris, her
      streets without gas and lighted by petroleum lamps at infrequent
      intervals; Paris, shivering under her icy mantle; Paris, to whom the
      authorities doled out her scanty daily ration of black bread and horse
      flesh, continued to hope—in spite of all, talking of Faidherbe in
      the north, of Chanzy on the Loire, of Bourbaki in the east, as if their
      victorious armies were already beneath the walls. The men and women who
      stood waiting, their feet in snow and slush, in interminable lines before
      the bakers' and butchers' shops, brightened up a bit at times at the news
      of some imaginary success of the army. After the discouragement of each
      defeat the unquenchable flame of their illusion would burst out and blaze
      more brightly than ever among those wretched people, whom starvation and
      every kind of suffering had rendered almost delirious. A soldier on the
      Place du Chateau d'Eau having spoken of surrender, the by-standers mobbed
      and were near killing him. While the army, its endurance exhausted,
      feeling the end was near, called for peace, the populace clamored still
      for the sortie en masse, the torrential sortie, in which the entire
      population of the capital, men, women, and children, even, should take
      part, rushing upon the Prussians like water from a broken dyke and
      overwhelming them by sheer force of numbers.
    

      And Maurice kept himself apart from his comrades, with an ever-increasing
      disgust for the life and duties of a soldier, that condemned him to
      inactivity and uselessness behind the ramparts of Mont-Valerien. He
      grasped every occasion to get away and hasten to Paris, where his heart
      was. It was in the midst of the great city's thronging masses alone that
      he found rest and peace of mind; he tried to force himself to hope as they
      hoped. He often went to witness the departure of the balloons, which were
      sent up every other day from the station of the Northern Railway with a
      freight of despatches and carrier pigeons. They rose when the ropes were
      cast loose and soon were lost to sight in the cheerless wintry sky, and
      all hearts were filled with anguish when the wind wafted them in the
      direction of the German frontier. Many of them were never heard of more.
      He had himself twice written to his sister Henriette, without ever
      learning if she had received his letters. The memory of his sister and of
      Jean, living as they did in that outer, shadowy world from which no
      tidings ever reached him now, was become so blurred and faint that he
      thought of them but seldom, as of affections that he had left behind him
      in some previous existence. The incessant conflict of despair and hope in
      which he lived occupied all the faculties of his being too fully to leave
      room for mere human feelings. Then, too, in the early days of January he
      was goaded to the verge of frenzy by the action of the enemy in shelling
      the district on the left bank of the river. He had come to credit the
      Prussians with reasons of humanity for their abstention, which was in fact
      due simply to the difficulties they experienced in bringing up their guns
      and getting them in position. Now that a shell had killed two little girls
      at the Val-de-Grace, his scorn and hatred knew no bounds for those
      barbarous ruffians who murdered little children and threatened to burn the
      libraries and museums. After the first days of terror, however, Paris had
      resumed its life of dogged, unfaltering heroism.
    

      Since the reverse of Champigny there had been but one other attempt,
      ending in disaster like the rest, in the direction of Bourget; and the
      evening when the plateau of Avron was evacuated, under the fire of the
      heavy siege artillery battering away at the forts, Maurice was a sharer in
      the rage and exasperation that possessed the entire city. The growing
      unpopularity that threatened to hurl from power General Trochu and the
      Government of National Defense was so augmented by this additional repulse
      that they were compelled to attempt a supreme and hopeless effort. What,
      did they refuse the services of the three hundred thousand National
      Guards, who from the beginning had been demanding their share in the peril
      and in the victory! This time it was to be the torrential sortie that had
      all along been the object of the popular clamor; Paris was to throw open
      its dikes and drown the Prussians beneath the on-pouring waves of its
      children. Notwithstanding the certainty of a fresh defeat, there was no
      way of avoiding a demand that had its origin in such patriotic motives;
      but in order to limit the slaughter as far as possible, the chiefs
      determined to employ, in connection with the regular army, only the
      fifty-nine mobilized battalions of the National Guard. The day preceding
      the 19th of January resembled some great public holiday; an immense crowd
      gathered on the boulevards and in the Champs-Elysees to witness the
      departing regiments, which marched proudly by, preceded by their bands,
      the men thundering out patriotic airs. Women and children followed them
      along the sidewalk, men climbed on the benches to wish them Godspeed. The
      next morning the entire population of the city hurried out to the Arc de
      Triomphe, and it was almost frantic with delight when at an early hour
      news came of the capture of Montretout; the tales that were told of the
      gallant behavior of the National Guard sounded like epics; the Prussians
      had been beaten all along the line, the French would occupy Versailles
      before night. As a natural result the consternation was proportionately
      great when, at nightfall, the inevitable defeat became known. While the
      left wing was seizing Montretout the center, which had succeeded in
      carrying the outer wall of Buzanval Park, had encountered a second inner
      wall, before which it broke. A thaw had set in, the roads were heavy from
      the effects of a fine, drizzling rain, and the guns, those guns that had
      been cast by popular subscription and were to the Parisians as the apple
      of their eye, could not get up. On the right General Ducrot's column was
      tardy in getting into action and saw nothing of the fight. Further effort
      was useless, and General Trochu was compelled to order a retreat.
      Montretout was abandoned, and Saint-Cloud as well, which the Prussians
      burned, and when it became fully dark the horizon of Paris was illuminated
      by the conflagration.
    

      Maurice himself this time felt that the end was come. For four hours he
      had remained in the park of Buzanval with the National Guards under the
      galling fire from the Prussian intrenchments, and later, when he got back
      to the city, he spoke of their courage in the highest terms. It was
      undisputed that the Guards fought bravely on that occasion; after that was
      it not self-evident that all the disasters of the army were to be
      attributed solely to the imbecility and treason of its leaders? In the Rue
      de Rivoli he encountered bands of men shouting: “Hurrah for the Commune!
      down with Trochu!” It was the leaven of revolution beginning to work again
      in the popular mind, a fresh outbreak of public opinion, and so formidable
      this time that the Government of National Defense, in order to preserve
      its own existence, thought it necessary to compel General Trochu's
      resignation and put General Vinoy in his place. On that same day Maurice,
      chancing to enter a hall in Belleville where a public meeting was going
      on, again heard the levee en masse demanded with clamorous shouts.
      He knew the thing to be chimerical, and yet it set his heart a-beating
      more rapidly to see such a determined will to conquer. When all is ended,
      is it not left us to attempt the impossible? All that night he dreamed of
      miracles.
    

      Then a long week went by, during which Paris lay agonizing without a
      murmur. The shops had ceased to open their doors; in the lonely streets
      the infrequent wayfarer never met a carriage. Forty thousand horses had
      been eaten; dogs, cats and rats were now luxuries, commanding a high
      price. Ever since the supply of wheat had given out the bread was made
      from rice and oats, and was black, damp, and slimy, and hard to digest; to
      obtain the ten ounces that constituted a day's ration involved a wait,
      often of many hours, in line before the bake-house. Ah, the sorrowful
      spectacle it was, to see those poor women shivering in the pouring rain,
      their feet in the ice-cold mud and water! the misery and heroism of the
      great city that would not surrender! The death rate had increased
      threefold; the theaters were converted into hospitals. As soon as it
      became dark the quarters where luxury and vice had formerly held carnival
      were shrouded in funereal blackness, like the faubourgs of some accursed
      city, smitten by pestilence. And in that silence, in that obscurity,
      naught was to be heard save the unceasing roar of the cannonade and the
      crash of bursting shells, naught to be seen save the red flash of the guns
      illuminating the wintry sky.
    

      On the 28th of January the news burst on Paris like a thunderclap that for
      the past two days negotiations had been going on, between Jules Favre and
      M. von Bismarck, looking to an armistice, and at the same time it learned
      that there was bread for only ten days longer, a space of time that would
      hardly suffice to revictual the city. Capitulation was become a matter of
      material necessity. Paris, stupefied by the hard truths that were imparted
      to it at that late day, remained sullenly silent and made no sign.
      Midnight of that day heard the last shot from the German guns, and on the
      29th, when the Prussians had taken possession of the forts, Maurice went
      with his regiment into the camp that was assigned them over by Montrouge,
      within the fortifications. The life that he led there was an aimless one,
      made up of idleness and feverish unrest. Discipline was relaxed; the
      soldiers did pretty much as they pleased, waiting in inactivity to be
      dismissed to their homes. He, however, continued to hang around the camp
      in a semi-dazed condition, moody, nervous, irritable, prompt to take
      offense on the most trivial provocation. He read with avidity all the
      revolutionary newspapers he could lay hands on; that three weeks'
      armistice, concluded solely for the purpose of allowing France to elect an
      assembly that should ratify the conditions of peace, appeared to him a
      delusion and a snare, another and a final instance of treason. Even if
      Paris were forced to capitulate, he was with Gambetta for the prosecution
      of the war in the north and on the line of the Loire. He overflowed with
      indignation at the disaster of Bourbaki's army in the east, which had been
      compelled to throw itself into Switzerland, and the result of the
      elections made him furious: it would be just as he had always predicted;
      the base, cowardly provinces, irritated by Paris' protracted resistance,
      would insist on peace at any price and restore the monarchy while the
      Prussian guns were still directed on the city. After the first sessions,
      at Bordeaux, Thiers, elected in twenty-six departments and constituted by
      unanimous acclaim the chief executive, appeared to his eyes a monster of
      iniquity, the father of lies, a man capable of every crime. The terms of
      the peace concluded by that assemblage of monarchists seemed to him to put
      the finishing touch to their infamy, his blood boiled merely at the
      thought of those hard conditions: an indemnity of five milliards, Metz to
      be given up, Alsace to be ceded, France's blood and treasure pouring from
      the gaping wound, thenceforth incurable, that was thus opened in her
      flank.
    

      Late in February Maurice, unable to endure his situation longer, made up
      his mind he would desert. A stipulation of the treaty provided that the
      troops encamped about Paris should be disarmed and returned to their
      abodes, but he did not wait to see it enforced; it seemed to him that it
      would break his heart to leave brave, glorious Paris, which only famine
      had been able to subdue, and so he bade farewell to army life and hired
      for himself a small furnished room next the roof of a tall apartment house
      in the Rue des Orties, at the top of the butte des Moulins, whence he had
      an outlook over the immense sea of roofs from the Tuileries to the
      Bastille. An old friend, whom he had known while pursuing his law studies,
      had loaned him a hundred francs. In addition to that he had caused his
      name to be inscribed on the roster of a battalion of National Guards as
      soon as he was settled in his new quarters, and his pay, thirty sous a
      day, would be enough to keep him alive. The idea of going to the country
      and there leading a tranquil life, unmindful of what was happening to the
      country, filled him with horror; the letters even that he received from
      his sister Henriette, to whom he had written immediately after the
      armistice, annoyed him by their tone of entreaty, their ardent
      solicitations that he would come home to Remilly and rest. He refused
      point-blank; he would go later on when the Prussians should be no longer
      there.
    

      And so Maurice went on leading an idle, vagabondish sort of life, in a
      state of constant feverish agitation. He had ceased to be tormented by
      hunger; he devoured the first white bread he got with infinite gusto; but
      the city was a prison still: German guards were posted at the gates, and
      no one was allowed to pass them until he had been made to give an account
      of himself. There had been no resumption of social life as yet; industry
      and trade were at a standstill; the people lived from day to day, watching
      to see what would happen next, doing nothing, simply vegetating in the
      bright sunshine of the spring that was now coming on apace. During the
      siege there had been the military service to occupy men's minds and tire
      their limbs, while now the entire population, isolated from all the world,
      had suddenly been reduced to a state of utter stagnation, mental as well
      as physical. He did as others did, loitering his time away from morning
      till night, living in an atmosphere that for months had been vitiated by
      the germs arising from the half-crazed mob. He read the newspapers and was
      an assiduous frequenter of public meetings, where he would often smile and
      shrug his shoulders at the rant and fustian of the speakers, but
      nevertheless would go away with the most ultra notions teeming in his
      brain, ready to engage in any desperate undertaking in the defense of what
      he considered truth and justice. And sitting by the window in his little
      bedroom, and looking out over the city, he would still beguile himself
      with dreams of victory; would tell himself that France and the Republic
      might yet be saved, so long as the treaty of peace remained unsigned.
    

      The 1st of March was the day fixed for the entrance of the Prussians into
      Paris, and a long-drawn howl of wrath and execration went up from every
      heart. Maurice never attended a meeting now that he did not hear Thiers,
      the Assembly, even the men of September 4th themselves, cursed and reviled
      because they had not spared the great heroic city that crowning
      degradation. He was himself one night aroused to such a pitch of frenzy
      that he took the floor and shouted that it was the duty of all Paris to go
      and die on the ramparts rather than suffer the entrance of a single
      Prussian. It was quite natural that the spirit of insurrection should show
      itself thus, should bud and blossom in the full light of day, among that
      populace that had first been maddened by months of distress and famine and
      then had found itself reduced to a condition of idleness that afforded it
      abundant leisure to brood on the suspicions and fancied wrongs that were
      largely the product of its own disordered imagination. It was one of those
      moral crises that have been noticed as occurring after every great siege,
      in which excessive patriotism, thwarted in its aims and aspirations, after
      having fired men's minds, degenerates into a blind rage for vengeance and
      destruction. The Central Committee, elected by delegates from the National
      Guard battalions, had protested against any attempt to disarm their
      constituents. Then came an immense popular demonstration on the Place de
      la Bastille, where there were red flags, incendiary speeches and a crowd
      that overflowed the square, the affair ending with the murder of a poor
      inoffensive agent of police, who was bound to a plank, thrown into the
      canal, and then stoned to death. And forty-eight hours later, during the
      night of the 26th of February, Maurice, awakened by the beating of the
      long roll and the sound of the tocsin, beheld bands of men and women
      streaming along the Boulevard des Batignolles and dragging cannon after
      them. He descended to the street, and laying hold of the rope of a gun
      along with some twenty others, was told how the people had gone to the
      Place Wagram and taken the pieces in order that the Assembly might not
      deliver them to the Prussians. There were seventy of them; teams were
      wanting, but the strong arms of the mob, tugging at the ropes and pushing
      at the limbers and axles, finally brought them to the summit of Montmartre
      with the mad impetuosity of a barbarian horde assuring the safety of its
      idols. When on March 1 the Prussians took possession of the quarter of the
      Champs Elysees, which they were to occupy only for one day, keeping
      themselves strictly within the limits of the barriers, Paris looked on in
      sullen silence, its streets deserted, its houses closed, the entire city
      lifeless and shrouded in its dense veil of mourning.
    

      Two weeks more went by, during which Maurice could hardly have told how he
      spent his time while awaiting the approach of the momentous events of
      which he had a distinct presentiment. Peace was concluded definitely at
      last, the Assembly was to commence its regular sessions at Versailles on
      the 20th of the month; and yet for him nothing was concluded: he felt that
      they were ere long to witness the beginning of a dreadful drama of
      atonement. On the 18th of March, as he was about to leave his room, he
      received a letter from Henriette urging him to come and join her at
      Remilly, coupled with a playful threat that she would come and carry him
      off with her if he delayed too long to afford her that great pleasure.
      Then she went on to speak of Jean, concerning whose affairs she was
      extremely anxious; she told how, after leaving her late in December to
      join the Army of the North, he had been seized with a low fever that had
      kept him long a prisoner in a Belgian hospital, and only the preceding
      week he had written her that he was about to start for Paris,
      notwithstanding his enfeebled condition, where he was determined to seek
      active service once again. Henriette closed her letter by begging her
      brother to give her a faithful account of how matters were with Jean as
      soon as he should have seen him. Maurice laid the open letter before him
      on the table and sank into a confused revery. Henriette, Jean; his sister
      whom he loved so fondly, his brother in suffering and privation; how
      absent from his daily thoughts had those dear ones been since the tempest
      had been raging in his bosom! He aroused himself, however, and as his
      sister advised him that she had been unable to give Jean the number of the
      house in the Rue des Orties, promised himself to go that very day to the
      office where the regimental records were kept and hunt up his friend. But
      he had barely got beyond his door and was crossing the Rue Saint-Honore
      when he encountered two fellow-soldiers of his battalion, who gave him an
      account of what had happened that morning and during the night before at
      Montmartre, and the three men started off on a run toward the scene of the
      disturbance.
    

      Ah, that day of the 18th of March, the elation and enthusiasm that it
      aroused in Maurice! In after days he could never remember clearly what he
      said and did. First he beheld himself dimly, as through a veil of mist,
      convulsed with rage at the recital of how the troops had attempted, in the
      darkness and quiet that precedes the dawn, to disarm Paris by seizing the
      guns on Montmartre heights. It was evident that Thiers, who had arrived
      from Bordeaux, had been meditating the blow for the last two days, in
      order that the Assembly at Versailles might proceed without fear to
      proclaim the monarchy. Then the scene shifted, and he was on the ground at
      Montmartre itself—about nine o'clock it was—fired by the
      narrative of the people's victory: how the soldiery had come sneaking up
      in the darkness, how the delay in bringing up the teams had given the
      National Guards an opportunity to fly to arms, the troops, having no heart
      to fire on women and children, reversing their muskets and fraternizing
      with the people. Then he had wandered desultorily about the city, wherever
      chance directed his footsteps, and by midday had satisfied himself that
      the Commune was master of Paris, without even the necessity of striking a
      blow, for Thiers and the ministers had decamped from their quarters in the
      Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the entire government was flying in disorder
      to Versailles, the thirty thousand troops had been hastily conducted from
      the city, leaving more than five thousand deserters from their numbers
      along the line of their retreat. And later, about half-past five in the
      afternoon, he could recall being at a corner of the exterior boulevard in
      the midst of a mob of howling lunatics, listening without the slightest
      evidence of disapproval to the abominable story of the murder of Generals
      Lecomte and Clement Thomas. Generals, they called themselves; fine
      generals, they! The leaders they had had at Sedan rose before his memory,
      voluptuaries and imbeciles; one more, one less, what odds did it make! And
      the remainder of the day passed in the same state of half-crazed
      excitement, which served to distort everything to his vision; it was an
      insurrection that the very stones of the streets seemed to have favored,
      spreading, swelling, finally becoming master of all at a stroke in the
      unforeseen fatality of its triumph, and at ten o'clock in the evening
      delivering the Hotel de Ville over to the members of the Central
      Committee, who were greatly surprised to find themselves there.
    

      There was one memory, however, that remained very distinct to Maurice's
      mind: his unexpected meeting with Jean. It was three days now since the
      latter had reached Paris, without a sou in his pocket, emaciated and
      enfeebled by the illness that had consigned him to a hospital in Brussels
      and kept him there two months, and having had the luck to fall in with
      Captain Ravaud, who had commanded a company in the 106th, he had enlisted
      at once in his former acquaintance's new company in the 124th. His old
      rank as corporal had been restored to him, and that evening he had just
      left the Prince Eugene barracks with his squad on his way to the left
      bank, where the entire army was to concentrate, when a mob collected about
      his men and stopped them as they were passing along the boulevard
      Saint-Martin. The insurgents yelled and shouted, and evidently were
      preparing to disarm his little band. With perfect coolness he told them to
      let him alone, that he had no business with them or their affairs; all he
      wanted was to obey his orders without harming anybody. Then a cry of glad
      surprise was heard, and Maurice, who had chanced to pass that way, threw
      himself on the other's neck and gave him a brotherly hug.
    

      “What, is it you! My sister wrote me about you. And just think, no later
      than this very morning I was going to look you up at the war office!”
     

      Jean's eyes were dim with big tears of pleasure.
    

      “Ah, my dear lad how glad I am to see you once more! I have been looking
      for you, too, but where could a fellow expect to find you in this
      confounded great big place?”
     

      To the crowd, continuing their angry muttering, Maurice turned and said:
    

      “Let me talk to them, citizens! They're good fellows; I'll answer for
      them.” He took his friend's hands in his, and lowering his voice: “You'll
      join us, won't you?”
     

      Jean's face was the picture of surprise. “How, join you? I don't
      understand.” Then for a moment he listened while Maurice railed against
      the government, against the army, raking up old sores and recalling all
      their sufferings, telling how at last they were going to be masters,
      punish dolts and cowards and preserve the Republic. And as he struggled to
      get the problems the other laid before him through his brain, the tranquil
      face of the unlettered peasant was clouded with an increasing sorrow. “Ah,
      no! ah, no! my boy. I can't join you if it's for that fine work you want
      me. My captain told me to go with my men to Vaugirard, and there I'm
      going. In spite of the devil and his angels I will go there. That's
      natural enough; you ought to know how it is yourself.” He laughed with
      frank simplicity and added:
    

      “It's you who'll come along with us.”
     

      But Maurice released his hands with an angry gesture of dissent, and thus
      they stood for some seconds, face to face, one under the influence of that
      madness that was sweeping all Paris off its feet, the malady that had been
      bequeathed to them by the crimes and follies of the late reign, the other
      strong in his ignorance and practical common sense, untainted as yet
      because he had grown up apart from the contaminating principle, in the
      land where industry and thrift were honored. They were brothers, however,
      none the less; the tie that united them was strong, and it was a pang to
      them both when the crowd suddenly surged forward and parted them.
    

      “Au revoir, Maurice!”
     

      “Au revoir, Jean!”
     

      It was a regiment, the 79th, debouching from a side street, that had
      caused the movement among the crowd, forcing the rioters back to the
      sidewalks by the weight of its compact column, closed in mass. There was
      some hooting, but no one ventured to bar the way against the soldier boys,
      who went by at double time, well under control of their officers. An
      opportunity was afforded the little squad of the 124th to make their
      escape, and they followed in the wake of the larger body.
    

      “Au revoir, Jean!”
     

      “Au revoir, Maurice!”
     

      They waved their hands once more in a parting salute, yielding to the
      fatality that decreed their separation in that manner, but each none the
      less securely seated in the other's heart.
    

      The extraordinary occurrences of the next and the succeeding days crowded
      on the heels of one another in such swift sequence that Maurice had
      scarcely time to think. On the morning of the 19th Paris awoke without a
      government, more surprised than frightened to learn that a panic during
      the night had sent army, ministers, and all the public service scurrying
      away to Versailles, and as the weather happened to be fine on that
      magnificent March Sunday, Paris stepped unconcernedly down into the
      streets to have a look at the barricades. A great white poster, bearing
      the signature of the Central Committee and convoking the people for the
      communal elections, attracted attention by the moderation of its language,
      although much surprise was expressed at seeing it signed by names so
      utterly unknown. There can be no doubt that at this incipient stage of the
      Commune Paris, in the bitter memory of what it had endured, in the
      suspicions by which it was haunted, and in its unslaked thirst for further
      fighting, was against Versailles. It was a condition of absolute anarchy,
      moreover, the conflict for the moment being between the mayors and the
      Central Committee, the former fruitlessly attempting to introduce measures
      of conciliation, while the latter, uncertain as yet to what extent it
      could rely on the federated National Guard, continued modestly to lay
      claim to no higher title than that of defender of the municipal liberties.
      The shots fired against the pacific demonstration in the Place Vendome,
      the few corpses whose blood reddened the pavements, first sent a thrill of
      terror circulating through the city. And while these things were going on,
      while the insurgents were taking definite possession of the ministries and
      all the public buildings, the agitation, rage and alarm prevailing at
      Versailles were extreme, the government there hastening to get together
      sufficient troops to repel the attack which they felt sure they should not
      have to wait for long. The steadiest and most reliable divisions of the
      armies of the North and of the Loire were hurried forward. Ten days
      sufficed to collect a force of nearly eighty thousand men, and the tide of
      returning confidence set in so strongly that on the 2d of April two
      divisions opened hostilities by taking from the federates Puteaux and
      Courbevoie.
    

      It was not until the day following the events just mentioned that Maurice,
      starting out with his battalion to effect the conquest of Versailles,
      beheld, amid the throng of misty, feverish memories that rose to his poor
      wearied brain, Jean's melancholy face as he had seen it last, and seemed
      to hear the tones of his last mournful au revoir. The military
      operations of the Versaillese had filled the National Guard with alarm and
      indignation; three columns, embracing a total strength of fifty thousand
      men, had gone storming that morning through Bougival and Meudon on their
      way to seize the monarchical Assembly and Thiers, the murderer. It was the
      torrential sortie that had been demanded with such insistence during the
      siege, and Maurice asked himself where he should ever see Jean again
      unless among the dead lying on the field of battle down yonder. But it was
      not long before he knew the result; his battalion had barely reached the
      Plateau des Bergeres, on the road to Reuil, when the shells from
      Mont-Valerien came tumbling among the ranks. Universal consternation
      reigned; some had supposed that the fort was held by their comrades of the
      Guard, while others averred that the commander had promised solemnly to
      withhold his fire. A wild panic seized upon the men; the battalions broke
      and rushed back to Paris fast as their legs would let them, while the head
      of the column, diverted by a flanking movement of General Vinoy, was
      driven back on Reuil and cut to pieces there.
    

      Then Maurice, who had escaped unharmed from the slaughter, his nerves
      still quivering with the fury that had inspired him on the battlefield,
      was filled with fresh detestation for that so-called government of law and
      order which always allowed itself to be beaten by the Prussians, and could
      only muster up a little courage when it came to oppressing Paris. And the
      German armies were still there, from Saint-Denis to Charenton, watching
      the shameful spectacle of internecine conflict! Thus, in the fierce
      longing for vengeance and destruction that animated him, he could not do
      otherwise than sanction the first measures of communistic violence, the
      building of barricades in the streets and public squares, the arrest of
      the archbishop, some priests, and former officeholders, who were to be
      held as hostages. The atrocities that distinguished either side in that
      horrible conflict were already beginning to manifest themselves,
      Versailles shooting the prisoners it made, Paris retaliating with a decree
      that for each one of its soldiers murdered three hostages should forfeit
      their life. The horror of it, that fratricidal conflict, that wretched
      nation completing the work of destruction by devouring its own children!
      And the little reason that remained to Maurice, in the ruin of all the
      things he had hitherto held sacred, was quickly dissipated in the
      whirlwind of blind fury that swept all before it. In his eyes the Commune
      was to be the avenger of all the wrongs they had suffered, the liberator,
      coming with fire and sword to purify and punish. He was not quite clear in
      mind about it all, but remembered having read how great and flourishing
      the old free cities had become, how wealthy provinces had federated and
      imposed their law upon the world. If Paris should be victorious he beheld
      her, crowned with an aureole of glory, building up a new France, where
      liberty and justice should be the watchwords, organizing a new society,
      having first swept away the rotten debris of the old. It was true that
      when the result of the elections became known he was somewhat surprised by
      the strange mixture of moderates, revolutionists, and socialists of every
      sect and shade to whom the accomplishment of the great work was intrusted;
      he was acquainted with several of the men and knew them to be of extremely
      mediocre abilities. Would not the strongest among them come in collision
      and neutralize one another amid the clashing ideas which they represented?
      But on the day when the ceremony of the inauguration of the Commune took
      place before the Hotel de Ville, amid the thunder of artillery and
      trophies and red banners floating in the air, his boundless hopes again
      got the better of his fears and he ceased to doubt. Among the lies of some
      and the unquestioning faith of others, the illusion started into life
      again with renewed vigor, in the acute crisis of the malady raised to
      paroxysmal pitch.
    

      During the entire month of April Maurice was on duty in the neighborhood
      of Neuilly. The gentle warmth of the early spring had brought out the
      blossoms on the lilacs, and the fighting was conducted among the bright
      verdure of the gardens; the National Guards came into the city at night
      with bouquets of flowers stuck in their muskets. The troops collected at
      Versailles were now so numerous as to warrant their formation in two
      armies, a first line under the orders of Marshal MacMahon and a reserve
      commanded by General Vinoy. The Commune had nearly a hundred thousand
      National Guards mobilized and as many more on the rosters who could be
      called out at short notice, but fifty thousand were as many as they ever
      brought into the field at one time. Day by day the plan of attack adopted
      by the Versaillese became more manifest: after occupying Neuilly they had
      taken possession of the Chateau of Becon and soon after of Asnieres, but
      these movements were simply to make the investment more complete, for
      their intention was to enter the city by the Point-du-Jour soon as the
      converging fire from Mont-Valerien and Fort d'Issy should enable them to
      carry the rampart there. Mont-Valerien was theirs already, and they were
      straining every nerve to capture Issy, utilizing the works abandoned by
      the Germans for the purpose. Since the middle of April the fire of
      musketry and artillery had been incessant; at Levallois and Neuilly the
      fighting never ceased, the skirmishers blazing away uninterruptedly, by
      night as well as by day. Heavy guns, mounted on armored cars, moved to and
      fro on the Belt Railway, shelling Asnieres over the roofs of Levallois. It
      was at Vanves and Issy, however, that the cannonade was fiercest; it shook
      the windows of Paris as the siege had done when it was at its height. And
      when finally, on the 9th of May, Fort d'Issy was obliged to succumb and
      fell into the hands of the Versailles army the defeat of the Commune was
      assured, and in their frenzy of panic the leaders resorted to most
      detestable measures.
    

      Maurice favored the creation of a Committee of Public Safety. The warnings
      of history came to his mind; had not the hour struck for adopting
      energetic methods if they wished to save the country? There was but one of
      their barbarities that really pained him, and that was the destruction of
      the Vendome column; he reproached himself for the feeling as being a
      childish weakness, but his grandfather's voice still sounded in his ears
      repeating the old familiar tales of Marengo, Austerlitz, Jena, Eylau,
      Friedland, Wagram, the Moskowa—those epic narratives that thrilled
      his pulses yet as often as he thought of them. But that they should
      demolish the house of the murderer Thiers, that they should retain the
      hostages as a guarantee and a menace, was not that right and just when the
      Versaillese were unchaining their fury on Paris, bombarding it, destroying
      its edifices, slaughtering women and children with their shells? As he saw
      the end of his dream approaching dark thoughts of ruin and destruction
      filled his mind. If their ideas of justice and retribution were not to
      prevail, if they were to be crushed out of them with their life-blood,
      then perish the world, swept away in one of those cosmic upheavals that
      are the beginning of a new life. Let Paris sink beneath the waves, let it
      go up in smoke and flame, like a gigantic funeral pyre, sooner than let it
      be again delivered over to its former state of vice and misery, to that
      old vicious social system of abominable injustice. And he dreamed another
      dark, terrible dream, the great city reduced to ashes, naught to be seen
      on either side the Seine but piles of smoldering ruins, the festering
      wound purified and healed with fire, a catastrophe without a name, such as
      had never been before, whence should arise a new race. Wild stories were
      everywhere circulated, which interested him intensely, of the mines that
      were driven under all the quarters of the city, the barrels of powder with
      which the catacombs were stuffed, the monuments and public buildings ready
      to be blown into the air at a moment's notice; and all were connected by
      electric wires in such a way that a single spark would suffice to set them
      off; there were great stores of inflammable substances, too, especially
      petroleum, with which the streets and avenues were to be converted into
      seething lakes of flame. The Commune had sworn that should the Versaillese
      enter the city not one of them would ever get beyond the barricades that
      closed the ends of the streets; the pavements would yawn, the houses would
      sink in ruins, Paris would go up in flames, and bury assailants and
      assailed under its ashes.
    

      And if Maurice solaced himself with these crazy dreams, it was because of
      his secret discontent with the Commune itself. He had lost all confidence
      in its members, he felt it was inefficient, drawn this way and that by so
      many conflicting elements, losing its head and becoming purposeless and
      driveling as it saw the near approach of the peril with which it was
      menaced. Of the social reforms it had pledged itself to it had not been
      able to accomplish a single one, and it was now quite certain that it
      would leave behind it no great work to perpetuate its name. But what more
      than all beside was gnawing at its vitals was the rivalries by which it
      was distracted, the corroding suspicion and distrust in which each of its
      members lived. For some time past many of them, the more moderate and the
      timid, had ceased to attend its sessions. The others shaped their course
      day by day in accordance with events, trembling at the idea of a possible
      dictatorship; they had reached that point where the factions of
      revolutionary assemblages exterminate one another by way of saving the
      country. Cluzeret had become suspected, then Dombrowski, and Rossel was
      about to share their fate. Delescluze, appointed Civil Delegate at War,
      could do nothing of his own volition, notwithstanding his great authority.
      And thus the grand social effort that they had had in view wasted itself
      in the ever-widening isolation about those men, whose power had become a
      nullity, whose actions were the result of their despair.
    

      In Paris there was an increasing feeling of terror. Paris, irritated at
      first against Versailles, shivering at the recollection of what it had
      suffered during the siege, was now breaking away from the Commune. The
      compulsory enrollment, the decree incorporating every man under forty in
      the National Guard, had angered the more sedate citizens and been the
      means of bringing about a general exodus: men in disguise and provided
      with forged papers of Alsatian citizenship made their escape by way of
      Saint-Denis; others let themselves down into the moat in the darkness of
      the night with ropes and ladders. The wealthy had long since taken their
      departure. None of the factories and workshops had opened their doors;
      trade and commerce there was none; there was no employment for labor; the
      life of enforced idleness went on amid the alarmed expectancy of the
      frightful denouement that everyone felt could not be far away. And the
      people depended for their daily bread on the pay of the National Guards,
      that dole of thirty sous that was paid from the millions extorted from the
      Bank of France, the thirty sous for the sake of which alone many men were
      wearing the uniform, which had been one of the primary causes and the raison
      d'etre of the insurrection. Whole districts were deserted, the shops
      closed, the house-fronts lifeless. In the bright May sunshine that flooded
      the empty streets the few pedestrians beheld nothing moving save the
      barbaric display of the burial of some federates killed in action, the
      funeral train where no priest walked, the hearse draped with red flags,
      followed by a crowd of men and women bearing bouquets of immortelles. The
      churches were closed and did duty each evening as political club-rooms.
      The revolutionary journals alone were hawked about the streets; the others
      had been suppressed. Great Paris was indeed an unhappy city in those days,
      what with its republican sympathies that made it detest the monarchical
      Assembly at Versailles and its ever-increasing terror of the Commune, from
      which it prayed most fervently to be delivered among all the grisly
      stories that were current, the daily arrests of citizens as hostages, the
      casks of gunpowder that filled the sewers, where men patrolled by day and
      night awaiting the signal to apply the torch.
    

      Maurice, who had never been a drinking man, allowed himself to be seduced
      by the too prevalent habit of over-indulgence. It had become a thing of
      frequent occurrence with him now, when he was out on picket duty or had to
      spend the night in barracks, to take a “pony” of brandy, and if he took a
      second it was apt to go to his head in the alcohol-laden atmosphere that
      he was forced to breathe. It had become epidemic, that chronic
      drunkenness, among those men with whom bread was scarce and who could have
      all the brandy they wanted by asking for it. Toward evening on Sunday, the
      21st of May, Maurice came home drunk, for the first time in his life, to
      his room in the Rue des Orties, where he was in the habit of sleeping
      occasionally. He had been at Neuilly again that day, blazing away at the
      enemy and taking a nip now and then with the comrades, to see if it would
      not relieve the terrible fatigue from which he was suffering. Then, with a
      light head and heavy legs, he came and threw himself on the bed in his
      little chamber; it must have been through force of instinct, for he could
      never remember how he got there. And it was not until the following
      morning, when the sun was high in the heavens, that he awoke, aroused by
      the ringing of the alarm bells, the blare of trumpets and beating of
      drums. During the night the Versaillese, finding a gate undefended, had
      effected an unresisted entrance at the Point-du-Jour.
    

      When he had thrown on his clothes and hastened down into the street, his
      musket slung across his shoulder by the strap, a band of frightened
      soldiers whom he fell in with at the mairie of the arrondissement
      related to him the occurrences of the night, in the midst of a confusion
      such that at first he had hard work to understand. Fort d'Issy and the
      great battery at Montretout, seconded by Mont Valerien, for the last ten
      days had been battering the rampart at the Point-du-Jour, as a consequence
      of which the Saint-Cloud gate was no longer tenable and an assault had
      been ordered for the following morning, the 22d; but someone who chanced
      to pass that way at about five o'clock perceived that the gate was
      unprotected and immediately notified the guards in the trenches, who were
      not more than fifty yards away. Two companies of the 37th regiment of
      regulars were the first to enter the city, and were quickly followed by
      the entire 4th corps under General Douay. All night long the troops were
      pouring in in an uninterrupted stream. At seven o'clock Verge's division
      marched down to the bridge at Grenelle, crossed, and pushed on to the
      Trocadero. At nine General Clinchamp was master of Passy and la Muette. At
      three o'clock in the morning the 1st corps had pitched its tents in the
      Bois de Boulogne, while at about the same hour Bruat's division was
      passing the Seine to seize the Sevres gate and facilitate the movement of
      the 2d Corps, General de Cissey's, which occupied the district of Grenelle
      an hour later. The Versailles army, therefore, on the morning of the 22d,
      was master of the Trocadero and the Chateau of la Muette on the right
      bank, and of Grenelle on the left; and great was the rage and
      consternation that prevailed among the Communists, who were already
      accusing one another of treason, frantic at the thought of their
      inevitable defeat.
    

      When Maurice at last understood the condition of affairs his first thought
      was that the end had come, that all left him was to go forth and meet his
      death. But the tocsin was pealing, drums were beating, women and children,
      even, were working on the barricades, the streets were alive with the stir
      and bustle of the battalions hurrying to assume the positions assigned
      them in the coming conflict. By midday it was seen that the Versaillese
      were remaining quiet in their new positions, and then fresh courage
      returned to the hearts of the soldiers of the Commune, who were resolved
      to conquer or die. The enemy's army, which they had feared to see in
      possession of the Tuileries by that time, profiting by the stern lessons
      of experience and imitating the prudent tactics of the Prussians,
      conducted its operations with the utmost caution. The Committee of Public
      Safety and Delescluze, Delegate at War, directed the defense from their
      quarters in the Hotel de Ville. It was reported that a last proposal for a
      peaceable arrangement had been rejected by them with disdain. That served
      to inspire the men with still more courage, the triumph of Paris was
      assured, the resistance would be as unyielding as the attack was
      vindictive, in the implacable hate, swollen by lies and cruelties, that
      inflamed the heart of either army. And that day was spent by Maurice in
      the quarters of the Champ de Mars and the Invalides, firing and falling
      back slowly from street to street. He had not been able to find his
      battalion; he fought in the ranks with comrades who were strangers to him,
      accompanying them in their march to the left bank without taking heed
      whither they were going. About four o'clock they had a furious conflict
      behind a barricade that had been thrown across the Rue de l'Universite,
      where it comes out on the Esplanade, and it was not until twilight that
      they abandoned it on learning that Bruat's division, stealing up along the
      quai, had seized the Corps Legislatif. They had a narrow escape
      from capture, and it was with great difficulty that they managed to reach
      the Rue de Lille after a long circuit through the Rue Saint-Dominique and
      the Rue Bellechasse. At the close of that day the army of Versailles
      occupied a line which, beginning at the Vanves gate, led past the Corps
      Legislatif, the Palace of the Elysee, St. Augustine's Church, the Lazare
      station, and ended at the Asnieres gate.
    

      The next day, Tuesday, the 23d, was warm and bright, and a terrible day it
      was for Maurice. The few hundred federates with whom he was, and in whose
      ranks were men of many different battalions, were charged with the defense
      of the entire quartier, from the quai to the Rue Saint-Dominique.
      Most of them had bivouacked in the gardens of the great mansions that line
      the Rue de Lille; he had had an unbroken night's rest on a grass-plot at
      one side of the Palace of the Legion of Honor. It was his belief that soon
      as it was light enough the troops would move out from their shelter behind
      the Corps Legislatif and force them back upon the strong barricades in the
      Rue du Bac, but hour after hour passed and there was no sign of an attack.
      There was only some desultory firing at long range between parties posted
      at either end of the streets. The Versaillese, who were not desirous of
      attempting a direct attack on the front of the formidable fortress into
      which the insurgents had converted the terrace of the Tuileries, developed
      their plan of action with great circumspection; two strong columns were
      sent out to right and left that, skirting the ramparts, should first seize
      Montmartre and the Observatory and then, wheeling inward, swoop down on
      the central quarters, surrounding them and capturing all they contained,
      as a shoal of fish is captured in the meshes of a gigantic net. About two
      o'clock Maurice heard that the tricolor was floating over Montmartre: the
      great battery of the Moulin de la Galette had succumbed to the combined
      attack of three army corps, which hurled their battalions simultaneously
      on the northern and western faces of the butte through the Rues Lepic, des
      Saules and du Mont-Cenis; then the waves of the victorious troops had
      poured back on Paris, carrying the Place Saint-Georges, Notre-Dame de
      Lorette, the mairie in the Rue Drouot and the new Opera House,
      while on the left bank the turning movement, starting from the cemetery of
      Mont-Parnasse, had reached the Place d'Enfer and the Horse Market. These
      tidings of the rapid progress of the hostile army were received by the
      communards with mingled feelings of rage and terror amounting almost to
      stupefaction. What, Montmartre carried in two hours; Montmartre, the
      glorious, the impregnable citadel of the insurrection! Maurice saw that
      the ranks were thinning about him; trembling soldiers, fearing the fate
      that was in store for them should they be caught, were slinking furtively
      away to look for a place where they might wash the powder grime from hands
      and face and exchange their uniform for a blouse. There was a rumor that
      the enemy were making ready to attack the Croix-Rouge and take their
      position in flank. By this time the barricades in the Rues Martignac and
      Bellechasse had been carried, the red-legs were beginning to make their
      appearance at the end of the Rue de Lille, and soon all that remained was
      a little band of fanatics and men with the courage of their opinions,
      Maurice and some fifty more, who were resolved to sell their lives dearly,
      killing as many as they could of those Versaillese, who treated the
      federates like thieves and murderers, dragging away the prisoners they
      made and shooting them in the rear of the line of battle. Their bitter
      animosity had broadened and deepened since the days before; it was war to
      the knife between those rebels dying for an idea and that army, inflamed
      with reactionary passions and irritated that it was kept so long in the
      field.
    

      About five o'clock, as Maurice and his companions were finally falling
      back to seek the shelter of the barricades in the Rue du Bac, descending
      the Rue de Lille and pausing at every moment to fire another shot, he
      suddenly beheld volumes of dense black smoke pouring from an open window
      in the Palace of the Legion of Honor. It was the first fire kindled in
      Paris, and in the furious insanity that possessed him it gave him a fierce
      delight. The hour had struck; let the whole city go up in flame, let its
      people be cleansed by the fiery purification! But a sight that he saw
      presently filled him with surprise: a band of five or six men came
      hurrying out of the building, headed by a tall varlet in whom he
      recognized Chouteau, his former comrade in the squad of the 106th. He had
      seen him once before, after the 18th of March, wearing a gold-laced kepi;
      he seemed by his bedizened uniform to have risen in rank, was probably on
      the staff of some one of the many generals who were never seen where there
      was fighting going on. He remembered the account somebody had given him of
      that fellow Chouteau, of his quartering himself in the Palace of the
      Legion of Honor and living there, guzzling and swilling, in company with a
      mistress, wallowing with his boots on in the great luxurious beds,
      smashing the plate-glass mirrors with shots from his revolver, merely for
      the amusement there was in it. It was even asserted that the woman left
      the building every morning in one of the state carriages, under pretense
      of going to the Halles for her day's marketing, carrying off with her
      great bundles of linen, clocks, and even articles of furniture, the fruit
      of their thieveries. And Maurice, as he watched him running away with his
      men, carrying a bucket of petroleum on his arm, experienced a sickening
      sensation of doubt and felt his faith beginning to waver. How could the
      terrible work they were engaged in be good, when men like that were the
      workmen?
    

      Hours passed, and still he fought on, but with a bitter feeling of
      distress, with no other wish than that he might die. If he had erred, let
      him at least atone for his error with his blood! The barricade across the
      Rue de Lille, near its intersection with the Rue du Bac, was a formidable
      one, composed of bags and casks filled with earth and faced by a deep
      ditch. He and a scant dozen of other federates were its only defenders,
      resting in a semi-recumbent position on the ground, infallibly causing
      every soldier who exposed himself to bite the dust. He lay there, without
      even changing his position, until nightfall, using up his cartridges in
      silence, in the dogged sullenness of his despair. The dense clouds of
      smoke from the Palace of the Legion of Honor were billowing upward in
      denser masses, the flames undistinguishable as yet in the dying daylight,
      and he watched the fantastic, changing forms they took as the wind whirled
      them downward to the street. Another fire had broken out in an hotel not
      far away. And all at once a comrade came running up to tell him that the
      enemy, not daring to advance along the street, were making a way for
      themselves through the houses and gardens, breaking down the walls with
      picks. The end was close at hand; they might come out in the rear of the
      barricade at any moment. A shot having been fired from an upper window of
      a house on the corner, he saw Chouteau and his gang, with their petroleum
      and their lighted torch, rush with frantic speed to the buildings on
      either side and climb the stairs, and half an hour later, in the
      increasing darkness, the entire square was in flames, while he, still
      prone on the ground behind his shelter, availed himself of the vivid light
      to pick off any venturesome soldier who stepped from his protecting
      doorway into the narrow street.
    

      How long did Maurice keep on firing? He could not tell; he had lost all
      consciousness of time and place. It might be nine o'clock, or ten,
      perhaps. He continued to load and fire; his condition of hopelessness and
      gloom was pitiable; death seemed to him long in coming. The detestable
      work he was engaged in gave him now a sensation of nausea, as the fumes of
      the wine he has drunk rise and nauseate the drunkard. An intense heat
      began to beat on him from the houses that were burning on every side—an
      air that scorched and asphyxiated. The carrefour, with the barricades that
      closed it in, was become an intrenched camp, guarded by the roaring flames
      that rose on every side and sent down showers of sparks. Those were the
      orders, were they not? to fire the adjacent houses before they abandoned
      the barricades, arrest the progress of the troops by an impassable sea of
      flame, burn Paris in the face of the enemy advancing to take possession of
      it. And presently he became aware that the houses in the Rue du Bac were
      not the only ones that were devoted to destruction; looking behind him he
      beheld the whole sky suffused with a bright, ruddy glow; he heard an
      ominous roar in the distance, as if all Paris were bursting into
      conflagration. Chouteau was no longer to be seen; he had long since fled
      to save his skin from the bullets. His comrades, too, even those most
      zealous in the cause, had one by one stolen away, affrighted at the
      approaching prospect of being outflanked. At last he was left alone,
      stretched at length between two sand bags, his every faculty bent on
      defending the front of the barricade, when the soldiers, who had made
      their way through the gardens in the middle of the block, emerged from a
      house in the Rue du Bac and pounced on him from the rear.
    

      For two whole days, in the fevered excitement of the supreme conflict,
      Maurice had not once thought of Jean, nor had Jean, since he entered Paris
      with his regiment, which had been assigned to Bruat's division, for a
      single moment remembered Maurice. The day before his duties had kept him
      in the neighborhood of the Champ de Mars and the Esplanade of the
      Invalides, and on this day he had remained in the Place du Palais-Bourbon
      until nearly noon, when the troops were sent forward to clean out the
      barricades of the quartier, as far as the Rue des Saints-Peres. A feeling
      of deep exasperation against the rioters had gradually taken possession of
      him, usually so calm and self-contained, as it had of all his comrades,
      whose ardent wish it was to be allowed to go home and rest after so many
      months of fatigue. But of all the atrocities of the Commune that stirred
      his placid nature and made him forgetful even of his tenderest affections,
      there were none that angered him as did those conflagrations. What, burn
      houses, set fire to palaces, and simply because they had lost the battle!
      Only robbers and murderers were capable of such work as that. And he who
      but the day before had sorrowed over the summary executions of the
      insurgents was now like a madman, ready to rend and tear, yelling,
      shouting, his eyes starting from their sockets.
    

      Jean burst like a hurricane into the Rue du Bac with the few men of his
      squad. At first he could distinguish no one; he thought the barricade had
      been abandoned. Then, looking more closely, he perceived a communard
      extended on the ground between two sand bags; he stirred, he brought his
      piece to the shoulder, was about to discharge it down the Rue du Bac. And
      impelled by blind fate, Jean rushed upon the man and thrust his bayonet
      through him, nailing him to the barricade.
    

      Maurice had not had time to turn. He gave a cry and raised his head. The
      blinding light of the burning buildings fell full on their faces.
    

      “O Jean, dear old boy, is it you?”
     

      To die, that was what he wished, what he had been longing for. But to die
      by his brother's hand, ah! the cup was too bitter; the thought of death no
      longer smiled on him.
    

      “Is it you, Jean, old friend?”
     

      Jean, sobered by the terrible shock, looked at him with wild eyes. They
      were alone; the other soldiers had gone in pursuit of the fugitives. About
      them the conflagrations roared and crackled and blazed up higher than
      before; great sheets of white flame poured from the windows, while from
      within came the crash of falling ceilings. And Jean cast himself on the
      ground at Maurice's side, sobbing, feeling him, trying to raise him to see
      if he might not yet be saved.
    

      “My boy, oh! my poor, poor boy!”
     

      
 
    

      When at about nine o'clock the train from Sedan, after innumerable delays
      along the way, rolled into the Saint-Denis station, the sky to the south
      was lit up by a fiery glow as if all Paris was burning. The light had
      increased with the growing darkness, and now it filled the horizon,
      climbing constantly higher up the heavens and tingeing with blood-red hues
      some clouds, that lay off to the eastward in the gloom which the contrast
      rendered more opaque than ever.
    

      The travelers alighted, Henriette among the first, alarmed by the glare
      they had beheld from the windows of the cars as they rushed onward across
      the darkling fields. The soldiers of a Prussian detachment, moreover, that
      had been sent to occupy the station, went through the train and compelled
      the passengers to leave it, while two of their number, stationed on the
      platform, shouted in guttural French:
    

      “Paris is burning. All out here! this train goes no further. Paris is
      burning, Paris is burning!”
     

      Henriette experienced a terrible shock. Mon Dieu! was she too late,
      then? Receiving no reply from Maurice to her two last letters, the
      alarming news from Paris had filled her with such mortal terror that she
      determined to leave Remilly and come and try to find her brother in the
      great city. For months past her life at Uncle Fouchard's had been a
      melancholy one; the troops occupying the village and the surrounding
      country had become harsher and more exacting as the resistance of Paris
      was protracted, and now that peace was declared and the regiments were
      stringing along the roads, one by one, on their way home to Germany, the
      country and the cities through which they passed were taxed to their
      utmost to feed the hungry soldiers. The morning when she arose at daybreak
      to go and take the train at Sedan, looking out into the courtyard of the
      farmhouse she had seen a body of cavalry who had slept there all night,
      scattered promiscuously on the bare ground, wrapped in their long cloaks.
      They were so numerous that the earth was hidden by them. Then, at the
      shrill summons of a trumpet call, all had risen to their feet, silent,
      draped in the folds of those long mantles, and in such serried, close
      array that she involuntarily thought of the graves of a battlefield
      opening and giving up their dead at the call of the last trump. And here
      again at Saint-Denis she encountered the Prussians, and it was from
      Prussian lips that came that cry which caused her such distress:
    

      “All out here! this train goes no further. Paris is burning!”
     

      Henriette, her little satchel in her hand, rushed distractedly up to the
      men in quest of information. There had been heavy fighting in Paris for
      the last two days, they told her, the railway had been destroyed, the
      Germans were watching the course of events. But she insisted on pursuing
      her journey at every risk, and catching sight upon the platform of the
      officer in command of the detachment detailed to guard the station, she
      hurried up to him.
    

      “Sir, I am terribly distressed about my brother, and am trying to get to
      him. I entreat you, furnish me with the means to reach Paris.” The light
      from a gas jet fell full on the captain's face she stopped in surprise.
      “What, Otto, is it you! Oh, mon Dieu, be good to me, since chance
      has once more brought us together!”
     

      It was Otto Gunther, the cousin, as stiff and ceremonious as ever,
      tight-buttoned in his Guard's uniform, the picture of a narrow-minded
      martinet. At first he failed to recognize the little, thin,
      insignificant-looking woman, with the handsome light hair and the pale,
      gentle face; it was only by the brave, honest look that filled her eyes
      that he finally remembered her. His only answer was a slight shrug of the
      shoulders.
    

      “You know I have a brother in the army,” Henriette eagerly went on. “He is
      in Paris; I fear he has allowed himself to become mixed up with this
      horrible conflict. O Otto, I beseech you, assist me to continue my
      journey.”
     

      At last he condescended to speak. “But I can do nothing to help you;
      really I cannot. There have been no trains running since yesterday; I
      believe the rails have been torn up over by the ramparts somewhere. And I
      have neither a horse and carriage nor a man to guide you at my disposal.”
     

      She looked him in the face with a low, stifled murmur of pain and sorrow
      to behold him thus obdurate. “Oh, you will do nothing to aid me. My God,
      to whom then can I turn!”
     

      It was an unlikely story for one of those Prussians to tell, whose hosts
      were everywhere all-powerful, who had the city at their beck and call,
      could have requisitioned a hundred carriages and brought a thousand horses
      from their stables. And he denied her prayer with the haughty air of a
      victor who has made it a law to himself not to interfere with the concerns
      of the vanquished, lest thereby he might defile himself and tarnish the
      luster of his new-won laurels.
    

      “At all events,” continued Henriette, “you know what is going on in the
      city; you won't refuse to tell me that much.”
     

      He gave a smile, so faint as scarce to be perceptible. “Paris is burning.
      Look! come this way, you can see more clearly.”
     

      Leaving the station, he preceded her along the track for a hundred steps
      or so until they came to an iron foot-bridge that spanned the road. When
      they had climbed the narrow stairs and reached the floor of the structure,
      resting their elbows on the railing, they beheld the broad level plain
      outstretched before them, at the foot of the slope of the embankment.
    

      “You see, Paris is burning.”
     

      It was in the neighborhood of ten o'clock. The fierce red glare that lit
      the southern sky was ever mounting higher. The blood-red clouds had
      disappeared from where they had floated in the east; the zenith was like a
      great inverted bowl of inky blackness, across which ran the reflections of
      the distant flames. The horizon was one unbroken line of fire, but to the
      right they could distinguish spots where the conflagration was raging with
      greater fury, sending up great spires and pinnacles of flame, of the most
      vivid scarlet, to pierce the dense opacity above, amid billowing clouds of
      smoke. It was like the burning of some great forest, where the fire
      bridges intervening space, and leaps from tree to tree; one would have
      said the very earth must be calcined and reduced to ashes beneath the heat
      of Paris' gigantic funeral pyre.
    

      “Look,” said Otto, “that eminence that you see profiled in black against
      the red background is Montmartre. There on the left, at Belleville and la
      Villette, there has not been a house burned yet; it must be they are
      selecting the districts of the wealthy for their work; and it spreads, it
      spreads. Look! there is another conflagration breaking out; watch the
      flames there to the right, how they seethe and rise and fall; observe the
      shifting tints of the vapors that rise from the blazing furnace. And
      others, and others still; the heavens are on fire!”
     

      He did not raise his voice or manifest any sign of feeling, and it froze
      Henriette's blood that a human being could stand by and witness such a
      spectacle unmoved. Ah, that those Prussians should be there to see that
      sight! She saw an insult in his studied calmness, in the faint smile that
      played upon his lips, as if he had long foreseen and been watching for
      that unparalleled disaster. So, Paris was burning then at last, Paris,
      upon whose monuments the German shells had scarce been able to inflict
      more than a scratch! and he was there to see it burn, and in the spectacle
      found compensation for all his grievances, the inordinate length to which
      the siege had been protracted, the bitter, freezing weather, the
      difficulties they had surmounted only to see them present themselves anew
      under some other shape, the toil and trouble they had had in mounting
      their heavy guns, while all the time Germany from behind was reproaching
      them with their dilatoriness. Nothing in all the glory of their victory,
      neither the ceded provinces nor the indemnity of five milliards, appealed
      to him so strongly as did that sight of Paris, in a fit of furious
      madness, immolating herself and going up in smoke and flame on that
      beautiful spring night.
    

      “Ah, it was sure to come,” he added in a lower voice. “Fine work, my
      masters!”
     

      It seemed to Henriette as if her heart would break in presence of that
      dire catastrophe. Her personal grief was lost to sight for some minutes,
      swallowed up in the great drama of a people's atonement that was being
      enacted before her eyes. The thought of the lives that would be sacrificed
      to the devouring flames, the sight of the great capital blazing on the
      horizon, emitting the infernal light of the cities that were accursed and
      smitten for their iniquity, elicited from her an involuntary cry of
      anguish. She clasped her hands, asking:
    

      “Oh, merciful Father, of what have we been guilty that we should be
      punished thus?”
     

      Otto raised his arm in an oratorical attitude. He was on the point of
      speaking, with the stern, cold-blooded vehemence of the military bigot who
      has ever a quotation from Holy Writ at his tongue's end, but glancing at
      the young woman, the look he encountered from her candid, gentle eyes
      checked him. Besides, his gesture had spoken for him; it told his hatred
      for the nation, his conviction that he was in France to mete out justice,
      delegated by the God of Armies, to chastise a perverse and stiff-necked
      generation. Paris was burning off there on the horizon in expiation of its
      centuries of dissolute life, of its heaped-up measure of crime and lust.
      Once again the German race were to be the saviors of the world, were to
      purge Europe of the remnant of Latin corruption. He let his arm fall to
      his side and simply said:
    

      “It is the end of all. There is another quartier doomed, for see, a fresh
      fire has broken out there to the right. In that direction, that line of
      flame that creeps onward like a stream of lava—”
     

      Neither spoke for a long time; an awed silence rested on them. The great
      waves of flame continued to ascend, sending up streamers and ribbons of
      vivid light high into the heavens. Beneath the sea of fire was every
      moment extending its boundaries, a tossing, stormy, burning ocean, whence
      now arose dense clouds of smoke that collected over the city in a huge
      pall of a somber coppery hue, which was wafted slowly athwart the
      blackness of the night, streaking the vault of heaven with its accursed
      rain of ashes and of soot.
    

      Henriette started as if awaking from an evil dream, and, the thought of
      her brother flowing in again upon her mind, once more became a supplicant.
    

      “Can you do nothing for me? won't you assist me to get to Paris?”
     

      With his former air of unconcern Otto again raised his eyes to the
      horizon, smiling vaguely.
    

      “What would be the use? since to-morrow morning the city will be a pile of
      ruins!”
     

      And that was all; she left the bridge, without even bidding him good-by,
      flying, she knew not whither, with her little satchel, while he remained
      yet a long time at his post of observation, a motionless figure, rigid and
      erect, lost in the darkness of the night, feasting his eyes on the
      spectacle of that Babylon in flames.
    

      Almost the first person that Henriette encountered on emerging from the
      station was a stout lady who was chaffering with a hackman over his charge
      for driving her to the Rue Richelieu in Paris, and the young woman pleaded
      so touchingly, with tears in her eyes, that finally the lady consented to
      let her occupy a seat in the carriage. The driver, a little swarthy man,
      whipped up his horse and did not open his lips once during the ride, but
      the stout lady was extremely loquacious, telling how she had left the city
      the day but one before after tightly locking and bolting her shop, but had
      been so imprudent as to leave some valuable papers behind, hidden in a
      hole in the wall; hence her mind had been occupied by one engrossing
      thought for the two hours that the city had been burning, how she might
      return and snatch her property from the flames. The sleepy guards at the
      barrier allowed the carriage to pass without much difficulty, the worthy
      lady allaying their scruples with a fib, telling them she was bringing
      back her niece with her to Paris to assist in nursing her husband, who had
      been wounded by the Versaillese. It was not until they commenced to make
      their way along the paved streets that they encountered serious obstacles;
      they were obliged at every moment to turn out in order to avoid the
      barricades that were erected across the roadway, and when at last they
      reached the boulevard Poissoniere the driver declared he would go no
      further. The two women were therefore forced to continue their way on
      foot, through the Rue du Sentier, the Rue des Jeuneurs, and all the
      circumscribing region of the Bourse. As they approached the fortifications
      the blazing sky had made their way as bright before them as if it had been
      broad day; now they were surprised by the deserted and tranquil condition
      of the streets, where the only sound that disturbed the stillness was a
      dull, distant roar. In the vicinity of the Bourse, however, they were
      alarmed by the sound of musketry; they slipped along with great caution,
      hugging the walls. On reaching the Rue Richelieu and finding her shop had
      not been disturbed, the stout lady was so overjoyed that she insisted on
      seeing her traveling companion safely housed; they struck through the Rue
      du Hazard, the Rue Saint-Anne, and finally reached the Rue des Orties.
      Some federates, whose battalion was still holding the Rue Saint-Anne,
      attempted to prevent them from passing. It was four o'clock and already
      quite light when Henriette, exhausted by the fatigue of her long day and
      the stress of her emotions, reached the old house in the Rue des Orties
      and found the door standing open. Climbing the dark, narrow staircase, she
      turned to the left and discovered behind a door a ladder that led upward
      toward the roof.
    

      Maurice, meantime, behind the barricade in the Rue du Bac, had succeeded
      in raising himself to his knees, and Jean's heart throbbed with a wild,
      tumultuous hope, for he believed he had pinned his friend to the earth.
    

      “Oh, my little one, are you alive still? is that great happiness in store
      for me, brute that I am? Wait a moment, let me see.”
     

      He examined the wound with great tenderness by the light of the burning
      buildings. The bayonet had gone through the right arm near the shoulder,
      but a more serious part of the business was that it had afterward entered
      the body between two of the ribs and probably touched the lung. Still, the
      wounded man breathed without much apparent difficulty, but the right arm
      hung useless at his side.
    

      “Poor old boy, don't grieve! We shall have time to say good-by to each
      other, and it is better thus, you see; I am glad to have done with it all.
      You have done enough for me to make up for this, for I should have died
      long ago in some ditch, even as I am dying now, had it not been for you.”
     

      But Jean, hearing him speak thus, again gave way to an outburst of violent
      grief.
    

      “Hush, hush! Twice you saved me from the clutches of the Prussians. We
      were quits; it was my turn to devote my life, and instead of that I have
      slain you. Ah, tonnerre de Dieu! I must have been drunk not to
      recognize you; yes, drunk as a hog from glutting myself with blood.”
     

      Tears streamed from his eyes at the recollection of their last parting,
      down there, at Remilly, when they embraced, asking themselves if they
      should ever meet again, and how, under what circumstances of sorrow or of
      gladness. It was nothing, then, that they had passed toilsome days and
      sleepless nights together, with death staring them in the face? It was to
      bring them to this abominable thing, to this senseless, atrocious
      fratricide, that their hearts had been fused in the crucible of those
      weeks of suffering endured in common? No, no, it could not be; he turned
      in horror from the thought.
    

      “Let's see what I can do, little one; I must save you.”
     

      The first thing to be done was to remove him to a place of safety, for the
      troops dispatched the wounded Communists wherever they found them. They
      were alone, fortunately; there was not a minute to lose. He first ripped
      the sleeve from wrist to shoulder with his knife, then took off the
      uniform coat. Some blood flowed; he made haste to bandage the arm securely
      with strips that he tore from the lining of the garment for the purpose.
      After that he staunched as well as he could the wound in the side and
      fastened the injured arm over it, He luckily had a bit of cord in his
      pocket, which he knotted tightly around the primitive dressing, thus
      assuring the immobility of the injured parts and preventing hemorrhage.
    

      “Can you walk?”
     

      “Yes, I think so.”
     

      But he did not dare to take him through the streets thus, in his shirt
      sleeves. Remembering to have seen a dead soldier lying in an adjacent
      street, he hurried off and presently came back with a capote and a kepi.
      He threw the greatcoat over his friend's shoulders and assisted him to
      slip his uninjured arm into the left sleeve. Then, when he had put the kepi
      on his head:
    

      “There, now you are one of us—where are we to go?”
     

      That was the question. His reviving hope and courage were suddenly damped
      by a horrible uncertainty. Where were they to look for a shelter that gave
      promise of security? the troops were searching the houses, were shooting
      every Communist they took with arms in his hands. And in addition to that,
      neither of them knew a soul in that portion of the city to whom they might
      apply for succor and refuge; not a place where they might hide their
      heads.
    

      “The best thing to do would be to go home where I live,” said Maurice.
      “The house is out of the way; no one will ever think of visiting it. But
      it is in the Rue des Orties, on the other side of the river.”
     

      Jean gave vent to a muttered oath in his irresolution and despair.
    

      “Nom de Dieu! What are we to do?”
     

      It was useless to think of attempting to pass the Pont Royal, which could
      not have been more brilliantly illuminated if the noonday sun had been
      shining on it. At every moment shots were heard coming from either bank of
      the river. Besides that, the blazing Tuileries lay directly in their path,
      and the Louvre, guarded and barricaded, would be an insurmountable
      obstacle.
    

      “That ends it, then; there's no way open,” said Jean, who had spent six
      months in Paris on his return from the Italian campaign.
    

      An idea suddenly flashed across his brain. There had formerly been a place
      a little below the Pont Royal where small boats were kept for hire; if the
      boats were there still they would make the venture. The route was a long
      and dangerous one, but they had no choice, and, further, they must act
      with decision.
    

      “See here, little one, we're going to clear out from here; the locality
      isn't healthy. I'll manufacture an excuse for my lieutenant; I'll tell him
      the communards took me prisoner and I got away.”
     

      Taking his unhurt arm he sustained him for the short distance they had to
      traverse along the Rue du Bac, where the tall houses on either hand were
      now ablaze from cellar to garret, like huge torches. The burning cinders
      fell on them in showers, the heat was so intense that the hair on their
      head and face was singed, and when they came out on the quai they
      stood for a moment dazed and blinded by the terrific light of the
      conflagrations, rearing their tall crests heavenward, on either side the
      Seine.
    

      “One wouldn't need a candle to go to bed by here,” grumbled Jean, with
      whose plans the illumination promised to interfere. And it was only when
      he had helped Maurice down the steps to the left and a little way down
      stream from the bridge that he felt somewhat easy in mind. There was a
      clump of tall trees standing on the bank of the stream, whose shadow gave
      them a measure of security. For near a quarter of an hour the dark forms
      moving to and fro on the opposite quai kept them in a fever of
      apprehension. There was firing, a scream was heard, succeeded by a loud
      splash, and the bosom of the river was disturbed. The bridge was evidently
      guarded.
    

      “Suppose we pass the night in that shed?” suggested Maurice, pointing to
      the wooden structure that served the boatman as an office.
    

      “Yes, and get pinched to-morrow morning!”
     

      Jean was still harboring his idea. He had found quite a flotilla of small
      boats there, but they were all securely fastened with chains; how was he
      to get one loose and secure a pair of oars? At last he discovered two oars
      that had been thrown aside as useless; he succeeded in forcing a padlock,
      and when he had stowed Maurice away in the bow, shoved off and allowed the
      boat to drift with the current, cautiously hugging the shore and keeping
      in the shadow of the bathing-houses. Neither of them spoke a word,
      horror-stricken as they were by the baleful spectacle that presented
      itself to their vision. As they floated down the stream and their horizon
      widened the enormity of the terrible sight increased, and when they
      reached the bridge of Solferino a single glance sufficed to embrace both
      the blazing quais.
    

      On their left the palace of the Tuileries was burning. It was not yet dark
      when the Communists had fired the two extremities of the structure, the
      Pavilion de Flore and the Pavilion de Marsan, and with rapid strides the
      flames had gained the Pavilion de l'Horloge in the central portion,
      beneath which, in the Salle des Marechaux, a mine had been prepared by
      stacking up casks of powder. At that moment the intervening buildings were
      belching from their shattered windows dense volumes of reddish smoke,
      streaked with long ribbons of blue flame. The roofs, yawning as does the
      earth in regions where volcanic agencies prevail, were seamed with great
      cracks through which the raging sea of fire beneath was visible. But the
      grandest, saddest spectacle of all was that afforded by the Pavilion de
      Flore, to which the torch had been earliest applied and which was ablaze
      from its foundation to its lofty summit, burning with a deep, fierce roar
      that could be heard far away. The petroleum with which the floors and
      hangings had been soaked gave the flames an intensity such that the
      ironwork of the balconies was seen to twist and writhe in the convolutions
      of a serpent, and the tall monumental chimneys, with their elaborate
      carvings, glowed with the fervor of live coals.
    

      Then, still on their left, were, first, the Chancellerie of the Legion of
      Honor, which was fired at five o'clock in the afternoon and had been
      burning nearly seven hours, and next, the Palace of the Council of State,
      a huge rectangular structure of stone, which was spouting torrents of fire
      from every orifice in each of its two colonnaded stories. The four
      structures surrounding the great central court had all caught at the same
      moment, and the petroleum, which here also had been distributed by the
      barrelful, had poured down the four grand staircases at the four corners
      of the building in rivers of hellfire. On the facade that faced the river
      the black line of the mansard was profiled distinctly against the ruddy
      sky, amid the red tongues that rose to lick its base, while colonnades,
      entablatures, friezes, carvings, all stood out with startling vividness in
      the blinding, shimmering glow. So great was the energy of the fire, so
      terrible its propulsive force, that the colossal structure was in some
      sort raised bodily from the earth, trembling and rumbling on its
      foundations, preserving intact only its four massive walls, in the fierce
      eruption that hurled its heavy zinc roof high in air. Then, close at one
      side were the d'Orsay barracks, which burned with a flame that seemed to
      pierce the heavens, so purely white and so unwavering that it was like a
      tower of light. And finally, back from the river, were still other fires,
      the seven houses in the Rue du Bac, the twenty-two houses in the Rue de
      Lille, helping to tinge the sky a deeper crimson, profiling their flames
      on other flames, in a blood-red ocean that seemed to have no end.
    

      Jean murmured in awed tone:
    

      “Did ever mortal man look on the like of this! the very river is on fire.”
     

      Their boat seemed to be sailing on the bosom of an incandescent stream. As
      the dancing lights of the mighty conflagrations were caught by the ripples
      of the current the Seine seemed to be pouring down torrents of living
      coals; flashes of intensest crimson played fitfully across its surface,
      the blazing brands fell in showers into the water and were extinguished
      with a hiss. And ever they floated downward with the tide on the bosom of
      that blood-red stream, between the blazing palaces on either hand, like
      wayfarers in some accursed city, doomed to destruction and burning on the
      banks of a river of molten lava.
    

      “Ah!” exclaimed Maurice, with a fresh access of madness at the sight of
      the havoc he had longed for, “let it burn, let it all go up in smoke!”
     

      But Jean silenced him with a terrified gesture, as if he feared such
      blasphemy might bring them evil. Where could a young man whom he loved so
      fondly, so delicately nurtured, so well informed, have picked up such
      ideas? And he applied himself more vigorously to the oars, for they had
      now passed the bridge of Solferino and were come out into a wide open
      space of water. The light was so intense that the river was illuminated as
      by the noonday sun when it stands vertically above men's heads and casts
      no shadow. The most minute objects, such as the eddies in the stream, the
      stones piled on the banks, the small trees along the quais, stood
      out before their vision with wonderful distinctness. The bridges, too,
      were particularly noticeable in their dazzling whiteness, and so clearly
      defined that they could have counted every stone; they had the appearance
      of narrow gangways thrown across the fiery stream to connect one
      conflagration with the other. Amid the roar of the flames and the general
      clamor a loud crash occasionally announced the fall of some stately
      edifice. Dense clouds of soot hung in the air and settled everywhere, the
      wind brought odors of pestilence on its wings. And another horror was that
      Paris, those more distant quarters of the city that lay back from the
      banks of the Seine, had ceased to exist for them. To right and left of the
      conflagration that raged with such fierce resplendency was an unfathomable
      gulf of blackness; all that presented itself to their strained gaze was a
      vast waste of shadow, an empty void, as if the devouring element had
      reached the utmost limits of the city and all Paris were swallowed up in
      everlasting night. And the heavens, too, were dead and lifeless; the
      flames rose so high that they extinguished the stars.
    

      Maurice, who was becoming delirious, laughed wildly.
    

      “High carnival at the Consoil d'Etat and at the Tuileries to-night! They
      have illuminated the facades, women are dancing beneath the sparkling
      chandeliers. Ah, dance, dance and be merry, in your smoking petticoats,
      with your chignons ablaze—”
     

      And he drew a picture of the feasts of Sodom and Gomorrah, the music, the
      lights, the flowers, the unmentionable orgies of lust and drunkenness,
      until the candles on the walls blushed at the shamelessness of the display
      and fired the palaces that sheltered such depravity. Suddenly there was a
      terrific explosion. The fire, approaching from either extremity of the
      Tuileries, had reached the Salle des Marechaux, the casks of powder
      caught, the Pavilion de l'Horloge was blown into the air with the violence
      of a powder mill. A column of flame mounted high in the heavens, and
      spreading, expanded in a great fiery plume on the inky blackness of the
      sky, the crowning display of the horrid fete.
    

      “Bravo!” exclaimed Maurice, as at the end of the play, when the lights are
      extinguished and darkness settles on the stage.
    

      Again Jean, in stammering, disconnected sentences, besought him to be
      quiet. No, no, it was not right to wish evils to anyone! And if they
      invoked destruction, would not they themselves perish in the general ruin?
      His sole desire was to find a landing place so that he might no longer
      have that horrid spectacle before his eyes. He considered it best not to
      attempt to land at the Pont de la Concorde, but, rounding the elbow of the
      Seine, pulled on until they reached the Quai de la Conference, and even at
      that critical moment, instead of shoving the skiff out into the stream to
      take its chances, he wasted some precious moments in securing it, in his
      instinctive respect for the property of others. While doing this he had
      seated Maurice comfortably on the bank; his plan was to reach the Rue des
      Orties through the Place de la Concorde and the Rue Saint-Honore. Before
      proceeding further he climbed alone to the top of the steps that ascended
      from the quai to explore the ground, and on witnessing the
      obstacles they would have to surmount his courage was almost daunted.
      There lay the impregnable fortress of the Commune, the terrace of the
      Tuileries bristling with cannon, the Rues Royale, Florentin, and Rivoli
      obstructed by lofty and massive barricades; and this state of affairs
      explained the tactics of the army of Versailles, whose line that night
      described an immense arc, the center and apex resting on the Place de la
      Concorde, one of the two extremities being at the freight depot of the
      Northern Railway on the right bank, the other on the left bank, at one of
      the bastions of the ramparts, near the gate of Arcueil. But as the night
      advanced the Communards had evacuated the Tuileries and the barricades and
      the regular troops had taken possession of the quartier in the midst of
      further conflagrations; twelve houses at the junction of the Rue
      Saint-Honore and the Rue Royale had been burning since nine o'clock in the
      evening.
    

      When Jean descended the steps and reached the river-bank again he found
      Maurice in a semi-comatose condition, the effects of the reaction after
      his hysterical outbreak.
    

      “It will be no easy job. I hope you are going to be able to walk,
      youngster?”
     

      “Yes, yes; don't be alarmed. I'll get there somehow, alive or dead.”
     

      It was not without great difficulty that he climbed the stone steps, and
      when he reached the level ground of the quai at the summit he
      walked very slowly, supported by his companion's arm, with the shuffling
      gait of a somnambulist. The day had not dawned yet, but the reflected
      light from the burning buildings cast a lurid illumination on the wide
      Place. They made their way in silence across its deep solitude, sick at
      heart to behold the mournful scene of devastation it presented. At either
      extremity, beyond the bridge and at the further end of the Rue Royale,
      they could faintly discern the shadowy outlines of the Palais Bourbon and
      the Church of the Madeleine, torn by shot and shell. The terrace of the
      Tuileries had been breached by the fire of the siege guns and was
      partially in ruins. On the Place itself the bronze railings and ornaments
      of the fountains had been chipped and defaced by the balls; the colossal
      statue of Lille lay on the ground shattered by a projectile, while near at
      hand the statue of Strasbourg, shrouded in heavy veils of crape, seemed to
      be mourning the ruin that surrounded it on every side. And near the
      Obelisk, which had escaped unscathed, a gas-pipe in its trench had been
      broken by the pick of a careless workman, and the escaping gas, fired by
      some accident, was flaring up in a great undulating jet, with a roaring,
      hissing sound.
    

      Jean gave a wide berth to the barricade erected across the Rue Royale
      between the Ministry of Marine and the Garde-Meuble, both of which the
      fire had spared; he could hear the voices of the soldiers behind the sand
      bags and casks of earth with which it was constructed. Its front was
      protected by a ditch, filled with stagnant, greenish water, in which was
      floating the dead body of a federate, and through one of its embrasures
      they caught a glimpse of the houses in the carrefour Saint-Honore, which
      were burning still in spite of the engines that had come in from the
      suburbs, of which they heard the roar and clatter. To right and left the
      trees and the kiosks of the newspaper venders were riddled by the storm of
      bullets to which they had been subjected. Loud cries of horror arose; the
      firemen, in exploring the cellar of one of the burning houses, had come
      across the charred bodies of seven of its inmates.
    

      Although the barricade that closed the entrance to the Rue Saint-Florentin
      and the Rue de Rivoli by its skilled construction and great height
      appeared even more formidable than the other, Jean's instinct told him
      they would have less difficulty in getting by it. It was completely
      evacuated, indeed, and the Versailles troops had not yet entered it. The
      abandoned guns were resting in the embrasures in peaceful slumber, the
      only living thing behind that invincible rampart was a stray dog, that
      scuttled away in haste. But as Jean was making what speed he could along
      the Rue Saint-Florentin, sustaining Maurice, whose strength was giving
      out, that which he had been in fear of came to pass; they fell directly
      into the arms of an entire company of the 88th of the line, which had
      turned the barricade.
    

      “Captain,” he explained, “this is a comrade of mine, who has just been
      wounded by those bandits. I am taking him to the hospital.”
     

      It was then that the capote which he had thrown over Maurice's shoulders
      stood them in good stead, and Jean's heart was beating like a trip-hammer
      as at last they turned into the Rue Saint-Honore. Day was just breaking,
      and the sound of shots reached their ears from the cross-streets, for
      fighting was going on still throughout the quartier. It was little short
      of a miracle that they finally reached the Rue des Frondeurs without
      sustaining any more disagreeable adventure. Their progress was extremely
      slow; the last four or five hundred yards appeared interminable. In the
      Rue des Frondeurs they struck up against a communist picket, but the
      federates, thinking a whole regiment was at hand, took to their heels. And
      now they had but a short bit of the Rue d'Argenteuil to traverse and they
      would be safe in the Rue des Orties.
    

      For four long hours that seemed like an eternity Jean's longing desire had
      been bent on that Rue des Orties with feverish impatience, and now they
      were there it appeared like a haven of safety. It was dark, silent, and
      deserted, as if there were no battle raging within a hundred leagues of
      it. The house, an old, narrow house without a concierge, was still as the
      grave.
    

      “I have the keys in my pocket,” murmured Maurice. “The big one opens the
      street door, the little one is the key of my room, way at the top of the
      house.”
     

      He succumbed and fainted dead away in Jean's arms, whose alarm and
      distress were extreme. They made him forget to close the outer door, and
      he had to grope his way up that strange, dark staircase, bearing his
      lifeless burden and observing the greatest caution not to stumble or make
      any noise that might arouse the sleeping inmates of the rooms. When he had
      gained the top he had to deposit the wounded man on the floor while he
      searched for the chamber door by striking matches, of which he fortunately
      had a supply in his pocket, and only when he had found and opened it did
      he return and raise him in his arms again. Entering, he laid him on the
      little iron bed that faced the window, which he threw open to its full
      extent in his great need of air and light. It was broad day; he dropped on
      his knees beside the bed, sobbing as if his heart would break, suddenly
      abandoned by all his strength as the fearful thought again smote him that
      he had slain his friend.
    

      Minutes passed; he was hardly surprised when, raising his eyes, he saw
      Henriette standing by the bed. It was perfectly natural: her brother was
      dying, she had come. He had not even seen her enter the room; for all he
      knew she might have been standing there for hours. He sank into a chair
      and watched her with stupid eyes as she hovered about the bed, her heart
      wrung with mortal anguish at sight of her brother lying there senseless,
      in his blood-stained garments. Then his memory began to act again; he
      asked:
    

      “Tell me, did you close the street door?”
     

      She answered with an affirmative motion of the head, and as she came
      toward him, extending her two hands in her great need of sympathy and
      support, he added:
    

      “You know it was I who killed him.”
     

      She did not understand; she did not believe him. He felt no flutter in the
      two little hands that rested confidingly in his own.
    

      “It was I who killed him—yes, 'twas over yonder, behind a barricade,
      I did it. He was fighting on one side, I on the other—”
     

      There began to be a fluttering of the little hands.
    

      “We were like drunken men, none of us knew what he as about—it was I
      who killed him.”
     

      Then Henriette, shivering, pale as death, withdrew her hands, fixing on
      him a gaze that was full of horror. Father of Mercy, was the end of all
      things come! was her crushed and bleeding heart to know no peace for ever
      more! Ah, that Jean, of whom she had been thinking that very day, happy in
      the unshaped hope that perhaps she might see him once again! And it was he
      who had done that abominable thing; and yet he had saved Maurice, for was
      it not he who had brought him home through so many perils? She could not
      yield her hands to him now without a revolt of all her being, but she
      uttered a cry into which she threw the last hope of her tortured and
      distracted heart.
    

      “Oh! I will save him; I must save him, now!”
     

      She had acquired considerable experience in surgery during the long time
      she had been in attendance on the hospital at Remilly, and now she
      proceeded without delay to examine her brother's hurt, who remained
      unconscious while she was undressing him. But when she undid the rude
      bandage of Jean's invention, he stirred feebly and uttered a faint cry of
      pain, opening wide his eyes that were bright with fever. He recognized her
      at once and smiled.
    

      “You here! Ah, how glad I am to see you once more before I die!”
     

      She silenced him, speaking in a tone of cheerful confidence.
    

      “Hush, don't talk of dying; I won't allow it! I mean that you shall live!
      There, be quiet, and let me see what is to be done.”
     

      However, when Henriette had examined the injured arm and the wound in the
      side, her face became clouded and a troubled look rose to her eyes. She
      installed herself as mistress in the room, searching until she found a
      little oil, tearing up old shirts for bandages, while Jean descended to
      the lower regions for a pitcher of water. He did not open his mouth, but
      looked on in silence as she washed and deftly dressed the wounds,
      incapable of aiding her, seemingly deprived of all power of action by her
      presence there. When she had concluded her task, however, noticing her
      alarmed expression, he proposed to her that he should go and secure a
      doctor, but she was in possession of all her clear intelligence. No, no;
      she would not have a chance-met doctor, of whom they knew nothing, who,
      perhaps, would betray her brother to the authorities. They must have a man
      they could depend on; they could afford to wait a few hours. Finally, when
      Jean said he must go and report for duty with his company, it was agreed
      that he should return as soon as he could get away, and try to bring a
      surgeon with him.
    

      He delayed his departure, seemingly unable to make up his mind to leave
      that room, whose atmosphere was pervaded by the evil he had
      unintentionally done. The window, which had been closed for a moment, had
      been opened again, and from it the wounded man, lying on his bed, his head
      propped up by pillows, was looking out over the city, while the others,
      also, in the oppressive silence that had settled on the chamber, were
      gazing out into vacancy.
    

      From that elevated point of the Butte des Moulins a good half of Paris lay
      stretched beneath their eyes in a vast panorama: first the central
      districts, from the Faubourg Saint-Honore to the Bastille, then the Seine
      in its entire course through the city, with the thickly-built,
      densely-populated regions of the left bank, an ocean of roofs, treetops,
      steeples, domes, and towers. The light was growing stronger, the
      abominable night, than which there have been few more terrible in history,
      was ended; but beneath the rosy sky, in the pure, clear light of the
      rising sun, the fires were blazing still. Before them lay the burning
      Tuileries, the d'Orsay barracks, the Palaces of the Council of State and
      the Legion of Honor, the flames from which were paled by the superior
      refulgence of the day-star. Even beyond the houses in the Rue de Lille and
      the Rue du Bac there must have been other structures burning, for clouds
      of smoke were visible rising from the carrefour of la Croix-Rouge, and,
      more distant still, from the Rue Vavin and the Rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs.
      Nearer at hand and to their right the fires in the Rue Saint-Honore were
      dying out, while to the left, at the Palais-Royal and the new Louvre, to
      which the torch had not been applied until near morning, the work of the
      incendiaries was apparently a failure. But what they were unable to
      account for at first was the dense volume of black smoke which, impelled
      by the west wind, came driving past their window. Fire had been set to the
      Ministry of Finance at three o'clock in the morning and ever since that
      time it had been smoldering, emitting no blaze, among the stacks and piles
      of documents that were contained in the low-ceiled, fire-proof vaults and
      chambers. And if the terrific impressions of the night were not there to
      preside at the awakening of the great city—the fear of total
      destruction, the Seine pouring its fiery waves past their doors, Paris
      kindling into flame from end to end—a feeling of gloom and despair,
      hung heavy over the quartiers that had been spared, with that dense,
      on-pouring smoke, whose dusky cloud was ever spreading. Presently the sun,
      which had risen bright and clear, was hid by it, and the golden sky was
      filled with the great funeral pall.
    

      Maurice, who appeared to be delirious again, made a slow, sweeping gesture
      that embraced the entire horizon, murmuring:
    

      “Is it all burning? Ah, how long it takes!”
     

      Tears rose to Henriette's eyes, as if her burden of misery was made
      heavier for her by the share her brother had had in those deeds of horror.
      And Jean, who dared neither take her hand nor embrace his friend, left the
      room with the air of one crazed by grief.
    

      “I will return soon. Au revoir!”
     

      It was dark, however, nearly eight o'clock, before he was able to redeem
      his promise. Notwithstanding his great distress he was happy; his regiment
      had been transferred from the first to the second line and assigned the
      task of protecting the quartier, so that, bivouacking with his company in
      the Place du Carrousel, he hoped to get a chance to run in each evening to
      see how the wounded man was getting on. And he did not return alone; as
      luck would have it he had fallen in with the former surgeon of the 106th
      and had brought him along with him, having been unable to find another
      doctor, consoling himself with the reflection that the terrible, big man
      with the lion's mane was not such a bad sort of fellow after all.
    

      When Bouroche, who knew nothing of the patient he was summoned with such
      insistence to attend and grumbled at having to climb so many stairs,
      learned that it was a Communist he had on his hands he commenced to storm.
    

      “God's thunder, what do you take me for? Do you suppose I'm going to waste
      my time on those thieving, murdering, house-burning scoundrels? As for
      this particular bandit, his case is clear, and I'll take it upon me to see
      he is cured; yes, with a bullet in his head!”
     

      But his anger subsided suddenly at sight of Henriette's pale face and her
      golden hair streaming in disorder over her black dress.
    

      “He is my brother, doctor, and he was with you at Sedan.”
     

      He made no reply, but uncovered the injuries and examined them in silence;
      then, taking some phials from his pocket, he made a fresh dressing,
      explaining to the young woman how it was done. When he had finished he
      turned suddenly to the patient and asked in his loud, rough voice:
    

      “Why did you take sides with those ruffians? What could cause you to be
      guilty of such an abomination?”
     

      Maurice, with a feverish luster in his eyes, had been watching him since
      he entered the room, but no word had escaped his lips. He answered in a
      voice that was almost fierce, so eager was it:
    

      “Because there is too much suffering in the world, too much wickedness,
      too much infamy!”
     

      Bouroche's shrug of the shoulders seemed to indicate that he thought a
      young man was likely to make his mark who carried such ideas about in his
      head. He appeared to be about to say something further, but changed his
      mind and bowed himself out, simply adding:
    

      “I will come in again.”
     

      To Henriette, on the landing, he said he would not venture to make any
      promises. The injury to the lung was serious; hemorrhage might set in and
      carry off the patient without a moment's warning. And when she re-entered
      the room she forced a smile to her lips, notwithstanding the sharp stab
      with which the doctor's words had pierced her heart, for had she not
      promised herself to save him? and could she permit him to be snatched from
      them now that they three were again united, with a prospect of a lifetime
      of affection and happiness before them? She had not left the room since
      morning, an old woman who lived on the landing having kindly offered to
      act as her messenger for the purchase of such things as she required. And
      she returned and resumed her place upon a chair at her brother's bedside.
    

      But Maurice, in his febrile excitation, questioned Jean, insisting on
      knowing what had happened since the morning. The latter did not tell him
      everything, maintaining a discreet silence upon the furious rage which
      Paris, now it was delivered from its tyrants, was manifesting toward the
      dying Commune. It was now Wednesday. For two interminable days succeeding
      the Sunday evening when the conflict first broke out the citizens had
      lived in their cellars, quaking with fear, and when they ventured out at
      last on Wednesday morning, the spectacle of bloodshed and devastation that
      met their eyes on every side, and more particularly the frightful ruin
      entailed by the conflagrations, aroused in their breasts feelings the
      bitterest and most vindictive. It was felt in every quarter that the
      punishment must be worthy of the crime. The houses in the suspected
      quarters were subjected to a rigorous search and men and women who were at
      all tainted with suspicion were led away in droves and shot without
      formality. At six o'clock of the evening of that day the army of the
      Versaillese was master of the half of Paris, following the line of the
      principal avenues from the park of Montsouris to the station of the
      Northern Railway, and the remainder of the braver members of the Commune,
      a mere handful, some twenty or so, had taken refuge in the mairie
      of the eleventh arrondissement, in the Boulevard Voltaire.
    

      They were silent when he concluded his narration, and Maurice, his glance
      vaguely wandering over the city through the open window that let in the
      soft, warm air of evening, murmured:
    

      “Well, the work goes on; Paris continues to burn!”
     

      It was true: the flames were becoming visible again in the increasing
      darkness and the heavens were reddened once more with the ill-omened
      light. That afternoon the powder magazine at the Luxembourg had exploded
      with a frightful detonation, which gave rise to a report that the Pantheon
      had collapsed and sunk into the catacombs. All that day, moreover, the
      conflagrations of the night pursued their course unchecked; the Palace of
      the Council of State and the Tuileries were burning still, the Ministry of
      Finance continued to belch forth its billowing clouds of smoke. A dozen
      times Henriette was obliged to close the window against the shower of
      blackened, burning paper that the hot breath of the fire whirled upward
      into the sky, whence it descended to earth again in a fine rain of
      fragments; the streets of Paris were covered with them, and some were
      found in the fields of Normandy, thirty leagues away. And now it was not
      the western and southern districts alone which seemed devoted to
      destruction, the houses in the Rue Royale and those of the Croix-Rouge and
      the Rue Notre-Dame-des-Champs: the entire eastern portion of the city
      appeared to be in flames, the Hotel de Ville glowed on the horizon like a
      mighty furnace. And in that direction also, blazing like gigantic
      beacon-fires upon the mountain tops, were the Theatre-Lyrique, the mairie
      of the fourth arrondissement, and more than thirty houses in the adjacent
      streets, to say nothing of the theater of the Porte-Saint-Martin, further
      to the north, which illuminated the darkness of its locality as a stack of
      grain lights up the deserted, dusky fields at night. There is no doubt
      that in many cases the incendiaries were actuated by motives of personal
      revenge; perhaps, too, there were criminal records which the parties
      implicated had an object in destroying. It was no longer a question of
      self-defense with the Commune, of checking the advance of the victorious
      troops by fire; a delirium of destruction raged among its adherents: the
      Palace of Justice, the Hotel-Dieu and the cathedral of Notre-Dame escaped
      by the merest chance. They would destroy solely for the sake of
      destroying, would bury the effete, rotten humanity beneath the ruins of a
      world, in the hope that from the ashes might spring a new and innocent
      race that should realize the primitive legends of an earthly paradise. And
      all that night again did the sea of flame roll its waves over Paris.
    

      “Ah; war, war, what a hateful thing it is!” said Henriette to herself,
      looking out on the sore-smitten city.
    

      Was it not indeed the last act, the inevitable conclusion of the tragedy,
      the blood-madness for which the lost fields of Sedan and Metz were
      responsible, the epidemic of destruction born from the siege of Paris, the
      supreme struggle of a nation in peril of dissolution, in the midst of
      slaughter and universal ruin?
    

      But Maurice, without taking his eyes from the fires that were raging in
      the distance, feebly, and with an effort, murmured:
    

      “No, no; do not be unjust toward war. It is good; it has its appointed
      work to do—”
     

      There were mingled hatred and remorse in the cry with which Jean
      interrupted him.
    

      “Good God! When I see you lying there, and know it is through my fault—Do
      not say a word in defense of it; it is an accursed thing, is war!”
     

      The wounded man smiled faintly.
    

      “Oh, as for me, what matters it? There is many another in my condition. It
      may be that this blood-letting was necessary for us. War is life, which
      cannot exist without its sister, death.”
     

      And Maurice closed his eyes, exhausted by the effort it had cost him to
      utter those few words. Henriette signaled Jean not to continue the
      discussion. It angered her; all her being rose in protest against such
      suffering and waste of human life, notwithstanding the calm bravery of her
      frail woman's nature, with her clear, limpid eyes, in which lived again
      all the heroic spirit of the grandfather, the veteran of the Napoleonic
      wars.
    

      Two days more, Thursday and Friday, passed, like their predecessors, amid
      scenes of slaughter and conflagration. The thunder of the artillery was
      incessant; the batteries of the army of Versailles on the heights of
      Montmartre roared against those that the federates had established at
      Belleville and Pare-Lachaise without a moment's respite, while the latter
      maintained a desultory fire on Paris. Shells had fallen in the Rue
      Richelieu and the Place Vendome. At evening on the 25th the entire left
      bank was in possession of the regular troops, but on the right bank the
      barricades in the Place Chateau d'Eau and the Place de la Bastille
      continued to hold out; they were veritable fortresses, from which
      proceeded an uninterrupted and most destructive fire. At twilight, while
      the last remaining members of the Commune were stealing off to make
      provision for their safety, Delescluze took his cane and walked leisurely
      away to the barricade that was thrown across the Boulevard Voltaire, where
      he died a hero's death. At daybreak on the following morning, the 26th,
      the Chateau d'Eau and Bastille positions were carried, and the Communists,
      now reduced to a handful of brave men who were resolved to sell their
      lives dearly, had only la Villette, Belleville, and Charonne left to them,
      And for two more days they remained and fought there with the fury of
      despair.
    

      On Friday evening, as Jean was on his way from the Place du Carrousel to
      the Rue des Orties, he witnessed a summary execution in the Rue Richelieu
      that filled him with horror. For the last forty-eight hours two
      courts-martial had been sitting, one at the Luxembourg, the other at the
      Theatre du Chatelet; the prisoners convicted by the former were taken into
      the garden and shot, while those found guilty by the latter were dragged
      away to the Lobau barracks, where a platoon of soldiers that was kept
      there in constant attendance for the purpose mowed them down, almost at
      point-blank range. The scenes of slaughter there were most horrible: there
      were men and women who had been condemned to death on the flimsiest
      evidence: because they had a stain of powder on their hands, because their
      feet were shod with army shoes; there were innocent persons, the victims
      of private malice, who had been wrongfully denounced, shrieking forth
      their entreaties and explanations and finding no one to lend an ear to
      them; and all were driven pell-mell against a wall, facing the muzzles of
      the muskets, often so many poor wretches in the band at once that the
      bullets did not suffice for all and it became necessary to finish the
      wounded with the bayonet. From morning until night the place was streaming
      with blood; the tumbrils were kept busy bearing away the bodies of the
      dead. And throughout the length and breadth of the city, keeping pace with
      the revengeful clamors of the people, other executions were continually
      taking place, in front of barricades, against the walls in the deserted
      streets, on the steps of the public buildings. It was under such
      circumstances that Jean saw a woman and two men dragged by the residents
      of the quartier before the officer commanding the detachment that was
      guarding the Theatre Francais. The citizens showed themselves more
      bloodthirsty than the soldiery, and those among the newspapers that had
      resumed publication were howling for measures of extermination. A
      threatening crowd surrounded the prisoners and was particularly violent
      against the woman, in whom the excited bourgeois beheld one of those petroleuses
      who were the constant bugbear of terror-haunted imaginations, whom they
      accused of prowling by night, slinking along the darkened streets past the
      dwellings of the wealthy, to throw cans of lighted petroleum into
      unprotected cellars. This woman, was the cry, had been found bending over
      a coal-hole in the Rue Sainte-Anne. And notwithstanding her denials,
      accompanied by tears and supplications, she was hurled, together with the
      two men, to the bottom of the ditch in front of an abandoned barricade,
      and there, lying in the mud and slime, they were shot with as little pity
      as wolves caught in a trap. Some by-passers stopped and looked
      indifferently on the scene, among them a lady hanging on her husband's
      arm, while a baker's boy, who was carrying home a tart to someone in the
      neighborhood, whistled the refrain of a popular air.
    

      As Jean, sick at heart, was hurrying along the street toward the house in
      the Rue des Orties, a sudden recollection flashed across his mind. Was not
      that Chouteau, the former member of his squad, whom he had seen, in the
      blouse of a respectable workman, watching the execution and testifying his
      approval of it in a loud-mouthed way? He was a proficient in his role of
      bandit, traitor, robber, and assassin! For a moment the corporal thought
      he would retrace his steps, denounce him, and send him to keep company
      with the other three. Ah, the sadness of the thought; the guilty ever
      escaping punishment, parading their unwhipped infamy in the bright light
      of day, while the innocent molder in the earth!
    

      Henriette had come out upon the landing at the sound of footsteps coming
      up the stairs, where she welcomed Jean with a manner that indicated great
      alarm.
    

      “'Sh! he has been extremely violent all day long. The major was here, I am
      in despair—”
     

      Bouroche, in fact, had shaken his head ominously, saying he could promise
      nothing as yet. Nevertheless the patient might pull through, in spite of
      all the evil consequences he feared; he had youth on his side.
    

      “Ah, here you are at last,” Maurice said impatiently to Jean, as soon as
      he set eyes on him. “I have been waiting for you. What is going on—how
      do matters stand?” And supported by the pillows at his back, his face to
      the window which he had forced his sister to open for him, he pointed with
      his finger to the city, where, on the gathering darkness, the lambent
      flames were beginning to rise anew. “You see, it is breaking out again;
      Paris is burning. All Paris will burn this time!”
     

      As soon as daylight began to fade, the distant quarters beyond the Seine
      had been lighted up by the burning of the Grenier d'Abondance. From time
      to time there was an outburst of flame, accompanied by a shower of sparks,
      from the smoking ruins of the Tuileries, as some wall or ceiling fell and
      set the smoldering timbers blazing afresh. Many houses, where the fire was
      supposed to be extinguished, flamed up anew; for the last three days, as
      soon as darkness descended on the city it seemed as if it were the signal
      for the conflagrations to break out again; as if the shades of night had
      breathed upon the still glowing embers, reanimating them, and scattering
      them to the four corners of the horizon. Ah, that city of the damned, that
      had harbored for a week within its bosom the demon of destruction,
      incarnadining the sky each evening as soon as twilight fell, illuminating
      with its infernal torches the nights of that week of slaughter! And when,
      that night, the docks at la Villette burned, the light they shed upon the
      huge city was so intense that it seemed to be on fire in every part at
      once, overwhelmed and drowned beneath the sea of flame.
    

      “Ah, it is the end!” Maurice repeated. “Paris is doomed!”
     

      He reiterated the words again and again with apparent relish, actuated by
      a feverish desire to hear the sound of his voice once more, after the dull
      lethargy that had kept him tongue-tied for three days. But the sound of
      stifled sobs causes him to turn his head.
    

      “What, sister, you, brave little woman that you are! You weep because I am
      about to die—”
     

      She interrupted him, protesting:
    

      “But you are not going to die!”
     

      “Yes, yes; it is better it should be so; it must be so. Ah, I shall be no
      great loss to anyone. Up to the time the war broke out I was a source of
      anxiety to you, I cost you dearly in heart and purse. All the folly and
      the madness I was guilty of, and which would have landed me, who knows
      where? in prison, in the gutter—”
     

      Again she took the words from his mouth, exclaiming hotly:
    

      “Hush! be silent!—you have atoned for all.”
     

      He reflected a moment. “Yes, perhaps I shall have atoned, when I am dead.
      Ah, Jean, old fellow, you didn't know what a service you were rendering us
      all when you gave me that bayonet thrust.”
     

      But the other protested, his eyes swimming with tears:
    

      “Don't, I entreat you, say such things! do you wish to make me go and dash
      out my brains against a wall?”
     

      Maurice pursued his train of thought, speaking in hurried, eager tones.
    

      “Remember what you said to me the day after Sedan, that it was not such a
      bad thing, now and then, to receive a good drubbing. And you added that if
      a man had gangrene in his system, if he saw one of his limbs wasting from
      mortification, it would be better to take an ax and chop off that limb
      than to die from the contamination of the poison. I have many a time
      thought of those words since I have been here, without a friend, immured
      in this city of distress and madness. And I am the diseased limb, and it
      is you who have lopped it off—” He went on with increasing
      vehemence, regardless of the supplications of his terrified auditors, in a
      fervid tirade that abounded with symbols and striking images. It was the
      untainted, the reasoning, the substantial portion of France, the
      peasantry, the tillers of the soil, those who had always kept close
      contact with their mother Earth, that was suppressing the outbreak of the
      crazed, exasperated part, the part that had been vitiated by the Empire
      and led astray by vain illusions and empty dreams; and in the performance
      of its duty it had had to cut deep into the living flesh, without being
      fully aware of what it was doing. But the baptism of blood, French blood,
      was necessary; the abominable holocaust, the living sacrifice, in the
      midst of the purifying flames. Now they had mounted the steps of the
      Calvary and known their bitterest agony; the crucified nation had expiated
      its faults and would be born again. “Jean, old friend, you and those like
      you are strong in your simplicity and honesty. Go, take up the spade and
      the trowel, turn the sod in the abandoned field, rebuild the house! As for
      me, you did well to lop me off, since I was the ulcer that was eating away
      your strength!”
     

      After that his language became more and more incoherent; he insisted on
      rising and going to sit by the window. “Paris burns, Paris burns; not a
      stone of it will be left standing. Ah! the fire that I invoked, it
      destroys, but it heals; yes, the work it does is good. Let me go down
      there; let me help to finish the work of humanity and liberty—”
     

      Jean had the utmost difficulty in getting him back to bed, while Henriette
      tearfully recalled memories of their childhood, and entreated him, for the
      sake of the love they bore each other, to be calm. Over the immensity of
      Paris the fiery glow deepened and widened; the sea of flame seemed to be
      invading the remotest quarters of the horizon; the heavens were like the
      vaults of a colossal oven, heated to red heat. And athwart the red light
      of the conflagrations the dense black smoke-clouds from the Ministry of
      Finance, which had been burning three days and given forth no blaze,
      continued to pour in unbroken, slow procession.
    

      The following, Saturday, morning brought with it a decided improvement in
      Maurice's condition: he was much calmer, the fever had subsided, and it
      afforded Jean inexpressible delight to behold a smile on Henriette's face
      once more, as the young woman fondly reverted to her cherished dream, a
      pact of reciprocal affection between the three of them, that should unite
      them in a future that might yet be one of happiness, under conditions that
      she did not care to formulate even to herself. Would destiny be merciful?
      Would it save them all from an eternal farewell by saving her brother? Her
      nights were spent in watching him; she never stirred outside that chamber,
      where her noiseless activity and gentle ministrations were like a
      never-ceasing caress. And Jean, that evening, while sitting with his
      friends, forgot his great sorrow in a delight that astonished him and made
      him tremble. The troops had carried Belleville and the Buttes-Chaumont
      that day; the only remaining point where there was any resistance now was
      the cemetery of Pere-Lachaise, which had been converted into a fortified
      camp. It seemed to him that the insurrection was ended; he even declared
      that the troops had ceased to shoot their prisoners, who were being
      collected in droves and sent on to Versailles. He told of one of those
      bands that he had seen that morning on the quai, made up of men of
      every class, from the most respectable to the lowest, and of women of all
      ages and conditions, wrinkled old bags and young girls, mere children, not
      yet out of their teens; pitiful aggregation of misery and revolt, driven
      like cattle by the soldiers along the street in the bright sunshine, and
      that the people of Versailles, so it was said, received with revilings and
      blows.
    

      But Sunday was to Jean a day of terror. It rounded out and fitly ended
      that accursed week. With the triumphant rising of the sun on that bright,
      warm Sabbath morning he shudderingly heard the news that was the
      culmination of all preceding horrors. It was only at that late day that
      the public was informed of the murder of the hostages; the archbishop, the
      cure of the Madeleine and others, shot at la Roquette on Wednesday, the
      Dominicans of Arcueil coursed like hares on Thursday, more priests and
      gendarmes, to the number of forty-seven in all, massacred in cold blood in
      the Rue Haxo on Friday; and a furious cry went up for vengeance, the
      soldiers bunched the last prisoners they made and shot them in mass. All
      day long on that magnificent Sunday the volleys of musketry rang out in
      the courtyard of the Lobau barracks, that were filled with blood and smoke
      and the groans of the dying. At la Roquette two hundred and twenty-seven
      miserable wretches, gathered in here and there by the drag-net of the
      police, were collected in a huddle, and the soldiers fired volley after
      volley into the mass of human beings until there was no further sign of
      life. At Pere-Lachaise, which had been shelled continuously for four days
      and was finally carried by a hand-to-hand conflict among the graves, a
      hundred and forty-eight of the insurgents were drawn up in line before a
      wall, and when the firing ceased the stones were weeping great tears of
      blood; and three of them, despite their wounds, having succeeded in making
      their escape, they were retaken and despatched. Among the twelve thousand
      victims of the Commune, who shall say how many innocent people suffered
      for every malefactor who met his deserts! An order to stop the executions
      had been issued from Versailles, so it was said, but none the less the
      slaughter still went on; Thiers, while hailed as the savior of his
      country, was to bear the stigma of having been the Jack Ketch of Paris,
      and Marshal MacMahon, the vanquished of Froeschwiller, whose proclamation
      announcing the triumph of law and order was to be seen on every wall, was
      to receive the credit of the victory of Pere-Lachaise. And in the pleasant
      sunshine Paris, attired in holiday garb, appeared to be en fete;
      the reconquered streets were filled with an enormous crowd; men and women,
      glad to breathe the air of heaven once more, strolled leisurely from spot
      to spot to view the smoking ruins; mothers, holding their little children
      by the hand, stopped for a moment and listened with an air of interest to
      the deadened crash of musketry from the Lobau barracks.
    

      When Jean ascended the dark staircase of the house in the Rue des Orties,
      in the gathering obscurity of that Sunday evening, his heart was oppressed
      by a chill sense of impending evil. He entered the room, and saw at once
      that the inevitable end was come; Maurice lay dead on the little bed; the
      hemorrhage predicted by Bouroche had done its work. The red light of the
      setting sun streamed through the open window and rested on the wall as if
      in a last farewell; two tapers were burning on a table beside the bed. And
      Henriette, alone with her dead, in her widow's weeds that she had not laid
      aside, was weeping silently.
    

      At the noise of footsteps she raised her head, and shuddered on beholding
      Jean. He, in his wild despair, was about to hurry toward her and seize her
      hands, mingle his grief with hers in a sympathetic clasp, but he saw the
      little hands were trembling, he felt as by instinct the repulsion that
      pervaded all her being and was to part them for evermore. Was not all
      ended between them now? Maurice's grave would be there, a yawning chasm,
      to part them as long as they should live. And he could only fall to his
      knees by the bedside of his dead friend, sobbing softly. After the silence
      had lasted some moments, however, Henriette spoke:
    

      “I had turned my back and was preparing a cup of bouillon, when he gave a
      cry. I hastened to his side, but had barely time to reach the bed before
      he expired, with my name upon his lips, and yours as well, amid an outgush
      of blood—”
     

      Her Maurice, her twin brother, whom she might almost be said to have loved
      in the prenatal state, her other self, whom she had watched over and
      saved! sole object of her affection since at Bazeilles she had seen her
      poor Weiss set against a wall and shot to death! And now cruel war had
      done its worst by her, had crushed her bleeding heart; henceforth her way
      through life was to be a solitary one, widowed and forsaken as she was,
      with no one upon whom to bestow her love.
    

      “Ah, bon sang!” cried Jean, amid his sobs, “behold my work! My poor
      little one, for whom I would have laid down my life, and whom I murdered,
      brute that I am! What is to become of us? Can you ever forgive me?”
     

      At that moment their glances met, and they were stricken with
      consternation at what they read in each other's eyes. The past rose before
      them, the secluded chamber at Remilly, where they had spent so many
      melancholy yet happy days. His dream returned to him, that dream of which
      at first he had been barely conscious and which even at a later period
      could not be said to have assumed definite shape: life down there in the
      pleasant country by the Meuse, marriage, a little house, a little field to
      till whose produce should suffice for the needs of two people whose ideas
      were not extravagant. Now the dream was become an eager longing, a
      penetrating conviction that, with a wife as loving and industrious as she,
      existence would be a veritable earthly paradise. And she, the tranquillity
      of whose mind had never in those days been ruffled by thoughts of that
      nature, in the chaste and unconscious bestowal of her heart, now saw
      clearly and understood the true condition of her feelings. That marriage,
      of which she had not admitted to herself the possibility, had been,
      unknown to her, the object of her desire. The seed that had germinated had
      pushed its way in silence and in darkness; it was love, not sisterly
      affection, that she bore toward that young man whose company had at first
      been to her nothing more than a source of comfort and consolation. And
      that was what their eyes told each other, and the love thus openly
      expressed could have no other fruition than an eternal farewell. It needed
      but that frightful sacrifice, the rending of their heart-strings by that
      supreme parting, the prospect of their life's happiness wrecked amid all
      the other ruins, swept away by the crimson tide that ended their brother's
      life.
    

      With a slow and painful effort Jean rose from his knees.
    

      “Farewell!”
     

      Henriette stood motionless in her place.
    

      “Farewell!”
     

      But Jean could not tear himself away thus. Advancing to the bedside he
      sorrowfully scanned the dead man's face, with its lofty forehead that
      seemed loftier still in death, its wasted features, its dull eyes, whence
      the wild look that had occasionally been seen there in life had vanished.
      He longed to give a parting kiss to his little one, as he had called him
      so many times, but dared not. It seemed to him that his hands were stained
      with his friend's blood; he shrank from the horror of the ordeal. Ah, what
      a death to die, amid the crashing ruins of a sinking world! On the last
      day, among the shattered fragments of the dying Commune, might not this
      last victim have been spared? He had gone from life, hungering for
      justice, possessed by the dream that haunted him, the sublime and
      unattainable conception of the destruction of the old society, of Paris
      chastened by fire, of the field dug up anew, that from the soil thus
      renewed and purified might spring the idyl of another golden age.
    

      His heart overflowing with bitter anguish, Jean turned and looked out on
      Paris. The setting sun lay on the edge of the horizon, and its level rays
      bathed the city in a flood of vividly red light. The windows in thousands
      of houses flamed as if lighted by fierce fires within; the roofs glowed
      like beds of live coals; bits of gray wall and tall, sober-hued monuments
      flashed in the evening air with the sparkle of a brisk fire of brushwood.
      It was like the show-piece that is reserved for the conclusion of a fete,
      the huge bouquet of gold and crimson, as if Paris were burning like a
      forest of old oaks and soaring heavenward in a rutilant cloud of sparks
      and flame. The fires were burning still; volumes of reddish smoke
      continued to rise into the air; a confused murmur in the distance sounded
      on the ear, perhaps the last groans of the dying Communists at the Lobau
      barracks, or it may have been the happy laughter of women and children,
      ending their pleasant afternoon by dining in the open air at the doors of
      the wine-shops. And in the midst of all the splendor of that royal sunset,
      while a large part of Paris was crumbling away in ashes, from plundered
      houses and gutted palaces, from the torn-up streets, from the depths of
      all that ruin and suffering, came sounds of life.
    

      Then Jean had a strange experience. It seemed to him that in the slowly
      fading daylight, above the roofs of that flaming city, he beheld the
      dawning of another day. And yet the situation might well be considered
      irretrievable. Destiny appeared to have pursued them with her utmost fury;
      the successive disasters they had sustained were such as no nation in
      history had ever known before; defeat treading on the heels of defeat,
      their provinces torn from them, an indemnity of milliards to be raised, a
      most horrible civil war that had been quenched in blood, their streets
      cumbered with ruins and unburied corpses, without money, their honor gone,
      and order to be re-established out of chaos! His share of the universal
      ruin was a heart lacerated by the loss of Maurice and Henriette, the
      prospect of a happy future swept away in the furious storm! And still,
      beyond the flames of that furnace whose fiery glow had not subsided yet,
      Hope, the eternal, sat enthroned in the limpid serenity of the tranquil
      heavens. It was the certain assurance of the resurrection of perennial
      nature, of imperishable humanity; the harvest that is promised to him who
      sows and waits; the tree throwing out a new and vigorous shoot to replace
      the rotten limb that has been lopped away, which was blighting the young
      leaves with its vitiated sap.
    

      “Farewell!” Jean repeated with a sob.
    

      “Farewell!” murmured Henriette, her bowed face hidden in her hands.
    

      The neglected field was overgrown with brambles, the roof-tree of the
      ruined house lay on the ground; and Jean, bearing his heavy burden of
      affliction with humble resignation, went his way, his face set resolutely
      toward the future, toward the glorious and arduous task that lay before
      him and his countrymen, to create a new France.
    

      THE END.  
 



 
 
CONTENTS
  THE DOWNFALL 
 PART FIRST 
 I. 
 II. 
 III. 
 IV. 
 V. 
 VI. 
 VII. 
 VIII. 

 PART SECOND 
 I. 
 II. 
 III. 
 IV. 
 V. 
 VI. 
 VII. 
 VIII. 

 PART THIRD 
 I. 
 II. 
 III. 
 IV. 
 V. 
 VI. 
 VII. 
 VIII. 

 
  
 

  

  
    

      In the middle of the broad, fertile plain that stretches away in the
      direction of the Rhine, a mile and a quarter from Mulhausen, the camp was
      pitched. In the fitful light of the overcast August day, beneath the
      lowering sky that was filled with heavy drifting clouds, the long lines of
      squat white shelter-tents seemed to cower closer to the ground, and the
      muskets, stacked at regular intervals along the regimental fronts, made
      little spots of brightness, while over all the sentries with loaded pieces
      kept watch and ward, motionless as statues, straining their eyes to pierce
      the purplish mists that lay on the horizon and showed where the mighty
      river ran.
    

      It was about five o'clock when they had come in from Belfort; it was now
      eight, and the men had only just received their rations. There could be no
      distribution of wood, however, the wagons having gone astray, and it had
      therefore been impossible for them to make fires and warm their soup. They
      had consequently been obliged to content themselves as best they might,
      washing down their dry hard-tack with copious draughts of brandy, a
      proceeding that was not calculated greatly to help their tired legs after
      their long march. Near the canteen, however, behind the stacks of muskets,
      there were two soldiers pertinaciously endeavoring to elicit a blaze from
      a small pile of green wood, the trunks of some small trees that they had
      chopped down with their sword-bayonets, and that were obstinately
      determined not to burn. The cloud of thick, black smoke, rising slowly in
      the evening air, added to the general cheerlessness of the scene.
    

      There were but twelve thousand men there, all of the 7th corps that the
      general, Felix Douay, had with him at the time. The 1st division had been
      ordered to Froeschwiller the day before; the 3d was still at Lyons, and it
      had been decided to leave Belfort and hurry to the front with the 2d
      division, the reserve artillery, and an incomplete division of cavalry.
      Fires had been seen at Lorrach. The sous-prefet at Schelestadt had
      sent a telegram announcing that the Prussians were preparing to pass the
      Rhine at Markolsheim. The general did not like his unsupported position on
      the extreme right, where he was cut off from communication with the other
      corps, and his movement in the direction of the frontier had been
      accelerated by the intelligence he had received the day before of the
      disastrous surprise at Wissembourg. Even if he should not be called on to
      face the enemy on his own front, he felt that he was likely at any moment
      to be ordered to march to the relief of the 1st corps. There must be
      fighting going on, away down the river near Froeschwiller, on that dark
      and threatening Saturday, that ominous 6th of August; there was
      premonition of it in the sultry air, and the stray puffs of wind passed
      shudderingly over the camp as if fraught with tidings of impending evil.
      And for two days the division had believed that it was marching forth to
      battle; the men had expected to find the Prussians in their front, at the
      termination of their forced march from Belfort to Mulhausen.
    

      The day was drawing to an end, and from a remote corner of the camp the
      rattling drums and the shrill bugles sounded retreat, the sound dying away
      faintly in the distance on the still air of evening. Jean Macquart, who
      had been securing the tent and driving the pegs home, rose to his feet.
      When it began to be rumored that there was to be war he had left Rognes,
      the scene of the bloody drama in which he had lost his wife, Francoise and
      the acres that she brought him; he had re-enlisted at the age of
      thirty-nine, and been assigned to the 106th of the line, of which they
      were at that time filling up the cadres, with his old rank of
      corporal, and there were moments when he could not help wondering how it
      ever came about that he, who after Solferino had been so glad to quit the
      service and cease endangering his own and other people's lives, was again
      wearing the capote of the infantry man. But what is a man to do,
      when he has neither trade nor calling, neither wife, house, nor home, and
      his heart is heavy with mingled rage and sorrow? As well go and have a
      shot at the enemy, if they come where they are not wanted. And he
      remembered his old battle cry: Ah! bon sang! if he had no longer
      heart for honest toil, he would go and defend her, his country, the old
      land of France!
    

      When Jean was on his legs he cast a look about the camp, where the summons
      of the drums and bugles, taken up by one command after another, produced a
      momentary bustle, the conclusion of the business of the day. Some men were
      running to take their places in the ranks, while others, already half
      asleep, arose and stretched their stiff limbs with an air of exasperated
      weariness. He stood waiting patiently for roll-call, with that cheerful
      imperturbability and determination to make the best of everything that
      made him the good soldier that he was. His comrades were accustomed to say
      of him that if he had only had education he would have made his mark. He
      could just barely read and write, and his aspirations did not rise even so
      high as to a sergeantcy. Once a peasant, always a peasant.
    

      But he found something to interest him in the fire of green wood that was
      still smoldering and sending up dense volumes of smoke, and he stepped up
      to speak to the two men who were busying themselves over it, Loubet and
      Lapoulle, both members of his squad.
    

      “Quit that! You are stifling the whole camp.”
     

      Loubet, a lean, active fellow and something of a wag, replied:
    

      “It will burn, corporal; I assure you it will—why don't you blow,
      you!”
     

      And by way of encouragement he bestowed a kick on Lapoulle, a colossus of
      a man, who was on his knees puffing away with might and main, his cheeks
      distended till they were like wine-skins, his face red and swollen, and
      his eyes starting from their orbits and streaming with tears. Two other
      men of the squad, Chouteau and Pache, the former stretched at length upon
      his back like a man who appreciates the delight of idleness, and the
      latter engrossed in the occupation of putting a patch on his trousers,
      laughed long and loud at the ridiculous expression on the face of their
      comrade, the brutish Lapoulle.
    

      Jean did not interfere to check their merriment. Perhaps the time was at
      hand when they would not have much occasion for laughter, and he, with all
      his seriousness and his humdrum, literal way of taking things, did not
      consider that it was part of his duty to be melancholy, preferring rather
      to close his eyes or look the other way when his men were enjoying
      themselves. But his attention was attracted to a second group not far
      away, another soldier of his squad, Maurice Levasseur, who had been
      conversing earnestly for near an hour with a civilian, a red-haired
      gentleman who was apparently about thirty-six years old, with an
      intelligent, honest face, illuminated by a pair of big protruding blue
      eyes, evidently the eyes of a near-sighted man. They had been joined by an
      artilleryman, a quartermaster-sergeant from the reserves, a knowing,
      self-satisfied-looking person with brown mustache and imperial, and the
      three stood talking like old friends, unmindful of what was going on about
      them.
    

      In the kindness of his heart, in order to save them a reprimand, if not
      something worse, Jean stepped up to them and said:
    

      “You had better be going, sir. It is past retreat, and if the lieutenant
      should see you—” Maurice did not permit him to conclude his
      sentence:
    

      “Stay where you are, Weiss,” he said, and turning to the corporal, curtly
      added: “This gentleman is my brother-in-law. He has a pass from the
      colonel, who is acquainted with him.”
     

      What business had he to interfere with other people's affairs, that
      peasant whose hands were still reeking of the manure-heap? He was a
      lawyer, had been admitted to the bar the preceding autumn, had enlisted as
      a volunteer and been received into the 106th without the formality of
      passing through the recruiting station, thanks to the favor of the
      colonel; it was true that he had condescended to carry a musket, but from
      the very start he had been conscious of a feeling of aversion and
      rebellion toward that ignorant clown under whose command he was.
    

      “Very well,” Jean tranquilly replied; “don't blame me if your friend finds
      his way to the guardhouse.”
     

      Thereon he turned and went away, assured that Maurice had not been lying,
      for the colonel, M. de Vineuil, with his commanding, high-bred manner and
      thick white mustache bisecting his long yellow face, passed by just then
      and saluted Weiss and the soldier with a smile. The colonel pursued his
      way at a good round pace toward a farmhouse that was visible off to the
      right among the plum trees, a few hundred feet away, where the staff had
      taken up their quarters for the night. No one could say whether the
      general commanding the 7th corps was there or not; he was in deep
      affliction on account of the death of his brother, slain in the action at
      Wissembourg. The brigadier, however, Bourgain-Desfeuilles, in whose
      command the 106th was, was certain to be there, brawling as loud as ever,
      and trundling his fat body about on his short, pudgy legs, with his red
      nose and rubicund face, vouchers for the good dinners he had eaten, and
      not likely ever to become top-heavy by reason of excessive weight in his
      upper story. There was a stir and movement about the farmhouse that seemed
      to be momentarily increasing; couriers and orderlies were arriving and
      departing every minute; they were awaiting there, with feverish anxiety of
      impatience, the belated dispatches which should advise them of the result
      of the battle that everyone, all that long August day, had felt to be
      imminent. Where had it been fought? what had been the issue? As night
      closed in and darkness shrouded the scene, a foreboding sense of calamity
      seemed to settle down upon the orchard, upon the scattered stacks of grain
      about the stables, and spread, and envelop them in waves of inky
      blackness. It was said, also, that a Prussian spy had been caught roaming
      about the camp, and that he had been taken to the house to be examined by
      the general. Perhaps Colonel de Vineuil had received a telegram of some
      kind, that he was in such great haste.
    

      Meantime Maurice had resumed his conversation with his brother-in-law
      Weiss and his cousin Honore Fouchard, the quartermaster-sergeant. Retreat,
      commencing in the remote distance, then gradually swelling in volume as it
      drew near with its blare and rattle, reached them, passed them, and died
      away in the solemn stillness of the twilight; they seemed to be quite
      unconscious of it. The young man was grandson to a hero of the Grand Army,
      and had first seen the light at Chene-Populeux, where his father, not
      caring to tread the path of glory, had held an ill-paid position as
      collector of taxes. His mother, a peasant, had died in giving him birth,
      him and his twin sister Henriette, who at an early age had become a second
      mother to him, and that he was now what he was, a private in the ranks,
      was owing entirely to his own imprudence, the headlong dissipation of a
      weak and enthusiastic nature, his money squandered and his substance
      wasted on women, cards, the thousand follies of the all-devouring
      minotaur, Paris, when he had concluded his law studies there and his
      relatives had impoverished themselves to make a gentleman of him. His
      conduct had brought his father to the grave; his sister, when he had
      stripped her of her little all, had been so fortunate as to find a husband
      in that excellent young fellow Weiss, who had long held the position of
      accountant in the great sugar refinery at Chene-Populeux, and was now
      foreman for M. Delaherche, one of the chief cloth manufacturers of Sedan.
      And Maurice, always cheered and encouraged when he saw a prospect of
      amendment in himself, and equally disheartened when his good resolves
      failed him and he relapsed, generous and enthusiastic but without
      steadiness of purpose, a weathercock that shifted with every varying
      breath of impulse, now believed that experience had done its work and
      taught him the error of his ways. He was a small, light-complexioned man,
      with a high, well-developed forehead, small nose, and retreating chin, and
      a pair of attractive gray eyes in a face that indicated intelligence;
      there were times when his mind seemed to lack balance.
    

      Weiss, on the eve of the commencement of hostilities, had found that there
      were family matters that made it necessary for him to visit Mulhausen, and
      had made a hurried trip to that city. That he had been able to employ the
      good offices of Colonel de Vineuil to afford him an opportunity of shaking
      hands with his brother-in-law was owing to the circumstance that that
      officer was own uncle to young Mme. Delaherche, a pretty young widow whom
      the cloth manufacturer had married the year previous, and whom Maurice and
      Henriette, thanks to their being neighbors, had known as a girl. In
      addition to the colonel, moreover, Maurice had discovered that the captain
      of his company, Beaudoin, was an acquaintance of Gilberte, Delaherche's
      young wife; report even had it that she and the captain had been on terms
      of intimacy in the days when she was Mme. Maginot, living at Meziere, wife
      of M. Maginot, the timber inspector.
    

      “Give Henriette a good kiss for me, Weiss,” said the young man, who loved
      his sister passionately. “Tell her that she shall have no reason to
      complain of me, that I wish her to be proud of her brother.”
     

      Tears rose to his eyes at the remembrance of his misdeeds. The
      brother-in-law, who was also deeply affected, ended the painful scene by
      turning to Honore Fouchard, the artilleryman.
    

      “The first time I am anywhere in the neighborhood,” he said, “I will run
      up to Remilly and tell Uncle Fouchard that I saw you and that you are
      well.”
     

      Uncle Fouchard, a peasant, who owned a bit of land and plied the trade of
      itinerant butcher, serving his customers from a cart, was a brother of
      Henriette's and Maurice's mother. He lived at Remilly, in a house perched
      upon a high hill, about four miles from Sedan.
    

      “Good!” Honore calmly answered; “the father don't worry his head a great
      deal on my account, but go there all the same if you feel inclined.”
     

      At that moment there was a movement over in the direction of the
      farmhouse, and they beheld the straggler, the man who had been arrested as
      a spy, come forth, free, accompanied only by a single officer. He had
      likely had papers to show, or had trumped up a story of some kind, for
      they were simply expelling him from the camp. In the darkening twilight,
      and at the distance they were, they could not make him out distinctly,
      only a big, square-shouldered fellow with a rough shock of reddish hair.
      And yet Maurice gave vent to an exclamation of surprise.
    

      “Honore! look there. If one wouldn't swear he was the Prussian—you
      know, Goliah!”
     

      The name made the artilleryman start as if he had been shot; he strained
      his blazing eyes to follow the receding shape. Goliah Steinberg, the
      journeyman butcher, the man who had set him and his father by the ears,
      who had stolen from him his Silvine; the whole base, dirty, miserable
      story, from which he had not yet ceased to suffer! He would have run
      after, would have caught him by the throat and strangled him, but the man
      had already crossed the line of stacked muskets, was moving off and
      vanishing in the darkness.
    

      “Oh!” he murmured, “Goliah! no, it can't be he. He is down yonder,
      fighting on the other side. If I ever come across him—”
     

      He shook his fist with an air of menace at the dusky horizon, at the wide
      empurpled stretch of eastern sky that stood for Prussia in his eyes. No
      one spoke; they heard the strains of retreat again, but very distant now,
      away at the extreme end of the camp, blended and lost among the hum of
      other indistinguishable sounds.
    

      “Fichtre!” exclaimed Honore, “I shall have the pleasure of sleeping
      on the soft side of a plank in the guard-house unless I make haste back to
      roll-call. Good-night—adieu, everybody!”
     

      And grasping Weiss by both his hands and giving them a hearty squeeze, he
      strode swiftly away toward the slight elevation where the guns of the
      reserves were parked, without again mentioning his father's name or
      sending any word to Silvine, whose name lay at the end of his tongue.
    

      The minutes slipped away, and over toward the left, where the 2d brigade
      lay, a bugle sounded. Another, near at hand, replied, and then a third, in
      the remote distance, took up the strain. Presently there was a universal
      blaring, far and near, throughout the camp, whereon Gaude, the bugler of
      the company, took up his instrument. He was a tall, lank, beardless,
      melancholy youth, chary of his words, saving his breath for his calls,
      which he gave conscientiously, with the vigor of a young hurricane.
    

      Forthwith Sergeant Sapin, a ceremonious little man with large vague eyes,
      stepped forward and began to call the roll. He rattled off the names in a
      thin, piping voice, while the men, who had come up and ranged themselves
      in front of him, responded in accents of varying pitch, from the deep
      rumble of the violoncello to the shrill note of the piccolo. But there
      came a hitch in the proceedings.
    

      “Lapoulle!” shouted the sergeant, calling the name a second time with
      increased emphasis.
    

      There was no response, and Jean rushed off to the place where Private
      Lapoulle, egged on by his comrades, was industriously trying to fan the
      refractory fuel into a blaze; flat on his stomach before the pile of
      blackening, spluttering wood, his face resembling an underdone beefsteak,
      the warrior was now propelling dense clouds of smoke horizontally along
      the surface of the plain.
    

      “Thunder and ouns! Quit that, will you!” yelled Jean, “and come and answer
      to your name.”
     

      Lapoulle rose to his feet with a dazed look on his face, then appeared to
      grasp the situation and yelled: “Present!” in such stentorian tones that
      Loubet, pretending to be upset by the concussion, sank to the ground in a
      sitting posture. Pache had finished mending his trousers and answered in a
      voice that was barely audible, that sounded more like the mumbling of a
      prayer. Chouteau, not even troubling himself to rise, grunted his answer
      unconcernedly and turned over on his side.
    

      Lieutenant Rochas, the officer of the guard, was meantime standing a few
      steps away, motionlessly awaiting the conclusion of the ceremony. When
      Sergeant Sapin had finished calling the roll and came up to report that
      all were present, the officer, with a glance at Weiss, who was still
      conversing with Maurice, growled from under his mustache:
    

      “Yes, and one over. What is that civilian doing here?”
     

      “He has the colonel's pass, Lieutenant,” explained Jean, who had heard the
      question.
    

      Rochas made no reply; he shrugged his shoulders disapprovingly and resumed
      his round among the company streets while waiting for taps to sound. Jean,
      stiff and sore after his day's march, went and sat down a little way from
      Maurice, whose murmured words fell indistinctly upon his unlistening ear,
      for he, too, had vague, half formed reflections of his own that were
      stirring sluggishly in the recesses of his muddy, torpid mind.
    

      Maurice was a believer in war in the abstract; he considered it one of the
      necessary evils, essential to the very existence of nations. This was
      nothing more than the logical sequence of his course in embracing those
      theories of evolution which in those days exercised such a potent
      influence on our young men of intelligence and education. Is not life
      itself an unending battle? Does not all nature owe its being to a series
      of relentless conflicts, the survival of the fittest, the maintenance and
      renewal of force by unceasing activity; is not death a necessary condition
      to young and vigorous life? And he remembered the sensation of gladness
      that had filled his heart when first the thought occurred to him that he
      might expiate his errors by enlisting and defending his country on the
      frontier. It might be that France of the plebiscite, while giving itself
      over to the Emperor, had not desired war; he himself, only a week
      previously, had declared it to be a culpable and idiotic measure. There
      were long discussions concerning the right of a German prince to occupy
      the throne of Spain; as the question gradually became more and more
      intricate and muddled it seemed as if everyone must be wrong, no one
      right; so that it was impossible to tell from which side the provocation
      came, and the only part of the entire business that was clear to the eyes
      of all was the inevitable, the fatal law which at a given moment hurls
      nation against nation. Then Paris was convulsed from center to
      circumference; he remembered that burning summer's night, the tossing,
      struggling human tide that filled the boulevards, the bands of men
      brandishing torches before the Hotel de Ville, and yelling: “On to Berlin!
      on to Berlin!” and he seemed to hear the strains of the Marseillaise, sung
      by a beautiful, stately woman with the face of a queen, wrapped in the
      folds of a flag, from her elevation on the box of a coach. Was it all a
      lie, was it true that the heart of Paris had not beaten then? And then, as
      was always the case with him, that condition of nervous excitation had
      been succeeded by long hours of doubt and disgust; there were all the
      small annoyances of the soldier's life; his arrival at the barracks, his
      examination by the adjutant, the fitting of his uniform by the gruff
      sergeant, the malodorous bedroom with its fetid air and filthy floor, the
      horseplay and coarse language of his new comrades, the merciless drill
      that stiffened his limbs and benumbed his brain. In a week's time,
      however, he had conquered his first squeamishness, and from that time
      forth was comparatively contented with his lot; and when the regiment was
      at last ordered forward to Belfort the fever of enthusiasm had again taken
      possession of him.
    

      For the first few days after they took the field Maurice was convinced
      that their success was absolutely certain. The Emperor's plan appeared to
      him perfectly clear: he would advance four hundred thousand men to the
      left bank of the Rhine, pass the river before the Prussians had completed
      their preparations, separate northern and southern Germany by a vigorous
      inroad, and by means of a brilliant victory or two compel Austria and
      Italy to join hands immediately with France. Had there not been a
      short-lived rumor that that 7th corps of which his regiment formed a part
      was to be embarked at Brest and landed in Denmark, where it would create a
      diversion that would serve to neutralize one of the Prussian armies? They
      would be taken by surprise; the arrogant nation would be overrun in every
      direction and crushed utterly within a few brief weeks. It would be a
      military picnic, a holiday excursion from Strasbourg to Berlin. While they
      were lying inactive at Belfort, however, his former doubts and fears
      returned to him. To the 7th corps had been assigned the duty of guarding
      the entrance to the Black Forest; it had reached its position in a state
      of confusion that exceeded imagination, deficient in men, material,
      everything. The 3d division was in Italy; the 2d cavalry brigade had been
      halted at Lyons to check a threatened rising among the people there, and
      three batteries had straggled off in some direction—where, no one
      could say. Then their destitution in the way of stores and supplies was
      something wonderful; the depots at Belfort, which were to have furnished
      everything, were empty; not a sign of a tent, no mess-kettles, no flannel
      belts, no hospital supplies, no farriers' forges, not even a
      horse-shackle. The quartermaster's and medical departments were without
      trained assistants. At the very last moment it was discovered that thirty
      thousand rifles were practically useless owing to the absence of some
      small pin or other interchangeable mechanism about the breech-blocks, and
      the officer who posted off in hot haste to Paris succeeded with the
      greatest difficulty in securing five thousand of the missing implements.
      Their inactivity, again, was another matter that kept him on pins and
      needles; why did they idle away their time for two weeks? why did they not
      advance? He saw clearly that each day of delay was a mistake that could
      never be repaired, a chance of victory gone. And if the plan of campaign
      that he had dreamed of was clear and precise, its manner of execution was
      most lame and impotent, a fact of which he was to learn a great deal more
      later on and of which he had then only a faint and glimmering perception:
      the seven army corps dispersed along the extended frontier line en
      echelon, from Metz to Bitche and from Bitche to Belfort; the many
      regiments and squadrons that had been recruited up to only half-strength
      or less, so that the four hundred and thirty thousand men on paper melted
      away to two hundred and thirty thousand at the outside; the jealousies
      among the generals, each of whom thought only of securing for himself a
      marshal's baton, and gave no care to supporting his neighbor; the
      frightful lack of foresight, mobilization and concentration being carried
      on simultaneously in order to gain time, a process that resulted in
      confusion worse confounded; a system, in a word, of dry rot and slow
      paralysis, which, commencing with the head, with the Emperor himself,
      shattered in health and lacking in promptness of decision, could not fail
      ultimately to communicate itself to the whole army, disorganizing it and
      annihilating its efficiency, leading it into disaster from which it had
      not the means of extricating itself. And yet, over and above the dull
      misery of that period of waiting, in the intuitive, shuddering perception
      of what must infallibly happen, his certainty that they must be victors in
      the end remained unimpaired.
    

      On the 3d of August the cheerful news had been given to the public of the
      victory of Sarrebruck, fought and won the day before. It could scarcely be
      called a great victory, but the columns of the newspapers teemed with
      enthusiastic gush; the invasion of Germany was begun, it was the first
      step in their glorious march to triumph, and the little Prince Imperial,
      who had coolly stooped and picked up a bullet from the battlefield, then
      commenced to be celebrated in legend. Two days later, however, when
      intelligence came of the surprise and defeat at Wissembourg, every mouth
      was opened to emit a cry of rage and distress. That five thousand men,
      caught in a trap, had faced thirty-five thousand Prussians all one long
      summer day, that was not a circumstance to daunt the courage of anyone; it
      simply called for vengeance. Yes, the leaders had doubtless been culpably
      lacking in vigilance and were to be censured for their want of foresight,
      but that would soon be mended; MacMahon had sent for the 1st division of
      the 7th corps, the 1st corps would be supported by the 5th, and the
      Prussians must be across the Rhine again by that time, with the bayonets
      of our infantry at their backs to accelerate their movement. And so,
      beneath the deep, dim vault of heaven, the thought of the battle that must
      have raged that day, the feverish impatience with which the tidings were
      awaited, the horrible feeling of suspense that pervaded the air about
      them, spread from man to man and became each minute more tense and
      unendurable.
    

      Maurice was just then saying to Weiss:
    

      “Ah! we have certainly given them a righteous good drubbing to-day.”
     

      Weiss made no reply save to nod his head with an air of anxiety. His gaze
      was directed toward the Rhine, on that Orient region where now the night
      had settled down in earnest, like a wall of blackness, concealing strange
      forms and shapes of mystery. The concluding strains of the bugles for
      roll-call had been succeeded by a deep silence, which had descended upon
      the drowsy camp and was only broken now and then by the steps and voices
      of some wakeful soldiers. A light had been lit—it looked like a
      twinkling star—in the main room of the farmhouse where the staff,
      which is supposed never to sleep, was awaiting the telegrams that came in
      occasionally, though as yet they were undecided. And the green wood fire,
      now finally left to itself, was still emitting its funereal wreaths of
      dense black smoke, which drifted in the gentle breeze over the unsleeping
      farmhouse, obscuring the early stars in the heavens above.
    

      “A drubbing!” Weiss at last replied, “God grant it may be so!”
     

      Jean, still seated a few steps away, pricked up his ears, while Lieutenant
      Rochas, noticing that the wish was attended by a doubt, stopped to listen.
    

      “What!” Maurice rejoined, “have you not confidence? can you believe that
      defeat is possible?”
     

      His brother-in-law silenced him with a gesture; his hands were trembling
      with agitation, his kindly pleasant face was pale and bore an expression
      of deep distress.
    

      “Defeat, ah! Heaven preserve us from that! You know that I was born in
      this country; my grandfather and grandmother were murdered by the Cossacks
      in 1814, and whenever I think of invasion it makes me clench my fist and
      grit my teeth; I could go through fire and flood, like a trooper, in my
      shirt sleeves! Defeat—no, no! I cannot, I will not believe it
      possible.”
     

      He became calmer, allowing his arms to fall by his side in discouragement.
    

      “But my mind is not easy, do you see. I know Alsace; I was born there; I
      am just off a business trip through the country, and we civilians have
      opportunities of seeing many things that the generals persist in ignoring,