# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2018
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Émile Zola, The Conquest of Plassans
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/56860/56860-h/56860-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Abbé Faujas apologised. He spoke in a deep voice which
fell very softly at the end of each sentence. He was extremely
distressed, said he, to have arrived at such a moment.
And when he had expressed his regret in a very few
well-chosen words, he turned round to pay the porter who
had brought his trunk. His large well-shaped hands drew
from the folds of his cassock a purse of which only the steel
rings could be seen. Keeping his head bent, he cautiously
fumbled in it for a moment. Then, without anyone having[Pg 9]
seen the piece of money which he had received, the porter
went away, and the priest resumed in his refined way:
'I beg you, sir, sit down again. Your servant will show us
the rooms, and will help me to carry this.'
As he spoke, he stooped to grasp one of the handles of his
trunk. It was a small wooden trunk, bound at the edges with
iron bands, and one of its sides seemed to have been repaired
with a cross-piece of deal. Mouret looked surprised, and his
eyes wandered off in search of other luggage, but he could
see nothing excepting a big basket, which the elderly lady
carried with both hands, holding it in front of her, and
despite her fatigue obstinately determined not to put it down.
From underneath the lid, which was a little raised, there
peeped, amongst some bundles of linen, the end of a comb
wrapped in paper and the neck of a clumsily corked bottle.
'Oh! don't trouble yourself with that,' said Mouret, just
touching the trunk with his foot; 'it can't be very heavy, and
Rose will be able to carry it up by herself.'
He was quite unconscious of the secret contempt which
oozed out from his words. The elderly lady gave him a
keen glance with her black eyes, and then let her gaze
again fall upon the dining-room and the table, which she had
been examining ever since her arrival. She kept her lips
tightly compressed, while her eyes strayed from one object to
another. She had not uttered a single word. Abbé Faujas
consented to leave his trunk where it was. In the yellow rays
of the sunlight which streamed in from the garden, his
threadbare cassock looked quite ruddy; it was darned at the
edges; and, though it was scrupulously clean, it seemed so
sadly thin and wretched that Marthe, who had hitherto
remained seated with a sort of uneasy reserve, now in her turn
rose from her seat. The Abbé, who had merely cast a rapid
glance at her, and had then quickly turned his eyes elsewhere,
saw her leave her chair, although he did not appear to
be watching her.
'I beg you,' he repeated, 'do not disturb yourselves. We
should be extremely distressed to interfere with your dinner.'
'Very well,' said Mouret, who was hungry, 'Rose shall
show you up. Tell her to get you anything you want, and
make yourselves at home.'
Abbé Faujas bowed and was making his way to the
staircase, when Marthe stepped up to her husband and
whispered:
[Pg 10]
'But, my dear, you have forgotten——'
'What? what?' he asked, seeing her hesitate.
'There is the fruit, you know.'
'Oh! bother it all, so there is!' he exclaimed with an
expression of annoyance.
And as Abbé Faujas stepped back and glanced at him
questioningly, he added:
'I am extremely vexed, sir. Father Bourrette is a very
worthy man, but it is a little unfortunate that you commissioned
him to attend to your business. He hasn't got the
least bit of a head. If we had only known of your coming,
we should have had everything ready; but, as it is, we shall
have to clear the whole place out for you. We have been
using the rooms, you see; we have stowed all our crop of
fruit, figs, apples and raisins, away on the floors upstairs.'
The priest listened with a surprise which all his politeness
did not enable him to hide.
'But it won't take us long,' Mouret continued. 'If you
don't mind waiting for ten minutes, Rose will get the rooms
cleared for you.'
An anxious expression appeared on the priest's cadaverous
face.
'The rooms are furnished, are they not?' he asked.
'Not at all; there isn't a bit of furniture in them. We
have never occupied them.'
Thereupon the Abbé lost his self-control, and his grey
eyes flashed as he exclaimed with suppressed indignation:
'But I gave distinct instructions in my letter that furnished
rooms were to be taken. I could scarcely bring my
furniture along with me in my trunk.'
'Well, that just fits in with what I have been saying!'
cried Mouret, in a louder voice. 'The way that Bourrette
goes on is quite incredible. He certainly saw the apples when
he came to look at the rooms, sir, for he took up one of them
and remarked that he had rarely seen such fine fruit. He said
that everything seemed quite suitable, that the rooms were
all that was necessary, and he took them.'
Abbé Faujas was no longer listening to Mouret; his
cheeks were flushed with anger. He turned round and stammered
in a broken voice:
'Do you hear, mother? There is no furniture.'
The old lady, with her thin black shawl drawn tightly
round her, had just been inspecting the ground-floor, stepping[Pg 11]
furtively hither and thither, but without once putting down
her basket. She had gone to the door of the kitchen and
had scrutinised the four walls there, and then, standing on
the steps that overlooked the terrace, she had taken in all the
garden at one long, searching glance. But it was the dining-room
that seemed more especially to interest her, and she was
now again standing in front of the table laid for dinner,
watching the steam of the soup rise, when her son repeated:
'Do you hear, mother? We shall have to go to the hotel.'
She raised her head without making any reply; but the
expression of her whole face seemed to indicate a settled
determination to remain in that house, with whose every
corner she had already made herself acquainted. She
shrugged her shoulders almost imperceptibly, and again her
wandering eyes strayed from the kitchen to the garden and
then from the garden to the dining-room.
Mouret, however, was growing impatient. As he saw that
neither the mother nor her son seemed to make up their minds
to leave the place, he said:
'We have no beds, unfortunately. True, there is, in the
loft, a folding-bedstead, which perhaps, at a pinch, madame
might make do until to-morrow. But I really don't know
how Monsieur l'Abbé is to manage to sleep.'
Then at last Madame Faujas opened her lips. She spoke
in a curt and somewhat hoarse voice:
'My son will take the folding-bedstead. A mattress on
the floor, in a corner, will be quite sufficient for me.'
The Abbé signified his approval of this arrangement by a
nod. Mouret was going to protest and try to think of some
other plan, but, seeing the satisfied appearance of his new
tenants, he kept silence and merely exchanged a glance of
astonishment with his wife.
'To-morrow it will be light,' he said, with his touch of
bourgeois banter, 'and you will be able to furnish as you like.
Rose will go up and clear away the fruit and make the beds.
Will you wait for a few minutes on the terrace? Come,
children, take a couple of chairs out.'
Since the arrival of the priest and his mother, the young
people had remained quietly seated at the table, curiously
scrutinising the new-comers. The Abbé had not appeared to
notice them, but Madame Faujas had stopped for a moment
before each of them and stared them keenly in the face as
though she were trying to pry into their young heads. As they[Pg 12]
heard their father, they all three hastily rose and took some
chairs out.
The old lady did not sit down; and when Mouret, losing
sight of her, turned round to find out what had become of
her, he saw her standing before a window of the drawing-room
which was ajar. She craned out her neck and completed
her inspection with all the calm deliberation of a
person who is examining some property for sale. Just as
Rose took up the little trunk, however, she went back into the
passage, and said quietly:
'I will go up and help you.'
Then she went upstairs after the servant. The priest did
not even turn his head; he was smiling at the three young
people who still stood in front of him. In spite of the hardness
of his brow and the stern lines about his mouth, his
face was capable of expressing great gentleness, when such
was his desire.
'Is this the whole of your family, madame?' he asked
Marthe, who had just come up to him.
'Yes, sir,' she replied, feeling a little confused beneath
the clear gaze which he turned upon her.
Looking again at her children, he continued:
'You've got two big lads there, who will soon be men—Have
you finished your studies yet, my boy?'
It was to Serge that he addressed this question. Mouret
interrupted the lad as he was going to reply.
'Yes, he has finished,' said the father; 'though he is the
younger of the two. When I say that he has finished, I
mean that he has taken his bachelor's degree, for he is staying
on at college for another year to go through a course of
philosophy. He is the clever one of the family. His
brother, the elder, that great booby there, isn't up to much.
He has been plucked twice already, but he still goes on idling
his time away and larking about.'
Octave listened to his father's reproaches with a smile,
while Serge bent his head beneath his praises. Faujas
seemed to be studying them for a moment in silence, and
then, going up to Désirée and putting on an expression of
gentle tenderness, he said to her:
'Will you allow me, mademoiselle, to be your friend?'
She made no reply but, half afraid, hastened to hide her
face against her mother's shoulder. The latter, instead of
making her turn round again, pressed her more closely to
her, clasping an arm around her waist.
[Pg 13]
'Excuse her,' she said with a touch of sadness, 'she hasn't
a strong head, she has remained quite childish. She is an
"innocent," we do not trouble her by attempting to teach her.
She is fourteen years old now, and as yet she has only learned
to love animals.'
Désirée's confidence returned to her with her mother's
caresses, and she lifted up her head and smiled. Then she
boldly said to the priest:
'I should like you very much to be my friend; but you
must promise me that you will never hurt the flies. Will
you?'
And then, as every one about her began to smile, she
added gravely:
'Octave crushes them, the poor flies! It is very wicked
of him.'
Abbé Faujas sat down. He seemed very much tired. He
yielded for a moment or two to the cool quietness of the
terrace, glancing slowly over the garden and the neighbouring
trees. The perfect calmness and solitude of this quiet corner
of the little town seemed somewhat to surprise him.
'It is very pleasant here,' he murmured.
Then he relapsed into silence, and seemed lost in reverie.
He started slightly as Mouret said to him with a laugh:
'If you will allow us, sir, we will now go back to our
dinner.'
And then, catching a glance from his wife, Mouret added:
'You must sit down with us and have a plate of soup.
It will save you the trouble of having to go to the hotel to
dine. Don't make any difficulty, I beg.'
'I am extremely obliged to you, but we really don't require
anything,' the Abbé replied in tones of extreme politeness,
which allowed of no repetition of the invitation.
The Mourets then returned to the dining-room and seated
themselves round the table. Marthe served the soup and
there was soon a cheerful clatter of spoons. The young
people chattered merrily, and Désirée broke into a peal of
ringing laughter as she listened to a story which her father,
who was now in high glee at having at last got to his dinner,
was telling. In the meantime, Abbé Faujas, whom they had
quite forgotten, remained motionless upon the terrace, facing
the setting sun. He did not even turn his head, he seemed
to hear nothing of what was going on behind him. Just as
the sun was disappearing he took off his hat as if overcome[Pg 14]
by the heat. Marthe, who was sitting with her face to the
window, could see his big bare head with its short hair that
was already silvering about the temples. A last red ray lighting
up that stern soldier-like head, on which the tonsure lay
like a cicatrised wound from the blow of a club; then the
ray faded away and the priest, now wrapped in shadow,
seemed nothing more than a black silhouette against the
ashy grey of the gloaming.
Not wishing to summon Rose, Marthe herself went to get
a lamp and brought in the first dish. As she was returning
from the kitchen, she met, at the foot of the staircase, a
woman whom she did not at first recognise. It was Madame
Faujas. She had put on a cotton cap and looked like a servant
in her common print gown, with a yellow kerchief
crossed over her breast and knotted behind her waist. Her
wrists were bare, she was quite out of breath with the work
she had been doing, and her heavy laced boots clattered on
the flooring of the passage.
'Ah! you've got all put right now, have you, madame?'
Marthe asked with a smile.
'Oh, yes! it was a mere trifle and was done directly,'
Madame Faujas replied.
She went down the steps that led to the terrace, and
called in a gentler tone:
'Ovide, my child, will you come upstairs now? Everything
is quite ready.'
She was obliged to go and lay her hand upon her son's
shoulder to awaken him from his reverie. The air was
growing cool, and the Abbé shivered as he got up and
followed his mother in silence. As he passed before the
door of the dining-room which was all bright with the cheerful
glow of the lamp and merry with the chatter of the young
folks, he peeped in and said in his flexible voice:
'Let me thank you again, and beg you to excuse us for
having so disturbed you. We are very sorry——'
'No! no!' cried Mouret, 'it is we who are sorry and
distressed at not being able to offer you better accommodation
for the night.'
The priest bowed, and Marthe again met that clear gaze
of his, that eagle glance which had affected her before. In
the depths of his eyes, which were generally of a melancholy
grey, flames seemed to gleam at times like lamps carried
behind the windows of slumbering houses.
[Pg 15]
'The priest's not at all shamefaced,' Mouret remarked
jestingly, when the mother and son had retired.
'I don't think they are very well off,' Marthe replied.
'Well, at any rate, he isn't carrying Peru about with him
in that box of his,' Mouret exclaimed. 'And it's light
enough! Why, I could have raised it with the tip of my
little finger!'
But he was interrupted in his flow of chatter by Rose, who
had just come running down the stairs to relate the extraordinary
things she had witnessed.
'Well, she is a wonderful creature, indeed!' she cried,
posting herself in front of the table at which the family were
eating. 'She's sixty-five at least, but she doesn't show it at
all, and she bustles about, and works like a horse!'
'Did she help you to remove the fruit?' Mouret asked,
with some curiosity.
'Yes, indeed, she did, sir! She carried it away in her
apron, in loads heavy enough to burst it. I kept saying to
myself, "The apron will certainly go this time," but it didn't.
It is made of good strong material, the same kind of material
as I wear myself. We made at least ten journeys backwards
and forwards, and I felt as though my arms would fall off,
but she only grumbled, and complained that we were getting
on very slowly. I really believe, begging your pardon for
mentioning it, that I heard her swear.'
Mouret appeared to be greatly amused.
'And the beds?' he asked.
'The beds, she made them too. It was quite a sight to
see her turn the mattress over. It seemed to weigh nothing,
I can tell you; she just took hold of it at one end and tossed
it into the air as though it had been a feather. And yet she
was very careful and particular with it all. She tucked in
the folding-bed as carefully as though she were preparing a
baby's cradle. She couldn't have laid the sheets with greater
devotion if the Infant Jesus Himself had been going to sleep
there. She put three out of the four blankets upon the
folding-bed. And it was just the same with the pillows; she
kept none for herself, but gave both to her son.'
'She is going to sleep on the floor, then?'
'In a corner, just like a dog! She threw a mattress on
the floor of the other room and said that she'd sleep there
more soundly than if she were in paradise. I couldn't persuade
her to do anything to make herself more comfortable.[Pg 16]
She says that she is never cold, and that her head is much too
hard to make her at all afraid of lying on the floor. I have
taken them some sugar and some water, as madame told me.
Oh! they really are the strangest people!'
Then Rose brought in the remainder of the dinner. That
evening the Mourets lingered over their meal. They discussed
the new tenants at great length. In their life, which went on
with all the even regularity of clock-work, the arrival of these
two strangers was a very exciting event. They talked about
it as they would have done of some catastrophe in the neighbourhood,
going into all that minuteness of detail which helps
one to while away long nights in the country. Mouret was
especially fond of the chattering gossip of a little provincial
town. During dessert, as he rested his elbows on the table
in the cool dining-room, he repeated for the tenth time with
the self-satisfied air of a happy man:
'It certainly isn't a very handsome present that Besançon
has made to Plassans! Did you notice the back of his cassock
when he turned round? I shall be very much surprised if he
is much run after by the pious folks here. He is too seedy
and threadbare; and the pious folks like nice-looking
priests.'
'He has a very gentle voice,' said Marthe, indulgently.
'Not when he is angry, at any rate,' Mouret replied.
'Didn't you hear him when he burst out on finding that the
rooms were not furnished? He's a stern man, I'll be bound;
not one of the sort, I should think, to go lounging in confessional-boxes.
I shall be very curious to see how he sets
about his furnishing to-morrow. But as long as he pays me,
I don't much mind anything else. If he doesn't, I shall
apply to Abbé Bourrette. It was with him that I made the
bargain.'
The Mourets were not a devout family. The children
themselves made fun of the Abbé and his mother. Octave
burlesqued the old lady's way of craning out her neck to see
to the end of the rooms, a performance which made Désirée
laugh. After a time, however, Serge, who was of a more
serious turn of mind, stood up for 'those poor people.'
As a rule, precisely at ten o'clock, if he was not playing at
piquet, Mouret took up his candlestick and went off to bed,
but that evening, when eleven o'clock struck, he was not yet
feeling drowsy. Désirée had fallen asleep, with her head
lying on Marthe's knees. The two lads had gone up to their[Pg 17]
room; and Mouret, left alone with his wife, still went on
chattering.
'How old do you suppose he is?' he suddenly asked.
'Who?' replied Marthe, who was now beginning to feel
very sleepy.
'Who? Why, the Abbé, of course! Between forty and
forty-five, eh? He's a fine strapping fellow. It's a pity for
him to wear a cassock! He would have made a splendid
carbineer.'
Then, after an interval of silence, he vented aloud the
reflections which were exercising his mind:
'They arrived by the quarter to seven train. They can
only have just had time to call on Abbé Bourrette before
coming here. I'll wager that they haven't dined! That is
quite clear. We should certainly have seen them if they had
gone out to the hotel. Ah, now! I should very much like
to know where they can have had anything to eat.'
Rose had been lingering about the dining-room for the
last few moments, waiting for her master and mistress to go
to bed in order that she might be at liberty to fasten the
doors and windows.
'I know where they had something to eat,' she said. And
as Mouret turned briskly towards her, she added: 'Yes, I had
gone upstairs again to see if there was anything they wanted.
As I heard no sound, I didn't venture to knock at the door,
but I looked through the key-hole.'
'Why, that was very improper of you, very improper,'
Marthe interrupted, severely. 'You know very well, Rose,
that I don't approve of anything of that kind.'
'Leave her alone and let her go on!' cried Mouret, who,
under other circumstances, would have been very angry with
the inquisitive woman. 'You peeped through the key-hole,
did you?'
'Yes, sir; I thought it was the best plan.'
'Clearly so. What were they doing?'
'Well, sir, they were eating. I saw them sitting on one
corner of the folding-bedstead and eating. The old lady had
spread out a napkin. Every time that they helped themselves
to some wine, they corked the bottle again and laid it
down against the pillow.'
'But what were they eating?'
'I couldn't quite tell, sir. It seemed to me like the
remains of some pastry wrapped up in a newspaper. They[Pg 18]
had some apples as well—little apples that looked good for
nothing.'
'They were talking, I suppose? Did you hear what they
said?'
'No, sir, they were not talking. I stayed for a good
quarter of an hour watching them, but they never said anything.
They were much too busy eating!'
Marthe now rose, woke Désirée, and made as though she
were going off to bed. Her husband's curiosity vexed her.
He, too, at last made up his mind to go off upstairs, while old
Rose, who was a pious creature, went on in a lower tone:
'The poor, dear man must have been frightfully hungry.
His mother handed him the biggest pieces and watched him
swallow them with delight. And now he'll sleep in some
nice white sheets; unless, indeed, the smell of the fruit keeps
him awake. It isn't a pleasant smell to have in one's bedroom,
that sour odour of apples and pears. And there isn't a bit of
furniture in the whole room, nothing but the bed in the
corner! If I were he, I should feel quite frightened, and I
should keep the light burning all night.'
Mouret had taken up his candlestick. He stood for a
moment in front of Rose, and summed up the events of the
evening like a genuine bourgeois who has met with something
unusual: 'It is extraordinary!'
Then he joined his wife at the foot of the staircase. She
got into bed and fell asleep, while he still continued listening
to the slightest sounds that proceeded from the upper floor.
The Abbé's room was immediately over his own. He heard
the window of it being gently opened, and this greatly excited
his curiosity. He raised his head from his pillow, and
strenuously struggled against his increasing drowsiness in his
anxiety to find out how long the Abbé would remain at the
window. But sleep was too strong for him, and he was
snoring noisily before he had been able to detect the grating
sound which the window-fastening made when it was closed.
Up above, Abbé Faujas was gazing, bare-headed, out of
his window into the black night. He lingered there for a long
time, glad to find himself at last alone, absorbed in those
thoughts which gave his brow such an expression of sternness.
Underneath him, he was conscious of the tranquil slumber of
the family whose home he had been sharing for the last few
hours; the calm, easy breathing of the children and their
mother Marthe, and the heavy, regular respiration of Mouret.[Pg 19]
There was a touch of scorn in the way in which the priest
stretched out his muscular neck, as he raised his head to gaze
upon the town that lay slumbering in the distance. The tall
trees in the garden of the Sub-Prefecture formed a mass of
gloomy darkness, and Monsieur Rastoil's pear-trees thrust up
scraggy, twisted branches, while, further away, there was but
a sea of black shadow, a blank nothingness, whence not a
sound proceeded. The town lay as tranquilly asleep as an
infant in its cradle.
Abbé Faujas stretched out his arms with an air of ironic
defiance, as though he would have liked to circle them round
Plassans, and squeeze the life out of it by crushing it against
his brawny chest. And he murmured to himself:
'Ah! to think that the imbeciles laughed at me this evening,
as they saw me going through their streets!'
Mouret spent the whole of the next morning in playing the
spy on his new tenant. This espionage would now enable
him to fill up the idle hours which he had hitherto spent in
pottering about the house, in putting back into their proper
places any articles which he happened to find lying about,
and in picking quarrels with his wife and children. Henceforth
he would have an occupation, an amusement which
would relieve the monotony of his everyday life. As he had
often said, he was not partial to priests, and yet Abbé Faujas,
the first one who had entered into his existence, excited in
him an extraordinary amount of interest. This priest brought
with him a touch of mystery and secrecy that was almost
disquieting. Although Mouret was a strong-minded man and
professed himself to be a follower of Voltaire, yet in the
Abbé's presence he felt the astonishment and uneasiness of a
common bourgeois.
Not a sound came from the second floor. Mouret stood
on the staircase and listened eagerly; he even ventured to go
to the loft. As he hushed his steps while passing along the
passage, a pattering of slippers behind the door filled him with
emotion. But he did not succeed in making any new discovery,
so he went down into the garden and strolled into the
arbour at the end of it, there raising his eyes and trying to[Pg 20]
look through the windows in order to find out what might be
going on in the rooms. But he could not see even the
Abbé's shadow. Madame Faujas, in the absence of curtains,
had, as a makeshift, fastened some sheets behind the
windows.
At lunch Mouret seemed quite vexed.
'Are they dead upstairs?' he said, as he cut the children's
bread. 'Have you heard them move, Marthe?'
'No, my dear; but I haven't been listening.'
Rose thereupon cried out from the kitchen: 'They've
been gone ever so long. They must be far enough away
now if they've kept on at the same pace.'
Mouret summoned the cook and questioned her minutely.
'They went out, sir: first the mother, and then the priest.
They walked so softly that I should never have known anything
about it if their shadows had not fallen across the
kitchen floor when they opened the street door. I looked out
into the street to see where they were going, but they had
vanished. They must have gone off in a fine hurry.'
'It is very surprising. But where was I at the time?'
'I think you were in the garden, sir, looking at the grapes
in the arbour.'
This put Mouret into a very bad temper. He began to
inveigh against priests. They were a set of mystery-mongers,
a parcel of underhand schemers, with whom the devil himself
would be at a loss. They affected such ridiculous prudery
that no one had ever seen a priest wash his face. And
then he wound up by expressing his sorrow that he had
ever let his rooms to this Abbé, about whom he knew nothing
at all.
'It is all your fault!' he exclaimed to his wife, as he got
up from table.
Marthe was about to protest and remind him of their discussion
on the previous day, but she raised her eyes and
simply looked at him, saying nothing. Mouret, contrary to
his usual custom, resolved to remain at home. He pottered
up and down between the dining-room and the garden, poking
about everywhere, pretending that nothing was in its place
and that the house simply invited thieves. Then he got
indignant with Serge and Octave, who had set off for the
college, he said, quite half an hour too soon.
'Isn't father going out?' Désirée whispered in her
mother's ear. 'He will worry us to death if he stays at home.'
[Pg 21]
Marthe hushed her. At last Mouret began to speak of a
piece of business which he declared he must finish off during
the day. And then he complained that he had never a
moment to himself, and could never get a day's rest at
home when he felt he wanted it. Finally he went away,
quite distressed that he could not remain and see what
happened.
When he returned in the evening he was all on fire with
curiosity.
'Well, what about the Abbé?' he asked, without even
giving himself time to take off his hat.
Marthe was working in her usual place on the terrace.
'The Abbé!' she repeated, with an appearance of surprise.
'Oh, yes! the Abbé—I've really seen nothing of him, but I
believe he has got settled down now. Rose told me that some
furniture had come.'
'That's just what I was afraid of!' exclaimed Mouret. 'I
wanted to be here when it came; for, you see, the furniture
is my security. I knew very well that you would never think
of stirring from your chair. You haven't much of a head,
my dear—Rose! Rose!'
The cook appeared in answer to his summons, and he
forthwith asked her: 'There's some furniture come for the
people on the second floor?'
'Yes, sir; it came in a little covered cart. I recognised it
as Bergasse's; the second-hand dealer's. It wasn't a big load.
Madame Faujas came on behind it. I dare say she had been
giving the man who pushed it along a helping hand up the
Rue Balande.'
'At any rate, you saw the furniture, I suppose? Did you
notice what there was?'
'Certainly, sir. I had posted myself by the door, and it
all went past me, which didn't seem to please Madame Faujas
very much. Wait a moment and I'll tell you everything
there was. First of all they brought up an iron bedstead,
then a chest of drawers, then two tables and four chairs; and
that was the whole lot of it. And it wasn't new either.
I wouldn't have given thirty crowns for the whole collection.'
'But you should have told madame; we cannot let the
rooms under such conditions. I shall go at once to talk to
Abbé Bourrette about the matter.'
He was fuming with irritation, and was just setting off,
when Marthe brought him to a sudden halt by saying:
[Pg 22]
'Oh! I had forgotten to tell you. They have paid me
six months' rent in advance.'
'What! They have paid you?' he stammered out, almost
in a tone of annoyance.
'Yes, the old lady came down and gave me this.'
She put her hand into her work-bag, and gave her
husband seventy-five francs in hundred-sou-pieces, neatly
wrapt up in a piece of newspaper. Mouret counted the money,
and muttered:
'As long as they pay, they are free to stop. But they
are strange folks, all the same. Everyone can't be rich, of
course, but that is no reason why one should behave in this
suspicious manner, when one's poor.'
'There is something else I have to tell you,' Marthe continued,
as she saw him calm down. 'The old lady asked me
if we were disposed to part with the folding-bed to her. I
told her that we made no use of it, and that she was welcome
to keep it as long as she liked.'
'You did quite right. We must do what we can to
oblige them. As I told you before, what bothers me about
these confounded priests is that one never can tell what they
are thinking about, or what they are up to. Apart from that,
you will often find very honourable men amongst them.'
The money seemed to have consoled him. He joked and
teased Serge about his book on the Chinese missions, which
the boy happened to be reading just then. During dinner he
affected to feel no further curiosity about the tenants of the
second floor; but, when Octave mentioned that he had seen
Abbé Faujas leaving the Bishop's residence, he could not
restrain himself. Directly the dessert was placed on the
table he resumed his chatter of the previous evening, though
after a time he began to feel a little ashamed of himself.
His commercial pursuits had made him stolid and heavy, but
he really had a keen mind; he was possessed of no little
common sense and accuracy of judgment which often enabled
him to pick out the truth from the midst of all the gossip of
the neighbourhood.
'After all,' he said, as he went off to bed, 'one has no
business to go prying into other people's affairs. The Abbé
is quite at liberty to do as he pleases. It is getting wearisome
to be always talking about these people, and I, for my part,
shall say nothing more about them.'
A week passed away. Mouret had resumed his habitual[Pg 23]
life. He prowled about the house, lectured his children, and
spent his afternoons away from home, amusing himself by
transacting various bits of business, of which he never spoke;
and he ate and slept like a man for whom life is an easy
downhill journey, without any jolts or surprises of any kind.
The whole place sank back into all its old monotony. Marthe
occupied her accustomed seat on the terrace, with her little
work-table in front of her. Désirée played by her side. The
two lads came home at the usual time, and were as noisy
as ever; and Rose, the cook, grumbled and growled at
everyone; while the garden and the dining-room retained all
their wonted sleepy calm.
'You see now,' Mouret often repeated to his wife, 'you
were quite mistaken in thinking that our comfort would be
interfered with, by our letting the second-floor. We are as
quiet and happy as ever we were, and the house seems smaller
and cosier.'
He occasionally raised his eyes towards the second-floor
windows, which Madame Faujas had hung with thick cotton
curtains, on the day after her arrival. These curtains were
never drawn aside. There was a conventual look about their
stern, cold folds, and they seemed to tell of deep, unbroken
silence, cloistral stillness lurking behind them. At distant
intervals the windows were set ajar, and allowed the high,
shadowy ceilings to be seen between the snowy whiteness of
the curtains. But it was all to no purpose that Mouret kept
on the watch, he could never catch sight of the hand which
opened or closed them, and he never even heard the grating
of the window fastening. Never did a sound of human life
come down from the second floor.
The first week was at an end and Mouret had not yet had
another glimpse of Abbé Faujas. That man who was living
in his house, without he ever being able to catch sight even
of his shadow, began to affect him with a kind of nervous
uneasiness. In spite of all the efforts he made to appear
indifferent, he relapsed into his old questionings, and started
an inquiry.
'Have you seen anything of him?' he asked his wife.
'I fancy I caught a glimpse of him yesterday, as he was
coming in, but I am not sure. His mother always wears a
black dress, and it might have been she that I saw.'
And as he continued to press her with questions, Marthe
told him all she knew.
[Pg 24]
'Rose says that he goes out every day, and stays away a
long time. As for his mother, she is as regular as a clock.
She comes down at seven o'clock in the morning to go out and
do her marketing. She has a big basket, which is always
closed, and in which she must bring everything back with
her, coal, bread, wine and provisions, for no tradesman ever
calls with anything for them. They are very courteous and
polite; and Rose says that they always bow to her when
they meet her. But as a rule she does not even hear them
come down the stairs.'
'They must go in for a funny sort of cooking up there,'
said Mouret, to whom all these details conveyed none of the
information he wanted.
On another evening, when Octave mentioned that he had
seen Abbé Faujas entering Saint-Saturnin's, his father asked
him about the priest's appearance, what effect he had made
upon the passers-by, and what he could be going to do in the
church.
'Ah! you are really much too curious!' cried the young
man, with a laugh. 'He didn't look very fine in the sunshine
with his rusty cassock, I can vouch for that much. I noticed,
too, that, as he walked along, he kept in the shadow of the
houses, which made his cassock look a little blacker. He
didn't seem at all proud of himself, but hurried along with his
head bent down. Two girls began to laugh as he crossed
the Place. The Abbé raised his head and looked at them
with an expression of great softness—didn't he, Serge?'
Thereupon Serge related how on several occasions, as he
was returning from the college, he had at a distance followed
the Abbé, who was on his way back from Saint-Saturnin's.
He passed through the streets without speaking to anyone;
he seemed to know nobody and to be rather hurt by the suppressed
titters and jeers which he heard around him.
'Do they talk of him, then, in the town?' asked Mouret,
whose interest was greatly aroused.
'No one has ever spoken to me about him,' Octave replied.
'Yes,' said Serge,' they do talk of him. Abbé Bourrette's
nephew told me that he wasn't a favourite at the church.
They are not fond of these priests who come from a distance;
and besides he has such a miserable appearance. When
people get accustomed to him, they will leave the poor man
alone, but just at first it is only natural that he should attract
notice.'
[Pg 25]
Marthe thereupon advised the two young fellows not to
gratify any outsider's curiosity about the Abbé.
'Oh, yes! they may answer any questions,' Mouret exclaimed.
'Certainly nothing that we know of him could be
likely to compromise him in any way.'
From that time forward, with the best faith in the world
and without meaning the least harm, Mouret turned his
sons into a couple of spies. He told Octave and Serge that
they must repeat to him all that was said about the priest in
the town, and he even instructed them to follow him whenever
they came across him. But the information that was
to be derived from such sources was quickly exhausted. The
talk occasioned by the arrival of a strange curate in the
diocese died away; the town seemed to have extended
its pardon to the 'poor fellow,' who glided about in the
shade in such a rusty old cassock, and its only apparent
feeling for him now was one of disdain. The priest, on the
other hand, always went straight to the cathedral and so
returned from it, invariably passing through the same streets.
Octave said, laughingly, that he was sure he counted the
paving-stones.
Then Mouret bethought himself of enlisting the help of
Désirée in the task of collecting information. In the evening
he took her to the bottom of the garden and listened to her
chatter about what she had done and what she had seen
during the day, and he always tried to lead her on to the subject
of the tenants of the second floor.
'Now, just listen to what I tell you,' he said to her one
day. 'To-morrow, when the window is open, just throw your
ball into the room, and then go up and ask for it.'
The next day the girl threw her ball into the room, but
she had scarcely reached the steps of the house before the ball,
returned by an invisible hand, bounced up from the terrace.
Her father, who had reckoned on the child's taking ways
leading to a renewal of the intercourse which had been interrupted
since the day of the priest's arrival, now lost all hope.
It was quite clear that the Abbé had made up his mind to
keep to himself. This rebuff, however, only made Mouret's
curiosity all the keener. He even condescended to go gossiping
in corners with the cook, to the great displeasure of
Marthe, who reproached him for his want of self-respect; but
at this he became angry with her and defended himself by
lies. However, as he felt that he was in the wrong, it was[Pg 26]
only in secret that he henceforth talked to Rose about the
Faujases.
One morning she beckoned to him to follow her into the
kitchen.
'Oh, sir!' she said, as she shut the door, 'I have been
watching for you to come down from your room for more
than an hour.'
'Have you found out something then?'
'Well, you shall hear. Yesterday evening I was chatting
with Madame Faujas for more than an hour!'
Mouret felt a thrill of joy. He sat down on an old tattered
rush-bottom chair, in the midst of the dirty cloths and vegetable
parings left from the previous day, and exclaimed:
'Go along! make haste!'
'Well,' continued the cook, 'I was at the street-door saying
good-night to Monsieur Rastoil's servant, when Madame
Faujas came downstairs to empty a pail of dirty water in the
gutter. Instead of immediately going back again, without
even turning her head, as she generally does, she stopped
there for a moment to look at me. Then it struck me that
she wanted to speak to me, and I said to her that it had been
a beautiful day, and that it would be good for the grapes.
She said, "Yes, yes," in an unconcerned sort of way, just like
a woman who has no land and has no interest in such matters.
But she put down her pail and made no attempt to go away;
she even came and leant against the wall beside me—'
'Well! well! what did she say to you?' cried Mouret,
tortured by his impatience.
'Well, of course, you understand I wasn't silly enough to
begin to question her. She would have gone straight off if I
had. Without seeming to intend anything, I suggested things
to her which I thought might set her talking. The Curé[3] of
Saint-Saturnin's, that worthy Monsieur Compan, happened
to pass by, and I told her he was very ill and wasn't long for
this world, and that there would be great difficulty in filling
his place at the cathedral. She was all ears at once, I can
tell you. She even asked me what was the matter with Monsieur
Compan. Then, going on from one thing to another, I
gradually got talking about our bishop. Monseigneur Rousselot
was a most excellent and worthy man, I told her. She
did not know his age, so I told her that he was sixty, very
delicate also, and that he let himself be led by the nose. There[Pg 27]
is a good deal of talk about the vicar-general, Monsieur Fenil,
who is all powerful with the bishop. The old lady was quite
interested in that, and she would have stayed out in the street
all night, listening.'
An expression of desperation passed over Mouret's face.
'But what you're telling me is what you said yourself,' he
cried. 'What was it that she said? That's what I want to
hear.'
'Wait a little and let me finish,' Rose replied very calmly.
'I was gradually gaining my purpose. To win her confidence,
I ended by talking to her about ourselves. I told her that
you were Monsieur François Mouret, a retired merchant from
Marseilles, and that you had managed in fifteen years to
make a fortune out of wines and oils and almonds. I added
that you had preferred to come and settle down and live on
your means in Plassans, a quiet town, where your wife's
relations lived. I even contrived to let her know, too, that
madame was your cousin, that you were forty years old and
that she was thirty-seven, and that you lived very happily
together; in fact, I told her all about you. She seemed to
be very much interested, and kept saying, "Yes, yes," in her
deliberate way; and, when I stopped for a moment, she
nodded her head as though to tell me she was listening and
that I might go on. So we went on talking in this way, with
our backs against the wall, like a couple of old friends, till it
was quite dark.'
Mouret bounced from his chair in angry indignation.
'What!' he cried, 'is that all? She led you on to gossip
to her for an hour, and she herself told you nothing!'
'When it got dark, she said to me: "The air is becoming
quite chilly." And then she took up her pail and went back
upstairs.'
'You are nothing but an idiot! That old woman up
there is more than a match for half a score such as you.
Ah! they'll be laughing finely now that they have wormed
out of you all that they wanted to know about us. Do you
hear me, Rose? I tell you that you are nothing but an
idiot!'
The old cook waxed very indignant, and began to bounce
excitedly up and down the kitchen, knocking the pots and
pans about noisily, and crumpling up the dusters and flinging
them down.
'It was scarcely worth your while, sir,' she hissed, 'to[Pg 28]
come into my kitchen to call me insulting names. You had
better take yourself off. What I did, I did to please you. If
madame finds us here together talking about those people,
she will be angry with me, and quite rightly, because it is
wrong for us to be doing so. And after all, I couldn't drag
words from the old lady's lips if she wasn't willing to talk. I
did as any one else would have done under the same circumstances.
I talked and told her about your affairs, and it was
no fault of mine that she didn't tell me about hers. Go and
ask her about them yourself, since you are anxious to know
about them. Perhaps you won't make such an idiot of yourself
as I have done.'
She had raised her voice, and was talking so loudly that
Mouret thought it would be more prudent to retire, and he
did so, closing the kitchen door after him, in order to prevent
his wife from hearing the servant. But Rose immediately
pulled it open again, and cried after him down the passage:
'I shall bother myself about it no longer; do you hear?
You may get somebody else to do your underhand business
for you!'
Mouret was quite vanquished. He showed some irritation
at his defeat, and tried to console himself by saying that
those second-floor tenants of his were mere nobodies.
Gradually he succeeded in making this opinion of his that of
his acquaintances, and then that of the whole town. Abbé
Faujas came to be looked upon as a priest without means and
without ambition, who was completely outside the pale of
the intrigues of the diocese. People imagined that he was
ashamed of his poverty, that he was glad to perform any
unpleasant duties in connection with the cathedral, and
tried to keep himself in obscurity as much as possible. There
was only one matter of curiosity left in connection with him,
and that was the reason of his having come to Plassans from
Besançon. Queer stories were circulated about him, but they
all seemed very improbable. Mouret himself, who had played
the spy over his tenants simply for amusement and in order
to pass the time, just as he would have played a game at
cards or bowls, was even beginning to forget that he had a
priest living in his house, when an incident occurred which
revived all his curiosity.
One afternoon as he was returning home, he saw Abbé
Faujas going up the Rue Balande in front of him. Mouret
slackened his pace and examined the priest at his leisure.[Pg 29]
Although Abbé Faujas had been lodging in his house for a
month, this was the first time that he had thus seen him in
broad daylight. The Abbé still wore his old cassock, and he
walked slowly, with his hat in his hand and his head bare in
spite of the chilly air. The street, which was a very steep one,
with the shutters of its big, bare houses always closed, was
quite deserted. Mouret, who quickened his pace, was at last
obliged to walk on tip-toes for fear lest the priest should
hear him and make his escape. But as they neared Monsieur
Rastoil's house, a group of people turning out of the Place
of the Sub-Prefecture entered it. Abbé Faujas made a
slight détour to avoid these persons. He watched the door
close, and then, suddenly stopping, he turned round towards
his landlord, who was now close up to him.
'I am very glad to have met you,' said he, with all his
wonted politeness, 'otherwise I should have ventured to
disturb you this evening. The last time it rained, the wet
came through the ceiling of my room, and I should much
like to show it you.'
Mouret remained standing in front of him, and stammered
in confusion that he was entirely at the Abbé's service. Then,
as they went indoors together, he asked him at what time he
should go to look at the ceiling.
'Well, I should like you to come at once,' the Abbé
replied, 'if it wouldn't be troubling you too much.'
Mouret went up the stairs after him so excited that he
almost choked, while Rose followed them with her eyes from
the kitchen doorway quite dazed with astonishment.
When Mouret reached the second floor he was more perturbed
than a youth at his first assignation. The unexpected satisfaction
of his long thwarted desires, and the hope of seeing
something quite extraordinary, almost prevented him from
breathing. Abbé Faujas slipped the key which he carried,
and which he quite concealed in his big fingers, into the lock
without making the faintest noise, and the door opened as
silently as if it had been hung upon velvet hinges. Then
the Abbé, stepping back, mutely motioned to Mouret to
enter.
[Pg 30]
The cotton curtains at the two windows were so thick that
the room lay in a pale, chalky dimness like the half-light of a
convent cell. It was a very large room, with a lofty ceiling,
and a quiet, neat wall-paper of a faded yellow. Mouret ventured
forward, advancing with short steps over the tiled floor,
which was as smooth and shiny as a mirror, and so cold that
he seemed to feel a chill through the soles of his boots. He
glanced furtively around him and examined the curtainless
iron bedstead, the sheets of which were so straightly stretched
that it looked like a block of white stone lying in the corner.
The chest of drawers, stowed away at the other end of the
room, a little table in the middle, and two chairs, one before
each window, completed the furniture. There was not a
single paper on the table, not an article of any kind on the
chest of drawers, not a garment hanging against the walls.
Everything was perfectly bare except that over the chest of
drawers there was suspended a big black wooden crucifix, looking
like a dark splotch amidst the bare greyness of the room.
'Come this way, sir, will you?' said the Abbé. 'It is in
this corner that the ceiling is stained.'
But Mouret did not hurry, he was enjoying himself.
Although he saw none of the extraordinary things that he
had vaguely expected to see, there seemed to him to be a
peculiar odour about the room. It smelt of a priest, he
thought; of a man with different ways from other men.
But it vexed him that he could see nothing on which
he might base some hypothesis carelessly left on any
of the pieces of furniture or in any corner of the apartment.
The room was just like its provoking occupant, silent, cold,
and inscrutable. He was extremely surprised, too, not to
find any appearance of poverty as he had expected. On
the contrary, the room produced upon him much the same
impression as he had felt when he had once entered the richly
furnished drawing-room of the prefect of Marseilles. The
big crucifix seemed to fill it with its black arms.
Mouret felt, however, that he must go and look at the
corner which Abbé Faujas was inviting him to inspect.
'You see the stain, don't you?' asked the priest. 'It has
faded a little since yesterday.'
Mouret rose upon tip-toes and strained his eyes, but at
first he could see nothing. When the Abbé had drawn back
the curtains, he was able to distinguish a slight damp-stain.
'It's nothing very serious,' he said.
[Pg 31]
'Oh, no! but I thought it would be better to tell you of
it. The wet must have soaked through near the edge of the
roof.'
'Yes, you are right; near the edge of the roof.'
Mouret made no further remark; he was again examining
the room, now clear and distinct in the full daylight. It
looked less solemn than before, but it remained as taciturn as
ever. There was not even a speck of dust lying about to tell
aught of the Abbé's life.
'Perhaps,' continued the priest, 'we may be able to discover
the place from the window. Just wait a moment.'
He proceeded to open the window, but Mouret protested
against him troubling himself any further, saying that the
workmen would easily be able to find the leak.
'It is no trouble at all, I assure you,' replied the Abbé
with polite insistence. 'I know that landlords like to know
how matters are going on. Inspect everything, I beg of you.
The house is yours.'
As he spoke these last words he smiled, a thing he did
but rarely; and then as Mouret and himself leaned over the
rail that crossed the window, and turned their eyes towards
the guttering, he launched out into various technical details,
trying to account for the appearance of the stain.
'I think there has been a slight depression of the tiles,
perhaps even a breakage; unless, indeed, that crack which
you can see up there in the cornice extends into the retaining-wall.'
'Yes, yes, that is very possible,' Mouret replied; 'but I
must confess, Monsieur l'Abbé, that I really don't understand
anything about these matters. However, the masons will see
to it.'
The priest said nothing further on the subject, but quietly
remained where he was, gazing out upon the garden beneath
him. Mouret, who was leaning by his side, thought it would
be impolite to hurry away. He was quite won over when his
tenant, after an interval of silence, said to him in his soft
voice:
'You have a very pretty garden, sir.'
'Oh! it's nothing out of the common,' replied Mouret.
'There used to be some fine trees which I was obliged to cut
down, for nothing would grow in their shade, and we have to
pay attention to utility, you know. This plot is quite large
enough for us and keeps us in vegetables all through the
season.'
[Pg 32]
The Abbé seemed surprised, and asked Mouret for details.
The garden was an old-fashioned country garden, surrounded
with arbours, and divided into four regular square plots by
tall borders of box. In the middle was a shallow basin, but
there was no fountain. Only one of the squares was devoted
to flowers. In the other three, which were planted at their
edges with fruit-trees, one saw some magnificent cabbages,
lettuces, and other vegetables. The paths of yellow gravel
were kept extremely neat.
'It is a little paradise,' said Abbé Faujas.
'There are several disadvantages, all the same,' replied
Mouret, who felt extremely delighted at hearing his ground
so highly praised. 'You will have noticed, for instance, that
we are on a slope, and that the gardens hereabouts are on
different levels. Monsieur Rastoil's is lower than mine,
which, again, is lower than that of the Sub-Prefecture. The
consequence is that the rain often does a great deal of damage.
Then, too, a still greater disadvantage is that the people in
the Sub-Prefecture overlook me, and the more so now that
they have made that terrace which commands my wall. It
is true that I overlook Monsieur Rastoil's garden, but that is
very poor compensation I can assure you, for a man who
never troubles himself about his neighbour's doings.'
The priest seemed to be listening out of mere complaisance,
just nodding his head occasionally but making no
remarks. He followed with his eyes the motions of his
landlord's hand.
'And there is still another inconvenience,' continued
Mouret, pointing to a path that skirted the bottom of the
garden. 'You see that little lane between the two walls?
It is called the Impasse des Chevillottes, and leads to a cart-entrance
to the grounds of the Sub-Prefecture. Well, all the
neighbouring properties have little doors giving access to
the lane, and there are all sorts of mysterious comings and
goings. For my part, being a family man with children, I
fastened my door up with a couple of stout nails.'
He looked at the Abbé and winked, hoping that the priest
would question him about the mysterious comings and goings
to which he had just alluded. But Abbé Faujas seemed quite
unconcerned; he merely glanced at the alley without showing
any curiosity on the subject. Then he again gazed placidly
upon the Mourets' garden. Marthe was in her customary
place near the edge of the terrace, hemming napkins. She[Pg 33]
had raised her head on first hearing voices, and then had
resumed her work again, full of surprise at seeing her husband
at one of the second-floor windows in the company of the
priest. She now appeared to be quite unconscious of their
presence. Mouret, however, had raised his voice from a sort of
instinctive braggartism, proud of being able to show his wife
that he had at last made his way into that room which had
so persistently been kept private. The Abbé, on his side,
every now and then let his calm eyes rest upon the woman,
though all that he could see of her was the back of her bent
neck and her black coil of hair.
They were both silent again, and Abbé Faujas still seemed
disinclined to leave the window. He now appeared to be examining
their neighbour's flower beds. Monsieur Rastoil's
garden was arranged in the English fashion, with little walks
and grass plots broken by small flower-beds. At the bottom
there was a circular cluster of trees, underneath which a table
and some rustic chairs were set.
'Monsieur Rastoil is very wealthy,' resumed Mouret, who
had followed the direction of the Abbé's eyes. 'His garden
costs him a large sum of money. The waterfall—you can't
see it from here, it is behind those trees—ran away with more
than three hundred francs. There isn't a vegetable about
the place, nothing but flowers. At one time the ladies even
talked of cutting down the fruit-trees; but that would have
really been wicked, for the pear-trees are magnificent specimens.
Well, I suppose a man has a right to lay out his
ground so as to please his own fancy, if he can afford to
do so.'
Then, as the Abbé still continued silent, he continued:
'You know Monsieur Rastoil, don't you? Every morning,
from eight o'clock till nine, he walks about under his
trees. He is a heavy man, rather short, bald, and clean
shaven, with a head as round as a ball. He completed his
sixtieth year at the beginning of last August, I believe. He
has been president of our civil tribunal for nearly twenty
years. Folks say he is a very good fellow, but I see very
little of him. "Good-morning," and "Good-evening," that's
about all that ever passes between us.'
He stopped speaking as he saw several people coming
down the steps of the neighbouring house and making their
way towards the clump of trees.
[Pg 34]
'Ah, yes!' he resumed, lowering his voice, 'to-day's
Tuesday. There is a dinner party at the Rastoils'.
The Abbé had not been able to restrain a slight start, and
had then bent forward to see better. Two priests who were
walking beside a couple of tall girls seemed particularly to
interest him.
'Do you know who those gentlemen are?' Mouret
inquired.
And, when the priest only replied by a vague gesture, he
added:
'They were crossing the Rue Balande just as we met each
other. The taller and younger one, the one who is walking
between Monsieur Rastoil's two daughters, is Abbé Surin, our
bishop's secretary. He is said to be a very amiable young
man. The old one, who is walking a little behind, is one of
our grand-vicars, Abbé Fenil. He is at the head of the
seminary. He is a terrible man, flat and sharp, like a sabre.
I wish he would turn round so that you might see his eyes.
I am quite surprised that you don't know those gentlemen.'
'I go out very little,' said the Abbé, 'and there is no
house in the town that I visit.'
'Ah! that isn't right. You must often feel very dull.
To do you justice, Monsieur l'Abbé, you are certainly not of
an inquisitive disposition. Just fancy! you've been here a
month now, and you didn't even know that Monsieur Rastoil
had a dinner-party every Tuesday! Why, it's right before
your eyes there from this window!'
Mouret laughed slightly. He was forming a rather contemptuous
opinion of the Abbé. Then in confidential tones
he went on:
'You see that tall old man who is with Madame Rastoil—the
thin one I mean, with broad brims to his hat? Well,
that is Monsieur de Bourdeu, the former prefect of the Drôme,
a prefect who was turned out of office by the revolution of
1848. He's another one that you don't know, I'll be bound.
But Monsieur Maffre there, the justice of the peace, that
white-headed old gentleman who is coming last, with Monsieur
Rastoil, don't you know him? Well, that is really inexcusable.
He is an honorary canon of Saint-Saturnin's!
Between ourselves, he is accused of having killed his wife by
his harshness and miserliness.'
Mouret stopped short, looked the Abbé in the face and said
abruptly, with a smile:
[Pg 35]
'I beg your pardon, but I am not a very devout person,
you know.'
The Abbé again waved his hand with that vague gesture
which did duty as an answer and saved him the necessity of
making a more explicit reply.
'No, I am not a very devout person,' Mouret repeated
smilingly. 'But everyone should be left free, is it not so?
The Rastoils, now, are a religious family. You must have
seen the mother and daughters at Saint-Saturnin's. They
are parishioners of yours. Ah! those poor girls! The
elder, Angéline, is fully twenty-six years old, and the other,
Aurélie, is getting on for twenty-four. And they're no
beauties either, quite yellow and shrewish-looking. The
parents won't let the younger one marry before her sister;
but I dare say they'll both end by finding husbands somewhere,
if only for the sake of their dowries. Their mother
there, that fat little woman who looks as innocent and mild
as a sheep, has given poor Rastoil some pretty experiences.'
He winked his left eye, a common habit of his whenever
he indulged in any pleasantry approaching broadness. The
Abbé lowered his eyes, as if waiting for Mouret to go on, but,
as the latter remained silent, he raised them again and
watched the people in the garden as they seated themselves
round the table under the trees.
At last Mouret resumed his explanatory remarks.
'They will stay out there, enjoying the fresh air, till
dinner-time,' said he. 'It is just the same every Tuesday.
That Abbé Surin is a great favourite. Look how he is
laughing there with Mademoiselle Aurélie. Ah! Abbé Fenil
has observed us. What eyes he has! He isn't very fond of
me, you know, as I've had a dispute with a relation of his.
But where has Abbé Bourrette got to? We haven't seen
anything of him, have we? It is very extraordinary. He
never misses Monsieur Rastoil's Tuesdays. He must be ill.
You know him, don't you? What a worthy man he is! A
most devoted servant of God!'
Abbé Faujas was no longer listening. His eyes were
constantly meeting those of Abbé Fenil, whose scrutiny he
bore with perfect calmness, never once diverting his glance.
He was even leaning more fully against the iron rail, and his
eyes seemed to have grown bigger.
'Ah! here come the young people!' resumed Mouret as
three young men arrived on the scene. 'The oldest one is[Pg 36]
Rastoil's son; he has just been called to the Bar. The two
others are the sons of Monsieur Maffre; they are still at
college. By-the-by, I wonder why those young scamps of
mine haven't come back yet.'
At that very moment Octave and Serge made their appearance
on the terrace. Leaning against the balustrade they
began to tease Désirée, who had just sat down by her mother's
side. However, when the young folks caught sight of their
father at the second-floor window, they lowered their voices
and quietly laughed.
'There you see all my little family!' said Mouret complacently.
'We stay at home, we do; and we have no visitors.
Our garden is a closed paradise, which the devil can't enter
to tempt us.'
He smiled as he spoke, for he was really amusing himself
at the Abbé's expense. The latter had slowly brought his
eyes to bear upon the group formed by his landlord's family
under the window. He gazed down there for a moment;
then looked round upon the old-fashioned garden with its
beds of vegetables edged with borders of box; then again
turned his eyes towards Monsieur Rastoil's pretentious
grounds; and last of all, as though he wanted to get the plan
of the whole surroundings into his head, directed his attention
to the garden of the Sub-Prefecture. There was nothing
to be seen here but a large central lawn, a gently undulating
carpet of grass, with clusters of evergreen shrubs, and some
tall thickly-foliaged chestnut trees which gave a park-like
appearance to this patch of ground hemmed in by the neighbouring
houses.
Abbé Faujas glanced under the chestnut-trees, and at last
remarked:
'These gardens are quite lively. There are some people,
too, in the one on the left.'
Mouret raised his eyes.
'Oh, yes!' he said unconcernedly, 'it's like that every
afternoon. They are the friends of Monsieur Péqueur des
Saulaies, our sub-prefect. In the summer-time they meet in
the evenings in the same way round the basin on the left,
which you can't see from here. Ah! so Monsieur de Condamin
has got back! That fine old man there, who is so
well preserved and has such a bright colour; he is our conservator
of rivers and forests; a jovial old fellow, who is
constantly to be seen, gloved and tightly breeched, on horseback.[Pg 37]
And the tales he can tell, too! He doesn't belong
to this neighbourhood, and he has lately married a very
young woman. However, that's fortunately no business of
mine!'
He bent his head again as he heard Désirée, who was
playing with Serge, break out into one of her childish laughs.
But the Abbé, whose face was now slightly flushed, recalled
his attention by asking:
'Is that the sub-prefect, that fat gentleman with the
white tie?'
This question seemed to amuse Mouret exceedingly.
'Oh, no!' he replied, with a laugh. 'It is very evident
that you don't know Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies. He
isn't forty yet; he's a tall, handsome, very distinguished-looking
young man. That fat gentleman is Doctor Porquier,
the fashionable medical man of Plassans. He is a very well-to-do
man, I can assure you, and he has only one trouble, his
son Guillaume. Do you see those two people sitting on the
bench with their backs towards us? They are Monsieur
Paloque, the assistant judge, and his wife. They are the
ugliest couple in the town. It is difficult to say which is the
worse-looking, the husband or the wife. Fortunately they
have no children.'
Mouret began to laugh more loudly; he was growing
excited, and kept on striking the window-rail.
'I can never look at the assemblies in those grounds,' he
continued, motioning with his head, first towards Monsieur
Rastoil's garden and then towards the sub-prefect's, 'without
being highly amused. You don't take any interest in politics,
Monsieur l'Abbé, or I could tell you some things which would
tickle you immensely. Rightly or wrongly, I myself pass for
a republican. Business matters take me a good deal about
the country; I am a friend of the peasantry, and people have
even talked about proposing me for the Council-General—in
short, I am a well-known man. Well, on my right here, at
Monsieur Rastoil's, we have the cream of the Legitimists, and
on the left, at the Sub-Prefecture, we have the big-wigs of
the Empire. And so, you see, my poor old-fashioned garden,
my little happy nook, lies between two hostile camps. I am
continually afraid lest they should begin throwing stones at
each other, for the stones, you see, might very well fall into
my garden.'
Mouret appeared to be quite delighted with this witticism[Pg 38]
and drew closer to the Abbé, like some old gossip who is just
going to launch out into a long story.
'Plassans is a very curious place from a political point of
view. The Coup d'État succeeded here because the town is
conservative. But first of all it is Legitimist and Orleanist;
so much so, indeed, that at the outset of the Empire it
wanted to dictate conditions. As its claims were disregarded,
the town grew annoyed and went over to the opposition; yes,
Monsieur l'Abbé, to the opposition. Last year we elected for
our deputy the Marquis de Lagrifoul, an old nobleman of
mediocre abilities, but one whose election was a very bitter
pill for the Sub-Prefecture.—Ah, look! there is Monsieur
Péqueur des Saulaies! He is with the mayor, Monsieur
Delangre.'
The Abbé glanced keenly in the direction indicated by
Mouret. The sub-prefect, a very dark man, was smiling
beneath his waxed moustaches. He was irreproachably
dressed, and preserved a demeanour which suggested both
that of a fashionable officer and that of a good-natured
diplomatist. The mayor was by his side, talking and gesticulating
rapidly. He was a short man, with square shoulders,
and a sunken face that was rather Punch-like in appearance.
He seemed to be garrulously inclined.
'Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies,' continued Mouret, 'had
felt so confident of the return of the official candidate that the
result of the election nearly made him ill. It was very
amusing. On the evening of the election, the garden of the
Sub-Prefecture remained as dark and gloomy as a cemetery,
while in the Rastoils' grounds there were lamps and candles
burning under the trees, and joyous laughter and a perfect
uproar of triumph. Our people don't let things be seen from
the street, but they throw off all restraint and give full vent
to their feelings in their gardens. Oh, yes! I see singular
things sometimes, though I don't say anything about them.'
He checked himself for a moment, as though he was
unwilling to say more, but his gossiping propensities were too
strong for him.
'I wonder what course they will now take at the Sub-Prefecture?'
he continued. 'They will never get their
candidate elected again. They don't understand the people
about here, and besides they are very weak. I was told that
Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies was to have had a prefecture
if the election had gone off all right. Ah! he will remain a[Pg 39]
sub-prefect for a long time yet, I imagine! What stratagem
will they devise, I wonder, to overthrow the Marquis? They
will certainly have recourse to one of some kind or other; they
will do their best somehow to effect the conquest of Plassans.'
He turned his eyes upon the Abbé, at whom he had
ceased to look for the last few moments, and he suddenly
checked himself as he caught sight of the priest's eager face,
his glistening eyes, and his ears that seemed to have grown
bigger. All Mouret's bourgeois prudence then reasserted
itself, and he felt that he had said too much. So he hastily
added:
'But, after all, I really know nothing about it. People
tell so many ridiculous stories. All I care about is to be
allowed to live quietly in my own house.'
He would then have liked to leave the window, but he
dared not go away so suddenly after gossiping in such an
unrestrained and familiar fashion. He was beginning to
think that if one of them had been having his laugh at the
other, it certainly was not he.
The Abbé, for his part, was again glancing alternately
at the two gardens in a calm, unconcerned manner, and did
not make the slightest attempt to induce Mouret to continue
talking. Mouret was already wishing, somewhat impatiently,
that his wife or one of his children would call to him to come
down, when he was greatly relieved by seeing Rose appear on
the steps outside the house. She raised her head towards him.
'Well, sir!' she cried, 'aren't you coming at all to-day?
The soup has been on the table for the last quarter of an hour!'
'All right, Rose! I'll be down directly,' he replied.
Then he made his apologies to the Abbé, and left the window.
The chilly aspect of the room, which he had forgotten
while his back had been turned to it, added to the confusion
he felt. It seemed to him like a huge confessional-box, with
its awful black crucifix, which must have heard everything he
had said. When the Abbé took leave of him with a silent
bow, this sudden finish of their conversation so disturbed
him, that he again stepped back and, raising his eyes to the
ceiling, said:
'It is in that corner, then?'
'What is?' asked the Abbé in surprise.
'The damp stain that you spoke to me about.'
The priest could not restrain a smile, but he again
pointed out the stain to Mouret.
[Pg 40]
'Ah! I can see it quite plainly now,' said the latter.
'Well, I'll send the workmen up to-morrow.'
Then he at last left the room, and before he had reached
the end of the landing, the door was noiselessly closed behind
him. The silence of the staircase irritated him extremely, and
as he went down, he muttered:
'The confounded fellow! He gets everything out of one
without asking a single question!'
The next morning old Madame Rougon, Marthe's mother,[4]
came to pay a visit to the Mourets. It was quite an event,
for there was a coolness between Mouret and his wife's relations
which had increased since the election of the Marquis
de Lagrifoul, whose success the Rougons attributed to Mouret's
influence in the rural districts. Marthe used to go alone
when she went to see her parents. Her mother, 'that black
Félicité,' as she was called, had retained at sixty-six years of
age all the slimness and vivacity of a girl. She always wore
silk dresses, covered with flounces, and was particularly partial
to yellows and browns.
When she arrived, only Marthe and Mouret were in the
dining-room.
'Hallo!' cried the latter in great surprise, as he saw her
coming, 'here's your mother! I wonder what she wants!
She was here less than a month ago. She's scheming after
something or other, I know.'
The Rougons, whose assistant Mouret had been prior to
his marriage, when their shabby little shop in the old quarter
of the town had ever suggested bankruptcy, were the objects
of his constant suspicions. They returned the feeling with
bitter and deep-seated animosity, their rancour being especially
aroused by the speedy success which had attended him
in business. When their son-in-law said, 'I simply owe my
fortune to my own exertions,' they bit their lips and understood
quite well that he was accusing them of having gained
theirs by less honourable means. Notwithstanding the fine
house she now had on the Place of the Sub-Prefecture,[Pg 41]
Félicité silently envied the peaceful little home of the
Mourets, with all the bitter jealousy of a retired shopkeeper
who owed her fortune to something else than the profits of
her business.
Félicité kissed Marthe on the forehead and then gave her
hand to Mouret. She and her son-in-law generally affected a
mocking tone in their conversations together.
'Well,' she said to him with a smile, 'the gendarmes
haven't been for you yet then, you revolutionist?'
'No, not yet,' he replied with a responsive smile; 'they
are waiting till your husband gives them the order.'
'It's very nice and polite of you to say that!' exclaimed
Félicité, whose eyes were beginning to glisten.
Marthe turned a beseeching glance upon Mouret. He had
gone too far; but his feelings were roused and he added:
'Good gracious! What are we thinking of to receive you
in the dining-room? Let us go into the drawing-room, I
beg you.'
This was one of his usual pleasantries. He affected all
Félicité's fine airs whenever he received a visit from her. It
was to no purpose that Marthe protested that they were very
comfortable where they were; her husband insisted that she
and her mother should follow him into the drawing-room.
When they got there, he bustled about, opening the shutters
and drawing out the chairs. The drawing-room, which was
seldom entered, and the shutters of which were generally
kept closed, was a great wilderness of a room, with furniture
swathed in white dust-covers which were turning yellow from
the proximity of the damp garden.
'It is really disgraceful!' muttered Mouret, wiping the
dust from a small console; 'that wretched Rose neglects
everything abominably.'
Then, turning towards his mother-in-law, he said with
ill-concealed irony:
'You will excuse us for receiving you in this way in our
poor dwelling. We cannot all be wealthy.'
Félicité was choking with rage. She scanned Mouret
for a moment, and almost indulged in a burst of anger; but
she made an effort to restrain herself and slowly dropped her
eyes. When she again raised them she spoke in a pleasant
tone.
'I have just been calling upon Madame de Condamin,' she
said, 'and I thought I would look in here and see how you all[Pg 42]
were. The children are well, I hope, and you, too, my dear
Mouret?'
'Yes, we are all wonderfully well,' he replied, quite
astonished by this amiability.
But the old lady gave him no time to import any fresh
unpleasantness into the conversation, for she began to question
Marthe affectionately about all sorts of trifles, playing
the part of a fond grandmother and scolding Mouret for not
sending the dear children to see her oftener, for she was
always so delighted to have them with her, said she.
'Well, here we are in October again,' she remarked carelessly,
after awhile, 'and I shall be having my day again,
Thursdays, as in former seasons. I shall count upon seeing
you, my dear Marthe, of course; and you too, Mouret, you
will look in occasionally, won't you, and not go on sulking
with us for ever?'
Mouret, who was growing a little suspicious of all his
mother-in-law's affectionate chatter, was at a loss how to
reply. He had not expected such a thrust, but there was
nothing in it to which he could take exception; so he merely
said:
'You know very well that I can't go to your house; you
receive a lot of people who would be delighted to have an
opportunity of making themselves disagreeable to me. And,
besides, I don't want to mix myself up with politics.'
'You are quite mistaken, Mouret, quite mistaken!' Félicité
replied. 'My drawing-room is not a club; I would never
allow it to become one. All the town knows that I do all I
can to make my house as pleasant as possible; and if political
matters ever are discussed there, it is only in corners, I assure
you. Ah! believe me, I had quite enough of politics long
ago. What makes you say such a thing?'
'Why, you receive all the Sub-Prefecture set,' Mouret
said shortly.
'The Sub-Prefecture set!' she repeated, 'the Sub-Prefecture
set! Certainly I receive those gentlemen. But
I don't think that Monsieur Péqueur des Saulaies will be
found very often in my house this winter. My husband has
told him pretty plainly what he thought of his conduct in
connection with the last elections. He allowed himself to be
tricked like a mere nincompoop. But his friends are very
pleasant men. Monsieur Delangre and Monsieur de Condamin
are extremely amiable, and that worthy Paloque is kindness[Pg 43]
itself, while I'm sure you can have nothing to say against
Doctor Porquier.'
Mouret shrugged his shoulders.
'Besides,' she continued, with ironic emphasis, 'I also
receive Monsieur Rastoil's circle, worthy Monsieur Maffre and
our clever friend Monsieur de Bourdeu, the former prefect.
So you see we are not at all bigoted or exclusive, the representatives
of all opinions find a welcome among us. Of
course when I am inviting a party of people, I don't ask those
to meet each other who would be likely to quarrel. But wit
and cleverness are welcome in whomsoever they are found,
and we pride ourselves upon having at our gatherings all the
most distinguished persons in Plassans. My drawing-room
is neutral ground, remember that, Mouret; yes, neutral
ground that is the right expression.'
She had grown quite animated whilst talking. Her
drawing-room was her great glory, and it was her desire to
reign there, not as a chief of a party, but as a queen of society.
It is true that her friends said that she was adopting conciliatory
tactics merely in conformity with the advice of her
son Eugène, the minister,[5] who had charged her to personify
at Plassans the gentleness and amiability of the Empire.
'You may say what you like,' Mouret growled, 'but that
Maffre of yours is a bigot, and your Bourdeu is a fool, and
most of all the others are a pack of rascals. That's my
opinion of them. I am much obliged to you for your invitation,
but it would disturb my habits too much to accept it.
I like to go to bed in good time, and I prefer stopping at home.'
Félicité rose from her seat, and turning her back upon
Mouret, she said to her daughter:
'Well, at any rate I may expect you, mayn't I, my dear?'
'Of course you may,' replied Marthe, who wished to soften
the bluntness of her husband's blunt refusal.
The old lady was just going to leave, when a thought
seemed to strike her, and she asked if she might kiss Désirée,
whom she had seen playing in the garden. She would not let
them call the girl into the house, but insisted on going herself
to the terrace, which was still damp from a slight shower
which had fallen in the morning. When she found Désirée,
she was profuse in her caresses of the girl, who seemed
rather frightened of her. Then she raised her head as if by
chance and looked at the curtains at the second-floor windows.
[Pg 44]
'Ah! you have let the rooms, then? Oh, yes! I remember
now; to a priest, isn't it? I've heard it spoken of. What
sort of a person is he, this priest of yours?'
Mouret looked at her keenly. A sudden suspicion flashed
through his mind, and he began to guess that it was entirely
on account of Abbé Faujas that his mother-in-law had favoured
them with this visit.
'Upon my word,' he replied, without taking his eyes off
her, 'I really know nothing about him. But perhaps you
are able to give me some information concerning him yourself?'
'I!' she cried, with an appearance of great surprise.
'Why, I've never even seen him! Stay, though, I know he
is one of the curates at Saint-Saturnin; Father Bourrette told
me that. By the way, that reminds me that I ought to ask
him to my Thursdays. The director of the seminary and the
bishop's secretary are already amongst my circle of visitors.'
And, turning to Marthe, she added:
'When you see your lodger you might sound him, so as
to be able to tell me whether an invitation from me would be
acceptable.'
'We scarcely ever see him,' Mouret hastily interposed.
'He comes in and goes out without ever opening his mouth.
And, besides, it is really no business of ours.'
He still kept his eyes fixed suspiciously upon her. He
felt quite sure that she knew much more about Abbé Faujas
than she was willing to admit. However, she did not once
flinch beneath his searching gaze.
'Very well, it's all the same to me,' she said, with an
appearance of unconcern. 'I shall be able to find out some
other way of inviting him, if he's the right sort of person,
I've no doubt. Good-bye, my children.'
As she was mounting the steps again, a tall old man
appeared on the hall threshold. He was dressed very neatly
in blue cloth, and had a fur cap pressed over his eyes. In
his hand he carried a whip.
'Hallo! why there's Uncle Macquart!' cried Mouret,
casting a curious glance at his mother-in-law.
An expression of extreme annoyance passed over Félicité's
face. Macquart, Rougon's illegitimate brother, had, by the
latter's aid, returned to France after he had compromised
himself in the rising of 1851. Since arriving from Piedmont
he had been leading the life of a sleek and well-to-do citizen.
He had purchased, though where the money had come from[Pg 45]
no one knew, a small house at the village of Les Tulettes,
about three leagues from Plassans. And by degrees he had
fitted up an establishment there, and had now even become
possessed of a horse and trap, and was constantly to be met
on the high roads, smoking his pipe, enjoying the sunshine,
and sniggering like a tamed wolf. Rougon's enemies
whispered that the two brothers had perpetrated some black
business together, and that Pierre Rougon was keeping
Antoine Macquart.
'Good day, Uncle!' said Mouret affectedly; 'have you
come to pay us a little visit?'
'Yes, indeed,' Macquart replied, in a voice as guileless as
a child's. 'You know that whenever I come to Plassans——Hallo,
Félicité! I didn't expect to find you here! I came
over to see Rougon. There was something I wanted to talk
to him about.'
'He was at home, wasn't he?' she exclaimed with uneasy
haste.
'Yes, he was at home,' Uncle Macquart replied tranquilly.
'I saw him, and we had a talk together. He is a good fellow,
is Rougon.'
He laughed slightly, and while Félicité stamped her feet
with restless anxiety, he went on talking in his drawling
voice, which made it seem as if he was always laughing at
those whom he addressed.
'Mouret, my boy, I have brought you a couple of rabbits,'
he said. 'They are in a basket over there. I have given them
to Rose. I brought another couple with me for Rougon.
You will find them at home, Félicité, and you must tell me
how they turn out. They are beautifully plump; I fattened
them up for you. Ah, my dears! it pleases me very much
to be able to make you these little presents.'
Félicité turned quite pale, and pressed her lips tightly,
while Mouret continued to look at her with a quiet smile.
She would have been glad to get away, if she had not been
afraid of Macquart gossiping as soon as her back should be
turned.
'Thank you, Uncle,' said Mouret. 'The plums that you
brought us the last time you came were very good. Won't
you have something to drink?'
'Well, that's an offer I really can't refuse.'
When Rose had brought him out a glass of wine, he sat
down on the balustrade of the terrace and slowly sipped the[Pg 46]
beverage, smacking his tongue and holding up the glass to
the light.
'This comes from the district of Saint-Eutrope,' he said.
'I'm not to be deceived in matters of this kind. I know the
different districts thoroughly.'
He wagged his head and again sniggered.
Then Mouret, with an intonation that was full of meaning,
suddenly asked him:
'And how are things getting on at Les Tulettes?'
Macquart raised his eyes and looked at them all. Then
giving a final cluck of his tongue and putting down the glass
on the stone-work by his side, he said, quite unconcernedly:
'Oh! very well. I heard of her the day before yesterday.
She is still just the same.'
Félicité had turned her head away. For a moment no
one spoke. Mouret had just put his finger upon one of the
family's sore places, by alluding to old Adelaide, the mother
of Rougon and Macquart, who for several years now had
been shut up as a mad woman in the asylum at Les Tulettes.
Macquart's little property was near the mad-house, and it
seemed as though Rougon had posted the old scamp there to
keep watch over their mother.
'It is getting late,' Macquart said at last, rising from his
seat on the balustrade, 'and I want to get back again before
night. I shall expect to see you over at my house one of
these days, Mouret, my boy. You have promised me several
times to come, you know.'
'Oh, yes! I'll come, Uncle, I'll come.'
'Ah! but that isn't enough. I want you all to come; all
of you, do you hear? I am very dull out there all by myself.
I will give you some dinner.'
Then, turning to Félicité, he added:
'Tell Rougon that I shall expect him and you, too. You
needn't stop from coming just because the old mother happens
to be near there. She is going on very well, I tell you, and
is properly looked after. You may safely trust yourselves to me,
and I will give you some wine from one of the slopes of La
Seille, a light wine that will warm you up famously.'
He began to walk towards the gate as he spoke. Félicité
followed him so closely that it almost seemed as if she were
pushing him out of the garden. They all accompanied him
to the street. While he was untethering his horse, which he
had fastened by the reins to one of the house shutters, Abbé[Pg 47]
Faujas, who was just returning home, passed the group with a
slight bow. He glided on as noiselessly as a black shadow,
but Félicité quickly turned and watched him till he reached
the staircase. Unfortunately she had not had time to catch
sight of his face. Macquart on perceiving the priest had
shaken his head in utter surprise.
'What! my boy,' said he, 'have you really got priests
lodging with you now? That man has very strange eyes.
Take care! take care! cassocks bring ill luck with them!'
Then he took his seat in his trap and clucked his horse
on, going down the Rue Balande at a gentle trot. His round
back and fur cap disappeared at the corner of the Rue Taravelle.
As Mouret turned round again, he heard his mother-in-law
speaking to Marthe.
'I would rather you do it,' she was saying; 'the invitation
would seem less formal. I should be very glad if you could
find some opportunity of speaking to him.'
She checked herself when she saw that she was overheard;
and having kissed Désirée effusively, she went away, giving a
last look round to make quite sure that Macquart was not
likely to come back to gossip about her.
'I forbid you to mix yourself up in your mother's affairs,
you know,' Mouret said to his wife as they returned into the
house. 'She has always got some business or other on hand
that no body can understand. What in the world can she
want with the Abbé? She wouldn't invite him for his own
sake, I'm sure. She must have some secret reason for doing
so. That priest hasn't come from Besançon to Plassans for
nothing. There is some mystery or other at the bottom of
it all!'
Marthe had again set to work at the everlasting repairs of
the family-linen which kept her busy for days together. But
her husband went on chattering:
'Old Macquart and your mother amuse me very much.
How they hate each other! Did you notice how angry she
was when she saw him come? She always seems to be in a
state of fear lest he should make some unpleasant revelation——I
dare say that he'd willingly do so. But they'll
never catch me in his house. I've sworn to keep clear of all
that business. My father was quite right when he said that
my mother's family, those Rougons and Macquarts, were not
worth a rope to hang them with——They are my relations
as well as yours, so you needn't feel hurt at what I am[Pg 48]
saying. I say it because it is true. They are wealthy people
now, but their money hasn't made them any better—rather
the contrary.'
Then he set off to take a turn along the Cours Sauvaire,
where he met his friends and talked to them about the
weather and the crops and the events of the previous day.
An extensive transaction in almonds, which he undertook on
the morrow, kept him busy for more than a week and made
him almost forget all about Abbé Faujas. He was beginning,
besides, to feel a little weary of the Abbé, who did not talk
enough and was far too secretive. On two separate occasions
he purposely avoided him, imagining that the priest only
wanted to see him in order to make him relate the stories of
the remainder of the Sub-Prefecture circle and Monsieur
Rastoil's friends. Rose had informed him that Madame
Faujas had tried to get her to talk, and this had made him
vow that he would in future keep his mouth shut. This
resolve furnished fresh amusement for his idle hours, and
now, as he looked up at the closely drawn curtains of the
second-floor windows, he would mutter:
'All right, my good fellow! Hide yourself as much as
you like! I know very well that you're watching me from
behind those curtains, but you won't be much the wiser for
your trouble, and you'll find yourself much mistaken if you
expect to get any more information out of me about our
neighbours!'
He derived great pleasure from the thought that the Abbé
Faujas was secretly watching, and he took every precaution to
avoid falling into any trap that might be laid for him. One
evening as he was coming home he saw Abbé Bourrette and
Abbé Faujas standing before Monsieur Rastoil's gate. So he
concealed himself behind the corner of a house and spied on
them. The two priests kept him waiting there for more than
a quarter of an hour. They talked with great animation,
parted for a moment, and then joined each other again, and
resumed their conversation. Mouret thought he could detect
that Abbé Bourrette was trying to persuade Abbé Faujas to
accompany him to the judge's; and that Faujas was making
excuses for not going, and at last refusing to do so with some
show of impatience. It was a Tuesday, the day of the weekly
dinner. Finally Bourrette entered Monsieur Rastoil's house,
and Faujas went off in his quiet fashion to his own rooms.
Mouret stood for awhile thinking. What could be Abbé[Pg 49]
Faujas's reason for refusing to go to Monsieur Rastoil's? All
the clergy of Saint-Saturnin's dined there, Abbé Fenil, Abbé
Surin, and all the others. There was not a single priest in
Plassans who had not enjoyed the fresh air by the fountain
in the garden there. The new curate's refusal to go seemed
a very extraordinary thing.
When Mouret got home again, he hurried to the bottom
of his own garden to reconnoitre the second-floor windows.
And after a moment or two he saw the curtain of the second
window move to the right. He felt quite sure that Abbé Faujas
was behind it, spying upon what might be going on at
Monsieur Rastoil's. Then Mouret thought that he could discover
by certain movements of the curtain that the Abbé was
in turn inspecting the gardens of the Sub-Prefecture.
The next day, a Wednesday, Rose told him just as he was
going out that Abbé Bourrette had been with the second-floor
people for at least an hour. Upon this he came
back into the house and began to rummage about in the
dining-room. When Marthe asked him what he was looking
for, he replied sharply that he was trying to find a paper
without which he could not go out. He even went upstairs,
as if to see whether he had left it there. After waiting for a
long time behind his bedroom door, he thought he could hear
some chairs moving on the second floor, and thereupon he
slowly went downstairs, stopping for a moment or two in the
hall to give Abbé Bourrette time to catch him up.
'Ah! is that you, Monsieur l'Abbé? This is a fortunate
meeting! You are going to Saint-Saturnin's, I suppose, and
I am going that way too. We will keep each other company,
if you have no objection.'
Abbé Bourrette replied that he would be delighted, and
they both walked slowly up the Rue Balande towards the
Place of the Sub-Prefecture. The Abbé was a stout man, with
an honest, open face, and big, child-like blue eyes. His wide
silk girdle which was drawn tightly round him threw his well-rounded
stomach into relief. His arms were unduly short
and his legs heavy and clumsy, and he walked with his head
thrown slightly back.
'So you've just been to see our good Monsieur Faujas?'
said Mouret, going to the point at once. 'I must really thank
you for having procured me such a lodger as is rarely to be
found.'
'Yes, yes,' said the priest, 'he is a very good and worthy
man.'
[Pg 50]
'He never makes the slightest noise, and we can't really
tell that there is anyone in the house. And he is so polite
and courteous, too. I've heard it said, do you know, that he
is a man of unusual attainments, and that he has been sent
here as a sort of compliment to the diocese.'
They had now reached the middle of the Place of the
Sub-Prefecture. Mouret stopped short and looked at Abbé
Bourrette keenly.
'Ah, indeed!' the priest merely replied, with an air of
astonishment.
'So I've been told. The Bishop, it is said, intends to
do something for him later on. In the meantime, the new
curate has to keep himself in the background for fear of
exciting jealousy.'
Abbé Bourrette went on walking again, and turned the
corner of the Rue de la Banne.
'You surprise me very much,' he quietly remarked. 'Faujas
is a very unassuming man; in fact, he is far too humble. For
instance, at the church he has taken upon himself the petty
duties which are generally left to the ordinary staff. He is a
saint, but he is not very sharp. I scarcely ever see him at
the Bishop's, and from the first he has always been very cold
with Abbé Fenil, though I strongly impressed upon him that
it was necessary he should be on good terms with the Grand-Vicar
if he wished to be well received at the Bishop's. But
he didn't seem to see it, and I'm afraid that he's deficient in
judgment. He shows the same failing, too, by his continual
visits to Abbé Compan, who has been confined to his bed
for the last fortnight, and whom I'm afraid we are going to
lose. Abbé Faujas's visits are most ill-advised, and will do
him a deal of harm. Compan has always been on bad
terms with Fenil, and it's only a stranger from Besançon
who could be ignorant of a fact that is known to the whole
diocese.'
Bourrette was growing animated, and in his turn he
stopped short as they reached the Rue Canquoin and took
his stand in front of Mouret.
'No, no, my dear sir,' he said, 'you have been misinformed:
Faujas is as simple as a new-born babe. I'm not an ambitious
man myself, and God knows how fond I am of Compan, who
has a heart of gold, but, all the same, I keep my visits to him
private. He said to me himself: "Bourrette, my old friend,
I am not much longer for this world. If you want to succeed[Pg 51]
me, don't be seen too often knocking at my door. Come after
dark and knock three times, and my sister will let you in."
So now, you understand, I wait till night before I go to see
him. One has plenty of troubles as it is, without incurring
unnecessary ones!'
His voice quavered, and he clasped his hands across his
stomach as he resumed his walk, moved by a naïve egotism
which made him commiserate himself, while he murmured:
'Poor Compan! poor Compan!'
Mouret was feeling quite perplexed. All his theories about
Abbé Faujas were being upset.
'I had such very precise details furnished to me,' he
ventured to say. 'I was told that he was to be promoted to
some important office.'
'Oh dear, no!' cried the priest. 'I can assure you that
there is no truth in anything of the kind. Faujas has no
expectations of any sort. I'll tell you something that proves
it. You know that I dine at the Presiding Judge's every
Tuesday. Well, last week he particularly asked me to bring
Faujas with me. He wanted to see him, and find out what
sort of a person he was, I suppose. Now, you would scarcely
guess what Faujas did. He refused the invitation, my dear
sir, bluntly refused it. It was all to no purpose that I told
him he would make his life at Plassans quite intolerable, and
would certainly embroil himself with Fenil by acting so rudely
to Monsieur Rastoil. He persisted in having his own way,
and wouldn't be persuaded by anything that I said. I believe
that he even exclaimed, in a moment of anger, that he wasn't
reduced to accepting dinners of that kind.'
Abbé Bourrette began to smile. They had now reached
Saint-Saturnin's, and he detained Mouret for a moment near
the little side door of the church.
'He is a child, a big child,' he continued. 'I ask you,
now, could a dinner at Monsieur Rastoil's possibly compromise
him in any way? When your mother-in-law, that good
Madame Rougon, entrusted me yesterday with an invitation
for Faujas, I did not conceal from her my fear that it would
be badly received.'
Mouret pricked up his ears.
'Ah! my mother-in-law gave you an invitation for him,
did she?'
'Yes, she came to the sacristy yesterday. As I make a
point of doing what I can to oblige her, I promised her that I[Pg 52]
would go and see the obstinate man this morning. I felt
quite certain, however, that he would refuse.'
'And did he?'
'No, indeed; much to my surprise, he accepted.'
Mouret opened his lips and then closed them again without
speaking. The priest winked with an appearance of
extreme satisfaction.
'I had to manage the matter very skilfully, you know.
For more than an hour I went on explaining your mother-in-law's
position to him. He kept shaking his head, however;
he could not make up his mind to go, and he was ever
dwelling upon his desire for privacy. I had exhausted my
stock of arguments when I recalled one point of the instructions
which the dear lady gave me. She had told me to tell
him that her drawing-room was entirely neutral ground, and
that this was a fact well known to the whole town. When I
pressed this upon his notice he seemed to waver, and at last
he consented to accept the invitation, and even promised to
go to-morrow. I shall send a few lines to that excellent
Madame Rougon to inform her of my success.'
He lingered for a moment longer, rolling his big blue eyes,
and saying—more to himself than to Mouret:
'Monsieur Rastoil will be very much vexed, but it's no
fault of mine.'
Then he added: 'Good-morning, dear Monsieur Mouret;
remember me very kindly to all your family.'
He entered the church, letting the padded doors close
softly behind him. Mouret gazed at the doors and lightly
shrugged his shoulders.
'There's a fine old chatterbox!' he muttered; 'one of
those men who never give one a chance of getting in a word,
but go on chattering away for hours without ever telling one
anything worth listening to. So Faujas is going to Félicité's
to-morrow! It's really very provoking that I am not on good
terms with that fool Rougon!'
All the afternoon he was occupied with business matters,
but at night, just as he and his wife were going to bed, he said
to Marthe carelessly:
'Are you going to your mother's to-morrow evening?'
'No, not to-morrow,' Marthe replied, 'I have too many
things to do. But I dare say I shall go next week.'
He made no immediate reply, but just before he blew out
the candle, he resumed:
[Pg 53]
'It is wrong not to go out oftener than you do. Go to
your mother's to-morrow evening; it will enliven you a little.
I will stay at home and look after the children.'
Marthe looked at him in astonishment. He generally kept
her at home with him, requiring all kinds of little services
from her, and grumbling if she went out even for an hour.
'Very well,' she replied, 'I will go if you wish me to.'
Then he blew out the candle, laid his head upon the
pillow, and muttered:
'That's right; and you can tell us all about it when you
come back. It will amuse the children.'
About nine o'clock on the following evening, Abbé Bourrette
called for Abbé Faujas. He had promised to go with him to
the Rougons' and introduce him there. He found him ready,
standing in the middle of his big bare room, and putting on a
pair of black gloves that were sadly whitened at the finger-tips.
Bourrette could not restrain a slight grimace as he looked at
him.
'Haven't you got another cassock?' he asked.
'No,' quietly replied Abbé Faujas. 'This one is still very
decent, I think.'
'Oh, certainly! certainly!' stammered the old priest;
'but it's very cold outside. Hadn't you better put something
round your shoulders? Well! well! come along then!'
The nights had just commenced to be frosty. Abbé Bourrette,
who was warmly wrapped in a padded silk overcoat, got
quite out of breath as he panted along after Abbé Faujas,
who wore nothing over his shoulders but his thin, threadbare
cassock. They stopped at the corner of the Rue de la Banne
and the Place of the Sub-Prefecture, in front of a house built
entirely of white stone, one of the handsome mansions of the
new part of the town. A servant in blue livery received them
at the door and ushered them into the hall. He smiled at
Abbé Bourrette as he helped him to take off his overcoat, and
seemed greatly surprised at the appearance of the other priest,
that tall, rough-hewn man, who had ventured out on such a
bitter night without a cloak.
The drawing-room was on the first floor, and Abbé Faujas
entered it with head erect, and grave, though perfectly easy,[Pg 54]
demeanour, while Abbé Bourrette, who was always very
nervous when he went to the Rougons' house, although he
never missed a single one of their receptions, made his
escape into an adjoining apartment, thus cowardly leaving his
companion in the lurch. Faujas, however, slowly traversed
the whole drawing-room in order to pay his respects to the
mistress of the house, whom he felt sure he could recognise
among a group of five or six ladies. He was obliged to introduce
himself, and he did so in two or three words. Félicité
had immediately risen from her seat, and she closely if quickly
scanned him from head to foot. Then her eyes sought his
own, as she smilingly said:
'I am delighted, Monsieur l'Abbé; I am delighted indeed.'
The priest's passage through the drawing-room had created
considerable sensation. One young lady who had suddenly
raised her head, had quite trembled with alarm at the sight
of that great black mass in front of her. The impression
created by the Abbé was, indeed, an unfavourable one. He
was too tall, too square-shouldered, his face was too hard and
his hands were too big. His cassock, moreover, looked so
frightfully shabby beneath the bright light of the chandelier
that the ladies felt a kind of shame at seeing a priest so
shockingly dressed. They spread out their fans, and began to
giggle behind them, while pretending to be quite unconscious
of the Abbé's presence. The men, meantime, exchanged very
significant glances.
Félicité saw what a very churlish welcome the priest was
receiving; she seemed annoyed at it, and remained standing,
raising her voice in order to force her guests to hear the
compliments which she addressed to Faujas.
'That dear Bourrette,' said she, in her most winning tone,
'has told me what difficulty he had in persuading you to come.
I am really quite cross with you, sir. You have no right to
deprive society of the pleasure of your company.'
The priest bowed without making any reply, and the old
lady laughed as she began to speak again, laying a meaning
emphasis on certain of her words.
'I know more about you than you imagine, in spite of all
the care you have taken to hide your light under a bushel. I
have been told about you; you are a very holy man, and I
want to be your friend. We shall have an opportunity to talk
about this, for I hope that you will now consider yourself as
one of our circle.'
[Pg 55]
Abbé Faujas looked at her fixedly, as though he had recognised
some masonic sign in the movements of her fan. He
lowered his voice as he replied:
'Madame, I am entirely at your service.'
'I am delighted to hear you say so,' said Madame Rougon
with another laugh. 'You will find that we do our best here
to make everyone happy. But come with me and let me present
you to my husband.'
She crossed the room, disturbing several of her guests in
her progress to make way for Abbé Faujas, thus giving him
an importance which put the finishing touch to the prejudice
against him. In the adjoining room some card-tables were
set out. She went straight up to her husband, who was
gravely playing whist. He seemed rather impatient as she
stooped down to whisper in his ear, but the few words she
said to him made him spring briskly from his seat.
'Very good! very good!' he murmured.
Then, having first apologised to those with whom he was
playing, he went and shook hands with Abbé Faujas.
At that time Rougon was a stout, pale man of seventy,
and had acquired all a millionaire's gravity of expression. He
was generally considered by the Plassans people to have a fine
head, the white, uncommunicative head of a man of political
importance. After he had exchanged a few courtesies with
the priest he resumed his seat at the card-table. Félicité had
just gone back into the drawing-room, her face still wreathed
with smiles.
When Abbé Faujas at last found himself alone he did not
manifest the slightest sign of embarrassment. He remained
for a moment watching the whist-players, or appearing to do
so, for he was, in reality, examining the curtains, and carpet,
and furniture. It was a small wainscotted room, and book-cases
of dark pear-tree wood, ornamented with brass beadings,
occupied three of its sides. It looked like a magistrate's private
sanctum. At last the priest, who was apparently desirous of
making a complete inspection, returned to the drawing-room and
crossed it. It was hung with green, and was in keeping with
the smaller salon, but there was more gilding about it, so that
it suggested the soberness of a minister's private room combined
with the brightness of a great restaurant. On the other
side of it was a sort of boudoir where Félicité received her
friends during the day. This was hung in straw colour, and
was so full of easy-chairs and ottomans and couches, covered[Pg 56]
with brocade with a pattern of violet scroll-work, that there
was scarcely room to move about in it.
Abbé Faujas took a seat near the fireplace and pretended
to be warming his feet. He had placed himself in such a
position that through the open doorway he could command a
view of the greater part of the large drawing-room. He reflected
upon Madame Rougon's gracious reception, and half
closed his eyes, as though he were thinking out some problem
which it was rather difficult to solve. A moment or two afterwards,
while he was still absorbed in his reverie, he heard
someone speaking behind him. His large-backed easy-chair
concealed him from sight, and he kept his eyes still more
tightly closed than before, as he remained there listening,
looking for all the world as though the warmth of the fire had
sent him to sleep.
'I went to their house just once at that time,' an unctuous
voice was saying. 'They were then living opposite this place,
on the other side of the Rue de la Banne. You were at Paris
then; but all Plassans at that period knew of the Rougons'
yellow drawing-room. A wretched room it was, hung with
lemon-coloured paper at fifteen sous the piece, and containing
some rickety furniture covered with cheap velvet. But look
at black Félicité now, dressed in plum-coloured satin and
seated on yonder couch! Do you see how she gives her hand
to little Delangre? Upon my word, she is giving it to him to
kiss!'
Then a younger voice said with something of a sneer:
'They must have managed to lay their hands on a pretty
big share of plunder to be able to have such a beautiful
drawing-room; it is the handsomest, you know, in the whole
town.'
'The lady,' the other voice resumed, 'has always had a
passion for receptions. When she was hard up she drank
water herself so that she might be able to provide lemonade
for her guests. Oh! I know all about the Rougons. I have
watched their whole career. They are very clever people, and
the Coup d'État has enabled them to satisfy the dreams of
luxury and pleasure which had been tormenting them for forty
years. Now you see what a magnificent style they keep up,
how lavishly they live! This house which they now occupy
formerly belonged to a Monsieur Peirotte, one of the receivers
of taxes, who was killed in the affair at Sainte-Roure in the
insurrection of '51. Upon my word, they've had the most[Pg 57]
extraordinary luck: a stray bullet removed the man who was
standing in their way, and they stepped into his place and
house. If it had been a choice between the receivership and
the house, Félicité would certainly have chosen the house.
She had been hankering after it for half a score years nearly,
making herself quite ill by her covetous glances at the
magnificent curtains that hung at the windows. It was her
Tuileries, as the Plassans people used to say, after the 2nd of
December.'
'But where did they get the money to buy this house?'
'Ah! no one knows that, my dear fellow. Their son
Eugène, who has had such amazing political success in Paris,
and has become a deputy, a minister and a confidential
adviser at the Tuileries, had no difficulty in obtaining the
receivership and the cross of the Legion of Honour for his
father, who had played his cards very cleverly here. As for
the house, they probably paid for it by borrowing the money
from some banker. Anyhow, they are wealthy people to-day,
and are fast making up for lost time. I fancy their son keeps
up a constant correspondence with them, for they have not
made a single false step as yet.'
The person who was speaking paused for a moment, then
resumed with a low laugh:
'Ah! I really can't help laughing when I see that precious
grasshopper of a Félicité putting on all her fine duchess's
airs! I always think of the old yellow drawing-room with
its threadbare carpet and shabby furniture and little fly-specked
chandelier. And now, to-day, she receives the
Rastoil young ladies. Just look how she is manœuvring the
train of her dress! Some day, my dear fellow, that old
woman will burst of sheer triumph in the middle of her green
drawing-room!'
Abbé Faujas had gently let his head turn so that he
might peep at what was going on in the drawing-room.
There he observed Madame Rougon standing in all her
majesty in the centre of a group of guests. She seemed to
have increased in stature, and every back around bent before
her glance, which was like that of some victorious queen.
'Ah! here's your father!' said the person with the
unctuous voice; 'the good doctor is just arriving. I'm quite
surprised that he has never told you of all these matters. He
knows far more about them than I do.'
'Oh! my father is always afraid lest I should compromise[Pg 58]
him,' replied the other gaily. 'You know how he rails at me
and swears that I shall make him lose all his patients. Ah!
excuse me, please; I see the young Maffres over there, I
must go and shake hands with them.'
There was a sound of chairs being moved, and Abbé
Faujas saw a tall young man, whose face already bore signs
of physical weariness, cross the small room. The other
person, the one who had given such a lively account of the
Rougons, also rose from his seat. A lady who happened to
pass near him allowed him to pay her some pretty compliments;
and she smiled at him and called him 'dear Monsieur
de Condamin.' Thereupon the priest recognised him as the
fine man of sixty whom Mouret had pointed out to him in the
garden of the Sub-Prefecture. Monsieur de Condamin came
and sat down on the other side of the fireplace. He was
startled to see Abbé Faujas, who had been quite concealed by
the back of his chair, but he appeared in no way disconcerted.
He smiled and, with amicable self-possession, exclaimed:
'I think, Monsieur l'Abbé, that we have just been unintentionally
confessing ourselves. It's a great sin, isn't it, to
backbite one's neighbour? Fortunately you were there to
give us absolution.'
The Abbé, in spite of the control which he usually had
over his features, could not restrain a slight blush. He perfectly
understood that Monsieur de Condamin was reproaching
him for having kept so quiet in order to listen to what
was being said. Monsieur de Condamin, however, was not a
man to preserve a grudge against anyone for their curiosity,
but quite the contrary. He was delighted at the complicity
which the matter seemed to have established between himself
and the Abbé. It put him at liberty to talk freely and to
while away the evening in relating scandalous stories about
the persons present. There was nothing that he enjoyed so
much, and this Abbé, who had only recently arrived at
Plassans, seemed likely to prove a good listener, the more
especially as he had an ugly face, the face of a man who
would listen to anything, and wore such a shabby cassock
that it would be preposterous to think that any confidence to
which he might be treated would lead to unpleasantness.
By the end of a quarter of an hour Monsieur de Condamin
became quite at his ease, and gave Abbé Faujas a detailed
account of Plassans with all the suave politeness of a man
of the world.
[Pg 59]
'You are a stranger amongst us, Monsieur l'Abbé,' said
he, 'and I shall be delighted if I can be of any assistance to
you. Plassans is a little hole of a place, but one gets reconciled
to it in time. I myself come from the neighbourhood
of Dijon, and when I was appointed conservator of woods and
rivers in this district, I found the place detestable, and thought
I should be bored to death here. That was just before the
Empire. After '51, the provinces were by no means cheerful
places to live in, I assure you. In this department the folks
were alarmed if they heard a dog bark, and they were ready
to sink into the ground at the sight of a gendarme. But they
calmed down by degrees, and resumed their old, monotonous,
uneventful existences, and in the end I grew quite resigned to
my life here. I live chiefly in the open air, I take long rides
on horseback, and I have made a few pleasant friendships.'
He lowered his voice, and continued confidentially:
'If you will take my advice, Monsieur l'Abbé, you will be
careful what you do. You can't imagine what a scrape I
once nearly fell into. Plassans, you know, is divided into
three absolutely distinct divisions: the old district, where
your duties will be confined to administering consolation and
alms; the district of Saint-Marc, where our aristocrats live, a
district that is full of boredom and ill-feeling, and where you
can't be too much upon your guard; and, lastly, the new
town, the district which is now springing up round the Sub-Prefecture,
and which is the only one where it is possible to
live with any degree of comfort. At first I was foolish
enough to take up my quarters in the Saint-Marc district,
where I thought that my position required me to reside.
There, alack! I found myself surrounded by a lot of withered
old dowagers and mummified marquises. There wasn't an
atom of sociability, not a scrap of gaiety, nothing but sulky
mutiny against the prosperous peace that the country was
enjoying. I only just missed compromising myself, upon my
word I did. Péqueur used to chaff me, Monsieur Péqueur
des Saulaies, our sub-prefect; you know him, don't you?
Well, then I crossed the Cours Sauvaire, and took rooms on
the Place. At Plassans, you must know, the people have no
existence, and the aristocracy are a dreadful lot that it's quite
impossible to get on with; the only tolerable folks are a few
parvenus, some delightful persons who are ready to incur any
expense in entertaining their official acquaintances. Our
little circle of functionaries is a very delightful one. We live[Pg 60]
amongst ourselves after our own inclinations, without caring
a rap about the townspeople, just as if we had pitched our
camp in some conquered country.'
He laughed complacently, stretched himself further back
in his chair, and turned up his feet to the fire; then he took
a glass of punch from a tray which one of the servants handed
to him, and sipped it slowly while still watching Abbé Faujas
out of the corner of his eye. The latter felt that politeness
required him to say something.
'This house seems a very pleasant one,' he remarked,
turning slightly towards the green drawing-room, whence the
sound of animated conversation was proceeding.
'Yes, yes,' resumed Monsieur de Condamin, who checked
his remarks every now and then to take a little sip of punch.
'The Rougons almost make us forget Paris. You would
scarcely fancy here that you were in Plassans. It is the only
pleasant and amusing drawing-room in the whole place,
because it is the only one where all shades of opinion elbow
one another. Péqueur, too, has very pleasant assemblies. It
must cost the Rougons a lot of money, and they haven't the
public purse behind them like Péqueur has; though they have
something better still, the pockets of the taxpayers.'
He seemed quite pleased with this witticism of his. He
set his empty glass, which he had been holding in his hand,
upon the mantelpiece, and then, drawing his chair near to
Abbé Faujas and leaning towards him, he began to speak
again:
'The most amusing comedies are continually being played
here. But you ought to know the actors to appreciate them.
You see Madame Rastoil over yonder between her two
daughters—that lady of about forty-five with a head like a
sheep's? Well, have you noticed how her eyelids trembled
and blinked when Delangre came and sat down in front of
her? Delangre is the man there on the left, with a likeness
to Punch. They were acquainted intimately some ten years
ago, and he is said to be the father of one of the girls, but it
isn't known which. The funniest part of the business is that
Delangre himself didn't get on very well with his wife about
the same time; and people say that the father of his daughter
is an artist very well known in Plassans.'
Abbé Faujas had considered it his duty to assume a very
serious expression on being made the recipient of such confidences
as these, and he even closed his eyes and seemed to[Pg 61]
hear nothing; while Monsieur de Condamin went on, as
though in justification of himself:
'I allow myself to speak in this way of Delangre, as I
know him so well. He is a wonderfully clever, pushing fellow.
His father was a bricklayer, I believe. Fifteen years ago he
used to take up the petty suits that other lawyers wouldn't be
bothered with. Madame Rastoil extricated him from a condition
of absolute penury; she supplied him even with wood in
the winter-time to enable him to keep himself warm. It was
through her influence that he won his first cases. It's worth
mentioning that at that time Delangre had been shrewd
enough to manifest no particular political proclivities; and
so, in 1852, when people were looking out for a mayor, his
name was at once thought of. He was the only man who
could have been chosen without alarming one or other of the
three divisions of the town. From that time everything has
prospered with him, and he has a fine future before him.
The only unfortunate part of the matter is that he doesn't get
on very well with Péqueur; they are always wrangling about
some silly trifles or other.'
He broke off as he saw the tall young man, with whom he
had been chatting previously, come up to him again.
'Monsieur Guillaume Porquier,' he said, introducing him
to the Abbé, 'the son of Doctor Porquier.'
Then, as Guillaume seated himself, he asked him with a
touch of irony:
'Well! what did you see to admire over yonder?'
'Nothing at all, indeed!' replied the young man with a
smile. 'I saw the Paloques. Madame Rougon always tries
to hide them behind a curtain to prevent anything unpleasant
happening. Paloque never takes his eyes off Monsieur Rastoil,
hoping, no doubt, to kill him with suppressed terror. You
know, of course, that the hideous fellow hopes to die presiding
judge.'
They both laughed. The ugliness of the Paloques was a
perpetual source of amusement amongst the little circle of
officials. Porquier's son lowered his voice as he continued:
'I saw Monsieur Bourdeu, too. Doesn't it strike you that
he's ever so much thinner since the Marquis de Lagrifoul's
election? Bourdeu will never get over the loss of his prefecture;
he had put all his Orleanist rancour at the service of
the Legitimists in the hope that that course would lead him
straight to the Chamber, where he would be able to win back[Pg 62]
that deeply-deplored prefecture. So he was horribly disgusted
and hurt to find that instead of himself they chose the
marquis, who is a perfect ass and hasn't the faintest notion
of politics, whereas he, Bourdeu, is a very shrewd fellow.'
'That Bourdeu, with his tightly-buttoned frock-coat and
broad-brimmed hat, is a most overbearing person,' said
Monsieur de Condamin, shrugging his shoulders. 'If such
people as he were allowed to have their own way they would
turn France into a mere Sorbonne of lawyers and diplomatists,
and would bore us all to death——Oh! by the way,
Guillaume, I have been hearing about you. You seem to be
leading a merry sort of life.'
'I?' exclaimed the young man with a smile.
'Yes, you, my fine fellow! and observe that I get my
information from your father. He is much distressed about
it: he accuses you of gambling and of staying out all night
at the club and other places. Is it true that you have discovered
a low café behind the gaol where you go with a
company of scamps and play the devil's own game? I have
even been told——'
Here Monsieur de Condamin, observing two ladies enter
the room, began to whisper in Guillaume's ear, while the
young man replied with affirmative signs and shook with
suppressed laughter. Then he bent forward in turn and whispered
to Monsieur de Condamin, and the pair of them, drawing
close together with brightly glistening eyes, seemed to
derive a prolonged enjoyment from this private story, which
could not be told in the presence of ladies.
Abbé Faujas had remained where he was. He no longer
listened to what was being said, but watched the many movements
of Monsieur Delangre, who bustled about the green
drawing-room trying to make himself extremely agreeable.
The priest was so absorbed in his observations that he did not
see Abbé Bourrette beckoning to him, so that the other
had to come and touch his shoulder and ask him to follow.
He then led him into the card-room with all the precaution
of a man who has some very delicate communication to
make.
'My dear friend,' he whispered, when they were alone in
a quiet corner, 'it is excusable in you, as this is the first time
you have been here, but I must warn you that you have compromised
yourself very considerably by talking so long with
the persons you have just left.'
[Pg 63]
Then, as Abbé Faujas looked at him with great surprise,
he added:
'Those persons are not looked upon favourably. I myself
am not passing any judgment upon them, and I don't want
to repeat any scandal. I am simply warning you out of pure
friendship, that's all.'
He was going away, but Abbé Faujas detained him, exclaiming
hastily:
'You disquiet me, my dear Monsieur Bourrette; I beg of
you to explain yourself. Without speaking any ill of anyone,
you can surely be a little clearer.'
'Well then,' replied the old priest, after a momentary
hesitation, 'Doctor Porquier's son causes his worthy father
the greatest distress, and sets the worst example to all the
studious youth of Plassans. He left nothing but debts behind
him in Paris, and here he is turning the whole town upside
down. As for Monsieur de Condamin——'
Here he hesitated again, feeling embarrassed by the
enormity of what he had to relate; then, lowering his eyes,
he resumed:
'Monsieur de Condamin is very free in his conversation,
and I fear that he is deficient in a sense of morality. He
spares no one, and he scandalises every honourable person.
Then—I really hardly know how to tell you—but he has contracted,
it is said, a scarcely creditable marriage. You see
that young woman there, who is not thirty years old, and
who has such a crowd around her? Well, he brought her to
Plassans one day from no one knows where. From the time
of her arrival she has been all-powerful here. It is she who
has got her husband and Doctor Porquier decorated. She
has influential friends in Paris. But I beg of you not to repeat
any of this. Madame de Condamin is very amiable and
charitable. I go to her house sometimes, and I should be
extremely distressed if I thought that she considered me an
enemy of hers. If she has committed faults, it is our duty—is
it not?—to help her to return to a better way of life.
As for her husband, he is, between ourselves, a perfect scamp.
Have as little as possible to do with him.'
Abbé Faujas gazed into the worthy Bourrette's eyes. He
had just noticed that Madame Rougon was following their
conversation from the distance with a thoughtful air.
'Wasn't it Madame Rougon who told you to come and
give me this good advice?' he suddenly asked the old priest.
[Pg 64]
'How did you know that?' the latter exclaimed in great
astonishment. 'She asked me not to mention her name, but
since you have guessed it—Ah! she is a good, kind-hearted
lady who would be much distressed to see a priest compromising
himself in her house. She is unfortunately compelled to
receive all sorts of persons.'
Abbé Faujas expressed his thanks, and promised to be
more prudent in the future. The card-players had not taken
any notice of the two priests, who returned into the big
drawing-room, where Faujas was again conscious of hostile
surroundings. He even experienced greater coldness and
more silent contempt than before. The ladies pulled their
dresses out of his way as though his touch would have soiled
them, and the men turned away from him with sneering
titters. He himself maintained haughty calmness and indifference.
Fancying that he heard the word Besançon
meaningly pronounced in a corner of the room where Madame
de Condamin was holding her court, he walked straight up to
the folks by whom she was surrounded; but, at his approach,
there was a dead silence amongst them, and they all stared
him in the face with eyes that gleamed with uncharitable
curiosity. He felt quite sure that they had been talking about
him, and repeating some disgraceful story. While he was still
standing there, behind the Rastoil young ladies, who had not
observed him, he heard the younger one ask her sister:
'What was it that this priest, of whom everyone is talking,
did at Besançon?'
'I don't quite know,' the elder sister replied. 'I believe
he nearly murdered his vicar in a quarrel they had. Papa
also said that he had been mixed up in some great business
speculation which turned out badly.'
'He's in the small room over there, isn't he? Somebody
saw him just now laughing with Monsieur de Condamin.'
'Oh! then people do quite right to distrust him if he
laughs with Monsieur de Condamin.'
This gossip of the two girls made perspiration start from
Abbé Faujas's brows. He did not frown, but his lips tightened
one upon the other, and his cheeks took an ashy tint. He
seemed to hear the whole room talking of the priest whom he
had tried to murder, and of the shady transactions in which
he had been concerned.
Opposite him were Monsieur Delangre and Doctor Porquier,
still looking very severe; Monsieur de Bourdeu's[Pg 65]
mouth pouted scornfully as he said something in a low voice
to a lady; Monsieur Maffre, the justice of the peace, was
casting furtive glances at him, as if he had piously resolved
to examine him from a distance before condemning him; and
at the other end of the room the two hideous Paloques craned
out their malice-warped faces, in which shone a wicked joy at
all the cruel stories that were being whispered about. Abbé
Faujas slowly retired as he saw Madame Rastoil, who had
been standing a few paces away, come up and seat herself
between her two daughters, as though to keep them under the
protection of her wing and shield them from his touch. He
rested his elbow on the piano which he saw behind him, and
there he stood with his head erect and his face as hard and
silent as a face of stone. He felt that they were all in a plot
to treat him as an outcast.
As he stood thus gazing at the company from under his
partially lowered eyelids he suddenly gave a slight start,
which he quickly suppressed. He had just caught sight of
Abbé Fenil, leaning back in an easy-chair and smiling quietly
behind a perfect wall of petticoats. The eyes of the two men
met, and they gazed at each other for some moments with
the fierce expression of duellists about to engage in mortal
combat. Then there was a rustling of silk, and Abbé Fenil
was hidden from sight by the ladies' gowns.
However, Félicité had contrived to reach the neighbourhood
of the piano, and when she had succeeded in installing
at it the elder of the Rastoil girls, who had a pleasant voice,
and was able to speak to Abbé Faujas without being heard,
she drew him towards one of the windows and asked:
'What have you done to Abbé Fenil?'
They talked together in very low tones. The priest at
first feigned surprise, but when Madame Rougon had murmured
a few words, accompanied by sundry shruggings of
her shoulders, he seemed to become more open with her.
They both smiled, and made a pretence of merely exchanging
ordinary courtesies, but the glistening of their eyes spoke of
something much more serious. The piano was silent for
a moment, and then the elder Mademoiselle Rastoil began to
sing 'La Colombe du Soldat,' which was a favourite song at
that time.
'Your début has been most unfortunate,' Félicité continued.
'You have quite set people against you, and I should
advise you not to come here again for a considerable time.[Pg 66]
You must make yourself popular and a favourite, you understand.
Any rash act would be fatal.'
Abbé Faujas seemed absorbed in thought.
'You say that it was Abbé Fenil who circulated these
abominable stories?' he asked.
'Oh, he is much too wily to commit himself in such a
way. He must just have faintly suggested them to his
penitents. I don't know whether he has found you out, but
he is certainly afraid of you. I am sure of that. And he will
attack you in every possible way. The most unfortunate part
of the matter is that he confesses the most important people
in the town. It was he who secured the election of the
Marquis de Lagrifoul.'
'I did wrong to come this evening,' the priest murmured.
Félicité bit her lips, then continued with animation:
'You did wrong to compromise yourself with such a man
as that Condamin. I did what I thought was best. When
the person whom you know of wrote to me from Paris I
thought that I should be doing you a service by inviting you
here. I imagined that you would be able to make it an
opportunity for gaining friends. But, instead of doing what
you could to make yourself popular, you have set everyone
against you. Please excuse my freedom, but you really seem
to be doing all you can to ensure your failure. You have
committed nothing but mistakes: in going to lodge with my
son-in-law, in persistently keeping yourself aloof from others,
and in walking about in a cassock which makes the street-lads
jeer at you.'
Abbé Faujas could not repress a movement of impatience.
However, he merely replied:
'I will profit by your kind advice. Only, don't try to
assist me; that would mar everything.'
'Yes, what you say is prudent,' replied the old lady.
'Only return here in triumph. One last word, my dear sir.
The person in Paris is most anxious for your success, and it
is for that reason that I am interesting myself in you. Well,
then, don't make people frightened of you—shun you; be
pleasant, and make yourself agreeable to the ladies. Remember
that particularly. You must make yourself agreeable
to the ladies if you want to get Plassans on your side.'
The elder Mademoiselle Rastoil had just finished her song
with a final flourish, and the guests were softly applauding
her. Madame Rougon left the Abbé to go and congratulate[Pg 67]
the singer. Then she took up a position in the middle of the
room, and shook hands with the visitors who were beginning
to retire. It was eleven o'clock. The Abbé was much vexed
to find that the worthy Bourrette had taken advantage of the
music to effect his escape. He had thought of leaving with
him—a course which would have enabled him to make a
respectable exit. Now, however, he would have to go away
alone, which would be extremely prejudicial to him. It would
be reported through the town in the morning that he had
been turned out of the house. So he retired into a window-recess,
whence he watched for an opportunity to effect an
honourable retreat.
The room was emptying fast, however, and there were
only a few ladies left. At last he noticed one who was very
simply dressed; it was Madame Mouret, whose slightly waved
hair made her look younger than usual. He looked with
surprise at her tranquil face and her large, peaceful black
eyes. He had not noticed her during the evening; she had
quietly remained in the same corner without moving, vexed
at wasting her time in this way, with her hands in her lap,
doing nothing. While he was looking at her she rose to take
leave of her mother.
It was one of Félicité's greatest delights to see the high
society of Plassans leave her with profuse bows and thanks
for her punch, her green drawing-room, and the pleasant
evening they had spent there; and she thought how, formerly,
these same fine folks had trampled her underfoot, whereas
now the richest amongst them could not find sweet enough
smiles for 'dear Madame Rougon.'
'Ah, madame!' murmured Maffre, the justice of the peace,
'one quite forgets the passage of time here.'
'You are the only pleasant hostess in all this uncivilised
place,' whispered pretty Madame de Condamin.
'We shall expect you to dinner to-morrow,' said Monsieur
Delangre; 'but you must take pot-luck, for we don't pretend
to do as you do.'
Marthe was obliged to make her way through all this
incense-offering crowd in order to reach her mother. She
kissed her, and was about to retire, when Félicité detained
her and looked around as if to trying to find someone. Then
on catching sight of Abbé Faujas, she inquired, with a smile:
'Is your reverence a gallant man?'
The Abbé bowed.
[Pg 68]
'Well, then, I should be much obliged to you if you
would escort my daughter home. You both live in the same
house, and so it will not put you to any inconvenience. On
the road there is a little bit of dark lane which is not very
pleasant for a lady by herself.'
Marthe assured her mother, in her quiet way, that she
was not a little girl, and in no wise felt afraid; but as Félicité
insisted, saying that she should feel easier if her daughter had
someone with her, she at last accepted the Abbé's escort. As
the latter retired with her, Félicité, who accompanied them to
the landing, whispered in the priest's ear, with a smile:
'Don't forget what I told you. You must make yourself
agreeable to the ladies if you want Plassans to belong
to you.'
That same night Mouret, who was still awake when his wife
returned home, plied her with questions in his desire to find
out what had taken place at Madame Rougon's. She told him
that everything had gone off as usual, and that she had
noticed nothing out of the common. She just added that
Abbé Faujas had walked home with her, but had merely
spoken of commonplace matters. Mouret was very much
vexed at what he called his wife's indolence.
'If anyone had committed suicide at your mother's,' he
growled, as he angrily buried his head in his pillow, 'you
would know nothing about it!'
When he came home to dinner the next day, he called to
Marthe as soon as he caught sight of her:
'I was sure of it! I knew you had never troubled yourself
to use your eyes! It's just like you! Sitting the whole
evening in a room and never having the faintest notion of
what was being said or done around you! Why, the whole
town is talking about it! The whole town, do you hear? I
couldn't go anywhere without somebody speaking to me about——'
'About what, my dear?' asked Marthe, in astonishment.
'About the fine success of Abbé Faujas, forsooth! He was
turned out of the green drawing-room!'
'Indeed he wasn't! I saw nothing of the kind.'
[Pg 69]
'Haven't I told you that you never see anything? Do
you know what the Abbé did at Besançon? He either
murdered a priest or committed forgery! They are not quite
certain which it was. However, they seem to have given him
a nice reception! He turned quite green. Well, it's all up
with him now!'
Marthe bent her head and allowed her husband to revel in
the priest's discomfiture. Mouret was delighted.
'I still stick to my first idea,' he said; 'your mother and
he have got some underhand plot together. I hear that she
showed him the greatest civility. It was she, wasn't it, who
asked him to accompany you home? Why didn't you tell
me so?'
Marthe shrugged her shoulders without replying.
'You are the most provoking woman in the world!' her
husband cried. 'All these little details are of the greatest
importance. Madame Paloque, whom I have just met, told me
that she and several other ladies had lingered behind to see
how the Abbé would effect his departure, and that your
mother availed herself of you to cover the parson's retreat.
Just try to remember, now, what he said to you as he walked
home with you.'
He sat down by his wife's side with his keen, questioning
little eyes fixed upon her.
'Really,' said she quietly, 'he only talked to me about the
trifling commonplace matters such as anyone might have
talked of. He spoke about the cold, which was very sharp,
and about the quietness of the town at night-time, and I
think he mentioned the pleasant evening he had passed.'
'Ah, the hypocrite! Didn't he ask you any questions
about your mother or her guests?'
'No. The Rue de la Banne is only a very short distance,
you know, and it didn't take us three minutes. He walked
by my side without offering me his arm, and he took such
long strides that I was almost obliged to run. I don't know
why folks should all be so bitter against him. He doesn't
seem very well off, and he was shivering, poor man, in that
threadbare old cassock of his.'
Mouret was not without pity and sympathy.
'Ah! he must have done,' he said; 'he can't feel very
warm now that the frost has come.'
'I'm sure we have nothing to complain of in his conduct,'
Marthe continued. 'He is very punctual in his payments,[Pg 70]
and he makes no noise and gives no trouble. Where could
you find a more desirable tenant?'
'Nowhere, I grant you. What I was saying just now was
to show you what little attention you pay, wherever you go,
to what takes place around you. I know the set your mother
receives too well to attach much weight to anything that
happens in the green drawing-room: it's a perpetual source
of lies and the most ridiculous stories. I don't suppose for a
moment that the Abbé ever murdered anyone any more than
that he was ever a bankrupt; and I told Madame Paloque
that people ought to see that their own linen was clean before
they found fault with that of others. I hope she took the
hint to herself.'
This was a fib on Mouret's part, for he had said nothing
of the kind to Madame Paloque; but Marthe's pity had made
him feel rather ashamed of the delight which he had manifested
at the Abbé's troubles. On the following days he went
entirely over to the priest's side, and whenever he happened
to meet any people whom he detested, Monsieur de Bourdeu,
Monsieur Delangre, and Doctor Porquier, he launched out
into warm praises of the Abbé just for the pleasure of
astonishing and annoying them. The Abbé, said he, was a
man of great courage and perfect guilelessness, but extremely
poor, and some very base-minded person must have originated
the calumnies about him. Then he went on to have a rap at
the Rougons' guests, whom he called hypocrites, canting
humbugs and stuck-up idiots, who were afraid of a man of
real virtue. In a short time he had quite made the Abbé's
quarrel his own, and availed himself of it to attack both the
Rastoil gang and the gang of the Sub-Prefecture as well.
'Isn't it pitiable?' he sometimes said to his wife, forgetting
that she had heard him tell a very different story, 'isn't
it pitiable to see a lot of people who stole their money no one
knows where, leaguing so bitterly against a poor man just
because he hasn't got twenty francs to spare to buy a cart-load
of firewood? Such conduct quite disgusts me! I'm quite
willing to be surety for him. I ought to know what he does
and what sort of a man he is, since he lives in my house; and
so I'm not slack in telling them the truth, I give them all
they deserve when I meet them. And I won't content myself
with that, either. I want the Abbé to be my friend, and I
mean to walk out with him arm-in-arm along the promenade
to let people know that I'm not afraid of being seen with him,[Pg 71]
rich and well thought of as I am! I hope, too, that you will
show all the kindness and consideration to these poor people
that you can.'
Marthe smiled quietly. She was delighted at the friendly
disposition her husband was now manifesting towards their
lodgers. Rose was ordered to show them every civility; she
was even told that she might volunteer to do Madame Faujas'
shopping for her on wet mornings. The latter, however, always
declined the cook's services, though she no longer manifested
that silent stiffness of demeanour which she had shown
during the earlier days of her residence in the house. One
morning, as she met Marthe, who was coming down from an
attic which was used as a store-room for the fruit, she stopped
and talked to her for a moment, and even unbent so far as to
accept a couple of magnificent pears. Those pears were the
beginning of a closer intimacy between them.
Abbé Faujas, too, did not now glide so hurriedly up and
down the stairs as he had been wont to do. Almost every
day, when Mouret heard the rustling of the priest's cassock as
he came down, he hastened to the foot of the staircase and
told the Abbé that it would give him great pleasure to walk
part of the way with him. He had also thanked him for the
little service he had done his wife, skilfully questioning him
at the time to find out if he intended again calling on the
Rougons. The Abbé had smiled and freely confessed that he
was not fitted for society. This had delighted Mouret, who
felt quite certain that he had had some influence in bringing
about his lodger's decision. He even began to dream of preventing
all future intercourse with the green drawing-room and
of keeping him altogether to himself. So, when Marthe told
him one evening that Madame Faujas had accepted a couple
of pears, he looked upon this as a fortunate circumstance
which would facilitate the execution of his designs.
'Haven't they really got a fire on the second floor this
bitterly cold weather?' he asked, in Rose's presence.
'No, indeed, sir,' replied the cook, who understood that
the question was meant for herself; 'they couldn't very well
have one, for I've never seen the least bit of wood taken
upstairs, unless indeed they're burning their four chairs or
Madame Faujas manages to carry up the wood in her basket.'
'It is not right of you to talk in that way, Rose,' said
Marthe. 'The poor things must be shivering with cold in
those big rooms.'
[Pg 72]
'I should think so, indeed,' exclaimed Mouret; 'there
were several degrees of frost last night and there was considerable
fear felt about the olive-trees. The water in our jug
upstairs was frozen. This room of ours here is a small one,
however, and very warm.'
The doors and windows of the dining-room were provided
with pads, so that no draught could find its way through any
crevice, and a big earthenware stove made the place as warm
as a bakehouse. During the winter evenings the young
people read or played round the table, while Mouret made his
wife play piquet till bed-time, which, by the way, was perfect
torture to her. For a long time she had refused to touch the
cards, saying that she did not know a single game, but at last
he had taught her piquet, and she had then been forced to
resign herself to her fate.
'Don't you think,' Mouret continued, 'that we really
ought to ask the Faujases to come and spend the evenings
here? They would at any rate be warm for two or three
hours; and they would be company for us, too, and make us
feel more lively. Ask them, and I don't think they'll refuse.'
The next day Marthe met Madame Faujas in the hall
and gave the invitation, which the old lady at once accepted,
both for herself and her son.
'I'm surprised she didn't make some little demur about
coming,' said Mouret. 'I fancied that they would have
required more pressing. But the Abbé is beginning to
understand that he does wrong in living like a wild beast.'
In the evening Mouret took care that the table was cleared
in good time, and he set out a bottle of sweet wine and a
plateful of little cakes. Although he was not given to being
lavish, he was anxious to show that the Rougons were not
the only people who knew how things ought to be done.
The tenants of the second floor came downstairs about eight
o'clock. Abbé Faujas was wearing a new cassock, at the
sight of which Mouret was so much surprised that he could
only stammer a few words in answer to the priest's courtesies.
'Indeed, Monsieur l'Abbé, all the honour is for us. Come,
children, put some chairs here.'
They all took their seats round the table. The room was
uncomfortably warm, for Mouret had crammed the stove as
full as possible in order to let his guests see that he made no
account of a log more or less. Abbé Faujas made himself
very pleasant, fondling Désirée and questioning the two lads[Pg 73]
about their studies. Marthe, who was knitting some stockings,
raised her eyes every now and then in surprise at the flexible
tones of that strange voice which she was not accustomed to
hear sounding in the monotonous quietness of the dining-room.
She looked at the priest's powerful face and square-cut
features, and then bent her head again, without trying to
hide the interest she took in this man who was so strong and
kindly and whom she knew to be so poor. As for Mouret, he
uncouthly stared at the new cassock, and could not restrain
himself from saying, with a sly smile:
'You needn't have troubled to dress to come here,
Monsieur l'Abbé. We don't go in for ceremony, as you know
very well.'
Marthe blushed, while the priest gaily related that he had
bought the cassock that very day. He had kept it on, he
said, to please his mother, who thought that he looked finer
than a king in it.
'Don't you, mother?' he asked the old lady.
Madame Faujas nodded without taking her eyes off her
son. She was sitting opposite to him, gazing at him in the
bright lamplight with an air of ecstasy.
They began to talk of various matters, and Abbé Faujas
seemed to throw off his gloomy coldness. He still remained
grave, but it was with a pleasant, good-natured gravity. He
listened attentively to Mouret, replied to his most insignificant
remarks, and seemed to take an interest in his gossip. His
landlord explained to him the manner in which the family
lived, and finished his account by saying:
'We spend our evenings in the way you see, always as
quietly as this. We never invite anyone, as we are always
more comfortable by ourselves. Every evening I have a
game at piquet with my wife. It is a very old habit of ours,
and I could scarcely go to sleep without it.'
'Pray don't let us interfere with it!' cried Abbé Faujas.
'I beg that you won't in any way depart from your usual
habits on our account.'
'Oh dear no! I am not a monomaniac about it, and it
won't kill me to go without it for once.'
The priest insisted for a time, but, when he saw that
Marthe declined to play with even greater determination than
her husband, he turned towards his mother, who had been
sitting silent with her hands folded in front of her, and said:
'Mother, you have a game with Monsieur Mouret.'
[Pg 74]
She looked keenly into her son's eyes, while Mouret still
continued to refuse, and declared that he did not want to
break up the party. However, when the priest told him that
his mother was a good player he gave way.
'Is she, indeed?' he said. 'Then, if madame really
wishes it, and no one objects——'
'Come along, mother, and have a game!' said Abbé
Faujas in a more decided tone.
'Certainly,' she replied, 'I shall be delighted; but I shall
have to change my place.'
'Oh! there will be no difficulty about that,' said Mouret,
who was quite charmed. 'You had better take your son's
seat, and perhaps Monsieur l'Abbé will be good enough to
sit next to my wife. Madame can sit next to me. There!
that will do capitally.'
The priest, who had at first been opposite to Marthe on
the other side of the table, was thus placed next to her.
They sat quite apart by themselves, the two players having
drawn their chairs close together to engage in their struggle.
Octave and Serge had just gone up to their room. Désirée
was sleeping with her head on the table after her usual
custom. When ten o'clock struck, Mouret, who had lost the
first game, did not feel inclined to go to bed but asked for his
revenge. Madame Faujas consulted her son with a glance,
and then in her tranquil fashion began to shuffle the cards.
The Abbé had merely exchanged a few words with Marthe.
On this the first evening that he spent in the dining-room
he only spoke of commonplace topics; the household, the
price of victuals at Plassans, and the anxieties which children
caused. Marthe replied with a show of interest, looking up
every now and then with her bright glance, and importing
into the conversation some of her own sedate good sense.
It was nearly eleven o'clock when Mouret threw down
the cards with some slight irritation.
'I have lost again!' he said. 'I haven't had a single
good card all the evening. Perhaps I shall have better luck
to-morrow. We shall see you again, I hope, madame?'
And when Abbé Faujas began to protest that they could
not think of abusing the Mourets' kindness by disturbing
them in this way every evening, he continued:
'But you are not disturbing us at all, you are giving us
pleasure. Besides, I have been defeated, and I'm sure that
madame can't refuse me another game.'
[Pg 75]
When the priest and his mother had accepted the invitation
and had gone upstairs again, Mouret showed some ill-temper
and began to excuse himself for having lost. He seemed
quite annoyed about it.
'The old woman isn't as good a player as I am, I'm sure,'
he said to his wife; 'but she has got such eyes! I could
really almost fancy she was cheating, upon my word I could!
Well! we shall see what happens to-morrow.'
From that time the Faujases came down regularly every
day to spend the evening with the Mourets. There were
tremendous battles between the old lady and her landlord.
She seemed to play with him, to let him win just frequently
enough to prevent him from being altogether discouraged, and
this made him fume with suppressed anger, for he prided
himself on his skill at piquet. He used to indulge in dreams
of beating her night after night for weeks in succession
without ever letting her win a single game; while she ever
preserved wonderful coolness, her square peasant-like face
remaining quite expressionless as with her big hands she
threw down the cards with all the regularity of a machine.
From eight o'clock till bed-time they would remain seated at
their end of the table, quite absorbed in their game and never
moving.
At the other end, near the stove, Abbé Faujas and Marthe
were left entirely to themselves. The Abbé felt a masculine
and priestly disdain for woman, and in spite of himself this
disdain often made itself manifest in some slightly harsh
expression. On these occasions Marthe was affected by a
strange feeling of anxiety. She raised her eyes with one of
those sudden thrills of alarm which cause people to cast a
hurried glance behind them, half expecting to see some
concealed enemy raising his hand to strike. At other times,
on catching sight of the Abbé's cassock, she would check
herself suddenly in the midst of a laugh, and would relapse
into silence, quite confused, astonished at finding herself
talking so freely to a man who was so different from other
men. It was a long time before there was any real intimacy
between them.
Abbé Faujas never directly questioned Marthe about her
husband, or her children, or her house; but, nevertheless, he
gradually made himself acquainted with every detail of their
history and manner of life. Every evening, while Mouret
and Madame Faujas were contending furiously one against[Pg 76]
the other, he contrived to learn some new fact. Upon one
occasion he remarked that the husband and wife were
surprisingly alike.
'Yes,' Marthe answered with a smile, 'when we were
twenty years old we used to be taken for brother and sister;
and, indeed, it was a little owing to that circumstance that
we got married. People used to joke us about it, and were
continually making us stand side by side, and saying what a
fine couple we should make. The likeness was so striking
that worthy Monsieur Compan, though he knew us quite
well, hesitated to marry us.'
'But you are cousins, are you not?' the priest asked.
'Yes,' she replied, with a slight blush, 'my husband is a
Macquart, and I am a Rougon.'
Then she kept silence for a moment or two, feeling ill at
ease, for she was sure that the priest knew the history of her
family which was so notorious at Plassans. The Macquarts
were an illegitimate branch of the Rougons.
'The most singular part of it,' she resumed, to conceal
her embarrassment, 'is, that we both resemble our grandmother.
My husband's mother transmitted the likeness to
him, while in me it has sprung up again after a break,
passing my father by.'
Then the Abbé cited a similar instance in his own family.
He had a sister, he said, who was the living image of her
mother's grandfather. The likeness in this case had leapt
over two generations. His sister, too, closely resembled the
old man in her character and habits, even in her gestures and
the tone of her voice.
'It was just the same with me when I was a little girl; I
often heard people say of me,' remarked Marthe, '"She's Aunt
Dide all over again!" The poor woman is now at Les
Tulettes. She never had a strong head. For my part, in
growing older, I have become less excitable and stronger, but
I remember that when I was a child I hadn't good health at
all. I used to have attacks of giddiness, and my head was
filled with the strangest fancies. I often laugh now when I
think of the extraordinary things I used to do.'
'And your husband?'
'Oh! he takes after his father, a journeyman hatter, a
careful, prudent man. I should say that when we were young,
though we were so much alike in face, it was quite a different
matter as to our dispositions; however, as time has gone on,[Pg 77]
we have grown to resemble each other very much. We were
so quiet and happy in our business at Marseilles! The fifteen
years I spent there taught me to find happiness in my own
home, in the midst of my children.'
Abbé Faujas noticed a touch of bitterness in her tone
every time that he led her to speak on this subject. She was
certainly happy, as she said; but he fancied that he could
detect traces of old rebellion in her nervous nature, that was
now calmed by the approach of her fortieth year. He
imagined a little drama for himself, in which this husband
and wife, who were so much alike, were considered by their
relations to be made for each other, and were thus forced into
marriage, whereas, in reality, they were of different and
antagonistic temperaments. Then his mind dwelt upon the
fatal outcome of a monotonous life, the wearing away of
character by the daily cares of business, the soporific effect of
fifteen years' fortune-making upon this couple, who were now
living upon that fortune in a sleepy corner of a little town.
To-day, though they were both still young, there seemed to
be nothing but the ashes left of their former selves. The
Abbé cleverly tried to discover whether Marthe was resigned
to her existence, and he found her full of common sense.
'I am quite contented with my home,' she said; 'my
children are all that I want. I was never much given to
gaiety; I only felt a little dull at times. I dare say I should
have been better if I had had some mental occupation, but I
was never able to find one. And perhaps, after all, it's as
well I didn't, for I should very likely have split my head. I
could never even read a novel without giving myself a
frightful headache, and for nights afterwards all the characters
would dance about in my brain. Needlework is the only
thing which never fatigues me, so I stay at home and keep
out of the way of noise and chatter, and all the frivolous follies
which weary me.'
She paused every now and then to glance at Désirée, who
was still sleeping with her head upon the table, and smiling
in her innocent way.
'Poor child!' she murmured. 'She can't even do any
needlework. She gets dizzy directly. She is fond of animals,
and that's all she's capable of. When she goes to stay with
her nurse, as she does every now and then, she spends all her
time in the poultry-yard, and she comes back to me with rosy
cheeks and as strong and well as possible.'
[Pg 78]
Marthe often spoke of Les Tulettes, manifesting as she did
so a lurking fear of insanity, and Abbé Faujas thus became
aware of a strange dread haunting this peaceful home.
Marthe loved her husband with a sober, unimpassioned love,
but there was mingled with her affection for him considerable
fear of his jokes and pleasantries, his perpetual teasing. She
was hurt, too, by his selfishness, and the loneliness in which
he left her; she felt a vague grudge against him for the
quietude in which she lived—that very manner of life which
she said made her happy. When she spoke of him, she said:
'He is very good to us. You've heard him, I dare say,
get angry sometimes, but that arises from his passion for
seeing everything in order, which he often carries to an almost
ridiculous extent. He gets quite vexed if he sees a flower-pot
a little out of place in the garden, or a plaything lying
about on the floor; but in other matters he does quite right
in pleasing himself. I know he is not very popular, because
he has managed to accumulate some money, and still continues
to do a good stroke of business every now and then; but he
only laughs at what people say about him. They say nasty
things, too, of him in connexion with me. They say that he
is a miser, and won't let me go out anywhere, and even
deprives me of boots. But all that is quite untrue. I am
entirely free. He certainly prefers to see me here when
he comes home, instead of finding that I am always off
somewhere, paying calls and walking on the promenade. But
he knows quite well what my tastes are. What, indeed,
should I go out for?'
As she defended Mouret against the gossip of Plassans,
Marthe's voice assumed a sudden animation, as though she
felt the need of defending him quite as much from the secret
accusations which arose within her own mind; and she kept
reverting with nervous uneasiness to the subject of society
life. She seemed to seek a refuge within the little dining-room
and the old-fashioned garden with its box borders, as if
everything else filled her with vague alarm, and made her
doubtful of her strength, apprehensive of some possible catastrophe.
Then she would smile at her fears, and shrug
her shoulders as she resumed her knitting or the mending of
some old skirt; and Abbé Faujas would see before him only
a cold, reserved housewife, with listless face and inanimate
eyes, who filled the house with a scent as of clean linen, and
of blossoms gathered in the shade.
[Pg 79]
Two months passed away in this manner. Abbé Faujas
and his mother had become quite a part of the Mourets'
family life. They all had their recognised places every
evening at the table, just as the lamp had its place; and the
same intervals of silence were broken night after night by the
same remarks from the card-players and the same subdued
converse of the priest and Marthe. When Madame Faujas
had not given him too tremendous a beating Mouret found
his lodgers 'extremely nice people.'
All that curiosity of his, born of idleness, waned before
the interest and occupation that the nightly parties afforded
him, and he no longer played the spy upon the Abbé, whom
he declared to be a very good fellow, now that he knew him
better.
'Oh, don't bother me with your stories!' he used to
exclaim to those who attacked Abbé Faujas. 'You get hold
of a pack of nonsense and put absurd interpretations upon
facts that admit of the simplest explanation. I know all
about him. He very kindly comes and spends his evenings
with us; but he's not a man to make himself cheap, and I
can quite understand that people don't like him for it and
accuse him of pride.'
Mouret greatly enjoyed being the only person in Plassans
who could boast of knowing Abbé Faujas, and he even somewhat
abused this advantage. Every time he met Madame
Rougon he put on an air of triumph and made her understand
that he had stolen her guest from her, while the old
lady contented herself with smiling quietly. With his intimate
acquaintances Mouret extended his confidences further, and
remarked that those blessed priests could do nothing like
other people. Then he gave them a string of little details,
and told them in what manner the Abbé drank, how he talked
to women, and how he always kept his knees apart without
ever crossing his legs, and other trifling matters which the
vague alarm that his free-thinking mind experienced in the
presence of his guest's long, mystic-looking cassock made
him notice.
The evenings passed away one after another, and at last
the first days of February came round. In all the conversations
between himself and Marthe Abbé Faujas had to all
appearance carefully avoided the subject of religion. She had
once remarked to him, almost lightly:
'No, Monsieur l'Abbé, I am not a very religious woman,[Pg 80]
and I seldom go to church. At Marseilles I was always too
busy, and now I am too indolent to go out. And then I
must confess to you that I wasn't brought up with religious
ideas. My mother used to tell me that God would come to
us quite as well at home.'
The priest bowed his head without making any reply, and
seemed to signify that he would rather not discuss religious
matters under such circumstances. One evening, however,
he drew a picture of the unexpected comfort which suffering
souls find in religion. They were talking of a poor woman
whom troubles of every sort had driven to suicide.
'She did wrong to despair,' said the priest in his deep
voice. 'She was ignorant of the comfort and consolation to
be found in prayer. I have often seen heart-broken, weeping
women come to us, and they have gone away again filled with
a resignation that they had vainly sought elsewhere, and glad
to live; and this had come from their falling upon their
knees and tasting the blessedness of humiliating themselves
before God in some quiet corner of the church. They came
back there, they forgot their troubles, and became God's
entirely.'
Marthe listened with a thoughtful expression to these
remarks of the priest, whose last words fell in a gradually
softening voice that seemed to breathe of superhuman
felicity.
'Yes, it must be a blessed thing,' she murmured, as
though she were speaking to herself. 'I have thought about
it sometimes, but I have always felt afraid.'
If the Abbé seldom referred to such matters as this, he
frequently spoke on the subject of charity. Marthe was very
tender-hearted, and tears rose to her eyes at the slightest
tale of trouble. It seemed to please the priest to see her so
moved to pity; and every evening he told her some fresh story
of sorrow, and kept her constantly excited with compassion.
She would let her work fall, and clasp her hands as, with a
sad, pitying face, she gazed into his eyes and listened to him
as he recounted heart-rending details of how some poor persons
had died of starvation, or how others had been goaded by
misery into committing base crimes. At these times she fell
completely under his influence, and he might have done what
he willed with her.
About the middle of February a deplorable occurrence
threw Plassans into dismay. It was discovered that a number[Pg 81]
of young girls, scarcely more than children, had fallen into
evil courses while loafing about the streets, and it was even
rumoured that some persons of high position in the town
would be compromised. For a week Marthe was very painfully
affected by this discovery, which caused the greatest
sensation. She was acquainted with one of the unfortunate
girls, who was the niece of her cook, Rose; and she could not
think of the poor little creature without shuddering.
'It is a great pity,' said Abbé Faujas to her one evening,
'that there isn't a Home at Plassans on the model of the one
at Besançon.'
Then, in reply to Marthe's pressing questions, the Abbé
explained to her the constitution of this Home. It was a sort
of refuge for girls from eight to fifteen years of age, the
daughters of working men, whose parents were obliged to
leave them alone during the day while they themselves went
to their employment. During the day-time these girls were
set to do needlework, and in the evening they were sent back
to their parents, the latter having then returned home from
their work. By this system the children were brought up out
of the reach of vice and in the midst of good examples.
Marthe thought the idea an admirable one, and she gradually
became so prepossessed in its favour that she could talk of
nothing else than the necessity of founding a similar institution
at Plassans.
'We might put it under the patronage of the Virgin,'
Abbé Faujas suggested. 'But there are such difficulties in
the way! You have no idea of the trouble there is in effecting
the least good work! What is quite essential to the success
of such a scheme as this is some woman with a motherly
heart, full of zeal and absolutely devoted to the work.'
Marthe lowered her head and looked at Désirée, who was
asleep by her side, and she felt tears welling from beneath
her eyelids. She made inquiries as to the steps that it would
be necessary to take for founding such a Home, the cost of
erecting it, and the annual expenses.
'Will you help me?' she suddenly asked the priest one
evening.
Abbé Faujas gravely took her hand and held it within
his own for a moment, telling her that she had one of the
fairest souls he had ever known. He would willingly do what
he could, he assured her, but he should rely altogether upon
her, for the assistance that he himself would be able to give[Pg 82]
would be small. It would be for her to form a committee of
the ladies of the town, to collect subscriptions, and to take
upon herself, in a word, all the delicate and onerous duties
which are connected with an appeal to the charity of the
public. He appointed a meeting with her for the following
day at Saint-Saturnin's to introduce her to the diocesan
architect, who would be able to tell her much better than he
himself could do about the expenses that would have to be
incurred.
Mouret was very gay that evening when they went to bed.
He had not allowed Madame Faujas to win a single game.
'You seem quite pleased about something to-night, my
dear,' he said to his wife. 'Did you see what a beating I
gave the old lady downstairs?'
Then as he observed Marthe taking a silk dress out of her
wardrobe, he asked her with some surprise if she intended to
go out in the morning. He had not heard anything of the
conversation in the dining-room between his wife and the
priest.
'Yes,' she replied, 'I have to go out. I have to meet
Abbé Faujas at the church about a matter which I will tell
you of.'
He stood motionless in front of her, and gazed at her with
an expression of stupefaction, wondering if she were not
really jesting with him. Then, without any appearance of
displeasure, he said in his bantering fashion:
'Hallo! hallo! well I never expected that! So you've
gone over to the priests now!'
The next morning Marthe began by calling on her mother,
to whom she explained the pious undertaking which she
was contemplating. She became almost angry when the old
lady smilingly shook her head, and she gave her to understand
that she considered her lacking in charity.
'It is one of Abbé Faujas's ideas, isn't it?' Félicité
suddenly inquired.
'Yes,' Marthe replied in surprise: 'we have talked a good
deal about it together. But how did you know?'
Madame Rougon shrugged her shoulders without vouchsafing[Pg 83]
any definite reply. Then she continued with a show
of animation:
'Well, my dear, I think you are quite right. You ought
to have some kind of occupation, and you have found a very
good one. It has always distressed me very much to see you
perpetually shut up in that lonely, death-like house of yours.
But you mustn't count upon my assistance. I would rather
not appear in the matter, for people would say that it was I
who was really doing everything, and that we had come to an
understanding together to try to force our ideas upon the
town. I should prefer that you yourself should have all the
credit of your charitable inspiration. I will help you with my
advice, if you will let me, but with nothing more.'
'I was hoping that you would join the committee,' said
Marthe, who felt a little alarmed at the thought of finding
herself alone in such an onerous undertaking.
'No! no! my presence on it would only do harm, I can
assure you. Make it well known, on the contrary, that I am
not going to be on the committee, that I have been asked,
and have refused, excusing myself on the ground that I am
too much occupied. Let it be understood, even, that I have
no faith in your scheme; and that, you will see, will influence
the ladies at once. They will be delighted to take part in
charitable work in which I have no share. Go and see
Madame Rastoil, Madame de Condamin, Madame Delangre,
and Madame Paloque. Be sure to see Madame Paloque; she
will feel flattered, and will help you more than all the others.
If you find any difficulty about anything, come here again and
tell me.'
She accompanied her daughter to the head of the stairs;
then she stopped and looked her in the face, saying with her
sharp smile:
'I hope the dear Abbé keeps well.'
'Yes, he is quite well,' replied Marthe. 'I am going to
Saint-Saturnin's, where I am to meet the diocesan architect.'
Marthe and the priest had considered that matters were
still in too indefinite a stage for them to disturb the architect,
and so they had planned just to meet him at Saint-Saturnin's,
where he came every day to inspect a chapel that happened
to be under repair at the time. It would seem like a chance
meeting. When Marthe walked up the church, she caught
sight of Abbé Faujas and Monsieur Lieutaud—the architect—talking
together on some scaffolding, from which they[Pg 84]
descended as soon as they saw her. One of the Abbé's
shoulders was quite white with plaster, and he seemed to be
taking a great interest in the operations.
At this hour of the afternoon, there were no worshippers
or penitents in the church, and the nave and aisles were quite
deserted, encumbered only by a litter of chairs, which two
vergers were noisily setting in order. Workmen were calling
to each other from the tops of ladders, and trowels were
scraping against the walls. There was so little appearance of
devotion about Saint-Saturnin's that Marthe had not even
crossed herself on entering. She took a seat opposite to the
chapel that was being repaired, between Abbé Faujas and
Monsieur Lieutaud, just as she would have done if she had
gone to consult the latter in his office.
The conversation lasted for a good half-hour. The architect
showed much kindly interest in the scheme. But he
advised them not to erect a special building for the Home of
the Virgin, as the Abbé called the projected refuge. It would
cost too much money, he thought; and it would be better to
buy some building already in existence, and adapt it to suit
the requirements of their scheme. He suggested a house in
the Faubourg which, after being used as a boarding-school,
had passed into the hands of a forage dealer, and was now for
sale. A few thousand francs would enable one to entirely
transform the place and restore it from its present ruinous
condition; and he promised them all kinds of wonderful
things: a handsome entrance, spacious rooms, and a court
planted with trees. By degrees, Marthe and the priest raised
their voices, and they discussed details beneath the echoing
vaults of the nave, while Monsieur Lieutaud scratched the
flag-stones with the tip of his stick to give them an idea of the
façade he suggested.
'It is settled, then,' said Marthe, as she took leave of the
architect. 'You will make a little estimate, won't you, so
that we may know what we are about? And please keep our
secret, will you?'
Abbé Faujas wished to escort her as far as the door of
the church. As they passed together before the high-altar,
however, while she was still briskly talking to him, she was
suddenly surprised to miss him from her side. She turned
round and saw him bent almost double before the great cross,
veiled with muslin. The sight of him, covered as he was
with plaster, bent in this way before the cross, gave her a[Pg 85]
singular feeling. She recollected where she was, glanced
round her with an uneasy expression and trod as silently
as she could. When they reached the door, the Abbé, who
had become very grave and serious, silently reached out
his finger, which he had dipped in the holy water, and she
crossed herself in great disquietude of mind. Then the
muffled doors softly fell back behind her with a sound like
a sigh.
From the church Marthe repaired to Madame de Condamin's.
She felt quite happy as she walked through the
streets in the fresh air; the few visits that she had now to
make seemed to her almost like pleasure-parties. Madame de
Condamin welcomed her with an air of friendly surprise.
That dear Madame Mouret came so seldom! When she
learned the business on hand, she declared herself charmed
with it, and was quite ready to further it in every possible
way. She was wearing a lovely mauve dress, with knots of
pearl-grey ribbon, in that pretty boudoir of hers where she
played the part of an exiled Parisienne.
'You did quite right to count upon me,' she exclaimed
as she pressed Marthe's hands. 'Who ought to help those
poor girls if it isn't we whom people accuse of setting them a
bad example by our luxury? It is frightful to think of those
children being exposed to all those horrible dangers. It has
made me feel quite ill. I am entirely at your service.'
When Marthe told her that her mother could not join
the committee she displayed still greater enthusiasm for the
scheme.
'It is a pity Madame Rougon has so many things to do,'
she said with a touch of irony; 'she would have been of great
assistance to us. But it can't be helped. No one can do
more than they are able. I have plenty of friends. I will go
and see the Bishop; and move heaven and earth if it's necessary.
I'll promise you that we shall succeed.'
She would not listen to any of the particulars about the
expenses. She was quite sure, she said, that whatever money
was wanted would be found, and she meant the Home to be a
credit to the committee, as handsome and as comfortable as
possible. She added with a laugh that she quite lost her
head when she began to dabble in figures; but she undertook
to charge herself with the preliminary steps and the general
furtherance of the scheme. Dear Madame Mouret, said she,
was not accustomed to begging, and she would accompany[Pg 86]
her on her visits and would even take several of them off her
hands altogether. By the end of a quarter of an hour she had
made the business entirely her own, and it was now she who
gave instructions to Marthe. The latter was just about to
take her leave when Monsieur de Condamin came into the
room; so she lingered on, feeling very ill at ease, however,
and not daring to say any more on the subject of her visit in
the presence of a man who was rumoured to be compromised
in that matter of the poor girls with whose shameful story the
town was ringing.
But Madame de Condamin explained the great scheme to
her husband, who listened with an appearance of perfect ease,
and gave utterance to the most moral sentiments. He considered
the scheme an extremely proper one.
'It is an idea which could only have occurred to a mother,'
he said gravely, in a tone which made it impossible to tell
whether he was serious or not. 'Plassans will be indebted to
you, madame, for a purer morality.'
'But I must tell you that the idea is not my own! I have
merely adopted it,' replied Marthe, made uneasy by these
praises. 'It was suggested to me by a person whom I esteem
very highly.'
'Who was that?' asked Madame de Condamin, with a show
of curiosity.
'Abbé Faujas.'
Then Marthe, with great frankness, told them what a high
opinion she had of the priest. She made no allusion to the
unpleasant stories that had been circulated about him, but
she represented him as a man worthy of the highest respect,
whom she was very happy to receive in her home. Madame
de Condamin nodded approvingly as she listened.
'I always said so!' she exclaimed. 'Abbé Faujas is a
very distinguished priest. But there are such a lot of malicious
people about! Now, however, that you receive him in your
home, they don't venture to say anything more against him;
all that calumnious talk has been cut short. The idea, you
say, is his. We shall have to persuade him, then, to take a
prominent part in putting it into execution. For the present
we will keep the matter very quiet. I can assure you that I
always liked and defended the Abbé.'
'I recollect talking with him, and I thought him a very
good fellow,' remarked the conservator of rivers and forests.
His wife silenced him with a gesture. She occasionally[Pg 87]
treated him in a very cavalier style. Truth to tell, Monsieur
de Condamin alone bore the shame attaching to the equivocal
marriage which he was charged with having made; the young
woman, whom he had brought from no one knew where, had
got herself forgiven and liked by the whole town, thanks to
her pleasant ways and taking looks, to which provincial folks
are more susceptible than might be imagined.
Monsieur de Condamin understood that he was in the way
in this virtuous consultation.
'I will leave you to your good designs,' he said with a
slight touch of irony. 'I am going to smoke a cigar. Octavie,
don't forget to be dressed in good time. We are going to the
Sub-Prefecture this evening, you know.'
When he had left the room, the two women resumed their
conversation for a few moments longer, returning to what
they had previously been saying, expressing pity for the poor
girls who yielded to temptation, and manifesting much anxiety
to shelter them from danger. Madame de Condamin inveighed
eloquently against vice.
'Well, then!' she said, as she pressed Marthe's hand for
the last time, 'it is all settled, and I shall be entirely at your
service as soon as you call for my help. If you go to see
Madame Rastoil and Madame Delangre, tell them that I will
undertake to do everything, and that all we want from them
is their names. My idea is a good one, don't you think? We
won't depart a hair's breadth from it. Give my compliments
to Abbé Faujas.'
Marthe at once proceeded to call upon Madame Delangre,
and then upon Madame Rastoil. She found them very polite,
but less enthusiastic than Madame de Condamin. They discussed
the pecuniary side of the scheme. A large sum of
money would be required, they said; the charity of the public
would certainly never provide it, and there was a great risk of
the whole business coming to a ridiculous termination.
Marthe tried to reassure them, and plied them with figures.
Then they asked her what ladies had consented to join the
committee. The mention of Madame de Condamin's name
left them silent, but when they learned that Madame Rougon
had excused herself from joining, they became more amiable.
Madame Delangre had received Marthe in her husband's
private room. She was a pale little woman whose dissoluteness
had remained a matter of legend in Plassans.
'Indeed,' she ended by saying, 'there is nothing I should[Pg 88]
like to see better. It would be a school of virtue for the youth
of the working-classes, and it would be the means of saving
many weak souls. I cannot refuse my assistance, for I feel
that I could be of much use to you through my husband, who
as mayor of the town is brought into continual contact with all
the influential people. But I must ask you to allow me till
to-morrow before I give a definite reply. Our position requires
us to exercise circumspection, and I should like to consult
Monsieur Delangre.'
In Madame Rastoil Marthe encountered a woman who was
equally listless but more prudish, and who sought for irreproachable
words when referring to the unfortunate girls who
had fallen. She was a sleek, plump person, and Marthe found
her embroidering a very gorgeous alb, between her two
daughters, whom she sent away at her visitor's first words.
'I am much obliged to you for having thought of me,'
she said; 'but really I am very much occupied. I am already
on several committees and I don't know whether I should have
the time. I have had some such idea as your own myself,
but my scheme was a larger one and, perhaps, more complete
and comprehensive. For a whole month I have been intending
to talk to the Bishop about it, but I have never been able to
find the time. Well! we will unite our efforts, and I will tell
you my own views, for I think you are making a mistake in
some points. Since it seems necessary, I will surrender still
more of my time. But it was only yesterday that my husband
said to me: "Really, you never attend to your own affairs;
you are always looking after other people's."'
Marthe glanced at her curiously, thinking of her old entanglement
with Monsieur Delangre, which folks still chuckled
over in the cafés of the Cours Sauvaire. The wives of the
mayor and the presiding judge had received the mention of
Abbé Faujas's name very suspiciously, the latter especially so.
Marthe was a little vexed at this distrust of a person for whom
she vouched; so she made a point of dwelling upon the Abbé's
good qualities, and eventually forced the two women to
acknowledge the merit of this priest, who lived a life of retirement
and supported his mother.
On leaving Madame Rastoil's Marthe merely had to cross
the road to reach Madame Paloque's, which was on the other
side of the Rue Balande. It was seven o'clock, but she was
anxious to make this last call, even if she were to keep Mouret
waiting for dinner and get herself scolded in consequence.[Pg 89]
The Paloques were just about to sit down to table in a chilly
dining-room, whose prim coldness spoke of provincial penury.
Madame Paloque hastened to cover up the soup-tureen, vexed
at being thus found at table. She was very polite, humble
almost, anxious as she really felt about this visit which she
had not expected. Her husband, the judge, sat before his
empty plate with his hands upon his knees.
'The hussies!' he exclaimed, when Marthe spoke of the
girls of the old quarter of the town. 'I heard some nice
accounts of them to-day at court. It was they who led some
of our most respectable townspeople astray. You do wrong,
madame, to interest yourself about such vermin.'
'I am very much afraid,' said Madame Paloque in her turn,
'that I cannot be of much assistance to you. I know no one,
and my husband would cut his hand off rather than beg for
the smallest trifle. We have held ourselves quite aloof from
everyone, disgusted as we are with all the injustices we have
witnessed. We live here very quietly and modestly, happy
in being forgotten and let alone. Even if promotion were
offered to my husband now, he would refuse it. Wouldn't
you, my dear?'
The judge nodded his head in assent and they exchanged
a slight smile, while Marthe sat ill at ease in the presence
of that hideous wrinkled couple, livid with gall and bitterness,
who played so well the little comedy of feigned resignation.
Fortunately she recalled her mother's counsels.
'I had quite counted upon you,' she said, making herself
very pleasant. 'We shall have Madame Delangre, Madame
Rastoil, and Madame de Condamin; but, between ourselves,
those ladies will only give us their names. I should have
liked to find some lady of good status and kindly, charitable
disposition, who would have taken a stronger interest and
shown more energy in the matter, and I thought that you
would be the very person. Think what gratitude Plassans
would owe us if we could only bring such an undertaking to
a successful issue!'
'Of course, of course!' Madame Paloque murmured,
quite delighted at Marthe's insinuating words.
'I am sure you are wrong in fancying that you are without
power to assist us. It is very well known that Monsieur
Paloque is a favourite at the Sub-Prefecture; and between
ourselves I may say that he is intended to succeed Monsieur
Rastoil. Ah, now! don't try to depreciate yourselves; your[Pg 90]
merits are known, and it is no use your trying to hide them.
This would be a very good opportunity for Madame Paloque
to emerge a little from the obscurity and privacy in which
she keeps herself, and to let the world see what a head and
what a heart she has!'
The judge seemed very restless. He looked at his wife
with blinking eyes.
'Madame Paloque has not refused,' said he.
'No, certainly not,' interposed the latter. 'If you really
stand in need of me, that settles the matter. I dare say I am
only committing another piece of folly, and shall give myself
a lot of trouble without ever getting a word of thanks for it.
Monsieur Paloque can tell you of all the good works we've
done without ever saying a word about them; and you can
see for yourself what they've brought us to. Well, well, we
can't change our natures, and I suppose we shall continue
being dupes to the end! You may count upon me, dear
madame.'
The Paloques rose and Marthe took leave of them, thanking
them for their kindly interest. As she stopped for a
moment on the landing to liberate a flounce of her dress which
had caught between the banisters and the steps, she heard
them talking with animation on the other side of the door.
'They want to enlist you because they want to make use
of you!' the judge was saying in a bitter voice. 'You will
be their beast of burden.'
'Of course!' replied his wife, 'but you may be sure that
I'll make them pay for it with the rest!'
When Marthe at last got back home, it was nearly eight
o'clock. Mouret had been waiting a whole half-hour for his
dinner, and she was afraid that there would be a terrible
scene. But, when she had undressed and come downstairs,
she found her husband seated astride an overturned chair,
tranquilly beating a tattoo on the tablecloth with his fingers.
He was in a very teasing, bantering mood.
'Well,' said he, 'I had quite made up my mind that you
were going to spend the night in a confessional-box. Now
that you have taken to going to church, you had better give
me notice when the priests invite you, so that I can dine out.'
All through the dinner he indulged in witticisms of this
kind, and Marthe was more distressed by them than if he had
openly stormed at her. Two or three times she cast a glance
at him as if beseeching him to leave her in peace. But her[Pg 91]
looks only appeared to stimulate his wit. Octave and Désirée
laughed at it all, but Serge remained silent and mentally took
his mother's side. During dessert Rose came into the room,
looking quite scared, with the news that Monsieur Delangre
had called and wished to see madame.
'Hallo! have you begun to associate with the authorities
as well?' exclaimed Mouret in his sneering fashion.
Marthe went into the drawing-room to receive the mayor.
With much politeness the latter told her that he had felt
unwilling to wait until the morrow to congratulate her upon
her charitable idea. Madame Delangre was a little timid;
she had done wrong in not immediately promising her co-operation,
and he had now come to say in her name that
she would be delighted to serve on the committee of lady
patronesses of the Home of the Virgin. As for himself, he
would do all he could to further the success of a scheme that
would be so useful, so conducive to morality.
Marthe accompanied him to the street-door; and there,
as Rose held up the lamp to light the footpath, the mayor
added:
'Will you tell Abbé Faujas that I shall be glad to have
a little conversation with him, if he will kindly call on me?
As he has had experience of an establishment of this kind at
Besançon, he will be able to give me valuable information.
I mean the town to pay for the building, at any rate. Good-bye,
dear madame. Give my best compliments to Monsieur
Mouret, whom I won't disturb.'
When Abbé Faujas came down with his mother at eight
o'clock Mouret merely said to him, with a laugh:
'So you walked my wife off to-day, eh? Well, don't spoil
her for me too much, and don't make a saint of her.'
Then he turned to his card-play. He was anxious to
revenge himself on Madame Faujas, who had defeated him
three evenings in succession; and so Marthe was left free to
tell the Abbé of all she had done during the day. She seemed
full of child-like pleasure, and was still quite excited with her
afternoon. The priest made her repeat certain details, and
then promised to call on Monsieur Delangre, although he
would have preferred remaining altogether in the background.
'You did wrong to mention my name at all,' he said,
when he saw her so moved and yielding. 'But you are like all
other women; the best causes would be spoilt in your hands.'
[Pg 92]
She looked at him in surprise at this harsh exclamation,
recoiling and feeling that thrill of fear which she still
occasionally experienced in the presence of his cassock. It
was as though iron hands were being laid upon her shoulders
and were forcing her into compliance with their will. Every
priest looks upon woman as an enemy; but when the Abbé
saw that she was hurt by his stern reproof he softened his
voice and said:
'I think only of the success of your noble design. I am
afraid that I should compromise it if I myself were to appear
in it. You know very well that I am not a favourite in the
town.'
Marthe, seeing him so humble, assured him that he was
mistaken, and that all the ladies had spoken of him in the
highest terms. They knew that he was supporting his mother,
and that he led a quiet, retired life worthy of the greatest
praise. Then they talked over the great scheme, dwelling on
the smallest details of it, till eleven o'clock struck. It was a
delightful evening.
Mouret had caught a word or two of the talk every now
and then between the deals.
'And so,' he said, as they were going to bed, 'so you two
are going to stamp out vice? It's a fine invention.'
Three days later the committee of patronesses was formally
constituted. The ladies having elected Marthe as
president, she, upon her mother's advice which she
had privately sought, immediately named Madame Paloque
treasurer. They both gave themselves a great deal of trouble
in directing circulars and looking after a host of other petty
details. In the meantime Madame de Condamin went from
the Sub-Prefecture to the Bishop's, and from the Bishop's to
the houses of various other influential persons, exhibiting
some lovely toilettes, explaining in her pretty fashion 'the
happy idea that had occurred to her,' and carrying off subscriptions
and promises of assistance. Madame Rastoil, on
the other hand, told the priests who came to her house
on the Tuesday how she had formed a plan for rescuing
unfortunate girls from vice, and then contented herself with
charging Abbé Bourrette to inquire of the Sisters of Saint-Joseph
if they would come and serve in the projected refuge;
while Madame Delangre confided to a little company of
functionaries that the town was indebted for the Home to her
husband, who had also kindly given the committee the use[Pg 93]
of a room at the town-hall, where they could meet and
deliberate at their ease. Plassans was speedily excited by
this pious turmoil, and soon nothing but the Home of the
Virgin was spoken of. A chorus of praise went up, and the
friends of each lady patroness made up little parties and
worked strenuously for the success of the undertaking.
Within a week subscriptions were opened in all three quarters
of the town, and as the 'Plassans Gazette' published lists of
the subscriptions, a feeling of pride was awakened, and the
most notable families vied as to which should be the most
generous.
Amidst all the talk on the subject Abbé Faujas's name
frequently cropped up. Although each of the lady patronesses
claimed the idea of the refuge as her own, there was a
prevailing belief that it was the Abbé who had brought it with
him from Besançon. Monsieur Delangre, indeed, made an
express statement to that effect at the meeting of the municipal
council when it was decided to purchase the building which
the diocesan architect had suggested as being best suited to
the requirements of the Home. On the previous evening the
mayor had had a lengthy conversation with the priest. They
had shaken hands most cordially on parting, and the mayor's
secretary had even heard them call each other 'my dear sir.'
This brought about quite a revolution in the Abbé's favour.
From that time he had a group of partisans who defended
him against the attacks of his enemies.
Besides, the Mourets vouched for Abbé Faujas's respectability.
Supported by Marthe's friendship, recognised as the
originator of a good work, which he modestly refused to
acknowledge as his own, he no longer manifested in the
streets that appearance of humility which had led him to
withdraw as much as possible from observation by keeping
in the shadow of the houses. He bravely showed his new
cassock in the sun and walked in the middle of the road.
On his way from the Rue Balande to Saint-Saturnin's he now
had to return a great number of bows. One Sunday Madame
de Condamin stopped him after Vespers on the Place in front
of the Bishop's house and kept him talking with her there for
a good half-hour.
'Well, your reverence,' Mouret said to him with a laugh,
'you are quite in the odour of sanctity now. One would
scarcely have anticipated that six months ago when I was
the only one to say a good word for you! But if I were you[Pg 94]
I shouldn't trust too much to it all; you still have the
Bishop's set against you.'
The priest lightly shrugged his shoulders. He knew quite
well that what hostility he still met with came from the
clergy. Abbé Fenil kept Monseigneur Rousselot trembling
beneath his rough, hard will. However, when the grand-vicar,
about the end of March, left Plassans on a short holiday, Abbé
Faujas profited by his absence to make several calls upon the
Bishop. Abbé Surin, the prelate's private secretary, reported
that the 'wretched man' had been closeted for hours with
his lordship, who had manifested an atrocious temper after
each interview. When Abbé Fenil returned, Abbé Faujas
discontinued his visits, and again drew into the background.
But the Bishop still showed himself very much disturbed, and
it was quite evident that something had occurred to upset his
careless mind. At a dinner which he gave to his clergy he
showed himself particularly friendly to Abbé Faujas, who
was still only a humble curate at Saint-Saturnin's. Abbé
Fenil then kept his thin lips more tightly closed than ever,
but inwardly cursed his penitents when they politely asked
him how he was in health.
And now at last Abbé Faujas manifested complete serenity.
He still led a self-denying life, but he seemed permeated by a
pleasant ease of mind. One Tuesday evening he triumphed
definitively. He was looking out of the window of his room,
enjoying the early warmth of springtide, when Monsieur
Péqueur des Saulaies's guests came into the garden of the
Sub-Prefecture and bowed to him from a distance. Madame
de Condamin was there, and carried her familiarity so far as
to wave her handkerchief to him. Just at the same time, on
the other side, some guests came to sit on the rustic seats
in front of the waterfall in Monsieur Rastoil's grounds.
Monsieur Delangre, who was leaning over the terrace of
the Sub-Prefecture, could see across Mouret's garden into
the judge's place, owing to the sloping character of the
ground.
'You will see,' he said, 'they won't deign even to notice
him.'
But he was wrong. For Abbé Fenil, having turned his
head as though by chance, took off his hat, whereupon all
the other priests who happened to be present did the same,
and Abbé Faujas returned their salute. Then, after slowly
glancing over the two sets of guests on his right and his left,[Pg 95]
he quitted his window, carefully drawing his white and
conventual-looking curtains.
The month of April was very mild and warm, and in the
evenings, after dinner, the young Mourets went to amuse
themselves in the garden. Marthe and the priest, too, as they
found the dining-room become very close, also went out on to
the terrace. They sat a few steps from the open window,
just outside the stream of light which the lamp cast upon the
tall box hedges. Hid there in the deepening dusk, they discussed
all the little details connected with the Home of the
Virgin. This constant discussion of charitable matters seemed
to give a tone of additional softness to their conversation. In
front of them, between Monsieur Rastoil's huge pear-trees and
the dusky chestnuts of the Sub-Prefecture, there was a large
patch of open sky. The young people sported about under
the arbours, while every now and then the voices of Mouret
and Madame Faujas, who remained alone in the dining-room,
deeply absorbed in their game, could be heard raised in
passing altercations.
Sometimes Marthe, full of tender emotion, a gentle
languor that made her words fall slowly from her lips, would
check her speech as she caught sight of the golden train of
some shooting star, and smile as she threw back her head a
little and looked up at the heavens.
'There's another soul leaving purgatory and entering
paradise!' she murmured, while, as the priest kept silent,
she added: 'How pretty they are, those little beliefs! One
ought to be able to remain a little girl, your reverence.'
She no longer now mended the family linen in the evening.
She would have had to light a lamp on the terrace to see to
do it, and she preferred the gloom of the warm night, which
seemed to thrill her with peaceful happiness. Besides, she
now went out every day, which fatigued her, and when dinner
was over she had not energy enough to take up her needle.
Rose had been obliged to undertake the mending, as Mouret
was beginning to complain that his socks were all in holes.
To tell the truth Marthe was really very much occupied.
Besides the committee meetings over which she presided, she
had numerous other things to attend to, visits to make, and[Pg 96]
superintendence duties to exercise. She deputed much necessary
writing and other little matters to Madame Paloque;
but she was so eager to see the Home actually established,
that she went off to the Faubourg, where the building stood,
three times a week, to make sure that the workmen were not
wasting their time. Whenever she thought that satisfactory
progress was not being made, she hurried to Saint-Saturnin's
to find the architect, and grumbled to him and begged him
not to leave the men without his supervision, growing quite
jealous, indeed, of the work which was being executed in the
church, and saying that the chapel repairs were being much
too quickly pushed forward. Monsieur Lieutaud smiled at
all this, and assured her that everything would be completed
within the stipulated time. But Abbé Faujas likewise protested
that sufficient progress was not being made, and urged
Marthe to give the architect no peace, so she ended by going
to Saint-Saturnin's every day.
She went thither with her brain full of figures, or absorbed
in thinking of walls that had to be pulled down and rebuilt.
The chilliness of the church cooled her excitement a little.
She dipped her fingers in the holy water and crossed herself,
by way of doing as others did. The vergers grew to know
her and bow to her, and she herself became quite familiar
with the different chapels and the sacristy, whither she sometimes
had to go in search of Abbé Faujas, and the wide
corridor and low cloisters through which she had to pass. At
the end of a month there was not a corner in Saint-Saturnin's
which she did not know. Sometimes she had to wait for the
architect, and then she would sit down in some retired chapel
and rest after her hurried walk, recapitulating in her mind
the host of things which she wanted to impress upon Monsieur
Lieutaud. The deep, palpitating silence which surrounded
her, and the dim religious light falling from the stained-glass
windows, gradually plunged her into a vague, soft reverie.
She began to love the lofty arches and the solemn bareness
of the walls, the altars draped in protecting covers, and the
chairs all arranged in order. As soon, indeed, as the padded
doors swung to behind her, she began to experience a feeling
of supreme restfulness, she forgot all the weary cares of the
world, and perfect peace permeated her being.
'Saint-Saturnin's is such a pleasant place,' she said in an
unguarded moment one evening before her husband, after a
close, sultry day.
[Pg 97]
'Would you like us to go and sleep there?' Mouret asked,
with a laugh.
Marthe felt hurt. The feeling of purely physical happiness
which she experienced in the church began to distress her
as being something wrong; and it was with a slight feeling
of trouble that she thenceforward entered Saint-Saturnin's,
trying to force herself to remain indifferent and uninfluenced
by her surroundings, just as she would have been in the big
rooms at the town hall. But in spite of herself she was deeply,
distressfully affected. It was, however, a distress to which
she willingly returned.
Abbé Faujas manifested no consciousness of the slow
awakening which every day went on within her. He still
retained with her the demeanour of a busy, obliging man,
putting heaven on one side. He never showed anything of
the priest. Sometimes, however, she would disturb him as he
was going to read the burial office; and he would then speak to
her for a moment between a couple of pillars in his surplice
which exhaled a vague odour of incense and wax tapers. It
was frequently a mere bricklayer's bill or some carpenter's
claim that they spoke about, and the priest would just tell
her the exact figures and then hurry away to attend to the
funeral; she remaining there, lingering in the empty nave,
while one of the vergers was extinguishing the candles. As
Faujas, when he crossed the church with her, bowed before
the high altar, she had acquired the habit of doing likewise,
at first out of a feeling of mere propriety. But afterwards
the action had become mechanical, and she now bowed when
she was quite alone. Hitherto this act of reverence had been
her only sign of devotion. Two or three times she had come
to the church on days of high ceremonial of which she had
not previously been aware: but when she saw the church was
full of worshippers and heard the pealing of the organ, she
hurried off, thrilled with sudden fear and not daring to cross
the threshold.
'Well!' Mouret would frequently ask her with his
sniggering laugh, 'when do you mean to take your first
communion?'
He was perpetually teasing her, but she never replied,
simply fixing upon him the gaze of her eyes, in which a
passing brightness glistened when he went too far. By degrees
he became more bitter, he was tired of mocking at her; and
at the end of a month he quite lost his temper.
[Pg 98]
'What sense is there in going and mixing yourself up with
a lot of priests?' he would growl at times when his dinner
was not ready when he wanted it. 'You are always away
from home now, there's no keeping you in the house for an
hour at a time! I shouldn't mind it myself, if everything
weren't going to pieces here. I never get any of my things
mended, the table is not even laid by seven o'clock, there's no
making anything out of Rose, and the whole place is left to
rack and ruin.'
He picked up a house-cloth that was lying about, locked
up a bottle of wine that had been left out, and began to wipe
the dust off the furniture with his fingers, working himself
up to a higher pitch of anger as he cried: 'There'll soon be
nothing left for me to do but to take up a broom and put an
apron on! You would see me do it without disturbing yourself,
I know! I might do all the work of the house without
your being any the wiser for it indeed! Do you know that I
spent a couple of hours this morning in putting this cupboard
in order? No, no, things can't go on any longer in this
way!'
At other times there was a disturbance about the children.
Once when Mouret came home he found Désirée 'wallowing
like a young pig' in the garden, lying on her stomach before
an ant-hole, and trying to find out what the ants might be
doing in the ground.
'We may be very thankful, I'm sure, that you don't sleep
away from the house as well!' he cried as soon as he caught
sight of his wife. 'Come and look at your daughter! I
wouldn't let her change her dress because I wished that you
might see what a pretty sight she is.'
The girl cried bitterly while her father kept turning her
round.
'Look at her now! Isn't she a nice spectacle? This is
the way children go on when they are left to themselves! It
isn't her fault, poor little innocent! At one time you couldn't
leave her alone for five minutes: she would be getting into
the fire, you said! Well, I expect she will be getting into the
fire now, and everything will be burnt up, and then there'll
be an end of it all!'
When Rose had taken Désirée away, he continued:
'You live now simply for other people's children. You
don't give a moment to your own! What a goose you must
be to go knocking yourself up for a parcel of hussies who only[Pg 99]
laugh at you! Go and walk about the ramparts any evening
and you will see something of the conduct of those impudent
creatures whom you talk of putting under the protection of
the Virgin!'
He stopped to take breath and then went on again:
'At all events see that Désirée is properly taken care of
before you go picking up girls from the gutter! There are
holes as big as my fist in her dress. One of these days we
shall be finding her in the garden with a leg or an arm
broken. I don't say anything about Octave or Serge, though
I should much prefer your being at home when they come
back from college. They are up to all kinds of diabolical
tricks. Only yesterday they split a couple of flag-stones on
the terrace by letting off crackers. I tell you that if you
don't keep yourself at home we shall find the whole house
blown to bits one of these days!'
Marthe said a few words in self-defence. She had been
obliged to go out, she urged. There was no doubt that
Mouret, who possessed an ample fund of common sense, in
spite of his proclivities for teasing and jeering, was right.
The house was getting into a most unsatisfactory state. That
once quiet spot indeed, where the sun had set so peacefully,
was becoming uproarious, left to look after itself, suffering
from the children's noisiness, the father's bursts of temper,
and the mother's careless, indifferent lassitude. In the
evening, at table, they dined badly and quarrelled amongst
themselves. Rose did just what she liked, and she, by the
way, was of opinion that her mistress was quite in the right.
Matters came to such a pass at last that Mouret, happening
to meet his mother-in-law, complained to her bitterly of
Marthe's conduct, although he was quite aware of the pleasure
he afforded the old lady by revealing to her the troubles of
his home.
'You astonish me extremely!' Félicité replied with a
smile. 'Marthe always seemed to me to be afraid of you,
and I considered her even too yielding and obedient. A
woman ought not to tremble before her husband.'
'Ah, yes, indeed!' cried Mouret, with a hopeless look,
'once upon a time she would have sunk into the ground to
avoid a quarrel; a mere glance was sufficient to make her do
everything I desired. But that's all quite altered now. I
may remonstrate and shout as much as I like, she still goes
her own way. She doesn't reply, she hasn't as yet got to[Pg 100]
flying out at me, but that will come as well, I dare say, by-and-by.'
Félicité then answered with some hypocrisy:
'I will speak to Marthe if you like. But it might, perhaps,
hurt her if I did. Matters of this kind are better kept
between husband and wife. I don't feel very uneasy about
them; I've no doubt that you'll soon get back again all the
quiet peacefulness which you used to be so proud of.'
Mouret shook his head with downcast eyes.
'No! no!' he said; 'I know myself too well. I can
make a noise, but it does no good. In reality I am as weak
as a child. People are quite wrong in supposing that I
gained my own way with my wife by force. She has generally
done what I wanted her to do, because she was quite indifferent
about everything, and would as soon do one thing as
another. Mild as she looks, she is very obstinate, I can tell
you. Well, I must try to make the best of it.'
Then, raising his eyes, he added:
'It would have been better if I had said nothing about all
this to you; but you won't mention it to anyone, will you?'
When Marthe went to see her mother the next day, the
latter received her with some show of coldness, and exclaimed:
'It is wrong of you, my dear, to show yourself so neglectful
of your husband. I saw him yesterday and he is quite
angry about it. I am well aware that he often behaves in a
very ridiculous manner, but that does not justify you in
neglecting your home.'
Marthe fixed her eyes upon her mother.
'Ah! he has been complaining about me!' she said
curtly. 'The least he could do would be to keep silent, for I
never complain about him.'
Then she began to talk of other matters, but Madame
Rougon brought her back to the subject of her husband by
inquiring after Abbé Faujas.
'Perhaps Mouret isn't very fond of the Abbé, and finds
fault with you in consequence. Is that the case, do you
think?'
Marthe showed great surprise.
'What an idea!' she exclaimed. 'What makes you
think that my husband does not like Abbé Faujas? He has
certainly never said anything to me which would lead me to
imagine such a thing. He hasn't said anything to you, has[Pg 101]
he? Oh no! you are quite mistaken. He would go up to
their rooms to fetch them if the mother didn't come down to
have her game of cards with him.'
Mouret, indeed, never complained in any way about Abbé
Faujas. He joked with him a little bluntly sometimes, and
occasionally brought his name into the teasing banter with
which he tormented his wife, but that was all.
One morning, as he was shaving, he said to Marthe:
'I'll tell you what, my dear; if ever you go to confession,
take the Abbé for your director, and then your sins will, at
any rate, be kept amongst ourselves.'
Abbé Faujas heard confessions on Tuesdays and Fridays,
on which days Marthe used to avoid going to Saint-Saturnin's.
She alleged that she did not want to disturb him; but she
was really under the influence of that timid uneasiness which
disquieted her whenever she saw him in his surplice redolent
of the mysterious odours of the sacristy. One Friday, she
went with Madame de Condamin to see how the works at the
Home of the Virgin were getting on. The men were just
finishing the frontage. Madame de Condamin found fault with
the ornamentation, which, said she, was extremely mean and
characterless. At the entrance there ought to have been two
slender columns with a pointed arch, something at once light
and suggestive of religion, something that would be a credit
to the committee of lady patronesses. Marthe hesitated for a
time, but she gradually admitted that the place looked very
mean as it was. Then as the other pressed her, she promised
to speak to Monsieur Lieutaud on the subject that very day.
In order that she might keep her promise, she went to the
cathedral before returning home. It was four o'clock when
she got there, and the architect had just left. When she
asked for Abbé Faujas, a verger told her that he was confessing
in the chapel of Saint Aurelia. Then for the first time
she recollected what day it was, and replied that she could
not wait. But as she passed the chapel of Saint Aurelia on
her way out, she thought that the Abbé might, perhaps, have
already caught sight of her. The truth was that she felt
singularly faint, and so she sat down outside the chapel,
near the railing. And there she remained.
The sky was grey, and the church was steeped in twilight.
Here and there in the aisles, already shrouded in darkness,
gleamed a lamp, or some gilt candelabrum, or some Virgin's
silver robe; and a pale ray filtered through the great nave[Pg 102]
and died away on the polished oak of the stalls and benches.
Marthe had never before felt so completely overcome. Her
legs seemed to have lost all their strength, and her hands
were so heavy that she clasped them across her knees to save
herself from having to support their weight. She allowed
herself to drift into drowsiness, in which she still continued
to hear and see, but in a very soft subdued fashion. The
slight sounds wafted along beneath the vaulted roof, the
falling of a chair, the slow step of some worshipper, all filled
her with emotion, assumed a musical tone which thrilled her
to the heart; while the last glimmers of daylight and the
dusky shadows that crept up the pillars like covers of crape,
assumed in her eyes all the delicate tints of shot silk. She
gradually fell into a state of exquisite languor, in which she
seemed to melt away and die. Everything around her then
vanished, and she was thrilled with perfect happiness in her
strange, trance-like condition.
The sound of a voice awoke her from this state of ecstasy.
'I am very sorry,' said Abbé Faujas; 'I saw you, but I
could not get away.'
She then appeared to wake up with a start. She looked
at him. He was standing before her in the dying light, in
his surplice. His last penitent had just left, and the empty
church seemed to be growing still more solemn.
'You want to speak to me?' he asked.
Marthe made an effort to recall her thoughts.
'Yes,' she murmured; 'but I can't remember now. Ah
yes! it is about the frontage, which Madame de Condamin
thinks too mean. There ought to be two columns instead of
that characterless flat door. And up above one might put a
pointed arch filled with stained glass. It would look very
pretty. You understand what I mean, don't you?'
He gazed at her very gravely with his hands crossed over
his surplice, and his head inclined towards her; and she, still
seated, without strength to rise to her feet, went on stammering
confusedly, as though she had been taken unawares in a
sleep which she could not shake off.
'It would entail additional expense, of course; but we
might have columns of soft stone with a very simple moulding.
We might speak about it to the master mason, and he will tell
us how much it would cost. But we had better pay him his
last account first. It is two thousand one hundred and odd
francs, I think. We have the money in hand; Madame[Pg 103]
Paloque told me so this morning. There will be no difficulty
about that, Monsieur l'Abbé.'
She lowered her head, as though she felt oppressed by the
gaze that was bent upon her. When she raised it again and
met the priest's eyes, she clasped her hands together, after the
manner of a child seeking forgiveness, and she burst into sobs.
The priest allowed her to weep, still standing in silence in
front of her. Then she fell on her knees before him, weeping
behind her hands, with which she covered her face.
'Get up, I pray you,' said Abbé Faujas gently. 'It is
before God that you should go and kneel.'
He helped her to rise and he sat down beside her. They
talked together for a long time in low tones. The night had
now fully fallen, and the lamps set golden specks gleaming
through the black depths of the church. The murmur of their
voices alone disturbed the silence in front of the chapel of
Saint Aurelia. From the priest streamed a flood of words
after each of Marthe's weak broken answers. When at last
they rose, he seemed to be refusing her some favour which she
was seeking with persistence. And leading her towards the
door, he raised his voice as he said:
'No! I cannot, I assure you I cannot. It would be better
for you to take Abbé Bourrette.'
'I am in great need of your advice,' Marthe murmured,
beseechingly. 'I think that with your help everything would
be easy to me.'
'You are mistaken,' he replied, in a sterner voice. 'On
the contrary, I fear that my direction would be prejudicial
to you to begin with. Abbé Bourrette is the priest you want,
I assure you. Later on, I may perhaps give you a different
reply.'
Marthe obeyed the priest's injunctions, and on the morrow
the worshippers at Saint-Saturnin's were surprised to see
Madame Mouret kneel before Abbé Bourrette's confessional.
Two days later nothing but this conversion was spoken of in
Plassans. Abbé Faujas's name was pronounced with subtle
smiles by certain people, but on the whole the impression was
a good one and in favour of the Abbé. Madame Rastoil complimented
Madame Mouret in full committee, and Madame
Delangre professed to see in the matter a first blessing
vouchsafed by God who rewarded the lady patronesses for
their good work by touching the heart of the only one
amongst them who had not conformed with the requirements[Pg 104]
of religion. Madame de Condamin, taking Marthe
aside, said to her:
'You have done right, my dear. What you have done is
a necessity for a woman; and, besides, as soon as one begins
to go about a little, it is necessary to go to church.'
The only matter of astonishment was her choice of Abbé
Bourrette. That worthy man almost entirely confined himself
to hearing the confessions of young girls. The ladies
found him 'so very uninteresting.' On the Thursday at the
Rougons' reception, before Marthe's arrival, the matter was
talked over in a corner of the green drawing-room, and it
was Madame Paloque with her waspish tongue who summed
up the matter.
'Abbé Faujas has done quite right in not keeping her
himself,' said she, with a twist of her mouth that made her
still more hideous than usual; 'Abbé Bourrette is very
successful in saving souls and appearances also.'
When Marthe came that evening her mother stepped forward
to welcome her, and kissed her affectionately with
some ostentation before the company. She herself had
made her peace with God on the morrow of the Coup
d'État. She was of opinion that Abbé Faujas might now
venture to return to the green drawing-room; but he excused
himself, making a pretext of his work and his love
of privacy. Madame Rougon then fancied that he was
planning a triumphal return for the following winter. The
Abbé's success was certainly on the increase. For the first
few months his only penitents had come from the vegetable-market
held behind the cathedral, poor hawkers, to
whose dialect he had quietly listened without always
being able to understand it; but now, especially since all
the talk there had been in connection with the Home of
the Virgin, he had a crowd of well-to-do citizens' wives
and daughters dressed in silk kneeling before his confessional-box.
When Marthe quietly mentioned that he would
not receive her amongst his penitents, Madame de Condamin
was seized with a sudden whim, and deserted her director,
the senior curate of Saint-Saturnin's, who was greatly distressed
thereby, to transfer the guardianship of her soul to
Abbé Faujas. Such a distinction as this gave the latter a
firm position in Plassans society.
When Mouret learned that his wife now went to confession,
he merely said to her:
[Pg 105]
'You have been doing something wrong lately, I suppose,
since you find it necessary to go and tell all your affairs to
a parson?'
In the midst of all this pious excitement he seemed to isolate
himself and shut himself up in his own narrow and
monotonous life still further. When his wife reproached him
for complaining to her mother, he answered:
'Yes, you are right; it was wrong of me. It is foolish to
give people any pleasure by telling them of one's troubles.
However, I promise you that I won't give your mother this
satisfaction a second time. I have been thinking matters
over, and the house may topple down on our heads before I'll
go whimpering to anyone again.'
From that time he never made any disparaging remarks
about the management of the house or scolded his wife in
the presence of strangers, but professed himself, as formerly,
the happiest of men. This effort of sound sense cost him
little, for he saw that it would tend to his comfort, which
was the object of his constant thoughts. He even exaggerated
his assumption of the part of a contented methodical
citizen who took pleasure in living. Marthe only became
aware of his impatience by his restless pacing up and down.
For whole weeks he refrained from teasing or fault-finding
as far as she was concerned, while upon Rose and his children
he constantly poured forth his jeers, scolding them too
from morning till night for the slightest shortcomings.
Previously he had only been economical, now he became
miserly.
'There is no sense in spending money in the way we are
doing,' he grumbled to Marthe. 'I'll be bound you are giving
it all to those young hussies of yours. But it's quite sufficient
for you to waste your time over them. Listen to me, my dear.
I will give you a hundred francs a month for housekeeping,
and if you will persist in giving money to girls who don't
deserve it, you must save it out of your dress allowance.'
He kept firmly to his word, and the very next month he
refused to let Marthe buy a pair of boots on the pretext that
it would disarrange his accounts, and that he had given her
full notice and warning. One evening his wife found him
weeping bitterly in their bedroom. All her kindness of heart
was aroused, and she clasped him in her arms and besought
him to tell her what distressed him. But he roughly tore
himself away from her and told her that he was not crying at[Pg 106]
all, but simply had a bad headache. It was that, said he,
which made his eyes red.
'Do you think,' he exclaimed, 'that I am such a simpleton
as you are to cry?'
She felt much hurt. The next day Mouret affected great
gaiety; but some days afterwards, when Abbé Faujas and his
mother came downstairs after dinner, he refused to play his
usual game of piquet. He did not feel clear-headed enough
for it, he said. On the next few nights he made other excuses,
and so the games were broken off, and everyone went out on
the terrace. Mouret seated himself in front of his wife and
the Abbé, doing all he could to speak as much and as frequently
as possible; while Madame Faujas sat a few yards
away in the gloom, quite silent and still, with her hands upon
her knees, like one of those legendary figures keeping guard
over a treasure with the stern fidelity of a crouching dog.
'Fine evening!' Mouret used to say every night. 'It is
much pleasanter here than in the dining-room. It is very wise
of you to come out and enjoy the fresh air. Ah! there's a
shooting-star! Did your reverence see it? I've heard say
that it's Saint Peter lighting his pipe up yonder.'
He laughed, but Marthe kept quite grave, vexed by his
attempts at pleasantry, which spoilt her enjoyment of the
expanse of sky that spread between Monsieur Rastoil's
pear-trees and the chestnuts of the Sub-Prefecture. Sometimes
he would pretend to be unaware that she conformed
with the requirements of religion, and he would take the Abbé
aside and tell him that he relied on him to effect the salvation
of the whole house. At other times he could never begin a
sentence without saying in a bantering tone, 'Now that my
wife goes to confession—' Then having grown tired of this
subject, he began to listen to what was being said in the
neighbouring gardens, trying to catch the faint sounds of
voices which rose in the calm night air, as the distant noises
of Plassans were hushed.
'Ah! those are the voices of Monsieur de Condamin and
Doctor Porquier!' he said, straining his ear towards the
Sub-Prefecture. 'They are making fun of the Paloques.
Did you hear Monsieur Delangre saying in his falsetto,
"Ladies, you had better come in, the air is growing cool"?
Don't you think that little Delangre always talks as though
he had swallowed a reed-pipe?'
Then he turned his head towards the Rastoils' garden.
[Pg 107]
'They haven't anyone there to-night,' he said; 'I can't
hear anything. Ah, yes! those big geese the daughters are
by the waterfall. The elder one talks just as though she
were gobbling pebbles. Every evening they sit there jabbering
for a good hour. They can't want all that time to tell
each other about the matrimonial offers they have had. Ah!
they are all there! There's Abbé Surin, with a voice like a
flute; and Abbé Fenil, who would do for a rattle on Good
Friday. There are sometimes a score of them huddled
together, without stirring a finger, in that garden. I believe
they all go there to listen to what we say.'
While he went chattering on in this manner Abbé Faujas
and Marthe merely spoke a few words, chiefly in reply to his
questions. Generally they sat apart from him with their
faces raised to the sky and their eyes gazing into space. One
evening Mouret fell asleep. Then, inclining their heads towards
each other, they began to talk in subdued tones; while
some few yards away, Madame Faujas, with her hands upon
her knees, her eyes wide open and her ears on the strain, yet
never seeing or hearing anything, seemed to be keeping watch
for them.
The summer passed away, and Abbé Faujas seemed in no
hurry to derive any advantage from his increasing popularity.
He still kept himself in seclusion at the Mourets', delighting
in the solitude of the garden, to which he now came down
during the day-time. He read his breviary as he slowly
walked with bent head up and down the green arbour at the
far end. Sometimes he would close his book, still further
slacken his steps, and seem to be buried in deep reverie.
Mouret, who used to watch him, at last became impatient
and irritated at seeing that black figure walking to and fro
for hours together behind his fruit-trees.
'One has no privacy left,' he muttered. 'I can't lift my
eyes now without catching sight of that cassock. He is
like a crow, that fellow there, with his round eyes that always
seem to be on the look-out for something. I don't believe
in his fine disinterested airs.'
[Pg 108]
It was not till early in September that the Home of the
Virgin was completed. In the provinces workmen are painfully
slow; though it must be stated that the lady patronesses
had twice upset Monsieur Lieutaud's designs in favour of
ideas of their own. When the committee took possession of
the building they rewarded the architect for the complaisance
he had manifested by lavishing the highest praises upon him.
Everything seemed to them perfectly satisfactory. The
rooms were large, the communications were excellent, and
there was a courtyard planted with trees and embellished
with two small fountains. Madame de Condamin was particularly
charmed with the façade, which was one of her
own ideas. Over the door, the words 'Home of the Virgin'
were carved in gold letters on a slab of black marble.
On the occasion of the opening of the Home there was
a very affecting ceremony. The Bishop, attended by the
Chapter, came in person to install the Sisters of Saint
Joseph, who had been authorised to work the institution. A
troop of some fifty girls of from eight to fifteen years of age
had been collected together from the streets of the old quarter
of the town, and all that had been required from the parents
to obtain admission for their children had been a declaration
that their avocations necessitated their absence from home
during the entire day. Monsieur Delangre made a speech
which was much applauded. He explained at considerable
length, and in a magnificent style, the details and arrangements
of this new refuge, which he called 'the school of
virtue and labour, where young and interesting creatures
would be kept safe from wicked temptations.' A delicate
allusion, towards the end of the speech, to the real promoter
of the Home, Abbé Faujas, attracted much notice. The Abbé
was present amongst the other priests, and his fine, grave
face remained perfectly calm and tranquil when all eyes
were turned upon him. Marthe blushed on the platform,
where she was sitting in the midst of the lady patronesses.
When the ceremony was over, the Bishop expressed a
desire to inspect the building in every detail; and, notwithstanding
the evident annoyance of Abbé Fenil, he sent for
Abbé Faujas, whose big black eyes had never for a moment
quitted him, and requested him to be good enough to act as
his guide, adding aloud with a smile, that he was sure he
could not find a better one. This little speech was circulated
amongst the departing spectators, and in the evening all[Pg 109]
Plassans commented upon the Bishop's favourable demeanour
towards Abbé Faujas.
The lady patronesses had reserved for themselves one of
the rooms in the Home. Here they provided a collation for
the Bishop, who ate a biscuit and drank two sips of Malaga,
while saying a polite word or two to each of them. This
brought the pious festival to a happy conclusion, for both
before and during the ceremony there had been heart-burnings
and rivalries among the ladies, whom the delicate
praises of Monseigneur Rousselot quite restored to good
humour. When they were left to themselves, they declared
that everything had gone off exceedingly well, and they
profusely praised the Bishop. Madame Paloque alone looked
sour. The prelate had somehow forgotten her when he was
distributing his compliments.
'You were quite right,' she said in a fury to her husband,
when she got home again; 'I have just been made a convenience
in that silly nonsense of theirs. It's a fine idea,
indeed, to bring all those corrupt hussies together. I have
given up all my time to them, and that big simpleton of a
Bishop, who trembles before his own clergy, can't even say
thank you. Just as if that Madame de Condamin had done
anything, indeed. She is far too much occupied in showing
off her dresses! Ah! we know quite enough about her,
don't we? The world will hear something about her one of
these days that will surprise it a little! Thank goodness,
we've nothing to conceal. And that Madame Delangre and
Madame Rastoil, too—well, it wouldn't be difficult to tell
tales about them that would cover them with blushes! And
they never stirred out of their drawing-rooms, they haven't
taken half the trouble about the matter that I have! Then
there's that Madame Mouret, with her pretence of managing
the whole business, though she really did nothing but hang
on to the cassock of her Abbé Faujas! She's another
hypocrite of whom we shall hear some pretty things one of
these days! And yet they could all get a polite speech, while
there wasn't a word for me! I'm nothing but a mere
convenience, they treat me like a dog! But things sha'n't
go on like this, Paloque, I tell you. The dog will turn and
bite them before long!'
From that time forward Madame Paloque showed herself
much less accommodating. She became very irregular in
her secretarial work, and declined to perform any duties that[Pg 110]
she did not fancy, till at last the lady patronesses began to
talk of employing a paid secretary. Marthe mentioned these
worries to Abbé Faujas and asked him if he could recommend
a suitable man.
'Don't trouble yourself to look for anyone,' he said, 'I
dare say I can find you a fit person. Give me two or three
days.'
For some time past he had been frequently receiving
letters bearing the Besançon postmark, They were all in
the same handwriting, a large, ugly hand. Rose, who took
them up to him, remarked that he seemed vexed at the
mere sight of the envelopes.
'He looks quite put out,' she said. 'You may depend
upon it that it's no great favourite of his who writes to him
so often.'
Mouret's old curiosity was roused by this correspondence.
One day he took up one of the letters himself with a pleasant
smile, telling the Abbé, as an excuse for his own appearance,
that Rose was not in the house. The Abbé probably saw
through Mouret's cunning, for he assumed an expression of
great pleasure, as though he had been impatiently expecting
the letter. But Mouret did not allow himself to be deceived
by this piece of acting, he stayed outside the door on the
landing and glued his ear to the key-hole.
'From your sister again, isn't it?' asked Madame Faujas,
in her hard voice. 'Why does she worry you in that way?'
There was a short silence, after which came a sound of
paper being roughly crumpled, and the Abbé said, with evident
displeasure:
'It's always the same old story. She wants to come to us
and bring her husband with her, so that we may get him a
situation somewhere. She seems to think that we are
wallowing in gold. I'm afraid they will be doing something
rash—perhaps taking us by surprise some fine morning.'
'No, no! we can't do with them here, Ovide!' his
mother replied. 'They have never liked you; they have
always been jealous of you. Trouche is a scamp and Olympe
is quite heartless. They would want everything for themselves,
and they would compromise you and interfere with
your work.'
Mouret was too much excited by the meanness of the act
he was committing to be able to hear well, and, besides, he
thought that one of them was coming to the door, so he[Pg 111]
hurried away. He took care not to mention what he had
done. A few days later Abbé Faujas, in his presence, while
they were all out on the terrace, gave Marthe a definite reply
respecting the Secretaryship at the Home.
'I think I can recommend you a suitable person,' he said,
in his calm way. 'It is a connection of my own, my brother-in-law,
who is coming here from Besançon in a few days.'
Mouret became very attentive, while Marthe appeared
delighted.
'Oh, that is excellent!' she exclaimed. 'I was feeling
very much bothered about finding a suitable person. You
see, with all those young girls, we must have a person of unexceptionable
morality, but of course a connection of yours—'
'Yes, yes,' interrupted the priest; 'my sister had a little
hosiery business at Besançon, which she has been obliged to
give up on account of her health; and now she is anxious to
join us again, as the doctors have ordered her to live in the
south. My mother is very much pleased.'
'I'm sure she must be,' said Marthe. 'I dare say it grieved
you very much to have to separate, and you will be very glad
to be together again. I'll tell you what you must do. There
are a couple of rooms upstairs that you don't use; why
shouldn't your sister and her husband have them? They
have no children, have they?'
'No, there are only their two selves. I had, indeed,
thought for a moment of giving them those two rooms; but I
was afraid of displeasing you by bringing other people into
your house.'
'Not at all, I assure you. You are very quiet people.'
She checked herself suddenly, for her husband was
tugging at her dress. He did not want to have the Abbé's
relations in the house, for he remembered in what terms
Madame Faujas had spoken of her daughter and son-in-law.
'The rooms are very small,' he began; 'and Monsieur
l'Abbé would be inconvenienced. It would be better for all
parties that his sister should take lodgings somewhere else;
there happen to be some rooms vacant just now at the
Paloques' house, over the way.'
There was a dead pause in the conversation. The priest
said nothing, but gazed up into the sky. Marthe thought he
was offended, and she felt much distressed at her husband's
bluntness. After a moment she could no longer endure the
embarrassing silence. 'Well, it's settled then,' she said,[Pg 112]
without any attempt at skill in knitting the broken threads of
the conversation together again, 'Rose shall help your mother
to clean the rooms. My husband was only thinking about
your own personal convenience; but, of course, if you wish it,
it is not for us to prevent you from disposing of the rooms in
any way you like.'
Mouret was quite angry when he again found himself
alone with his wife.
'I can't understand you at all!' he cried. 'When first I
let the rooms to the Abbé, you were quite displeased, and
seemed to hate the thought of having even so much as a cat
brought into the house; and now I believe you would be
perfectly willing for the Abbé to bring the whole of his
relations, down to his third and fourth cousins. Didn't you
feel me tugging at your dress? You might have known that
I didn't want those people. They are not very respectable
folks.'
'How do you know that?' cried Marthe, annoyed by this
accusation. 'Who told you so?'
'Who, indeed? It was Abbé Faujas himself. I overheard
him one day while he was talking to his mother.'
She looked at him keenly; and he blushed slightly beneath
her gaze as he stammered:
'Well, it is sufficient that I do know. The sister is a
heartless creature and her husband is a scamp. It's of no
use your putting on that air of insulted majesty; those were
their own words, and I'm inventing nothing. I don't want to
have those people here, do you understand? The old lady
herself was the first to object to her daughter coming here.
The Abbé now seems to have changed his mind. I don't
know what has led him to alter his opinion. It's some fresh
mystery of his. He's going to make use of them somehow.'
Marthe shrugged her shoulders and allowed her husband
to rail on. He told Rose not to clean the rooms, but Rose
now only obeyed her mistress's orders. For five days his
anger vented itself in bitter words and furious recriminations.
In Abbé Faujas's presence he confined himself to sulking, for he
did not dare to attack the priest openly. Then, as usual, he
ended by submitting, and ceased to rail at the people who were
coming. But he drew his purse-strings still tighter, isolated
himself, shut himself up more and more in his own selfish
existence. When the Trouches arrived one October evening,
he merely exclaimed:
[Pg 113]
'The deuce! they don't look a nice couple. What faces
they have!'
Abbé Faujas did not appear very desirous that his sister
and brother-in-law should be seen on that occasion. His
mother took up a position by the street-door, and as soon as
she caught sight of them turning out of the Place of the Sub-Prefecture,
she glanced uneasily behind her into the hall and
the kitchen. Luck was, however, against her, for just as the
Trouches arrived, Marthe, who was going out, came up from
the garden, followed by her children.
'Ah! there you all are!' she said, with a pleasant smile.
Madame Faujas, who was generally so completely mistress
of herself, could not suppress a slight show of confusion as she
stammered a word or two of reply. For some moments they
stood confronting and scrutinising each other in the hall.
Mouret had hurriedly mounted the steps and Rose had taken
up her position at the kitchen door.
'You must be very glad to be together again,' said Marthe,
addressing Madame Faujas.
Then, noticing the feeling of embarrassment which was
keeping them all silent, she turned towards Trouche and
added:
'You arrived by the five o'clock train, I suppose? How
long were you in getting here from Besançon?'
'Seventeen hours in the train,' Trouche replied, opening
a toothless mouth. 'It is no joke that, in a third-class
carriage, I can tell you. One gets pretty well shaken up
inside.'
Then he laughed with a peculiar clattering of his jaws.
Madame Faujas cast a very angry glance at him, and he
began to fumble mechanically at his greasy overcoat, trying
to fasten a button that was no longer there, and pressing to
his thighs (doubtless in order to hide some stains) a couple of
cardboard bonnet-boxes which he was carrying, one green
and the other yellow. His red throat was perpetually gurgling
beneath a twisted, ragged black neckcloth, over which appeared
the edge of a dirty shirt. In his wrinkled face, which seemed
to reek with vice, there glistened two little black eyes that
rolled about incessantly, examining everybody and everything
with an expression of astonishment and covetousness. They
looked like the eyes of a thief studying a house to which he
means to return in order to plunder it some night.
Mouret fancied that Trouche was examining the fastenings.
[Pg 114]
'That fellow,' he thought to himself, 'looks as though he
were getting the patterns of the locks into his head!'
Olympe was conscious that her husband had made a
vulgar remark. She was a tall, slight woman, fair and faded,
with a flat plain face. She carried a little deal box and a big
bundle tied up in a tablecloth.
'We have brought some pillows with us,' she said,
glancing at the bundle. 'Pillows come in very usefully in a
third-class carriage; they make one quite as comfortable as if
one were travelling first-class. It is a great saving, going
third, and it is of no use throwing money away, is it?'
'Certainly not,' Marthe replied, somewhat surprised by the
appearance and language of the new-comers.
Olympe now came forward and went on talking in an
ingratiating way.
'It's the same thing with clothes,' said she; 'when I set
off on a journey I put on my shabbiest things. I told Honoré
that his old overcoat was quite good enough. And he has got
his old work-day trousers on too, trousers that he's quite tired
of wearing. You see I selected my worse dress; it is actually
in holes, I believe. This shawl was mother's; I used to iron
on it at home; and this bonnet I'm wearing is an old one
that I only put on when I go to the wash-house; but it's quite
good enough to get spoilt with the dust, isn't it, madame?'
'Certainly, certainly,' replied Marthe, trying to force a
smile.
Just at this moment a stern voice was heard from the top
of the stairs, calling sharply: 'Well! now, mother!'
Mouret raised his head and saw Abbé Faujas leaning
against the second-floor banisters, looking very angry, and
bending over, at the risk of falling, to get a better view of
what was going on in the passage. He had heard a sound of
talking and had been waiting there for a moment or two in
great impatience.
'Come, mother, come!' he cried again.
'Yes, yes, we are coming up,' answered Madame Faujas,
trembling at the sound of her son's angry voice.
Then turning to the Trouches, she said:
'Come along, my children, we must go upstairs. Let us
leave madame to attend to her business.'
But the Trouches did not seem to hear; they appeared
quite satisfied to remain in the passage, and they looked about[Pg 115]
them with a well-pleased air, as though the house had just
been presented to them.
'It is very nice, very nice indeed, isn't it, Honoré?'
Olympe said. 'After what Ovide wrote in his letters we
scarcely expected to find it so nice as this, did we? But I
told you that we ought to come here, and that we should do
better here, and I am right, you see.'
'Yes, yes, we ought to be very comfortable here,' Trouche
murmured. 'The garden, too, seems a pretty big one.'
Then addressing Mouret, he inquired:
'Do you allow your lodgers to walk in the garden, sir?'
Before Mouret had time to reply, Abbé Faujas, who had
come downstairs, cried out in thundering tones:
'Come, Trouche! Come, Olympe!'
They turned round; and when they saw him standing on
the steps looking terribly angry, they fairly quailed and
meekly followed him. The Abbé went up the stairs in front
of them without saying another word, without even seeming
to observe the presence of Mouret, who stood gazing after the
singular procession. Madame Faujas smiled at Marthe to
take away the awkwardness of the situation as she brought
up the rear.
Marthe then went out, and Mouret, left to himself, lingered
a moment or two in the passage. Upstairs, on the second
floor, doors were being noisily banged. Then loud voices
were heard, and presently there came dead silence.
'Has he locked them up separately, I wonder?' said
Mouret to himself, with a laugh. 'Well, anyhow, they are
not a nice family.'
On the very next day, Trouche, respectably dressed,
entirely in black, shaven, and with his scanty hair carefully
brushed over his temples, was presented by Abbé Faujas to
Marthe and the lady patronesses. He was forty-five years of
age, wrote a first-rate hand, and was said to have kept the
books of a mercantile house for a long time. The ladies at
once installed him as secretary. His duties were to represent
the committee, and employ himself in certain routine work
from ten till four in an office on the first floor of the Home.
His salary was to be fifteen hundred francs.
'Those good people are very quiet, you see,' Marthe
remarked to her husband a few days afterwards.
Indeed the Trouches made no more noise than the Faujases.
Two or three times Rose asserted that she had heard quarrels[Pg 116]
between the mother and daughter, but the Abbé's grave voice
had immediately restored peace. Trouche went out every
morning punctually at a quarter to ten, and came back again
at a quarter past four. He never went out in the evening.
Olympe occasionally went shopping with Madame Faujas, but
she was never seen to come down the stairs by herself.
The window of the room in which the Trouches slept
overlooked the garden. It was the last one on the right, in
front of the trees of the Sub-Prefecture. Big curtains of red
calico, with a yellow border, hung behind the glass panes,
making a strong contrast, when seen from outside, with the
priest's white ones. The window was invariably kept closed.
One evening when Abbé Faujas and his mother were out on
the terrace with the Mourets, a slight involuntary cough was
heard, and as the priest raised his head with an expression of
annoyance, he caught sight of Olympe and her husband leaning
out of the window. For a moment or two he kept his
eyes turned upwards, thus interrupting his conversation with
Marthe. At this the Trouches disappeared; and those below
heard the window-catch being fastened.
'You had better go upstairs, I think, mother,' said the
priest. 'I am afraid you may be catching cold out here.'
Madame Faujas wished them all good-night; and, when
she had retired, Marthe resumed the conversation by asking
in her kindly way:
'Is your sister worse? I have not seen her for a week.'
'She has great need of rest,' the priest curtly answered.
However, Marthe's sympathetic interest made her continue
the subject.
'She shuts herself up too much,' said she; 'the fresh air
would do her good. These October evenings are still quite
warm. Why doesn't she ever come out into the garden?
She has never set foot in it. You know that it is entirely at
your disposal.'
The priest muttered a few vague words of excuse, and then
Mouret, to increase his embarrassment, manifested still greater
amiability than his wife's.
'That's just what I was saying this morning,' he began.
'Monsieur l'Abbé's sister might very well bring her sewing
out here in the sun in the afternoons, instead of keeping herself
shut in upstairs. Anyone would think that she daren't
even show herself at the window. She isn't frightened of us,
I hope! We are not such terrible people as all that! And[Pg 117]
Monsieur Trouche, too, he hurries up the stairs, four steps at
a time. Tell them to come and spend an evening with us now
and then. They must be frightfully dull up in that room of
theirs, all alone.'
The Abbé did not seem to be in the humour that evening
to submit to his landlord's pleasantry. He looked him
straight in the face, and said very bluntly:
'I am much obliged to you, but there is little probability
of their accepting your invitation. They are tired in the
evening, and they go to bed. And, besides, that is the best
thing they can do.'
'Just as they like, my dear sir,' replied Mouret, vexed by
the Abbé's rough manner.
When he was alone again with Marthe, he said to her:
'Does the Abbé, I wonder, think he can persuade us that
the moon is made of green cheese? It's quite clear that he
is afraid that those scamps he has taken in will play him some
bad trick or other. Didn't you see how sharply he kept his
eye on them this evening when he caught sight of them at
the window? They were spying out at us up there. There
will be a bad end to all this!'
Marthe was now living in a state of blessed calm. She
no longer felt troubled by Mouret's raillery; the gradual
growth of faith within her filled her with exquisite joy, she
glided softly and slowly into a life of pious devotion, which
seemed to lull her with a sweet restfulness. Abbé Faujas
still avoided speaking to her of God. He remained merely a
friend, simply exercising influence over her by his grave
demeanour and the vague odour of incense exhaled by his
cassock. On two or three occasions when she was alone with
him she had again broken out into fits of nervous sobbing,
without knowing why, but finding a happiness in thus allowing
herself to weep. On each of these occasions the Abbé had
merely taken her hands in silence, calming her with his serene
and authoritative gaze. When she wanted to tell him of her
strange attacks of sadness, or her secret joys, or her need of
guidance, he smiled and hushed her, telling her that these
matters were not his concern, and that she must speak of
them to Abbé Bourrette. Then she retired completely within
herself and remained trembling; while the priest seemed to
assume still colder reserve than before, and strode away from
her like some unheeding god at whose feet she wished to pour
out her soul in humiliation.
[Pg 118]
Marthe's chief occupation now was attending the various
religious services and works in which she took part. In the
vast nave of Saint-Saturnin's she felt perfectly happy; it was
there that she experienced the full sweetness of that purely
physical restfulness which she sought. She there forgot
everything: it was like an immense window open upon
another life, a life that was wide and infinite, and full of an
emotion which thrilled and satisfied her. But she still felt
some fear of the church, and she went there with a feeling of
uneasy bashfulness, and a touch of nervous shame, that made
her glance behind her as she passed through the doorway,
to see if anyone was watching her. Then, once inside, she
abandoned herself, everything around her seemed to assume a
melting softness, even the unctuous voice of Abbé Bourrette,
who, after he had confessed her, sometimes kept her on her
knees for a few minutes longer, while he spoke to her about
Madame Rastoil's dinners or the Rougons' last reception.
Marthe often returned home in a condition of complete
prostration. Religion seemed to break her down. Rose had
become all-powerful in the house. She scolded Mouret,
found fault with him because he dirtied too much linen, and
let him have his dinner at her own hours. She even tried
to convert him.
'Madame does quite right to live a Christian life,' said she.
'You will be damned, sir, you will, and it will only be right,
for you are not a good man at heart, no, you are not! You
ought to go with your wife to mass next Sunday morning.'
Mouret shrugged his shoulders. He let things take their
own course, and sometimes even did a bit of house-work himself,
taking a turn or two with the broom when he thought
that the dining-room looked particularly dusty. The children
gave him most trouble. It was vacation-time, and, as their
mother was scarcely ever at home, Désirée and Octave—who
had again failed in his examination for his degree—turned
the place upside down. Serge was poorly, kept his bed, and
spent whole days in reading in his room. He had become
Abbé Faujas's favourite, and the priest lent him books.
Mouret thus spent two dreadful months, at his wits' end how
to manage his young folks. Octave was a special trouble to
him, and as he did not feel inclined to keep him at home till
the end of the vacation, he determined that he should not
again return to college, but should be sent to some business-house
at Marseilles.
[Pg 119]
'Since you won't look after them at all,' he said to Marthe,
'I must find some place or other to put them in. I am quite
worn out with them all, and I won't have them at home any
longer. It's your own fault if it causes you any grief. Octave
is quite unbearable. He will never pass his examination, and
it will be much better to teach him at once how to gain his
own living instead of letting him idle his time away with a
lot of good-for-nothings. One meets him roaming all over
the town.'
Marthe was very much distressed. She seemed to awake
from a dream on hearing that one of her children was about
to leave her. She succeeded in getting the departure postponed
for a week, during which she remained more at home,
and resumed her active life. But she quickly dropped back
again into her previous state of listless languor; and on the
day that Octave came to kiss her, telling her that he was to
leave for Marseilles in the evening, she had lost all strength
and energy, and contented herself with giving him some good
advice.
Mouret came back from the railway station with a very
heavy heart. He looked about him for his wife, and found
her in the garden, crying under the arbour. Then he gave
vent to his feelings.
'There! that's one the less!' he exclaimed. 'You ought
to feel glad of it. You will be able to go prowling about the
church now as much as you like. Make your mind easy, the
other two won't be here long. I shall keep Serge with me as
he is a very quiet lad and is rather young as yet to go and
read for the bar; but if he's at all in your way, just let me
know, and I will free you of him at once. As for Désirée,
I shall send her to her nurse.'
Marthe went on weeping in silence.
'But what would you have?' he continued. 'You can't
be both in and out. Since you have taken to keeping away
from home, your children have become indifferent to you.
That's logic, isn't it? Besides it is necessary to find room
for all the people who are now living in our house. It isn't
nearly big enough, and we shall be lucky if we don't get
turned out of doors ourselves.'
He had raised his eyes as he spoke, and was looking at
the windows of the second-floor. Then, lowering his voice,
he added:
'Don't go on crying in that ridiculous way! They are[Pg 120]
watching you. Don't you see those eyes peeping between
the red curtains? They are the eyes of the Abbé's sister; I
know them well enough. You may depend on seeing them
there all day long. The Abbé himself may be a decent
fellow, but as for those Trouches, I know they are always
crouching behind their curtains like wolves waiting to spring
on one. I feel quite certain that if the Abbé didn't prevent
them, they would come down in the night to steal my pears.
Dry your tears, my dear; you may be quite sure that they
are enjoying our disagreement. Even though they have been
the cause of the boy's going away, that is no reason why we
should let them see what a trouble his departure has been to
us both.'
His voice broke, and he himself seemed on the point of
sobbing. Marthe, quite heart-broken, deeply touched by
his last words, was prompted to throw herself into his
arms. But they were afraid of being observed; and besides
they felt as if there were some obstacle between them that
prevented them from coming together. So they separated,
while Olympe's eyes still glistened between the red curtains
upstairs.
One morning Abbé Bourrette made his appearance, his face
betokening the greatest distress. As soon as he caught sight
of Marthe on the steps, he hurried up to her and, seizing her
hands and pressing them, he stammered:
'Poor Compan! it is all over with him! he is dying! I am
going upstairs, I must see Faujas at once.'
When Marthe showed him his fellow priest, who, according
to his wont, was walking to and fro at the bottom of the
garden, reading his breviary, he ran up to him, tottering on
his short legs. He tried to speak and tell the other the sad
news, but his grief choked him, and he could only throw his
arms round Abbé Faujas's neck, while sobbing bitterly.
'Hullo! what's the matter with the two parsons?' cried
Mouret, who had hastily rushed out of the dining-room.
'The Curé of Saint-Saturnin's is dying,' Marthe replied,
showing much distress.
[Pg 121]
Mouret assumed an expression of surprise, and, as he
went back into the house, he murmured:
'Pooh! that worthy Bourrette will manage to console
himself to-morrow when he is appointed Curé in the other's
place. He counts on getting the post; he told me so.'
Abbé Faujas disengaged himself from the old priest's
embrace, quietly closed his breviary, and listened to the sad
news with a grave face.
'Compan wants to see you,' said Abbé Bourrette in a
broken voice; 'he will not last the morning out. Oh! he has
been a dear friend to me! We studied together. He is
anxious to say good-bye to you. He has been telling me all
through the night that you were the only man of courage in
the diocese. For more than a year now he has been getting
weaker and weaker, and not a single Plassans priest has dared
to go and grasp his hand; while you, a stranger, who scarcely
knew him, you have spent an afternoon with him every week.
The tears came into his eyes just now as he was speaking of
you; you must lose no time, my friend.'
Abbé Faujas went up to his room for a moment, while
Abbé Bourrette paced impatiently and hopelessly about the
passage; and then at last they set off together. The old
priest wiped his brow and swayed about on the road as he
talked in disconnected fashion:
'He would have died like a dog without a single prayer
being said for him if his sister had not come and told me
about him at eleven o'clock last night. She did quite right,
the dear lady, though he did not want to compromise any of
us, and even would have foregone the last sacraments. Yes,
my friend, he was dying all alone, abandoned and deserted,
he who had so high a mind, and who has only lived to do
good!'
Then Bourrette became silent; but after a few moments
he resumed again in a different voice:
'Do you think that Fenil will ever forgive me for this?
Never, I expect! When Compan saw me bringing the
viaticum, he was unwilling to let me anoint him and told me to
go away. Well, well! it's all over with me now, and I shall
never be Curé! But I am glad that I did it, and that I
haven't let Compan die like a dog. He has been at war
with Fenil for thirty years, you know. When he took to his
bed he said to me, "Ah! it's Fenil who is going to carry the
day! Now that I am stricken down he will get the better of[Pg 122]
me!" So think of it! That poor Compan, whom I have
seen so high-spirited and energetic at Saint-Saturnin's!
Little Eusèbe, the choir-boy, whom I took to ring the viaticum
bell, was quite embarrassed when he found where we
were going. He kept looking behind him at each tinkle, as
if he was afraid that Fenil would hear it.'
Abbé Faujas, who was stepping along quickly with bent
head and a preoccupied air, kept perfectly silent, and did not
even seem to hear what his companion was saying.
'Has the Bishop been informed?' he suddenly asked.
But Abbé Bourrette in his turn now appeared to be buried
in thought and made no reply; however, just as they reached
Abbé Compan's door he said to his companion:
'Tell him that we met Fenil and that he bowed to us. It
will please him, for he will then think that I shall be appointed
Curé.'
They went up the stairs in silence. The Curé's sister
came to the landing, and on seeing them burst into tears.
Then she stammered between her sobs:
'It is all over! He has just passed away in my arms. I
was quite alone with him. As he was dying, he looked round
him and murmured, "I must have the plague since they have
all deserted me." Ah! gentlemen he died with his eyes full
of tears.'
They went into the little room where Abbé Compan, with
his head resting on his pillow, seemed to be asleep. His eyes
had remained open, and tears yet trickled down his white sad
face. Then Abbé Bourrette fell upon his knees, sobbing and
praying, with his face pressed to the counterpane. Abbé
Faujas at first remained standing, gazing at the dead man;
and after having knelt for a moment, he quietly went away.
Abbé Bourrette was so absorbed in his grief that he did not
even hear his colleague close the door.
Abbé Faujas went straight to the Bishop's. In Monseigneur
Rousselot's ante-chamber he met Abbé Surin, carrying
a bundle of papers.
'Do you want to speak to his lordship?' asked the
secretary, with his never-failing smile. 'You have come at
an unfortunate time. His lordship is so busy that he has
given orders that no one is to be admitted.'
'But I want to see him on a very urgent matter,' quietly
said Abbé Faujas. 'You can at any rate let him know that I
am here; and I will wait, if it is necessary.'
[Pg 123]
'I am afraid that it would be useless for you to wait.
His lordship has several people with him. It would be better
if you came again to-morrow.'
But the Abbé took a chair, and just as he was doing so the
Bishop opened the door of his study. He appeared much
vexed on seeing his visitor, whom at first he pretended not to
recognise.
'My son,' he said to Surin, 'when you have arranged those
papers, come to me immediately; there is a letter I want to
dictate to you.'
Then turning to the priest, who remained respectfully
standing, he said:
'Ah! is it you, Monsieur Faujas? I am very glad to see
you. Perhaps you want to say something to me? Come into
my study; you are never in the way.'
Monseigneur Rousselot's study was a very large and
rather gloomy room, in which a great wood fire was kept
burning in the summer as well as the winter. The heavy
carpet and curtains kept out all the air, and the room was like
a warm bath. The Bishop, like some dowager shutting herself
up from the world, detesting all noise and excitement,
lived a chilly life there in his armchair, committing to Abbé
Fenil the care of his diocese. He delighted in the classics,
and it was said that he was secretly making a translation of
Horace. He was equally fond of the little verses of the
Anthology, and broad quotations occasionally escaped from
his lips, quotations which he enjoyed with the naïveté of a
learned man who cares nothing for the modesty of the vulgar.
'There is no one here, you see,' said he, sitting down before
the fire; 'but I don't feel very well to-day, and I gave
orders that nobody was to be admitted. Now you can tell me
what you have to say; I am quite at your service.'
His general expression of amiability was tinged with a
kind of vague uneasiness, a sort of resigned submission.
When Abbé Faujas had informed him of the death of Abbé
Compan, he rose from his chair, apparently both distressed
and alarmed.
'What!' he cried, 'my good Compan dead! and I was not
able to bid him farewell! No one gave me any warning! Ah,
my friend, you were right when you gave me to understand
that I was no longer master here. They abuse my kindness.'
'Your lordship knows,' said Abbé Faujas, 'how devoted I
am to you. I am only waiting for a sign from you.'
[Pg 124]
The Bishop shook his head as he murmured:
'Yes, yes; I remember the offer you made to me. You
have an excellent heart; but what an uproar there would be,
if I were to break with Abbé Fenil! I should have my ears
deafened for a whole week! And yet if I could feel quite sure
that you could really rid me of him, if I was not afraid that
at a week's end he would come back and crush your neck
under his heel——'
Abbé Faujas could not repress a smile. Tears were welling
from the Bishop's eyes.
'Yes, I am afraid, I am afraid,' the prelate resumed, as he
again sank down into his chair. 'I don't feel equal to it yet.
It is that miserable man who has killed Compan and has
kept his death agony a secret from me so that I might not go
and close his eyes. He is capable of the most terrible things.
But, you see, I like to live in peace. Fenil is very energetic
and he renders me great services in the diocese. When I am
no longer here, matters will perhaps be better ordered.'
He grew calmer again and his smile returned.
'Besides, everything is going on satisfactorily at present,
and I don't see any immediate difficulty. We can wait.'
Abbé Faujas sat down, and calmly resumed:
'No doubt: but still you will have to appoint a Curé for
Saint-Saturnin's in succession to the Abbé Compan.'
Monseigneur Rousselot lifted his hands to his temples with
an expression of hopelessness.
'Indeed, you are right!' he ejaculated. 'I had forgotten
that. Poor Compan doesn't know in what a hole he has put
me, by dying so suddenly without my having had any warning.
I promised you that place, didn't I?'
The Abbé bowed.
'Well, my friend, you will save me by letting me take back
my word. You know how Fenil detests you. The success of
the Home of the Virgin has made him quite furious, and he
swears that he will prevent you from making the conquest
of Plassans. I am talking to you quite openly, you see.
Recently, when reference was made to the appointment of a
Curé for Saint-Saturnin's, I let your name fall. But Fenil
flew into a frightful rage and I was obliged to promise that I
would give the place to a friend of his, Abbé Chardon, whom
you know, and who is really a very worthy man. Now, my
friend, do this much for me, and give up that idea. I will
make you whatever recompense you like to name.'
[Pg 125]
The priest's face wore a grave expression. After a short
interval of silence during which he seemed to be taking
counsel of himself, he spoke:
'You know very well, my lord,' he said, 'that I am quite
without personal ambition. I should much prefer to lead a
life of privacy, and it would be a great relief to me to give up
this appointment. But I am not my own master, I feel
bound to satisfy those patrons of mine who take an interest
in me. I trust that your lordship will reflect very seriously
before taking a step which you would probably regret afterwards.'
Although Abbé Faujas spoke very humbly, the Bishop was
not unconscious of the menace which his words veiled. He
rose from his chair and took a few steps about the room, a
prey to the painful perplexity.
'Well, well,' he said, lifting his hands, 'here's trouble and
no mistake, for a long time. I should much have preferred
to avoid all these explanations, but, since you insist, I must
speak frankly. Well, my dear sir, Abbé Fenil brings many
charges against you. As I think I told you before, he must
have written to Besançon and learnt all the vexatious stories
you know of. You have certainly explained those matters to
me, and I am quite aware of your merits and of your life of
penitence and solitude; but what can I do? Fenil has weapons
against you and he uses them ruthlessly. I often don't know
what to say in your defence. When the Minister requested
me to receive you into my diocese, I did not conceal from him
that your position would be a difficult one; but he continued
to press me and said that that was your affair, and so in the
end I consented. But you must not come to-day and ask me
to do what is impossible.'
Abbé Faujas had not lowered his head during the Bishop's
remarks. He now raised it still higher as he looked the
prelate straight in the face and said in his sharp voice:
'You have given me your promise, my lord.'
'Certainly, certainly,' the Bishop replied. 'That poor
Compan was getting weaker every day and you came and confided
certain matters to me, and I then made the promise to
you. I don't deny it. Listen to me, I will tell you everything,
so that you may not accuse me of wheeling round like a
weathercock. You asserted that the Minister was extremely
desirous for you to be appointed Curé of Saint-Saturnin's.
Well, I wrote for information on the subject, and a friend of[Pg 126]
mine went to the Ministry in Paris. They almost laughed in
his face there, and they told him that they didn't even know
you. The Minister absolutely denies that he is your supporter,
do you hear? If you wish it, I will read you a letter in which
he makes some very stern remarks about you.'
He stretched his arm towards a drawer, but Abbé Faujas
rose to his feet without taking his eyes off him, and smiled
with mingled irony and pity.
'Ah, my lord! my lord!' said he.
Then, after a moment's silence, as though he were unwilling
to enter into further explanations, he said:
'I give your lordship back your promise; but believe that
in all this I was working more for your own advantage than
for mine. By-and-by, when it will be too late, you will call
my warnings to mind.'
He stepped towards the door, but the Bishop laid his hand
upon him and brought him back, saying with an expression
of uneasiness:
'What do you mean? Explain yourself, my dear Monsieur
Faujas. I know very well that I have not been in favour at
Paris since the election of the Marquis de Lagrifoul. But
people know me very little if they suppose that I had any
hand in the matter. I don't go out of my study twice a
month. Do you imagine that they accuse me of having
brought about the marquis's return?'
'Yes, I am afraid so,' the priest curtly replied.
'But it is quite absurd! I have never interfered in
politics; I live amongst my beloved books. It was Fenil who
did it all. I told him a score of times that he would end by
compromising me in Paris.'
He checked himself and blushed slightly at having allowed
these last words to escape him. Abbé Faujas sat down again
and said in a deep voice:
'My lord, by those words you have condemned your vicar-general.
I have never said otherwise than you have just said.
Do not continue to make common cause with him or he will
lead you into serious trouble. I have friends in Paris, whatever
you may believe. I know that the Marquis de Lagrifoul's
election has strongly predisposed the Government against
you. Rightly or wrongly, they believe that you are the sole
cause of the opposition movement which has manifested itself
in Plassans, where the Minister, for special reasons, is most
anxious to have a majority. If the Legitimist candidate[Pg 127]
should again succeed at the next election, it would be very
awkward, and I should be considerably alarmed for your
comfort.'
'But this is abominable!' cried the unhappy Bishop,
rocking himself in his chair; 'I can't prevent the Legitimist
candidate from being returned! I haven't got the least
influence, and I never mix myself up in these matters at all.
Really, there are times when I feel that I should like to shut
myself up in a monastery. I could take my books with me,
and lead a quiet, peaceful life there. It is Fenil who ought
to be Bishop instead of me. If I were to listen to Fenil, I
should get on the very worst terms with the Government. I
should hearken only to Rome, and tell Paris to mind its own
business. But that is not my nature, and I want to die in
peace. The Minister, then, you say, is enraged with me?'
The priest made no reply. Two creases which appeared
at the corners of his mouth gave his face an expression of
silent scorn.
'Really,' continued the Bishop, 'if I thought it would
please him if I were to appoint you Curé of Saint-Saturnin's,
I would try to manage it. But I can assure you that you are
mistaken. You are but little in the odour of sanctity.'
Abbé Faujas made a hasty movement of his hands, as he
broke out impatiently:
'Have you forgotten that calumnies are circulated about
me, and that I came to Plassans in a threadbare cassock?
When they send a compromised man to a post of danger, they
deny all knowledge of him till the day of triumph. Help me
to succeed, my lord, and then you will see that I have friends
in Paris.'
Then, as the Bishop, surprised to find in a priest such a
bold adventurer, continued to gaze at him in silence, Faujas
lapsed into a less assertive manner and continued:
'These, however, are suppositions, and what I mean is,
that I have much to be pardoned. My friends are waiting to
thank you till my position is completely established.'
Monseigneur Rousselot kept silence for a moment longer.
He was a man of sharp understanding, and he had gained a
knowledge of human failings from books. He was conscious
of his own yielding character, and he was even a little
ashamed of it; but he consoled himself for it by judging men
for what they were worth. In the life of a learned epicurean,
which he led, there were times when he felt supreme disdain[Pg 128]
for the ambitious men about him, who fought amongst themselves
for a few stray shreds of his power.