# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2018
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    Israel Zangwill, Jinny the Carrier
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57836/57836-h/57836-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

    “You don’t seem to remember anything.”
“I dare say I was a bit dazed at all the silliness. But if you
swore too not to cross our threshold, why, I’ll go and let you in
by the lattice. And perhaps Gran’fer will be that tickled, he’ll
laugh and forget about his cranky old oath. Or perhaps he’ll
reckon you have scrambled in on your hands and knees. Oh
dear, isn’t it funny? See you in a moment, Will.” She put
her hand on the latch of the gate.
He shook his head. “Neither by door nor by window.”
“Didn’t I say I’d never cross your doorstep?” she urged.
“And yet I came.”
“You came through the window.”
“Well, I’ll come by the door. There! That’s a fair offer.
I’m not going to stick to silliness—when it’s so silly!”
“All very well,” he said coldly. “But you know you can’t
get through my door.”
“Goodness gracious! Have I grown so fat?”
“Don’t pretend. You know it’s the flood. Besides, it
wouldn’t be any good my going through the window. What I
said when I raised my hand to heaven was that your grandfather
should never see me in his house——!”
“Just what I said—I remember now,” she interrupted. “I
said you’d never see me in Frog Farm. And yet you did—and
lost your bet too.” Her face was gay again. “So I gave in
first, you see, sweetheart, and now you’ve got to play fair.”
“You don’t listen—you cut into my words. What I swore
was that your grandfather should never see me in his house
unless he carried me in!”
Her gaiety grew hysterical. “Ha, ha, ha!” she laughed.
“Grandfather’s given up carrying ages ago. I’m his deputy
now. Oh dear!” She measured him with a rueful eye. “Well,
I can but try!” And she put her arms round his hips.
“Don’t make light of an oath, Jinny.” He pushed her off
with his left hand.
“ ’Twas you that made light of an oath—taking the Lord’s
name over trifles.”
“I never took the Lord’s name,” he said sullenly. “I only
lifted my hand.”
“Well, you can’t lift it now—and serve you right! You
surely never expected Gran’fer to lug a sulky lout over his
doorstep.”
“Of course not. I never expected I’d want to cross it. Why,
Jinny, though you were there in the room, I was that blind——!”
And his hand sought hers again.
“Leave me alone!” she cried. “You and your miserable
vows!”
“I’d cut my tongue out if I could unsay the words.”
“You can unsay ’em more easily with your tongue in.”
“A man can’t go back on his sworn word. Women don’t
understand.”
“So you said about horses. And nicely you managed yours!
Oh, forgive me, I didn’t mean to crow. That was your misfortune.
But this is your fault. It’s your pride you’re in love
with; not me. Good-bye; Gran’fer will be starving.” She lifted
the gate-latch angrily.
“But only good-bye for the moment,” he pleaded. “I can’t
cross your threshold, but you can cross mine.”
She answered more gently, but her tone was tired and helpless.
“And what would be the good, unless you and Gran’fer make
it up?”
“I’m not marrying your grandfather!”
Something patronizing in the sentence jarred afresh. “You’d
better go back to Blanche—it’ll be too late soon.”
“I wouldn’t touch Blanche with Bidlake’s barge-pole!”
The magnificence of the repudiation had its effect—it swamped
in both the recollection that it was Blanche who had done the
refusing.
“You don’t expect me to give up Gran’fer at his age?” she
said more mildly.
“We’ll get him a minder—when I come back from Australia!”
Australia put the climax to her weariness. “Oh, yes, I don’t
wonder it’s so easy for you to go.”
“It isn’t easy for me to go, even as far as Chipstone,” he
protested passionately. “But it’s your grandfather you love,
not me.”
“I love you both. Only think how old he is. It’s like
quarrelling with a child. And he is in his second childhood
almost, though I wouldn’t say it to anybody else. There are
times when he seems quite his old self, wonderfully strong and
sensible, but there are moments when he quite frightens me. He
can’t bear to be crossed, and he forgets almost everything that
happens nowadays.”
“Then perhaps he’s forgotten our upset!”
“No, that’s the unfortunate part. But we must just make a
little joke of it. Down on your marrow-bones, Willie!” And
she laid her hand on his shoulder with a last sprightly effort.
But even as his shoulder subsided, it swelled up again, like a
pressed gutta-percha ball. “It’s all grandfather with you, your
husband doesn’t count.”
“Husband, indeed!” She withdrew her hand as if stung.
“You’re going quicker than your coach ever went.”
“Oh, very well—I’m off to Australia!”
“As you please. I’ll call for your box!”
“I’ll have no truck with a cart of yours.”
“There’s no other way of getting things to Chipstone,” she
reminded him blandly.
“I’ll shoulder it sooner,” he burst forth.
“Ah, then you won’t be going just yet!”
“Damn my arm! I’ll not stay in this wretched country
another fortnight! I’ll never look on your face again.”
She began humming: “A dashing young man from
Canada——!”
His face grew black with anger, and he strode away even
before she had passed through the gate.
Righteous resentment saved Jinny from the collapse of the
previous week. That dreadful gnawing of uncertainty was over.
Whatever she had said, she was sure now that he did love her,
even if she came second to his pride. That a way out of their
difficulties would soon present itself to her nimble brain she did
not doubt: her one fear was that he would find the way to
Australia first, and it was a comfort to remember his helpless
arm and his empty purse—“no money to think of foolishness,”
as his dear old mother had put it. Already on the Tuesday
after the unheard sermon, she found a means of communicating
with him without a lowering of her own proper pride. For the
fourteenth of the month was nigh upon them, and the shops—even
apart from the stationer’s—-were ablaze with valentines, a
few sentimental, but the overwhelming majority grotesque and
flamboyant, the British version of Carnival. After long search
she discovered a caricature that not only resembled Will in
having carroty locks, but carried in its motto sufficient allusiveness
to the quarrel with her grandfather to make it clear the
overture came from her. Not that the overture looked conciliatory
to the superficial eye. Quite the contrary. For apart
from the ugliness of the visage, the legend ran:
To such a man I’d never pledge my troth,
I’d sooner die, I take my Bible oath.
Not a very refined couplet or procedure perhaps, but Jinny
was never a drawing-room heroine, and the valentine was dear
to the great heart of the Victorian people. Besides, do not the
grandest dames relax at Carnival?
Jinny half expected a similar insult from Will by the same
post, and though St. Valentine’s Day passed without bringing
her one, she still expected a retort in kind the day after. And
when Bundock appeared with a voluminous letter, directed
simply to “Jinny the Carrier, Little Bradmarsh, England,” her
disappointment at Mr. Flippance’s flabby handwriting was acute,
though otherwise she would have been excited, not only by his
letter, but by the foreign stamp, the first she had ever received.
“So he’s still in Boulogne,” Bundock observed casually, lingering
to pick up the contents. “I hope he’s sending you the money
to pay Mrs. Purley.”
“Why should he send it through me?” she said sharply.
“Well, since he’s writing to you, it would save stamps, wouldn’t
it? I do think it was rough on Mrs. Purley, though, a wedding
breakfast like that, though I expect he bought his own champagne—and
clinking stuff it was, nigh as good as the sherry at
poor Charley’s funeral. However, she’s marrying her own
daughter now—Mrs. Purley, I mean—and lucky she is too to
have escaped young Flynt, who is off to Australia without a
penny—looks to me almost as if they’re hurrying on the marriage
so that Will may be best man before he goes, he and ’Lijah are
that thick! He, he, he! Funny world, ain’t it? You’ve
heard my riddle perhaps—Why are marriages never a success?
Because the bride never marries the best man! He, he! Well,
she came near doing it this time—he, he, he! Though whether
she’s the best woman for either of ’em is a question.”
“That’s their own business,” Jinny managed to put in.
“So ’tis, but with ’Lijah a member of the Chipstone Temperance
Friendly Society, he’ll hardly like a wife who washes her
head in beer.”
“What nonsense! How can you know that?”
“Fact. It’s to make her hair wavy. There’s nothing her
brother Barnaby don’t let out to my poor old dad. She was at
it the day you all came to the Farm. It wasn’t that she had her
bodice off and her hair down after the douche,”—Bundock
seemed to savour these details—“she didn’t want him to
smell it.”
“Well, you seem to smell out everything,” she said severely.
“I do have a nose like Nip’s!” he chuckled. But although
Mr. Flippance’s letter was under it, he was forced to go off
without even discovering that it did contain a financial document.
Very amazed indeed was Jinny to see it drop out, this IOU,
which was for herself and not Mrs. Purley, and represented half
a crown! Retiring to her kitchen, she studied the large-scrawled
pages.
“My dear Jinny,—I have just read in Madame F.’s copy of
her London Journal (which like Mrs. Micawber she will never
desert, at least not till the present serial is finished) an extract
from the Chelmsford Chronicle about the miraculous saving of
a cornstack belonging to our mutual friend, Mr. Caleb Flynt.
“I gather that a flood must have devastated Little Bradmarsh,
and I write at once to know if all my friends are safe,
especially your charming little self. Strange to think that
the parlour in which I breakfasted on bacon and mushrooms
in your sweet society may have been washed away! But
such is life—a shadow-pantomime!
“We are still at Boulogne, you see. For one thing—to speak
frankly—it’s a providential place to be at when funds are for
the moment low, and it appears that Madame F.’s fortune—all
that the villain Duke left of it—is in Spanish bonds. I need
say no more. (I think I told you she was the niece of the
famous Cairo Contortionist, and doubtless it was during the
star’s sensationally successful season at Madrid that she was
thus misled.) The wily master of marionettes must have been
aware of this when he got [“her off his hands” appeared
quite legibly here, though scratched out with heavy strokes]
back his show over her head.
“Our present plans are, before attempting London (which
though almost barren of talent calls for overmuch of the ready),
to launch an English season in Boulogne itself, where there is
such a large English circle, that saves so much by being here
immune from sheriff’s officers that it can well afford the
luxury of the theatre, not to mention the many French people
here who must be anxious to learn English, especially after
their visit to the Great Exhibition.
“Between you and I, I fear that Madame F.’s hopes will be
dashed by the fact that the French have no eyes or ears except
for a Jewess called Rachel, but as they have nothing near as
good in the male line, we may yet—between us—show them
something!
“If this fails—and I have seen too much of the public to be
surprised at any ingratitude—there are always those wonderful
new goldfields, where men of our race and speech are flocking,
pickaxe on shoulder. Surely after their arduous toil for the
filthy lucre, they must be longing of an evening for a glimpse
of the higher life—I understand they have only drinking
shanties.
“Imagine it, Jinny—a theatre for the rugged miners amid
the primeval mountains with a practicable moon shining over
the tropical scene. Pity I sold Duke that theatre-tent, but I
suppose it couldn’t be transported to Australia as easily as a
convict. (Good gag, that, eh?) Admission, I suppose, by
nugget. I don’t see how you can give change—unless they
take it in gold-dust—and anyhow, flush as they are, they will
probably hand in considerable chunks at the box-office,
reckless of petty calculation.
“So do not be surprised if one Easter morn you receive a
golden egg laid by some Australian goose (I understand it is
half a mole). Which reminds me to enclose herewith the half-crown
I owe you. I dare say you have forgotten my borrowing
it from you in the caravan of my blood-sucking son-in-law.
But players have long memories.
“I suppose you see nothing of him or of Polly, for Chipstone
is a poor pitch, but I am afraid from a Christmas card Polly
sent me in reply to mine that the rascal is making her happy,
so I can’t hate him as much as he deserves.
“ ‘I hope,’ I scribbled across the picture of the snowy
Mistletoe Bough I sent her, ‘you are experiencing all that
matrimony was designed for, when this institution was introduced
into Eden.’ Lovely, isn’t it? And where do you
suppose it came from? It was that delicious Martha’s farewell
wish to me on my wedding morning! I fancy she took
it out of the number of the Lightstand that I bought her.
“Poor, dear Martha! Do give her my love and tell her
there is a branch of the New Jerusalemites in Boulogne—no,
best make it two, while you are about it, a French branch as
well as an English branch, mutually emulous in ‘Upbuilding!’
“And how is her dashing cavalier of a son who posed as an
American? I expect he’s married by now to the queen of the
wasp-killers, judging by the warm way things were going at
my own wedding-party. If so, pray hand him back his
mother’s Christadelphian wedding-wish with my kind regards.
“Oh, and don’t forget to say amiable things (as they put it
here) to Miss What’s-a-name, the young and lovely bridesmaid!
Tell her I haven’t forgotten about her becoming
wardrobe mistress, though if we go to Australia, I’m afraid
it’ll be too rough for her at her age, and even Madame F. may
shrink from the snakes and the blacks and the convicts and
the desperado diggers, in which case we shall have boys to do
the female parts and revive the glories of the Shakespearean
stage.
“Heavens, how I have let myself chatter on! My paper is
nearly at an end—like youth and hope! Believe me, dear
Jinny, in this world or the next (don’t be alarmed, I only mean
Australia),
“Your ever devoted,
“Tony Flippance.
“P.S.—I am so sorry but I find I can’t find (excuse my
Irish) any way of sending the half-crown by post, so I am
compelled to send you an IOU, but if you send it to Polly
(Duke’s Marionettes, England, is sure to find her some day)
I have no doubt she will honour it on my behalf. Safest
address for me by the way is Poste Restante, Boulogne, as
Madame F. likes trying different hotels.
“P.P.S.—There is a game here called ‘Little Horses.’ Most
fascinating.”
Many and mixed were Jinny’s feelings as she ploughed through
this bulky document, swollen by the opulent handwriting.
Having no notion about investments, she vaguely imagined that
Spanish robbers had impounded Cleopatra’s money, and it
added to her sense of the unsettled state of the Continent. As
for the IOU, she was angrily amused to think that he had
already paid her the half-crown on the very morning of the
bacon and mushrooms so fondly recalled, and that she had
bought him his wedding present—a Bible—with it. To pay
little debts twice over while defrauding the big creditors (and
she had reason to think Miss Gentry as well as the Purleys had
been left unpaid) seemed to her only an aggravation of fecklessness.
But perhaps the Flippances had not meant to be dishonest:
it was those Spanish freebooters that were to blame, who
had captured the gold destined for Little Bradmarsh. The
humiliation of his reference to Blanche was hard to bear—it
made her want to dismiss Will altogether—but oddly enough a
still keener emotion was kindled by Mr. Flippance’s obsession
with Australia. Yes, Australia was in the air, it was a net into
which everybody was being swept. Will was going from her—and
to a place bristling with blacks and snakes and convicts
and desperado diggers. Never had she received so perturbing
a letter.
In the menacing silence of Will, she began to study this interloping
and kidnapping Australia. For it was not only his
silence that menaced: through the hundred threads of her
carrying career—antennæ always groping for news of him—she
learned that his resolve was fixed. Indeed, Frog Farm was
almost the only place on her rounds where his departure was
not talked of. At the fountain head she could collect no information,
for Martha was the only person she now saw there and
the old lady seemed anxious, after receiving her parcels, to rush
back to the clearing up of the colossal mess of the receded flood:
a work in which the scrupulously invisible Will was understood
to be lending a hand almost as vigorous as his father’s, albeit a
single hand. But if the other was still in its sling, it was getting
dangerously better, she gathered from Bundock’s father.
That he would go without another word to her was highly
probable. Was there not in Finchingfield a hot-tempered
farmer who had kept silence for seven years after his wife’s
death? Miss Gentry, who in her Colchester days used to make
his wife’s gowns—the lady riding in behind him to be measured—said
it was from remorse because he had once used an improper
expression to her. And this same Essex obstinacy was liable to
manifest itself in less noble forms, as her grandfather’s feuds had
proved abundantly. Will would shake off the soil of old England
as surlily as he had shaken it off in his boyhood. As he had run
away from his parents, so he would now run away from her,
though far more unreasonably. But this time she would at
least know where he was going, and her tortured soul reached
out hungrily to picture his new world. The Spelling-Book was
absolutely blank about Australia—how empty and worthless
loomed that storehouse of information, with this gigantic lacuna!—but
from a bound magazine volume of Miss Gentry’s, borrowed
for the first time, she drew confirmation of her worst fears. It
was a place that needed many more stations and out-stations of
the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, and there were
mosquitoes that could only be kept off by lighted torches, and
biting spiders as big as your palm; after frying at 105 in the
shade, you might shiver the next moment in the icy blast of the
“Southern Buster.” And there were dust-winds to boot. If
you went to the cemetery of Port Phillip, you would see that the
majority of deaths were between the ages of thirty and forty.
This premature mortality was due to the excessive drinking of
cold water natural in so droughty a country. What a blessing
that Will was not, like Mr. Skindle, a member of the Temperance
Friendly Society! Nor was the labour market, congested as it
was with ticket-of-leave men and bounty-emigrants from England,
really superior to that of the old country, while house-rents were
twice as high. As for the interior, another number of the
magazine contained a story in which “an ill-favoured man with
his arm in a sling” was pursued by a bull amid mimosa swamps
in a setting of blacks with tomahawks and whites with pistols.
“The Bull and the Bush,” she murmured whimsically to herself,
but at heart she was cold with apprehension.
Then by a strange coincidence she found reassurance. Calling
on Mrs. Bidlake in her confinement, she found the mother well
and the new child vigorous. But it was not from their condition
merely that emanated the novel atmosphere of happiness that
radiated over the household: perhaps, indeed, the well-being
was only a consequence of the happiness. For the Bidlakes, too,
were off to Australia, though not to the goldfields. The cloud
over the family had lifted at last. Not that Hezekiah had been
proved innocent, but that he was become opulent. Released on
ticket-of-leave, the sturdy ploughman had got a position with a
cottage and garden in that “splendid suny clim” as he now
called it, and then, just as he was about to send for Sophy and
Sally, he had won six hundred and forty acres on the outskirts
of Port Phillip in a lottery run by the Bank of Australasia! If
he could borrow the capital from the bank, as was not improbable,
he would be able to cut up his prize into ten-acre allotments and
build houses on it—by that you simply doubled or trebled your
outlay in a few years. His sister should have a house anyhow,
and in the meantime her husband could help him manage
or farm the vast estate. As for the “dere gels” there would be
no need for them to work now, though if they wanted pocket-money
they would be snapped up for service, and get as much
as sixteen pounds a year each. He had already sent fifty pounds
towards the passage-money, and would raise more when he
knew if they would all come out, and moreover he understood
that there was a Family Colonization Society in London to
which Ephraim might apply for an advance. What a change,
this going out of theirs, from that dreadful departure in the
prison coach for the hulks and Botany Bay! Jinny, sharing
their tears of joy, was vastly relieved on her own account at the
paradise the grotesquely spelt letter conjured up, and she
rejoiced to reflect that all that ancient barbarous harshness of
magistrates and judges had led under Providence to the enrichment
of Britain’s new soil with the sweat of her skilled agriculturists,
and was even opening up new horizons for their innocent
relatives. For assuredly this was a paradise on earth, if Hezekiah’s
letter was not a shameless lure for his brother-in-law.
Think of tea at eighteenpence a pound—even a shilling if bought
by the chest!—think of sugar at twopence-halfpenny, and neck
of mutton at a penny a pound, nay, a whole sheep for five
shillings. Think of pork at twopence and the best cows’ butter
at sixpence; and after one has been reduced to turnips and dry
bread, think of a land where ox-tails can be had for the skinning
and sheeps’ heads and plucks by the barrow for the fetching
away. A land where, as he wound up rapturously, any man
who worked could have his bellyful, and where everything
was plentiful except women, so that his girls would be
able to pick and choose among the “gumsuckers” and have
“cornstalks” for husbands. They shouldn’t marry among the
“prisoners,” please God, for he didn’t reckon himself in that set,
having done nothing to be ashamed of, though he did see now
that threshing-machines were necessary when you had a lot
of land.
“If they want women so badly, I might do worse than go
myself,” said Jinny laughingly.
“No, no, whatever would Little Bradmarsh do without you?”
said Ephraim.
“They did without me well enough,” she said bitterly. Indeed
her first fine faith in human nature could not be mended as
easily as the broken bridge, nor did the depreciatory allusions of
her old customers to the deceased coach, and their compliments
at her return, soften her cynicism. And as she spoke, she felt a
sudden yearning to be done with them all: the infection of the
new world began to steal into her veins too, but she knew her
own exodus was impossible while her grandfather lived, and
though she played with the idea and asked if she might copy
Hezekiah’s instructions for the passage, her real design was to
gather information for Will’s sake. It was very worrying
though to copy the recommendations in the original spelling.
“Of kors i don’t now wot the shipps is like nowerdies, but the
nu chums ses they dont give no solt, onni roc-solt (solt is peny
a pound here, peper 2d. nounc) and you’ll want thik warm
close and moor beding.” There was an elaborate list of provisions
necessary to supplement the ship’s dietary during the
four weary months—it hardly needed copying, since it embraced
a little of everything edible that would keep—but she was glad
again that Will was not a temperance man when she found a
bottle of brandy recommended as an indispensable medicine for
the contingencies of the voyage.
Neglecting even the last instalment of her debt to Miss Gentry—had
not the dressmaker given her the alternative of working
it out?—Jinny began to acquire the longest-lived comestibles,
storing them secretly in one of the ante-room chests. And it
was by this concentration on Will’s interests that she managed
to live through his dreadful silence, nay, to enjoy long spells of
day-dreaming in which these edibles were for their joint Australian
larder. The goldfields her imagination dismissed as
bristling with “desperado diggers.” It was on the more idyllic
images of her magazine article, written before the days of the
discovery of gold, that her imagination fed. For though the
writer denigrated the urban labour market, he admitted that
there was plenty of room for rural labour, and then—with what
seemed so uncanny a prying into her affairs that it flushed her
cheek and made her heart beat faster—he postulated a young
couple without capital setting up housekeeping together, and
instructed them to take employment with a farmer while saving
up enough to buy a small farm or herd of their own. The
system, it appeared, was that the employer supplied rations as
well as money-wages, and that while the husband worked on
the land, the wife could do the farm cooking. (How lucky she
had had so much experience, Jinny thought.) Nay, these rations,
said the article (pursuing her affairs to what the blushing reader
thought the point of indelicacy) would practically suffice for the
children too, and when they grew up—-but her delicious daydream
rarely went so far as this calculation of them as independent
labour-assets.
The happy couple would also be permitted to keep a few cows,
pigs, and fowls. Here the thought of Methusalem would intrude
distressfully, and the difficulty of transporting him to the
Antipodes. But when he had been left at Frog Farm in the
loving hands of Caleb and Martha (become almost his parents-in-law),
under promise of leisurely grazing for the rest of his life,
with perhaps a rare jaunt to Chipstone market for their household
needs, this ideal solution only reminded her of the phantasmal
nature of the whole scheme, for Frog Farm could certainly not
be saddled with her grandfather. But lest she should remember
too cruelly its visionary character, the day-dream would at this
point dart off swiftly on the journey through the Bush in quest
of an idyllic spot free from blacks and provided with a generous
employer.
Fortunate that this journey was to be so inexpensive, there being
no inns (not even “The Bull and Bush”), but every settler being
compelled by a wise decree of this wonderful State to give the
bona fide traveller board and lodging for nothing. What a
lovely journey that would be—if only one dodged the blacks and
the diggers and the swamps with the alligators. She saw herself
and Will bounding along like kangaroos (with Nip of course in
attendance, she did not intend to take up with a dingo instead)
through mimosa-bushes (like the scrub on the Common, only
gaudier), and eating their dinner-packets under giant gum-trees,
so enchantingly blue, whose tops, five hundred feet high, one
might climb so as to survey the route for signs of native camps
or friendly farmers. If there was no settler in sight by the time
darkness fell, they would just perch themselves like birds in a
nest of high branches out of all danger, and go to sleep under
the starry heaven, which she saw vividly with the old constellations.
Closer to the real was her picture of the tenement with which
the ideal farmer (when found) would provide his young couple.
There would just be a few poles driven into the ground to support
the roof of gum-bark, with its hole to let out the smoke. But
of course one need not live much indoors in that climate—despite
the occasional vagaries of the “Southerly Buster”—and
it would be all the easier not to have to spend money on furniture.
Why, put in Nip’s basket, lay out Will’s razor and slippers,
set out her Spelling-Book and the Peculiar Hymn-Book the
young rebel had thrown into the bushes, hang up his hat and
her bonnet, and the place already begins to look like home. As
for Will’s box—presumably conveyed to the chosen spot by the
local carrier in a bullock-cart—it is so large it will crowd out
everything else and furnish the place of itself. Decked with a
rug it will serve as sofa, covered with a cloth it becomes a table.
Lucky she has not brought a box of her own, but has squeezed
her things into his—in that wonderful, incredible fusion of two
existences!
It was hard to wake from these day-dreams to the wretched
reality, and yet Uncle Lilliwhyte profited from one of these
awakenings, for her Australian hut had reminded her of his
English specimen, and she hurried to see it and him. She found
them both in a bad way. His wading overmuch in the flood in
quest of salvage had brought back more than a touch of his
rheumatism, while the winds and rain had left his shanty leakier
than ever. They were both breaking up, the ancient and his
shell, and she now did her best to patch both up. Already in
her new affluence she had called in young Ravens to mend her
grandfather’s bedroom ceiling and redaub the gaps in the walls,
and it was simple to turn this Jack-of-all-trades and fountain of
melody on to the derelict hut in the woods. The poor old “Uncle”
had hitherto built his fire as well as he could on the ground on
the leeward side of his hut; Jinny now installed an old stove
which she bought up cheap at the pawnbroker’s and conveyed
to the verge of the wood. But the hole in the roof that might
serve for Australia would not do for England, and after Ravens
had re-thickened the walls with fresh faggots and re-thatched
the hut with shavings presented by Barnaby, Jinny was amused
to find that what seemed an iron chimney turned out on closer
inspection to consist of three old top-hats. Where the ancient
had picked up these treasures—whether in the flood or in his
normal scavenging—he refused to say. “Happen Oi’ve got a
mort o’ culch ye don’t know of,” he cackled, enjoying her admiration
of his architecture. She wanted to have a floor to the hut,
but this, like the exchange of his sacking for a pallet-bed, he
opposed strenuously. “Gimme the smell o’ the earth,” he said.
“Ye’ve shut out the stars and that’s enough.” He accepted,
however, a bolster for a pillow.
By such interests and devices, aided by her regular rounds,
Jinny staved off too clear a consciousness of the inevitable
parting, which would not even have the grace of a parting. But
the inexorable moment was like a black monster bearing down
upon her—and yet it was not really advancing, it was rather
something retreating: it could not even be visualized as a shock
against which one could brace one’s shoulders. There was the
horror of the impalpable in this silent drift away from her.
But when at last the day of departure was named, and came
vibrating to her across a dozen subtle threads, the negative
torture turned to a positive that was still more racking. It was
on the Friday—unlucky day!—that Will was to leave for London,
and here was already Tuesday. Some of her threads conveyed
even the rumour that, in order to save a little cash for his start
at the Antipodes, he meant to work his passage. And here was
she unable to pack his box or even to slip her provisions into it;
doomed by all the laws of sex and proper spirit to watch—bound
hand and foot as in a nightmare—the receding of the mate
whose lips had sealed her his. By the Wednesday morning even
her grandfather observed something was wrong.
“Ye ain’t eatin’ no breakfus.”
“Yes, Gran’fer, lots!”
“Do ye don’t tell me no fibs. Oi’ve noticed your appetite
fallin’ lower and lower like the flood, and now there’s a’mos’
nawthen o’ neither. And ye used to be my little mavis!”
“You don’t want me to eat snails or worms?”
“ ’Tis your singin’, Oi mean.”
“There is Hey!” she chanted obediently.
“Ye’re the most aggravatin’ gal—minds me o’ your great-gran’mother.
Ye need your mouth for eatin’, not singin’.”
After a sleepless night, unable to bear this inactivity, she ran
round to the Bidlake lodgings to suggest that as young Mr. Flynt
seemed to be sailing for Australia, it might be a neighbourly action
to show him Hezekiah’s hints to travellers. But she gathered
from the happy mother that the absent Ephraim had already
talked to Will about the heavier clothes and the bedding, and
that Will had said how fortunate it was he had sold off his
summer suits, so as in any case to get the latest make at Moses
& Son’s on his passage through London. Jinny suspected he
had sold them off to raise funds for the voyage. Still the bravado
of this pretence of a London outfit did not displease her. She
learnt too that there had been a question of Will’s convoying
the ex-convict’s daughters to their impatient parent, as the
Ephraim Bidlakes would not be ready for ages, but it had been
thought scarcely proper in view of their age and looks—a decision
Jinny thought wise. Indeed, the idea that he was not to be thus
companioned almost reconciled her, by contrast, to his departure.
When she got home she found to her surprise that her grandfather
was entertaining Martha Flynt, who was far from the
spruceness she usually achieved for outsiders of the other sex.
She looked draggled and worn after her long and windy walk.
What astonished Jinny most was that the old rheumatic woman
should have trudged so far, and she opined that her business
must be pressing and must be with herself. For it could hardly
lie in the Christadelphian texts with which Martha seemed to
be battering and bemusing the nonagenarian, whose great Bible
lay open between them, and who was disconcerted to find her
texts really there.
Martha had never set foot in Blackwater Hall before, so far
as Jinny could remember, and very strange it was to see her
sitting over her cup of tea which she must have made for herself
at her host’s invitation. With all his perturbation over the
texts, he seemed only too brisked up by this amazing visit from
a female, the first unwhiskered being, save Jinny, he had met for
many moons. It was a fillip he did not need, Jinny considered:
the old good food again, the sweet security, the satisfaction of
revenge, had made his eyes less bleared, filled out his flacked
cheeks and given him a new lease of strength and sanity—a sort
of second wind—and this visit might only over-stimulate him.
She did not like the undercurrent of excitement that showed
itself in the twitching of his limbs and eyelids, especially when
Martha declared he could not be really accepting the Book as
all-inspired if he believed man’s heaven lay in the skies.
“Whither I go, ye cannot come,” she repeated.
“We’ll see about that,” said Daniel Quarles fiercely, and
clenched his fists as if he meant to storm the gates of cloudland.
“And ain’t ye forgittin’ ’Lijah what went up to heaven with a
chariot and bosses o’ fire? That won’t happen to ’Lijah Skindle,
damn him—he’ll have the chariot o’ fire, but he won’t git no
higher. He, he, he!”
Martha was momentarily baffled by Elijah’s ascension, but
recovering her nerve, she dealt John iii. 13, “No man hath
ascended up to heaven.”
Partly to soothe the old man, partly to give Martha a chance
of speaking out, Jinny here intervened with the suggestion that
he himself should ascend up to his room and bring down the
telescope to amuse his guest withal. Obviously relieved—for he
felt himself in a tight textual corner—he hastened upstairs.
It was then that the old woman, bursting into tears, and
clutching at Jinny’s arm, sobbed out: “Oh, Jinny, you’ve got
to come back with me—you’ve got to come back at once!”
Jinny turned cold and sick. What had happened to Will?
“But what for?” she gasped.
“To Willie!”
Her worst fears were confirmed. “Is he hurt?”
“I wish he was a little,” Martha sobbed. “But even his
arm’s all right now.” What Martha went on to say Jinny never
remembered, for she was suddenly sobbing with Martha. But
hers was the hysteria of relief, and when she at last understood
that what Martha was asking was that she should come back
and marry Will, so that he should stay near his mother, her
heart hardened again. It was not that she made any attempt
to deny her love—things seemed suddenly to have got beyond
that—but Martha, she felt, knew not what she asked, seeming
to have divined from her boy’s demeanour a lover’s quarrel, but
without any inkling of the real tangle and deadlock. Even if
she humiliated herself, as Martha half unwittingly suggested, it
was all a blind-alley.
“My making it up won’t keep him in England,” she urged.
“He’s got no money. And no more have I.”
She might have been more willing to make a last desperate
dash of her head against the brick wall, had she understood how
Martha had fought against her from the first and how pitiable
was her surrender now, but no suspicion of that underground
opposition had ever crossed her mind, nor did Martha now
confess what indeed she no longer remembered clearly.
“But there’s room for you in Frog Farm, dearie. We’d love
to have you. We’ve always loved you.”
“I can’t,” Jinny moaned. “It’s all no use. And I’ve got
Gran’fer!” Indeed, Martha’s passionate plea had curiously
clarified and steadied her mind, reconciling her to the inevitable.
To go to Will was exactly what she had been yearning to do.
But when the plea for such action came through Martha’s mouth,
she could see it from outside, as it were, realize its futility and
cleanse her bosom of it. She felt strangely braced by her own
refusal.
“But I’ve got some provisions for the voyage,” she said, “that
you might smuggle into his box—I know it’s big enough. And
I do hope, Mrs. Flynt, he’s not going to work his passage.”
“I only wish he was, for he mightn’t find a ship. But you see
Flynt would go and advance him the money and insist he must
go steerage like a gentleman. He’s got no heart, hasn’t Flynt,”
she wept, “he only wants to settle down in peace after Will and
the flood, and sit under his vine and fig-tree.”
“Don’t cry—here’s Gran’fer coming down. I tell you what I
will do, Mrs. Flynt, I will call for his box.”
“Oh, bless you, Jinny!” Martha fell on her neck. “If you
come, he won’t go! That’s as sure as sunrise.”
“And then I can bring him his provisions,” Jinny pointed out
sceptically, as she disentangled herself from Martha’s arms.
Then both females were dumbed by the sight of the Gaffer
returning in his best smock and with his beard combed! He
tendered Martha the telescope with a debonair gesture. But
Martha, her mission comparatively successful, departed so
precipitately that the poor old man felt his toilette wasted, not
to mention his telescope.
“She’s a flighty young woman,” was his verdict, “as full o’
warses as our thatch o’ warmin. Sets herself up agin John.
Wesley as searched the Scriptures afore she was born.” And
laying down his telescope, he turned over the pages of his Bible,
and perpending her textual irritants and questing for antidotes,
fell quietly asleep.
He was delighted when she returned the next afternoon, and
he played Genesis v. 24, with a snort of triumph, by way of
greeting. Martha tremulously countered with Acts ii. 34, and
denied that Enoch had gone up to heaven, but it was obvious
her heart was not in the game, and Jinny was glad when Ravens’
ladder was clapped against the casement and his padded knees
appeared in an ascension of a purely terrestrial character, however
celestial the melody that accompanied it. For the Gaffer had
grown fond of this bird-of-all-work, now in the rôle of thatcher,
and would hasten to hover about him, fussily directing the
operations of his club, shears, or needle, correcting the words
and airs of his songs, and even joining him in duets. Ravens’
encouragement of the older bird had become almost as alarming
to Jinny as his shameless delay in sending in his bill and his
positive refusal to charge for Uncle Lilliwhyte’s repairs, but this
afternoon his advent was welcome, though the noise and jingle
of the duets outside made her conversation with Martha difficult.
“He mustn’t go—he mustn’t go,” Mrs. Flynt sobbed. “It’s
like the New Jerusalem coming down and going up again.”
Jinny quite appreciated that. “I thought he wouldn’t let
me call for his box,” she said quietly.
“No, the pig-headed mule! He’s going to carry it himself.”
“In what? It’s not easy to get anything but me.”
“He knows that. That’s why he’s carrying it. On his
shoulders, I mean.”
“With his arm just healed!”
“There won’t be much inside—he’s going to buy his things in
London!”
“But the box itself—why, it’s big enough to pack himself in!”
“I know, I know, dearie. But Caleb says he carried it himself
all the way from Chipstone. And chock-full, too!”
Jinny suppressed a faint smile. “I remember,” she said.
“But perhaps he’ll break down before he gets it to Chipstone,”
she added encouragingly.
“Oh, do you think so, dearie?” Then Martha’s face fell.
“But he only means to carry it to ‘The King of Prussia.’ There’s
a commercial traveller going from there in a trap to catch the
same coach.”
“Then let us hope he’ll never get to ‘The King of Prussia.’ ”
Martha shook her head. “You see, Flynt’s offered to bear
a hand.”
“Oh, well!” said Jinny. “Then it’s all settled.”
“But he won’t have his father, either. Nearly bullied his
head off. So Flynt’s going to keep behind him all the way in
case of a breakdown.”
The picture of Caleb slinking furtively along the roads, behind
his boy and the box, moved Jinny’s risible muscles, and she
burst into a laugh that was not far from tears.
“Don’t, Jinny! I can’t bear it. You can’t love him, or you
wouldn’t sit there and laugh. I always knew you weren’t the
right girl for him!”
Jinny took this as the babbling of a mind distraught. “You’ll
get over it,” she assured the old woman, patting the thin hand
with the worn wedding-ring. “And he’s bound to come back.”
The necessity of quieting Martha was fortifying: Jinny was like
a queasy passenger saved from sea-sickness by having to look
after a still worse sailor. She was the soul of the company at
tea, staving off the duel of texts and sending Ravens into
ecstasies over her quips and flashes. There was one bad moment,
however, when Daniel Quarles candidly remarked to Mrs. Flynt:
“Ravens should be tellin’ me as your Willie’s gooin’ furrin.
Ye’ll be well riddy o’ the rascal.”
“Willie’s an angel!” cried Martha hysterically.
“How could there be angels ef there ain’t no heaven?” he
queried, with a crafty cackle. “Noa, noa, Mrs. Flynt, it ain’t no
use kiverin’ up as he’s a bad egg. But one bad in a dozen or sow
is fair allowance. Ye’re luckier than me, what hadn’t even one
good ’un. Now ef Ravens here had been my buo-oy——!”
Jinny saw Martha a bit of the way home. She had now found
a new compromise. “Tell Will that Ravens will come with
my cart.”
“And what will be the good of that?”
“It will save him the strain of carrying the box. And then
as to-morrow’s my day, I shall have to meet my cart at ‘The
King of Prussia.’ ”
“Oh, Jinny, then you will!”
“Yes—but don’t tell him. Only say Ravens will call for the
box at eight o’clock—that will give him time to walk if he jibs
at the cart for himself.”
It had all been arranged with the obliging bird-of-all-work, and
Ravens had left Blackwater Hall that evening, carolling even
more blithely than usual, when Jinny found—evidently pushed
under the house-door—a mysterious cocked-hat addressed “Miss
Boldero.” With trembling fingers she opened it, her heart
thumping. “To hell with Ravens! You can keep him!”
This utterly unexpected flash of an utterly unforeseen
jealousy, and the thought that he had been drawn so spatially
near again, was all that stood between her and despair that
last dreadful night.
When the fateful Friday dawned, it found Jinny fast asleep,
worn out after long listening to a wind that would soon be
tossing a ship about. In those harsh hours she had felt it would
be impossible to get up and go on her round in the morning.
But no sooner were her eyes unsealed, than there sprang up in
her mind the thought that, did she fail her customers to-day,
gossip would at once connect her breakdown with Will’s departure.
So far, she had reason to believe, Martha’s guess at their
relations had not penetrated outside. But eyes were sharp and
tongues sharper, and she must not be exposed to pity. Under
this goad she sprang up instanter and did her hair carefully
before the cracked mirror and dressed herself in her best and
smartest. She would go around with gibe and laughter and
fantasias on the horn, and whatever was consonant with
celebrating the final retreat of the coach.
The morning was quiet after the blustrous night, but the year,
like her fate, was at its dreariest moment—no colour in sky or
garden, no hint of the Spring—and at breakfast a reaction overcame
her. But this time her grandfather did not observe her
depression: he was too full of the crime of ’Lijah, who—according
to Martha—was putting his mother in the Chipstone
poorhouse prior to installing his bride in Rosemary Villa. So
garrulous was he this morning that Jinny—her mind morbidly
possessed by a story of a miner who was found dead of starvation
in the Bush with a bag of gold for his pillow—ceased to listen
to his diatribes, retaining only an uneasy sense that he was
twitching and jerking with the same excitement as when Martha
had first come. “And Oi count ye’ll be doin’ the same with me
one day,” she heard him say at last, for he was shaking her arm.
“But Oi’d have ye know it’s my business, not yourn—Daniel
Quarles, Carrier.”
Jinny wearily assured him that there was no danger of her
ever marrying, and she felt vexed with Martha for coming and
starting such agitated trains of thought in his aged brain.
Possibly the foolish mother might even have broached to him
her desire to rob him of his granddaughter.
“Ye ought to be glad Oi’ve give ye food and shelter and them
fine clothes ye’ve titivated yourself with,” he went on, unsoothed,
“bein’ as there ain’t enough in the business for myself. ’Tis a
daily sacrifice, Jinny, and do ye don’t forgit it.”
The prompt arrival of Ravens made a break, but she had to
cancel with thanks her request for his services with the cart, and
then, when the old man was settled at his Bible, and her bonnet
and shawl were on, she collapsed in the ante-room, sinking down
on the chest in which she had hoarded Will’s provisions, and
feeling her resolution oozing away with every tick of the Dutch
clock. Impossible to whip up a pseudo-gaiety, to make the tour
of all these inquisitive faces! And through the lassitude of her
whole being pierced every now and then her grandfather’s voice,
crying “Tush, you foolish woman!” She knew it was not
meant for her, but for an imagined Martha whose texts he was
confuting, but it sounded dismally apposite, and when once he
declared “Wiser folks than you knowed it all afore you was
born,” she bowed her head as before the human destiny.
When the clock struck nine, he came stalking in. “Why,
Jinny! Ain’t to-day Friday?”
She raised a miserable face. “Yes, but I’m going to-morrow
instead!”
“To-morrow be dangnationed!” he cried, upset. “Oi’ve,
never missed my Friday yet.”
“But I don’t feel like going to-day.”
“That’ll never do, Jinny. Ye’ll ruin my business with your
whimwhams and mulligrubs. And it don’t yarn enough as it is.”
“There’s no competition—it doesn’t matter now.”
“And is that your thanks to the Lord for drowndin’ Pharaoh
and his chariot and hosses?”
But she put her head back in her hands. “Do let me be!”
she snapped.
“Don’t ye feel well, Jinny?” he said, with a change of tone.
“Have ye got shoots o’ pain in your brain-box?”
“I’m all right, but I don’t want to go to-day. I should only
make muddles.”
“We don’t make muddles,” he said fiercely.
“Let me be. I can’t harness.”
“Well, then Oi’ll do it, dearie. You just set there—Oi’ll put the
door a bit ajar and once you’re in the fresh air you’ll be all right.”
She heard him shuffle back into the living-room and thence
into the kitchen as the shortest way to the stable, and then,
almost immediately, she became aware of a little noise at the
garden-gate. She was sitting opposite the clock, and through
the slit at the doorway she beheld, to her amaze, a red-headed
figure outside the gate, sitting on a box and mopping its brow
as it gazed sentimentally at the cottage. Even in the wild
leaping of her pulses, the grotesqueness of their both sitting
gloomily on boxes—so near and yet so far—tickled her sense of
humour. But as she sat on, smiling and fluttering, she saw
him rise, cast a cautious look round, open the gate, and steal
towards the living-room. In a bound she was within and waiting
by the closed casement, and as his expected peep came, the
lattice flew back in his face and her hysteric mockery rang out.
“I thought you’d never look on my face again!”
It was almost a greater surprise than when she had appeared
with Methusalem walking the waters, for he had counted her
just as surely set out on her Friday round as the sun itself, and
his sentimental journey safe from misunderstanding (or was it
understanding?).
“Oh, don’t cackle!” he snarled. “I might have guessed
you’d try to catch me.”
She gulped down the sobs that were trying to strangle her
speech. How glad she was that she had on her best frock! “I
overslept myself!” she said gaily. “Gran’fer’s harnessing. I
see you’ve brought your box! You’re just in time!”
“I haven’t brought my box!” he snapped.
“Do ye don’t tell me no fibs,” she parodied.
“I mean, it’s going from ‘The King of Prussia.’ ”
“Really? Well I’ll take it over the bridge for you.”
“Thank you! I’m taking it there myself.”
“This don’t seem the shortest cut to Long Bradmarsh,” she
observed blandly.
He glowered. “Shows how easily I can carry it. I’m having
a good-bye look at all the old places.”
But below this surface conversation they were holding one of
their old silent duologues. Jinny’s heart was beating fast with
happiness and triumph as her eyes told him he would never get
away now, and he, hypnotized by that dancing light in them,
dumbly acknowledged he was self-trapped. Yet how they were
going to get out of their impasse, and how his pride was to be
reconciled with their reconciliation, neither had the ghost of an
idea. “I see,” she replied, as if accepting his explanation of
his visit. “But as to this old place, I’m afraid Ravens has
rather changed the look of it with his new thatch.”
He snorted at the name.
“But you’ll find it unchanged inside,” she added affably, “if
you come in.”
“Don’t begin that again! You know I can’t.”
“Dear me! I had forgotten that old nonsense. Well, you
can come nearer and peep in.” Her face shone at the window.
His face worked wildly with the struggle not to approach hers.
“I did have a peep. Good-bye, I’ve got the coach to catch.”
“Well, the cart will be ready in a moment. Gran’fer is so
slow harnessing. Hark! Nip’s getting impatient.”
He raised his hat. “Thank you, but I told you I was my own
carrier.”
“Good-bye, then. Pity you came so out of your way.”
He turned, and his feet dragged themselves hopelessly gateward.
She waved her hand desperately through the casement.
“Good luck, Will! Hope you’ll strike plenty of nuggets!”
“Thank you, Jinny!” He opened the gate.
“You’ll let me know how you’re getting on.”
“If you like!” The gate clicked behind him. Her mother-wit
leapt to stave off the moment beyond which all her frenzied
questing for some solution would be waste.
“Oh dear me, Will! Where is my memory going? Put your
box in the porch a moment, will you?”
“What for?”
“I’ve got a few little things for the voyage—I really forgot.”
“Oh, Jinny!” He came back through the gate. “But I
don’t need to bring the box to the door. I’ll take the things
from you through the window.”
“But I want to pack them in properly—I can’t on the road.”
“There’s nobody passing.”
“You never can tell. We don’t want Bundock——”
“But I’ll pack them in myself.”
“I’d never trust a man—in fact I expect I’ll have to repack
all the rest. Look at Mr. Flippance.”
But still he hung back. “There’s lots of room.”
“I know. Like a sensible man you’re getting your outfit in
London. Bring it along. Or shall I lend you a hand?”
“No! No!” He hurriedly shouldered the huge box and
Jinny heard its contents shifting like a withered kernel in a
nutshell. It was the same American trunk with the overarching
lid, and as he swaggered up the garden with it, it seemed to
her as if time had rolled back to last Spring. But what comedies
and tragedies had intervened between the two box-carryings,
all sprung from the same obstinacy! And yet, she felt, she
did not love him the less for his manly assertiveness: how
sweet would be the surrender when their sparring was over
and her will could be legitimately embraced in his, held like
herself in those masterful, muscular arms.
Her mind was really in her Australian hut as he dumped the box
at her feet. No, it would hardly do for a table, she thought, with
that lid-curvature. Then she braced herself for a tricky tussle.
“Well, where’s the goods?” he said lightly.
“Don’t be so unbelieving—they’re in that spruce-hutch. Four
months, you know, you’ve got to provide against.”
“I know,” he said glumly, unlocking his trunk and throwing
up the lid violently. He would have liked to smash the springs.
But the lid, lined with cheap striped cloth, stood up stiffly,
refusing to give him a pretext for postponing his journey.
Jinny from her doorway gazed at the jumble in the great void.
“Shove it forward a bit,” she said carelessly, moving backwards
within.
“What for?”
“Your end of the box is not under cover.”
“Why should it be?”
“It might rain and spoil your things—I’m sure I saw a drop.”
She tugged at the handle and the trunk slid along the porch and
some inches over the sill. Unostentatiously he pulled it back a
bit, but she jerked it in again. “Do leave it where I can see
the things,” she said with simulated fretfulness. “Good
gracious!” She drew out the frock-coat he had sported for the
Flippance wedding. “What’s this grandeur for?”
“Oh, for funerals and things like that!”
“In the Bush? And fancy packing it next to the blanket.
It’s all over hairs. I’ll brush it and sell it for you—Ravens will
be wanting one for the wedding.”
“What wedding?” he demanded fiercely.
“Mr. Skindle’s, of course. Weren’t you invited?”
He winced, and unrebuked she threw his wedding raiment
over the provision-chest. “We’d best keep this on top,” she
said, drawing out the blanket, “else you won’t get at it.”
“I expect you’ll be married by the time I’m back,” he
remarked with aloofness.
“Not I. I’ll never marry now. I’ve seen too much of men’s
foolishness.”
“Going to be an old maid?”
“If I live long enough!” Her vaunt of youth was dazzling.
“Well, I hope you won’t!” he said fervently.
“Won’t live? Oh, Will!”
“Won’t fade into that. You know what I mean. The
sweetest rose must fade.”
“So will this muffler—fortunately. Haven’t you taken your
dad’s ‘muckinger’ by mistake?”
“No, no—you leave that be.”
“What a let of Sunday collars!”
“Weekdays too I like a clean collar.”
“Ow, this onrighteous generation,” she said in Caleb’s voice, “all
one to them, Sundays or no Sundays.” She pulled up his cloak.
“You leave that cloak be!” he said, laughing despite himself.
“But now your sling’s off, you don’t need it.”
“Yes, I do. Let it be, please.”
But she unrolled it mischievously and a packet of letters fell
out—her letters about the great horn.
“Well, didn’t I say men were silly!” she cried. “Fancy
taking that to Australia.” And she made as if to hurl them
towards the living-room fire.
“Give ’em to me!” He reached for them angrily, and that
gave her an idea.
“But they’re mine!” Standing at the end of the box, which
made a barrier between them, she held them mockingly just
beyond his reach. He came forward, then perceiving one foot was
right across the forbidden sill, he jerked himself back violently.
Then balancing himself well on his soles, with a sudden swoop he
curved his body forward to the utmost. It only resulted in his
nearly falling athwart the open box. He recovered his balance
and the perpendicular with some difficulty and no dignity.
“Take care!” she cried in almost hysterical gaiety. “You
nearly crossed that time.”
“You give me my property!” he cried furiously.
“They’re as much mine as yours.”
“Not by law. You’ve no legal right to detain my property.”
“And who’s detaining it? You’ve only got to come and
take it!”
His anger was enhanced by the sounds of Daniel Quarles
returning with the cart, a carolling, lumbering, barking medley.
It would be intolerable to be caught as though trying to cross
the threshold.
“Give it me,” he hissed. “I don’t want to meet him.” And
as she tantalizingly tendered the packet nearer, he lunged
towards her at a desperate angle, and overreaching himself as
she deftly withdrew it, fell prone into the open box, his legs
asprawl in the air.
“Curl ’em in, quick,” she whispered, with an inspiration, tucking
his legs in before he knew what was happening. But as the
lid closed on him, he was not sorry to be spared the encounter.
“Get rid of him!” he implored through the keyhole.
“Business pouring in, Gran’fer!” she cried cheerily, as the
Gaffer came up astare. “Bear a hand! No, no, not into
the cart. It’s to wait here. There is Hey,” she began
chanting.
“There is Ree,” came his antiphone, as he grasped the other
handle. “Lord, that’s lugsome!” he panted, dropping it as
soon as it was inside and letting himself fall upon it. “Whew!”
he breathed heavily. Nip, too, all abristle leaped on the box
and yapped hysterically, as though nosing for a rat. This was
the last straw. Will, whose head the Gaffer was pressing through
the far from inflexible lid, and who already felt asphyxiating,
gave a vigorous heave.
“Why, it’s aloive!” cried the Gaffer, jumping up nervously.
Then as the lid flew up, Nip was hurled into space and Will’s
red poll popped up. “It’s a Will-in-the-box,” cried Jinny.
“Willie Flynt!” gasped the Gaffer.
“Yes, Gran’fer,” she said in laughing triumph. “And you
carried him in!”
“Ha, ha, ha!” A great roar of glee came from the jubilant
junior, and in the act of scrambling up, his knees relaxed in
helpless mirth and he let himself fall forward once more in the
box, in a convulsion of merriment. “Daniel Quarles, Carrier!
Ha, ha, ha!”
“And see, Gran’fer!” cried Jinny in still greater triumph.
“He came in on his hands and knees!”
Daniel Quarles’s bemused countenance changed magically.
“Ho, ho, ho!” he croaked. “On his hands and knees!
Ho, ho, ho!”
Will’s spasms froze as by enchantment.
“Come along, Will,” said Jinny, hauling him out. “It’s a
fair draw and you’ve got to shake hands.”
Will manfully put out his hand. “You nearly squashed me,
Mr. Quarles,” he said ruefully.
“Ye wanted settin’ on,” said the Gaffer, chuckling, and he
took the fleshy young hand in his bony fingers. “Ye sot yourself
to ruin us. But what says the Book?” he demanded
amiably. “He that diggeth a pit shall tumble into——”
“A box,” wound up Jinny merrily.
“Oi never knowed he was there, did, Oi’d a-tarned that key,”
said her grandfather, guffawing afresh.
“And everybody would have thought me in Australia, and
then after long years a skeleton would have been found,” said
Will, with grim humour.
Jinny clapped her hands. “Just like Mr. Flippance’s play,
The Mistletoe Bough!”
She had closed the house-door. A timid tapping at it, which
had gone unobserved, now grew audible.
“There’s your dad!” said Jinny.
Will’s eyes widened. “My dad?” he breathed incredulously.
“Git in the box!” whispered the Gaffer, almost bursting with
glee. “Git in the box!” His sinewy arms seized the young
man round the waist.
Will struggled indignantly. “I nearly choked!” he spluttered.
“Sh!” Jinny with her warning finger and dancing eyes
stilled him. “Just for fun—only for a moment!”
Her instinct divined that to let the old man have his way
would be the surest method of clinching the reconciliation. He
could then never go back on her later, never resent the trick
played upon him. It would become his trick, his farce, it would
provide a fund of happy memories for the rest of his life. And
as she cried “Come in!” and the latch lifted and Caleb’s white-rimmed,
cherubic countenance was poked meekly through a gap,
while her grandfather, stroking his beard, composed his face to
an exaggerated severity, Jinny felt that life was almost too
delicious for laughter.
“Hullo, young chap!” was the Gaffer’s genial greeting.
“What brings you here?”
“Oi—Oi happened to be passin’,” explained Caleb awkwardly,
while his puzzled eyes roved from the girl to his senior, and then
towards Nip, who was cowering in a corner, too nerve-shattered
to leap on the lid again. “You ain’t seen my Willie?” He
moved forward questingly.
The older man tried to answer, then a guffaw burst from that
toothless mouth, and turning his back he blew his nose thundrously
into his handkerchief, while his lean sides shook like a
jelly. “Why ever should we see your Willie?” cried Jinny,
saving the situation. “Ain’t he gone furrin?”
Caleb rubbed his eyes. “But Oi seen him at this door—he’ll
be late for the coach.”
“At this door?” the Gaffer succeeded in saying, and then his
handkerchief came into play again and he sneezed and coughed
and blew like a grampus.
“Oi seen him just by the sill, swingin’ forth and back like a
parrot on a perch.”
At that Jinny had some pains to keep a stiff lip, and even the
box-lid quivered, but not with laughter, she surmised.
“I’m afraid you must have dreamed it,” she replied.
“Lord!” quoth Caleb, and dropped dazedly on the box. To
see the Gaffer’s face when the lid shot up under his visitor was
worth more than Mr. Flippance’s finest show. The very soul of
old English mirth was there. You would have thought that this
crude device had never entered human brain before, was as fresh
as the first laughter of Eden. And what heightened the humour
of the situation was that Caleb was by no means overpleased to
find Will had no intention of catching his coach. Nor did he
begin to enter into the spirit of the thing till, admitting that
Martha would “exult in gladness,” it occurred to him what a
surprise for her it would be to get her boy delivered back to her
inside the box. Eagerly the two old men imagined the scene,
catching fire from each other, improvising Martha’s dialogue for
her, from her amazement at seeing the box back, down to the
colossal climax, till the mere idea had them both rolling about in
helpless quiverings and explosions. Nor could Will, though he
said he’d be danged if he’d stuff himself in again, and groused he’d
got cramp in every limb, altogether escape the contagion, while
to witness the roisterous merriment of the two hairy ancients
gave Jinny such an exquisite joy of life as not even her lover’s
first kiss had given her. Such an assurance streamed from it of
life being sound at the centre: a bubbling fount of sweetness
and love and innocent laughter. It wiped out for ever the
memory of that morbid doubt of the nature of things that had
assailed her as she sat under the gaze of the stuffed owl in Mrs.
Pennymole’s cottage, the day of the rape of Methusalem. Tears
welled through her smiles as Will at last bade his father lend a
hand in transporting the box to the waiting cart. It must
return to Frog Farm, even if he was not inside it.
“And I don’t believe there ever were any provisions, Jinny,”
he grinned, with an afterthought.
“Oh yes, there are,” said Jinny. “Look! And a bottle of
brandy too!”
“You dear!” he began, but Jinny cut him short with warning
signals. The sudden revelation of their relations might undo all
the good of the spree, by reviving her grandfather’s apprehensions
of desertion. Indeed, when the hurly-burly was over, he could
scarcely fail to ask himself what this sportive intimacy of the
young couple portended, especially as he had even in the past
suspected the answer. The truth must be broken to him
cautiously, and with that reflection came the chilling remembrance
that all this hubbub and laughter had solved nothing, that the
situation, though superficially eased, was essentially the same as
before, that the problem had only been postponed. Putting Will
in a box was not keeping him in England. He would probably
have to sail just the same, and the pain of parting be borne
afresh, and even if he remained, she could not abandon her
grandfather. But she shook off these thoughts. Enough for
the moment that Will was hers again.
“Oi’ve never laughed so much since Oi seen that Andraa at
Che’msford Fair the day Oi fust met Annie!” said her grandfather,
wiping his eyes, as she set off on her delayed round, with
Will at her side, and Caleb and the box in the cart, and Nip
bounding like mad along the muddy road.
But it was impossible to keep Caleb in mind. Will was too impatient
and too famished a lover for that, and it is not often that
you sit at your sweetheart’s side when you ought to be whirling
towards the Antipodes. Caleb could not help seeing happy
backs, circumplicated—in the more solitary roads—by arms, and
the hope, first implanted by Martha, that he would be relieved of
Will after all, and in so desirable a fashion, grew more and more
assured, though the occasional rigidity of the bodies under observation
unsettled him afresh.
“Aren’t you late for the coach?” he heard Bundock’s voice
inquire at one of these prim intervals.
“No, too early!” laughed Will.
“But you’re going the wrong way!”
“The first time I’ve gone right!” said Will, and with magnificent
indiscretion he turned and kissed Jinny.
“Oh dear!” Jinny gasped, red as fire. “It’ll be all over
Chipstone by to-night.”
“I wanted the banns proclaimed as soon as possible,” he said,
unabashed.
Then they became aware of a curious gulping sound behind
them which drowned even Methusalem’s tick-tacks. They turned
their heads. Caleb—convinced at last—had buried his face in
the famous “muckinger” mentioned between them only that
morning.
“What’s up, dad?” cried Will sympathetically. “Got a
toothache?”
“It’s the joy at you and Jinny,” he sobbed apologetically.
“And to think that some folk are near-sighted and can’t see
God, their friend.”
“Meaning me, dad?” asked Will, not untouched.
“Meanin’ mother, Willie. Lord, what a state Oi left her in—all
blarin’ and lamentation. ‘Have faith,’ Oi says to her. But
Oi’m afeared she’s got too much brains and book-larnin’!”
“Oh, I say, dad!” laughed Will. “Wouldn’t Bundock like
to hear that?”
“Bundock’s of the same opinion,” said Caleb, meaning the
bed-ridden Bundock. “ ‘Few texts and much faith,’ he says to
me once. And faith cometh by hearin’, don’t one of ’em tell us?
Singafies the ear can’t take hold of a clutter o’ texts.”
“Oh, but surely Mrs. Flynt has faith?” protested Jinny.
“She’s too taken up with other folks’ faith,” Caleb maintained
stoutly. “Wanted Mrs. Skindle to break bread with her and
look for the New Jerusalem—she ain’t found much of a Jerusalem,
poor lone widder. And wanted to baptize that Flip
gen’leman, but he never would come to the scratch. And tried
her tricks and texts on your poor old Gran’fer, she let out. But
when it comes to takin’ a sorrow from the hand of God, her
friend, she sets and yowls like a heathen what runs naked in the
wilderness. Oi’m done with that Christy Dolphin stuff—it don’t
bring the peace of God, and Oi’ll tell her sow to her head the next
time she’s at me to be a Jew!”
He mopped up the remains of his tears. “And same as Oi
did jine the Sin agog,” he added pensively, “how do Oi know
she wouldn’t goo on gooin’ forrard?”
If, in the very heart of the romp at Blackwater Hall, Jinny’s
insight could perceive that this reconciliation of her two males
(or her two mules as she called them to herself) had left her
marriage problem unsolved, still more did afterthought bring
home the sad truth. There was no way of leaving the old man,
no way of adding Will to the household. The latter alternative
she never even suggested. It would bring her husband into
public contempt to be thus absolutely swallowed up by the
female carrier, and supported as in a poorhouse. So far off
seemed the possibility of marriage that the Gaffer was considerately
left in ignorance of the engagement—the only man in
a radius of leagues from whom it was hidden, though Will was
constantly about the cottage, having supplanted poor Ravens as
a house repairer. But ever since the Gaffer had clapped him in
the trunk—and the old man had forgotten he was not the first
to do so—his affections had passed to the victim of his humour,
and he often recalled it to Will with grins and guffaws as they
sat over their beer. “Ye thought to git over Daniel Quarles,”
he would chuckle, poking him in the ribs, “but ye got to come
in on your hands and knees! Ho, ho, ho!” He seemed to
imagine Will called on purpose to be thus twitted with his defeat,
though as a matter of fact the privation of his pipe was a great
grievance to the young man, and supplied a new obstacle to his
taking up his quarters there as son-in-law. But outwardly Will
had fallen into Jinny’s way of humouring the old tyrant, and
this parade of affection rather shocked her, for she felt that Will
was more interested in the veteran’s death than in his life. Once
when, recalling the delectable memory, the Gaffer remarked,
“Lucky ye ain’t as bonkka as Sidrach, Oi count they had to
make him a extra-sized coffin,” she caught an almost ghoulish
gleam in her lover’s eyes. He had indeed lugubriously drawn
her attention to a paragraph in the paper saying that six thousand
centenarians had been counted in Europe in the last half-century.
Evidently the age of man was rising dangerously, he implied.
The worst of it was that Jinny herself, though she would have
fought passionately for the patriarch’s life, found shadowy
speculations as to the length of his span floating up to her mind
and needing to be sternly stamped under. For she had told
Will definitely that so long as her grandfather lived, she could
neither marry nor leave England. Gloomily he cited Old Parr—he
seemed to have become an authority on centenarians—who
had clung to existence till 152. “At that rate I shall be over
eighty,” he calculated cheerlessly.
“Oh, it isn’t very likely!” she consoled him.
“Well, it’s lucky we aren’t living before the Flood, that’s all
I can say,” he grumbled. “Fancy waiting six hundred years
or so!”
“I wish we were living before our flood,” she said. “Then
you’d have your livelihood.”
“And what would have been the good of that without you?
You’d have stuck to your grandfather just the same.”
No, there was no way out. Australia resurged, black and
menacing, and finally she even wrote herself to the London
agents about his ship, consoled only by the entire supervision of
his wardrobe and the famous trunk. And the only wedding that
followed on their engagement was Elijah’s. For—according to
Bundock’s father—till that had become certain, Blanche had
refused to marry, despite the calling of her banns. “I didn’t
think that a man who once aspired to me could ever keep company
with a common carrier,” was her final version to Miss
Gentry. “It shows how right you were to spurn him,” said
that sympathetic spinster, who had transferred her adoration of
the Beautiful from the faithless Cleopatra to the clinging Blanche,
and figured at the altar in her now habitual rôle of bridesmaid.
And it was on that very wedding-day—so closely does tragedy
tread on the sock of comedy—that poor Uncle Lilliwhyte fell
asleep in a glorious hope of resurrection. Jinny had not suspected
the imminence of his last moments till the evening before,
though she and Will had paid him several visits at his now
weathertight hut. But she had become rather alarmed about
him, and returning from her round one Tuesday, she set off
alone, as soon as supper was over. Will had seen sufficient of
her during the day, and it was understood he was to give his
mother his company that evening, for Martha had fallen into a
more distressful state than ever. “Will’s got to go just the
same,” she kept moaning when Jinny came, “and Flynt vows
he’ll never be baptized into the Ecclesia, and turns round and
tells me I lack faith. Me, who’ve learnt him all the religion
he knows!”
There was a full moon as Jinny set out with a little basket for
the invalid. Nip trotted behind her, and the trees and bushes
cast black trunks and masses across her path, almost like solid
stumbling-blocks. The bare elms and poplars rose in rigid
beauty in the cold starry evening. Death was far from her
thoughts till she reached the hut and saw the sunken cheeks in
their tangle of hair illumined weirdly from the stove, which lay
so close to the patriarch’s hand he could replenish it from his
bed of sacks.
“Just in time, Jinny!” he said joyfully. “Oi was afeared
you wouldn’t be.” His excitement set him coughing and,
frightened, she knelt and put her jug of tea to his lips.
“There! Don’t talk nonsense!” she said, as a faint colour
returned to his face.
He shook his head. “ ’Tis the tarn of the worms at last.”
“Not for twenty years. Look at Gran’fer.”
“Oi can’t grudge ’em,” he persisted. “Oi’ve took many a
fish with ’em, and Oi’ve been about the woods from a buoy-oy,
master of beast and bird and snake, and Oi know’d Oi’d be
catched myself one day. And that’s onny fair, ain’t it?”
“Don’t talk like that—it’s horrible.”
“Ye’re too softy-hearted, Jinny, or ye wouldn’t be here
fussin’ over the poor ole man in the trap. And ef ye’d been
more of a sport, ye’d ha’ understood it’s all a grand ole game.
Catch-me-ef-you-can, Oi calls it.”
“It’s dreadful, I think—the hawks and weasels eating the
little birds.”
“Then why do the little birds sing so? Tell me that! It’s
all fun, Oi tell ye, and they’re havin’ it theirselves with the flies
and the worms. Take your Nip now. [Nip, hearing his name,
wagged his tail.] Oi’ve seen that animal, what looks so peaceful
squattin’ there by the fire, stand a-roarin’ like when you shuts
the flap o’ the stove time he tries to git at a rat-hole. Ten men
couldn’t howd him.”
“He’s never got a rat anyhow,” said Jinny with satisfaction.
“More shame to his breed. Oi count he’s frighted away my
fox all the same. There’s one what comes and looks in at me
every evenin’ just like Nip there, onny wild about the eyes
like. Oi reckoned he’d be squattin’ there to-night for a warm, too,
friendly-like, but he’ll find both on us cowld soon, the fire and
me.” And a racking spasm of coughing accented his prognostic.
“You mustn’t talk like that. You mustn’t talk at all. I’ll
send Dr. Mint to-morrow.”
He raised himself convulsively on his sacking, throwing off the
rags and tags that covered him, and revealing the grimy shirt
and trousers that formed his bed-costume. His grey hair
streamed wildly, almost reaching the bolster. “Ef ye send me
a doctor,” he threatened, “Oi’ll die afore he gits here!”
“Do lie down.” She pressed him towards his bolster.
“Oi won’t take no doctors’ stuff,” he gurgled, as his head
sank back.
“But why?” she said, covering him up with his fusty bedclothes.
“You’re not one of us, surely!”
“A Peculiar? Noa, thank the Lord. Oi told ye Oi don’t
believe nawthen of all they religions. Git over me, the whole
thing.”
“But if you won’t have medicine, you must pray, like we do.”
“Ye don’t catch me doin’ the one ne yet the tother. Oi
count Oi can git along without ’em as much as the other critters
in the wood. They don’t have neither.”
“Yes, they do—at least Nip and Methusalem have medicine
when they’re sick. I give it ’em myself.”
“Oi reckon that’s what makes ’em sick—relyin’ on Skindles
and sech. Oi never seen a stoat nor a squirrel take physic, and
ye don’t want nawthen livelier, and Oi never seen a animal goo
down on his knees, unless ’twas a hoss what slipped. He, he, he!”
When the cough into which his gaggle passed was quieted,
Jinny reminded him sternly that men were not animals, that he
had an immortal soul, and she asked whether he would see
Mr. Fallow or one of the various chapel ministers. That proved
the most agitating question of all.
He sat up again, his face working in terror. “None o’ that,
Oi tell ye. Oi ain’t afeared o’ the old black ’un. He’ll end all
my pains, though Oi ain’t tired o’ life even with ’em—no, not by
a hundred year. But do ye don’t come scarin’ me with your
heavens and hells, for Oi don’t want to believe in ’em.”
“But I remember your saying once, we’ve got to have one or
the other.”
“And Oi told ye Oi mislikes ’em both.”
“Not really? You wouldn’t really dislike heaven.”
He shuddered. “Lord save me from it! Oi’ve thought a
mort lately about that Charley Mott—Oi used to see him drunk
with his mates—and ef he’s in heaven among they parsons and
angels, Oi warrant he’s the most miserable soul alive.”
“Lie down! I oughtn’t to have let you talk!” she said, so
shocked that she charitably supposed his wits were going. This
apprehension was enhanced when, just as her hand had pressed
his relaxing form back to his bolster, she felt him grow rigid
again with an impulse so violent that she was jerked backwards.
“Where’s my wits?” he exclaimed in odd congruity with her
thought. “Oi’ve nigh forgot the teapot!”
She hastened to offer again the half-sipped jug, which she had
stood by the stove. He waved it away.
“Not that! Gimme the spade!”
“The spade?”
“Ay, it stands in the corner—Oi ain’t used it since my old
lurcher died. D’ye think he’s in heaven—Rover—and all they
rats we digged up together?”
“You’re not going to dig up a rat?” she said in horror.
“No fear. But Oi won’t have nobody else ferret it out.” And
from his bed he tried to shovel away the earth near the stove.
But his strength failed. She took his spade. “I’ll do it.
What is it?”
“ ’Tis in the earth,” he panted, “like Oi’ll be. And Oi reckon
Oi’d as soon be buried here as anywheres.”
She turned faint. Did he mean her to dig his grave?
“This isn’t consecrated ground,” she said feebly.
“Oi count it’s got as lovely a smell as the churchyard earth,”
he said. “But let ’em bury me where they will, so long as Oi
don’t wake up. Ye ain’t diggin’, Jinny.”
Mystified and trembling, and wishing she had not come
without Will, she stuck the spade in deeper and threw up the
clods. Set her teeth as she might, she could not shake off the
thought that she was digging his grave, and they began to
chatter despite the warmth from the stove. The lurid glow
streaming from it seemed sinister in the darkness of the windowless
hut, and she paused to let in a streak of moonlight through
a gap in the door. But the night outside in its vastness and
under its blue glamour seemed even more frightening, and the
cold blast that blew in made the ancient cough again. She
reclosed the door, and with trembling spade resumed her strange
task. Suddenly her blade struck a metallic object.
“That’s it!” he cried gleefully. “And ye wanted to put
boards over it!”
More mystified than ever, she drew up a heavy old teapot of
Britannia metal—never had she handled such a weighty pot.
“Pour it out! Pour it out!” he chuckled.
She held the spout over her jug, which made him laugh till he
nearly died. But by thumping his shoulders she got his breath
back. She understood now what moved his mirth, for though
nothing had issued from the spout, the lid had burst open and
a rain of gold pieces had come spinning and rolling all over the
hut. It seemed like the stories the old people told of the
treasures of gnomes and pixies. There seemed hundreds of
them, glittering and twirling.
“All for you, Jinny,” he panted with his recovered breath.
“All for you.”
“Why, wherever did you get all this?” she replied, dropping
on her knees to gather the shimmering spilth.
“That’s all honest, Jinny, don’t be scat. ’Tis the pennies
Oi’ve put together, man and buo-oy this sixty year and more.”
“But what for?” she gasped.
“For you. And fowrpence or fi’pence a day tots up.”
“No, I mean why did you do it?” Her brain refused to
take in the idea that all this fabulous wealth was hers. “Why
didn’t you live more comfortable—why didn’t you get another
cottage?”
“Oi ain’t never been so happy as since Farmer tarned me
out. To lay on the earth, that’s what Oi wanted all my life—onny
Oi dedn’t know it.”
“Then what was the good of the money?”
A crafty look came into the hollow eyes and overspread the
wan features. “They’d have had me, they guardians, ef Oi
dedn’t have money. Oi wasn’t a-gooin’ to die in the poorhouse
like my feyther, time they sold him up. Ef ye got the brads,
they can’t touch ye. Do, the Master ’ould git into trouble. They
put mother and me sep’rit from feyther, and when Oi seen her
cryin’ Oi swore in my liddle heart Oi’d die sooner than stay
there or tarn ’prentice. Oi dropped through a window the
night o’ feyther’s funeral—for the Master had thrashed me—but
Oi’d promised mother Oi’d come back for her, and ’twarn’t
many year afore she was livin’ with me upright in the cottage.
Happen you seen her, though she never seen you.”
“Yes, I know,” said Jinny softly. “She was blind.”
“Cried her eyes out, to my thinkin’. But Oi says to her
marnin’ and night, ‘Cheer up, mother,’ Oi says, ‘so long as we’ve
got the dubs, they can’t touch us, and ef they parish gents tries
to lay hands on me, they’ll git such a clumsy thump with the
teapot they’ll know better next time.’ She never seen the teapot,
mother dedn’t, but she used to waggle her fingers about in it
and laugh like billy-o.”
Jinny felt nearer weeping as she culled these spoils of a lifetime.
Many of the coins were curious; mintage of an earlier
reign. She was peering in a cobwebbed corner when the barking
of Nip as well as a familiar footstep in the clearing announced a
welcome arrival. How glad she was Will had not been able to
keep away! And then suddenly—at last—came the realization
of her riches, of the solution of her financial problem!
“Quick! Quick!” whispered the old man hoarsely, and
signed to her to hide the teapot. To soothe him she put it
swiftly in her basket.
“You’re sure there’s nobody else ought to have it?” she
asked anxiously.
“Oi ain’t got no friend ’cept you and the fox. And ye don’t
catch him in the poorhouse. But Oi’ll die happy, knowin’ as
Oi’ve saved you from it. Don’t let ’em come in!” he gasped, as
a tapping began.
“It’s only young Mr. Flynt.”
“Willie, d’ye mean?”
She blushed in the friendly obscurity. “He’s come to see me
home.”
“He mustn’t come in!”
“I’ll tell him.”
She set down the basket and went out into the blue night. It
was no longer terrifying. Will with his ash stick seemed a
match for all the powers of darkness. But she drew back from
his kiss. Death was too near. In whispers she explained the
situation, forgetting even to mention the gold. “I oughtn’t to
leave him—he oughtn’t to die alone.”
“Nonsense, sweetheart. You can’t stay all night with a dirty
old lunatic!”
“Don’t talk so unchristianly, Will. You don’t deserve——!”
But she shut her lips. She could not go now into the happiness
the “dirty old lunatic” was bringing them.
“Make him up a good fire and say you’ll be back first thing
in the morning. I’ll come and take you. There!”
“Couldn’t—couldn’t you stay with him, Will?”
“Me? You said he wouldn’t have me! And I haven’t got
enough baccy on me.”
She went back tentatively. She found Uncle Lilliwhyte lying
on his back on his sacks with closed eyes, and there was blood
on the bolster. The earth had been shovelled in again and the
soil flattened tidily with the back of the spade. The superfluous
precaution—automatic effect of lifelong habit—had evidently
cost him dear.
“He can come in now,” he said feebly.
“But he doesn’t want anything,” she explained. “You lie
still.”
“Oi’d like him to come.” She went softly to the door and
called.
“Here I am, uncle!” cried Will cheerily.
“ ’Tain’t you Oi want. But happen ef your mother ’ud come
and talk things over——”
“My mother?” said Will, startled. Martha, he knew, would
have the same repugnance as he to this feckless, grimy, impossible
creature: an aversion which even the wasted features could not
counteract.
“It don’t seem to git over she,” he explained, “but Oi never
could hear proper, bein’ at the keyhole in a manner o’ speakin’.
But ef she’d come and explain——!”
“Yes, she will,” said Jinny. “She must, Will.”
“I’ll tell her,” he murmured.
“He’ll bring her in the morning,” she promised emphatically.
“You take a little more tea now and get to sleep.” She covered
him up carefully and stuck a great log in the stove.
“Do ye take that fowlin’-piece, young Flynt,” he said, opening
his eyes. “And be careful—it’s loaded.”
“Thanks, I’ll take it in the morning.”
“And there’s the coppers and silver, Jinny. That’s at the
bottom o’ the sack Oi’m on. And old tradesmen’s tokens too.”
“In the morning—you go to sleep now,” she said tenderly.
But she still lingered, reluctant to leave him, and was very relieved
when Ravens (now become a woodman with an adze) looked in
to see the old man, and, unembittered by the sight of the lovers,
consented to pass the night in the hut he had mended.
Swinging home through the wood, through aisles flooded only
with moonlight, the young lovers soon left the thought of death
behind them. Indeed from the hut itself there had soon come
following them the careless strains of the incurable caroller:
“’Tis my delight of a shiny night
 In the season of the year.”
“What a hefty basket!” said Will at last. “Whatever have
you been carrying the old codger?”
“It’s what I’m carrying off,” she laughed. “But give it me,
if it’s too much for your poor arm.”
“It’s not so heavy as my box,” he smiled.
“But it saves carrying that,” she said happily.
“How do you mean?”
“That’s your farm in there—your English farm! Australia
is off.” She enjoyed his obvious fear that the scene in the hut
had been too much for her brain. “Goose!” she cried. “Goose
with the golden eggs. Just take a peep.”
“There’s only your jug and teapot.” He was more mystified
than ever.
But her happiness waned again when the riddle was read.
“You surely don’t expect me to pocket your money,” he said,
as soon as his slower brain had taken in the situation.
“Oh, Will! Surely what is mine is yours!”
“Not at all. What is mine is yours.”
“But that’s what I said.”
“Don’t turn and twist—I know you’re cleverer than me.”
Her hand sought his. “Don’t let us have a storm in a teapot!”
But he rumbled on. “With all my worldly goods I thee endow—it’s
the man says that.”
“You’ve been reading the marriage service.”
“And how would you know it, if you hadn’t?”
That suspended the debate on a kiss. “You see I’d be almost
as bad as poor Charley Mott,” he pointed out.
“I see,” she said humbly. Indeed she felt herself so much a
part of him now that she wondered how she could have failed
to look at it from his point of view. Her defeat of his coach—under
Providence—had humiliated him enough. To have turned
suddenly into an heiress was an aggravation of her success; now
to make him appear a fortune-hunter would be the last straw.
“But couldn’t I buy the farm and you rent it of me?” she
ventured, with a memory of Hezekiah Bidlake.
“Everybody would think just the same——”
“Well, but somewhere else—where nobody knows us——?”
“You wouldn’t come somewhere else—not till I’m eighty!”
“Don’t be absurd! Anyhow you’ll look beautiful with a
white beard.”
“Why not get him a minder with the money? Then we
could go to Australia together.”
“Leave him to a stranger! He’d die. But so long as the
farm was in England, it wouldn’t be so bad, even if I couldn’t
come just yet.”
He did not answer, and as they walked on silently, her daydreams
resurged, her nipped buds began bursting into wonderful
flower. They parted at her door without further reference to
money questions, but her face was brimming with happiness as
the pot with guineas.
In that rosy mood—when her grandfather, nid-nodding over
the hearth, roused at her return—she could not refrain from
pouring out her teapot on the table, and changing his grumbles
at her absence into squeaks of delight. She meant to pour out
her story too, but he cut her short.
“That’s mine!” he cried, exultant. “That’s the gold Sidrach
brought me!”
“No, no, Gran’fer. That comes from——!”
“But there’s the wery spade guineas!” He dabbled his
claws in the coins.
“Oh, is that what they are? But there’s heads of Victoria,
too.”
“That’s what he saved in Babylon. Dedn’t Oi say as he died
warrum?”
“But you must listen, Gran’fer. Uncle Lilliwhyte——” she
recapitulated the story.
“They’re mine anyways!” He scooped them up in his
skinny palms and let them fall into the pot with a voluptuous
clang. “Ye gits quite enough out o’ my biznus.”
This seemed so exactly the reverse of Will’s attitude that she
found herself smiling ruefully at the way she was caught again
between her “two mules.” But she could not thus lose her
marriage-portion. “Uncle Lilliwhyte gave them to me for
myself,” she said firmly.
“And don’t ye owe me back all the money Oi paid when your
feyther died?”
Jinny was taken aback. “How much did you pay?”
“Hunderds and hunderds. Dedn’t, he’d a-been a disgraced
corpse, and your mother too.”
Jinny was silent. The Angel-Mother seemed rustling overhead.
The Gaffer closed shutters and bolted doors with rigorous precautions,
and hugging the teapot to his bosom stumbled up to
bed. Depressed by this unexpected seizure of her windfall, she
found herself too utterly weary after her long day’s work and
excitement to open the shutters again, much as she disliked an
airless room; she had scarcely energy to pull out her chest of
drawers. For a few minutes she watched from her bed the blue
flickering flame of the log, then knew no more till suddenly she saw
above the dead fire a monstrous shadow curling over the chimney-piece
and along the ceiling: in another instant she traced it to
something still more horrible—her grandfather’s legless trunk
appearing over the hearthstone, with his nightlight in one hand
and the teapot in the other. The rush-candle shook in its holed
tin cylinder and set his grisly counterpart dancing. Jinny’s blood
ran cold. Evidently some one had murdered him for the gold
and this was his ghost. Then she told herself it was one of her
nightmares, and she looked around for Henry Brougham, Esq.,
to clear up the situation. But with a soft thud the trunk dropped
as through a trap-door and there was nothing left but a great
glimmering hole where the hearthstone should have been.
Instantly she realized that it was only a secret hiding-place in
which her magpie of a grandfather was bestowing the treasure—yes,
there was the hearthstone slewed round as on a pivot. This
must be that old smugglers’ storehouse he and gossip had sometimes
hinted at—with perhaps the long underground passages of
ancient legend, reaching to Beacon Chimneys, nay, to the
parsonage itself.
She closed her eyes carefully as his shadow heralded his re-ascent.
He came up almost as noiselessly as that giant spectre,
and between her lids she saw him scrutinize her. Reassured to
see his shanks again, she emitted one of his snores, wondering
whimsically if she did snore, or if any other girl had ever heard
herself snore, and a smile almost broke the impassivity of her
cheeks. Satisfied with the snore, he stooped down and she saw
the hearthstone veer back to its place. “Well, I can always get
it when I want it,” she thought cheerfully, as his slow stockinged
feet bore him and his more sinister shadow upstairs.
For some time she lay awake, pondering over the fate of her
money, which seemed like Cleopatra’s to be “in bonds,” and
wondering whether poor Uncle Lilliwhyte was still alive; then
everything faded into a vision of Mr. Flippance jogging marionettes
for rugged miners who poured out their teapots at the
box-office, reducing it to such a swamp that its boxes floated
in the tea.
At breakfast, finding her grandfather abnormally restless, she
asked him a little maliciously if he had slept all right.
“Oi’ll sleep better to-night,” he said, and chuckled a little.
He seemed indeed very happy at having his treasure so well
warded, and though his exuberance was alarming, she felt that
the excitement of happiness was a lesser danger than that long
depression of penuriousness. If the defeat of the coach had
seemed to give him a second lease of life, what might not his new
wealth do for him? He might really become an Old Parr, and
poor Will be kept waiting till the twentieth century!
It was thus with only a moderate uneasiness that she left him,
stealing with her basket to the rendezvous at the hut. In the
wood she met Ravens hurrying to find breakfast, and he sang
out that Martha and Will had relieved him, and that Uncle
Lilliwhyte was better. As she approached the clearing, she saw
the old woman come out of the hut with a bottle in her hand
and a face absolutely transfigured. The whining, peevish,
latter-day Martha was gone: a radiance almost celestial illumined
her features—it seemed to transcend even the bonnet and to rim
it with a halo. This was a woman walking not on the dead
dank leaves of a frost-grey wood, but through the streets of the
New Jerusalem. Behind her came Will, with a little cynical
smile playing about his mouth till he espied Jinny, when his
face took on the same ecstatic glow as his mother’s. Jinny
could not but feel enkindled in her turn by all this spiritual
effulgence, and it was three glorified countenances that met on
this March morning.
“He’s broken bread with me,” breathed Martha, “and I’ve
helped him put on the Saving Name.” She displayed her bottle
with drops of water beaded on the mouth. She had baptized—albeit
only by an unavoidable reversion to sprinkling—her first
convert. The dream of years had been fulfilled at last, and the
apostolic triumph had lifted her beyond humanity, fired her
with a vision in which, a conquistador of faith, she was to turn
all Little Bradmarsh, nay, Chipstone itself, into one vast synagogue.
This were indeed the New Jerusalem. “And it was
Will that led my feet,” she said, kissing him to his disconcertment.
“And go where he may now, Jinny, he can’t take that
away from me. And I shall always have his letter to inspire me
to win other souls.” She touched the left side of her bodice, and
poor Jinny, suddenly reminded that her grandfather had robbed
her of her last chance of keeping Will in England, felt envious
of Martha’s exalted source of consolation.
“I’ve got to go now and cook Flynt’s dinner,” said Martha.
“But he won’t have much appetite for it if he’s got any right
feeling left, when he hears that another man, a stranger, has
been before him in the path of righteousness. Maybe you’ll
write to the Lightstand, Willie, to say there’s a new brother in
Little Bradmarsh.”
“I’ll tell ’em the Ecclesia has doubled its membership,” said
Will, with a faint wink at Jinny, to which the girl did not respond.
“Do you think, mother,” he asked with mock seriousness, “the
New Jerusalem will come down in Australia same as here?”
“Of course,” said Martha.
Again Will winked at Jinny. But she frowned and shook her
head. Her study of Australia had instructed her sufficiently
that it was on the other side of the globe, and she knew that
Will was having fun with the idea of the golden city coming
down two opposite ways at once, but she felt it criminal to break
Martha’s mood, and indeed was not certain she herself understood
how the Australians escaped falling off into space. Discouraged
by her stern face, Will murmured he’d put his mother
on the road and be back. She smiled and nodded at the promise,
but her heart was heavy with a sense of inevitable partings as
she went in to the lingering ancient.
The death-bed conversion was evidently a success, for she
found him almost as radiant as Martha, though with a more
unearthly light, while the gleaming as of dewdrops on his dishevelled
hair, and the stains of damp over his bolster seemed to
convict his spiritual preceptress of a dangerous recklessness.
But he was probably beyond saving in any case, Jinny reflected,
and what other medicine could have given him that happy
exaltation? The logs roared in the stove, and all was joy and
warmth that rimy morning.
“Oi’ve tarned a Christy Dolphin!” he announced jubilantly.
“Yes, I’m so glad. Drink this before it gets cold.”
He waved it away. “Oi suspicioned all the time as that be the
right religion. No hell at all, ye just goos to sleep, and when
the New Jerusalem comes down for they righteous, ye don’t
git up.”
“You’ll wake up—you and your mother,” she assured him,
standing her jug by the stove.
“That’s what Mrs. Flynt says. ‘Ye ain’t done no harm,’ she
says, ‘and when the trumpet blows for the saints, your bones will
git their flesh agen, same as now.’ ”
There was little enough on them to go through eternity in, she
thought, gazing at his shrunken arms, which he had left outside
the coverings in repudiating the tea. “Won’t that be wonderful!”
she said, the tears in her eyes.
“That’ll be wunnerful wunnerful,” he agreed. “That fares to
be what Oi calls a real heaven—your own body, not a sort o’
smoke-cloud ye wouldn’t know was you ef you met it, your own
flesh and blood, livin’ on this lovely earth with the birds and the
winds and the sun and the water, all a-singin’ and a-shinin’ for
ever and ever. And no bad folks ne yet angels to worrit ye, no
liddle boys to call arter ye—why it’s just ginnick! Oi reckon
Oi’ll choose this same old spot.”
“Yes, it’s a lovely spot,” said Jinny, but she wondered whether
he had not made his own version of Martha’s New Jerusalem,
which she herself had always understood to be more jewelled
than natural.
“Your mother will be able to see it too,” she added gently, as
she put the tea to his lips.
A beautiful smile traversed the sunken features. But suddenly
a frenzy of terror swamped it. He sat up with a jerk that dashed
her jug to the stove, shivering it into fragments. “But ef Oi
waked, Oi’d need my money agen!” he shrilled.
What Jinny always remembered most vividly, when she
recalled this tragic moment, was the red lettering on the sacks
he lay on, exposed by his upright posture.
“Gay, Bird & Co., Colchester,” her eyes read mechanically.
When he fell back and hid that inscription, his face was at peace
again. That acuteness of terror—the quintessence of the morbidity
of a lifetime—had stopped his heart.
She was terribly shaken by this sudden and grotesque end.
She felt his pulse, but without hope. She had never seen human
death before, but she had a vague idea that you closed the eyes
and put pennies on them. She had no pennies with her. She
remembered there were some in the sack he lay on, pennies and
shillings, but she did not dare disturb him to get at them. She
was obscurely glad she had not to wrestle with the problem of
whether she ought to get his teapot buried with him, for the
contingency of his resurrection. Her grandfather would never
surrender it, she felt, and if she descended into his mysterious
underground and abstracted it, that might upset his wits altogether.
Besides, Uncle Lilliwhyte’s face was now taking on a
strange beauty, as though his pecuniary anxieties were allayed.
But her nerves were giving way—she threw open the door and
looked out eagerly, not for the lover, but for the man who
seemed necessary in these rough moments. The dead must not
be left alone, she knew that, or she would have set out to meet
Will. Perhaps if she left him alone, his shy friend the fox would
come trotting in, now he was so still. The parish authorities
must doubtless be summoned to take charge of him. But ought
he to have a pauper funeral—ought she not to steal back enough
of his money to save him from that? But she remembered
with relief that he had expressed indifference as to what became
of his body—so long as it was restored to earth, its good old
mother. As she moved a few paces without, in her peering for
Will, she saw the blue smoke rising through the three top-hats,
and in spite of the dead man’s doctrines and apprehensions, she
could not help fancying it was his spirit soaring towards the abode
of the Angel-Mother.
When Will returned, she was relieved to find Ravens striding
beside him. That sunny-souled factotum, who had meant to hie
to the Skindle wedding, now found himself transformed instead
into a corpse-watcher, while Will, taking Jinny a bit of his way,
went off by the shortest cuts to Chipstone Poorhouse, as probably
the centre of authority for parish funerals.
“There’s the coroner, too,” Ravens called after him.
“Will there be an inquest?” Jinny asked.
“Must be,” said Will, and Jinny, alarmed for Martha’s sake,
ran back on pretence of her basket, and surreptitiously wiped
the bolster. As they left the clearing, they heard Ravens singing
in the hut.
When their roads parted, Jinny insisted on returning to her
grandfather, whose excitement now recurred to her mind. She
was still a little uneasy about the pauper funeral, but Will had
emphatically agreed with her that the teapot could not now be
recaptured. Nor could it be drawn upon, he declared: the old
grabber would assuredly have counted the contents. Jinny suspected
that Will was pleased rather than sympathetic at her
having ceased to be an heiress. The death of Uncle Lilliwhyte,
so much the junior of Daniel Quarles, could not but set both
their minds on the thought of a similar cutting of their Gordian
knot, but the thought—dreaded or welcome—was not allowed
to appear in their conversation, finding expression only in Will’s
aggrieved assumption of the Gaffer’s immortality. “Even if I
was to strike a nugget as big as a prize marrow, we’d be no
forrarder,” he had grumbled, and Jinny, with jangled nerves,
had accused him of selfishness, when that poor old uncle was
lying dead.
As she approached Blackwater Hall, a creepy conviction began
to invade her that their knot was already cut: after that scene
in the hut she was aquiver with presages of death and disaster.
The absence of smoke—surely Gran’fer’s hearth was not already
cold—added to her alarm. She remembered again his effervescence
at breakfast; why should his heart not stop too?
And when she saw the broad garden-gate open, and the house
door ajar, her own heart nearly stopped. Her intuition, she
felt, had not deceived her. Yet he was nowhere in the house.
Ante-room, living-room, kitchen, all were empty of him. The
fire was out. In the bedroom lay his telescope, a discarded toy.
She was about to sweep the horizon with it, when she had an
inspiration. The smugglers’ storehouse! He had gone down
to count his gold, and the stone had rolled back—The Mistletoe
Bough in another version. Tearing downstairs, she managed,
after much fumbling with the poker, to make it revolve, and
peered down into the dark clammy depths.
“Gran’fer! Gran’fer!” she cried. But only the dank silence
welled up. He was undoubtedly dead, lying there stark among
his guineas. She was scrambling down into the vault. But no!
What nonsense! He must be pottering about with a spud,
currycombing Methusalem, or doing some other odd job his
renewed strength permitted. She hauled herself up—at any rate
that would postpone the dread vision—and rushed round to the
stable. That door too was open—Methusalem was gone! So
was the cart. Nor was there any sign of Nip.
In her relief it was almost a pleasure to trace the wheels on
the road. But soon she saw black again. It was his last drive—the
last drive of Daniel Quarles, Carrier. That was the meaning
of his excitement of the morning. He had gone out for the last
time on his old rounds, and would meet Death on his driving-board,
face to face, as he had met so many wintry storms and
buffets. Staying only to roll back the stone, she raced out in
his tracks.
But his course led unluckily to the Four Wantz Way and
there she could no longer disentangle his cart-ruts. However,
Mrs. Pennymole, reinstated in her scoured ground floor, had reassuring
news enough, though it carried a new apprehension.
“I couldn’t believe my eyes when I catched sight of him with
the May Day favours all a-flyin’ and a-flutterin’ on whip and
harness, and lookin’ that strong with a great old smile over his
dear old phiz, and Nip barkin’ fit to bust. ‘Where be you off
to?’ I cries as he dashes by, whippin’ past like fleck—I never
seen Methusalem go that pace, seemin’ a’most as if he was glad
to have his old master back agen, meanin’ no disrespect to you,
Jinny.”
“No, of course not,” said Jinny impatiently. “But what did
he say?”
Then he became aware to his surprise that Tony Flip, still in his
dressing-gown and still hugging the balance of his posters, was
pacing the corridor restlessly, like a caged lion, though it turned
out to be really like a tame creature denied his cage.
“They won’t let me in,” he said miserably. And he indicated
an open bedroom door opposite the fox, with a view of housemaids
at work, angry at the hour. One was making his bed,
thumping it viciously; another raised swirls of dust with a
broom. Slops stood blatantly around.
“They won’t even take free seats,” he groaned.
“What did I tell you?” said Will.
“Oh, it ain’t because they think it wicked, the hussies. They
turn up their noses at it, just because it’s under their noses. If
they had to go to Greenwich Fair to see it, they’d fight to get
in. Candidly, cocky, have you ever seen a better bill?”
“It seems only too much,” ventured Will.
“It don’t say all at the same performance. In practice it all
comes down to The Mistletoe Bough, the silliest of the lot, a bride
who shuts herself in a chest for fun, you know, and moulders into a
spirit. But think of Richardson’s—what they cram into twenty-five
minutes! You saw that at Greenwich, I suppose, Easter
time.”
“No, I only got to London in time for the Great Exhibition.”
“You’ve been to that?” The Showman’s eyes sparkled.
“What I came back for.”
“That’s a Show!!” And a note of immeasurable envy mixed
with the rapture of the rival impresario. “But what a chance
missed!”
“How so?”
“No drinks.”
“I got lemonade.”
“That’s not a drink—that’s a gas. Lord, I thought, looking
at that bumper house, with a proper Christian bar, they could
pay off the National Debt.”
“You’ve seen it then?”
“Was there at the opening. Stood so near the Royal Party
I patted the head of little Wales, and the Goldstick and Chamberlain
walking backwards from the Presence nearly shoved me
into the Chinese Ambassador just as he was salaaming on his
stomach. Didn’t little Albert Edward look sweet in his Highland
costume?”
“I wasn’t inside then,” confessed Will, “and I only had eyes
for the Queen and her cream-coloured horses. You’ve got a
season ticket, I suppose.”
“With the Prince Consort’s compliments. The fact is, I
supplied the elephant for the Queen’s howdah.”
“Did you?”
“Yes, didn’t you see it in the Indian compartment? They
wanted to show off the magnificent trappings she got from the
Rajah, and they thought of getting a real live elephant, which
would have been no end of trouble amid all those precious vases.
But I happened to know of a stuffed elephant at a show down
here in Essex, so I entered into correspondence with Buckingham
Palace and loaned the beast for the season—buying him up first,
of course—and sent him up in my caravan that had to be roused
from its winter sleep and completely unpacked. Yes, trouble
enough! But talk of the Koh-i-noor, that elephant’ll be worth
his weight in gold when he comes back—Queen Victoria’s
elephant as visited by the nobility and gentry of the world. I
annex the Great Exhibition. See!”
“I wish I’d noticed him,” said Will wistfully. “I only saw
her statue in zinc, seven yards high. But there’s so much to
see—machinery and jewels and Mexican figures, it makes your
head ache, and I couldn’t even get a look at that Koh-i-noor,
such a crush round it. But did you see the Preserved Pig?”
The Showman’s eyes twinkled. “Mr. Woods, d’ye mean?”
“Mr. Woods?”
“The Chancellor of the Exchequer. Haven’t you noticed how
they’ve left off abusing the income tax now they’ve got the
show to talk about? By Jove,” he chuckled, “what a haul for
the Exchequer if they bring the Crystal Palace under the
window tax!”
“No, no! Best Berkshire breed. The real marvel of the
Exhibition! None o’ your stuffed creatures, but a natural pig
cured whole. Weighs three and a half hundredweight; five foot
and a half from tail to snout. ’Twas done by a provision
merchant in Dublin—Smith—I took note of the name.”
“That name will be immortal,” said Mr. Flippance gravely.
“Yes, and there was a monster pigeon-pie!” said Will with
the same unsuspicious enthusiasm.
The church clock, striking four at this point, made the Showman
bound frantically to his doorway. “Not done yet, you
snails and sluts! When am I to get these bills to the tent? Do
you realize we open to-night? You’ll ruin the show.”
“I’ll take them,” volunteered Will. “My road lays by the
field.”
“A friend in need is a friend indeed.” Tony thrust the
heavy roll effusively into Will’s hands. “Ask for my daughter—she’ll
help you to stick ’em up on the bill-boards.”
“Your daughter?” murmured Will. He would have resented
his sudden reduction to a bill-poster but for the romantic vision
of the Bohemian petticoat.
“I can’t pull the strings on both sides of the stage at once,
can I? Not to mention the women’s and boys’ voices, and the
piping Gaffers. Lord, she’s got a head on her, has Polly. And
pops in and out to play the piano too.”
With pleasant flutterings of the springtide fancy, the young
man lightly strode with his roll under his arm to the field where
a long chocolate-coloured caravan—apparently the vehicle that
had transported the elephant—stood horseless at an aperture in
the mammoth mushroom described by Tony Flip. Labourers
in shirt-sleeves were carrying in ropes and rough benches. Small
boys and large dogs stood around, and there was a litter of
straw, cardboard, shivered packing-cases, and dirty paper. Two
trucks covered with tarpaulin, and a vast box with a high-pitched
roof marked “Duke’s Marionettes,” completed the confusion.
Will, peeping in, saw a stage already set, at the border of which
a girl on her knees was tacking a row of tin footlight-holders.
The rear was already roped off, and the benches seemed to rise
like a gallery. Evidently the thing was done in style—crowned
heads or no crowned heads. Not without a thrill he walked in,
and across the grassy floor, but romance fled when the girl,
raising her head, presented a face almost as massive as her
father’s, and ravaged by smallpox to boot. Polly had indeed
“a head on her,” he thought, though long pendent ear-rings
preserved its femininity.
Politely concealing his chill, he murmured “Miss Flippance,”
and explained he had been instructed to deliver the bills to her.
She received them and him with an indifference that would
have been galling had she been prettier, and was not gratifying
even from a massive brain.
“Silly nonsense!” she grumbled, unrolling them. “To open
before you’ve done your posting and circularizing. There won’t
be a soul!”
“Oh, surely—this weather!” he murmured.
Miss Flippance threw him an annihilating glance. “If dad
once gets an idea into his head, you can’t get it out with a
forceps.” Will stared at this vigorous young lady, who, with a
poster unfurled in her hand, proceeded to yell directions and
rebukes at the bench-arranging clodhoppers. It was an insult
to his sex, he felt resentfully. No woman, however ugly, had
the right to order men about, men who were not even married
to her.
“Nincompoops! They’ll never be ready for to-night,” said
Miss Flippance, acknowledging his existence again. “Would to
heaven dad had gone up to London to see the Exhibition—and
not hustled us like this.”
“But he was there at the opening.”
Miss Flippance stared at him. “Were you with him?”
“No such luck. I didn’t even see the stuffed elephant.”
“Has he stuffed you with that?” Miss Flippance emitted a
mirthless laugh, and Will looked at once angry and sheepish.
“Not that way, you hulking brutes! Turn ’em round. . . . And
besides, it’s ridiculous to give Hamlet. High art don’t take
south of Scarborough.”
“Well, I saw Othello in London last week,” he contradicted
sharply—she should see he was no mere gull: “And the pit was
packed.”
“Yes—in April. But try it in the dog-days.”
“Too warm, eh?” he sniggered. She turned away as from
an idiot. That hurt him more than having swallowed her
father’s royal rodomontade. Did she then think the plot of
Othello glacial? Or had she no sense of humour? Yes, that
was it—the sex had been denied the sense of humour. True, it
shrieked with laughter if you tickled it, but the tickling must be
physical. Ah, she was at it again, bustling and bullying the
superior sex. Well, he wasn’t going to paste bills under her.
Let that lazy liar of a Showman do his own dirty work.
“Good afternoon,” he called out huffily, and walked out of
the great tent in a far less romantic mood than when he had
entered it. And then, as he came through the opening in the canvas,
his eyes nearly started out of their sockets: Daniel Quarles’s
cart stood outside the tent, and there, perched on the driving-board,
holding the reins, and calmly instructing the shirt-sleeved
yokels to deliver the big drum to Miss Flippance, was the girl of
the parcel-shed!
Before his eyes could return normally to their orbits or his
breath to his windpipe, the incredible vision had vanished.
Jinny had, in fact, had an overdose of commissions in the other
purlieus of Chipstone, and having fetched the drum from its
winter quarters as directed by Miss Polly Flippance that noon—it
had, in fact, been pawned, and the piano was still irredeemable—she
was hastening on her homeward circuit as fast as Methusalem
could be induced to go.
“Who was that?” Will gasped.
The rustic who had received the drum looked at him with
unconcealed contempt. A man who did not know that!
“That war Jinny!” he said.
It was as if he had given his drum a terrific bang. Jinny?—Jinny
Quarles then! Who else? In the boom of that name
reverberated a clamour of memories and of emotions, old and
new. Images of a solemn-eyed mite, of a merry little maid, of a
sedate Sunday scholar, and of the amazing creature of to-day,
went all interflashing with one another. Yes, the little Jinny
who had shared the wagon and his secret with him that fateful
Sunday, and who if ever by a rare chance she had flitted across
his thoughts, figured always as this same little girl in her grand
pink Sunday pelisse, trimmed with pink velvet and fringes, was
now grown up; bonneted, bewitching, incredible.
“But where—where was her grandfather?” he stammered.
“Asleep inside?”
“Asleep?” The rustic grinned. “A long sleep, Oi should
reckon. Whoy, we ain’t seen the Gaffer for years.”
“Don’t stand there gossiping.” It was the female martinet
at her sternest.
“It’s not his fault,” said Will. “I was asking about old
Daniel Quarles. Is he really dead?”
“Dead? Not to my knowledge. At least I have never
noticed Jinny in black.”
“Then where is he? Why isn’t he looking after Jinny?”
“Eh? But he must be a hundred!”
“You don’t mean to say he lets Jinny go out and do his job?”
“The most natural person I should think,” said Miss Flippance.
“Really I haven’t time to discuss village carriers, if the show is
to open to-night. . . . Do be careful of that drum. No, not
inside, blockhead. Come back!”
As the tambour-laden slave did not seem to hear, his affrighted
fellow-serfs yelled to him to bring the drum outside again, and
when he was come, the despot’s skirts rustled majestically back
into the tent—they were long and hunched out quite fashionably,
which accentuated the humiliation of the male element. But
Will remained at the tent door, like Abraham after an angel’s
visit, thunderstruck and dumbfounded, but with consternation,
not reverence. It was, he thought, the grossest carelessness that
had ever occurred in the history of the globe. A respectable girl
like that—why, what was the world coming to? Sent gadding
about the country like a trollop, perched up horsily behind a
carter’s whip—this was what little Jinny had been allowed to
grow up into! And that girl at “The Black Sheep”—she who
had looked so innocent, whom he had mentally seen as a May
Queen, crowned with garlands, dancing girlishly round a Maypole—this
was what lay under her poetic semblance. And at the
same time—pleasing and perturbing thought—both the unsexed
Carrier and the maidenly May Queen were in reality little Jinny:
no stand-offish stranger, needing deferential approach, but—in a
way—his very own: the meek poppet whose cheek he had always
pinched patronizingly, in whose eyes he had always seen himself
as a grown-up god.
Miss Flippance, sweeping out again, and finding him still
hanging about, immovable, had a new thought. “Pardon me—has
my father engaged you?”
He coloured up in anger. “I brought his bills in passing—that’s
all.”
“Oh, I thought you might be looking for a job. There’s this
drum, you know.”
He could have knocked her down. But she was evidently
quite in earnest, this outrageous, humourless female, only second
in self-sufficiency to Jinny the Carrier. The world seemed
suddenly emasculated.
“I’m no musician,” he said surlily.
“But you look a strong young man and it’s muscle we want,
not music. You’d only have to stand here about half an hour
a day. This afternoon, of course, you might join the Bellman
round the town—I’ve ordered him for five.”
“Miss Flippance,” said Will, mastering himself and speaking
with crushing dignity, “have you observed my clothes?”
“They don’t matter,” she assured him. “We provide the
uniform.”
“Do I look,” he snorted, “like a drummer at a dime show?”
“If you’ve come as a walking gentleman,” replied Miss
Flippance simply, “you’ve come to the wrong shop. We’re only
wires.”
“Oh, I know all about that.” And he slashed savagely with
his stick at the insulting tambour, which uttered a bass roar of
agony.
“Splendid! But you might have smashed it!” cried Miss
Flippance. “Where’s the drumstick?”
“Am I the drumstick’s keeper?” he answered, with an odd
Biblical reminiscence.
“Nincompoops! Thickheads! Zanies! Where’s the drumstick?”
But nobody had seen the drumstick. Jinny hadn’t brought
it, the slaves assured her. She assured them, still more emphatically,
that they had dropped it off the drum in taking it out.
And no inch of it being visible where the cart had stood, she
drew the deduction that it was now speeding towards Long
Bradmarsh.
She turned to Will. “Do run after her—the men are so busy—she
can’t be far, and she has to stop every now and again.”
He glared at her. Then something inside him whispered that
that was the obvious thing to do—impishly to pretend to obey
her, and then to keep her waiting for the drumstick—eternally.
Yes, he would be revenged on behalf of his sex.
“Yoicks! Tally-ho!” he cried with an advent of glee that
he felt justifiably malicious. And, waving his own stick wildly,
he bounded with mock frenzy towards the field gate by which
the cart had gone off.
“You won’t catch her like that,” bawled Miss Flippance after
him. “Across the fields! Head her off!” But he would not
take orders from any woman, he told himself, so feigning deafness
he ran doggedly into the Long Bradmarsh road, and turning a
sharp elbow, felt his heart leap up to see the now familiar cart
at a standstill before a wayside cottage. But even as he gazed
it started afresh.
He tore on madly. The back of the tilt vanished round
another bend. “Following a drumstick” passed grotesquely
across his mind. What an odd home-coming! What a queer
renewal of acquaintance with Jinny—after that solemn oath-taking
in the wagon!
Presently he heard a wild scampering through the bushes on
his right, and his canine friend of the inn was leaping and frisking
and joyously barking beside him. They ran together—owing to the
dog’s leisurely tangents and curvatures he could just keep up with
it. But with the sweat now pouring from his forehead, the inner
imp began asking what he was running for, since he had already
deceived and chastised Miss Flippance, left her eternally expectant.
Why not now drop into the pleasant saunter home he
had planned?
But the poor dog was panting in this heat—he answered the
imp—it must have run miles since its meal in the parlour.
Apoplexy threatened perhaps, hydrophobia even. Look at its
lolling tongue! He snatched it up: it must be restored to its
inconsiderate mistress, to whom, at the same time, a still more
important rebuke could be administered, if indeed any vestiges
of decency yet remained in the minx. But the little terrier
struggled spasmodically in his arms—the ungrateful brute! He
must save it from itself, then, just as he must save its mistress
from herself. Clamping it to his breast with iron muscles, he
toiled frenziedly forwards. Then the far, faint sound of a horn
came like elfin mocking laughter on the sultry air, and with a
sudden convulsion the animal wrested itself free, and Will was
left hopelessly pursuing, not the cart, but the dog. He had
indeed the pleasure of seeing the former slacken to receive the
latter, but the vehicle was wafted away again so smoothly that
to the poor perspiring pedestrian Methusalem appeared in his
original Mazeppa rôle.
The chase ran along wide horizons—great ploughed lands or
meadows with grazing cattle—the level broken only by ricks,
roofs, and trees, mainly witch-elms, with a few poplars. Sometimes
these elms clustered in groves, sometimes a few helped to
make the hedge-line; as often they rose solitary in arrogant
individualism. To the right was a delicious sense of the saltings
and of mewing sea-birds; and mysteriously, as in the heart of
the fields, red-brown barge sails or the tall, bare poles of vessels
could be seen upstanding. And once where the road mounted,
Will caught a glimpse of the Blackwater, and ships floating, and
the dim, blue shore beyond.
But at the top of this hill he was too breathed to continue.
He sat down, wiped his forehead, and surveyed the view; far
from soothed, however, by its simple restfulness. If only his
father had come to meet him, as his letter had requested, he
thought savagely, all this wouldn’t have happened!
Anyhow there was no need to follow the glaring high road any
longer. On the left he could see the clump of Steeples Wood,
and he knew that once he had cut through that, he could find
the swift field-path through Hoppits that would save miles of the
high road and not bring him out on it till the Silverlane Pump.
He strolled with a sense of relief towards the wood, but hardly
had its green groves closed refreshingly upon him when, reminding
himself he was a trespasser, he quickened his pace again, and
hurried through the oak plantations and over the wonderful
carpet of bluebells with but a slight eye to the sylvan beauty.
Even when he reached the field-path bounded by the ditch
and the dog-rose hedge, he did not relax his speed, having
bethought himself that the poor horse would surely be given
drink at the trough of the Silverlane Pump, and that there
would probably be a delay at “The Silverlane Arms,” even if he
should not have succeeded in heading the Carrier off altogether.
And from that point she would surely need his protection, so
lonely was the road till you sighted Long Bradmarsh with the
drainage windmills and the bridge. And the no less necessary
sermon could be combined with the protection.
He found the wheel of the village pump chained up. Evidently
the water was running scarce. It looked not unlike a gibbet,
this tall pump, and he could imagine a criminal dangling from
the spout. There was little water in the trough, and the water-butt
of the inn was almost equally dry; a wayside mudhole
haunted by geese represented a pool. He remembered these
arid villages in such strange juxtaposition with his own oozy
birthplace—was it here or at Kelcott that he had made a boyish
fortune, bringing water at a halfpenny a pint? His mother, he
recalled with a faint smile, had been against the business because
Jesus had said to the woman of Samaria “Give me to drink,”
though he had trumped her text with the injunction to the
Israelites: “Ye shall also buy water of them for money.” It
all made him super-conscious of thirst, and he went into the inn,
and ordering a pint of ale, inquired if the Carrier had passed by.
“Which way be you a-gooin’?” said the tapster. It irritated
him to be questioned, and he replied tartly that he was going
home. He gulped down his liquor and put his question to a
group of children playing around the pump. They scratched
their heads and gaped at him, and the youngest put shy, chubby
hands to its smeary face. “The white horse and the girl!” he
explained, and the shy child started screaming, and a woman
burst from a cottage door and dragged it within, glaring suspiciously
at the “furriner.”
A labourer riding a plough-horse barebacked, and leading
another, came from the Bradmarsh direction. “Has the Carrier
passed you?” he asked.
“D’ye want a lift?” was the reply.
He lost his temper. “Haven’t you got enough business o’
your own?”
“Not much,” said the labourer naïvely. “Ground be as ’ard
as the road. Curous, baint it, arter all that soakin’.”
He replied more civilly, glad his rudeness was misunderstood.
“Yes, it’s always either too little or too much.”
“And ye can’t sow unless ’tis none-or-both,” added the
philosophic ploughman, plodding on. “Gimme a followin’
toime!”
The rustic meant a season in which rain and sunshine came in
rapid alternation, but Will ruefully reflected that the “followin’
toime,” in the sense he was having it, was far from satisfactory.
But at that moment there was a cheerful bark, and that
inconsistent dog was curveting around him, its tall thumping
wildly against his trousers in an ecstasy of recognition. So he
was too late, he thought with a strange heart-sinking; knowing
its rearguard habit. He pushed it away with his foot. If the
beast thought he was going to carry it again, it was jolly well
mistaken. No more cart-chasing for him. His “following
time” was over. And as the creature persisted in gambolling
round his legs, he made a swish in the air with his stick to drive
it on its way, and it uttered a fearsome yell; it being part of
Nip’s slyness to cry before he was hurt. But for once Nip was
not a laggard, but an advance courier, and Fate brought
Methusalem round the corner at the exact instant of his yell.
“How dare you strike my dog?” It was an inauspicious
reunion. Jinny had checked Methusalem, and her grey eyes
were blazing down from their dark lashes; her face framed in
its bonnet glowed like a dark flower, and he was confusedly
aware that that lonely hamlet’s high-street was suddenly pullulating
with people—the tapster and gapers at the inn door, the
ploughman looking backwards, excited at last, the little children
mysteriously out again with their mother, and other mothers
and infants (in arms or at skirt) surging agitatedly from nowhere,
whether at Nip’s cry or Jinny’s. Even the pump seemed to
have spouted an old man, while an old lady arose, like an ancient
Venus, from the pond. And every eye, he felt, was stabbing at
the maltreator of Jinny’s animal; the cackle seemed a sinister
clamour as of vengeance mounting from that swarm of sympathizers.
“I didn’t strike him,” he answered sulkily. Clearly she had
not recognized him—a position not without its advantages.
Doubtless the raw youth of her childish memories was effectually
buried beneath this manly form, set off by the elegant London
suit, this well-barbered head, and the face that had exchanged
freckles for the stamp of experience. “As a matter of fact,” he
added, “I fed the brute at the inn.”
“Which brute?” retorted Jinny sharply. But at this moment
Nip, who had been calmly lapping the dregs of the pool, intervened
by leaping up to lick Will’s hand.
“I beg your pardon,” she murmured, coming to a standstill.
“Granted,” he said, not to be outdone in graciousness, and
beginning to enjoy the advantage her ignorance of his identity
gave him. “But that’s no proof I haven’t beaten him. You
remember the saying:
A woman, a dog, and a walnut-tree,
The more you beat them, the better they be.”
“That’s all nonsense,” said Jinny, bridling up again.
He changed the subject quickly. “Have you got a drumstick?”
“Gracious! Do you want to try?”
He laughed. “It’s for the drum at the show. Miss Flippance
thinks you didn’t deliver it.”
“Why, it was tied on the drum. The fool of a man must have
dropped it—if he hasn’t poked it inside the drum. Did you look
under the benches?”
“No. That’s it! I remember now seeing the man take the
drum inside by mistake. He must have dropped it on the
way back.”
“Don’t you think it would have been more sensible to look
before you leaped—especially such a long leap! And what a
pace you must have come in this heat!”
He flushed faintly. “I’m a good walker. I know the cuts.”
“Well, if you get back as quick as you came, there won’t be
much time lost.” She clucked up Methusalem. “Good afternoon—hope
you’ll find your stick, and that you’ll drum-in a
good house.”
What! She too thought him capable of being a drum-banger,
a minion of marionettes. Had women then no eye—no perception
of clothes—as well as no humour? The mob was melting
away under their amiable parley, but he now rallied it afresh:
“Stop!” he called desperately after Jinny. “Stop!”
But Nip’s joyous bark at the resumption of the journey
drowned all lesser remarks, and again the cart receded on the
horizon—an horizon he knew houseless and arid, no region for a
lonely, good-looking girl. Let poor pockmarked Polly Flippance
brave the wild, if female carriers there must be: not his Jinny.
No, he must reveal himself at the next stop, he must remonstrate,
protest.
But the trouble was that the thing would not stop, and that
there would be no stop now—he knew—for several miles. Perspiring,
panting, hallooing and waving his stick and utterly
oblivious of the scandalized street, he pursued at his swiftest, and
Methusalem being no serious competitor in the long run, Jinny
heard him at last, and looking back through the tilt over the
dwindled packages, saw the pitiful, gesturing figure, and to his
infinite relief the cart drew up.
“What have you lost now?” she called. “Your sandwich-boards?”
“I’m not going back to Miss Flippance,” he panted, “I’m
going Bradmarsh way.”
“Then why ever didn’t you say so?” she replied calmly.
“Jump up!”
Jump up? She asked a strange young man to jump up?
Then what else could she have done if he had said who he was—a
fact of which he had indeed been just about to make royal
proclamation.
“You take passengers?” he gasped. He remembered now
that Joey had told him the cart would take him, but then he had
had no idea that “her” was not the vehicle.
She was equally surprised: “Why else did you run after me?”
Run after her? He did not like the phrase. Girls ran after
men—girls of a sort—to some extent girls of every sort: that
was the doctrine in his set. And yet he had run after her—it
called for explanation. “I wasn’t running after you,” he said
slowly, “it was only that—that I couldn’t believe my eyes to
see you like that.”
“Like what?” She was frankly puzzled.
“Driving about alone in this God-forsaken part. It’s—”
scandalous, he was about to say, but before the glimmering fire
in her eyes he altered the word—“it’s dangerous.”
“Dangerous!” Her little laugh rippled out. “I thought
you said you knew these parts.”
“So I do—I’m an Essex man, even though I mayn’t look it,
having been half round the world.”
“Have you now? Well, it’s the big cities that are dangerous,
Gran’fer says.”
“Maybe he’s right,” he admitted, wincing a little before the
candid grey eyes. “But don’t you understand that a woman
carrier is—” again he toned down his word—“outlandish.”
Her amusement danced in her eyes. “Inlandish, I suppose
you mean.”
“Don’t laugh,” he said, forgetting that the unrevealed Will
had no right to that tone. “You know it’s an unwomanly
occupation.”
“Laughing?”
“You know what I mean. For one thing a woman can’t
know much about horses—and she oughtn’t to have to do with
’em anyhow—it’s not natural.”
“May she have to do with donkeys?” Jinny inquired
sweetly.
He frowned. “Chaff’s no good.”
“But I never give my horse any—do I, Methusalem dear?”
Such word-mockery was bewildering to his simpler brain. He
opened his mouth, but nothing came, and his vexation only
increased for finding no vent.
“May she have to do with pigs?” queried Jinny again.
“Pigs are at home,” he conceded.
“Not always,” she said demurely. “I meet lots on this very
road.”
“And you might meet worse than pigs on a lonely road like
this—you might meet men——”
“Like I’ve met one now.”
“Yes, but it happens to be me!” he said, again all but forgetting
her ignorance of his identity. “Usually it would be
dangerous.”
“Well, but wouldn’t it be just as dangerous for a male
carrier?”
“Not at all. He can fight.”
“And if he met a woman?” she said slyly.
“There’s no danger in a woman.”
“Then why are you running away from Miss Flippance?”
“Miss Flippance!” he cried in angry astonishment. “Who
says I’m running away from Miss Flippance?”
“Well, you’ve run from her to me. And if you say you
weren’t running after me, you must have been running away
from her.”
“Don’t you try to bamboozle me. I tell you I’ve been half
round the world, and nowhere have I seen a woman carrier.”
“If you’d ha’ stayed at home you would have,” said Jinny.
“So it seems. And in America there are those Bloomerites—come
over here, too, I hear, nowadays, the hussies. Want to
wear the breeches.”
“Do they?” inquired Jinny with genuine interest. “I’ve
often thought it would be more convenient for me jumping up
and down, and there would be yards of stuff less. Some of those
Chipstone ladies quite scavenge the streets with their long skirts,
padded out by all those petticoats, don’t you think?”
He grew almost as auburn as his hair: such secrets of the
toilette, babbled by a young girl he still thought good at heart,
outraged his sense of decorum.
“No, I don’t think!” he answered angrily.
“Well, try,” she suggested sweetly. “Put yourself into our
place.”
“It’s you putting yourselves into our place that’s the trouble,”
he retorted. “What will women be up to next, I wonder.”
Here it was Jinny’s turn to flare up. She had never—it has
been already remarked—thought of herself as up to anything,
rarely even thought of herself as a woman, least of all as a representative
of her sex. But challenged now to her face for the
first time, she felt she must hold the pass for all womanhood.
“We women will be up to whatever we please.”
“Not if you want to please the men.”
Jinny’s young face flashed fire and roses. “And who wants
to please the men?”
He laughed complacently. “I never met a woman who
didn’t.”
The girl’s fire died into cold contempt. “I don’t think you
know much about women.”
“Me? Why, I’ve knocked about since you were in pinafores—and
pelisses!”
“I shouldn’t be surprised, Mr. Drummer,” said Jinny with
judicial frigidity, “if you knew less about women than I know
about horses.”
“I’ve seen half the world, I tell you.”
She flicked up Methusalem. “But not the better half.”
He winced again. “Fiddlesticks!” was all he could find to
answer.
“Drumsticks!” rejoined Jinny gaily, and with a mocking
flourish of her horn, she receded afresh.
Something stronger than his will now shot him forward crying:
“I say, Jinny!” He meant by crying that old familiar name
to disclose himself, and then to have it out with her, side by side
on the driving-board.
She turned her head. “Do you want to jump on or don’t
you?” she called.
It was the last straw. Jinny—he had forgotten—-was not a
name privileged for the friend of her pelisse and pinafore days:
any male might use it, just as any wayside rough might abuse
its owner. “I don’t,” he shouted savagely. “I’ll never
patronize a woman carrier.”
“A dashing young lad from Buckingham!” She had started
singing, whether to herself or at him, he could not tell, and he
strode behind the cart almost as rapidly as Methusalem before
it, to find out whether she was still answering back.
But apparently she had forgotten him—that was the most
pungent repartee of all—and the gaiety of the chorus only added
salt to the smart:
“Still he’d sing fol de rol iddle ol,
 Still he’d sing fol de rol lay——”
The thin silver treble reminded him incongruously of her
Sunday-school singing, and the revival of that long-faded picture
of himself driving her home only emphasized the jarring present.
He turned furiously down Plashy Walk, where the rollick of the
chorus soon ceased to penetrate and the white fragrance of the
wonderful hawthorn avenue made a soothing passage-way. His
tongue felt acrid with anger, ale, and running, and Frog Farm,
with the faces of his parents, now began to loom more emotionally
before him, because of the tea as well as the tenderness awaiting
him. For neither of these luxuries was likely to be absent, even
if his letter—or his father—had gone astray. Let her protect
herself, this minx of a carrier, Time’s odd changeling for his
sober little Jinny. Serve her right if some horrid instrument of
fate should take down her pride!
By the time he had come through the mile of hawthorn, and
defied the Plashy Hall dog with his stick, she had passed out of
his thoughts, and his indignation against her had changed to
indignation against the impudent attempt—obvious from the
notice-boards—to deny him and the public this old-established
right-of-way. Things would not have got even thus far had he
remained in Little Bradmarsh, he was thinking, and he was
already brooding over a plan of campaign as he was climbing
over the stile back into the high road. And then his vaulting
leg remained suspended an instant in air in sheer astonishment.
Jinny was facing him from her perch of vantage, smiling sweetly
from her witching bonnet, her cart athwart the road, in fact he
could hardly step off the stile without treading on Methusalem’s
toes. Relaxing his motion, he sat down on the stile, staring
at her.
“Why, Will!” exclaimed Jinny, and there was now a strange
softness in her face and voice. “How stupid of me not to
recognize you when I’ve got your box all the time!”
His mind, still perturbed about the right-of-way, and bent
now upon home, could not adjust itself so suddenly to the new
situation. Again his mouth opened without issue. Her smile
faded.
“I’m Daniel Quarles’s granddaughter,” she said with a little
quaver. “Little Jinny of Blackwater Hall.”
“So you’ve remembered me at last!” His voice came out
harsh, though inwardly he was melted by this new sweetness.
“Then did you know me all the time?”
“Of course—the moment I clapped eyes on you.” He was not
consciously romanticizing.
“That’s what I’ve been thinking as I waited here for you. I’m
so glad. Because that shows you were only teasing me, saying
all those horrid things.” Then a new thought struck her to
self-mockery. “Of course—I’m getting silly—it wasn’t so
wonderful of you recognizing me, with the name of Daniel
Quarles on the cart.” And she laughed merrily. “Do you
know why I didn’t recognize you? It wasn’t only Miss Flippance
put me off, and that I couldn’t connect you with drums and
marionettes—it was you yourself that blocked the way.”
“I don’t understand.”
“The old you, I mean—I was thinking about him all the time
we were talking, and that funny new you wasn’t like him one
bit.”
“Thinking of me!” He was touched. . . . “Whatever made
you think of me?”
“Didn’t I just tell you I’ve got your box? And of course I
knew you were coming back. We’ve been expecting you for
days.”
“Oh, then mother did get my letter!” His latent ill-humour
flowed into the new channel.
“Of course.”
“Then why didn’t dad come to meet me?”
Her mouth twitched humorously at the corners with the
suspicion the letter was still unread, but she replied: “I suppose
because he’s old and hasn’t got a trap any more, and he knew
that Tuesday was my day. Jump up, I’m ever so late!”
He shook his head. “I can’t jump up.”
“Why, what’s the matter, Will?” Her voice was anxious
and tender. “Have you hurt your ankle, running?”
“No, no!” he said petulantly. “Didn’t you hear me say I’d
never patronize a woman carrier?”
She smiled in relief. “Yes—I heard you say it. But that
was the silly you.”
His face hardened. “Silly or sensible, I stick to my word.”
“Drumsticks!” she mocked again. “Jump up and tell me
all about your affair with Miss Flippance.”
“Don’t be saucy, Jinny. It don’t become you:”
For the life of him he could not accept her as grown up, much
less as an equal, though she sat on high, dominating the situation,
whip in hand and horn at girdle, spick and span and cool; while
he, astride the stile, was a forlorn figure, with dusty shoes and
hot, lowering look.
“It becomes me as much as silliness does you,” said Jinny.
“I don’t see the silliness.”
“Why, you can’t live a week at Frog Farm without patronizing
me. Who else is there? There isn’t hardly a trap to be had
even miles around. Why there was a young man I drove out to
Frog Farm last week, and a fine to-do he had getting home!”
It was not calculated to soothe him. “And what need had
you to drive a young man?”
“It was for Maria—your mother’s pig. She was ill; her
whole litter might have been lost.”
He frowned more darkly. Pigs, he had but just admitted,
might reasonably come into the feminine ambit: still, if girls did
get to know coarse facts, they might at least have the decency
not to talk about them. “And did he call you Jinny?” he
grunted.
“He didn’t call me Maria.”
“Well, traps or no traps,” he said sullenly, “you’ll get no
orders from me. I’ve fended for myself in the Canadian backwoods,
where there wasn’t even a woman to sew on buttons, and
I certainly don’t need one now.”
But she was still smiling. “Do you know the song of the
dashing young lad from Buckingham?”
“I know you do. But what’s that to do with it?”
She re-started the merry tune, but markedly altered the words:
“A dashing young lad from—Canada,
   Once a great wager did lay
 That he’d never use Jinny the Carrier,
   But—he gave her an order straightway!”
“No, he won’t.”
“Don’t interrupt. You’ve already given it.
But still he’d sing fol de rol iddle ol——”
“What order have I given you?”
“To carry your box, of course—
Still he’d sing fol de-rol lay——”
“But that was before I had the ghost of an idea——”
“Do join in the chorus:
Still he’d sing fol de rol iddle ol——”
“I’ll have my trunk at once!” he cried furiously, and sprang
off the stile.
“Fol de rol arilol lay!” she wound up with easy enjoyment.
“Give me my trunk,” he commanded again.
“What—on this lonely road—in this weather!”
“That’s my business!”
“No, it isn’t—it’s mine.” She touched up Methusalem and
turned his eager nose homewards.
Will ran round with the turning animal.
“Give me my trunk!” He was white with determination.
“And don’t you call that an order?” She cracked her great
whip.
He sprang to the tail-board, hanging on by one arm, and
clutched at the trunk with the other, dragging it out. But he
had forgotten to reckon with the faithful guardian. Nip,
excited as at a rabbit, sprang from the basket in which he had
been resting his four weary limbs and growled ominously, and
as the burglarious arm did not draw back, the terrier—O almost
human ingratitude!—sprang at it and made his beautiful white
teeth meet in its fleshy middle.
“You little beast!” Alarmed more for his finery than his
flesh, he snatched back the elegant London sleeve and dropped
off the cart, which soon disappeared down a grim and lonely
lane.
He examined the wound in his coat, and finding to his relief
that it could be neatly patched up, he stripped off the garment
and surveyed his abraded skin, tooth-marked and red-flecked;
Nip’s signature in blood. Then the horrible thought of hydrophobia—he
had witnessed a dreadful case in Montreal—popped
again into his mind: after all, it was as hot as July, and no
sane dog would have behaved so disgracefully! And then,
pricked up by the sound of the horn, which came vaunting and
taunting from the lane, he started running after the cart yet
once more: he must find out if the dog would drink. But even
the rumbling of the vehicle could no longer be heard, and he
was slackening hopelessly when he became aware how involuted
was this lane, and that by trespassing across a ploughed field he
could gain several furlongs. Bounding over the ditch with his
coat slung over his arm, and nearly tearing it afresh in breaking
through the blackberry hedge, he ran as recklessly as a fox-hunter
across the furrows, breaking out again like a footpad
when he heard Methusalem’s leisurely trot, and catching that
unreluctant animal by the beribboned headstall. Jinny manifested
no surprise.
“I thought you’d get over your silliness,” she said, smiling.
“Jump up then!”
“I’m not jumping up!” He was angrier and hotter than
ever. “I’ve come to give your dog a drink.”
“Eh? But we’ve passed ‘The Silverlane Arms.’ ”
“This is no joking matter. He must have water.”
“He doesn’t need any. Surely I can look after my own dog—that’s
not a man’s place, too, is it?”
“It’s not a question of that—but if he doesn’t drink, it may
be fatal.”
“Nonsense. A kind cottager offered him water only a mile
back—he didn’t want it. . . . What’s the matter? You’re
looking so strange. . . . Have you had a sunstroke?” The
alarm in her voice reflected the alarm in his face, and his alarm
was in turn augmented by hers. He had a weird vision of that
man in Montreal, thrown into convulsions by the sound of a
splash and trying to bite his attendants, and a ghastly memory
came to him of a Bradmarsh woman who had frizzled for her
foaming child the liver of the dog that had bitten it. “Suppose
your dog should be mad?” he asked, with white lips that already
felt frothy.
“Nip? Nonsense.”
“He bit me.”
“Oh, I’m so sorry. Where? Let me see.”
“I won’t.”
“But Nip never bites.”
“All the more suspicious. Try him with some water, please.”
“Where can I get water? Nip finds his own.”
“You mean to say you don’t carry water?”
“I’m not a water-carrier.”
“How can you laugh? It’s a question of life and death.
Surely there must be a pond somewhere.”
“You know there’s nothing hereabouts. Why, you used to
come to Kelcott to sell water at a halfpenny a pint. Don’t you
remember? You bought me a monkey-on-a-stick out of the
profits.”
“How you babble! Then I must go in suspense?”
“Drumsticks! Here, Nip!” The dog was in her lap in a
twinkling. She pulled off her driving-glove and thrust her
fingers into its mouth. “Bite, Nip, bite.”
Will felt his first conscious flash of romance in all that fagging
chase. It was like dying together.
But Nip’s teeth refused to close on his mistress’s fingers—instead
he growled ominously at Will.
“Bite, you naughty dog!” And she pressed his reluctant
teeth together.
“There!” She held down towards Will two fingers faintly
ridged in red and white. But instead of feeling a reassuring
sanity, an impulse he felt really mad streamed through his veins
to seize the little fingers in his strong hands and to pull her
down from the seat of the mighty, down towards the inner
breast pocket that held his bank-notes. But his stick and
his coat and Methusalem’s bridle, all of which he was holding
simultaneously, cluttered up his hands sufficiently to clog the
impulse.
“That proves nothing,” he said sulkily.
“And wasn’t he lapping at the pool after you struck him?”
“Ah, that’s true.” His face lit up.
“Then you did strike him?”
“Don’t tease. Yes, I’d forgotten, he lapped then, or rather I
scarcely noticed it.”
“I suppose you shut your eyes when going for him, just like
a bull does.”
“I didn’t go for him, I tell you. I just swished my stick.”
“Well, if you’d kept your eyes open, you’d have seen him
drinking and saved your fright.”
He was disappointed as well as irritated. “Then when you
let him bite you, you knew there was no danger.”
“There’s never any danger on these roads—didn’t I tell you
so? Why, there was more danger in that monkey you gave me,
for I sucked the paint off.”
“I don’t remember giving you any monkey.”
“I didn’t want a monkey, but you made me take it—like that
oath in the wagon. Perhaps you’ve forgotten that too.”
“I can remember giving you a kiss,” he jerked defiantly.
“That I can’t remember,” said Jinny quietly.
“Suppose you’ve had so many since.”
“Lots!” said Jinny. “Good-bye again, if you’re so silly.
Gee up, Methusalem!”
But he clung to the bridle and was dragged along, to Nip’s
shrilled agitation.
“Let go,” said Jinny. “Don’t be silly.”
“Not till I have my trunk.”
“That’s sillier still.”
“Give me my trunk.”
“I think you have gone mad, Will.”
“That’s not your affair, Miss Quarles, I want my trunk.”
“I was ordered to deliver it at Frog Farm.”
“And I order you to deliver it to me.”
“Let go.” She cracked her whip in his direction.
“You little spitfire! If you touch me with that whip I’ll
have an action against you—as well as against your dog.”
“Let go my horse then.”
“I’m within my legal rights, as any male carrier would know.
I demand my trunk.”
“And I demand my horse. Let go!”
“I won’t.” He was running along with it now, keeping pace
with the mystified Methusalem.
“Oh, Will!” she cried. “And you said that on a lonely road
I might meet a man.”
“Well—you have now!” he said viciously.
“Yes—the first in all my life to give me trouble.”
That hurt worse than any whip. He loosed the festive bridle,
staggering a little, and the cart rolled past him. Only what was
that little object in the road?
Ah, in the altercation she had forgotten to put on her glove
again after that dramatic offer of her fingers to the dog—it had
tumbled down. ’Twould pay her out to lose it, he thought
savagely. However, he thrust it into the inner waistcoat pocket
where his paper fortune reposed so comfortingly. But as again
he saw the tail-board with his now protruding box vanishing
round a corner, a blind rage began to possess him. Surely he was
not thus entirely to be thwarted and overridden. Surely, at
least, he would not endure her actual delivery of his box at Frog
Farm. No, he must head her off again, if only outside his own
gate. Across his border a woman carrier must in no circumstances
be countenanced. And once more the unfortunate Will
Flynt ploughed through the hedges and meadows, not always
remembering the prickly places; and finally chased by a bull
on which he had to turn several times with his coat and his
stick, just like a toreador; though, remembering what Jinny had
just said about the bull shutting its eyes, he dodged it at the
charging crises, and thus saved both coat and skin. But he was
forced to scramble ignominiously over a fence into the high
road, still a good mile from Bradmarsh Bridge, at the very
moment the cart came clattering up.
But if Jinny had observed the Spanish bull-fight she gave no
sign. What she said, as she reined in Methusalem, was much
more surprising.
“I’ve been thinking you were within your legal right, Will.
I’m sorry. A carrier must deliver goods as ordered. So if
you’re still silly——!”
If she had stopped before the final clause, he might have been
touched by the unexpected surrender. As it was, he only said
icily, “How much do I owe you?”
“Sixpence,” she said as frigidly, “unless you’d like a reduction
for my not taking it all the way.”
“No, thank you.” He passed the coin, grazing her warm
fingers.
“By the way, you didn’t happen to see my glove?” she said.
“Your glove?” he repeated. Why, indeed, should he fetch
and carry for her? Let her be punished for her negligence. He
moved towards his box.
“Oh, well—I suppose it’ll be there on Friday,” she said.
“I’m the only person who ever goes that cut.”
“Drumsticks aren’t the only things that are dropped,” he
observed maliciously.
“No,” she agreed simply. She did not even seem to remember
how she had trounced “that fool of a man.” No sense of humour
in the sex, he reflected again.
“Do hold the brute!” he cried, for Nip was again showing his
teeth in defence of the box.
“If you kept off a bull, you don’t need protection against a
terrier,” she replied, and to his further amazement there was a
note of admiration in her voice.
“The weaker the thing the harder it is to fight,” he rejoined
significantly. He had his back now to the cart, and he hoisted
his trunk upon it.
“You’re not going to carry it?” There was incredulity in
her voice, for it was a box that looked nearly as long as himself.
“Who else?” He shifted the box to his right shoulder,
which he had padded with his coat.
“I thought you’d go home and get a truck or something.”
“And leave it on the road?”
“It’s just as safe as my glove.”
“There’s no safety for either,” he said oracularly, “if a man
like me comes along.” And he swaggered forwards with his
huge load.
“Why, you’re as strong as the bull!” said Jinny.
“I am.” He was flattered.
“And as obstinate as a mule!”
He increased his pace.
“Good-bye, Will!”
He did not answer.
Methusalem caught him up. “Since you are going to Frog
Farm,” said the Carrier, “why not take your folks’ groceries too?
I don’t usually get ’em till Friday, but when I got your order to
go there to-day——!”
“Why should I do your jobs?”
“Just what I told you. You can’t live a week at Frog Farm
without me.”
“Give me the parcel.” His forehead was already beaded with
perspiration, but his left hand heroically held out his stick:
“Slide the string on this.”
She shook her head. “Still he’d sing fol de rol lay,” she
trilled, and in a minute he was hopelessly left behind. The road
had already begun the ascent towards Long Bradmarsh, but he
heard her goading Methusalem to greater efforts, as though in
fear lest he should repent under the burden of his obstinacy.
As soon as she was safely out of sight, Will, breathing heavily,
slackened his showy pace, and very soon lowered his load
altogether and sat down upon it, while he wiped his streaming
countenance. The physical relief was great. A lark was singing
overhead and his eyes followed it restfully till he couldn’t tell
whether the throb was singing or the song throbbing. He must
smoke his pipe by this wayside grass after all that scurrying and
squabbling. Fumbling for his matches, he felt the bulge of the
glove and softened still more. Anyhow he had been victorious
over the vixen, and he was resting on his laurels, so to speak.
Now that she realized he would never recognize her as a carrier,
he could afford to give her one of the Canadian fal-lals he
had bought at Moses & Son’s for his mother, and which now
reposed in the box arching beneath him. That would make her
think he had not forgotten her even in Canada, and anyhow it
would show her he bore no malice for the bite or even for her
bark. Surveying the landscape, he recognized that by going
on a little he would strike the turning to the bridge and
“The King of Prussia,” where he might possibly find a trap.
The hussy need never know he had broken down. But as he
sat there lazily smoking and evoking his boyhood and her part
therein, the best part of an hour sped glamorously, and suddenly
he saw red. Caleb Flynt, equally coatless, was hastening from
the Bradmarsh direction as fast as his aged limbs could carry him.
“Hullo, dad!” he cried, startled. “Same old shirt!”
Caleb grinned. “Keeps her colour, don’t she?”
“But why didn’t you come to meet me?” said Will, recalling
his grievance.
“Oi did—soon as Jinny come and told us she’d passed you
carrying your chest and you might want a hand. Is that the
hutch? Dash my buttons, you must ha’ growed up like Samson!
Fancy carryin’ that all the way from Chipstone in the strong
sun!”
understand that prices make themselves, and that what we get
with one hand we have to give away with the other. Have you
ever heard of the Income Tax now?”
“No,” admitted Jinny.
“Ha! You’d change your tune if you had to pay a shilling
on every pound you earned. But that’s merely the last straw
that breaks the camel’s back, for it isn’t only as a farmer I’m put
upon. But think of the Malt Tax! It’s simply a scandal.”
“Is it? I should have thought ’twas six shillings a week
would be the scandal.” Her eyes and cheeks blazed prettily,
and she was beginning to shelve the idea of consulting her
companion at the horse-market.
“I don’t say you’re altogether wrong,” conceded Farmer Gale,
admiring, despite himself, her fire and sparkle. “But it’s the
Government that’s responsible. There was a great old meeting
t’other day at Drury Lane Theatre in London. Two thousand
people, if a man. The Duke of Richmond he up and said by
Heaven we’ve got to have Protection, and we will have it. Oh,
it was a grand speech. I went up for it express. And we’ve
had a meeting of farmers down here, too, and we’re going to
wake up the country, we Essex chaps.”
“Are you?” said Jinny, secretly amused at this “furriner’s”
complacent identification of himself with her county.
“You wait! We’re going to come out with a Proclamation.”
“But that’s a Royal thing,” said Jinny.
“Not always: besides we shall end with God save the Queen.
Yes, that’s it: ‘Down with the Malt Tax and God save the
Queen!’ And the beginning: ‘To our worthy labourers,
greeting.’ I’ll draw that up soon as I get home.”
“I should offer ’em ten shillings a week,” said Jinny.
“You’re joking!”
“I’m dead earnest. A family can’t live under ten shillings a
week. Then they wouldn’t want to shoot your rabbits and steal
your turnips and cabbages.”
“Prices make themselves, I tell you. Folks can’t have more
than they’re worth. Why, my dad paid as much as thirteen
shillings a week to our old looker, Flynt, when he had his strength.
Yes, though nobody ever suspected he got more than twelve.”
“But besides his duties as bailiff he had to see after feeding
the stock night and morning, including Sundays.”
“That was why my father paid him the extra shilling. And you
can’t say I haven’t treated him generously over the farmhouse.”
“I wonder he could bring up such a large family so genteelly,”
mused Jinny at a tangent.
“The more the easier. A brat of four can scare the crows:
the only pity is that his boys wouldn’t stay on the land.”
“What was there to stay for? I think there ought to be a
law that nobody gets under ten shillings,” persisted Jinny.
“What a blessing we haven’t got women over us,” said the
farmer, smiling at a heresy too unreasonable for argument.
“Men Governments are bad enough, but women would drive us
to the workhouse.”
“And what about the Queen?” asked Jinny.
“Well, what about the Queen?” he repeated vaguely.
“Isn’t the Queen a woman?”
“The Queen a woman!” He was dazed. “But she doesn’t
really govern—not nowadays. It’s Lord John!”
“Well then, what about Queen Elizabeth?”
“Ah, that was some time back,” he said evasively.
“Yes, she put on the crown in 1558, November 17,” quoted
Jinny from that Spelling-Book.
“I didn’t know you were so well up in history,” he said
admiringly. “I reckon you’re ready at ciphering too?”
“How could I do my work without it?”
“Ah, that’s true. And a good hand at a pen, I suppose?”
“I can scratch what I want.”
“Ah!”
He fell silent.
“You don’t play the piano?” he asked after a pause.
“No,” said Jinny. “Only the horn.” And she blew gaily
upon it: whereupon to her surprise and satisfaction—for she
had forgotten him, and it was necessary to tie him up against
the sheep—Nip appeared, tearing from the rear. Farmer Gale
watched musingly the operation of confining him to his basket
by one of those pieces of hoop-borne rope that had excited the
speculation of Mr. Elijah Skindle.
“I suppose you could play a polka on it,” he remarked.
Jinny obliged with a few bars of the “Buy a Broom.”
“If you had a piano,” he observed with growing admiration,
“I expect you’d soon learn to play it on that.”
Jinny shook her head. “I shall never have the time. There’s
the goats, and the garden, and Gran’fer, and Methusalem——”
“Nearly all g’s,” laughed Farmer Gale, exhilarated by his
own erudition.
“And isn’t Methusalem a gee?” flashed Jinny, and exhilarated
him further by her prodigious wit.
They were both smiling broadly as, just outside the market,
they came upon Will leaning against a lime-tree, a pipe between
his teeth and a darkness palpable on his forehead despite its
“ginger” aureola.
Jinny’s smile died and her heart thumped. Instantaneously
she decided that as the farmer had seen them together at “The
Black Sheep,” to ignore Will absolutely would be to betray
their quarrel to the world.
“Fine morning!” she cried as the vehicles passed. Will
sullenly touched his hat.
He was amazed that the Cornish potentate should countenance
her presence, so incongruous amid this orgie of untempered
masculinity, this medley of unpetticoated humanity of every
rank and class, of which drovers twirling branches or leaning on
sticks formed the ground pattern: small farmers rubbing
shoulders with smart-gaitered gentry in frilled shirts; blue-aproned
butchers with scissors at breast jostling peasants in
grimy smock-frocks and squash hats or ruddy, whiskered old
squires and great grazier farmers in blue, gilt-buttoned coats,
white flap buff waistcoats, and white pot or broad-brimmed
hats; still more elegant town types in glossy, straight-brimmed
cylinders and double-breasted, green frock-coats galling the kibes
of bucolic, venerable-bearded ancients in fusty sleeved waistcoats
and greasy high-hats, who blew their noses with black fingers.
It was a fantasia of pipes and caps, of immaculate collars and
dirty scarves, of broadcloth cutaways and filthy Cardigan
jackets, of top-booted buckskins and corduroy trousers tied with
string below the knee. As Jinny and Farmer Gale alighted, and
mingled with this grotesque mob swirling around the pens in the
sunshine, Will’s heart was hot with resentment against the girl
who, while rejecting the counsel and co-operation of her old
friend in the great horse-deal, had brazenly accepted the guidance
of a bumptious “furriner.” How shamelessly she walked amid
that babel of moos, baas, grunts, shouts, and bell-ringing, as if
here was her natural place. Really, to see smoke puffing publicly
out of her mouth, as it had puffed privately out of that Polly’s,
would hardly be surprising now. And the men were looking
after her, there could be no doubt of that, appraising her as if
she, too, was in the market. He could not but feel a faint relief
that she was under substantial masculine escort, however
abhorred.
The market-place, along which our quite unconscious Jinny
was now making so indiscreet a tourney, was constructed outside
the town proper, bordered on two sides by lime-trees and open
to the sky save in the auction-room and bar, where walls and
roofing gave a grateful shade, though the company in either did
not contribute coolness. The cattle were shuffling about restlessly,
jostling, mounting. The store calves and bullocks lay in
pens; the fatted calves had already been sold: pathetic plumpnesses
about to be butchered. Butchers, indeed, were already
emerging from the auction-room leading struggling strap-muzzled
calves by head-ropes, and holding on—for extra precaution—to
their tails.
“Poor creatures!” said Jinny, with tears coming to her eyes.
“Yes, a poor lot!” assented Farmer Gale, and if Will could
have felt the flash of scorn that went through Jinny’s heart, he
would have scowled less. There was a store calf, stamped in
blue, so tiny that Jinny longed to mother it. Here again the
farmer blundered: he doubted if anybody would buy it; at
least it would be killed instanter to be mixed with pork for
sausages.
He was a widower, Jinny remembered, and the line in the
Spelling-Book defining that word floated suddenly before her
illumined mind: “Widower—One who has buried his wife.”
There had always seemed to her something superfluously sinister
in that definition—as if the husband had personally put his wife
out of the way, or at least made sure she was disposed of. Was
a man a widower whose wife had been burnt up, she had wondered
whimsically. Or if Miss Gentry had been married and gone to
sea and been duly drowned, would her husband have been free
to remarry? But for Farmer Gale at least, how pat was the
definition, she felt. He assuredly suggested the wilful widower:
this man without entrails of mercy, whether for the poor or for
beasts.
She moved away silently, trying to lose him, looking for the
horses. She passed pens of sheep, and dogs (only a few of these,
and tied), and cows with swollen, oozy udders. There was a
sheep nibbling at a fallen lime branch outside its pen, and another
shoving hard to displace him. Jinny picked it up and gave it
to this covetous creature, who sniffed and then turned away.
There seemed to be a sort of Spelling-Book moral in it. Before
the pigs (red-crossed and blue-marked) she found Master Peartree
in rapt contemplation.
“The pegs be lookin’ thrifty and prosperous,” he observed, in
response to her asking how he found himself. “They don’t need
no auctioneer’s gammon.”
“No pig does,” punned Jinny.
“Ah, here we are!” said a less welcome voice—Jinny maliciously
referred Farmer Gale’s “we” to his juxtaposition with
the pigs. The uneasy capping and ducking of the shepherd-cowman
before his master, and his moving off towards his own
animals, suggested that pigs were a private passion with Master
Peartree. But he had brought up the memory of the shearing-shed,
and with it the renewed thought of Will, and it was a
tenderer thought than for the potentate at her side. Will might
be stubborn and silly, but never, surely, would he deny that no
family should have less than ten shillings a week: she felt
relieved she had broken the ice between them, even though
“Fine morning” was only a little hole in it.
As if echoing her thoughts, “Fine morning!” said the pig-auctioneer
to Farmer Gale. It was a special mark of attention
from this gentlemanly-looking man, elevated on a massive stool,
who wore gaiters and a great gleaming signet-ring that showed
as he turned the pages of a written catalogue. This was kept by
elastic strings in a grand calf cover, though pigskin would have
seemed more in keeping. Two acolytes, standing on the ground,
scribbled in their lowliness. Buyers sat on the rim of the pens,
with their feet dangling over the pigs, and the pig-drovers
hovered near, in their long high aprons of coarse brown sacking.
Soon Farmer Gale became as fascinated as Master Peartree, for
the pigs did indeed look “thrifty and prosperous,” and as the
penful was on the point of falling to a low bid, he nipped in and
secured a bargain. While he was complacently cutting away
bristles, signing his acquisition with his scissors, Jinny stole
away, feeling he was safely penned.
Will had long since disappeared from her ken, but when she
came to the long roofed place, open at the side, where beribboned
and straw-plaited hacks and draught-horses were tied to their
staples, there he was, chained just as firmly by a sort of sentinel
stubbornness. It was as if he was saying “Through my body
first!” The thrill his proximity gave her was shot through with
a renewed resentment against this obviously undiminished opposition
of his. But she was resolved to meet him with banter
rather than with anger.
“You buying horses?” she said genially.
“No, I am not buying horses!” he answered roughly. “But
aren’t you ashamed to be here—the only one of your sex?”
“Surely not!” said Jinny. “Where’s your eyes?”
He looked round, wonderingly.
“Under your nose!” guided Jinny. “There, isn’t that a
mare? And I passed sows and ewes and heifers by the score.”
“And that’s what you class yourself with? And then you
deny you are lowering yourself!”
“I always lower myself when I get off my cart.”
“Well, you get up again! That’s the best advice I can give
you. Drive home!”
“And shirk my job!”
“I’ll do your job.”
“You! I thought you were not buying horses.”
“You know what I mean. How much does old Flippance
want to give?”
“Oh, he’s not so old,” she said evasively. She was scanning
the horses with troubled eye, perturbed even more than by her
own affairs by the thought of the innumerable diseases and
defects and doctorings which might be lurking beneath their
sheen of health and vigour. Her innocent faith undermined by
literature and Mr. Flippance’s experience, she had a cynical sense
of horsey hypocrisy, of whited, blacked, or browned sepulchres,
within which fearsome worms burrowed in their millions. She
would have gladly consulted Will, had he not been so tactlessly
intrusive. Even as it was, she murmured encouragingly:
“There doesn’t seem much choice to-day.” Indeed, the animals
were mostly huge shire horses with their heavily feathered fetlocks.
Of hackneys there were only two or three.
“I should take that Suffolk Punch,” advised Will, indicating
a chestnut. “He’ll have the strength to draw the caravan, and
doesn’t look so clumsy and hairy-legged as the others.”
“I like the star on his forehead,” said Jinny. “But I can’t
bear a cropped tail, it’s cruel. Besides, Mr. Flippance hasn’t got
a caravan.”
“Well, how does he carry all that truck I saw?”
“Oh, that goes in wagons with horses just hired from town
to town. They don’t even live in a caravan like Mr. Duke’s
got. No, but they have a trap that they drive over in, ahead, and
then Mr. Flippance uses the trap to look for a pitch to hire, or
to bring home naphtha for the lamps or timber for mending the
theatre—something always goes wrong, he says.”
“Then I’d have the Cleveland?”
“Which is the Cleveland?”
“That tall bay with black points and clean legs. I’ve hardly
ever seen one at an Essex fair, but they’re strong as plough-horses
and handsome as hackneys.”
“But don’t you think that couple there are handsomer?”
“The black—of course! They’re a pair of real carriage
horses. Splendid action, I reckon. But Mr. Flippance won’t
want anything so showy as that.”
“Just what a show does want,” laughed Jinny. “You see he
also rides about the town, blowing on the horn and scattering
handbills.”
“I didn’t understand that. And can he blow a horn as
well?”
“As well as who?”
“As me!” said Will boldly. “And when am I to have my
gloves?” He sought her hand in the press and it was not
withdrawn.
“When you go blowing it for Mr. Flippance in his next town,”
she laughed happily.
“Then I must choose the horse I blow behind,” he said with
an air of lightness. “What’s the most old Flippance will go
to?”
“Thirty pounds is his last word, I’m afraid.”
“Much too little. But we’ll see. Now I’ll take you back to
your cart.”
“What for?” Her hand unclasped. “I’ve got to buy the
horse, I must wait here.”
“But they’ll be taken in there.” He pointed to the cattle
auction-chamber. “And there’s no need for you to bid personally.”
“I shall enjoy bidding.”
“Among all those men? You won’t even get a look in.”
The chamber was indeed besieged by a seething crowd, some
standing on tiptoe, astrain to get their bids marked.
“I’ll borrow one of those pig-dealers’ stools,” she said.
“Do be serious, Jinny.”
“And do you suppose my work is a joke?”
“But you can’t squeeze in that crowd? Suppose we find
out the owner and get one of the black horses by private
treaty?”
“And pay the market fee? Not me! Besides, he’ll want a
top price and there’s more fun and chances in bidding. Oh look!
that poor Cleveland’s got himself all tangled up! Do help
him!”
It was not easy to release the animal which, having encoiled
its legs in the rope attached to its staple, was getting more and
more frightened as its own efforts lassoed it the tighter. Jinny’s
heart beat fast lest Will should get kicked, and still faster
at the nonchalance with which he accomplished his dangerous
task.
“Thank you,” she said sweetly, when the animal stood
shaking, but quiet.
“It’s not your horse.”
“But I asked you to do it.”
“Then you might do what I ask you?” he retorted.
She frowned. She did not like this tricky tit-for-tat. It was
unchivalrous. It undid his deed of derring-do.
“You must not interfere with my business,” she said severely,
and swept to the nearest door.
“Jinny! Where are you going?” He had followed her.
“To the bar!” she said solemnly, perceiving the nature of the
forbidden chamber. “Why can’t I have a drink and a smoke?
What will you take?”
He gasped, believing her serious. So female smoking even in
public was no impossible foreboding. To this buffet, blockaded
by laughing, swilling, tobacco-clouded masculinity, mitigated
only—if not indeed aggravated—by a barmaid, Jinny was
actually going to wriggle her way! And the buffet did not even
sell milk!
“You shan’t go,” he said in a low hoarse tone, clutching at
her arm. “By God, you shan’t!”
But he succeeded only in grasping her dangling horn, and, in
her dart forward, it was left in his hand. “I didn’t ask you to
‘take’ that!” she laughed back as she crossed the threshold. “I
meant, what’s your drink?”
“Jinny!” he breathed, his voice frozen.
“Mine’s ink!” she called out gaily, and the males, now aware
of her presence, vied with one another to pass the bottle and
pen on the counter to her, together with the little bowl of sand,
all of which she bore to the quiet side of the room, where a
protracted desk supplied facilities for notes and accounts. Reassured,
but still resentful, Will stood at the door, awkwardly
holding her horn with its bit of broken girdle, and watching her
protectively as she scribbled on a piece of paper, and blotted it
with the sand. Then coming back to him, she took away her
horn—not without a reproachful glance at the snapped cord—and
putting her folded paper into his hand instead, glided past
him and was lost in the hurly-burly.
Disconsolate, yet excited, he opened the note, and read this
wholly unexpected quatrain:
              Swearing
 
Of all the nauseous complicated crimes
That both infect and stigmatize the Times;
There’s none that can with impious Oaths compare,
Where Vice and Folly have an equal Share.
This rebuke, drawn from the endless thesaurus of “The Universal
Spelling-Book,” and not original even in spelling, Will
believed to be Jinny’s own composition, and as inspired as it
was, alas! deserved. Wonderful that Jinny could sit down in
all that turmoil, in that smoky, gin-laden atmosphere, and pour
out these pure bursts of song. Surely Martin Tupper, the mighty
bard of the day, whose renown had reached even Will’s illiterate
ears, could not better them. And what was he, Will, beside her,
he whose own claim to literature rested upon an imaginary
exposition of Daniel! Smarting with self-reproach, he deposited
the note where once her glove had rested—it should be a text of
warning henceforward.
But if she was thus marvellous, still more necessary was it to
withdraw her from these unfitting atmospheres, and he returned
more tenaciously than ever to his equine watch, like a picket in
a camp.
Meanwhile Jinny had blotted herself out in the crowd around
the sheep-auctioneer, who towered in the midst of his dirty-white
sea, yelling “All going at thirty-five shillings apiece!” or striding
from pen to pen across the bars, while the buyers ruddled their
lots with their mark, and the drovers cleared for him ever fresh
passages among the swirling sheep, and acolytes kept parallel to
him outside the fold with their ink-horns and notebooks.
But she had only fallen from the frying-pan into the oven, for
suddenly she became conscious that Farmer Gale was again at
her side.
“Got your horse yet?” he inquired, with his breeziest British
smile.
“Sale not on yet,” she answered coldly.
“Then come and see the bullocks sell.”
Jinny, pleading she must go to the horse sale-room, moved
away towards the congested chamber. He followed, smiling.
“Why, that is where they’re selling the bullocks now,” he
said.
Her brain was seeking for a further pretext, when she caught
sight of the sentinel Will frowning furiously in her direction. If
she slipped in now, further argument from him would be nipped
in the bud, and silently she followed the robustious widower
through the hole he bored into the seething mass.
The entry of a female attracted no general attention, for it was
impossible for the squeezed buyers to see more than the backs
and sides of their immediate neighbours, even if all eyes had not
been on the auctioneer and on the beasts which occupied the
central ring, in the brief moments of their glory.
He stood at a raised desk, this master of the revels, in his
shirt-sleeves, with a little stick for hammer: a clean-shaven man,
with the back of his long head almost straight, and further
lengthened and straightened by the continuation down it of the
central parting of his neatly combed hair; the face bulging
forward and into a massive mouth and chin. He was flanked by
two young bookkeepers, one spotty-faced and spectacled in a
Scotch cap and loud tweeds, and one bareheaded and demure;
and around him on the rising benches of an amphitheatre rose a
mass of masculinity surmounted by small boys. Drovers chevied
in the “lots”—stuck with paper numbers—through large
double wooden gates, and back—after their great moments in
the ring—to their pens, through a smaller folding gate. The beasts
did not always listen proudly to their praises: the more modest,
instead of showing off their beauties, preferred to nose restfully
about the straw of the floor, and had to be prodded into circular
activity by the sticks of drovers who, as the bullocks went
sullenly round, looked like a prose variety of picador in a toy
arena. And throughout fell the auctioneer’s patter, sometimes
suave and slow, but for the most part staccato and breathless.
“Who will say seventy shillings? Property of Mr. Purley of
Foxearth Farm. And a crown. You all know Foxearth Farm.
You all know the hurdle-maker. And his herds are even better
than his hurdles! Who makes level money? Going, going——”
“No, don’t you be going,” said Farmer Gale smilingly. For
the girl had begun to edge out. She felt herself uncomfortably
pressed. Why, it almost seemed as if Farmer Gale’s arm were
round her waist. Good heavens, it was! And what was more,
his body barred her movement outwards.
“Take away your arm,” she whispered fiercely.
“I’m protecting you from the crowd,” he whispered back.
“They’ll break your ribs in.”
“Take it away!” she hissed. But he feigned not to hear, and
his eye being now on the arena, not on her, she was too shy to
struggle and make a sensation. The horn in her hand also
impeded her efforts to extricate herself. Furious and flushing,
she was forced to stand there, while the auctioneer’s prosy patter
beat down on her brain in a maddening ceaseless pour: “Selling
to the highest bidder—no reserve. A big bullock. In your
hands. Start the bidding, please. To be sold without reserve,
I say. How much? Come on! Look at his fat! Thank you.
Seven pound, fifteen—nine pound, ten—a great big bullock.
I’m selling him without reserve. He is to be sold whatever he
fetches. Ten pound, two and six. Going! No, not gone yet!
Going——!”
“I must go!” repeated Jinny. “I must inspect the horses.”
“You’ll see them better in the ring here.”
“Let me go! I’ll never drive to chapel with you again!”
“Why not, Jinny?” He bent down with sudden passion, all
the cautious Cornishman’s long-wavering desires clenched by the
discovery of her high educational endowments and concreted by
actual contact with the desirable waist. “Why not go to chapel
together and be done with it, once for all?”
“Done with what?” she murmured, reddening.
“Separating. Let me keep off the crowd always.”
“Hush! They’ll hear you.”
“No, they won’t. What do you say?”
“Be quiet! I want to hear the bidding.”
“Shall we publish the banns?”
Jinny closed her lips obstinately.
“Won’t you speak? You know I can buy out half Little
Bradmarsh.”
In her silence the voice of the auctioneer possessed the
situation.
“The best heifer for the last—maiden heifer, beautiful quality.
Fourteen pound. Marvellous creature, marvellously cheap.
Won’t anybody start me?” The drover prodded the prodigy
up, and she trotted round dismally.
“Fifteen,” cried a squeaky voice.
“Fifteen,” echoed the auctioneer, cheering up. But his gloom
soon returned. For the bidding refused to advance. “Being
badly sold, this heifer,” he wailed.
“By crum, he’s right!” quoth the Cornishman, pricking up
his ears. “Sixteen pound!” he cried aloud, and was already
congratulating himself upon his bargain, when, like the voice of
doom, came the squeaky “Seventeen!”
Farmer Gale was piqued. “Eighteen,” he said surlily.
“Twenty!”
It was a staggering blow. But it only raised the farmer’s
blood. “Guineas!” he cried.
“Twenty-two pounds!” chirped the voice.
“Twenty-two pounds!” repeated the auctioneer insatiably.
Beads of perspiration and hesitation appeared on the farmer’s
brow. In his concentration on the problem his arm relaxed.
Jinny stepped aside, and men unconsciously made way for her.
“Guineas!” cried the farmer.
“Twenty-two guineas!” repeated the auctioneer. “A beautiful
maiden heifer—never had a calf. Going——”
But this time Jinny was really gone. She would not even risk
waiting outside to hear the result, but in generous gratitude at
her escape, she hoped he would at least secure the maiden heifer.
The sight of Will still at his post suggested to her with a little
qualm that he was not so wrong: these male environments were
not without their drawbacks.
“Those horses seem to fascinate you,” she said, with a little
tremor in her voice. Whether Will or the violence just done to
her was the cause of it, she did not quite know. But her mood
was melting and her eye the brighter for a soft moisture.
But how was Will to follow her vagaries and adventures?
“That’s my business,” he answered gruffly.
“I thought it was mine,” she laughed. She was quite prepared
now to make it a joint affair.
“You know my opinion on that,” he said icily.
“You haven’t changed it yet?” she bantered.
“Why, what should happen in these few minutes to make me
change it?”
“Things do happen in a few minutes,” she said mysteriously.
“Why, I might have come back and bought up the whole show.”
She waved her horn comprehensively over the horses.
“What rubbish you do talk!” he said impatiently.
“Do I?” She fired up. “There’s others think differently.”
“If they think differently, it’s because they think lightly of
you.”
“Lightly, indeed!”
“Yes—they do. To drag you into an indecent sale-room!”
“Indecent?” She flushed, wondering if Will had seen that
circumambient arm.
“It’s all indecent—all that talk about heifers. I don’t
wonder you blush.”
She laughed, relieved. “I’m blushing for you. You do talk
such rubbish!”
“There you go with your cheek!”
“It’s only what you just said to me.”
“I said it because you do talk rubbish.”
“And you talk rubbish in saying it.”
“Well, go to those who talk sense, Miss Boldero!” And he
pulled out his pipe and matches with a symbolic gesture.
“What an obstinate creature you are, Will!”
“Me obstinate! Why, ain’t it your obstinacy that keeps you
here, when I’m ready to do your job?”
“I told you I preferred to do my own jobs.” And with that
she went straight up to the black hackneys, and while Will
puffed volcanically, she learnedly examined their teeth through
tear-misted eyes that saw neither incisors nor age-marks. Then,
after carefully prodding their ribs and punching and poking them
about, as she had seen purchasers do with bullocks, she swept
haughtily towards the auction arena, but afraid of encountering
the farmer, she hovered uncertainly on the threshold, feeling like
a bundle of straw between two donkeys.
Gradually she realized, and with enhanced resentment, that
she was the donkey; that both these men had deceived her in
representing the cattle-arena as the selling-place for the horses.
By the crowd that began to accumulate round the horses, and to
blot out the patient sentinel, as the hour for their sale approached,
it became plain that they would be sold where they were tied,
and presently the motley crowd, swollen by many of the cattle-auctioneer’s
audience, thrilled with the coming of this heavy-jowled worthy,
who had not turned a hair of his neatly combed
chevelure.
The biddings were not brisk. To Jinny’s joy only the heavier
animals, the plough-horses and the cart-horses, seemed in demand;
the cobs and the ponies went for a song. The sable steeds she
had selected as the only suitable ones came late—most of the
animals had been released from their staples and led off by their
new masters. To her dismay the hackneys were put up as a
pair, and all her pride seemed falling into ruin. Fortunately, not
provoking a bid, they were then put up separately, and Jinny
set the ball rolling for the first with a brazen offer of ten pounds.
For a moment she thought gleefully that the horse was to be
hers at that—for nobody there seemed in quest or in need of
carriage horses—but under the auctioneer’s scoff a few bargain-hunters
soon raised it to twenty, and then to Jinny’s alarm—for
her margin was getting dangerously narrow—to twenty-four.
At twenty-five the bargain-hunters fell off, and a new voice
intervened—a husky voice that seemed to mean business, and
whose every counter-bid filled her with dismay. At its twenty-eight
pounds the auctioneer still upheld his stick with scorn and
incredulity. She was almost at her bids’ end. “Twenty-nine
pounds,” she cried crushingly. This time the voice seemed
indeed silenced. She fully expected the stick to fall. But at
the first “Going,” though there had been no sound, the auctioneer
cried cheerily, “Thirty pounds.” Evidently somebody else had
nodded or held up a finger. Inflamed by the fever of the
struggle, she was impelled to risk even her own earnings, if
Flippance would not go so far. “Thirty-one pounds,” she cried
ringingly. “Thirty-one pounds,” echoed the auctioneer with a
promising accent of finality. “Thirty-two pounds,” he added
instantly, and this silent competition was even more crushing
than the huskiest bid. It put out her flame of recklessness, and
her heart sank with the stick, as despite all the auctioneer’s
derisory deprecation, that wooden finger of fate fell finally at
this truly absurd figure.
Then the name of the unseen silent buyer transpired. “Mr.
William Flynt!” proclaimed a familiar voice. A blaze of
positive hatred ran through all Jinny’s being. The brute! The
obstinate pig! To come interfering with her daily work, with
her bread and butter! To ride his will roughshod over hers!
And not only roughrider, but coward, sneak, traitor! Had he
not wormed and wheedled out of her the limit of her commission
and thus romped in, an easy winner! And he would take his
purchase to Mr. Flippance, she supposed. Yes, he was already
paying in full—she saw him now, near one of the clerks, drawing
a pocket-book out of the region of his black heart; he was in a
hurry, he would hasten with the animal to Tony Flip. But not
so fast, O dashing young man from Canada! Flippance is a man
of honour, he will repudiate the purchase. And the second
hackney still remains. The biter is bit—the pit you have digged
shall engulf you.
But what was Jinny’s horror and indignation when this young
man from Canada, now shamelessly revealed, instead of going
off with his spoil to Mr. Flippance, remained and ran up the
second horse with his serpent’s tongue at still greater speed, as
now cocksure of her limit. This time in her fury she ventured
as far as thirty-five—it was useless. With a recklessness still
more magnificent he cried “Forty,” and with a chill at her
heart in curious contrast with the glow of hate at it, she felt
that all was over. Was it of any use bidding even for the few
mediocre animals still possible? Would not this brutal monopolist
buy up the whole bunch—even as she had, oddly enough,
hinted a few minutes before about doing? Yes, there was nothing
his masterful obstinacy would boggle at in its resolve to crush
her will. He still stood by the horse-enclosure in unrelaxed
vigilance. Before she could arrive at any decision, her mind
was still further unhinged by the simultaneous appearance of
Nip and the advent of pandemonium.
Whether it was Nip that had produced the pandemonium, or
the pandemonium that had liberated Nip, Jinny never knew. The
fact was, however, that Farmer Gale, waking to find himself
outbidden for the heifer and disappointed of his maiden, had
retreated fuming to his trap, and hearing Nip’s revolutionary
yaps for freedom in the adjacent cart, had loosed him out of
some vague instinct of malice—kindness he called it to himself,
so unacknowledged was his desire to thwart the will of the
creature’s mistress. A final kick administered to the retreating
jump—also apparently as a kindly encouragement to the freed
dog’s progress—had not proved conducive to the equilibrium of
an animal already deranged by a long-iterated grievance and an
unexpected freedom, and his helter-skelter pelt through the
market-place not unnaturally startled the nerves of not a few
fellow-quadrupeds, already shaken by the strange journeyings
and novel experiences of the day. But it was not until the
sheep were reached, that Nip’s passing became a public episode.
There had even before been numberless difficult scenes with the
sold lots; the effort to muster them for their new journeyings
had sufficiently taxed the lungs and tempers of men and sheep-dogs.
When Nip appeared, the normally stolid Master Peartree
was waving a giant red handkerchief and screaming wildly, while
demented-seeming drovers, formed into a half-ring, danced and
shrieked like savages at a religious service, and waved sticks
with a ritual air, and the sheep-dog leapt round and round,
chevying the flock in the desired direction. In this delicate
crisis, Nip’s rush of recognition at Master Peartree proved the
last straw. One super-terrified wether threw the flock into a
panic. The sheep rushed to and fro and everywhere (save where
the sticks and shrieks pointed); and going thus everywhere,
they went nowhere, jumping on and over one another’s backs
as in a game of leap-lamb. Some darted back into alien pens,
and the sheep-dog, itself distracted, leapt from back to back of
these, baying and menacing with feverish futility. It was like a
stormy sea of sheep, in which man was tossed about as in a
tempest. There were sheep standing on their hind legs as if
dancing, there were men clinging on to these legs or to tails or
to rumps, and pushing, pulling, and wrestling with them, but
never ceasing to yell and chevy. Finally a rescue party appeared
with a five-barred gate, which they moved this way and that,
striving to cut off at least one of the ways of escape. But this
only drove more sheep back into the wrong pens, where they
seemed hopelessly mixed up with lots still unsold. Jinny had
never imagined sheep such lively and individual lunatics. Now
the intruders were being dragged out by the wool of the head or
the rump, or half-carried, or wholly kicked; again the five-barred
gate was brought into play, this time to keep them away
from the pens, and then, wherever the eye turned, were these
tempestuous billows of sheep. They bounded, reared, wrestled,
danced, pranced, flew wildly at tangents: some escaped towards
the town, and everywhere men screamed, scurried, bellowed,
waved hands, or brandished sticks. Nip, his head equally lost,
seemed to be doing every one of these things at once, whether
ovine or human. And Jinny, in her anxiety to capture him, to
remove him, unseen, from the Witches’ Sabbath she feared he
had called into being, forgot all about the other possible, if
inferior, horses. By the time she had refastened Nip and
returned to the sale, the stick had fallen for the last bid. She
was just in time to see Will springing on one barebacked steed,
and leading his beribboned brother by a cord. And despite all
her anger and contempt, she could not avoid a thrill of admiration
for the grace of his poise and the fearlessness of his carriage.
And a dull aching pain began at her heart. She felt she wanted
something; she had missed getting something—and obscurely
she told herself it was the horses he was leading away. Yes, as
a Carrier she was a failure.
And then suddenly the jovial figure of the Showman panted
into view. His face was unshorn, unwashed even, although
abundantly irrigated with perspiration, and he wore a low-crowned
vast-brimmed hat and an unseasonable fur-lined cloak
reaching almost to his slippers and fastened at the neck by a
brass buckle. Although Jinny always had a soft place in her
maternal heart for Mr. Flippance, nobody could have been more
unwelcome at this moment of her professional humiliation. But
before she could confess her failure, Tony Flip gasped out: “A
horse! A horse! My kingdom not to have it!”
“How do you mean?”
“Am I too late? Have you bought it yet?”
“Not yet!” said Jinny.
“Thank God!” He grasped effusively at her hand, but
encountering the horn first, shook that instead, without apparently
noticing the difference. “Just as I woke up, it popped
into my nut that this was the morning of the cattle fair. Out
of bed I flew like from that bed in the Crystal Palace that chucks
you out by a spring, and though I mayn’t have beat the half-mile
record, I’m beat myself! Whew! Not a bad gag, that!”
And mopping his brow, he grinned through a grimy handkerchief.
“I thought you looked odd,” said Jinny, equally relieved.
“Yes, I know my collar’s a rag. But better sweat than debt,
eh?”
“It’s not your collar—it’s seeing you out of your dressing-gown
at this hour!”
“You’re a quiz, that’s what you are,” laughed Tony.
“Never mind! That cloak comes nigh it, and you’ve still
got your carpet slippers.”
“Have I? O Lord! I thought the road was feeling hard.
Is that a bar I see before me?”
“It is,” said Jinny severely. “But while you’re still sober,
perhaps you will tell me why you’ve changed your mind about
the horse?”
“Because I’ve done with marionettes. I’m going back to the
legitimate.”
Jinny was puzzled. “To your wife, do you mean? I thought
she was dead.”
Tony roared with laughter. “You little country mouse!
And yet you’re right. The legitimate is the missus I should
never have left—the drama with a big D. I don’t mean the
drama with swear words—ha, ha, ha! but the real live article.
You see, Duke and me, we’ve agreed to swop back.”
“What for?”
“What for? Why, that’s just the trouble. For a consideration,
says that son of a horse-leech. And I say that’s blood-sucking.
Good idea! Why shouldn’t you be arbitrator?”
The word, which was unfortunately absent from the Spelling-Book,
suggested nothing to her but being hanged, drawn, and
quartered, like a rebel whom Gran’fer had once seen executed.
But she was afraid of being again set down as a country mouse,
so she replied cautiously: “I haven’t the time!”
“Oh, I’ll pay you your time. Yes, you’d be the ideal arbitrator,”
cried Mr. Flippance, catching fire at his own idea. “To
begin with, you know nothing about it. So that’s settled, and
you shall drive me to Duke’s caravan this very morning.”
“Not if I have to wait for your drink.”
“The way you drive a man not to drink is awful,” he groaned.
“Never mind. I’ve got cool again. Talking to you is as good
as a drink. Guardian angel!” He squeezed her horn.
“You see,” he narrated, as they drove townwards, “Duke
turned up here with the Flippance Fit-Up on Saturday night, and
struck an awful frost.”
“So he told me,” said Jinny. “I met him yesterday when I
came out of chapel, and I told him what a roaring trade you
were doing.”
“My preserver! Then it’s to you I owe it he’s hankering for
his own show back again! Not that he could expect to do any
business in my own town, or indeed any other. He forgot that
while I, unseen, can be Duke, the public won’t look at him for
a moment as Flippance. He takes the name of Flippance in
vain—the public knows the difference between a barnstormer
and their own Tony. To say nothing of that mincing little
Duchess after my full-throated, full-bosomed Polly. Poor dear
Polly—pining away pulling strings!”
“Why, she told me,” said the astonished Jinny, “that she
wouldn’t go back on the stage for all the treasures of the Crystal
Palace.”
“Ah, that’s her unselfishness—bless her!—her own crystal
soul. She knows how the stage tries her pa’s nerves. But
haven’t I stood by her side as we jogged the figures and seen her
poor phiz working at the thought of being cut off from her public
like in a diving-bell? She takes things hard, does Polly, not
like the Duchess, who’s got no more temperament than a tinned
sardine. You’ve seen her, haven’t you?”
“If you mean Mrs. Duke, she was with him yesterday. A
pretty, blue-eyed woman, with golden hair.”
“Oh, is it golden this season? But have you seen her act, I
mean?”
“I’ve never seen a play at all!”
“Tut, tut, tut! Then you’ve never seen Me!”
“Oh—you seem to me a play all the time,” she said candidly.
He was not displeased. “Then you do have an idea what a
play is?”
“I’ve seen Punch and Judy—and the Christmas mummers.”
He laughed. “Well, if Polly was working Punch and Judy
from behind, there’d be more life and go in her than there is to
the Duchess when she’s on the stage playing Juliet. The public
won’t pay to see a china doll. But my Polly! I tell you that
standing with the strings in her hand, with nobody’s eye on her
but mine and her Maker’s, and in a space where there isn’t room
to swing a cat, I’ve seen that girl raging and shouting and tearing
about with the passion of the scene till I’ve had to wake up too,
and we’ve gone at it ding-dong, hammer and tongs. And with
three figures each to work, and voices to keep changing, it’s no
mean feat, I can tell you. Duke and his Duchess now, when
they worked the figures, used to just stand like stocks, saying
the words, no expression or movement, except in the marionettes.”
“But if the public sees only the marionettes——!” said Jinny.
Mr. Flippance shook his head. “There’s no art in cold blood.
Not that marionette art hasn’t got its own special beauties, and
I freely admit that in puppetry proper I’m not in it with Duke,
who was born into the business, and who cut and fitted the
figures himself. Lazy though you think me, how I’ve sweated
to get those things right! What an ungrateful swine the public
can be for one’s pearls!”
“What kind of pearls?” asked Jinny.
“Why, when a character takes up a glass of wine, for instance,
and drinks it.”
“Well, I shouldn’t applaud that,” laughed Jinny.
“There you are!” he said with gloomy triumph. “The
public can’t see the cleverness of it. But if you remember the
delicacy it takes to manipulate the figure from behind, to make
it clutch the glass just right, instead of pawing the air, to make
that glass come accurately to the mouth, you’ll see the countless
chances against perfection. Talk of the corkscrew equilibrist at
Astley’s! Why, Jinny, when that glass sets itself down again
without accident, there ought to be applause to make the welkin
ring. But not a hand, not a hand!”
“Well, but it can’t seem very wonderful from the front,” said
Jinny.
“It would if people had brains to think. For every joint in
the human body there’s a joint in Duke’s marionette, and for
every joint in Duke’s marionette there’s a separate string to
pull. Every art has its own ideal, and for a puppet to sit down
safely is a greater success than for a Kean to play Shylock.
Though, of course, all this must be Greek to you.”
“But when I’m thinking of the fun of Punch and Judy,” said
Jinny shrewdly, “I can’t think of the cleverness of the showman
pulling the strings—otherwise I should forget the figures weren’t
alive, nor the story real—the two things contradict one another.”
“By Jove! I think you’ve hit it,” said Mr. Flippance, more
gloomily than ever. “They take the standard of drama—not
of mechanical miracles. And that’s why they applaud most at
the easiest effects, just shouting and blood and thunder, and
that’s why I’m sick, I mean, why Polly is sick of the whole
business. Take our tight-rope dancer now. I don’t say she’s as
graceful as a live dancer at Richardson’s, or pirouettes like the
Cairo Contortionist of my young days at Vauxhall. But she’s
far more wonderful. A live tight-rope dancer can, after all, only
fall downwards if she makes a slip. But ours, instead of tumbling
down, might fly up like a balloon, or even just miss the tight-rope
and dance on nothing like you see a murderer at Newgate. But
the public take the standard of the ballet or the queens of the
tight-rope, and instead of giving us a hand for the cleverness in
the making and dressing of the puppet, and another hand for
the putting life into it, and a third hand for the dexterity of the
manipulation, there’s times when we get no more recognition
than if ’twas a monkey-on-a-stick. I tried to educate ’em by
letting ’em see the strings or the wires—I mustn’t tell an outsider
what they are exactly—I flooded my stage with light.
Duke, now, used to keep his scene particularly dark with the
fantoccini.”
“What’s fantokeeny?” asked Jinny, imitating his mispronunciation
as best she could.
“They’re the figures that are more mechanism than character—balancers,
pole-carriers, stilt-walkers, spiral ascensionists, and
this tight-rope dancer I’m telling you of. Duke’s idea was to keep
the mechanism dark.”
“That seems to me best,” said Jinny.
“I don’t agree,” said Mr. Flippance. “There’s the scenic
effects to consider. Darken your scene and you hide it.”
“But if you light it, you show up the way it’s done,” Jinny
urged.
“Unless you show ’em the way it’s done, how can they appreciate
the way you do it? But there, I’m done with it! Let
Duke have his pony. Polly shall tread the boards once more.”
“Does he want you to give him a pony then to change back?”
“That’s it, the son of a Shylock.”
“Then you will want a horse after all?”
“A pony—you little innocent—means twenty-five pounds. I
suppose, though, that’s about the value of a pony.”
“It depends who’s bidding against you,” said Jinny ruefully.
“Well, anyhow, that’s what the bloodsucker wants—the
twenty-five pounds he gave me he wants back again.”
“But if he gave it you, why isn’t it fair to give it back?”
“Ah! You’re beginning to arbitrate, are you? Well, then!
It isn’t fair because I get back the Flippance Fit-Up tarnished
and depreciated by the performances of that howling amateur
and his squeaking doll of a Duchess. Besides, I don’t want the
‘Fit-Up’ particularly, only my trade-mark back, the world-famous
word, Flippance, for I am going to stay the whole year
here in Chipstone—you see what lots of people there are on
market days—-Mother Gander’s buying a bigger hall for you
Peculiars—haven’t you heard?—and me and Charley have
worked it with her to sell me the old chapel. I’ll easily get it
mortgaged, licensed, knocked into shape, and enlarged—that
piece of ground between the gate and the doors is wasted at
present, and there’s an American capitalist keen to come in—I
met him just now riding a black horse and leading another—and
what better omen could man desire? The Flippance Palace I
shall call my theatre—suggests the Hyde Park success, d’ye see?
And when that Crystal show is over—it won’t run beyond
October—I’ll have the Queen’s elephant standing in my lobby!
Lord, it’ll draw all Essex! Chipstone’ll become the capital!”
These sudden pieces of information left Jinny gasping. The
old chapel thus whisked away from under her feet, and turned
into a gigantic Punch-and-Judy show sent her world reeling;
while Will, transformed into a theatre proprietor, seemed rapt
away to unimaginable heights—or depths. But she did not
quite believe it all.
“And what does Miss Flippance say?” she murmured.
“Polly? She’ll be off her nut with joy. Why, she’s such a
glutton for work, is that girl, that when we played The Mistletoe
Bough she used to play Lady Agnes in Act I and her spirit in
Act II (after she’s killed by being shut up in the box, you
know), and actually double the part with that of her maid, Maud,
who has two quick changes from jacket and petticoat to tunic
and trunks, and back again to bodice and skirt, not to mention
slipping to and fro ’twixt spirit and flesh. She’s pining away to
a spirit herself, poor dear, for lack of her real work. Only we
mustn’t break it to her before the deed is done—or rather signed.
The poor girl would insist on sacrificing herself. But after all
I’ve saved thirty pounds—you realize I won’t need a horse now—so
even if I pay him twenty-five, I make a fiver. Not a bad
morning’s work, eh, my dear? We’ll get a good stock company
and give ’em everything from the Bard to burletta, and I’ve got
some lovely ideas for taking plays out of Mr. Dickens’s novels.
Oh, we’ll wake up the old place. Charley knows some local girls
that would come in splendidly for ballets and choruses, and
there’s a wonderful scene-painter, too, down here—a chap I
knew at the ‘Eagle’ in London—he’s lost his job and come
down to his folks to get cured—his hand shakes a bit still, but
he’s a marvel, I promise you, the days he’s not sewn up.”
Accepting this synonym for intoxication as referring to the
medical operations upon the unfortunate artist, Jinny received
the statement with an admiring commiseration.
“And haven’t you got a friend, a wonderful expert in costumes?”
Tony rattled on.
“Me?” she murmured, puzzled.
“A sort of bearded lady from a French convent, a cranky old
Catholic who talks with angels, but is a dab all the same at dressmaking——!”
“You don’t mean Miss Gentry?”
“That’s the name. We’ll appoint her wardrobe mistress.”
Never had Jinny known him so happy and gaseous—and, paradoxically
enough, the more he poured out, the more inflated
he got!
“Miss Gentry’ll never enter a theatre,” said Jinny assuredly.
“We shall see. Wardrobe Mistress to the Flippance Palace,
Chipstone. Think how that will improve her billheads! And
there’s you, too! Why should you waste a first-class stage
presence on carrying? You carry yourself too well for that,
eh? Ha, ha, ha! A thinking part, perhaps, to begin with, but
with your good speaking voice——”
Before Jinny had encountered the full shock of this new proposition,
Mr. Flippance broke off and besought her frenziedly to
drive down a side street. As she obeyed, she realized that they
had just escaped Polly—though a Polly hardly recognizable in
that houri in white, creamily jacketed, bonneted, gloved, and,
above all, veiled, whom only her massive tread betrayed as
charmless.
“You see,” explained Polly’s pa, “it doesn’t do to argue with
women you’re fond of: you’ve just got to do what’s best for ’em.
Duke now, he’s very weak with women: ’twixt you and I, he
only got my Fit-Up because the Duchess, tired of working in the
dark and of blushing unseen, wanted to show off what you call
her blue eyes and golden hair. She tried pulling his strings—see?—and
he, having no backbone, jigged about at her pleasure.
But now, to my thinking, Duke’s found out what a fool she’s
made of him and of herself, too. For, of course, she’s mucked
up his business. Polly mayn’t be a Venus, but she’s stunning in
her make-ups—I assure you such a great artist is that woman,
that seeing her standing in the wings at the first dress rehearsal,
I’ve more than once fallen in love with her myself—till, of
course, she opened her mouth. Yes, Polly can always have blue
eyes and golden hair, but the Duchess will never have talent if
she rehearses till doomsday.”
“Then is Mr. Duke satisfied to go back to the illegitimate?”
asked Jinny.
He laughed at the word. “To the marionettes? That’s
what Duke wants the twenty-five pounds for,” he answered.
“He’s lost heavily, and he’ll be able to show her a quid pro quo—or
rather twenty-five of ’em—ha, ha, ha! All the same, we’d
better not talk business if the Duchess happens to be at home.
She may have her hand too tight on his strings.”
“But what shall we do if she’s in?”
“I shall only say I’ve looked in to congratulate her on her
successes!”
“Oh!” Jinny was seriously shocked, and Mr. Flippance,
realizing that her conscience was as “country” as her vocabulary,
had the shrewdness to say he was only joking. “Besides,” he
added, “she’s sure not to be at home in the morning.”
“Why not?”
“Because she won’t have her hair on.”
“But how could she go out then without it?”
Tony made as if to pinch her cheek, as if nothing else could
adequately express his acute sense of her simplicity, but she
guarded deftly with the horn; rapping him, indeed, on the
knuckles with it.
“Why, Jinny, you hurt me,” he said ruefully.
“Well, remember I’m not a marionette.”
“You’re certainly not a woman of the world. The Duchess
wouldn’t let us in, I mean, but that’s just what we want, provided
we can get Duke to exit.”
In another minute or two she drove him up to the back of
“The Learned Pig,” and alighting, they picked their way
through the undulating and muddy enclosure, grass-grown, and
strewn with logs, where the caravan was stationed. There was
really a pig there (duly styed in his very dirty academy), besides
pecking poultry and pathetic rabbit-hutches agleam with eager
sniffing noses, and a flutter of washing, and two shabby traps,
holding up their shafts like beggars’ arms. But the caravan
itself illumined the untidy space with its gay green paint, its
high yellow wheels, its spick-and-span air, culminating in the
lace curtain of its tiny arched window. Mr. Flippance dragged
his slippers up the step-ladder, and Jinny, having by this time
gathered what an arbitrator was, followed in his wake, prepared
to undertake this or any other job.
But the Duchess did let them in—more, she opened the door
herself, looking indeed too lovely for anything but a doll, and
suggesting by her rising and falling eyelids, her smiling lips, and
her mobile hands that she was equipped with all the most
expensive devices.
Duke, habited in an old-fashioned blue coat with brass buttons,
was discovered poring at a desk over a long, narrow account
book: he was an elderly and melancholy young man, with
bristly black-and-white hair and small pig-eyes set close together.
The stamp of aspiration and defeat was set pathetically upon the
sallow face he turned over his shoulder to his visitors.
Jinny was not edified by Mr. Flippance’s pretence that she—Jinny—was
the sole ground for the visit. She had, he said,
been driving him home from the market, where he had gone to
dispose of a horse, and he had taken the liberty of bringing her
to see their “wonderful” caravan, finding, to his amazement,
that she had never been inside. For once the stock Essex
epithet was justified—it was indeed a “wonderful” caravan,
and the interior so took up her attention that for some time she
failed to follow the conversation, though she had a dim uneasy
sense that it continued—as it began—with scant regard to the
ethics of the Spelling-Book. The gay paint and the neat lace
curtains had prepared her for an elegance, and even an airiness,
that were not to be found within the caravan. But little else
seemed lacking. For into this cramped wheeled chamber,
looking scarce larger than her own cart, and certainly not so
large as Commander Dap’s cabin in the Watch Vessel, was
packed not only a complete cottage with its parlour, living-room,
bedroom, scullery, and kitchen, but the mantelpieces and chests
of drawers were as crowded with china dogs and shepherdesses
as Blackwater Hall itself, besides a wealth of pictures, objects
of art, posters, and inhabited birdcages, to which Daniel Quarles’s
domain could lay no claim. Not that there was really more
than one undivided space, or that you could tell where one room
ended and the other began. Nevertheless, all the different
sections were clearly visible, though a square yard here or there
did double or treble service, forming part of this or that room
according as you looked at it. Most clearly marked, of course,
was the bedroom, consisting of a raised, neatly counterpaned bed,
like an upper berth in a ship, and a chest of drawers topped with
ornaments, though the kitchen with its grate and oven and
flap-table ran it close, in every sense of the phrase. Amid these
poky surroundings, the Duchess’s blue eyes and golden hair
shone so sunnily and veraciously—taken unawares as she seemed—that
Jinny, ignorant she was expecting a visitor, felt that Mr.
Flippance was as unjust of judgment as he was loose of statement.
But an interior so foreign to her experience affected her with
all the pleasurable interest of drama, apart from the comedy of
which she felt it to be the setting, as, awaking again to the
conversation, she heard the two males still keeping it carefully
away from the negotiation pending between them, and evidently
hard exercised—despite gin from an improbable corner cupboard—to
keep the ball of nothingness rolling. Painful silences fell,
which a linnet and a goldfinch mule strove loyally to fill, but
which remained so awkward that she herself was constrained to
enter into the conspiracy, though only by way of genuine admiration.
Admiration of the caravan—a ready-made thing that went
with Duke—was by no means, however, the admiration the
Duchess wanted, and as she failed to extract it from poor Mr.
Flippance, fidgeting under Jinny’s Puritan eye, she fell back on
a tribute of her own to herself, recounting tediously the triumphs of
her tour, and calling on her partner for corroboration, which he
supplied in joyless monosyllables.
All Flippance’s interjections with a view to stem the stream
and divert the conversation to a pretext for Duke’s exit with
him were like straws tossed before a torrent. But presently
there came relief—though the plot thickened, Jinny felt. There
was a sound of footsteps on the ladder, and, “Ah, there’s Polly!”
the monologist broke off.
If Jinny was already steeped in a sense of the dramatic, if,
stimulated by the novel setting, she had begun to feel that in
such cross-currents and mutual deceptions must lie the substance
of that unknown article of commerce these people lived by—a
play—how strongly was this intuition confirmed and this sense
enhanced when Mr. Flippance, whispering in apparent facetiousness,
“I’m in my slippers—she’ll rag me,” kicked them off under
a chair, slid back mahogany panels below the bed, disclosing
a lower berth, and tumbled in, with his finger roguishly on his
lips, closing the panels from within!
“The Mistletoe Bough!” he sibilated. So there it was! They
were actually imitating a play before her very eyes. Duke and
the Duchess, grinning, drew the panels tighter. The theatre was
so in their blood, Jinny felt, that these things came as natural
to them as carrying to her.
It was thus that Jinny saw her first farce—unless the high
tragedy of Punch and Judy be degraded by that name.
Polly, it soon transpired, was come to the midday dinner with
her friend, and the dinner itself was coming in presently from
“The Learned Pig.” The real purpose of the invitation was, it
transpired equally, that Polly might explain to the Duchess the
reading of a part alleged to be confused in the manuscript
acquired with the Flippance Fit-Up: she was obviously fishing
for tips. While these things were transpiring, poor Flippance in
his fur was perspiring. Gradually Jinny saw a rift appearing in the
bed-panels and widening to a cautious chasm of a few inches. It
made her feel choky herself, especially as the caravan’s little
window was closed. She signed apprehensively to Mr. Duke,
who, however, was already revolving feverishly how to clear the
stage for himself and his fellow-negotiator. And presently he
broke into the feminine dialogue with, “I’m sure, dearest, Polly
wouldn’t mind acting that bit for you. But there ain’t room for
Polly’s genius here—she’d be breaking up the happy home!
Hadn’t you better go into the inn-parlour, Bianca? There’ll be
nobody there yet.”
The Duchess might have lacked talent, but she had not played
in farces without learning how to behave in them: so without
even needing a wink from her spouse, she made a kindly exit
behind Polly, not, however, without turning back a grinning
doll’s head at Mr. Flippance’s beaded countenance emerging
gaspingly from his berth. But Jinny, who had already witnessed
comedy and farce, was now more conscious of the tragedy of the
situation than of its humours, as she saw the Duchess tripping
down the ladder, with silken stockings revealed by the raised
skirt. It seemed to Jinny that the poor lady was tripping thus
blithely to her dark doom, behind the scenes of the puppet show;
that her blue eyes and golden hair had flaunted their last upon
the stage. And the irony of her grinning exit was accented by
the manuscript in her hand: she was going off to study a part
she would nevermore play. It all gave Jinny a sense of the
Duchess being herself a puppet, with an ironic fate pulling the
strings, and she was frightened by a thought hitherto beyond
the reach of her soul; by a dim feeling that perhaps she too—and
everybody else—was similarly mocked. Who was perpetually
jerking her towards that young man, and then jerking
her back? What force was always putting into her mouth
words of fleer and flout, and pulling away the hand she yearned
to lay in his?
“Whew!” exclaimed Mr. Anthony Flippance, as Jinny shut
the door safely on the Duchess—for that lady never shut doors,
partly because the process interfered with the sweep of one’s
exit, partly because what concerned a scene from which she was
absent never entered her golden head.
“Whew!” repeated Mr. Flippance, scrambling out. “I know
now what Lady Agnes felt like. ‘Help, Lovel!—Father, help!—I
faint—I die—Oh! Oh!’ But I’m disappointed in Polly,”
he added, diving under a chair. “Fancy being all her life on
the stage, and not espying these slippers!” He dug his feet
into them.
“There’s no time for joking,” said Duke anxiously, as he
tugged open the drawer of a desk in his “parlour.” “I suppose
Jinny is in the know?”
“Jinny’s come as arbitrator!”
“What!” Duke wheeled round, his hair still more on end.
“Get on with your mystery-desk. It stands to reason a
runaway financial imagination like yours needs a brake.”
“Ain’t you brake enough?” Mr. Duke’s tone was bitter.
“And you want me to be broke!” retorted Tony. “I give
you my beautiful marionettes, life-sized and life-painted, all
carved by the best maker——”
“Oh, I know all about that!” interrupted Duke impatiently.
“Well, you’re not going to deny your own skill, I hope?”
Duke glared impotently with his little pig-eyes.
“And with the costliest costumes,” Tony went on blandly.
“And all these puppets moreover with the latest mechanical
contrivances, regardless of expense——”
“And don’t I give you the finest goodwill in East Anglia,”
burst in Mr. Duke, “the Flippance Fit-Up with all its plays,
prestige, and unique takings?”
“One thing at a time, old cock. Packed into a box that itself
opens out and forms part of the stage, combining portability of
props with——”
“Do dry up!” cried the maddened Duke. “If you’re not
quick, Bianca will be back.”
“What’s that to me? To cut it short, I give you the finest
marionette show in the world, with scenery, sky-borders, and
plays complete, and an old-established reputation, a show that
has played before the crowned heads of Europe, America, and
Australia, and, like the workhouse boy in Mr. Dickens’s book,
you ask for more. What say you, Jinny? Thinkest thou the
Duke should have more?”
“We all want more,” said Jinny. “Air! Mayn’t I open the
window?”
“Oh, excuse me.” Mr. Duke, evidently trained by his big
doll, rushed to do it. “But haven’t I lost enough without losing
my twenty-five pounds too?”
He turned back to his desk, and extricating from its remoter
recesses another large narrow fat account book—the twin of that
he had been poring over—held it up theatrically. “Here’s my
marionette accounts for sixteen years—look through ’em and see
if you can find any single week—ay, even the week of King
William’s funeral—as low as the best of the weeks since I touched
your wretched show.”
“My wretched show!” Mr. Flippance lost his blandness.
“Why, if that’s the case, it’s you that have depreciated it. You
ought to pay me compensation.”
But Duke had dramatically dumped the book down side by
side with its twin. “Look on this picture and on that!” he
said. “Duke’s Marionettes, week ending March 10th, 1849,
Colchester. Total, £23 18s. 10d. Flippance Fit-Up, Colchester
Corn Exchange, week ending March 8th, 1851. Monday.
Eleven shillings. There’s an opening! Tuesday——”
“Oh, come to the d——d total!” said Tony impatiently.
“There ain’t any total,” said Duke crushingly. “Tuesday,
sixteen shillings and sixpence.”
“Always rising, you see!” said Tony.
“Wednesday,” Duke went on implacably, “nine shillings and
fourpence——”
“Why, how do you get fourpence?” interrupted Tony
severely. “You haven’t been letting down the prices, I hope.”
“That’s noted at the side. See!” said the careful Duke. “A
swindler passed off a groat as a tanner. Thursday, Eight and
sixpence—imagine the Colchester Corn Exchange with eight and
sixpence! Friday. Nine shillings——”
“Rising again, you see,” chirruped Tony.
“Saturday. One pound thirteen and six.”
“There you are! That pulls you up.”
“Saturday evening,” concluded Duke. “Two pounds eight.”
“And then he grumbles!” Mr. Flippance raised his great
ringed hands towards Jinny.
“Total, six pounds five and tenpence!”
“And isn’t that enough to live on?” cried Tony. “Only two
in family and a little bird or so! And if your box-office man had
been smart enough to tell a groat from a tester, you’d have had
six guineas!”
“He wasn’t such a fool,” said Duke dryly, “for on another
night it’s noted that a half-sovereign was passed off on him for
sixpence.”
“And then you outrage Providence by complaining of the
takings,” said Tony.
“Rent of Corn Exchange,” continued Duke doggedly, “three
guineas. Salaries (to company, including check-taker), four
pounds eight. Lighting, a pound. Advertising (including bill-poster),
three pounds ten——”
“But, my dear chap, what extravagance! No wonder——”
“Travelling expenses (company and scenery, excluding caravan),
eighteen and ninepence. Drinks to Pressmen—one and
sixpence——”
“Oh, not enough! No wonder——!”
“Net deficit, seven pounds sixteen and threepence, plus the
salary of Bianca and me!”
“What! Why, you said salary of company, four pounds
eight!”
“You don’t suppose I included ourselves with the check-taker!”
“You didn’t? Oh, my dear fellow,” said Tony sympathetically,
“no wonder you’re down in the mouth. A wise manager
always pays his salary before any other expense; then he’s always
sure of a stand-by!”
“It isn’t the money that’s the worst,” Duke explained. “It’s
the dreadful loneliness.”
“Why didn’t you stuff the house with paper and put up ‘Free
List Absolutely Suspended’?”
“Easier said than done in a place where you don’t know a
soul. Why, Bianca had a Benefit Night, and how many do you
think were in the stalls? Two women and a boy.”
“I’ve known only the theatre cat——” began Tony cheerfully.
“And the boy went to sleep!”
“Wasn’t it his bedtime? But I will say it’s not entirely the
fault of your acting. I’ve noticed ever since that Crystal Palace
loomed on the horizon, it’s unsettled the public within at least
fifty miles from Hyde Park. I was talking to a showman who
told me that in March and April this year business fell off everywhere—there
was no interest in giants, dwarfs, fat men, pig-faced
ladies, and even jugglers, animal magnetizers, lion-tamers, performing
elephants, ventriloquists, prestidigitators, and professors
of necromancy. Didn’t you hear of the fate of poor Wishbone, the
conjurer, at Chelmsford Fair? Not even a kid dropped into his
booth, so he went out to perform outside, but before he could
‘hey, presto!’ the purse back to the owner, the peeler copped
him. The magistrate wouldn’t listen to his patter, and he can’t
tap himself out of quod either, poor chap. Besides, we all
remember the awful weather in March, yes and up to the very
opening of the Crystal Palace—rain, rain, rain.”
“Well, take the March of 1849,” said Duke, turning back his
oblong pages, “and don’t forget people’ll sit in Assembly Rooms
or a Corn Exchange when they won’t risk a draughty tent. Now
look at the weather that year—when I pulled my own strings.
Tuesday, W.S.—that is, wet, snow. Wednesday, R.N. (rough
night). Thursday, S.H.T. (storm, hail, and thunder). Saturday,
W.T. (wind, tilt OFF!). Come now, you could hardly have a
worse week, could you? Everything except B.F.1 or B.F.2
(black fog or big funeral). Yet see, my takings for that week
were——”
Tony flipped away the book with his jewelled hand. “What
you’ve got to compare with your Colchester week,” he said, “is
not your marionette week in March ’49, but my Fit-Up week for
that date.”
“I don’t see that.”
“It stands to reason.”
They debated the point warmly: finally Tony referred it to
Jinny: that was what she was there for, he recalled.
“I certainly think,” arbitrated the little Carrier, “that we
ought to see what Mr. Flippance’s live theatre could do in the
same weather.”
“Oh, very well,” acquiesced Duke sulkily. “And what did
you do that week?”
“Heavens, man, how on earth can I remember?”
“But haven’t you got it written down?”
“What do you take me for?” asked Tony. “A tradesman?
A bookkeeper? Unless Polly——”
“You told me the other Christmas that you averaged twenty-five,”
said Duke bitterly, “and I paid you one week’s takings
by way of douceur.”
“Well, then you do know my weekly takings,” said Tony
loftily.
“I can’t stay here for ever,” put in Jinny. “I’ve got my
work.”
“I’m paying you, ain’t I?” Tony rebuked her.
“But not giving me work.” She assumed a judicial air. “Do
you, Mr. Flippance, maintain that your theatre is a more valuable
concern than Mr. Duke’s marionettes?”
“Of course I do.”
“Then,” said the young Solomon in petticoats, “surely if you
get it back, you ought to pay him the difference in value.”
“Bravo! Bravo!” Mr. Duke’s little pig-eyes gleamed.
“A sensible girl!”
“Oh, Jinny!” groaned Mr. Flippance: “To desert your old
pal!”
“And do you, Mr. Duke,” went on Jinny imperturbably,
“maintain that your marionettes are a better property than the
Flippance Fit-Up?”
“Certainly not,” said Mr. Duke, not to be caught.
“The marionettes are a worse property then?” she asked.
Duke banged his book. “Much worse.”
“Then why do you want it back?”
Tony uttered a shriek of delight. “A Daniel come to judgment!
Oh, Jinny, I could hug you!”
A sweep of her horn kept him at arm’s length. “You say, Mr.
Duke, that the Fit-Up property is the better, and yet you want
to give it up?”
Mr. Duke leaned his elbows on the desk, and dropped his head
in his hands. “You confuse me—I must have time to think.”
“Hamlet!” observed Tony pleasantly. “But I don’t think
the ghost will walk.” His hand moved towards the gin decanter,
but again that baffling horn intervened.
“Look here!” said Duke, rummaging in his drawer. “I’ve
got the transfer written out, ready for signature, two copies—the
exact words of our last agreement, only turned the other way, of
course. I’m a plain man—is it to be or not to be?”
“That is the question,” said Tony sepulchrally. “But you
see it isn’t so plain as you. You’ve depreciated my theatre and
it’s not worth the extra pony. Why can’t you make a reasonable
compromise and just swap back?”
“What! And be a pony out of pocket?”
“You’ll be an elephant out of pocket if you don’t,” Jinny
reminded him. “Seven pounds sixteen and threepence a week
mount up.”
“Ah, that was a particularly bad week.”
“Then there were good weeks?” flashed Tony.
“I tell you the best weren’t as good as the marionettes’ worst.”
“Come, come, old cock, draw it mild!”
“If you don’t believe me,” said Duke, firing up, “look for
yourself! And what’s more, if you find I’m wrong, keep the
pony and be hanged to you!”
“Easy! Easy! But I was never a man to refuse a sporting
offer—tip us the tomes!”
Duke handed him the twin account books, but soon, tiring of
the rows of figures, Mr. Flippance begged Jinny to pursue the
investigation while he studied the document of transfer.
It was not without a thrill that, setting the volumes on a
hanging flap that Duke had changed for her into a table, she went
back over the pages of faded ink that told of toils and tribulations
in the years before she had come into being: as a carrier she
was peculiarly sensitive to these records of wrecked tents and
ruined takings. Through the peace of the summer morning in
that poky caravan, the winds from that pre-natal period seemed
to be rushing, its snows falling, its hails and thunders crashing,
and with these imagined tempests came up the thought of Will.
What was he doing now, with his beautiful black horses? Was
he looking for Mr. Flippance at “The Black Sheep”? But the
thought of him was too agitating; she crushed it down and got
absorbed in her task and the tales the figures told: the blanks
carefully explained by Good Friday or royal mourning or the
journey to some distant pitch; the varying cost of these pitches
in publicans’ meadows; the varying expense of cartage; the
sudden jumps in the takings, due—as annotated—to high days
and holidays, or to royal weddings, or to favourite pieces. She
wondered why Mr. Duke ever played any others. “What is
D.F.N.?” she asked suddenly.
“Dismissed. Fine night,” said Mr. Duke in melancholy
accents. It was the supreme tragedy. “Although a fine night,”
he explained, rubbing it in to himself, “not enough to be worth
playing to.”
“You didn’t always do good business, you see,” gurgled Tony
from the gin-glass he had imperceptibly acquired.
“Accidents will happen,” Duke retorted.
“And what is D.S.?” put in Jinny. “Dismissed. Snow?”
“D.S. is diddling show,” explained Duke gloomily. “I struck
one only last week at the very public-house I hired my pitch
from.”
“That wasn’t playing fair,” said Tony.
“No, indeed. They stuck a placard in the window, ‘Great
Water Otter. Free.’ And when you’d had your drink they
took you to the stables to see it in its tub. There were crowds
every night. It was put in the paper.”
Tony grinned. “ ‘Lord, what fools these mortals be!’ ”
“But why?” asked Jinny. “I’d rather see a water-otter
than a dancing doll.”
“You’re not even a country mouse,” said Tony. “When the
fools push and squeeze to get near the tub, they warn ’em, ‘Don’t
go too near!’ And all the while it’s only a big iron kettle—a
water-’otter. See!”
Jinny laughed.
“Yes, that’s what they all do,” said Duke dismally. “Laugh
and help to gull the others. And between them the legitimate
goes to the dogs.”
“Or the otters.” Jinny bent in lighter spirits over the twin
volumes. “I’m afraid you’ve lost, Mr. Flippance,” she
announced at last. “I can’t see any drama week of Mr. Duke’s
that goes as high as the worst of his marionette weeks.”
“Right you are!” said Tony, cheerful under his liquid.
“Sport is sport and the pony is yours. Here goes!” And
picking up a pen from the desk, he signed one of the documents
with a long thick line sweeping backward from his
final “e.” Duke signed the other copy more soberly, and
Jinny witnessed both signatures with careful calligraphy. “It
only remains, old cock,” said Tony, “to deliver the twenty-five
pounds.”
“Hear, hear,” agreed Duke.
“You don’t suppose I carry it about with me?”
Duke’s face fell. “But without money passing, it ain’t
legal.”
“But I jumped out of bed in a hurry—Jinny’ll bear me out.
I mean,” he added hurriedly, as a dramatic interest flickered
across Duke’s face, “look at my slippers!”
“Oh, I’ve seen your stinking old slippers!” Duke was
getting unpleasant. “What I want to see is my money.”
“Sorry, old boy—no use letting your dander rise—it’s a case
of H.G.I.—haven’t got it, and M.O.I.U.—must owe it you!
Still, I dare say we can rake up something on account, to make
a legal consideration. Doubtless Jinny has got half a crown.
Give me one, Jinny, till I get home.”
Jinny, who had always hitherto dealt with Polly, and been
scrupulously paid, had no hesitation in handing him the coin.
She did not know it was the cost of her arbitration. Duke
accepted it ungraciously as earnest money.
“And if I may advise you how to run your own show, now
you’ve got it back,” said Tony handsomely, “don’t go so much
by the fairs. There’s not only the waste of time and travel in
between one and t’other, it’s lowering a fine art to the level of a
merry-go-round or the talking lobst——”
“I can’t wait for ever,” interposed Jinny. “Are you coming?”
She opened the door.
“Your time’s paid,” said Mr. Flippance severely. “However,
Duke takes my meaning. Here’s luck to him!” And with a
last gulp at Duke’s gin, he followed her to the door. “Send me
my scenery and props and the same cart can take back yours
and the box of figures.”
“No, no,” said Duke, “that’ll need several journeys or carts.
We divide the freightage.”
“What! When I throw in twenty-five pounds! O Duke,
Duke, if you ain’t careful there’ll be a show of the meanest man
on earth.” And shaking his fat jewelled forefinger waggishly at
the caravan proprietor, he followed the Carrier. “Now for a
last kick at the company,” he observed to her, as the door
closed upon the dismal Duke.
But at that moment the ground resounded with gallant hoofs,
and a handsome red-haired cavalier riding a barebacked black
horse and leading another steed of Satan, and followed by a
bounding little white dog, brought life and spirit into the scene.
The rabbits poked their noses greedily through their wires, and
the pig grunted in perturbation. Jinny, shrinking back behind
Mr. Flippance, remained paralysed on the steps of the caravan,
while Tony, unconscious that he was needed as a screen, hurried
forward with a joyous greeting and a query which served the
purpose as effectually, for Jinny was left unnoted on her
pedestal.
“You looking for me?” asked Tony.
“I was,” answered the horseman. “But now I’m looking for
the stables. ‘The Black Sheep’s’ full up, and I thought I’d put
up my spare horse at ‘The Learned Pig’ till I could find you.
However, here you are.”
“But you crossed me, man, just outside the market!”
“Did I? Is Jinny here? I see her cart outside.”
“Never mind Jinny—you’re just in the nick of time. I want
to talk business to you.”
“And so do I to you. If I crossed you, ’twas because I
was galloping to you with the horse you ordered through
Jinny.”
“And I was galloping to her to cancel it!”
“What!” cried Will. But the joyous rush and gambollings
of Nip now directed his attention to Nip’s statuesque
mistress.
“I’m afraid you’ve let yourself in for those horses,” she said,
descending. She did not speak maliciously—the sting of her
defeat was over, now that his victory had recoiled on the victor,
and she was really a little sorry for him. But all other feelings
were overwhelmed for the moment by this new sense of dash
and grace, in which he and the beautiful pawing steeds were
mixed up centaur-like, his figure looking so much taller on
horseback that it almost corresponded to Miss Gentry’s ideal.
Unfortunately Will himself had no sense of the horses except as
a costly and burdensome mistake: the iron issuing from Jinny’s
soul was entering into his.
“But surely you want one of ’em,” he said, addressing Mr.
Flippance. He had cherished a dim hope that the Showman
might launch out into binary grandeur, but at the worst he was
prepared to keep one horse—it would be useful for riding into
Chipstone—pending its sale. But to have two horses on his
hands, eating their heads off, after consuming practically the
whole of his capital—this was too much. Nor could he believe
that Jinny was not gloating over the Nemesis that had overtaken
his attempt to crush her will.
“I don’t see what I should do with a horse,” said Tony,
“seeing that I’m setting up the Flippance Palace Theatre as a
local landmark. Of course I might have a play written round
him,” he mused, “or even round ’em both. They would certainly
‘draw’ all Chipstone, especially with a carriage behind
’em. Odd, isn’t it? There’ll be scores of carriages waiting outside
my theatre, yet to see one on the stage gives everybody a thrill.
Lord, how the public does love to see natural things in unnatural
places! As my old pa used to say—my real pa, I mean—put
an idiot on the stage and he gives pleasure, put him in the stalls
and he writes dramatic criticism! Ha, ha, ha!”
“Then you do want ’em?” said Will eagerly.
“If you’re ready to bring in the noble animals as part of the
capital, I’ll look around for a dramatist to work ’em in.”
“You’d best look around for a capitalist,” retorted Will in
angry disappointment. “I’ve told you before, I’m going into
farming.”
“Then you’ll want the horses yourself.”
“They’re no good for farming,” Jinny corrected.
“Ain’t they?” said Tony, surveying them with a fresh eye.
“Then why did he buy them?”
Will got angrier. “That’s my business. Do you want them
or not?”
“I can always do with anything. A play’s a pie you can
shove anything into. You’d look bully yourself, as you Americans
say, riding just as you are: just a cowboy costume, that’s all
you need. Will you do it?”
“Will I do what?”
“Play lead and supply your own horses.”
“Don’t be a fool—or try to make me one. I’m a plain
farmer.”
Tony grinned. “Jinny don’t seem to think ’em suitable for
plain farming. I reckon you’d better set up as undertaker.
They’ll go lovely with a hearse. All you need is a corpse.”
“And I shan’t be long finding one!” hissed Will.
Tony clapped his hands. “That’s the style. Lord, man,
what a wasted actor!”
Jinny could not suppress a smile. It brought Will’s temper to
breaking-point. “These horses at least won’t be wasted,” he
said to her at a white heat. “For I’ll take our friend’s advice.”
“Harness ’em to a hearse?” murmured Jinny.
“No, to a coach. I’ll put an end, miss, to your mannish
ways.”
“Indeed!” Jinny bridled up, without, however, quite
following the threat.
“You’ve done for yourself,” he explained. “You’ve forced
me into competition. You’ve got me the horses—there’s no end
of out-of-work coaches on the market to be got for an old song.
I’ll carry passengers and luggage faster and cheaper than you,
and heavier stuff too, and I’ll wipe you out.”
Jinny grew white, but at the venom of his words, not their
business significance. Her instinct retorted with a smile. “And
I got you the horn, too, don’t forget that.”
“I don’t—I was thinking of that. It’s all your doing—and
serve you jolly well right.” He turned sneeringly to Mr. Flippance.
“So I won’t be a wasted musician either.”
“Oho!” said Jinny. “And shall we see you on the box-seat
all a-crowing and a-blowing?”
“I know you still think I can’t blow—but you shall see.”
“Seeing isn’t believing,” said Jinny.
“Had you there, old cock,” said Tony.
“She knows what I mean, right enough. I’ll start a coach-service
’twixt Little Bradmarsh and Chipstone, ay and farther
too, passengers inside, luggage on the roof. I’ll wake up this
sleepy old spot.” And his vigour seemed to communicate itself
to his horses: they caracoled and stamped.
“Better let sleeping spots lie,” said Jinny. “I thought you
hated Yankee going-ahead.”
“It’ll save you going ahead, anyhow,” said Will. “Why
didn’t you let things sleep?”
“Me! How could I help helping Gran’fer?”
“Women have always got an excuse. ‘And the man gave
unto me and I did eat.’ ”
“Lord! He’s been reading the Bible!” laughed Tony.
Will flushed. All those hours in quest of orthography passed
through his mind. And what had all his painstaking letters led to?
Quarrels, recriminations, miseries. Well, let him have done with
it all. Ignore her, crush her, that was the best way. Once he
had driven her out of the business, that tongue of hers would
wag more meekly. Then, perhaps——!
A rousing blast on Jinny’s horn cut defiantly into his thoughts.
It was at once a challenge and a mockery. Will turned his
horses’ heads sharply and trotted out, Nip at their heels. But
at the edge of the enclosure Nip looked back wistfully to beg his
mistress to join the party. She, however, lowering her horn,
cried, “Come here, you naughty dog. Come here at once.”
Nip stood in pathetic hesitation.
“It’s that animal my play shall be written round,” said Tony
decisively. “How much do you want for him?”
“You know I wouldn’t, part with him for love or money,” said
Jinny.
“Well, I haven’t got any money,” said Tony slowly. “But
if you’d like the other thing——”
“Don’t be silly!” Jinny moved towards her cart.
“I mean it—a wife like you would be the making of a man.”
“Now you’ll have to walk home!” said Jinny, springing into
her seat. It was too ironic a climax to the morning.
“Not in my slippers!” gasped Tony.
“You should have put on your boots!” said Jinny sternly.
“But listen!” He clung to the cart as if he would stop it.
“It’s a heaven-sent opportunity.”
“It must be sent back,” said Jinny gravely.
“I mean for me,” he explained desperately. “You know
how Polly objects to my marrying again. But I’ve got to break
the deal with Duke to her, so I could work in the two at once. It
couldn’t be worse.”
“I shall never marry,” said Jinny. “Gee up!”
“But whoa, whoa, you don’t carry only your husbands,” cried
Tony. “Stop!”
He pursued Methusalem for some yards, but even Methusalem
was too quick for him. And then, as he stood panting and
perspiring and overcome by a dark upwelling of disbelief in life,
he perceived the Duchess with her manuscript and his daughter
returning from the histrionic consultation at “The Learned Pig.”
“Thank the Lord, Polly’s feeding out,” he murmured, as he
slunk into a doorway. Then his face brightened up. “After
all,” he thought, “I’ve only got to break to her about the
theatre.”
TWO OF A TRADE
This comic story or this tragic jest
May make you laugh or cry, as you think best.
Gay, Prologue to “The What D’ye Call It?”
The darkest season in Jinny’s life—outwardly a feast of light—was
come to the crowning mockery of its August splendour.
Day after day there was the lazy pomp of high summer; massive
white clouds in a blue sky, a spacious voluptuousness, a languid
glory. But Jinny felt less melancholy on the rare days when
sea-mists rolled in from the marshes and spectral sheep were
heard tinkling from dim meadows. The corn was now cut, and
this too was a curious alleviation of the gnawing at her heart.
When the far-spreading wheat-fields had rustled in the sun like
the hair of the earth-mother, an auburn gold touched with
amber and purple lights, infinitely subtle and suffusive, the
beauty of it all had been almost intolerable. Now that remorseless
reapers had turned the wheat into rows of stooks that were
more suggestive of the hair of a village girl in curl-papers, Jinny
found it easier to jog on her sorely diminished business along the
sunbaked roads.
It was not merely that Will had turned from a swain into an
enemy, and from a figure of romance into a business rival. It
was not merely that his hated handsome visage kept coming up
in her mind at the oddest moments, to the confusion of her
work. It was the pressure of his competition.
Hitherto Jinny had believed in mankind. Despite “The
Seven Stages of Life,” by which her Spelling-Book combined
instruction in old English print with detailed information on how
the Devil blurs God’s image in man; despite the testifyings of
her fellow-Peculiars to their own wickedness, she had regarded
her fellow-beings as in the main virtuous and kindly. What was
she to think of human nature when she saw this dashing innovator
literally “carrying” all before him?
In her pique and distress she failed to allow for the sensation
created by the advent of the small second-hand coach with its
pair of high-stepping black horses. Nothing so great and
momentous had happened in Bradmarsh from time immemorial.
Even in Jinny’s own mind it loomed as large as any of the events
in the Spelling-Book, from Noah’s Flood to Trafalgar. Throughout
all those somnolent Essex by-ways the passage of the novel
equipage brought everybody to door or window. It was equal
to the passing of the County Flyer on the main roads, a thunder
of wheels and a jingle of harness and a music of the horn. True,
two horses are not four, and a driver who blows his own trumpet
has not the grandeur of a coachman with a scarlet-coated guard,
not to mention the absence of relays to paw the ground and be
switched without loss of a second to the fiery vehicle. Still, with
scarcely a hill to negotiate before Chipstone, two horses and a
man seemed velocity and magnificence to villages accustomed to
a crawling two-wheeled tilt-cart and a girl.
And the Flynt Flyer—as it styled itself in vainglorious paint—had
created a demand, as well as a sensation, even if the want
had been unfelt before. Starting three services a week instead
of two, it moreover dashed and zigzagged into corners and by-roads
that Jinny had never pretended to serve, the denizens of
which had been content to wait at cross-roads and landmarks, or
to deal with her through intermediary neighbours or houses of
call. And besides these attractions of convenience and novelty,
there was the comfort for passengers of riding in the body of
the coach with their feet in the straw, instead of dangling uneasily
from the narrow side-ledges in Jinny’s cart or sprawling in
contorted adjustment to parcels and boxes. Persons who had
always walked, now found it simpler to jump into the coach
than to fag along in the heat. The carrying business saw itself
transformed and extended.
In this elegant and epoch-making vehicle the non-human
freight overflowing from the fore and hind boots was stacked on
the roof, though the lucky first-comer had always space to sit beside
Will and hear his stories of the great world. A shipmate from
’Frisco had boasted of driving in kid gloves a polished silk-lined cab
and spanking fifteen-hundred-dollar steeds with silver-gleaming
harness, and earning his three hundred dollars a month. The
vision beglamoured Will’s own status on the box, and reconciled
him to lifting the luggage of his labouring inferiors. He aped
it by driving in his best Moses & Son suit, as though more of a
sporting charioteer than a menial, touting for custom. And
parcels and clients flung themselves into his arms. What
wonder if the high-piled load soon out-topped Jinny’s, revealed
in its nakedness on these sweltering days when she drove
without her tilt! For gradually folk’s eyes seemed opened,
unsealed of a spell. Without a word spoken it was as if something
unnatural and monstrous had been wafted away, and the
simple order of nature—in the shape of a male carrier—had been
restored. Without being quite conscious of how they had
lugged their own boxes for the puny female, customers were
aware of a new facility. They did not so much turn against
Jinny as forget her in this gravitation to the natural centre.
At first Will had—with a touch of considerateness—fixed his
days on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays, not to clash with
Jinny’s Tuesdays and Fridays. But as his supply created new
demands, as he found he could widen his ambit as far even as
Brandy Hole Creek or Blackripple, he took on new circuits, first
for Tuesday and then for Friday and dropping his Wednesdays
to give his hard-worked horses a solid rest in mid-week. It was
not these new routes of his that galled Jinny, nor his impinging
on her days—possibly she was not altogether displeased to meet
the rival vehicle. No, the iron that entered her soul was the
loss of her previous customers, who, despite Will’s comparative
magnanimity, had changed their day to suit the rival round. In
the cases where she had imagined herself a friend rather than an
employee, it was heart-breaking.
Hence this new and rankling doubt of her species, waxing daily
as her business waned. Folk seemed to follow one another like
sheep, and whenever now on a bit of miry road she came upon
the serried footmarks of a flock, she shuddered with a sense of
the ignoble pettiness of the pattern: no massive individual
stamp like Methusalem’s, not even a characteristic dent like
Nip’s, but an ignominious churning of mud by a multiplication
of innumerable little identities. Pigs, too, supplied her with
bitter comparisons when, with her cart void of passengers and
almost empty of parcels, she passed at some cross-road the Flynt
Flyer, stiflingly chock-full of both. For she had often noted in
the feeding of swine that however abundant the food at its
snout, master pig will always rush to the thickest jostling-point.
Such was the crowd, such was humanity, thought our little
cynic; who was, however, no mere soured philosopher, but a
harassed housekeeper, with a couple of aged dependents, whose
rashers or oats were becoming seriously endangered. Methusalem
had always lived from hoof to mouth, and as for her grandfather,
had he not spent all his savings on her Angel-Mother’s debts? There
were still potatoes in the store, and half a flitch in the larder, and
beer in the barrel, and vegetables in the ground, and milk in
the goats’ udders, but the reserves of provender, as of cash, were
small, and Methusalem, whose appetite age could not abate, now
began to loom as a deficit rather than an asset. Nip was the
first to notice—and with pained astonishment—the parsimony of
the new regime. Why keep a mistress if one is to be practically
thrown back on one’s own resources?
In these circumstances it scarcely seemed on a par with the
ethics of the Spelling-Book, or of a piece with Jinny’s character,
that she should go to Miss Gentry and order a new Sunday dress
of pink sprigged muslin of the latest design—a gown that
but for its not hooking up at the back was absolutely ladylike.
Still less that she should drive in it on Tuesdays and Fridays.
Whether it was in emulation of her rival, on the theory that
fashionableness was a factor of his success, whether it was to
brighten up her spirits, or to exhibit a defiant prosperity, Jinny
did not reveal, even to herself. But that it was worn at Will
rather than on herself, may be deduced from the fact that the
commission to the “French dressmaker” followed hard upon
her first encounter with the Flynt Flyer at the cross-roads.
It was on this occasion—as at many subsequent meetings on
Tuesdays or Fridays—that Nip was torn almost literally in two
by his desire to be in both vehicles at once. That they should
wish to pass each other without a halt or even a hail was amazing
to the poor animal, and if his distraction usually ended in a leap
on to the coach, where Will was never without a beguiling
biscuit, he was always careful to rejoin the cart before the
interval had become too spacious. Though a Nip-o’-both-sides,
he was disloyal to neither: indeed, if ever creature did his best
to bring two foolish mortals together, that creature was Nip.
But they no longer even saluted each other. At first, indeed,
the gentleman driver had doffed his hat gallantly, but Jinny’s
face had remained a stone, though that stone was a ruby. Will,
therefore, when he had to meet or pass her, flew by at a rate
which by its air of insolent superiority only increased her resentment.
Later, he had begun to slow down when he espied her
lumbering along his route, and to play the “Buy a Broom”
polka on his horn with malicious accuracy.
By way of retort Jinny once tied a label to Nip’s collar, marked
“In charge of the guard.” It was meant to taunt Will with
lacking the dignity of a true driver, who never blew a horn. But
the somewhat periphrastic sarcasm seemed to miss fire, for Will
took the label literally, and when Nip had executed his usual
leap on to the coach, he kept him prisoner for several days. The
faithful animal, though fed as never before, was as unhappy, tied
on the roof, as Jinny was, and when her cart at last passed, and
her horn blew imperiously for him, he made such a supercanine
effort that his cord snapped, and in an instant he was snuggling
hysterically in the legitimate lap; regardless of that flowery
summery fabric. His label, she found, now bore the words,
“Pay Up The Gloves.”
Alas, paying up—whether for wagers or fabrics—was out of
Jinny’s power. That very morning Miss Gentry had handed
her the bill, delicately wrapped in a tract. Such a situation was
quite new to her, though not unprovided against in the Spelling-Book:
Weigh ev’ry small Expence and nothing waste,
Farthings, if sav’d, amount to Pounds in Haste.
This had been a large expense, yet she had not weighed it. It
was her debts and not her savings that had in such haste amounted
to pounds. Woe to the pride that had seduced her:
What the weak head with strongest bias rules
Is pride, the never-failing Vice of Fools.
She did not need her book’s reminder of her head’s weakness—only
too dismally she recognized that strange slipperiness of
memory which made it more difficult to execute her commissions
in proportion as their number dwindled. Was not the little
notebook, to which she must now have recourse, the abiding
symbol of this paradoxical humiliation?
She was not psychologist enough to understand that it was the
very perfection of her memory which was now tripping her up.
So many of her clients had for so long demanded the same
things so seasonably that she was automatically compelled to
carry out commissions that had now lapsed. She was like an
actress who knows her part even backwards, but is broken up
and confused when cuts are made; finding the too familiar words
not to be ousted. Jinny would mechanically purchase items for
clients who had forsaken her, and then—so scatterbrained was
she become—leave them at other customers’ houses! And on
the other hand, she was capable of forgetting the orders of the
few faithful. It was thus that under the combined strain of
Miss Gentry’s bill, the sultry August weather, the sight of the
packed coach and its jaunty driver, the frantic return of Nip
with his mocking message, Jinny, whom necessity had compelled
to keep Farmer Gale as a customer, clean forgot his urgent need
of a wedding-cake. It was not that she had forgotten to order
it or even to fetch it from the leading confectioner’s. The
sudden union of Farmer Gale with the wealthy land-surveyor’s
widow, whose piano-playing had excited the far-off admiration
of Elijah Skindle, was too sensational an event, especially to
herself, to permit of complete oblivion. It was only that she
forgot to deliver the cake at Beacon Chimneys. She was actually
within sight of the stag-headed poplars that marked the horizon
of home, when, turning her head as Nip suddenly leapt for a
rabbit, she saw the great elegant carton in the cart. And the
wedding was on the morrow. Conscience-stricken, and morbidly
feeling as though the marriage would scarcely be legal without
this colossal confection, she resolved, worn out as she was with
the heat, to drive back to the house. But she had reckoned
without Methusalem. To turn back within the very smell of
his stable was unprecedented: it violated every equine code.
Like Nip, he now became aware of the instability of things—of a
new order. But, more obstinate, he refused to recognize it.
Nothing short of the whip—which would have moved him, not
out of pain but out of astonishment—could have sufficed to
turn him, and how could a mistress who knew him in the right
and herself in the wrong, resort to that, especially after such a
sultry day? So after every effort to coax him or to lead him by
the bridle had failed and almost twenty minutes had been wasted,
she decided—in view of her grandfather’s supper—to make a
special journey the first thing in the morning.
As she gave Methusalem his glad head, she remembered that
it was just before the turning to the hymeneal homestead that
she had met that scandalously successful coach.
Before Jinny reached home that evening, a complainant had
already called at Blackwater Hall to unload his grievance. Such
visitors were, alas, no longer a novelty to Daniel Quarles, who
had one day begun to find himself no merely nominal representative
of the business, but a principal charged with derelictions.
His virulent rebuttals of the reproaches did but increase the
defections. The flouted customers made no allowances for the
ferocities of senility, and, when told to go to hell, simply went
to the Flynt Flyer—a much pleasanter alternative. Indeed,
one suspects they welcomed the insult as justifying gravitation
to the new star. The indelicacy, however, of divulging
its existence to the nonagenarian was reserved for Mr. Elijah
Skindle.
That rising practitioner’s patronage was not the least of
Jinny’s humiliations. Even after his proposal of marriage, she
had not been able to refuse to carry dogs to and from his establishment
when so commanded by her clients, though she had drawn
the line at orders originating from himself. Now, however, in
justice to her grandfather, she could not but accept his commissions,
even though she was aware they were largely artificial,
mere canals for communication and courtship. Why, for
example, could not Mr. Skindle, whose gig was often at gardens
buzzing with beehives, not purchase his own honey? Why
must she procure him an article linkable with “moons” and
permitting fatuous references to “sweetness”? His protestations
of lack of time were too brazen even for his own mouth: he
stuttered and blushed like a schoolboy. It will be seen that
Elijah’s deeper self had not accepted his “lucky” escape from
her. Hope springs eternal, especially when the desirable one’s
pride is bent, if not broken, by adversity. That proud stomach
which had rejected his proffered luxuries with disdain now bade
fair to be empty. While he, moreover, touched nothing he did
not profit by, and through a lucky rise in animal sickness was
fast overtaking the respectable Jorrow.
With an audacity almost Napoleonic he had conceived the
idea of at once blazoning and curing his baldness, purchasing a
hair-restorer through Jinny herself, so that she might be an
accessory to the improvement at which he was—obviously for
her sake—slaving. And there did actually begin to sprout on
his cranium microscopic dots, like pepper sprinkled over an egg-shell.
Elijah lost no opportunity now of lifting his cap at the
sight of her, though he had not yet acquired the habit of removing
it indoors.
“Whoa!” Elijah drew up his trap in the grassy lane before
Blackwater Hall and jumped down. The afterglow of sunset
was in the sky, but the Common was still torpid with the breezeless
heat of the day. He was in his best flannel suit and smartest
cap, though the same old pipe stuck in his blackened teeth.
Removing it, he rapped at the door with it, knocking out the
ashes with the same taps. As nothing happened, he tugged
from his pocket a paper-wrapped pot and thudded at the door
with that. He had been simulating rage, for he had come to
denounce a mistake, though enchanted to have the opportunity
of calling on Jinny. But now for fear she was not yet back—and
vexed with himself for not choosing one of her domestic
days—he began to get really ruffled. He lifted the latch unceremoniously,
but the door seemed bolted. Re-pocketing the pot
with an unsmothered oath, he moved towards the living-room
wall and peeped through the wide-flung little casement. Pah!
Only the Gaffer snoring in his favourite posture, head on the
family Bible. The shabbiness of the ancient earth-coloured smock-frock,
like the meanness of the furniture, added to Elijah’s disgust.
“Fancy her slaving in this heat,” he mused, “when she might
be snoozing on my horsehair sofa!” He shouted angrily,
“Wake up, you old codger.”
The nonagenarian obeyed with a start. “What’s amiss, my
little mavis?” he yawned.
“I ain’t a mavis,” Elijah informed him irately, “I’m a
veterinary surgeon.”
Daniel Quarles sprang to his feet. “Marciful powers! Anything
wrong with Methusalem?”
“No, no—” Elijah assured him through the little window,
“I’ve come about Jinny.”
The old man tottered and caught at his chair. “An accident
to Jinny?”
“Stuff and nonsense! She’ll be home any minute. Can I
come in and wait for her?”
Daniel growled and grumbled. “Don’t you see Oi’m busy
readin’ the Scriptures?”
“I won’t interfere with that.” He moved back to the door
and rattled the latch masterfully. He suddenly saw the possibility
of pushing his suit with the grandfather. “Why do you
lock yourself in?” he demanded, as the bolts creaked back.
“Don’t you see they’ve took the Dutch clock?” said the
Gaffer pitifully. “She desarts me all day long, and Oi can’t
have my eyes everywheres.”
Elijah glanced up at the clock in the ante-room, ticking as
imperturbably as ever.
“Why, it’s up there!” he said, puzzled.
“Do ye don’t try to befool me. That’s the same face, but
they’ve took out the works and put in rubbidge. But it ain’t
works we’re justified by,” he added musingly.
Elijah, picking his way among the old cypress chests, followed
him into the living-room, sat down unasked on the settle, and
mechanically pulled out his pipe.
“Git out o’ my house!” roared Daniel.
Elijah’s pipe fell on the rush mat.
“Boldero hisself,” explained the ancient, “never durst smoke
in my nostrils. And who be you?”
Who was Boldero, Elijah thought a more sensible question.
But he picked up his pipe with an apology. “All right,
uncle, no harm done.” He wiped his forehead. “Warm, ain’t
it?”
“Then why do ye want hell-smoke?”
“I shouldn’t quite call this hell-smoke,” Elijah deprecated.
“There’s no smoke without hell-fire,” Daniel explained.
“Farmer Thoroughgood, he smoked just such a pipe as yourn.”
“And he was thorough good, you see,” said Elijah with an
air of victorious repartee.
“Thorough bad,” chuckled the Gaffer with a still greater air
of wit. “Starved his missus to death. The neighbours as
come, to see the corpse found her on a bed made out of a common
sheep-hurdle, stood on bricks.” He tapped the Bible with a
dirty thumb. “Do ye don’t yoke a hoss and ass together, says
the Book. But that evil-doer used to plough a field with a cow
and a donkey, and when it ploughed too hard, he’d harness an
old sow in front of the donkey—there’s currant-trees there now
what pays better, not needin’ no ploughin’.”
“Quite like the old song,” observed Elijah, still feeling superior
and witty. “There was a cow went out to plough.”
“Chrissimus Day, Chrissimus Day,” hummed the old man.
Set agoing, he quavered on:
“There was a pig went out to dig
 On Chrissimus Day in the marning!
“Set ye down,” he broke off genially, though Elijah was already
ensconced, leg over knee. “Jinny’ll be home in a jiffy.”
“I wonder she’s so long,” Elijah began tentatively, “when
she’s got so little to do.”
“Ay,” assented the ancient, souring again. “ ’Tis me that’s
got the whole work o’ the place. But gals likes to gad about in
the summer, what becomes o’ the old folks never troubles the
young ’uns nowadays.”
“They might just as well be married,” ventured Elijah boldly.
“Ay, their husbands ’ud make ’em work,” said the Gaffer, his
eye gleaming maliciously. “But Oi don’t howd with starvin’
’em, like Farmer Thoroughgood did his missus. When they
come to see her corpse they found her on a bed made out of
a common sheep-hurdle. Ay, and he used to plough his fields
with a——”
Elijah, groaning inwardly, composed himself to hear the story
again. Fortunately there was a fresh development at the
finish. “One day ’twas a team o’ bullocks and a blind hoss he
started droivin’. Powerful warrum it war—wuss than to-day—and
the flies sow worritin’ that the bullocks set their tails up
and bolted. The poor blind hoss couldn’t see where to goo and
fell down. The oxen couldn’t drag him, and got tangled up in
the traces.” He roared with laughter at the picture, and Elijah
grinned too.
“Those flies do worrit,” he agreed, flicking at his forehead.
“But about that Jinny of yours——” he added.
“She’ll onny have them harmless fly-papers, you see,” said
Daniel, pointing to a coloured patch on the ceiling, blackened by
a happy multitude. “Ef ye can’t wait for her,” he added
amiably, “Oi’ll give her your message. A wet you said?”
“A veterinary surgeon, Mr. Elijah Skindle,” said Elijah
grandly.
“Skindle!” The old man groped agitatedly in his memory.
“That’s a name Oi know.”
“Known all over the Hundred,” said Elijah complacently.
“Ay, and they’re hearing of my success at Colchester, too, where
I come from.”
“Cowchester!” The old man sprang up. “That’s it—the
man as married Annie! But that ain’t you—he had more hair
to him.”
“Perhaps it was my father,” said Elijah, flushing.
“Nay, nay. Annie couldn’t have a son your soize,” the
Gaffer pondered.
“My mother’s name is Annie,” said Elijah.
A strange fire crept into the old patriarch’s eyes. “A big-boned
mawther of a girl, tall as the rod her father lit the lamps
with, long raven hair and eyes as black as sloes, and a wunnerful
fine buzzom,” he said with slow voluptuousness. “Your mother
ain’t like that?”
“No,” admitted Elijah.
Daniel Quarles heaved a sigh. “Oi thought not, or you’d be
more of a beauty.”
“Well, you’re wrong,” retorted Elijah. “For I’ve heard that
my grandfather did use to light the lamps in Chipstone, and it’s
a great shame the way my brothers and sisters all dump her on
me to keep.”
The old man seized him suddenly by the coat-lapels. “She’s
back in Chipstone?”
“Been back over two years—ever since father died.”
“He’s dead?” Elijah felt the hands trembling against his
breast.
“Of course—and I’ve got her to keep, though I’m the
youngest,” he grumbled.
“That’s the same luck as Oi had,” said the Gaffer, “with this
bit of property, though Sidrach, he’s the first-born.” He dropped
pensively back into his chair. “But Oi count Annie’s better off
where she is, bein’ as Oi’ve got Jinny to keep and food gittin’
dearer every day, she says, something cruel. And happen
Sidrach’ll come back too when he’s old, not havin’ landed property
like me, ne yet no relations in Babylon. Never been sech a year
since he went away—the Brad was all froze over.”
Elijah imprudently recollected—to the old man’s annoyance—that
it had frozen equally in Queen Victoria’s first winter, and
he brought up “Murphy’s coldest day,” the proverbial lucky hit
of an almanack-maker. Fortunately the Gaffer recalled an
ancient jest of Bundock’s: “Mother Gander’s gin-bottle’s froze
over,” and relaxed in genial hysterics. “Ay, she’s conwerted
now,” he said, wiping his rheumy eyes. “But what an adulteress
in them days! Ye couldn’t get drunk at ‘The Black Sheep’ ef
ye tried—beer without hops and wine without gripes.”
Mechanically drawing out his pipe and popping it back in
alarm, Elijah reverted to Jinny. Daniel now blamed Methusalem
for her lateness. Horses, too, were lazy and ungrateful,
same as granddaughters.
“Why don’t you get rid of him?” said Elijah, with a sudden
inspiration. That would cut her comb, he thought. Jinny
docked of Methusalem would be ripe for the marriage-altar.
“He’s long past his work.”
But Daniel Quarles shook his head. “Jinny wouldn’t like me
to part with that. Besides, who’d buy him?”
“I would,” said Elijah, with a feeling of “All for love, or the
world well lost.”
“You? Od rabbet, what for?”
“I’d give you a fiver!” parried the knacker in his reckless
passion. “Though most people let me have ’em for the trouble
of killing ’em,” he added incautiously.
The old man sprang up again. “Git out o’ my house! And
don’t ye dare cross my doorstep agen!”
Elijah cowered back in his seat. “But I’ve come on business,”
he protested.
“Oi bain’t a-gooin’ to sell Methusalem.”
“That’s not what I came for,” Elijah urged soothingly. “It’s
about Jinny.”
“Oi bain’t a-gooin’ to sell Jinny neither.”
Elijah winced. Was it divination or drivel, he wondered.
“You might as well sell her,” he said boldly. “Look how
she’s mucking up your business, muddling everything.” And
rising and pulling out the pot again, he banged it down on the
table.
“My Jinny muddle things! Git out o’ my house!”
Before the Gaffer’s blazing spectacles and furious fangs Elijah
backed doorwards.
“Not before it’s set right,” he said, assured of his line of
retreat.
“The Quarleses don’t make muddles. For a hundred year——”
“Oh, Jinny’s been all right the last hundred years,” he interrupted
impatiently. “It’s the last few weeks I complain about!
I hope it’s not sunstroke.”
“My Jinny!” The Gaffer’s anger died. “She went away
singin’ as merry as could be, my little mavis,” he said
anxiously.
“Then what do you make of that?” Elijah indicated the pot.
The old man unwrapped it slowly, and readjusting his spectacles
spelt out the label. “Oliver’s Depil—Depil—” he stumbled on.
“Is that pills?”
“No, it’s for the hair.”
“Well, that’s what you want, ain’t it?” he said naïvely.
Mr. Skindle coloured up. “But this is to take off the hair,”
he explained.
“Well, you can’t do that,” chuckled Daniel, “bein’ more a
’Lisha than a ’Lijah.”
“Oh yes, I can,” said Elijah, his every dot bristling. “But if
I hadn’t been a noticing man, I should have undone all the good
of months of my pots of hair-restorer.”
“Whichever way it be, ’tis agen Nature,” said the Gaffer.
“The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh away. But pots be as
like as peas. That’s the shopman’s fault, not Jinny’s.”
“Oh, indeed!” cried Elijah savagely. “And what about her
bringing me hairpins?”
“Hairpins!” gasped the Gaffer. “Hairpins for a man
without hair!”
“Even Samson in his prime didn’t want hairpins!” Elijah
pointed out angrily. “But that’s what she brought me a packet
of last week, instead of tobacco.”
“Sarve ye right, ye unswept chimbley,” the Gaffer growled,
with a grin.
“That ain’t serving me right,” riposted Elijah. “That’s
serving me wrong,” he added with redoubled wit. “And
wouldn’t take ’em back neither, the little minx, maintained I’d
ordered ’em for my ma.”
“Well, she’d want hairpins, wouldn’t she, with all that beautiful
raven hair,” said the Gaffer, turning serious. “Happen you
ordered ’em for her.”
“I never order anything for her,” said Elijah, waiving the
description of her chevelure.
“More shame to you, then, young man. Ye don’t desarve to
have her. Same as ye’re too stingy to pay for the hairpins, ye’d
best give ’em to her with Daniel Quarles’s love.”
“I’m not stingy!” retorted Elijah hotly. “Would I be
keeping my mother, with the poorhouse so handy, and me the
youngest, too, if Elijah Skindle wasn’t the most generous man
in Chipstone? But I won’t pay for Jinny’s woolgathering.
No wonder everybody’s going to the coach!”
“The coach?” repeated Daniel Quarles. “What coach?”
“Hasn’t Jinny told you?” cried Elijah, equally astonished.
“The handsomest pair of black horses——”
“A funeral coach?” half-whispered the Gaffer, paling. The
notion of slaughtering Methusalem had already brought the
thought of death unpleasantly near.
“You and Jinny may well call it so, old sluggaby,” said Elijah
grimly.
The old man fell back into his chair. “Nobody never needed
no funeral coaches here!” he quavered. “Our shoulders on
the corpse-path was good enough for us. ’Twas onny that
obstinacious little Dap, when poor Pegs laid by the wall, as
wanted one.”
“Who’s talking of funeral coaches?” snapped Mr. Skindle.
“Anyhow I’ve got to have that pot changed.”
“Git out o’ my house!” repeated the ancient for the fourth
time, hurling the pot out of the window. Luckily it fell on grass.
Elijah’s patience was at an end. Besides it had now occurred
to him he might cut off Jinny on the route, away from this
tiresome nonagenarian. The effort to woo her through him had
been baffled by his inconsequence.
“Who’s hankering after your wooden chairs? I’ve got
horsehair at home,” he retorted crushingly.
As he climbed into his trap he heard the bolts shot behind
him. But just as he was clucking off his horse, the Gaffer’s head
popped frenziedly through the casement.
“Stop thief!” it cried. “Stop!”
“You be careful what you’re saying, old cockalorum,” said
Elijah angrily, lashing his horse with vicarious wrath. “And
pick up that pot. I shan’t pay for it.”
“You’ve stole my spectacles! Oi can’t find ’em nowheres!”
“Why, you’ve got ’em on!” Elijah called back contemptuously.
So eagerly did his horse respond to the whip and the homeward
impulse that Elijah had the satisfaction of passing the equally
enthusiastic Methusalem before he could pull up. He was not
even sure that this arrogantly gowned Jinny had acknowledged
his salute. She would be at her door before he could turn—confound
it! Why had he not waited another moment or
started earlier and cut her off at a remoter point? To face that
old dodderer again would be an anti-climax.
So swiftly did Daniel Quarles nod again over his big Bible that
by the time Jinny had got Methusalem stabled, she could not
rouse him to undo the bolts, and all her merry whistling as she
neared the latch was a wasted pretence. This protective habit of
his indoors was a recent development, coinciding curiously with
the advent of the coach she was concealing from him, and these
closed doors—even his bedroom was now locked from within—annoyed
and alarmed her. She had visions of him agonizing in
his bed and herself reduced to breaking open the door. Perhaps
even now he was ill, dying, dead! She dashed to the living-room
window—stumbling over a pot outside it. Ah, thank God, that
dear, peaceful grey head, that sonorous snore!
Pausing now to pick up the mysterious pot, she was distressed
again. The passing of Elijah was explained! Miss Gentry’s
Depilatory she had brought to Mr. Skindle, Mr. Skindle’s Hair
Restorer to Miss Gentry. He had come to complain, but unable
to get admission, he had flung the pot on the path. Oh, plaguy
similarity of potted pomades—fatal double error—she had killed
two clients with one stone. Her eyes filled with tears: even
with a notebook she could not keep straight.
So guilty did she look as she scrambled noiselessly through the
casement, that an observer would have thought her a burglar.
Creeping past her grandfather, she opened the house-door,—the
gigantic key that used to hang on the beam was now always in
the lock—brought in the carton with the wedding-cake from the
cart, and placed it on the chest of drawers for unfailing reminder
in the morning. Then swiftly changing into her old frock and
hanging up the new behind a corner-curtain, she donned her
apron and stole into the kitchen. Finally, to lay the table, she
must with loving hands uplift the venerable head.
The ancient had not slept off his perturbation, though he did
not remember the cause of it, and seeing his supper still unlaid,
he was righteously wroth. “A muddler, mucking up everything—that’s
what you be!” he said, repeating unconsciously Elijah’s
indictment. And Jinny, remembering the pot that now stood
by the wedding-cake, went about wanly, unresentfully, with
movements lacking their wonted deftness. Her grandfather had
already forgotten the suggestion of sunstroke, much as it had
shaken him: for her actual pallor he had no eye.
When she finally brought in the meal, she found him risen
and standing tranced before the great wedding-cake, gazing
dazedly at its elaborately frosted architecture.
“You didn’t want to open it,” she cried with irrepressible
petulance as she hooked down the pasteboard lid.
He ignored the reproach. “Weddin’s and funerals in one
day,” he brooded. “Pomps and wanities.”
“Come to the table, Gran’fer,” she said more gently.
“Pomps and wanities!” he repeated. “Who’s this for?”
“It’s for Farmer Gale’s wedding—’twas too late to deliver it.
Come along.”
“In my day folks made their own weddin’-cakes. And dedn’t
want no funeral coaches neither. The church-path or the farm-wagon——”
“Come along!” She took his arm. “There’s no funeral
coaches here.”
A whining and scratching at the door made a welcome diversion.
Nip, back from the hunting-path, sneaked in, aware of
sin, with ears flat, tail abased, and sidelong squint.
“Ain’t seen that for days,” said the Gaffer. “Where’s that
been?”
“I don’t know,” she lied, glad of Nip’s guilty air, for to explain
would reveal the coach. “On the razzle-dazzle, I suppose.”
After supper, she remembered a box must be put in the ante-room
that had been left with her to be called for. It was stupid
not to have brought it in at once, ere the cart had been put in
its shed—as stupid as her pot-swapping. In a sudden fear that
if unremoved to-night she would carry it off to Farmer Gale’s
wedding just when the owner would be coming for it, she asked
her grandfather to lend a hand with it. It was an unfortunate
request, for as the still sinewy veteran was dragging his end
over the sill, he said weirdly: “There ain’t no man in Bradmarsh
more lugsome’n that. Who wants your new-fangled coach?”
“What coach?” murmured Jinny, half puzzled, half apprehensive.
“The funeral coach.” He stood still. “Where else ’ould a
coffin goo?”
“Rubbish, Gran’fer. There’s no funeral coach.” Her little
silvery voice rang out. “Heave away, my Johnny. Come along,
Gran’fer, I’ve got to rub down Methusalem—you’ll be too
tired now.”
“No funeral coach?” he repeated slowly, loosing the box.
“You’ve been dreaming, Gran’fer.”
“But the two black horses——”
Her heart beat like a criminal’s on the eve of detection.
“Nightmares!” she laughed. “What did I say?”
“But he said——!”
“Who said?”
“Annie’s buoy-oy.”
“Annie’s——?”
“ ’Lijah, he calls hisself.”
“Elijah? And did he go up in a chariot of fire with the
horses?” And more than ever incensed against Mr. Skindle,
she hastily started her carrier’s chanty:
“There is Hey, there is Ree.”
Automatically his sepulchral bass exuded, and his arms
reclasped the box:
“There is Hoo, there is Gee——”
Then together their antithetical voices rolled out joyously as
the box moved forward:
“But the bob-tailed mare bears the bells away.”
Inwardly she was thinking that a “funeral coach” was just
what it was. Did its bells not ring the knell of all the peaceful
past? Yes, it was the hearse of her past, of her youth. And
somehow—somehow—she must readjust herself to the strange
raw cruelty of the present.
She resettled him before his Bible. But when she returned
from the stable, he had wandered again to the chest of drawers,
and was now holding up the pot.
“And ye told me Oi was dreamin’!” he said angrily. “Why
did ye lie to me?”
“What do you mean, Gran’fer?” she said, flushing.
“How did that pot come here?”
“I brought it, of course.”
“No, you dedn’t. Annie’s good-for-nawthen son brought it.”
“But I brought it in,” she persisted. “It was lying on the
path.”
“Ah! Oi mind me now—he threw it at me.”
“The wretch!” said Jinny, believing him. “Poor Gran’fer!”
she cried with self-reproach, patting his hairy hand. “But it’s
bedtime. Come along!”
“Why did ye lie to me?” he repeated, unappeased.
“There’s no funeral coach,” she persisted. But even as she
spoke, the faint tooting of a horn was heard from afar. Nip, idly
gulping at flies, pricked up his ears; the ancient uttered a cry:
“The coach! The coach!”
Jinny’s hand clutched his more tightly. They could now hear
the distant rattling and jingling—the Flynt Flyer was incredibly
coming their way, along that grass-grown road. What was it
doing by that lonely Common, she wondered tremulously. What
customers were there to steal here? Did the pirate hanker even
after Uncle Lilliwhyte?
“You’ll lose your beauty sleep, Gran’fer!” She drew him
towards the corkscrew staircase. But he broke from her convulsively
and hobbled out into the path, and stood with hand at
ear towards the advancing clatter. To be seen staring at its
meteoric passing would be too dreadful.
“Go in, Nip,” she cried with unwonted harshness. “Are you
coming, Gran’fer?” she said, following the dog, “or shall I bolt
you out? Must bolt up against thieves, you know.” And she
began singing cheerily:
“There is Hey, there is Ree”
“Nay, ’tis the black hosses that bears the bells away, curse
’em. What should coaches be doing in these parts?”
“Same as me, I suppose,” she said with desperate lightness.
“It’s only that young man who fancies himself a-driving and
a-blowing.”
“A young man come to steal my business!”
“Well, one can’t lock that up! Come in, Gran’fer.”
“Oi’ll lock him up! What’s the thief’s name?”
“He’s not a thief. It’s the young man from Frog Farm.”
“That whippersnapper! Come with a coach to drive over
you and me——!”
“That’s just what he’d try to do if we stand here! Come
inside—the jackanips’ll only think we’re envying his bonkka
turn-out.”
The argument and the touch of idiom succeeded, though she
