# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2007
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Rudolf Schmid, The Theories of Darwin and Their Relation to Philosophy, Religion, and Morality
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/22150/22150-h/22150-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

We have now reached the end of that part of our work which considers
 and treats of the views of others. To our regret, we have been compelled
 to restrict ourselves, in this review, to the countries of the English
 and German tongues; the former being the home of Darwin, the latter our
 own. We should have preferred to take into our review also the literature
 of France and Belgium, Holland and Italy; but we feared being able to
 give only an incomplete report. Besides, it is in Germany and Great
 Britain—and partly also in North America, related to both in
 language and origin—where the Darwinian agitation has taken deepest
 hold of the mind; and, in restricting our report to these countries, we
 are not likely to have omitted any view essential to the consideration of
 the present question. It is true that in the other countries named the
 Darwinian literature is also rich, and we are well aware of the
 incompleteness of our report in that respect. But we believe that we have
 not omitted any essential views and evidences, even if the names of many
 of their advocates have not been mentioned.
It still remains to us to investigate independently the position of
 the Darwinian theories, with their philosophic supplements, in reference
 to religion and morality: a task for which we hope to have essentially
 prepared the way through the preceding representations and
 investigations.
[249]
PRELIMINARY VIEW.
In treating the religious question, we proceed from the
 supposition that religion is concerned not only in this subjective truth
 of religious impulse and sensation, but also in the objective truth and
 reality of its faith, although it attains these in a different way from
 natural science. A religion which should have the authorization of its
 existence only in psychology, and which was not allowed to ask whether
 the object of its faith also has objective reality, would stand on a weak
 basis, and its end would only be a question of time; for an impulse which
 can only be psychologically established, and to which no real objective
 necessity could correspond, must sooner or later either be proven a
 psychological error or be eliminated by progressing culture. On the other
 hand, if we find a reconcilableness or an irreconcilableness of Darwin's
 views with the objective substance of religion, the possible question as
 to its reconcilableness or irreconcilableness with subjective
 religiousness on the ground of those results wholly answers itself. In no
 way, not even in the most indirect, can we approve that method of
 book-keeping by which something can be true in regard to religion and
 false in regard to science, or vice-versa; on the contrary, we see [250]in
 all attempts at healing in such a way the rupture which at present exists
 in the minds of so many, only a more emphatic avowal of that rupture.
In treating of the religious question as it affects the position of
 Darwinism in reference to the substance and the objective truth of the
 religious faith, without going into a detailed treatment of the question
 of the reconcilableness of a purely subjective religiousness with the
 Darwinian views, it will be of advantage to speak first of the position
 of the Darwinian theories in reference to the basis of all true and sound
 religion and religiousness—the theistic view of the world.
 In doing this, we shall discriminate the purely scientific theories of
 Darwin from the philosophic supplements and conclusions which have been
 given to and drawn from them, and shall have to consider each of them
 separately in connection with the theistic view of the world. If thereby
 we shall discover Darwinian views which can be brought into accord with a
 theistic view of the world, we shall also, in order to close our
 investigation, have to consider them with those parts of the theology of
 positive Christianity which can be affected by the Darwinian
 questions.
In treating the question of the relation of Darwinism to morality, our
 investigation can be somewhat abridged, because many of the principal
 questions which have to be considered have found their solution in what
 has been previously said, and partly also because they will present
 themselves in it different form.
The principal division in our discussion we shall most appropriately
 assign to ethics, and thus treat first of the position of Darwinism in
 reference to the moral principles, and then treat of this in reference to
 the concrete [251]moral life. Where the question as to the
 position of Darwinism in reference to morality occurs, we shall no longer
 have to treat of it separately as to the different aspects of its
 problems—we should otherwise get lost in too many repetitions; but
 we shall only have to separate an ethical naturalism which supports
 itself upon Darwinian grounds, from pure Darwinism, and to treat of each
 in turn as to its position in reference to morality.
[252]
 this, Darwin did in the realm of the history of the organic kingdoms,
 seconded by the geological principles of Sir Charles Lyell and by the
 investigations in biology and comparative anatomy of a number of
 scientists. From this point of view, the movement which was inaugurated
 by Darwin seems to us but the reflex of the universal spirit of the
 present time upon a particular realm; namely, that of natural science.
 But since, soon after the appearance of the before-mentioned work and
 long before the publication of Darwin's "Descent of Man," man also was
 included in the consequences of the evolution theory, and his existence
 was explained as a wholly natural development out of lower animal forms;
 since Darwin himself unreservedly adopted this theory of the descent of
 man from the animal world as an entirely natural consequence of his
 doctrine of the origin of species, the evolution question has gone far
 beyond the proportionately narrow and limited bounds of natural
 philosophy and of merely theoretical scientific interest—has
 surpassed in interest all the before-mentioned investigations, however
 lively this interest was and is to-day, and has stirred up the minds of
 all most thoroughly, not only in their scientific but also in their
 religious and ethical depths, some in [19]acknowledgment and
 admiration, others in aversion and repugnance, and only a few in sober
 and unprejudiced judgment. While some see in Darwinism the flambeau which
 now lights mankind to entirely new paths of truth, and also to spiritual
 and moral perfection, others see in it only an unproved hypothesis,
 threatening to become the torch which might change the noblest and
 greatest acquirements of the culture of past centuries into a heap of
 ashes; while some date from it a new period of culture, others see in it
 a deep descent of the present from the scientific, religious, and moral
 height which mankind has ascended.
Under these circumstances, it has become an impossibility for religion
 and the moral interest as guardians of the highest and most sacred
 acquisitions of mankind, and still more for theology and ethics as the
 scientific representations of religion and morality, to remain idle
 spectators. It would certainly be more agreeable to them, and more
 profitable, if they could delay their judgment until the question became
 better cleared up. For the whole question presented by Darwin has not yet
 passed beyond the stage of problems and attempts at solution; and there
 is always something unsatisfactory in being compelled to deal with
 theories which in their fundamentals are still hypotheses. But since all
 tendencies of the present which are hostile to Christianity and to the
 theistic view of the world, from the most extreme materialism up to the
 most sublime monism (as pantheism and materialism of to-day have begun to
 call themselves), seemingly with the confidence of complete victory, take
 possession of Darwinism as the solid ground from which they hope to
 destroy all and every belief [20]connected with faith in a living creator and
 master of the world, it has also become impossible for those to whom the
 religious and ethical acquisitions of mankind are a sacred sanctuary to
 take any longer a reserved and expectant position. Silence now would be
 looked upon only as an inglorious retreat; and thus nothing remains but
 openly to face the question: What position must religion and morality
 take in reference to the Darwinian theories?
In order to treat of the question with that objectivity which it
 requires, we have to begin with a synopsis of the theories themselves. In
 this representation we have to discriminate strictly between the merely
 scientific theories and the naturo-philosophical and metaphysical
 supplements and conclusions which have been brought into connection with
 them. For precisely in the mixing of the most different problems which
 are to be considered here, lies the main cause of the confused and
 superficial judgment which is so often heard upon these questions.
[21]
[23]
THE SCIENTIFIC PROBLEM.
The interesting problem which underlies Mr. Darwin's theories is the
 answer to the question: How did the different species of organic
 beings on the earth originate? We find ourselves in the midst of an
 endless variety of organic beings, animals and plants; we see ourselves,
 so far as regards the entire physical part of our being, in relationship
 with this organic world—especially with the organization and
 physical functions of the animal body. The organic individuals come and
 go. They originate by being begotten by and born of individuals of the
 same kind, or they spring up through the formation of germs and buds; and
 they produce in the same way new individuals, that resemble them in all
 essential characteristics. Like always begets like, so far as our
 observations go. But not only the individuals, but even the species to
 which they belong, must have originated at some definite period of
 time—and, indeed, as geology tells us, not all at once, but in a
 long series, which stretched through immeasurable epochs of the earth's
 history. Thus we come face to face with the question, already put, which
 we can now formulate more [24]precisely: How did the first individuals
 of each organic species come into existence?
No human being ever has observed, nor ever could observe, the
 origination of a new species, because man, as it seems, did not appear on
 the earth until all the other organisms were in existence. For this
 reason, the scientists for a long time thought it unprofitable to occupy
 themselves with this question; and even in our time a great many of them
 declare the question to be absolutely insolvable, and every attempt at
 answering it to be an unjustifiable use of hypotheses. But the impulse
 toward investigation admits of no limitation so long as there is any
 probability of extending its field of action. Especially in the province
 of nature, so many things which could not be discovered by mere
 observation have been traced indirectly, and so many important and
 established facts have been added to our stores of knowledge, by first
 starting from hypothetical premises, that man has again and again
 endeavored to approximate an answer to the question of the origin of
 species by taking the indirect course of hypothesis and induction,
 whenever the direct way of observation did not lead to any result.
 Religion of course gives a solution to the problem by stating that the
 species have been originated by the creative act of God. It is wrong to
 say that this solution is opposed to the above-mentioned impulse toward
 investigation; for this solution suffices for religion, whether a natural
 progress in the origination of species be established or not. For, to the
 believer in religion, the whole universe, with all its objective
 phenomena and growth, is the work of God as well as the individuals of
 the already existing species; and a [25]closer acquaintance with
 the manner of their origin is not only no disturbance to his ground of
 belief, but, on the contrary, an addition to his knowledge of the method
 of God's action. In every man of sound mind, the religious faith is not
 antagonistic or even indifferent to the scientific impulse toward
 investigation, but stands upon a most intimate footing with it. Hence the
 human intellect again and again makes the attempt to find an answer to
 the problem of the origin of species in a scientific way, and each
 endeavor of this kind necessarily ends with the dilemma that either the
 first individuals of a species, no matter whether it be the highest or
 the lowest, have been evolved out of inorganic matter, or they originated
 by descent from the most closely related species of their predecessors.
 The denial of the first part of our dilemma, and the affirmation of the
 second, is the "Theory of Descent."
But this theory of descent leads us at once into another dilemma. If
 the species originated by descent from the most closely related lower
 species, and under certain circumstances also from species of the same
 rank, and even by degeneration from the next higher, it must have
 occurred in one of two ways: either by leaps—called by naturalists
 "metamorphosis of germs" or "heterogenetic conception"—or by a
 succession of imperceptibly small alterations of the individuals from
 generation to generation. Each of these changes would have been no
 greater than the differences we observe to-day between the individuals of
 the very same species, but became in the course of time so massed and
 strengthened in one direction that new species have been evolved. This
 hypothesis is called the "Theory of Development," [26]or "Evolution." We retain
 this name, although well aware of the fact that the authors do not agree
 in their use of the term "evolution." Professor Wigand, who adopts only
 the theory of a descent from one primordial cell to another, and who
 positively rejects the idea of a progress from one fully developed
 species to another, claims among other things that one value of his own
 theory is that he secures for the idea of evolution its full meaning. The
 expression still has a meaning for those who reject the real descent of
 the species or their primordial germs one from another, and acknowledge
 only the ideal bond of a common plan in their successive manifestations.
 But as soon as we examine more closely the literal and logical meaning of
 the word, we shall find it of most weight when we understand by it the
 before-mentioned gradual evolution in opposition to the theory of
 progress by leaps or new creations. Moreover, it is well known that long
 before this no other term than evolution was used to designate the growth
 of a single organic individual from the primordial cell and egg to its
 fully developed form and vital function. Besides, we find ourselves also
 in harmony with most of the authors, so far as they have distinct
 conceptions of the different scientific problems, if we use the term
 "theory of evolution" for the gradual development of one species from
 another, in opposition to the hypothesis of a metamorphosis of germs, or
 even of a genealogy of primordial cells.
But each evolution theory leads again to new theories, as soon as it
 has to be proved in a scientific way. For it can claim a scientific worth
 only when sustained by earnest attempts to find and prove the [27]productive
 power, agencies and laws of such an evolution of species. Those attempts
 can be made in various ways. As a philosophical question, many attempts
 at solution have been made, both in ancient and modern times; but being
 mainly in the realm of metaphysics, they do not come within the limits of
 our scientific essay. As a question for investigators of natural
 phenomena, only two attempts of sufficient importance to be mentioned
 have been made. The first one was made by Lamarck, who, taking the really
 different ideas of descent and evolution as one, made use of the
 hypothesis of transmutation; thus becoming the pioneer of Darwinism. The
 other attempt was made by Darwin in his theory of natural selection, or
 struggle, for existence, and is called the "Theory of Selection."
In defining our problem, therefore, we find ourselves under the
 influence of a scientific law of development. The simple problem which we
 started from has developed into a trinity of problems and attempts at
 solution. The simple question of the origin of species led us into the
 dilemma of a generatio ćquivoca, or a descent; the hypothesis of a
 descent led to the dilemma of a heterogenetic conception, or an
 evolution; and the hypothesis of an evolution rendered necessary the
 attempt at explaining this evolution, and showed Darwin's method of
 explaining it by his selection theory. It will be well for the reader to
 keep distinctly in mind the difference between these problems and
 theories, in following our investigations, even if we cannot arrange our
 historical sketch according to the natural principle of division arising
 from these differences.
For it lies in the nature of the question itself, that [28]these theories,
 in their historical progress, did not appear singly, but together. Those
 who inclined to the theory of a descent of species could claim for it the
 attention of scientific investigators only after having also made the
 attempt at conceiving this descent in a concrete way, and according to
 certain analogies of observation. The only analogy of the kind appeared
 in the sphere of individual development and individual differences on the
 one hand, and in that of closely related characters of allied species on
 the other; and thus led of itself to the evolution theory. As soon as the
 naturalists thought they had found the causes of such an evolution of the
 species, they naturally placed these causes in the foreground of their
 demonstrations, and erected upon them the structure of their entire
 theory; thus treating descent, evolution and selection as one single and
 indissolubly connected theory. But this manner of treating the question
 had also its dangers, which have already caused a great deal of confusion
 and misunderstanding, as well as much unprofitable controversy. Often
 friends and enemies of the theories placed that which was in favor of the
 theory of descent to the credit of the evolution or selection theory;
 and, on the other hand, that which seemed opposed to the selection theory
 was often held to be a weakening of the evolution and descent theory; and
 this was done, not only by amateurs, but often enough by the highest
 authorities also. In reality, however, it is quite conceivable that the
 idea of a descent may prove correct, and possibly the idea of an
 evolution of the species will have to be replaced by that of a
 heterogenetic generation, or by the theory that certain groups in the
 organic system are originated [29]by heterogenetic generation, and others by
 evolution; and so the evolution theory must share with the theory of
 heterogenetic generation, or of a metamorphosis of germs. On the other
 hand, it is conceivable that even where the evolution theory is
 confirmed, the evolution can be accounted for wholly or partly by other
 reasons than those derived from the selection theory. And even this
 result of present investigations is not inconceivable: that the reasons
 for and against the different theories will be found to balance one
 another to such a degree that they will sooner or later lead science, in
 answering the question of the origin of species, to the old confession of
 Socrates—"Ignoramus."
We shall, therefore, have to arrange our historical sketch according
 to the historical order of the appearance of the theories, and treat the
 problems more or less as an undivided whole. But we shall keep in mind,
 during our historical sketch, not only the logical separation of the
 problems in question, in order not to lose clearness of judgment, but we
 shall also at the end of our review, if we consider the present condition
 of the problems, have to examine the same once more in detail, so far as
 regards the above mentioned separation.
[30]
RISE OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.
§ 1. Direct Predecessors.—Lamarck.
The first man who gave direct expression to the idea of a successive
 generation of the species through transmutation, and who attempted to
 follow it up in a scientific way, was the French naturalist and
 philosopher, Jean Lamarck, born 1744. In the year 1801, and subsequently,
 he published his views, first in smaller essays and afterward more in
 detail in his "Philosophie Zoologique," which appeared in 1809,
 and in the first volume of his "Histoire Naturelle des Animaux sans
 Vertčbres," published in 1815. In these works Lamarck upholds fully
 the descent and evolution theory, and maintains that the simplest
 organisms are generated through a generatio spontanea, which is
 still taking place; but that all the more developed organisms, including
 man, are descended through a gradual change from other species. With this
 theory, he put himself in direct and conscious opposition to the old
 doctrine of the immutability of species and their characteristics, which
 had been ably maintained by Linnćus, and also made some attempts at
 explanation which approach very nearly the selection theory. A change in
 the physical conditions of life, especially the force of habit in the use
 or disuse of the organs, the inheritance of physical and psychical [31]qualities thus attained, and the extension
 of the process of transmutation into extraordinarily long periods of time
 with very slight changes, are also, in his view, the probable causes of
 the variation and development of the species. He only lacks the idea of a
 natural selection in the struggle for existence, and the comparison of
 the processes in nature with the methodical selection of man in the
 breeding of domestic animals and plants, to identify his views with those
 of Darwin.
At first, Lamarck met only with violent opposition; but after a little
 while his views ceased to attract attention. The time had not yet come to
 make such an attempt at observing nature from the standpoint of
 evolution. The sciences which favor such a mode of observation, and even
 demand it—such as comparative anatomy and physiology and the
 history of the development of the different plants and animals—were
 only in their infancy, or were—like palćontology and the
 comparative geography of plants and animals—not yet in existence.
 The influence of Linnćus, whose views diametrically opposed those of
 Lamarck, predominated over all the investigations of natural science;
 Buffon, who favored the ideas of Lamarck, and loved to trace a unity in
 natural phenomena, was too instable in his investigations and views to
 arrive at a comprehensive principle; and even the eminent naturalist,
 Cuvier, of Montpellier, showed in his observation of nature a
 predilection for analysis rather than synthesis, and although his
 comprehensive mind inclined to generalize and explain, he placed himself
 in decided opposition to a theory which was founded only on a few
 decisive facts.
This last mentioned deficiency seems to have been [32]the main cause
 of Lamarck's views soon being lost sight of. They nowhere found a support
 in facts; the force of habit played in them an exaggerated and unnatural
 rôle; the different illustrations of them—such as the long
 neck of the giraffe explained by the permanent and inherited habit of
 browsing on the branches of high trees, or the web on the toes of frogs,
 swimming-birds, etc., explained by the habit of swimming—were
 talked about and laughed at more as curiosities than as worthy of serious
 consideration.
Only twice after this did the question put by Lamarck attract wider
 attention from the learned world. The first time was when, in 1830, the
 bitter contest arose at the Academy of Paris, between Cuvier and Etienne
 Geoffrey St. Hilaire, the father of Isidor G. St. Hilaire. Geoffrey St.
 Hilaire had views similar to Lamarck's, but reached them from quite a
 different standpoint—from the observation of the analogy and
 homology of the organs; and accounted for the variation of species, not
 by the use or disuse of the organs, but on the one hand by the common
 original type of the organs, and on the other by the varied influence of
 the surroundings—the monde ambiant. Lamarck himself seems
 not to have been mentioned in this contest. The controversy turned much
 more on the question whether in observing nature we can proceed by
 synthesis and find in the analogies of the organisms the principles for
 explaining the real connection between the different organic forms, or
 whether the analytical process is the only correct one, and the
 synthetical should be discarded. The solution of it will probably be,
 that the one process must be supplemented by the [33]other, as Goethe has
 already shown in his account of this controversy; but at that time it was
 decided in favor of the analytical principle, and the question was for
 the time dropped. It came up for a second time, but created little
 excitement, in 1844, when an anonymous work, "Vestiges of the Natural
 History of Creation," directed the attention and the interest of
 scientists again to Lamarck and his doctrine. But this interest also soon
 came to an end, until through Darwin's first publication the
 half-forgotten man again suddenly attained great honor.
Those who wish to form a closer acquaintance with the different
 advocates of the evolution theory before Darwin's appearance, will find
 them carefully arranged in the historical sketch which Darwin gives in
 the introduction to his work on "The Origin of Species"; and the most
 important extracts of Lamarck's "Philosophie Zoologique" are to be
 found in Oscar Schmidt's "Descent and Darwinism."[1]
§ 2. Indirect Preparations.
While thus the ideas of Lamarck gradually fell into partial oblivion,
 yet contemporaneous with and following them arose several other series of
 thoughts, views, and investigations, which, although they only indirectly
 prepared for the revival of the evolution theory, yet exercised a deeper
 and more lasting influence on the minds of scientists. We refer to the
 ideas in regard to natural phenomena held during the first decades of our
 century; further, to the principles of comparative anatomy which, up to
 the present time, partly dependent [34]and partly independent of
 natural philosophy, have been expressed, valued, and admired as leading
 thoughts; and, lastly, to the empiric results of comparative anatomical
 and biological investigations in palćontology and geology, as attained by
 the help of those very principles. And even physics and astronomy had to
 coöperate in preparing the way for the idea of evolution.
The philosophical ideas referred to, together with the points of view
 and results of comparative anatomy, led more and more decisively to the
 idea of an original form, or type, which retains its
 identity in all the modifications of form in plants and animals; and of a
 ground-plan, which is realized in the systems of the plant and
 animal world in higher and higher differentiations and in more and more
 developed modifications, diverging farther and farther from the prototype
 until it reaches its highest form, still reducible to the prototypes, in
 the most highly organized dicotyledons in plants, and in the animal world
 in the mammalia, and lastly in man.
Men like Cuvier and Geoffrey St. Hilaire, who otherwise stand
 diametrically opposed to each other, unite in these and kindred ideas.
 The naturalist Oken attains the same result, tinged with the views of
 Schelling; the poet Goethe, from an intuitive knowledge of nature,
 arrived at the same conclusion. The former, during a journey in the Hartz
 Mountains, at the sight of a bleached deer's skull, and the latter, upon
 picking up a sheep's skull in the Jewish cemetery at Venice, were struck
 by the same thought: the skull is only a modified vertebra. Oken founded
 upon this idea and kindred analogies his profound philosophy of the
 system of animals and plants which comes very near to the evolution [35]theory,
 and in his cosmogony traces all organisms to a protoplasm in such a way
 as to bring him in this respect also very near to Darwinism. Goethe, in
 his metamorphosis of plants, develops ideas in which, in all seriousness,
 he makes a concrete application of his thought of a prototype to the leaf
 of a plant; and proved for zoölogy the fruitfulness of his idea of a type
 by his well known discovery of the mid-jaw bone in man. Although Oscar
 Schmidt seems to be decidedly right in supposing, in opposition to Ernst
 Häckel, that Goethe did not intend to have his idea of unity and
 development taken in a real but in an ideal sense, and hence could not be
 called a direct representative of the evolution theory, still he is all
 the more decidedly a predecessor of that theory in directing attention to
 the unity in plan and metamorphosis of plants and animals. Louis Agassiz,
 who, on the other hand, continued up to his death in opposition to the
 entire doctrine of descent, made the idea of types the principle
 of his whole classification, and said: "Man is the purpose toward which
 the whole animal creation tends from the first appearance of the first
 paleozoic fish." Richard Owen, who rejected the selection theory and
 favored that of descent, published, long before Darwin's appearance, some
 most interesting results of his anatomical and palćontological
 investigations from the point of view of the prototype and its
 modifications. "Man, from the beginning of organisms, was ideally present
 upon the earth," is a sentence which we quote from Owen's works.
In short, this ideal momentum in the observation of the organic
 kingdoms is not only the most beautiful blossom and the ripest fruit of
 the union between [36]laborious and comprehensive detailed
 investigations and a generalizing philosophic penetration, but it was
 also a very efficient preparation of the mind for the evolution problem,
 so far as the summing up of the organisms under a type and plan is only
 the ideal reverse of its realistic reduction to a common pedigree.
We have yet to add the investigations in regard to the history of
 evolution of the single organisms, as well as those in comparative
 anatomy, which in former centuries were begun by scientists like
 Swammerdam and Boerhave and carried more nearly to completion by K. E.
 von Baer, Carus, and others. In reducing all the tissues of plants and
 animals to one cell, and tracing back also their individual developments
 to the first differentiation of the simplest cell, they followed out the
 unity of the plan of the organic kingdoms—which hitherto had been
 maintained only ideally and proclaimed as a philosophic
 postulate—farther and deeper into the sphere of empiric reality. We
 must mention, moreover, the great palćontological discoveries which, from
 the first foraminifera of the Cambrian formations up to the historical
 period of man, showed a great progressive scale in the appearance of the
 organisms and a very wide relationship between this scale and the natural
 systems of botany and zoölogy; and, finally, the principles of geology,
 which, under the leadership of Sir Charles Lyell, starting from the idea
 of an identity of the powers which were active in former times with those
 of the present, attempted to explain the most violent of the changes in
 the earth's crust in former times by causes active to-day. This often
 explains prodigious effects—such as the elevation and settling of
 entire mountains [37]and continents—by the constant and
 related action of the slightest causes and most gradual steps; it opens
 the perspective into vast epochs of long and numerous geological periods;
 and sometimes, where scientists like Cuvier and Agassiz have supposed the
 most complete cataclysms and the most universal revolutions of the globe,
 there prove to have been only gradual changes with revolutions very
 partially and locally limited.
Finally, if we take into consideration the grand discoveries which
 strikingly illustrate the connection in extent and quality between the
 universe and all its agencies and powers—such as Robert von Mayer's
 discovery of the conservation of force and of the mechanical equivalent
 of heat, or the spectrum analysis and the information which it gives us
 by ever-increasing evidences of the identity of the cosmic and telluric
 substances—we may venture to say that the scientific and
 intellectual ground was well prepared for a theory which takes the origin
 of organisms into this common relationship of the essential unity and
 development of the universe.
Only one thing more remained to complete the hypothesis offered by
 Lamarck, of the fact of a development of species by a new and more
 satisfactory answer to the question as to the manner of their
 development. The task of answering in a more comprehensive and scientific
 way the question as to the manner of development has been undertaken by
 Darwin in his selection theory. Alfred Russell Wallace, who arrived at
 the same results contemporaneously with and independently of Darwin, has,
 with praiseworthy modesty, renounced his claim to priority of the
 discovery, as Darwin had been longer engaged in working out his theories
 and had begun to collect materials for proof.
[38]
HISTORY OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.
§ 1. Darwin.
In order to explain the development of higher species from lower ones
 in a natural way, Darwin starts from two facts. The first fact is, that
 all individuals of the same species show, besides their specific
 similarity, individual differences: a fact which we call the law of
 individual variability. The other fact is, that each individual
 inclines to transmit to his offspring all his qualities—not only
 the characteristics of the species, but also those of the individual: a
 fact which we call the law of heredity.
To show how the whole basis of explanation of the evolution of one
 species from another is given in these two facts, Darwin calls attention
 to the rules according to which the often extraordinarily great varieties
 of domestic animals and cultivated plants are obtained and preserved;
 namely, the rules of artificial breeding. The breeder simply
 selects from a species those individuals having such individual qualities
 as he wishes to preserve and to increase, and refrains from breeding
 those individuals which do not possess the characteristics he wants or
 which possess them only in a small degree. He continues the same process
 with the next generation; and by the constant and effectual agency of the
 two [39]before-mentioned laws, he will, after the
 lapse of a few generations, have breeded a variety in which the
 characteristics originally belonging only to a single individual have
 become common and permanent.
It is now important to consider whether nature, in natural
 selection (whence the name "Selection Theory") does not act
 unconsciously according to the same rules, and attain the same results,
 as man with his artificial and intentional selection; and, furthermore,
 whether she does not reach results which, according to that principle of
 natural selection, finally explain the origin of all, even of the highest
 and most complicated organisms, from one single original form or a few
 original and simplest forms. Darwin finds these questions answered in the
 affirmative; and arrives at this answer through the following
 conclusions.
The English political economist Malthus (1766-1834), in his "Essay on
 the Principles of Population," established a law in regard to the growth
 of the human race, which may be applied just as well to all the species
 of the entire organic world: that population tends to increase in a
 geometrical ratio, although the conditions of life for the individual
 remain the same or at most increase in an arithmetical ratio. The
 consequence is that if the species is to be preserved and the individuals
 of future generations are to continue to find sufficient food and other
 means for sustaining life, a great many individuals of each generation
 must perish very early, and even as germ and seed, and only a minority
 will be preserved and reproduced. This exuberant prodigality of
 life-germs, of which proportionately only a few are preserved and
 reproduced, takes place in the plant and [40]animal world in a very
 marked degree. There a continual struggle for existence prevails;
 each individual has to get access to his conditions of life by wresting
 them from a whole series of other individuals of his own or other
 species; and now the question arises: which individuals will survive in
 this struggle? which will more probably be preserved and procreate
 offspring? Evidently, the answer is, those individuals which possess
 individual characteristics more favorable to the preservation of the
 individual than those possessed by other individuals. These individual
 characteristics are transmitted to the next generation. In this there
 will be again individuals that have in a still higher degree the
 characteristics thus transmitted and favorable for the preservation of
 the individual, or that add to these favorable characteristics new
 characteristics favorable in another direction to the survival of the
 individual in the struggle for existence. While these individuals, with
 more probability than the others, are thus preserved and reproduced, they
 transmit to their offspring not only the old favorable characteristics
 increased, but also those newly added. Among the favorable individual
 qualities, Darwin reckons the divergence of character, the perfection of
 organization, and the law of correlation; the latter, however, can not be
 explained by natural selection, since according to this law a variation
 in an organ brings about a corresponding variation in entirely different
 organs (e.g., cats with white fur and blue eyes are also
 deaf).
This is natural selection by means of the survival of the fittest
 in the struggle for existence. Changes in the conditions and
 surroundings of life, and more or less [41]perfect adaptation of the
 organisms to the new conditions of form, color, food and habit, are the
 main causes of those individual variations, the accumulation of which
 through many generations produces so great effects. If we only have
 behind us periods long enough to permit us to imagine each step in the
 development as an extremely small and hardly appreciable one, natural
 selection offers us not the exclusive but the main means of explaining
 the evolution of the whole animal and plant world out of one or a few
 simple organized original forms.
This is the outline of the selection theory, as given by Darwin in
 1859, and still retained in all its essentials. It is true, in his work
 on the origin of man he added as supplemental the sexual to the
 common natural selection, and made it of special importance for the
 presentation of the beautiful in nature—for the production
 of beautiful forms, colors, and tones, and for the development of power
 and intelligence. And in the same work he said that there are many
 circumstances of structure which seem to be neither beneficial nor
 detrimental to the individual, and that to have overlooked this fact was
 one of his greatest mistakes in his former publications. But for the
 rest, he maintains the selection theory unchanged, with the single
 modification that it explains, if not the whole development of the
 species through descent, at least that which is of most importance in
 it.
That it was only one step in the course of reasoning to extend the
 selection theory to the descent of man, was seen by many as soon as
 Darwin's work on the origin of species was published and began to attract
 [42]attention; although not a syllable upon this
 question was presented in this work. Various persons manifested their
 presentiment or perception according to their point of view—partly
 by the most violent opposition to the new doctrine, partly by scientific
 development or modification of their anthropogonic views, partly also by
 revelling in imagination in the consequences hostile to religious faith
 which they thought could be drawn from this doctrine. We remind the
 reader of the itinerant lectures of Karl Vogt about the ape-pedigree of
 man, and of the echo they found by assent or dissent in press and public;
 also of Huxley in England, Karl Snell, Schleiden, Reichenbach, and
 others; of the materialists, L. Büchuer and Moleschott, and of the
 publications of Ernst Häckel. Finally, Darwin himself made us fully
 certain of the importance which from the beginning he had attributed to
 his theory, by publishing his work on the "Descent of Man," in the year
 1870.
In this work he explained the descent of man fully from the
 before-named principles of the descent, evolution, and selection
 theories, of which we have given all the essentials in the foregoing
 presentation. He carefully enumerates everything in the structure of the
 human body that reminds us of our relationship with the
 animals—especially those embryonic phenomena and rudimentary organs
 in man which are still to be found in use and in a more developed state
 in different animal species, and which led him to imagine our ancestors
 now with a tail, then with sharp ears, now living in the water, then
 being hermaphrodites. He reviews the spiritual qualities of man, and
 finds for them all analogous qualities in the animal world. He finds in
 his work on [43]"Expression of the Emotions in Man and
 Animals," published in 1872, new confirmation of the genealogical
 relationship of both. He looks over the whole course of the zoölogical
 system and of palćontological discoveries, and searches for the points
 where the branches and twigs of the animal pedigree of man must have
 diverged. To begin with the lowest branches, he thinks the most important
 divergence took place where the series of vertebrates may have been
 developed out of the invertebrates. Here he adopts the investigations of
 A. Kowalewsky, and the deductions of Häckel founded upon them, concerning
 the larva of the ascidić, a genus of marine mollusca of the order
 tunicata, and sees in a cord, to be found in this larva, most decided
 relationship to the spine of the lancelet fish or amphioxus, the lowest
 of all the vertebrates, it being yet doubtful whether it belongs at all
 to the vertebrates. In the transition that once took place from one
 species of ascidian larva to a form similar to the lancelet fish, he sees
 the new branch diverging in the series of vertebrates. Out of the fish he
 concludes that the amphibia were developed, and out of those the
 reptilia, out of one of them the marsupialia, and from them the lemurs or
 half-apes, the representatives of which yet live in Madagascar and the
 southern part of Asia. From these there branched off on the one side the
 platyrrhini, or apes with a flat nose, on the new continent; on the
 other, the catarrhini, or apes with a narrow nose, on the old. Among the
 ancestor of the last, he searches for the common progenitors, from which
 again two branches started—on the one hand the ignoble branches of
 the catarrhine species of apes, always remaining lower in [44]development, to
 which also belong the anthropomorphous apes, like the orang outang and
 gibbon in Asia, the gorilla and chimpanzee in Africa; on the other hand,
 that branch which represents the ascent of animals to man.
The refining agencies which finally raise the animal up to the man are
 essentially the same that on the lowest scales of the pedigree have
 caused the development of the lower organisms into the higher, namely:
 favorable individual variations, inheritance, acclimatization, survival
 of the fittest in the struggle for existence, natural, and especially,
 sexual selection. These are, if not the exclusive, still the main
 agencies which finally led the primate of the earthly creation upon the
 stage and furnished him with his superior faculties. But it is
 particularly by means of his social life, and of the forces which
 determine, transmit, increase and ennoble the various impulses and
 instincts promoting it, that man has become what he is. Through the need
 and faculty of reciprocal help, through sexual selection—which of
 course is a very essential factor of social life—there originated
 language, and reflection, and all the intellectual qualities; and through
 these again originated the moral qualities, which are most important in
 constituting the specific worth of man, and which were finally developed
 into self-consciousness and free moral responsibility.
But with the description of this attempt to explain more in detail
 these specific characteristics of man, we leave the ground of pure
 natural science and enter the region of philosophy, in which we have to
 take up the [45]question again (in Book
 II, Ch. I) at the same point where we here leave it.
§ 2. The Followers of Darwin.—Ernst Häckel.
Darwin's theory soon found an enthusiastic corps of followers—on
 the continent, and especially in Germany, almost more than in his own
 country. The outlook into an entirely new explanation of the origin of
 man, and the probable use of this theory for attacks upon faith in a
 Creator and Master of the world, called wide-spread attention to it; and
 the theory opened to natural science itself entirely new impulses and
 paths, and promised the solution of many problems before which it had
 hitherto been compelled to stand in silence. To be sure, it threatened
 likewise to allure the mind from the slow but sure ways of solid study to
 the entertaining but insecure and aimless paths of imagination and
 hypothesis.
Among all the German followers of Darwin who adopted not only the idea
 of an origin of species through descent and evolution, but also the
 explanation of evolution by natural selection, and extended it so as to
 make the principle of selection of exclusive value, Ernst Häckel occupies
 the most prominent rank.
In his "General Morphology," published in 1866, and in his "Natural
 History of the Creation," the first edition of which appeared in 1868,
 and finally in his "Anthropogeny"[2] (why he does not say Anthropogony, we are
 nowhere informed), 1874, this scientist brought the new theory, which had
 been presented by Darwin in an almost bewildering flood of details, into
 connection and order, and, analyzing the powers active in natural
 selection, combined them into an entire system of laws. He [46]at once drew the
 origin of man also into the course of reasoning on the new theory, and
 sustained the theory by the discovery of the monera and other low
 organisms of one cell, as well as by special investigations of the
 calcareous sponges. For these labors, he was rewarded by the warm and
 unreserved acknowledgment which Darwin made to him in his work upon the
 origin of man, which was published subsequently to the "Natural History
 of the Creation." There Darwin says: "If this work had appeared before my
 essay had been written, I should probably never have completed it. Almost
 all the conclusions at which I have arrived, I find confirmed by this
 naturalist, whose knowledge on many points is much fuller than mine."
 Häckel's labors rendered still greater service to the Darwinian theory by
 dividing the organic world into three kingdoms: the protista kingdom, the
 vegetable kingdom, and the animal kingdom,—a division which solves
 in a most simple way the difficulty that was felt more and more of
 securing for the lowest organisms a place among the animals or plants. He
 further aided the theory by leaving the choice open to adopt either a
 uniform or multiform pedigree of the organisms and their kingdoms and
 classes, and by treating each class under both points of view; and
 finally, by fascinating experiments to bring before us in detail the
 hypothetical pedigrees of all classes of organisms from the protista
 kingdom up to man.
We will try to reproduce briefly the pedigree which is of most
 interest—the hypothetical pedigree of man. Häckel divides it
 into twenty-two stages, eight of them belonging to the series of the
 invertebrates, and fourteen to that of the vertebrates. On this ladder of
 [47]twenty-two rounds, he leads us from the
 lowest form of the living being, in slight and mostly plausible
 transitions, continually higher and higher, up to man; and makes our
 steps easy by mentioning at each stage, on the one hand the corresponding
 state in the embryonic development, on the other the still living
 creature through which, in his opinion, the former organisms of the
 corresponding round of the ladder are still represented, and which
 accordingly has been a creature that remained on its round, while other
 members of its family have been developed up to man and to many other
 genera and species.
He begins with the monera, the organisms of the lowest form,
 discovered by himself, which have not so much as the organic rank of a
 cell, but are only corpuscules of mucus, without kernel or external
 covering, called by him cytod, and arising from an organic carbon
 formation. The lowest and most formless moneron is the bathybius,
 discovered by Thomas Huxley, a network of recticular mucus, which in the
 greatest depths of the sea, as far down as 7,000 metres, covers stone
 fragments and other objects, but are also found in less depths, in the
 Mediterranean Sea, for instance. From the moneron he proceeds to the
 amœba—a simple cell, with a kernel, which still corresponds
 to the egg of man in its first state. The third stage is formed by the
 communities of amœbć (synamœbć), corresponding to the
 mulberry-yolk in the first development of the fecundated egg, and to some
 still living heaps of amœbć. To the fourth stage he assigns the
 planća, corresponding to the embryonic development of an albumen and the
 planula or ciliated [48]larva. When these ciliated larvć are
 developed, they contract themselves so as to form a cavity; and this
 fifth stage—especially important for his theory—he calls
 gastrća. In this form, he says, the progaster is already developed, and
 its wall is differentiated for the first time into an animal or dermal
 layer (ectoblast), and into a vegetative or intestinal layer (hypoblast).
 At the sixth stage, there branched off the prothelmis, or worms, with the
 first formations of a nervous system, the simplest organs of sense, the
 simplest organs for secretion (kidneys) and generation (sexual organs),
 represented to-day by the gliding worms or turbellaria; as the seventh
 stage, the soft worms, as he called them at first—the blood worms,
 or cœlomati, as he describes them in his "Anthropogeny"—a
 purely hypothetical stage, on which a true body-cavity and blood were
 formed; the eighth stage are the chorda-animals with the beginning of a
 spinal rod, corresponding to the larva of the ascidić. At the ninth
 stage, called the skull-less animals (acrania), and corresponding to the
 still living lancelet, we enter the series of the vertebrates. The
 importance of the eighth and ninth stages for the theory, we have already
 pointed out in our remarks upon Darwin, p. 43. The
 tenth stage is formed by those low fishes in which the spinal rod is
 differentiated into the skull—and the vertebral-column, called the
 single-nostriled animals (monorrhini), and represented by the cyclostoma
 of today (hag and lampreys). The eleventh stage is formed by the primćval
 fish or selachii (sharks); the twelfth by the mud fish, of which there
 still live the protopterus in Africa, the lepidosiren in the tributaries
 of the Amazon, and the ceratodus in the swamps of Southern [49]Australia. On
 the thirteenth stage, there are the gilled amphibians (sozobranchia),
 proteus and axolotl; on the fourteenth, the tailed amphibians (sozura),
 newt and salamander; on the fifteenth, the purely hypothetical primćval
 amniota or protamnia (amnion is the name given to the chorion which
 surrounds the germ-water and embryo of the three higher classes of
 vertebrates) on the sixteenth, the primary mammals (promammalia), to
 which the present monotremes (ornithorhynchus and echidna) stand nearest;
 on the seventeenth, the pouched animals or marsupialia; on the
 eighteenth, the semi-apes or prosimić (loris and maki); on the
 nineteenth, the tailed apes, or menocerca (nose-apes and slender-apes, or
 semnopithecus); on the twentieth, the man-like apes (anthropoides) or
 tail-less catarrhini (gorilla, chimpanzee, orang outang and gibbon). And
 now we come to twenty-one—ape-like men or speechless primćval men
 (alali)—of whom we are reminded to-day by the deaf, and dumb, the
 cretins and the microcephali; and number twenty-two is homo
 sapiens, the man. The Australians and the Papuans are supposed to be
 the only remaining representatives of his first stage-development. In
 like manner, Häckel also gives us the stem-branches of all the types,
 classes and orders of the organisms, and forms from them a very
 acceptable hypothetical pedigree; or—if we prefer to suppose a
 polyphyletic rather than a monophyletic origin of
 species—hypothetical pedigrees of the whole organic world.
The perspicuity and clearness of Häckel's deductions, the extent of
 his knowledge, and the singleness of his aim, to which he makes them all
 subservient, lend [50]to his works a great charm. But on the other
 hand we dare not conceal that, even on the ground of explanations
 belonging purely to natural history, the character of hypothesis is often
 lost in that of arbitrariness and of the undemonstrable. Even the
 unlearned in natural science often enough get this impression when
 reading his works, and will find it confirmed by scientists who not only
 contradict his assertions in many cases, but disclose plain errors in his
 drawings—errors, indeed, exclusively in favor of the
 unity-hypothesis; and in other cases they show that drawings which are
 given as pictures of the real, represent merely hypothetical opinions.
 There is especially evident in his works an extremely strong tendency to
 impress on his hypotheses the character of an established and proved
 fact, by giving them the alluring name of laws. Entire systems of laws of
 the selection theory are produced, and all imaginable assertions are also
 immediately called laws. For example, Huxley, in his anatomical
 investigations of apes and men, arrives at the conclusion that the
 differences between the highest and the lowest apes are greater than the
 differences between the highest apes and man. This purely anatomical
 comparison, Häckel calls repeatedly "Huxley's Law." We are well aware
 that the idea of law is capable of great extension in meaning, and in
 that respect we can refer to nothing more instructive than the
 well-meditated inquiry upon this idea in the "Reign of Law" of the Duke
 of Argyll (London, Strahan & Co.). But if we may venture to call
 purely anatomical comparisons of this nature laws, such a use of
 language destroys all logical reasoning; and this mistake appears again
 in Häckel's philosophic [51]discussions, of which we shall have to speak
 hereafter. We shall have to refer also hereafter to an additional
 embellishment, which Häckel thinks himself obliged to give to his
 works—namely, that he makes on every occasion the strongest attacks
 upon faith in a personal God, a Creator and Lord of the world; that he
 traces all the motives of human action to self-interest; that he denies
 the liberty of man and the moral system of the world; that he makes
 consent to his view of things the criterion of the intellectual
 development of a man; and that he thinks to render a service to
 civilization by such a view of the world and of ethics.
In the consequent carrying out of the selection principle as the
 satisfactory key in explaining the origin of all species and also of man,
 Häckel is indeed, in spite of the approval of his works by the British
 master, more Darwinian than Darwin himself, who expressly refuses to give
 exclusive value to this theory of explanation. Hence there are among
 scientists only a few who go with him to this extent. In Germany, aside
 from the materialists, we only know of Seidlitz and Oskar
 Schmidt—who in the thirteenth volume of the "International
 Scientific Series" treats of "The Theory of Descent and Darwinism," and
 advocates not only the autocracy of the selection theory, but also all
 the monistic and atheistic consequences which are deduced from it.
 Perhaps Gustav Jäger, Schleiden, Bernhard Cotta—at least judging
 from their earlier publications—should be mentioned as followers of
 the pure selection theory; although they do not all draw from it the
 before-mentioned philosophic consequences. On the other hand, the number
 of those is very great who, although inspired [52]by Darwin to adopt the
 idea of an origin of species through descent and evolution, yet have more
 or less modified, laid aside, or entirely refused the very doctrine which
 is especially new in Darwin's theory—the selection theory. In the
 following section we shall briefly give an account of them.
§ 3. Modifications of the Theory—Moriz Wagner. Wigand.
One of the most prominent objections to the selection theory, which
 strikes us at once from the standpoint of natural history, is the
 following: The varieties of a domesticated species, obtained by
 artificial breeding, are lost, and return to the original wild form of
 the species as soon as they are crossed long enough with other varieties
 or are left to themselves and to the crossing with individuals of the
 original form of their species; and hence we can not see how individual
 characteristics, even if favorable to the individual, will not be lost
 again by the crossing which is inevitable in a state of nature, with such
 individuals as do not possess those characteristics. Besides, it is an
 established fact, confirmed by all our observations stretching over
 thousands of years, that the characteristics of species are preserved in
 spite of all individual modifications, and that this preservation of the
 characteristics of species has its cause essentially in the free crossing
 of individuals.
This objection induced Moriz Wagner to take up again an idea already
 expressed by Leopold von Buch, and to complete the principle of a
 selection through natural breeding by another, and partly, indeed, to
 supplant it by the principle of isolation by migration. Isolated
 individuals, who, from any reason naturally to [53]be accounted for, leave
 the mass of their fellows, can from the very consequence of this
 isolation transmit to their offspring common individual characteristics
 which are not destroyed again by the crossing with other individuals.
 They will especially fix and transmit these individual characteristics,
 when they are favorable to them for the conditions of existence in their
 new place of living, and these individual characteristics will so much
 the more be increased and developed in a direction favorable to the
 subsistence of the individuals in their new place of living, as there are
 more closely connected with this isolation variations in the conditions
 of existence, in climate, geographical surroundings, food, and so on. He
 very attractively applies this theory also to the explanation of the
 origin of man. According to his opinion, even the nearest animal
 progenitors of man were isolated, and the isolating power was the rise of
 the great mountains of the Old World, which took place previous to the
 glacial period. One pair, or perhaps a few pairs, of those progenitors
 were driven away from the luxurious climate of the torrid zone to the
 northern half of the globe, and found their return cut off by glaciers
 and high mountains; in place of a comfortable life on the trees,
 necessity urged them to gain support from conditions less favorable to
 existence, and necessity, this mother of so many virtues and
 achievements, finally made man what he is. In following out these ideas,
 Moriz Wagner has gradually and more and more decidedly given up the
 selection theory, and opposed it by sharp criticisms.
This migration or isolation theory also found a degree
 of favor, but subordinate in its nature. For it [54]can not and will not
 pretend to solve the main problems. It only tries to explain how the
 individual variations, already in existence, might have been preserved
 and perhaps increased, and how new conditions of existence could have
 roused latent powers; but not how these variations and these powers
 originated. Just as little is the selection theory able to explain this;
 but it pretends to do it, and hence we can easily comprehend how during
 the last few years a constantly increasing number of voices, and more
 important ones, have been raised against the selection theory. This
 opposition came not only from those who—like Agassiz, Barrande,
 Emil Blanchard, Escher von der Linth, Göppert, Giebel, Sir Roderick
 Murchison, Pfaff, and others—directly reject each and every idea of
 descent on account of the difficulty in defending the selection theory;
 or who—like Karl Ernst von Baer,[3] (the [55]pioneer in the region of
 the history of individual development), like Oskar Fraas, Griesebach,
 Sandberger, and others—generally take a more reserved and neutral
 position, because of the uncertainty of the facts and the inaccessibility
 of the problems; but it comes especially from those scientists who are
 inclined to adopt an origin of species through descent and even through
 development, yet refuse to explain it by the selection principle, and
 look for the essential cause of the development in the organisms
 themselves, without claiming to have themselves found these causes. Among
 the most prominent advocates of this view, we may name the late Sir
 Charles Lyell, Mivart, and [56]Richard Owen, in England; and in Germany,
 Alexander Braun, Ecker, Gegenbaur, Oswald Heer, W. His, Nägeli,
 Rütimeyer, Schaaffhausen, Virchow, Karl Vogt, A. W. Volkmann, Weismann,
 Zittel, and here also Moriz Wagner, and among the philosophers, Eduard
 von Hartmann. Many of these men are but little aware of the difference
 between the two questions: whether, on the one hand, the adoption of the
 origin of species through descent does not of itself involve the idea of
 a gradual development of one species from another, almost unobservable in
 its single steps; or, on the other hand, whether a descent of species
 through heterogenetic generation in leaps and through a metamorphosis of
 the germs, could be imagined. They consider descent and evolution as
 identical; and this identification is explainable so long as we are not
 in a condition to come nearer to the eventual causes of the supposed
 variation of species. But men are not wanting who put these questions
 clearly and plainly, and separate them distinctly from one another. Among
 them we may mention K. E. von Baer, Ed. von Hartmann and Wigand; of the
 latter we will have occasion to speak more in detail hereafter. Among
 them we find also scientists who answer the question in the sense of a
 new-modeling of the species, of a heterogenetic generation, and of a
 metamorphosis of germs. To this class belong especially Oswald
 Heer—"Urwelt der Schweitz" ("Antediluvian World in Switzerland"),
 Zürich, 1865, p. 590-604; Kölliker—"Ueber die Darwin'sche
 Schöpfungstheorie," ("Darwin's Theory of Creation"), Leipzig, 1864;
 "Morphologie und Entwicklungeschichte des Pennatulidenstammes nebst
 allgemeinen Betrachtungen zur Descendenzlehre," [57]("Morphology and History
 of the Development of the Stem of the Pennatulidć, together with General
 Remarks on the Descent Theory"), Frankfurt, 1872; and Heinrich
 Baumgärtner—"Natur und Gott" ("Nature and God"), Leipzig,
 Brockhaus, 1870. Heer has introduced into scientific language the term
 "new-modeling of the species," Kölliker that of a "heterogenetic
 generation," and Baumgärtner that of a "transmutation of the types
 through a metamorphosis of germs." Baer also is not averse to adopting
 the latter.
The botanist, Albert Wigand, of Marburg, takes a peculiar position. On
 one hand, the observation of the relationship of organic beings with one
 another leads him to adopt a common genealogy, a descent; on the other,
 the objections to adopting a descent of the species one from another
 appear to him insurmountable. In the first place, he sees all the species
 everywhere strictly limited—although in the second volume of his
 work, which appeared after the preceding lines were written, he again
 warns against a one-sided emphasizing of the invariability of species. In
 the second place, he sees so clearly, through the whole organic world,
 the differences, nay, the contrasts, of the species, in their building
 plan, in the numbers and conditions and positions of their parts, and in
 their mode of development, that it appears to him impossible to assume in
 the perfected organism a production of germs which in a course of
 generations, by a process even as gradual as possible, would grow into
 such an entirely new phenomenon as a new, even closely related, species
 would be. But if we adopt the theory of a heterogenetic generation, we
 explain by it the variety but not the similarity of species; [58]for a
 heterogenetic generation would in the new species make everything
 different from the old one—a conclusion, the necessity of which it
 would be difficult to show. For these reasons, he refers the descent of
 the organic beings, not to the series of the species, with their
 individuals already specified and defined, but to the series of
 primordial cells living free in the water. The earliest primordial
 cells represented only the common character of the whole organic
 world, and out of them the primordial cells of the animal and
 those of the vegetable kingdom were produced by dividing the
 cells; so that the first ones embraced only the general and primitive
 characteristics of the whole animal, the last ones those of the whole
 vegetable kingdom. Out of these primordial cells of the two kingdoms,
 those of the main types proceeded—(for instance, the
 primordial cells of the radiated animals, the vertebrates, etc., the
 gymnosperms, the angiosperms, etc.); out of them those of the
 classes—(for instance, the mammalia, the dicotyledons); out
 of them those of the orders—(for instance, the beasts of
 prey, rosiflorć); out of them those of the families (canina,
 rosaceć); out of them those of the genus (canis, rosa); and out of
 them those of the species (canis lupus, rosa canina). Only when
 the primordial cells of the species had been produced, were they
 developed into finished representatives of the species; and when once
 these primordial cells of the species had been developed into finished
 and full-grown individuals of the species, their transmission took place
 in the manner well known to us. Wigand published his criticism of the
 Darwinian Theories in his larger work, "Der Darwinismus und die
 Naturforschung Newtons und Cuviers," ("Darwinism [59]and the Natural Science
 of Newton and Cuvier"), Braunschweig, Vieweg, Vol. I, 1874, Vol. II,
 1876, and his own attempt at explanation in a smaller book, published at
 the same place in 1872: "Die Genealogie der Urzellen als Lösung des
 Descendenzproblems oder die Entstehung der Arten ohne natürliche
 Zuchtwahl" ("Genealogy of the Primordial Cells as a Solution of the
 Problem of Descent; or the Origin of Species without Natural
 Selection").
Whether this genealogy of the primordial cells found any
 followers, we do not know. None of the hypotheses thus far mentioned are
 so very far from having analogies in experience. The idea of a first
 development of the higher organisms out of their specific primordial
 cell, through all kinds of conditions of larvć up to the finished form,
 demands of us the acceptance of monstrous improbabilities—(think,
 for example, of the first men, who, originating from a human primordial
 cell, grow in different metamorphoses of larvć, first in the water and
 then on the land, until they appear as finished men). Moreover, the
 hypothesis, in claiming that a heterogenetic generation of one species
 from another must necessarily nullify all similarity between the organism
 of the child and that of the mother, is so little convincing, and
 shows—in the necessity of conceiving the universal type of
 organisms, the type of kingdoms, of main types, of classes, of orders, of
 families, of genera, and of species, as but individual existences which,
 in the form of cells and before the existence of the developed species,
 partly through many thousands of years, lead a real empiric and concrete
 life—such an abstract synthetical construction of nature, that [60]we are
 not astonished that the theory of the genealogy of primordial cells
 stands almost alone. On the other hand, Wigand's larger critical work
 rendered great service in clearing up the problems. It is true, his
 judgment appears in many single cases not at all convincing, since he
 often enough fights his adversaries with sophisms and deduces from the
 views of Darwin and Häckel conclusions to which they certainly do not
 lead. But in the majority of cases, his work is full of real convincing
 power, and with the breadth of its philosophical view and with the
 sharpness of its definitions, as well as with its abundance of
 philosophic and especially botanical teachings and their ingenious
 application, it is directly destructive to the use of the selection
 theory as the principal key to the solution of the problems. Eduard von
 Hartmann describes the work in his publication, "Wahrheit und Irrthum im
 Darwinismus," ("Truth and Error in Darwinism"), as a mile-stone which
 marks the limits where Darwinism as such passed the summit of its
 influence in Germany.
[61]
PRESENT STATE OF THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.
§ 1. The Theory of Descent.
The historical retrospect of the Darwinian theories, from their purely
 scientific side, leads us of itself to a critical review of their present
 state. We can briefly indicate in advance the result to which it will
 lead us, viz.: that the descent theory has gained, the selection theory
 has lost ground, the theory of development oscillates between both; but
 that all three theories have not yet passed beyond the rank of
 hypotheses, although they have very unequal hypothetical value. We can
 best arrange our review by beginning with that theory which is the most
 common, and which perhaps may still have value when both the others find
 their value diminished or lost: the theory of descent. From that
 we proceed to the theory of evolution, and from this to that of
 selection.
The theory of descent is indeed at first sight exceedingly plausible,
 and will probably always be the directive for all future
 investigations as to the origin of species. The organic species show,
 besides the great variety of their characteristics and the unchangeable
 nature of these characteristics, many other qualities which are common to
 them; and these common characteristics are precisely those which are most
 essential. [62]Moreover the higher the structure of the
 organisms which are differentiated, the more numerous and more valuable
 will become the evidences of similarity, and the greater also will be
 their distance from the inorganic and from the lowest organisms of their
 class, their type, or their kingdom. For instance, rose and apple-tree,
 elder and ash, wolf and dog, goat and sheep, ape and man, are not only a
 great deal farther removed from the mode of existence of inorganic bodies
 than the algć, the monera, and other low organisms, but they have also,
 in spite of the great interval which separates them from one another and
 especially which separates man from every animal, much more numerous and
 important points of contact than, for instance, two families or genera of
 algć or of mosses, of polyps or of infusoria, have among one another. Now
 our imagination refuses to accept the theory that the Creator, or nature,
 or whatever we wish to call the principle generating the species, in
 producing the new species, laid aside all those points of contact which
 are continually becoming more numerous and more important, and produced
 instead, by ever widening leaps, the new and higher species from the
 inorganic, which lies farther and farther from them. On the other hand,
 the theory appears to us all the more plausible, that every new species
 came into existence on that stage which is the most nearly related to it,
 and which was already in existence. If we add further, that the two old
 maxims of the natural scientists, omne vivum ex ovo and omne
 ovum ex ovario, have not been invalidated, in spite of all the
 searching for a generatio ćquivoca, and that, even if the
 origination of the lowest organisms out of the inorganic could in future
 be [63]proved, yet the truth of these maxims for
 all the higher organized individuals is established as a fact without
 exception. Moreover, if we take into consideration the fact that we can
 not at all imagine either the origin or the first development of a higher
 animal or a human organism without the protecting integument and the
 nourishing help of a mother's womb, we may venture to say that each and
 every attempt to render the origin of the first individuals of the higher
 species conceivable, leads of necessity to the descent theory. We have
 either to reject, once for all, such an attempt, as an unscientific
 playing with impossibilities, or to accept the idea of descent. It is
 certainly the lasting merit of Darwin, even if his whole structure of
 proofs should in the course of time show itself weak, that he not only
 had the courage (as others had before him), but also inspired scientists
 with the courage to trace the idea of a descent of species in a
 scientific way.
To be sure, so long as we have no other proof of the descent theory
 than the circumstance that we can imagine it, it will continue to be
 nothing more than an ingenious hypothesis. We have, therefore, to look to
 the realm of nature for more direct proofs; and we are there furnished
 with them. They are presented to us by geology in connection with the
 botanical and zoölogical systems, by geology in connection with vegetable
 and animal geography, by comparative anatomy, and by the history of the
 embryonic development of animals.
Geology finds in the strata of the crust of the globe a large
 number of extinct plants and animals of extraordinary variety; but all of
 them, however much they [64]may differ from the organisms of to-day, are
 completely in harmony with the botanical and zoölogical
 systems in which we divide the still living organisms. Not only have
 by far the most of the now extinct genera and species their family and
 stem-companions, and many even their genera and species companions, in
 the living world, but also those genera whose nearer relations are now
 extinct—as, for instance, the club-moss-trees, the trilobites, the
 ammonites, the belemnites, the sauria, the nummulites,—show still a
 very perceptible relationship with living genera, and can be quite
 accurately included in the botanical and zoölogical systems; nay, they
 even fill up gaps in it. The anatomical, morphological, and, so far as we
 can judge, the physiological and biological relationship of the fossil
 with living organisms, is so great and comprehensive that in the present
 state of science a systematic botany or zoölogy, that should only treat
 of the fossils or of living organisms alone, would be imperfect. But the
 relationship of the fossil organisms with the natural systems of botany
 and zoölogy is apparent not only in this respect, but also in the fact
 that the single species during the long periods of time which are shown
 by geology to have elapsed, came into existence in a series, which again
 pretty closely corresponds to the natural system of the organic kingdoms;
 and that the fossil representatives of all classes and families, the
 nearer they come to the present world, appear the more nearly related to
 the living organisms, so that the fauna and flora of the ante-human time
 are lost in those of the human period by transitions gliding from the one
 to the other. For instance, in the Miocene formation of the tertiary
 epoch [65]we find thirty per cent. of species still
 living to-day; in the Pliocene, even sixty to eighty per cent., and
 toward its end even about ninety-six per cent. of species which are
 identical with those now living.
A brief glance may still more closely illustrate this analogy between
 the geological series and the organic systems. Plants and animals seem to
 have appeared nearly at the same time, and at first in the form of the
 very lowest organisms. The earliest plants found by geology belong also
 to the lowest stage of the vegetable kingdom; they are the algć. They are
 followed again by higher cryptogamous plants, especially ferns and
 club-mosses. Only at a later period flowering plants appear, among them
 being first the plants with naked seeds standing lower in the systems, as
 the cycad-trees and pine-forests; later, those with enclosed seeds, among
 them being again first the monocotyledons, last the
 dicotyledons,—all of them precisely corresponding to the botanical
 system. The same thing is true in the animal kingdom. If the eozoon
 Canadense, found in the laurentian slate of the Cambrian formation in
 North America, is really an organism and not an inorganic form, the
 earliest vestiges of animal life we can find are the rhizopodes or
 foraminifera; and these organisms belong to the lowest stage of
 life—to that stage which forms a kind of undeveloped intermediate
 member between the vegetable and animal kingdom, Häckel's kingdom of the
 protista. The next oldest animal organisms found in the Cambrian
 formation are the zoöphytes, and immediately above them the mollusca and
 the crustacea. In the following Silurian period we find corals, radiata, worms,
 mollusca, and crustacea, in [66]great number, also all the main-types of the
 invertebrates; and in the highest Silurian strata there are also to be
 found representatives of the lowest class of vertebrates, of fish, but
 still of very low organization and little differentiated. That the five
 main-types of the invertebrates seem to have appeared quite
 contemporaneously, yet that the zoöphytes really appeared first, does not
 contradict the before-mentioned law of a progress in the appearance of
 the organisms from the lower to the higher. For in the zoölogical system
 also these main-types of the invertebrates do not stand one above the
 other, but by the side of each other: at most, the radiata, the worms,
 the mollusca, and the articulata, take their places above the zoöphytes.
 Only within the main-types, in the classes, orders, etc., do differences
 in rank take effect; and even here, not without exception. What
 difference in rank, for instance, is there between an oyster and a
 cuttle-fish? between a cochineal and a bee or ant? and yet the first two
 belong to one and the same type—the type of mollusca; and the last
 three to one and the same class—the class of insects. The
 vertebrates rank decidedly above the invertebrates; and in a manner
 wholly corresponding to this, the vertebrates also appear after the
 invertebrates. Just as decidedly as to their rank, the main classes of
 the vertebrates do not stand beside, but above one another: above the
 fish stand the amphibia, above them the reptiles, next the birds, and
 above them the mammalia. To this series of succession also the geological
 facts seem to correspond pretty closely; only long after the fish do the
 first amphibia and reptilia appear—although it can not yet be
 decided which of these [67]two classes has left its earliest traces. If
 the interpretation of the gigantic foot-steps in the colored sandstone of
 North America, as belonging to the cursorial birds, is correct, the first
 appearance of birds falls in the time between the reptilia and mammalia;
 otherwise the first mammalia would have appeared before the first birds.
 For if we find the first real bones of birds only in the Jura and in the
 Chalk-formation, they are birds with tail-spines and with teeth in the
 beak—hence still related to the reptilia or the sauria. The first
 traces of mammalia to be found in the Upper Keuper formation, and in the
 Jura, belong to the order of opossums or marsupialia; i.e., to
 that order which (excepting the echidna and the ornithorhynchus that, as
 so-called monotremeta, stand the very lowest in the class of the
 mammalia, but are very scarce) occupies the lowest stage among the
 multitude of mammalia. Only after them do the higher orders of mammalia
 appear; and last of all organisms, man.
If we follow more in detail the appearance of the single organisms,
 some remarkable modifications show themselves in the course of their
 appearance and growth. We have heretofore mentioned the possibility of
 the appearance of the mammalia before the bird. Another fact which
 deserves attention is, that frequently the lowest representatives of a
 class or an order do not at first appear where the highest
 representatives of the next lower class or order are in existence, but
 with lower representatives of a preceding class or order, viz.: such
 representatives of the same as are still less differentiated and unite in
 themselves comparatively still more generic and less specific
 characteristics—as for instance, the lowest and [68]earliest
 amphibia, which do not appear at the same time and place with the most
 highly organized fishes, but with fishes of still lower organization.
 Moreover many groups of organisms show in earlier geological periods a
 richness of development from which they have now fallen far away. For
 instance, among the mammalia the pachydermata, among the reptilia the
 salamander and newt, among the articulata the cephalopoda, are at present
 remarkably reduced;—compare with the legions of ammonites and
 belemnites of the secondary period the small number of nautilus and
 cuttle-fish of the seas at the present day. A similar fortune was
 experienced by the ferns and club-mosses which formed whole forests in
 the carboniferous period. Other groups which once played a great
 rôle, are now wholly extinct; for instance, the trilobites of the
 primary, the sauria of the secondary, the nummulites of the tertiary
 periods. Now, all these modifications of geological progress would
 entirely correspond to the idea of a pedigree to which the descent theory
 traces back the whole abundance of forms of organisms. As soon as we
 seriously accept the idea of a pedigree, each of the two organic kingdoms
 would throughout form for its classes and species not only one single
 straight line of descent, but a tree, the branches of which are again
 ramified in a manifold way; a tree on which single branches—as
 perhaps that of the class of birds—may leave the main-stem or a
 main-branch, possibly being a branch destined to a higher development,
 and on that account held back in the process of development; a tree,
 finally, on which also branches and twigs can wholly or partly die off,
 as those of the extinct or reduced groups of organisms. [69]
From the point where the geological formations approach the present
 time, plant and animal geography also assists
 geology in increasing the weight of the reasons for an origin of
 organisms through descent. With the tertiary period, the fauna and flora
 of the globe, which in former periods had a nearly uniform character all
 over the earth and showed no climatic differences, begin to separate
 according to climate, zones, and greater continents. This separation
 becomes distinctly evident in the middle tertiary formations, the
 Miocene, and much more distinctly in the higher tertiary formations, the
 Pliocene. The animals, especially the higher vertebrates, of the Pliocene
 formation on each continent or each larger group of islands, correspond
 very closely to the now living animals of the same geographical limit,
 with the exception of being generally of a much larger size. The Pliocene
 animal world of mammalia of the three old continents, for instance,
 corresponds exactly, through all its orders, to the present fauna of
 Europe, Asia and Africa; and that on an average it was built up more
 stupendously than that of to-day, we can see from the cave-bear and the
 mammoth. South America is the home of a peculiar order of
 mammalia—of the edentata, to which belong the sloth, the armadillo,
 and the like. All its predecessors are to be found also in the Pliocene
 strata of South America, and only there; and mostly in gigantic, but
 otherwise completely related, forms. New Zealand has no indigenous
 mammalia, but in their place great cursorial birds with but rudimentary
 wings. Exactly the same thing is found by geology in its tertiary and
 post-tertiary strata: nowhere a mammal, but gigantic birds with
 rudimentary [70]wings, down to the dinornis, which probably
 died out in man's time. New Holland has merely marsupial and some
 monotrematous, but no placental, mammalia; even its tertiary strata give
 no placental mammalia, but marsupialia, in analogy with all living
 genera, herbivorous, and carnivorous. Indeed, the analogy goes so far
 that the same line which through the Indian Archipelago separates the
 present Australian animal and plant world from the Asiatic, forms also
 the separating line for the geological zones of the Pliocene epoch. All
 these are facts which render quite inevitable the idea of an origin of
 the higher organic species of to-day through descent.
But still, from another side, animal geography, though it does not yet
 speak for a common pedigree of the whole animal world, as the facts just
 mentioned also do not, still at least speaks for a descent of related,
 though at present separated, genera and species from common forefathers.
 The continents of the Old and New World are so constructed that toward
 the North Pole they approach one another very closely, and toward the
 South Pole they withdraw from one another. Without doubt there existed in
 the North, through long periods of time, a land-connection of America
 with Asia and with Europe. Now, both continents have their more or less
 characteristic animal world, and these characteristics are distributed
 over the two halves of the globe in the following extremely remarkable
 way: The fauna of the Old and the New World, in those groups of animal
 genera which live only in the warmer or tropic zones or only south of the
 equator, and have no associates of genera or families in the higher
 North, is in each hemisphere entirely characteristic, and differs in a
 [71]marked way from the fauna of the other half
 of the globe. For instance, the rhinoceros, the hippopotamus, the
 giraffe, the antelope with undivided horns, the hedgehog, the mole
 proper, are only inhabitants of the Old World, whence also the horse
 originally came, the striped ones in Africa and the non-striped in Asia;
 on the other hand, the lemur, the ant-eater, the armadillo, and others,
 are limited to South America. The apes of the Old World have five molar
 teeth on each side of the jaw, narrow noses, tails usually short and
 never prehensile, and fleshy protuberances for sitting; the apes of the
 New World have six molar teeth, flat noses, and long prehensile tails.
 And on the contrary, where closely related species are found on both
 parts of the globe, they belong only to genera of which single species
 live or have lived in the far North; as, for instance, the rein-deer,
 still common to the Old and the New World in this very North which once
 formed a bridge between the two halves of the earth. The same is true in
 regard to cattle, the deer, the cat, the dog, the hare. Similar facts can
 also be shown of other animal classes. The farther the different species
 of these genera withdraw from the North Pole, the greater become the
 differences between the species on the one half of the globe and the
 analogous species of the other. Compare on this point K. E. von Baer's
 "Studien aus dem Gebiete der Naturwissenchaften, über Darwin's Lehre,"
 ("Studies from the Realm of Natural Science upon Darwin's Teachings"), p.
 356 f. If we add, further, the before mentioned fact, that those genera
 which are exclusively peculiar to one or the other continent, have their
 related predecessors in the tertiary strata of these continents, [72]the
 hypothesis of a separate origin for each single species, without
 genealogical connection with the anatomically and physiologically related
 species, becomes neither more nor less than a scientific
 impossibility.
Moreover, there are several facts of comparative anatomy which
 have long been the joy of all zoölogists and have rewarded the toilsome
 labors of detailed investigations by a delightful view over the whole
 realm of the organic world, but which find a scientific explanation only
 in the descent theory. They are the homology of the organs, and to
 a certain degree also the so-called rudimentary organs. By
 homology of organs we mean the fact that within one and the same
 class-group of organisms all the organs, and especially the organs in
 their most solid constituents, in the skeleton, are built after one and
 the same fundamental plan, and therefore are even in their most widely
 separated modifications varied after this one and the same plan. This is
 especially true of the vertebrć and the limbs. This homology goes so far
 within one class, particularly within the class of mammalia, that, for
 instance, the hands and feet of man, the hands of the ape, the paws of
 the beast of prey, the hoof of the horse and of the ox, the paws of the
 mole, the fins of the seal and of the whale, the wing-membranes of the
 flying-squirrel, correspond to one another in their smallest parts and
 ossicles, and can all be registered with the same numbers and letters;
 i.e., they are homologous to one another even to the minutest
 detail. The ideal plan and connection in the organisms, disclosed
 by these facts, and long ago acknowledged and admired, receives at the
 same time its simple material basis through the acceptance of a
 common descent. [73]
A similar relation is observed in rudimentary organs.
Many of them, as the nipples of males, point, if not to a common
 descent from a lower form, at least to a common plan of the sexes. But
 when the embryo of the whale still has its teeth in the jaw, the grown up
 whale its hip-bones, when the eye of man still has its winking membrane,
 the ear and many portions of the skin their rudimentary muscles of motion, the end of the
 vertebral column its rudimentary tail, the intestinal canal its blind
 intestine; when sightless animals, living in the dark, still have their
 rudimentary eyes, blind worms their shoulder-blades; when in like manner
 the plants, especially in their parts of fecundation, show in great
 number such rudimentary organs as are entirely useless for the functions
 of life, but which are never misleading in determining their relationship
 with other plants:—how simply are all these facts explained by the
 descent theory, how not at all without it!
Finally, if we now mention the history of the development of
 animals, we shall have to postpone to the next section the
 consideration of the most essential facts furnished by this science; for
 the individual development of animals is a process which could speak not
 only for a descent of the species, but also for a descent of them through
 gradual development. But where, as in the present section, we treat the
 descent theory apart from the evolution theory, we have also to think of
 the possibility that the species or groups of species are not originated
 through gradual development, but nevertheless do originate through
 descent—namely, in leaps through metamorphosis of germs or a
 heterogenetic generation; and for such an idea we find confirmation in
 the [74]observation of the history of development of
 animals, which we call change of generation or
 metagenesis.[4] By
 this is meant the following phenomenon: Certain animals, as the salpa and
 doliolum of the order of the tunicata, as well as certain mites and many
 tape-worms, produce offspring which are wholly dissimilar to the mother
 stock. These offspring have the capacity of reproducing
 themselves—if not by sexual means, as at the first generation,
 still by the formation of sprouts; and it is only the animals originated
 by the second generation (with many species, even those by the third)
 which return again to the form of the first generation. The plant-lice
 transmit themselves through six, seven, even ten generations by means of
 sprouts, until a generation appears which lays eggs. Now it is indeed
 true that the change of generation forms a circle in which the form of
 the last generation always returns to that of the first, and therefore
 leaves the species, as species, wholly unchanged. But it is nevertheless
 a process which shows that the natural law of an identity between
 generator and product, observed in other relations, is not without
 exception; and if we once have reason to suppose that the generation of
 new species took place in past periods of the globe, but has ceased in
 the present, such processes in the single period open to our direct
 observation—namely, the present (in which, however, according to
 our knowledge, the species remain constant)—are [75]nevertheless
 hints worthy of notice. For they refer us to ways in which in those
 former times, when certainly new species did originate, this formation of
 species might possibly have taken place.
This consideration leads us to treat of the main objection raised to
 every descent theory: namely, that never yet has the origin of one
 species from another been observed, but that, on the contrary, all
 species—so far as our experience goes, stretching over
 thousands of years—remain constant. We will give no weight
 to the fact that the constancy of species seems by no means to be
 absolutely without exception; for on the whole, they certainly remain
 constant. The only example which goes to prove such an evolution of
 species as taking place to-day—viz: the natural history of
 sponges—seems not to have this bearing. The transitions of form,
 proven by O. Schmidt in the siliceous sponges and by Häckel in the
 chalk-sponges, seem to show, not the genetic coming forth of a new
 species out of another, and especially not the evolution of a higher
 species out of a lower, but rather the uncertainty of the idea of species
 in general and the worthlessness of the skeleton-forms, for this idea, in
 such low organizations as the sponges. But that objection already loses
 its chief force from the consideration that we have not only never
 observed the origin of one species from another, but never even the
 origin of a species itself; and that nevertheless all species have
 successively originated in time. If we, therefore, are not able to
 observe directly their origination, we have a right to make all possible
 attempts at approaching the knowledge of it in an indirect way. But we
 see this objection invalidated by still another [76]fact. From all
 observations, it seems to be evident that those agencies which originated
 the species in general have ceased since man appeared. Now this fact is
 inconvenient for all those who, on metaphysical grounds, reject aim and
 purpose in the world and accept an aimless motion in the universe, a
 circle in which only identical powers are ever active to all eternity.
 From this standpoint, the scientists cannot, except by very artificial
 hypotheses, escape the conclusion that, if new species once originated
 through descent, new species ought still to originate through descent. In
 like manner, it is true, they are also obliged to accept the other
 conclusion: that if new species once originated through primitive
 generation, new species ought still to originate through primitive
 generation. On the other hand, those scientists who recognize aims in the
 world for which the world and each part of it is destined, and which are
 attained in the world through the processes of coming into existence,
 have to expect in advance that the organic kingdoms are also planned with
 reference to those aims. They naturally see the aim of the origin of
 species attained, where in the organic world beings appear who combine
 with the highest physical organization a self-conscious and responsible
 spiritual life, and who are capable of conceiving the ideal, even the
 idea of God. For, with the appearance of these beings, there enter upon
 the theatre of the world beings who go beyond the value of a purely
 physical organism and of a purely somato-psychical life, and in like
 manner represent again a higher order of beings; just as the first
 appearance of organic life on earth once introduced a new and higher
 stage of [77]existence in contrast to the inorganic
 world. Scientists who take this standpoint can readily adopt the fact
 that we do not now observe the origination of new species; for it is in
 full harmony with their metaphysical doctrines, without the same being on
 that account essentially dependent upon the confirmation or rejection of
 the hypothesis of the present constancy of species. With this very fact,
 the maxim that if new species once originated through descent, new
 species must still originate through descent, has lost for them its
 truth, and therefore its power of demonstration. So we see even here,
 while in the midst of the discussion of a purely scientific problem, in
 what close correlation metaphysics and natural science stand, and
 moreover—since the metaphysical view is most closely connected with
 the religious—in what close relationship religion and natural
 science stand. At the same time we also see how little the metaphysical
 interest, and much more how little the religious interest, has reason to
 avoid the investigation of facts in nature.
§ 4. The Theory of Evolution—Archćology, Ethnography,
Philology.
The evolution theory teaches that the species have developed
 themselves one from another in gradual transitions, each of which was as
 small as the individual differences still observed to-day among the
 individuals of the same species. It is not without support, especially in
 the history of the development of plants and animals.
Each organic being becomes what it is by means of organic development.
 Each plant, even the highest organized, begins in its seed-germ with a
 simple cell, [78]and is differentiated in constant
 development up to the fully perfected individual. Each animal, even the
 most highly organized (man included), begins the course of its existence
 as an egg; and each egg has no greater value of form than that of a
 single cell. This egg-cell is differentiated, after fecundation, in
 gradual and imperceptible transitions, farther and farther, higher and
 higher, until the individual has reached its perfect organization. No
 organ, no function of the body, no power or function of the soul or of
 the mind, appears suddenly, but all in gradual development. Since we see
 all individuals thus originating by means of gradual development, the
 possibility lies very near that the different organic formations of all
 the organic kingdoms could also have been originated by the same
 means.
In still another direction does the history of the development of
 single plants and animals make this possibility plausible to us. In the
 animal world, and partly also in the plant world, the single individuals
 of higher species in their embryonic development pass through states of
 development, in the former stages of which not only the individuals of
 the most different species look confusingly similar to one another, but
 also the embryos in their organization remind us of the perfected state
 of much lower classes of beings. In order to give a clear idea of the
 first mentioned facts, Häckel, for instance, in his "Natural History of
 Creation" and in his "Anthropogeny," represents by engravings the embryos
 of different vertebrates and also of man; representations
 which—although, according to the judgment of competent scientists,
 unfortunately not exact, but modified, after the manner of stencil
 plates, in favor of [79]greater similarity—yet make it quite
 clear that the similarity of the different embryos must be very great. We
 see, for instance, on one table the embryos of a fish, a salamander, a
 turtle, a fowl; on a second, those of a pig, an ox, a rabbit, a man; on a
 third, those of a turtle, a fowl, a man; and we find the similarity
 really great. Examples of the second fact—that individuals of
 higher classes or orders in former states of their embryonic development
 represent an organization which corresponds to the full-grown individuals
 of the lower classes—are: the tail of the human embryo, the
 gill-arches of the embryos of reptilia, of birds, of mammalia, and of
 man. Now Häckel here takes up again an idea first suggested by Fritz
 Müller, and derives from these observations the "biogenetic maxim," as he
 calls it: "The history of the germ is an epitome of the history of the
 descent; or, in other words, ontogeny (the history of the germs or the
 individuals) is a recapitulation of phylogeny (the history of the tribe);
 or, somewhat more explicitly: that the series of forms through which the
 individual organism passes during its progress from the egg-cell to its
 fully developed state, is a brief, compressed reproduction of the long
 series of forms through which the animal ancestors of that organism (or
 the ancestral forms of its species) have passed from the earliest periods
 of so-called organic creation down to the present time." In his latest
 publication, "Ziele und Wege der heutigen Entwicklungsgeschichte," ("Aims
 and Methods of the Present History of Evolution"), he admits into the
 formulation of his biogenetic maxim also the consideration of those
 phenomena in the ontogenetic development which are no recapitulation of
 the history [80]of the stem, but originated by adapting the
 embryo to its surroundings. In the description and explanation of this
 theory, he uses a term which throws upon nature a peculiar reproach,
 never before made, namely: cenogeny, or history of falsifications, in
 contrast to palingeny, or history of abridgments. This amended formula
 now reads: The development of germs is an abridgment of the development
 of stems, and is the more complete according as the development of the
 abridgment is continued by inheritance, the less complete according as
 the development of the false is introduced by adaptation.
Now, we ask: Is this biogenetic maxim correct? and moreover, from the
 fact of the organic individuals originating through development, are we
 entitled to draw the conclusion that even the species must have
 originated through development? To this question we can no longer get an
 answer from the life-processes of living organisms; for we have already
 mentioned the fact that, according to the present state of our knowledge,
 we can no longer observe the origination of a new species. Moreover, the
 embryonic states of development show also, in all their similarity, even
 in the very first stages, and with especial distinctness in these first
 stages, many differences between the single species; and this is true
 especially of those species which, according to the followers of this
 so-called biogenetic maxim, should lie in the same stem-line,—so
 that the direct scientific value of the embryological results to the
 palćontological investigation, or of the latter to the former, is so far
 very slight. Such a problem, however, as the one contained in that
 biogenetic maxim, which only gives to investigators the direction
 in which possibly an [81]interesting and profitable path can be
 opened, does not at all deserve the name of a "law." K. E. von
 Baer, the founder of the whole present science of the history of
 development, has certainly a most competent judgment of the correctness
 of this so-called biogenetic maxim; and he convincingly shows, in his
 essay on "Darwin's Doctrine," that the embryos never represent a former
 animalic form, but that their development follows the principle of
 representing first the common characteristics of the class, then those of
 the order, etc., until finally the individual characteristics appear in
 the formation. Those who wish more information about embryology can find
 it in Heinrich Rathke's "Entwicklungsgeschichte der Wirbelthiere"
 ("History of the Development of Vertebrates"), edited by A. Kölliker,
 Leipzig, Engelmann, 1861; and those who wish to inform themselves as to
 the influence of the ontogenetic results of the solution of the
 phylogenetic problems, will find, besides the before-mentioned work of
 Wigand, rich and clearly elaborated material in the publication of
 Wilhelm His—"Unsere Körperform und das physiologische Problem ihrer
 Entstehung, Briefe an einen befreundeten Naturforscher" ("The Form of our
 Body and the Physiological Problem of its Origin; Letters to an Associate
 Scientist"), Leipzig, Vogel, 1875. The latter writer, although he
 advocates the descent theory, rejects the hasty assertions of Häckel with
 direct and convincing arguments.
Thus embryology, having from the simple fact of an origin of single
 plants and animals through descent at least confirmed the idea of the
 possibility of an origin also of species through development,
 forsakes us in the [82]inquiry as to the reality of such a genealogy of
 development, and refers us to other sciences.
Such a science, from which we certainly are entitled to expect a
 decided answer, is geology. For if the evolution theory is right,
 those periods of the history of our globe in which new species
 originated—namely, the periods of geology—must show us
 also the forms of transition between the different species. And,
 indeed, geology gives us an answer; but it reads contradictorily: It says
 yes, and it says no.
Geology does show us forms of transition, and, indeed, most frequently
 in the lower classes of animals. Who that has once studied petrifactions,
 does not know the mass of forms of the terebratulć, the belemnites, and
 the ammonites, in the Jura formation? Würtemberger has brought light into
 the perplexing division of species of the ammonites by simply showing
 their temporary and systematic transitions into one another. In the fresh
 water chalk formation of Steinheim, near Heidenheim, in Würtemberg,
 scientists have found, on the same place, in an uninterrupted series of
 strata, the snail valvata or paludina multiformis in all imaginable
 transitions—from the flat winding, showing the form of a
 chess-board, up to the sharp form of a tower. And it was not, as
 Hilgendorf thought, in a series which can be traced in the strata
 according to time, but, as Sandberger says, in quite a varied mixture,
 yet in all imaginable modifications. But even among the higher and the
 highest classes of animals, we can trace the transitions. The flying
 sauria, if not in their organs of flying, which remind us more of the
 bat, at least in head, neck, and toes, are closely connected with the
 [83]birds—the oldest birds of the Jura and
 chalk formations, with their tail-spines similar to the reptilia and
 their teeth in the beak to the sauria. The tertiary formations especially
 show the primitive history of many vertebrates in very instructive forms
 of transitions—which, for instance, Rütimeyer, a scientist who is
 very cautious in his conclusions, very distinctly traced to the horse, to
 the ruminating animals, and lately also to the turtles. Still more in
 detail, W. Kowalewsky has lately shown us the primitive history of the
 horse, and Leidy and Marsh have further completed it by the addition of
 American forms, the former having at the same time described the forms
 which have led to the tapir.
But to such facts there are, on the other hand, experiences directly
 contradictory. Many lower and higher forms of animals and plants appear
 in the geological strata, so far as they have been explored, in a wholly
 independent way. We have mentioned, in the foregoing section, that the
 main types of the invertebrates appear somewhat contemporaneously and
 without any traceable intermediate form. The trilobites, a quite highly
 organized order of crustacea, appear in the strata of the silurian epoch
 almost suddenly, in very many and very distinctly marked species. The
 uncertainty of our knowledge shows itself most clearly when we ask for
 the geneologic relationship of the vertebrates. In Chap. II, § 1 and § 2 we have already
 referred to the value which Darwin, and more especially Häckel, lays on
 the relationship of the larva of the ascidia to the lancelet fish. Now
 the important testimony of K. E. von Baer, in his "Mémoires de l'Académie
 de St. Pétersbourg," Ser. vii, Vol. 19, No. 2, tells us that the
 nerve-ganglion [84]of the ascidia lies on the side of the
 stomach, and on that account can not be homologous with the spine of the
 vertebrates, but that the cord in the larva of the ascidia is nothing
 more than a support for the tail in swimming, which afterwards
 disappears, as with many other larvć. As to the course of reasoning in
 reaching these genealogical conclusions, he says: "The hypothesis is
 indeed flexible. According to common reasoning, that which shows itself
 early in the development is an inheritance of the first progenitors.
 Therefore the ascidć ought to descend from the vertebrates, and not the
 reverse. But it was necessary to show the descent of the vertebrates from
 the lower forms. In order to respond to such a necessity, men sometimes
 reverse their conclusions. Although favorably disposed to the doctrine of
 the transmutation of the animalic forms, I want a complete proof before I
 can believe in a transformation of the vertebrate type into that of the
 mollusca." Moreover, the zoölogists Semper and Dohrn find in the
 embryonic development of the sharks, the scates, and other cartilaginous
 fishes, organs which would bring them rather into a nearer relationship
 with the ringed worms than with the crustacea. When, on the other hand,
 we look around in palćontology, the oldest fossil fishes remind us
 neither of the crustacea nor of the ringed worms, but of the crabs: a
 class of animals which lies entirely outside of Häckel's stem-line of
 vertebrates. Also the first appearance of mammalia does not show
 transitions. Thus far we have not found in the geological strata any
 vestiges of the half-apes, which, according to the hypothesis of the
 evolutionists, as a common stem-line for the lines of ape and man
 development, once played such an [85]important rôle, and which have quite
 numerous representatives.
But the answer which geology gives to our questions as to the probable
 confirmation of the evolution theory, naturally becomes most interesting
 where the origin of man is treated of. Our attention is,
 therefore, especially directed to the most recent formations of the globe
 which show us the oldest remains of man. The most instructive are those
 parts of the skeleton which allow us to draw the most convincing
 conclusions as to the degree of mental development of an individual,
 namely: the parts of the skull. Although human bones seem to have been
 less easily preserved than those of animals, and are, comparatively
 speaking, very scarce, especially more so than prehistoric implements,
 still there are not wanting such remains, which go back far beyond
 historical time. The oldest known skull is the celebrated one of the
 Neander cave near Düsseldorf, with its large vault of the forehead, and
 its low height. Although Virchow finds on it evidences of rachitis in
 youth and of gout in old age, as well as of injuries, it nevertheless can
 not have been changed in its fundamental form by any sickness,
 even according to Virchow. This very skull now indisputably shows a still
 lower formation, which, although quite essentially different from the
 type of the ape, stands nearer to it than is the case with the skulls of
 men in later times. Of a later date, and of a correspondingly higher
 form, are the skull of Engis, of Cannstatt, the skulls of the Belgian
 caves (especially Chauvaux), of France, and of Gibraltar. According to
 the weighty authority of Schaaffhausen (note his opening address at the
 Wiesbaden Congress of the [86]Anthropological Society, 1873), the skulls
 and the remaining parts of the skeleton show more indications of a lower
 formation the older they are. He especially calls attention to a certain
 bone of the roof of the skull—the Os interparietale or the
 so-called Os Incć—which has only recently been recognized as
 a characteristic of a lower formation of skulls, standing nearer to that
 of animals. As late as the summer of 1873, two human skeletons were found
 at Coblenz in a volcanic sand, of which Schaaffhausen says: "No less than
 eight anatomic marks of a lower formation, which probably have not
 heretofore been found together, indicate the great age of these remains."
 With all these traces of a difference between the former and the present
 state of the physical condition of man, the differences between the type
 of man and that of the animal are still great enough to leave wide open
 the possibility of the origin of man through some other means than that
 of gradual development. On the other hand, it is more or less in favor of
 the evolution idea, that so far such old remains of man have been found
 in places which certainly can not have been the cradle of mankind, and
 that those parts of the earth which we would naturally suppose to be the
 first dwelling place of the earliest human genera have been little or not
 at all investigated. And also the hypothesis of Häckel, that the cradle
 of mankind was a land between Africa and Asia, now sunk in the sea, and
 called Lemuria, can be neither proved nor denied. Such vague
 possibilities have indeed not the least scientific value.
In considering these contradictory results of geological
 investigation, we dare not overlook three points: First, our knowledge of
 the crust of the globe is still [87]very fragmentary, and does not yet extend
 over the whole globe. Further, it lies in the nature of the case that the
 strata in mountain formations can only give a very incomplete picture of
 the whole variety of the real organic life which may have populated the
 earth and the sea. What a poor picture of the present plant and animal
 life would be offered, for instance, by the soil of our continents, the
 slime, sand, and pebbles of our coasts and of the bottoms of our lakes
 and seas, if we had to construct from them alone the fauna and flora of
 the present! A third, but purely hypothetical, consideration is rendered
 of importance particularly by Darwin and Häckel; namely, that the forms
 of transition without doubt existed for a shorter period than those forms
 whose organization has established itself in fully developed species.
Thus far we have directed our attention to inquiring how the organic
 individuals were originated—and have throughout observed a
 successive development; next, we have questioned geology—and here
 also have observed a progress in the appearance of the species, but have
 received at the same time contradictory answers to the question whether
 this progress presents itself as a gradual development of one species
 from another or as a sudden appearance. So the reasons for and against
 the evolution theory almost balance one another; and it is not improbable
 that the hypothesis of an origin of species through development will have
 to share its authority with the hypothesis of a descent of species
 through heterogenetic generation, as well as with the hypothesis of a
 primitive generation of lower organisms, still repeating itself at a
 later time. Thus for the origination of [88]groups lying nearer
 together, we have the evolution theory; for the other groups, and
 especially for the origination of types where no transitions to other
 types can be traced, the theory of the heterogenetic or primitive
 generation recommends itself; and both theories thus far are of a purely
 hypothetical nature.
But there is still a third realm, which is just as open to our
 observation as the history of the development of organisms and as
 geology, and of which we can also ask, whether it does not open for us an
 indirect way to the knowledge of the origin of species, and especially of
 man—a knowledge which we can no longer approach in the direct way
 of observation. This realm is natural history and the history
 of the development of the human race. For mankind also is engaged in
 a process of development, and its present members do not stand on the
 same height. Now the question is, to what beginning can we trace backward
 the development of mankind, and to what succeeding stages of development
 from this present condition? And do we find in these earliest periods,
 and on these lowest stages, points that are connected with still earlier
 conditions and organizations, and especially points which could
 genealogically join together mankind and the animal kingdom? Three
 sciences, still young, favorite children of the present generation,
 participate in investigating this realm, namely, archćology,
 comparative ethnology, and comparative philology.
Archćology leads us back to far-off times. It is a fact that,
 chronologically speaking, man lived in the glacial period—according
 to French scientists, even before it; and that, palćontologically
 speaking, man and [89]mammoth lived at the same time, and,
 according to a discovery made some thirty years ago at Denise in Middle
 France, probably even man and another older and defunct form of
 pachydermata, the elephas meridionalis, in North America man and the
 mastodon. The reader may compare the discoveries regarding the age of
 mankind, as they are described most recently by Sir Charles Lyell in his
 work upon this subject, in the publications of the Anthropological
 Congress at Brussels in the year 1873, and in those of the fourth General
 Assembly of the German Society for Anthropology, Ethnology and Primitive
 History, at Wiesbaden, in the year 1873.
Now, to be sure, from the oldest human tools and
 utensils that are found, we can expect still less than from the
 oldest human bones that they will throw direct light upon the answer to
 the question of the origin of man. For where man not only uses
 tools, but manufactures the same for use, a wide breach already
 exists between man and animal. Manufactured articles, therefore, can only
 throw some light on the history of the development of the already
 existing human race. And even this light is less clear than we perhaps
 expected in view of the first interesting prehistorical discoveries. It
 is true, all these discoveries show us an ascent from the simplest and
 roughest forms to the more perfect; from the split but unpolished stone
 to the polished, and from stone to bronze and iron. But a progress of the
 human races in manufacturing and using articles, from the simple and
 rough form to the more artificial, lies so much in the nature of the
 case, and is so taken for granted with every conception of the origin of
 man, even with that contradictory to Darwinism, that from this simplicity
 of [90]the earliest tools we can not at all
 conclude that there was a condition of mankind lying near that of
 animals; and especially we can draw only general and uncertain
 conclusions as to that which makes man man, as to the spiritual
 and moral qualities of those prehistoric men. Moreover, in discoveries
 belonging to the very oldest, we come upon drawings and engravings from
 which we recognize the man of those primitive times as a creature whose
 life was not entirely taken up in the animalic struggle for existence,
 but was already adorned with those ideal pursuits and enjoyments which we
 are accustomed to ascribe to the height of civilization. Examine, for
 instance, the drawing of a mammoth on a mammoth tooth of Dordogne, which
 the French scientists Lartet and Christy have reprinted in their Reliquić
 Aquitanicć (1868), and which Sir Charles Lyell has copied in his "Age of
 the Human Race." How much spirit and life in this primitive work of art!
 Or read what Fraas, in the "Journal of the German Society for
 Anthropology," March, 1874, reports about the picture of a grazing
 reindeer, engraved on a knife handle made of the horns of a reindeer,
 which was lately found in the cave of Thayngen near Schaffhausen, and
 which surpasses in beauty all rough drawings thus far found. The whole
 bearing of the animal—the muscles of the legs and the head, the
 form of the many-branched antlers, with the wide-spread eyes, the
 representation of the hair upon the body and under-jaw—all disclose
 a real artist among those savages.
This is also to be taken into consideration: that those men, whose
 traces we find, could possibly have been the descendants of more noble
 predecessors, driven [91]off and degenerated, just as well as they
 could have been representatives of the whole former condition of culture
 of mankind. In England, where the questions of the first condition of
 culture of mankind are very warmly discussed, the Duke of Argyll
 particularly, in his "Primeval Man," advocates these views, and very
 forcibly calls attention to the fact that thus far the places of the
 discovery of the earliest traces of man undoubtedly lie very far from the
 original home of the human race; while Sir John Lubbock, in his "Origin
 of Civilization" and in his "Prehistoric Times," and also Tylor in his
 "Beginning of Culture" and in his "Early History of Mankind," take the
 opposite view of a progress of mankind from the most uncultivated
 beginnings.
Archćology, as a whole, seems to do no more than admit that its
 results can be incorporated into the theory of an origin of the human
 race through gradual development, if this theory can be shown to
 be correct in some other way, and that its results can just as well be
 brought into harmony with a contradictory theory.
Comparative ethnology gives us quite a similar result. It is
 true, there are races of mankind in the lowest grades of human existence.
 It is well known how Darwin, in his voyage on board the "Beagle," got one
 of his first vivid impressions of the possibility of an evolution of man
 from the animal world, by seeing the inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego; and
 it is remarkable that the arms, tools, and furniture, used by the lowest
 savages, are very similar to the earliest remains of civilized races
 found on earth. The conclusion lies extremely near, that the savages
 simply remained in earlier stages of human culture; and an ethnographic
 picture of mankind [92]at present would in a similar way give an
 approximately correct view of its former development, as the natural
 zoölogical and botanical system of the present fauna and flora must give
 us at the same time the key to their pedigree; supposing the Darwinian
 theory to be correct.
If it were so, ethnology would be an altogether inestimable help for
 the exploration of the descent and development of the human race. For the
 extremely few and rare fossil remains of man—which, moreover, do
 not give us any answer to the most important questions in regard to the
 mental and moral quality of the primitive man—would be rendered
 complete by living examples of the kind, which remained at the old stages
 of development.
But much is still wanting, before the followers of an evolution theory
 dare to use ethnology directly as a primitive history of the development
 of mankind, prepared and preserved for them. Especially the
 before-mentioned objection of the Duke of Argyll—that the lowest
 savages of our time can just as well be depraved as be men who remained
 stationary in the process of development—has here increased weight.
 Moreover, even with the savages of to-day, a rude state of their tools
 and a low condition of their mental and moral life are not so nearly
 parallel as to allow unrestricted conclusions to be drawn. Finally, we
 still know too little about the state of culture of the savages; and the
 deeper and higher the intellectual and ethical possessions of mankind
 are, the presence of which among the savages is in question, the more
 uncertain is our knowledge.
This is especially true of the most important question in this
 connection—the question as to the existence [93]or absence of an idea of
 God, and the different stages of development of religious ideas. While
 some assume as an established fact, that there are savage tribes without
 any idea of God or any religion, and even give the names of these tribes,
 especially of some from the interior of South America; while Sir John
 Lubbock systematically enumerates seven stages of religious development,
 from atheism to the connection of religious with moral conceptions, and
 lets each single race run through these stages in an identical series
 until it either remains on one of the seven stages or arrives at the
 highest: yet, on the contrary, other equally trustworthy scientists
 assert that there is not a single human race without some idea of
 religion and of a God—indeed, not a single race without a
 monotheistic presentiment—and that all heathenism, down to its most
 degenerate stages, consists not so much in a non-recognition of a God as
 in ignoring him. They call especial attention to the difficulty of
 getting acquainted with the ideas of a savage tribe without living with
 it through many years and being intimate with its language and customs,
 and especially without enjoying the unrestricted confidence of the tribe.
 Mutual misunderstandings, a suspicious reserve, evasive and untrue
 answers to questions, are entirely unavoidable without those conditions.
 At any rate, the fact deserves attention, that those who have been
 longest and most active among savages, and who enjoyed their confidence
 to the fullest extent, all reached this result: they found them not only
 not without religion, but also not without a presentiment of the
 monotheistic idea of God. Livingstone, for instance, expressed this idea
 decidedly of all the African tribes [94]with which he became
 acquainted; and Jellinghaus gives the same evidence in regard to the Kols
 in South Asia.
The anatomic results of ethnology are more favorable to the
 descent theory, although they too lead no farther than to the conclusion
 that the skull-forms of the lowest tribes represent a lower stage of
 formation than those of the higher, and that these lower skull-forms are
 relatively nearer to the ape-form than the higher, but that they are
 still separated from it by a wide interval.
It appears, then, that even ethnology does not lead us essentially
 nearer the solution of the question than archćology and geological
 anthropology.
The relatively strongest support to the evolution theory is given by
 comparative philology; and since language is the most important
 and most decisive of all the distinctive characteristics which separate
 man and animal[5], this
 science deserves especial consideration.
In the realm of the natural sciences, the enormous progress of
 palćontology on the one hand and of systematic zoölogy and botany on the
 other took place step by step together, and thus prepared the way for
 Darwin's idea—which, from the rich material of analytical
 investigations, only tries to draw the simple synthesis, and to show at
 the same time in the zoölogical and botanical system a
 representation of the zoölogical and botanical history of
 development. In quite an analogous way, a process took place in the
 linguistic realm which in independent investigations prepared the way for
 Darwinism, and now, since Darwin's theory has sought [95]acknowledgment
 in the realm of natural history, brings again Darwin's ideas to the
 support of philology.
Linguistic and ethnographic investigations, especially the linguistic
 works of the missionaries, long ago resulted in gathering rich material
 from the storehouse of the language of races now living, and the latest
 works in the realm of historical, etymological, and comparative philology
 had traced the branches and twigs of the better known languages to stems
 and roots lying far back. The result of the comparison soon became the
 same as in the realm of the organic world: what presented itself in the
 system of the living languages as a lower form, seemed to represent
 itself as the older and more original form also in the history of
 languages. Therefore, all the prominent linguistic investigators found
 themselves more and more urged to accept a theory which declares
 language, this entirely specific characteristic of man, to be subject to
 the same laws of development from the simpler and most simple forms as
 the world of the organic. Long ago so celebrated a man as Jacob
 Grimm,—"Ueber den Ursprung der Sprache" ("The Origin of Language"),
 Berlin, Dümmler—following the footsteps of Wilhelm von Humboldt,
 had established a theory, according to which language is "not created,
 but produced by the liberty of the human will;" and judging from many of
 his Darwinistic utterances concerning the origin and development of
 language, he had traced its development in such a way as to arrive at the
 conclusion that artless simplicity in the unfolding of the senses is the
 first period of its appearance.
The scientists divide all the languages of the earth into three great
 groups: first, the monosyllabic, [96]isolating, radical, or asynthetic languages;
 second, the agglutinant, terminational, or polysynthetic languages;
 third, the inflectional languages. They are of the opinion that even the
 languages of highest rank—the inflectional—very probably took
 a starting-point from the asynthetic languages, and a course of
 development through the agglutinants, and that in like manner the
 agglutinants have behind them an asynthetic period. Thus they trace all
 the languages back to certain roots, which are more or less common
 to the different groups of languages.
To the question that now arises—How did these roots
 originate?—the linguists give us three different answers. The
 onomatopoetic theory, called by Max Müller the Wow-Wow Theory, traces
 them to imitations of the sound (W. Bleek, G. Curtius, Schleicher,
 Wedgewood, Farrar); the interjectional theory, called by Max Müller the
 Pooh-Pooh, or Pah-Pah Theory, traces them to expressions of the senses
 (Condillac); a third theory declares the roots to be phonetic types (Max
 Müller, Lazar Geiger, Heyse, Steinthal); while it is still an open
 question, whether the attempts at explanation of these types must here
 come to a stand-still for the present, as Max Müller thinks, or whether,
 according to Lazar Geiger, we can trace the first root-expressions
 especially to impressions of light and color.
The reasons from which Max Müller, in his "Lectures on the Science of
 Languages" (Vol. I, Lect. IX), rejects the first two theories and proves
 the third, are quite convincing. Even if, in a purely hypothetical way, a
 language could be thought of in abstracto, the roots of which only
 consist in imitations of sounds or interjections, still in the really
 existing languages, [97]so far as we can trace back and uncover
 their roots, the roots imitating sounds and the interjectional roots form
 only a small and entirely isolated minority, which neither shares in, nor
 is capable of development; they stand like "dead sticks in a live hedge."
 By far the greater number of roots, and all which are capable of
 development, express abstractions from visible objects, conditions and
 activities, and therefore presume a human intelligence, reflecting with
 self-consciousness, which formed and used the roots.
Now Max Müller sees, back of this period, still open to science, in
 which the root-elements of the human languages were fixed, a long period
 of exuberant and unhindered growth of the elements of language, in which
 the roots were separated from the multitude of nascent tones by
 elimination or natural selection in the struggle for existence. In this
 realm, which is no longer open to investigation, the naturalistic and the
 linguistic friends of the evolution theory are now in entire accord.
 Wilhelm Bleek, in his small, but very noteworthy essay, "Ueber den
 Ursprung der Sprache" ("Origin of Language"), Weimar, Böhlau, 1868, p.
 11, uses this ingenious figure: what the animal world possesses analogous
 to language, takes about the same position as, in the art of printing,
 the block-print does in relation to printing with movable types. On page
 12, he sees in the communication of the emotions among animals the
 sources from which under favorable conditions (in consequence of which
 the separation of language into articulated parts became possible) human
 language might have originated. This idea, which is closely joined to the
 interjectional theory, Darwin meets [98]with a related idea,
 depending upon the onomatopoetical theory, when he says, in his "Descent
 of Man": "Since monkeys certainly understand much that is said to them by
 man, and when wild, utter signal-cries of danger to their fellows, may
 not some unusually wise ape-like animal have imitated the growl of a
 beast of prey, and thus told his fellow-monkeys the nature of the
 expected danger? This would have been a first step in the formation of
 language."
But philology, from the point where it goes farther back in search of
 the roots of language, leaves the safe ground of knowledge and commits
 itself to the fluctuating ocean of conjectures; and since also the
 scientific evolution theory has only a hypothetical value, the support of
 a hypothesis in the one science by a hypothesis in the other naturally
 adds no weight to its probability, either for the one or the other.
 Besides, we must not overlook the fact that the very point in the history
 of the development of languages on which the investigation, as it looks
 backwards, must at present pause—namely, the existence of
 linguistic roots—presumes a faculty of abstraction which can not be
 thought of without self-consciousness.
Therefore archćology, comparative ethnography, and comparative
 philology, show us quite clearly a development, but not an
 origin of mankind through development. Yet they do show an already
 existing development of mankind; for all three sciences lead back to
 starting-points, where mankind already existed with all the essential
 attributes of mankind, and leave us without answer to our questions as to
 the conditions lying still farther back. Their results we can [99]without
 difficulty harmonize with a theory which supposes mankind to have
 originated by evolution, provided such a theory could be confirmed from
 another side; but they agree just as well with a contrary theory, which
 excludes the origin of mankind by gradual development.
Taking, thus, everything into consideration, we come to the conclusion
 that the evolution theory, like the descent theory, is so far only a
 hypothesis—and, indeed, a hypothesis which as such has a much more
 problematical character than the descent theory. For while in regard to
 the latter we had to say that we have either this explanation or none of
 the origin of the higher species, with the evolution theory there is not
 even room for this alternative. For even in case of its failure, a
 descent of one species from another through heterogenetic generation is
 certainly very possible. Besides, it is not only possible, but even
 probable, that both theories—that of heterogenetic generation and
 that of gradual development—may have to share with one another in
 the explanation of the origin of species; and even that, especially for
 the lowest species and for the beginnings of the main types, primitive
 generation also has its share in the establishment of the paternity.
The evolution theory could only pass beyond the rank of a hypothesis,
 if we should succeed in showing the impelling forces of such an origin of
 species through development. Such an attempt can be made in two
 ways—the metaphysical and the scientific-empirical. The first, the
 metaphysical, although it may be justified in its general principles,
 will always, from the point at which it attempts to approach the concrete
 questions as [100]to the origin of single species, expose
 itself to the fate of being a priori rejected by science as
 unjustified, and of being a posteriori confuted by facts—a
 fate which it has richly and clearly experienced in the first half of our
 century. But the discussion of the metaphysical way does not belong to
 the present purely scientific part of our investigation; it will,
 however, be shortly taken up again in Book II. The other way, the
 scientific-empirical, will have to be looked upon as correct when it can
 show the impelling forces of development in such powers and laws as are
 either still active to-day or at least have their points of connection in
 powers and laws active to-day. Such an attempt is the selection theory.
 We have already in Chap. II, § 1 and 2, given an outline of this theory, and have only yet
 to discuss its present state of tenability.
§ 3. The Theory of Selection.
The selection theory also is not entirely without support in the realm
 of observed facts. How simply it explains the fixedness of the
 differences of closely related species arising from their geographical
 and climatical home! how simply the similarity of the color of many
 animals from the color of their abode, through which they have protection
 against persecution! how simply the so-called
 mimicry—i.e., the similarity of certain species in
 form and color with form and color of entirely different species in the
 midst of which they live, a similarity which often gives them protection
 against persecution! The best known examples of this, in our regions, are
 the spinning caterpillars, which in a state of rest look strikingly like
 a twig of a tree or a shrub on which [101]they live. In other
 regions there is a multitude of the most striking freaks of nature of
 this kind—for instance, butterflies and other insects, which at
 rest look like the leaves of plants under which they live; butterflies
 living among other butterflies which, by an offensive odor, are protected
 against persecution, and although they are themselves a favorite food for
 birds, carrying the form and color of that badly-smelling family of
 butterflies. We can also add the orchideć, and their resemblance to bees,
 flies, butterflies, spiders, etc. A. R. Wallace and Darwin themselves
 recur often to these striking appearances.
But herewith we have mentioned nearly every support which the
 selection theory has on the ground of observed facts. More numerous and
 more weighty are the objections to it. First of all, we have to state
 that the selection theory no longer enjoys that protection which the
 descent and evolution theories can justly claim, against the main
 objection, mentioned in Chap. III, § 1, to all the
 ideas of descent, development and selection. That main objection is the
 permanence of species, observed through thousands of years; and the
 defense with which the descent and evolution theories successfully weaken
 it, is the statement of the fact that, since man appeared, no new species
 has originated, and that therefore the principle of the generation of
 species seems to have come to a stand-still. Now this fact is no longer
 in favor of the selection theory, but directly repugnant to it. For the
 selection theory expressly declares the origin of species through
 agencies that are all active still, and, therefore, if they really
 suffice to explain the origin of species, would not only have to generate
 new species, [102]but also to develop all the
 existing species. All those circumstances which, according to the
 selection theory, have led to change of species, are just as active
 to-day as they are supposed to have been from the beginning of organic
 life; and the effect which we observe is not change but permanence of
 species. The individuals still have individual qualities; they still have
 the tendency to inherit, in addition to the qualities of the species,
 those of the individual; the individuals still change their abode, and
 therewith also their conditions of life; a natural selection still takes
 place in the struggle for existence; and what is the result? From an
 observation stretching over thousands of years, we find nowhere an effect
 of natural selection going farther than alterations in growth and color
 and purely external changes in form. All the dispositions of organisms
 and their reciprocal action aim not at increasing the individual
 differences, but at reducing them to the average character of the
 species. When the species change their abode or their conditions of life,
 they either perish or remain constant; at least, with the exception of
 the slight modifications before mentioned. Even those alterations which
 artificial breeding produces, have a tendency to return to the original
 species: as soon as cultivated plants and domestic animals are left to
 themselves, they run wild, i.e., they reassume their original
 qualities. Even the bastard-formations either cease to be fertile, or,
 remaining fertile, finally return to one or the other stem-form of the
 originally crossed species. Nor can we oppose to these facts the
 consideration that the period of time during which mankind has observed
 the organisms is too short. For the permanence of very many [103]species can be
 traced through thousands of years, and the shortness of the period of our
 observations is amply counterbalanced on the one hand by the multitude of
 species from all parts of the organic systems which come under our
 notice, on the other by the immense alterations in the conditions of
 existence to which man submits plants and animals. How great, for
 instance, are the alterations in the conditions of existence which
 tropical plants undergo in our hot-houses and gardens! And the only
 alteration they show is that they are stunted and only bear blossoms with
 difficulty and fruits with still greater difficulty.[6] Now, if the ever-active selection
 principle does not produce in thousands of years even minimum alterations
 which can be observed, science certainly is justified in doubting for the
 present the asserted effect of that principle.
Thus not only are the facts directly opposed to the autocracy
 of the selection principle; but logic is also none the less so.
 For, under the most favorable circumstances, selection would only explain
 the preservation and perhaps also the increase of useful
 qualities and organs, if the same are already in existence and
 have shown themselves useful to the individual; but would not explain
 their origination. This would rather most emphatically be left to
 chance. According to the strict selection theory, it would be
 pure chance that among the thousands and thousands of individual
 qualities of the individuals of a species, such qualities are always
 existing as offer advantages to the individual in his struggle for
 existence. And it would be a second series of chances, which from
 generation to generation would [104]have to coincide with the first, that
 among the individual qualities advantageous to the individual and making
 it victorious in the struggle for existence, there should be found always
 just those qualities which develop the species and raise it to a higher
 rank and order in the zoölogical and botanical systems. But the total of
 improbabilities which would have to be overcome continually in this
 theatre of chance, would in the course of generations necessarily amount
 to infinity. Thus, in the very beginning, insuperable doubts arise as to
 how we can explain from two causes the world of organisms which is so
 richly, beautifully, and systematically arranged. The first of these
 causes is the inclination to individual alteration, inherited indeed in
 the organisms, but in itself absolutely indifferent, for the systematical
 idea in the framework of the organic systems and for the progressive
 element in the development. The other is the struggle for existence and
 natural selection, which approaches the organisms purely from without
 like individual variability, must as a whole appear a necessity, but in
 each single case in the concrete mixture of coinciding circumstances,
 would seem a work of chance for the individual which is to be
 changed.
Moreover, it is a demonstrable impossibility to explain the origin of
 just those organs and members in the structure of organisms which are
 systematically the most significant and functionally the most important,
 by means of natural selection. It is true that many of these organs and
 members, in their perfected state, offer to the organism an immense
 advantage over lower organisms; but if they had been originated through
 gradual development, they would have been in their first [105]beginnings and
 earlier stages of development at least quite indifferent, often directly
 obstructive to the individual in its struggle for existence, and
 therefore would have been called into existence and developed by agencies
 which had an effect directly counteracting natural selection. How high,
 for instance, stand the vertebrates above the invertebrates! Yet how
 could the first deviation from the ganglionic system of the nerves of the
 invertebrates to the cerebro-spinal system of the vertebrates have
 occurred?—and, especially, how could the first deposit of the
 vertebral column have procured any benefit to the individual in the
 struggle for existence? We quote this objection from Karl Planck's
 "Wahrheit und Flachheit des Darwinismus," ("Truth and Platitude of
 Darwinism"), Nördlingen, Beck, 1872.
Still more striking is the insufficiency of the selection theory for
 the explanation of the origin of the organs of motion in the higher
 classes of vertebrates. A. W. Volkman says of it, in his instructive
 lecture, "Zur Entwickelung der Organismen," ("Development of the
 Organisms") Halle, Schmidt, 1875, p. 3 ff.: "Without doubt, animals with
 extremities will come from animals which lacked extremities. Now if the
 metamorphosis originated in the course of one generation, the animals
 with extremities would have an advantage over the rest, which ought to
 show itself in the natural selection; but if the development of an
 extremity needs 10,000 generations, the individual in which the process
 of the development begins produces 1/10000 of the extremity and the
 advantage, resulting therefrom is reduced to zero. For an organ can only
 be of advantage when it performs its functions; and on [106]the first of
 the 10,000 stages of development the extremity can not perform its
 functions. Just think of the cetacea! Of the hind extremity, only its
 carrier, the pelvis, has been developed; and even this is only
 represented by the two hip-bones, hanging in the flesh. As to the python,
 the hind extremities are more complete, but they lie hidden under the
 skin, and therefore are of no use for local movement. Such examples show
 that in the history of the development of an organ thousands of years may
 pass, and numerous generations may arise and disappear, until it reaches
 that grade of perfection where it is of use to its owner. How therefore,
 can we look upon such an organ, when finally it is perfect, as a product
 of selection in the sense of Darwin?"
We find the scientific objections to the selection theory collected in
 detail in the before-mentioned works of Wigand, Blanchard, His, von Baer,
 and especially in Mivart's "Genesis of Species," (London, MacMillan,
 1871); and it is a praiseworthy testimony of Darwin's love of truth, that
 lately he himself, the originator of the selection theory, willingly
 admits these weak points in his theory,[7] while Häckel and many of his followers
 [107]in Germany still stoutly reject every
 doubt of the autocracy of the selection principle.
In summing up all we have said thus far about the theories of descent,
 of evolution, and of selection, we still find all three solutions of the
 scientific problems to be hypotheses, but hypotheses of very different
 value. The idea of descent has the most scientific ground; it will, as a
 permanent presupposition, govern all scientific investigations as to the
 origin of species, even if it does not exclude the idea of an
 often-repeated primitive generation of organisms—especially of
 those that stand still lower in development. More uncertain and less
 comprehensive is the position of the evolution theory; in all likelihood,
 the idea of an origin through development will have to share the
 sovereignty with the idea of origin by leaps through metamorphosis of
 germs. Still more unfavorable is the state of the selection theory. It
 possesses the merit of having started the whole question as to the origin
 of species; it may explain subordinary developments; natural selection
 may have coöperated as a regulator in the whole progress and the whole
 preservation of organic life. Ed. von Hartmann, in his essay, "Truth and
 Error of Darwinism," (Berlin, Duncker, 1875), on page 111, compares its
 functions with those of the bolt and coupling in a machine; but that the
 driving principle which called new species into existence lay or
 originated in the organisms, and did not approach them from
 without, seems to be confirmed more and more decidedly with every new
 step of exact investigation as well as of reflection.
[108]
THE PHILOSOPHIC PROBLEMS.
Although, in accordance with the requirements of the task before us,
 we have to restrict ourselves to giving the results of natural science
 only in their general outlines, still we believe that we have not
 overlooked any essential result which is of importance to the question of
 the origin of species and of man. We have now finished our scientific
 review; and the conclusion to which we see ourselves brought is that
 natural science, in its investigation of the origin of species, has
 arrived at nothing but problems which it is not able to solve. There is a
 very great probability of an origin of species, at least of the higher
 organized species, through descent; but whether through descent by means
 of gradual development or of metamorphosis of germs, or whether with one
 group of organisms it is in this way, with another in that, is not yet
 decided. The attempt to explain their entire origin exclusively by the
 selection theory, must be regarded as a failure; all indications rather
 show that, supposing the descent principle correct, the deciding agencies
 which formed new species did not approach the old species out of which
 the new ones originated from [109]without, but that they originated or were
 already in existence within them. But what these agencies were, natural
 science is at present unable to state; and not only those scientists who
 reject every idea of a descent, but also those who are favorable to the
 ideas of descent and of evolution, rejecting only the selection theory,
 are at one in silent or open acknowledgment of this limit of our
 knowledge, be it permanent or temporary.
But now the question arises: does the search after these agencies
 henceforth remain the exclusive task of natural science, and have we
 therefore simply to wait and see whether it will succeed in finding them?
 or have we to look for the answer to these questions, which natural
 science can no longer give, in another science—namely, philosophy?
 The first question we will have to answer in the affirmative, the second
 in the negative. It is certainly understood that metaphysical
 principles must underlie all physical appearances; and the right
 to define these principles, so far as they can be known, is willingly
 conceded to philosophy by the scientists, with the exception of those of
 materialistic and naturalistic tendencies. This mutual re-approaching of
 philosophy and natural science is one of the most gratifying, and, to
 both, most fruitful evidences of the intellectual work of the present
 generation. But these metaphysical principles themselves become
 cognizable only when the physical effects, whose cause they are, become
 accessible to our knowledge; and every attempt to find them a
 priori, or only to extend them a priori, will always fail
 through the opposition of empirical facts; or even if this attempt
 accommodates itself to the existing state of knowledge at a given time,
 it will always be overcome by the [110]progress of the
 empirical sciences. In the most favorable case, it can claim the value of
 a hypothesis which has to be put to the proof, whether it can be
 empirically confirmed and whether we can successfully operate with it in
 knowing the world of realities. But herewith it leaves the realm of pure
 philosophy, and makes the question of its right to exist dependent upon
 the decision of natural science.
Since the decline of the doctrines of nature held by Schelling,
 Steffens, and Hegel, there has come to our knowledge, from the domain of
 philosophy, but one earnest attempt to explain the origin and development
 of organisms down to the concrete differences between single types,
 classes, and even orders and families, from one single metaphysical
 principle; and this attempt has been made by an antagonist of the descent
 doctrine. K. Ch. Planck, in "Seele und Geist, oder Ursprung, Wesen und
 Thätigkeitsform der physischen und geistigen Organisation von den
 naturwissenschaftlichen Grundlagen aus allgemein fasslich entwickelt"
 ("Soul and Spirit, or Origin, Nature, and Form of Activity of Physical
 and Intellectual Organization, Clearly Developed from a Scientific
 Basis"), Leipzig, Fues, 1871, and in "Wahrheit und Flachheit des
 Darwinismus" ("Truth and Platitude of Darwinism"), Nördlingen, Beck,
 1872, makes the "inner concentration" the moving principle of the whole
 development of the world. He thinks that what belongs to the organism and
 to the soul has originated and developed up to man and his spiritual
 nature thus: that the creating centrum of the earth produces individual
 centra on its periphery, which tend more and more to bring into view the
 principle of [111]centralization, in its contrast to the
 purely peripheral form of existence, until it reaches its goal in man,
 with his centralizing spirit. We have no reason to reject the idea of a
 principle of concentration in the world and its parts; it is confirmed by
 observation, and shows itself fruitful in many respects. But in spite of
 the many ingenious and often suggestive ideas in the works of Planck, we
 have some doubt about a system which tries to explain the whole concrete
 abundance of the richness of formations and life-forms in the world,
 rising higher and higher up to spiritual existence and moral action, from
 the single idea of concentration, and makes this principle the mystical
 and mysteriously acting cause of a whole world and its contents. We doubt
 at the outset the success of this argument. We have especially the
 strongest objections to a philosophical system which submits all the
 contending physical theories of the present to the measure of that
 concentration principle, and from these purely metaphysical reasons takes
 side exclusively with the one or the other of the theories, or
 establishes new theories—from the theories of atoms and ether, of
 light and heat, down to geological questions as to whether universal
 revolutions of the world or a continual development took place. The
 solution of all these questions, in their full extent, we do not
 attribute to philosophy, but to natural science; although to a natural
 science which permits philosophy to define the ideas with which it
 operates and the general principles to which it comes. For this
 renunciation—which philosophy, however, can not at all
 escape—it will be the more richly rewarded in this, that it obtains
 the more certainly for its own work sure and sifted material. But all
 attempts which can not [112]submit to this renunciation, give only an
 apparent right to that view which Albert Lange, in his "History of
 Materialism," defends, when he banishes speculative philosophy to the
 realm of imagination.
But in rejecting philosophy in the question of the causes of the
 development and organization of the organic kingdoms, we did not reach
 the end of the philosophic problems with which we are confronted. This
 whole question is itself only a segment of the problems before which we
 stand, and leads of necessity to other questions.
Already within the series of development of the organic world, so far
 as it is investigated by natural science, we have found and named a point
 (at the end of § 1, Chap. II, Book I), where the
 competency of pure natural science comes to an end, and the question
 arises whether another source of knowledge—i.e., even philosophy—can not take up the investigation where natural
 science completes its task. This point was the origin of
 self-consciousness and of free moral self-determination;
 consequently, the origin of that which makes man man. Going still
 farther back on the temporal and ideal scale of organic beings, we arrive
 at another point, which natural science no longer can explain, and that
 is the origin of sensation and of consciousness. With the
 appearance of sensation and consciousness, the animal world came
 into existence. Moreover, the whole scientific question as to the origin
 and development of species, so far as we have hitherto treated it,
 started from initial points where the organic and life already existed;
 it, therefore, leads of necessity to the further question as to the
 origin of the organic and of life itself. D. F. Strauss, [113]in his
 "Postscript as Preface," thus clearly and simply characterizes these
 still unfilled blanks in the evolution theory: "There are, as is well
 known, three points in the rising development of nature, to which the
 appearance of incomprehensibility especially adheres (to speak more
 categorically: which have not been explained thus far by anybody). The
 three questions are: How has the living sprung from that which is without
 life? the sentient (and conscious) being from that which is without
 sensation? that which possesses reason (self-consciousness and free will)
 from that which is without reason?—questions equally embarrassing
 to thought." But even the question as to the origin of the organic and of
 life can not be discussed without an investigation, leading us farther
 back to the question as to the elements of the world in general.
 The doctrine of atoms, and the mechanical view of the
 world, are the scientific evidences of the efforts in this
 direction.
So far as the attempts to solve these four questions start from the
 results of natural science and, from this starting-point of the known,
 try to solve the unknown, we will have to assign them in the encyclopćdic
 classification of the sciences, to that department of philosophy which
 treats the doctrines of nature; and since our whole investigation starts
 from the Darwinian theories, and only tries to treat of what is properly
 connected with them, the attempts to solve these four questions offer
 themselves as the naturo-philosophic supplements of the
 Darwinian-theories.
After concluding our treatment of them, we shall have to speak of
 still another view, which presupposes all these attempts at solution to
 be wholly or nearly [114]successful, and draws an inference from
 them which no longer belongs to the realm of natural science, but is a
 purely metaphysical hypothesis; it is the abolition of the idea
 of design in nature. In connection with this, finally, we shall have
 to discuss the name which this view has lately assumed, viz:
 "Monism."
Whatever further questions may arise, belong either to the special
 subdivisions of natural science and philosophy, or to theological and
 ethical problems.
[115]
THE NATURO-PHILOSOPHIC SUPPLEMENTS OF THE DARWINIAN
THEORIES.
§ 1. The Origin of Self-Consciousness and of Free Moral Self-Determination.
If sensation, and its most developed form, consciousness, is a reflex
 of the material in something immaterial, which feels itself a unit in
 contrast to the material, and, where sensation rises into consciousness,
 is opposed as a unit to the material—self-consciousness again is
 the reflex of this sentient and conscious subject in a new and still
 higher immaterial unity; and this again makes this sentient and conscious
 subject, together with the sum of its feelings and ideas, its object,
 changing it from a sentient and conscious subject into a felt and
 presented object. Therefore it is clear, and will be the result of all
 thought upon these concepts, that as with sensation and consciousness, so
 also with self-consciousness, something new always comes into
 existence—a higher category of being, different from the merely
 material. The first is the form of being of the animal world; the latter
 that of mankind.
It is exactly the same with the first appearance of voluntary
 movement, and again with that of free moral self-determination. The
 reaction of the sentient subject upon his sensations is something
 qualitatively different from the purely mechanical and physical action
 and [116]reaction of pure matter; although, in
 order to understand the possibility of a sensation as well as of a
 voluntary movement, we must admit that the physical qualities of matter
 must be such as to afford a basis and condition for sentient and reacting
 beings. That reaction is the reaction of something immaterial upon the
 material, even if it is entirely caused by the material and bound to the
 material. Now, with free moral self-determination a new subject comes
 into existence and activity in the individual, which makes that subject,
 reacting upon mere sensations and ideas, its object, and, as a new
 immaterial subjective unity, acts determiningly upon that subject which
 has just become object. This new subject, considered from the side of its
 receptivity, we call self-consciousness; from the side of its
 spontaneity, free moral self-determination. Whether we consider
 this freedom predetermined or not, does not at all alter the described
 fact and the qualitative difference between the form of human moral
 agency and that of purely animal spontaneity. For even those advocating
 determination must admit that the morally acting subject distinguishes
 itself from its object, and does not take its motives to action from the
 material and from the instinctive life which is bound to the sensual and
 dependent on it.
Now it is true that all these circumstances in organized individuals
 which serve self-consciousness and free moral self-determination as their
 condition, presupposition, and basis, all the dispositions of the soul
 and the manifestations of life found in the animal world, will be worthy
 of the closest attention even on this account: because they form the
 basis, the condition, and (if self-consciousness and freedom are once
 present) an essential [117]part of the contents and object of
 self-consciousness and moral self-determination. But where the origin of
 man is discussed, the central point of the investigation is no longer the
 enumeration of those activities of the soul of man whose analogies we
 also find in the animal world, but rather in the answer to the question
 as to how that entirely new manifestation, self-consciousness and moral
 self-determination, came into existence or could have originated. This
 question is the more decidedly the central point of the investigation,
 since this new form, when once in existence, has for its object not only
 what already appears in the life of the soul of animals, but also
 receives a new object, which can only be an object of self-consciousness
 and of moral self-determination, and not of mere consciousness and
 instinctive life. These new objects are the ideas leading up to the
 conception of God and moral ideals.
Now this very question as to the origin of self-consciousness and of
 free moral self-determination is wholly misjudged as to its importance,
 and given remarkably little attention by those evolutionists who are well
 versed in the realm of natural science. The question as to the origin of
 self-consciousness is either entirely ignored—as if
 self-consciousness must originate wholly by itself, if only those first
 steps of an intellectual and social life which the animal world also
 shows, are once present and properly developed—or the solution is
 put aside with the most superficial analogies. The question regarding
 free moral self-determination, on the other hand, is either likewise
 ignored, and for the same reasons, or it is supposed that it must fail of
 itself, if [118]only this self-determination is explained
 in a deterministic way.
It is true, Darwin devotes several chapters of his work, "Descent of
 Man," to a comparison of the intellectual powers of man with those of
 animals, and these chapters are full of the most interesting facts and
 comparisons; but although his work comprises two volumes, he devotes to
 the origin of self-consciousness, individuality, abstraction, general
 ideas, etc., only a single page, and justifies his brief treatment with
 the assertion that the attempt at discussing these higher faculties is
 useless, because hardly two authors agree in their definitions of these
 terms. What he says about self-consciousness is really contained in two
 sentences, namely: "But how can we feel sure that an old dog with an
 excellent memory and some power of imagination, as shown by his dreams,
 never reflects on his past pleasures or pains in the chase? This would be
 a form of self-consciousness." On the other hand, as Büchner has remarked
 in his "Lectures about Darwin's Theory": "How little can the hard-working
 wife of a degraded Australian savage, who hardly ever uses abstract
 words, and can not count above four, how little can such a woman exert
 her self-consciousness, or reflect on the nature of her own existence!"
 And in Darwin's resumé of his chapters on the intellectual powers
 of man and animals, he says, on page 126: "If it could be proved that
 certain high mental powers, such as the formation of general concepts,
 self-consciousness, etc., were absolutely peculiar to man, which seems
 extremely doubtful, it is not improbable that these qualities are merely
 the incidental results of other highly-advanced intellectual faculties:
 [119]and these again mainly the result of the
 continued use of a perfect language."
If Darwin is thus not able to show us in the animal world a single
 real analogy which at all approaches self-consciousness, and, in order to
 supply this want, must have recourse to the purely hypothetical
 possibility that it is not certain whether an old hunting-dog does
 not reflect upon the past joys of the chase; if by the uncertainty of the
 expression that self-consciousness might be an "accompanying"
 result of other faculties, he nevertheless gives us to understand that he
 can not find the sufficient cause of the origin of
 self-consciousness in those other faculties; and, finally, if he closes
 the last mentioned quotation with a sentence which has for its premise
 the wholly illogical thought that language might have been able to reach
 "a high state of development" before the origin of self-consciousness and
 without its assistance: then, indeed, the result of all this certainly is
 that he has given no adequate consideration to the specific nature of
 self-consciousness. It is only under this supposition that it is possible
 for him to say: "Nevertheless, the difference in mind between man and the
 higher animals, great as it certainly is, is one of degree and not of
 quality." The authors may possibly not agree in the definitions of the
 idea of self-consciousness—we ourselves perhaps are only an
 additional example in confirmation of this fact—; but whatever the
 definition may be, the fact itself remains, that self-consciousness does
 not stand as one of the intellectual faculties beside the others and
 coördinate with them, but, as an entirely new form of being, introduces a
 qualitatively new and valuable factor into the subject. That which
 precedes the [120]origin of self-consciousness—the
 purely conscious and not yet self-conscious life of the soul, as it shows
 itself with higher animals, especially with mammals—may have
 been the necessary condition and requirement for the origin of
 self-consciousness. It certainly has been so; and from this point
 of view, all these psychological studies of animals and psycho-physical
 investigations which are a favorite object of modern science, have a high
 value; but what has been called into existence by means of
 conditions is not on that account the product of those conditions.
 This very fact is one of the greatest mistakes of most of the modern
 evolution theories: that very often—and especially where they wish
 to draw metaphysical conclusions from their scientific results or
 hypotheses—they confound condition and basis with cause.
Now it appears to us that, in quite an analogous way, Darwin overlooks
 or contests the fact that with free moral self-determination
 something specifically new comes into existence. He certainly discusses
 the origin of the moral qualities of man more in detail than he does the
 origin of his intellectual qualities. He derives them, in their first
 beginnings, from the fixity, transmission and increase of the
 social impulses and instincts. These, being the basis of the whole
 moral development, and leading in their more mature form to love and to
 sympathy, originated by natural selection; and the other moral qualities,
 such as moral sense and conscience, progressed more by the effect of
 custom, by the power of reflection, instruction, and religion, than by
 natural selection. Higher and lower, common and special, permanent and
 transitory instincts come into collision [121]with one another. The
 dissatisfaction of man when any of the lower, special, and transitory
 instincts have overcome the higher, common and permanent, and the
 resolution to act differently for the future, is conscience.
 Darwin considers that one a moral being who is capable of
 comparing with one another his past and future actions and motives, of
 approving some of them and of disapproving others; and the fact that man
 is the only creature who can with certainty be ranked as a moral being
 is, according to Darwin, the greatest of all differences between man and
 animals.
Here, again, the whole central point of the investigation as to the
 origin of man does not lie in the question of the origin of the instincts
 between which the moral subject, acting in moral self-determination, has
 to choose. For it is clear that the beginnings of these instincts are
 also present in the animal world. But the main question is, how did this
 faculty and necessity of choosing, this conscience and responsibility,
 this "moral sense," as Darwin calls it, originate? Now to this question
 we have a plain answer in the before-mentioned utterances of Darwin: It
 originated not as a product of the social instincts—it only
 has these instincts for its preceding condition, object and instrument;
 but it originated as a product of other agencies, which act upon these
 impulses and instincts, operate with them, choose between them; and as
 these other agencies Darwin mentions the high development of the
 intellectual powers. That this is his opinion, we can clearly see from an
 expression with which he introduces his essay on the origin of "moral
 sense": "The following proposition seems to me in a high degree
 probable—namely, that [122]any animal whatever, endowed with
 well-marked social instincts, would inevitably acquire a moral sense or
 conscience, as soon as its intellectual powers had become as well, or
 nearly as well developed, as in man." These intellectual powers which
 moral feeling and conscience require at their birth, are certainly,
 according to Darwin the power to distinguish oneself as subject from
 one's impulses and instincts, and to choose between them; i.e.,
 self-consciousness. We shall have to admit fully this intimate connection
 between moral self-determination and self-consciousness; but we must
 admit, at the same time, that moral self-determination—this new
 form of activity in which moral activity distinguishes itself from all
 merely instinctive activity—finds its sufficient explanation
 in the previous stage of the animal world as little as
 self-consciousness; and that moral self-determination has the condition
 and presupposition, but not the cause, of its existence in that which is
 also found in the previous stage of the animal world. The proof that the
 origin of moral self-determination finds its sufficient explanation in
 that which the previous stage of the animal world also has, would appear
 to have been given by Darwin only when he had succeeded in explaining the
 origin of self-consciousness from animal intelligence; but that he did
 not succeed in it, we think we have clearly shown. On the other hand, we
 willingly admit that the study of the social and all other instincts and
 impulses which are common to man and animals, and which in man form the
 object and instrument of his moral activity, has for us the highest
 interest, inasmuch as the only problem is to explain the conditions and
 prerequisites of moral self-determination—or, historically
 speaking, the conditions [123]and prerequisites of the origin of morally
 acting beings. Furthermore we have to say here also that condition and
 prerequisite are not identical with cause, and it is precisely the
 cause of moral responsibility and of the origin of such morally
 responsible beings, which has not yet been discovered by the Darwinian
 theory.
The followers of Darwin enter still less into the discussion of the
 question as to the origin of self-consciousness and of moral
 self-determination. Häckel—who, in his "Natural History of
 Creation" and in his "Anthropogeny," expounds his whole evolution theory
 in all its antecedent conditions and consequences—has, indeed, much
 to say of the different faculties of the soul of man and animals. He
 traces these faculties in the case of man down to the lowest state of the
 most degraded races, and in the case of animals from the kermes up to the
 bee, from the lancelet-fish to the dog, ape, elephant and horse; and he
 also treats of the so-called a priori knowledge which "arose only
 by long-enduring transmission, by inheritance of acquired adaptations of
 the brain, out of originally empiric or experiential knowledge a
 posteriori," (Vol. II, 345). But we look in vain in his works for a
 treatment of the question as to the origin of the Ego—of
 self-consciousness. Nowhere does he enter into the analysis of the
 psychological ideas; he only compares the psychical utterances of
 different creatures, and thinks the whole problem solved when he says:
 "The mental differences between the most stupid placental animals (for
 instance, sloths and armadillos) and the most intelligent animals of the
 same group (for instance dogs and apes) are, at any rate, much more
 considerable than the differences in the [124]intellectual life of
 dogs, apes, and men." Or: "If these brutish parasites are compared with
 the mentally active and sensitive ants, it will certainly be admitted
 that the psychical differences between the two are much greater than
 those between the highest and lowest mammals—between beaked
 animals, pouched animals and armadillos, on the one hand, and dogs, apes,
 men, on the other." The fact that in the human individual consciousness
 and self-consciousness are gradually developed, is to him a proof that in
 the organic kingdom also consciousness and self-consciousness came into
 existence gradually, and, indeed, hand-in-hand with the development of
 the nervous system; and with this result he thinks that he has relieved
 himself from the task of showing the "how" of the origin of
 self-consciousness. This becomes clearly evident from a remark about the
 origin of consciousness, in his "Anthropogeny," where he says that, if
 DuBois-Reymond had thought that consciousness is developed, he would no
 longer have held its origin to be a thing beyond the limits of human
 capacity. Häckel likewise seems to regard the question of the origin of
 moral self-determination as solved or rejected, if only freedom is
 denied—which, indeed, is repeatedly done by him.
A similar defect in the treatment of this question by evolutionists we
 find in the works of Oscar Schmidt, Gustav Jäger, and others. Even Emil
 DuBois-Reymond, who, in his celebrated and eloquent lecture on "The
 Limits of the Knowledge of Nature," given before the assembly of
 scientists at Leipzig, 1872, asserts so energetically that the origin of
 sensation and consciousness is inexplicable (see next section), seems to
 [125]take the origin of self-consciousness for
 granted, and as needing no further explanation, if only consciousness is
 once present.
Since, then, the scientists leave us without a sufficient answer to
 the question respecting the origin of self-consciousness and of moral
 self-determination, we shall have to turn to the philosophers. Here,
 indeed, we find rich definitions and genetic analyses, but none that lead
 us any farther than to the information that consciousness is the
 necessary condition of self-consciousness; that animal instinct is the
 necessary antecedent condition of moral self-determination. Yet in the
 works of these very philosophers who are inclined to a mechanical and
 "monistic" view of the world, we find that they directly avoid the
 question as to the origin of self-consciousness and of moral
 self-determination. As soon as they are led near it, in the course of
 reasoning in their works, they suddenly turn aside again to the quite
 different questions of the connection between brain and soul, between
 physical and psychical, external and internal processes, etc. Evidently
 they feel that with this question they have arrived at the weak point of
 their system. That here is a weak point, we clearly see in the case of D.
 F. Strauss, a leading advocate of modern naturalism, and the greatest
 philosophic scholar of that school. It is true, in his "Postscript as
 Preface," as we saw before, he mentions the origin of self-consciousness
 as one of the points which need special explanation; but he seems to have
 made this acknowledgment more with the purpose of showing that
 DuBois-Reymond, in admitting the origin of self-consciousness to be
 explainable, has no longer any reason to contest the explicability of the
 [126]origin of sensation and consciousness; for
 in his work on "The Old Faith and the New," he did not enter into that
 question at all. On the other hand, he makes in his last-mentioned work a
 remarkable confession. In answering the question—how do we
 determine our rule of life?—he comes to speak of the position of
 man in nature, traces a law of progress in nature, and says: "In this
 cumulative progression of life, man is also comprised, and, moreover, in
 such wise that the organic plasticity of our planet (provisionally, say
 some naturalists, but that we may fairly leave an open question)
 culminates in him. As nature can not go higher, she would go
 inwards. 'To be reflected within itself,' was a very good expression
 of Hegel's. Nature felt herself already in the animal, but she wished to
 know herself also." But still stronger is the following expression:
 "In man, nature endeavored not merely to exalt, but to transcend
 herself." In § 1, Chap. II, we shall have to
 speak of this important acknowledgment of teleology in nature, which such
 an antagonist of teleology as Strauss makes in the above-quoted remarks
 about a progress in nature and a will of nature; but here we are more
 interested in the equally remarkable acknowledgment of the fact that man
 can not be explained from nature alone—that he is something which
 transcends nature. For that (according to Strauss) nature, in originating
 man, not only intended to transcend herself, but really did
 transcend herself and, that she succeeded in her intention, we can infer
 from the moral precept which Strauss gives: "Do not forget for a moment,
 that thou art human; not merely a natural production."
The result of our investigation, therefore, is that [127]with
 self-consciousness and free moral self-determination something
 specifically new came into existence which had its antecedent condition
 in a previous state of existence, but has not yet found its sufficient
 explanation in this antecedent state.
§ 2. The Origin of Sensation and of Consciousness.
The limits of our knowledge show themselves still more clearly in the
 attempts to explain the origin of consciousness and its lowest
 form—sensation. Self-consciousness is without doubt ideally nearer
 to consciousness in this, that both are an immaterial activity; and yet
 we found no demonstrable bridge which leads from consciousness to
 self-consciousness. Still broader is the gulf between the material and
 the immaterial, between the unconscious and the conscious,—or, to
 describe the two realms with names which bring them nearest together,
 between that which is without sensation and that which has sensation: a
 gulf to bridge which philosophy also has vainly exerted its utmost
 efforts, as has been well known since the "supernatural assistance" of
 Descartes and the "preëstablished harmony" of Leibnitz. Wherein lies the
 real necessity that there should be sensation? How does the material
 become something that is felt? What is the demonstrable cause (not the
 condition, but the cause) of a sentient subject? To these questions,
 every science up to the present day lacks an answer. As is well known,
 DuBois-Reymond, in his previously-mentioned lecture upon "The Limits of
 our Knowledge of Nature," declares the origin of sensation and of
 consciousness to be one of two limits, beyond [128]which we have not only
 to say "ignoramus," but "ignorabimus."
In abstracto, we might think of two attempts at bridging over
 this gulf: the first one is that we try to transform sensation itself
 into something material, and the other is that we attribute sensation
 also to that which, according to our observation, seems to be without
 sensation; namely, to matter and its elements, the atoms. Both of these
 attempts have been made—the former by D. F. Strauss in his "The Old
 Faith and the New," and by the English philosopher, Herbert Spencer, in
 his "First Principles of Philosophy;" the latter, first pointed out by
 Schopenhauer, was taken up and farther developed by Zöllner in his work,
 "Ueber die Natur der Kometen" ("Nature of the Comets"), Leipzig,
 Engelmann, 1872, and with special acuteness by an "Anonymus" in the work:
 "Das Unbewusste von Standpunkt der Physiologie und Descendenztheorie"
 ("The Unconscious from the Standpoint of Physiology and Descent Theory"),
 Berlin, Duncker, 1872.
Strauss says, in the previously-mentioned work: "If, under certain
 conditions, motion is transformed into heat, why may it not, under other
 conditions, be transformed into sensation?" And Herbert Spencer says, in
 his "First Principles of Philosophy," (page 217): "Various classes of
 facts thus unite to prove that the law of metamorphosis, which holds
 among the physical forces, holds equally between them and the mental
 forces. Those modes of the unknowable which we call motion, heat, light,
 chemical affinity, etc., are alike transformable into each other, and
 into those modes of the unknowable which we distinguish as sensation,
 [129]emotion, thought: these, in their turns,
 being directly or indirectly retransformable into the original
 shapes."
But motion—even the finest material motion, that of ether,
 (which, in consequence of the very important discovery of the
 conservation of force and of the mechanical equivalent of heat, made by
 Robert von Mayer, at present is taken to be heat)—is so decidedly a
 material process, the sensation of motion is so decidedly a reflex of the
 material in something immaterial, that the assertion of a transformation
 of motion into sensation seems to us only to change the point of view,
 and not to explain the difference, but to efface it. And we think that
 the appeal of Strauss from his contemporaries, who do not understand him,
 to posterity, who would understand him better and esteem him, has but
 little prospect of being operative.
If that which has sensation and that which has it not, are to be
 brought genetically near one another, and hence the difference between
 the two at the point where the lowest sentient being has found its first
 existence, is to be made void or at least bridged over, then it is much
 more reasonable, and also in the line of Strauss's solution, to deny the
 difference between that which has sensation and that which has it not,
 and to do this in the sense in which we also declare that to be sentient
 which we have hitherto been accustomed to regard as without sensation;
 and we should likewise attribute sensation to the original elements of
 the world, be they called atoms or whatever one may wish. This is done by
 Zöllner and by the before mentioned "Anonymus." This conclusion is
 logical; it is even the only possible conclusion, if we once start from
 the axiom that the new, which comes [130]into existence, must
 necessarily be explainable from agencies previously active, and known to
 or imagined by us through abstractions and hypotheses. Zöllner is
 certainly right when, in his work which appeared before the lecture of
 DuBois-Reymond, he puts the alternative, "either to renounce forever the
 conceivableness of the phenomena of sensation, or hypothetically to add
 to the common qualities of matter one more, which places the simplest and
 most elementary transactions of nature under a process of sensation,
 legitimately connected with it;" as also when he says (page 327): "We may
 regard the intensity of these sensations (of matter) as little and
 unimportant as we wish; but the hypothesis of their existence is,
 according to my conviction, a necessary condition, in order to comprehend
 the really existing phenomena of sensation in nature." Only we shall do
 well to choose the first alternative for the present, and, with
 DuBois-Reymond, answer the question as to the explanation of the origin
 of sensation with an "ignoramus"; indeed, we shall take a surer
 road with his "ignorabimus" than by a plunge into that bottomless
 ocean of hypotheses—in spite of the protest of Häckel, who
 (Anthrop., page XXI) sees that scientist who has the courage to admit the
 limits of our knowledge, on account of this "ignorabimus", walking
 in the army of the "black International", and "marshalled under the black
 flag of the hierarchy," together with "spiritual servitude and falsehood,
 want of reason and barbarism, superstition and retrogression", and
 fighting, "spiritual freedom and truth, reason and culture, evolution and
 progress." For a solution of the question which simply denies all
 sharply-marked differences in the world, and explains [131]the new, which
 comes into existence with sensation, by the assertion that this new
 element is not new, but was already present, and that it exists
 everywhere, only we do not see it everywhere,—such a solution seems
 to us not to be the true way to interpret the problem of the sphinx. Even
 Ed. von Hartmann seems to infringe the impartiality of the true observer,
 when, in his "Philosophy of the Unconscious," he attributes sensation to
 plants. But when Zöllner says (p. 326): "All the labors of natural
 beings [and, as the connection indicates, of all, even of inorganic
 natural beings] are determined by like and dislike;" and when "Anonymus"
 attributes sensation to all atoms and to all complexities composed of
 them, even to stone, then all reasonable conception of natural things and
 processes certainly vanishes into thin air.
It will be remembered, however, that in treating the question of the
 origin of self-consciousness, although we were not able to solve the
 problem, nevertheless we had to ascribe high value to the investigation
 of all psychical processes on the low stage of sensation and
 consciousness, since they show us not the cause, but the condition and
 basis, of self-consciousness. Likewise, in the question as to the origin
 of sensation and of consciousness, although we are not able to solve it,
 we will willingly admit that we observe, even in that which has no
 sensation, qualities and processes which furnish the absolutely necessary
 condition and basis for sensation. For the same reason, we will also
 admit the manifold analogies of sensation which we observe in that which
 is without sensation. The whole system of symbols in nature which fills
 our treasury of words and penetrates, in a [132]thousandfold way, our
 scientific and popular, our poetical and prosaic speech, our thoughts and
 feelings, bears witness to the fact that that which is without sensation
 is also a preparatory step to sensation, and feeling both active and
 passive springs from it. However, a preparatory step, as such, is not
 necessarily the cause; and the fact and the acknowledgment of a
 correlation is not on that account an explanation.
§ 3. The Origin of Life.
The third problem to be solved is the origin of life. As is well
 known, Darwin himself makes no attempt at explaining this problem, but is
 satisfied with the idea that life was infused into one or a few forms by
 the Creator ("Origin of Species," 6 ed., p. 429). His investigations and
 theories only begin where organic life, in its first and lowest forms, is
 already in existence.
But lately there have been made, in the realm of the organic,
 discoveries of beings which take the lowest conceivable round on the
 ladder of organisms, and which in their form and structure are so simple
 that from them to the inorganic there seems to be but a short step. We
 can no longer mention as belonging to the bridges which are said to lead
 from the organic world to the inorganic, the often-named
 bathybius, discovered by Huxley, and so strongly relied upon for
 the mechanical explanation of life—a slimy net-like growth, which
 covers the rocks in the great depths of the ocean. For after scientists
 like K. E. von Baer and others had already declared it probable that this
 bathybius is only a precipitate of organic relics, no less a person than
 the discoverer of the bathybius, in the "Annals of Natural History,"
 1875, [133]and in the "Quarterly Journal of
 Microscopical Science," 1875, has suggested that the whole discovery is
 but gypsum, which was precipitated in a gelatinous condition. Likewise
 the utterances concerning the simplicity and lack of structure of the
 lowest organisms, are to be accepted only with great reservation; for
 most of these organisms show very differently and very distinctly stamped
 structures; of this fact, anyone may easily convince himself, who has had
 the opportunity of observing with the microscope low and lowest
 organisms, and to admire their striking and manifold forms. Nevertheless,
 there are monera whose structure seems to be nothing but a living clod
 without kernel and cover, and which in that respect represent the lowest
 conceivable form of organic being and life.
Now, relying on these discoveries, as well as upon the successful
 demonstration, by inorganic means, of organic acids in chemistry, and
 starting from the supposition that the first appearance of life must
 necessarily be explained by those agencies which are already active in
 the inorganic nature, many scientists have attempted the so-called
 mechanical explanation of life. This attempt has been made most
 logically and systematically by Häckel. He says that organic
 matter, organic form, and organic motion, in the
 lowest stages of the organic, which are almost the only ones to be taken
 into consideration when the problem of the origin of life is discussed,
 contain nothing at all which does not also pertain to the inorganic. In
 his opinion, organic matter is an albuminous carbon combination,
 of which we have to presuppose that, like all chemical combinations,
 under certain physical and chemical conditions it can also arise in the
 realm [134]of the inorganic in a purely chemical and
 mechanical way. Organic form which, in its lowest stages, is so
 simple, like the moneron and the bathybius, and which stands still lower
 than a cell, is, moreover, something which there is no difficulty in
 explaining from inorganic matter. Finally, organic motion which
 alone is the last and lowest characteristic of the organic in its lowest
 stage—in which the process of life properly consists, and in which,
 therefore, we have to recognize the punctum saliens of the whole
 question—is only an increase and complication of the merely
 mechanical motion of the inorganic, likewise explainable by mechanical
 causes. This view Häckel expounds in the thirteenth and partly also in
 the first chapter of his "Natural History of Creation," and explains the
 origin of the first and most simple organic individuals either through
 what he calls autogony in an inorganic fluid, or through
 plasmogony in an organic fluid—a plasma or protoplasma. In
 fact, according to him, the only correct idea is that all matter is
 provided with a soul, that inorganic and organic nature is one, that all
 natural bodies known to us are equally animated, and that the contrast
 commonly drawn between the living and the dead world does not exist. This
 is but a repetition, in a more rhetorical way, of the same idea which
 "Anonymus" expressed in discussing the question as to the origin of
 sensation.
DuBois-Reymond—who, in his lecture at Leipzig, pronounced the
 origin of sensation and of consciousness a problem of
 natural science, never to be solved—is also of the opinion that the
 explanation of life from mere mechanism of atoms is very probable,
 and only a question of time. It is well known that the experimental [135]attempts at originating the organic
 through chemistry are at present pursued with an eagerness that can have
 its stimulus only in the hope of success.
It is clear that the main point of the question does not lie in
 organic matter or in organic form, but in organic motion, for even
 the specific of the organic form originates only first through
 organic motion of life. If, therefore, life is to be explained
 from mechanical causes, it must also be shown that the merely mechanical
 motion of inorganic matter produces that motion which we know as organic
 motion, and how it produces it. The idea of "increase and
 complication of the inorganic, merely mechanical motion," with which
 Häckel throws a bridge from the living to the lifeless or from the
 organic to the inorganic, does not yet give us that proof; it seems
 rather to be one of those pompous phrases with which people hide their
 ignorance and make the uncritical multitude believe that the explanation
 is found: a manipulation against which, among others, Wigand, in his
 great work, repeatedly protests, as also does the Duke of Argyll in his
 lecture on "Anthropomorphism in Theology," having especially in his mind
 the deductions of Spencer. For we may review the whole known series of
 mechanical motions and their mechanical causes, and imagine their
 mechanical increase and their mechanical complication the largest
 possible; and still the life-motion of the organic will never result
 therefrom. If such a keen psychical and physiological investigator and
 thinker, and such an authority in the realm of the motions of atoms and
 molecules, as Gustav Theodor Fechner—"Einige Ideen zur Schöpfungs-
 und Entwicklungsgeschichte der Organismen" ("Some Ideas about the History
 of the [136]Creation and Development of Organisms"),
 Leipzig, 1873, p. 1, f.—can find the whole lasting and effectual
 difference between the organic and inorganic in nothing else than in the
 way and manner of motion—namely, that the motion of the
 organic molecules is different from that of the inorganic
 molecules—and when he traces this difference with mathematical
 exactness, then an assertion which simply denies that difference, without
 attempting to show the identity of the two motions, to say nothing of
 proving this identity, is nothing more than a clear evidence that the
 mechanical theory has not yet succeeded in explaining the origin of life,
 and that those scientists who so haughtily look down upon the abuse of
 "vital power," to the efficacy of which their antagonists began to
 resort when their knowledge came to an end, make exactly the same abuse
 with their "mechanism." That organic motion, even the organic
 motion of molecules, once present, comes into dependence on the
 well known laws of mechanism, we naturally will not deny; any more than
 that the human body, when serving the will of the mind, follows in its
 motions the laws of physiology and mechanism.
Preyer seems to make a mistake similar to that of those who efface
 sensation and motion, when, in an essay on the hypothesis of the origin
 of life, in the "Deutsche Rundschau," Vol. I, 7, he even effaces the
 difference between life and sensation, and simply identifies life and
 motion. "Self-motion, called life, and inorganic movement of bodies by
 agencies outside of themselves, are but quantitatively, intensively, or
 gradually different forms of motion; not in their innermost being
 different.... Our will changes many kinds of motion into heat, makes [137]cold
 metal to be red-hot simply by hammering.... Likewise inversely, as the
 law of the conservation of force must require, a part of the eternal heat
 of the metal can be now and forever transposed into the living motion of
 our soul." This whole manner of investigation and proof is one of those
 numerous unconscious logical fallacies which, introduced by Hegel, have
 gradually attained a certain title by possession. From the observation of
 a process, they abstract a characteristic, as general as
 possible,—as, for instance, from the observation of life the
 characteristic of motion; then they find that the process has the
 characteristic in common with still other processes—as, for
 instance, the self-motion of the living has the general characteristic of
 motion in common with the objective motion of the lifeless; and then they
 persuade themselves that the process which they try to explain is really
 explained by having found a quality of this process as comprehensive as
 possible. And in order to hide the falsity of the conclusion, they also
 give to the general idea, which they have found to be a characteristic of
 that process, the same name which the special process has,—as, for
 instance, they call motion life, no matter whether it is a motion of
 itself or a being moved, no matter whether it is performed from within or
 in consequence of an impulse from without; and then they say: "Behold,
 life is explained; life is nothing but motion." But it can be readily
 seen that life is also motion, and has therefore this characteristic in
 common with everything which is moved; but that the specific of that
 motion called life—namely, self-motion in consequence of an impulse
 renewing itself from within, and, as Fechner shows, [138]self-motion in
 a rotatory direction of the molecules, precisely the same thing which in
 distinction from other motions we call life,—is not explained, but
 simply ignored.
There is still another bold hypothesis which we have to
 mention—namely, that the organic germs were once thrown from
 other spheres upon the earth by ćrolites. Years ago this idea was
 declared by Helmholtz to be scientifically conceivable; then it was
 formally asserted and brought into general notice by Sir William
 Thompson, in his opening address before the annual assembly of the
 British Association at Edinburgh, in 1871, but rejected as formally and
 materially unscientific by Zöllner, in the preface to his work, "Nature
 of Comets," and again defended by Helmholtz in his preface to the second
 volume of a translation of Thompson and Tait's Theoretical Physics.
 However, this hypothesis also only defers the solution of the question,
 and, supposing its scientific possibility, leads either to the remoter
 question, how life did originate in those other spheres, or to the
 metaphysical assertion of the eternity of life and of the eternal
 continuity of the living in the world, and shows therewith very clearly
 the impossibility of its explanation.
This inexplicability would still exist, if what is quite improbable
 should happen, namely, that the experimental attempts at artificially
 producing organic life should be successful, and if thus the question
 as to the generatio ćquivoca, which during the past decades so
 much alarmed the minds of scientists and theologians, should be
 experimentally solved and answered in the affirmative. For in view of the
 hopes of a possible explanation of life, which is expected to be the
 reward for the success of [139]these attempts, Zöllner is fully right in
 saying: "That the scientists to-day set such an extremely high value on
 the inductive proof of the generatio ćquivoca, is the most
 significant symptom of how little they have made themselves acquainted
 with the first principles of the theory of knowledge. For, suppose they
 should really succeed in observing the origin of organic germs under
 conditions entirely free from objection to any imaginable communication
 with the atmosphere, what could they answer to the assertion that the
 organic germs, in reference to their extension, are of the order of
 ether-atoms, and, with these, press through the intervals of the material
 molecules which form the sides of our apparatus?"
How little life is explained, at least according to the present state
 of our knowledge, also follows from the insufficiency of all
 attempts at defining it. The latest and most thorough attempt
 at such a definition of life, with which we are familiar, is that made by
 Herbert Spencer in his "First Principles", § 25, and in his "Principles
 of Biology," Vol. I, Part I, Chap. 4 and 5. Having made thorough
 investigations, he arrives at the general formula: "Life is the
 continuous adjustment of internal relations to external relations." To
 this definition we will not make the objection that it is nothing but a
 logical abstraction from the common quality of all processes and
 phenomena of life; for it certainly lies in the nature of a definition
 that it can be nothing else but that. Nevertheless, we will state that
 such a definition of life not only does not lead us any nearer to the
 comprehension of its processes, and especially of the richness and the
 organization of its forms and functions, but that it [140]clearly shows
 us how little the origin of life is explained. For this very definition
 necessarily and obviously leads us to the questions: Whence do those
 internal relations originate, whence their adjustment to external
 relations, and whence the continuity of this adjustment? The answer to
 these questions this definition still owes us.
Therefore, not only self-consciousness and freedom, not only sensation
 and consciousness, but also life and the organic, remain a phenomenon
 which—at least, according to the present state of our knowledge and
 reasoning—enters into the realm of the world of phenomena as
 something new that can not be explained from the foregoing,
 although it presupposes the foregoing as the condition, not the
 cause, of its appearance; and no matter whether we have to think of the
 modality of its origin as a sudden or as a gradual one.
§ 4. The Elements of the World, the Theory of Atoms, and the Mechanical View of the World.
The investigating and thinking mind, when it attempts to explain the
 appearances and forms of that which exists, finds itself led further and
 further back, until it finally arrives at the last elements of the world
 and of matter. Whether we take the problem of life as solved or unsolved,
 the living has matter and its subordination to the efficiency of all its
 chemical and mechanical powers in common with the lifeless; and the
 organic, in its first beginnings, stands extraordinarily near to, and is
 grown on the ground of, the inorganic,—if not according to the
 category of cause and effect, still according to that of condition and
 consequence, of basis and structure. Therefore we stand at last before
 the [141]question of the final elements of matter,
 which, indeed, constitutes organic as well as inorganic bodies.
The answer to this question is attempted by the theory of atoms: the
 doctrine which teaches that the whole material world is composed of
 simple particles which are no farther divisible, and from whose
 juxtaposition the chemical elements—and, in respect to their other
 forms of existence and combination, the whole world of bodies, with all
 their forms, states, and changes,—are composed.
This theory has not only the practical value that the physical (and
 especially the chemical) sciences can make and use their formulas most
 easily under the supposition of such simple primitive elements; but it
 also has the great theoretical merit that it has broken down the old
 barriers between matter and force, and has thus promoted
 considerably our method of regarding the world of material substances.
 Toward this result, scientists and philosophers—and, among the
 latter, the thinkers and investigators of both views of the world, the
 theistic and the pantheistic, the ideal and the materialistic,—have
 worked with equal merit, and have equally enjoyed its fruits, with
 perhaps the single exception of so pure a materialist as Ludwig Büchner,
 who, it seems, does not like to give up his old doctrine of force
 and matter as the two inseparable, equivalent, and equally eternal
 elements of the universe. That matter itself, even when looked upon from
 a purely physical standpoint, has an incorporeal principle; that the
 whole world of bodies, as such, has but a phenomenal character; that not
 force and matter are the two empirico-physical principles of the
 world, but that matter itself must be a product of elementary [142]force
 active in the atoms; these doctrines have now be pretty nearly common
 property of natural science and philosophy. Investigators who like
 Wilhelm Wundt, rise from natural science to philosophy, or such as take
 their starting-point from philosophy—whether they be theists, like
 Lotze, I. H. Fichte, Ulrici, or occupy the ground of a pessimistic
 pantheism, as does Eduard von Hartmann,—all share this view and its
 fruits.
But in spite of all these preferences for the theory of atoms, we
 should not forget that it still has but hypothetical value—that it
 is but an idea of limits, which indicates, where the scientifically
 perceptible ceases, and that every attempt at moving this limit still
 farther on must either fail and lead into unsolvable contradictions, or,
 if successful, only leads to new difficulties and unsolved problems.
Already within that realm in which the theory of atoms is a
 supplemental hypothesis directly indispensable at
 present—i.e., within their application in physical
 sciences—we meet suppositions which raise great doubts and
 difficulties. Such a scientific difficulty occurs when the atomism of the
 natural philosophers supposes a double complexity of atoms, material
 atoms and atoms of ether: complexities which both penetrate one another,
 and are supposed to follow partly totally different, partly the same,
 elementary laws of force. Material atoms are subordinate to the law of
 gravitation, while atoms of ether are not; and yet both act legitimately
 upon one another,—as, for instance, when heat passes into motion
 and motion into heat, which certainly presupposes a law of power acting
 in common for both. Another difficulty lies in the atomism of the
 chemists; and still another [143]in the divergency of the aims at which the
 physical theory of atoms on the one hand and the chemical theory of atoms
 on the other seem to point. Chemistry is inclined to explain the
 difference of its numerous elements from the original difference of the
 atoms; and yet it is not at all certain that the elements of chemistry
 themselves are not composed of still more simple and less numerous
 primary elements. Many indications seem to point to such primary elements
 which are more simple in number and quality, and investigators even
 mention an element—hydrogen—in the direction of which we have
 to look for the way that will lead us to those primitive elements of
 matter. The divergency of aims, finally, consists in the fact that
 physical atomism prevailingly points to a conformity of the atoms of
 bodies; chemical atomism, on the contrary,—at least, according to
 its present state,—points to a dissimilarity among these.
The hypothetical and problematical nature of the theory of atoms
 strikes us still more clearly when we try to analyze it philosophically.
 First, we meet that antinomy which we always find where we try to pass
 beyond the limits of our empirical knowledge by means of conception. For,
 if the atoms still occupy space, we can not understand why they should
 not be further divisible, and if they do not occupy space, we can not
 understand how any sum of that which does not occupy space, can finally
 succeed in filling space. It is true, this very antinomy has led to the
 overcoming of that dualism of force and matter which so long enchained
 science, and the overcoming of which we greet as a progress of our
 theoretical knowledge of nature. We no [144]longer look upon the
 atoms as material elements, but as centres of force. The antinomy has the
 further merit that, in the realm of the knowledge of nature, it brings to
 our consciousness the great advantage of a concrete perception and
 reasoning over purely logical abstractions. For Ulrici, in his "God and
 Nature," is right in calling our attention to the fact that we must think
 about the atoms, not in an abstractly logical and an
 abstractly mathematical way, but concretely; that we have to
 consider them, not as mere quantities, but as qualities; and that we can
 then easily arrive at the perception of something which occupies space,
 and which therefore, according to abstract conclusions of logic and
 mathematics, could still be thought of as divisible in abstracto,
 but which, even as a consequence of its quality, of its concrete
 natural form, is no longer divisible in reality. Nevertheless, in spite
 of all these remarkable attempts at overcoming the difficulties of the
 theory of atoms, that antinomy returns as often as we undertake to make
 that clearly perceptible which we have at last gained a partial
 conception of; and thus shows us, from this side also, that even with the
 theory of atoms we have arrived at the limit where not only our
 observation, but also the preciseness and certainty of our conceptions,
 ceases.
By the atomic theory, we do not gain anything for the ultimate
 explanation of the world and its contents, not even if its present
 hypothetical value should be changed into a complete demonstration. For
 the whole theory but removes the question as to the origin of things from
 their sensible appearance to the elements of that appearance, and leaves
 us standing just as helpless before the elements as before the
 appearances. For [145]whence does the whole richness of the
 appearances in the world come? If the atoms are all alike, and their laws
 of force the simplest we can imagine, then their grouping into all the
 developments and formations of which we observe such an infinite and
 regularly arranged abundance, is not less unexplained than if we had not
 gone back to the theory of atoms at all. But if the atoms and their laws
 of force are different, the difficulty is not simplified, but doubled.
 For, first, the theory then owes us an answer to the questions wherein
 the difference of the atoms consists and whence it comes; and, second,
 the question we have to consider in supposing a uniformity of the atoms,
 is not disposed of or answered—the question, namely, as to the
 causes which bring these different atoms together to form precisely those
 complexities of atoms which we observe as the world of phenomena.
This insufficiency of the theory of atoms in explaining the world and
 its contents, is another proof to us that, however great the practical
 value of this theory may be for the operations of physics and chemistry,
 its theoretical value consists essentially in the fact that it formulates
 more accurately the perception of the limits of our exact knowledge. Even
 the idea of Lotze, that the atoms (in themselves different) are not
 really the final elements of matter, but consist of still more simple but
 likewise different elements, seems to us more a decoration than an
 extension of the limits at which our perception has arrived; we stand
 before a double door, but find both doors locked. We agree with
 DuBois-Reymond, when he declares, in his before-mentioned lecture, the
 impossibility of perceiving the last elements of the [146]world, matter
 and force, to be the other limit of our knowledge of nature which,
 together with the impossibility of the explanation of the origin of
 sensation and consciousness, remains forever fixed.
Likewise, the peculiar modification which G. Th. Fechner gives to the
 theory of the last elements of the world, cannot escape the charge of
 leaving the problem of the world scientifically just as unsolved as
 before. Fechner not only finds, as we have already mentioned, the
 difference between the organic and the inorganic in the difference of the
 mutual motions, but he also finds that the character of organic motions
 is exactly the same as that which the bodies of the universe have among
 themselves in their motions. Thus he distinguishes the cosmorganic
 motion, which is performed in the whole of the universe, and the
 molecular-organic motion, which we observe in the single organisms
 of the earth; he makes God the personal, self-conscious soul of this
 cosmical organism; and, in using the law of the tendency to stability,
 with which he completes the Darwinian selection theory, asserts that the
 organic in the whole of the universe, as well as in the narrow sphere of
 single bodies on the earth, is the first thing from which the inorganic
 was separated and became gradually fixed. Thus, in his opinion, the
 problem which up to the present has occupied investigators,—namely,
 how did the organic originate from the inorganic?—would have to be
 reversed to, how did the inorganic originate from the organic?
Preyer would also reach a similar result with his above-mentioned
 theory of the identity of life and motion. For according to this theory,
 the living would [147]be as old and common as motion, and the
 organic but the dregs of life.
We may, therefore, say that, without regard to the fact that neither
 pantheism nor theism will ever harmonize with Fechner's solution of this
 contrast which gives to God exactly the same position in the world as the
 soul has in the body, natural science will certainly treat with great
 reserve a cosmo-metaphysical system which so fully upsets all results of
 exact investigations into the history of origin and development, and has
 no other proof for itself than the identity, or at least the similarity,
 of the abstract formula according to which the molecular motions of
 organisms and the cosmical motions are performed. Although we thus have
 to deny to the proof of this identity or similarity the weight which
 Fechner gives to it, nevertheless it has still no small merit, since it
 throws new and clearer light upon the old thought, always attractive and
 yet so difficult to present,—of a macrocosmus and a microcosmus,
 which has been often enough treated with so much natural mysticism.
Thus, in our inquiry into the development of things, we have
 successively arrived at four points, each of which urged us to make the
 confession that here something new came into existence, which can not be
 explained from the preceding conditions of its being; these four points
 were: the origin of self-consciousness, the origin of sensation and consciousness,
 the origin of life, and finally the elements of the universe. Arrived at
 the last problem, we see the confession of our ignorance increased to the
 still more comprehensive confession that we are really not able
 fully to explain anything in the world. We are able to perceive a
 uniformity of law in the states and [148]changes of things, and
 to abstract therefrom common laws of nature; we can observe single
 objects, and perceive their states and changes in their connection with
 one another and in their dependence on those laws. But we are not able to
 explain scientifically either the origin of these laws or the last
 physical causes of the qualities of things, which follow these laws.
We should reach the same result if we had not started from the
 objective world of the existing, as we were induced to do by our subject,
 but from theoretical investigations. Here also we should immediately find
 ourselves in a world of relations between subject and object, of a
 regularly arranged abundance of subjective and objective qualities,
 states and processes, of which the objective only come to our knowledge
 through the medium of the subjective, and of regularly arranged laws to
 which both the subjective and the objective are commonly subordinate. But
 why just these and no other qualities of the subject and of objects
 exist, why just these and no other laws reign, why just this and no other
 relation takes place between the perceiving subject and the perceived
 object, would remain unanswered as before.
Amidst a generation which is so fond of reveling in the thought of an
 extension of all the limits of our knowledge, and is inclined to proclaim
 as true that which it wishes and hopes, investigators are not wholly
 wanting who very decidedly express their consciousness of these limits of
 our knowledge, and at the same time combine it with the most logical
 scientific reasoning and investigation. Even when in detail they reach
 these limits from the most varying points of view, and draw [149]them in
 different directions, they all agree in confirming the principle that it
 is one of the first and most indispensable conditions of successful
 investigation always to be conscious of the limits of its perception.
 Voices which remind mankind of these limits, are perhaps less popular,
 for man prefers to be reminded of the advances rather than of the
 limitations of his knowledge; but they are on that account the more
 worthy of our gratitude, for they keep us on the solid ground of the
 attainable from which alone sure progress in knowledge is possible. Among
 such philosophers we name Ulrici, and especially Lotze; among scientists,
 in the first place, two pioneers in their departments—namely, in
 the department of the mechanism of heat, Robert von Mayer—compare
 his "Bemerkungen über das mechanische Aequivalent der Wärme" ("Remarks on
 the Mechanical Equivalent of Heat"), and "Ueber nothwendige Consequenzen
 und Inconsequenzen der Wärmemechanik" ("Necessary Consequences and
 Inconsequences of the Mechanism of Heat"), Stuttgart, Cotta;—and in
 the realm of the development of organisms, K. E. von Baer—compare
 his "Reden und kleinere Aufsätze" ("Addresses and Essays"), 2 vols., St.
 Petersburg, 1864 and 1876. In this connection we have already mentioned
 the name of DuBois-Reymond. Otto Köstlin published two remarkable
 dissertations in this direction—"Ueber die Grenzen der
 Naturwissenschaft" ("Limits of Natural Science"), Tübingen, Fues, 2d ed.,
 1874, and "Ueber natürliche Entwicklung" ("Natural Development"), ib.,
 1875. In the latter he especially cautions against hastily confounding
 the laws of development of planets, development of the organic kingdom,
 and development [150]of the individual organisms. Recently,
 Wigand, in the second volume of his work already frequently mentioned,
 attempts, with an extreme energy which does too little justice to the
 representation and investigation of the still unsolved problems, to
 formulate the limits of the knowable.
A contrary extreme, and of its kind a still more one-sided corrective
 of this too great stability, we have in those investigators who, by
 reason of the great progress which has been made in the realm of the
 theoretical knowledge of nature, allow themselves to be drawn on to the
 hope of still explaining all states and processes in the world—the
 spiritual and the ethic processes as well as the physical—from the
 pure mechanism of atoms; and who see in that which thus far has been
 mechanically explained, the only and the infallible way of explaining all
 that is still obscure. They call this view the mechanical view of the
 world; and, as "monism," put it in opposition to the "vitalistic,
 teleological, and dualistic view of the world." In order to obtain a
 correct view of this standpoint, we quote from Häckel's "Natural History
 of Creation", Vol. I, page 23, the following passage: "By the theory of
 descent we are for the first time enabled to conceive of the unity of
 nature in such a manner that a mechanico-causal explanation of even the
 most intricate organic phenomena, for example, the origin and structure
 of the organs of sense, is no more difficult (in a general way) than is
 the mechanical explanation of any physical process; as, for example,
 earthquakes, the courses of the wind, or the currents of the ocean. We
 thus arrive at the extremely important conviction that all natural
 bodies which are known to us are equally [151]animated, that the
 distinction which has been made between animate and inanimate bodies does
 not exist. When a stone is thrown into the air, and falls to earth
 according to definite laws, or when in a solution of salt a crystal is
 formed, the phenomenon is neither more nor less a mechanical
 manifestation of life than the growth and flowering of plants, than the
 propagation of animals or the activity of their senses, than the
 perception or the formation of thought in man." Here crystallization,
 organic life, sensation, and formation of thought, are expressly put in
 one line of mechanism with the falling of a stone.
In the following section we will have occasion to discuss this view as
 a view of the world; but we believe that the presentation of this
 idea, and the exclusive vindication of it as a complete view of the
 world, needs just here, where we still stand on the ground of the
 philosophy of natural perception, some critical sifting.
In the realm of material nature, mechanical explanation and
 general explanation is directly identical; i.e., a process of
 nature remains obscure so long and so far as its mechanism is not yet
 perceived, and in the same degree as its mechanism is perceived, the
 process also is explained. The uniformity of law in the occurrence of
 events according to the causal principle in the realm of material nature,
 can be approached by us in no other form than in that of mechanism,
 provided we understand by mechanism an activity according to law and
 which can be mathematically estimated as to size and number. So far,
 therefore, every scientific investigator in the knowledge of material
 nature takes his place on the standpoint of a mechanical view of the
 world. [152]
But here we have gone to the full extent to which we are justified in
 taking a mechanical view of the world, and have fixed its limits in its
 own proper realm—the realm of the scientific perception of the
 material world; even if we do not join with Wigand in resigning
 scientific inquiry in that direction, and express the expectation that
 these limits are not fixed and not to be designated in advance, but will
 be moved farther and farther, and that not only in regard to the
 knowledge of the quantity of phenomena (which even Wigand, as a
 scientific investigator, naturally admits), but also in regard to their
 quality. In our researches hitherto we have often met such limits. We
 have found that in the realm of the material world such important
 phenomena and processes as life are at present not yet fully explained.
 By the mechanical view of the world, we have been led back to the last
 elements and to the most elementary forces of matter, but have been
 convinced that we are no longer able to find them with scientific
 certainty, and that consequently not a single quality of material
 existence is really explained and traced back to its last material
 causes, to say nothing of the transcendental causes which are entirely
 inaccessible to our exact scientific knowledge.
Now there is another realm of existence, just as large as and,
 according to its value, still larger than, that of the material world,
 which, not on account of its scientific inaccessibility, but in
 conformity with its own peculiar nature, entirely withdraws itself from
 the mechanical view. It is the realm of psychical life; and, still
 more decidedly and more evidently, the realm of mind. As far as
 our observations go, the law of [153]causality reigns here also, and here also
 nothing takes place without a cause. But as here the realm in
 which the causal law reigns is no longer material nature, so even the
 form in which it is active is no longer that of mechanism. For we
 certainly cannot understand mechanical effect to be anything else than an
 effect of something material upon something material, whose uniformity of
 law can be exactly estimated mathematically as to size and number. Now if
 the application of mechanism to the psychical and spiritual realm does
 not express anything except the certainly quite insidious idea that here
 also causality reigns, it is nothing else but the substitution of another
 idea for the word mechanism—an idea which it never had in the
 entire use of language up to this time, and by the substitution of which
 the proof for a mechanism of the mind is not given, but surreptitiously
 obtained in a manner similar to the before-mentioned attempt of Preyer,
 surreptitiously to obtain the proof for the origin of life.
But if the mechanical explanation of the functions of the mind really
 means that they also consist in an effect of the material upon something
 material, and that this effect can be mathematically estimated as to size
 and number, it is an assertion which has first to be proven, but which
 cannot be proven and cannot be allowed even as an hypothesis, as a
 problem for investigation, because it contradicts our whole experience.
 And it contradicts not only the conclusions drawn from most natural
 appearances, which, as is well known, are deceitful and even tell us that
 the sun goes around the earth, but it contradicts the philosophical
 analysis just as much and even still more directly and decidedly than
 [154]the direct impression—as became
 clear to us at the lowest point of contact between the material and the
 psychical, viz., at sensation, when we showed the impossibility of
 scientifically explaining the origin of sensation.
It is easy to see what facts made it altogether possible to produce
 such a materialistic psychology and to give it at the first superficial
 view a certain appearance of truth; but it will not be difficult to
 detect its want of truth. According to our whole experience, the human
 mind is bound to the body; its proper activity, its whole communication
 with the material and immaterial world outside of it, even its whole
 mutual intercourse with the minds of fellow-beings, is performed by means
 of bodily functions which, as such, are subordinate to mechanism.
 Therefore "physiological psychology" certainly belongs to the most
 interesting of the branches of science which at present enjoy special
 care, and works in this realm, like those of Wundt, are worthy of the
 greatest attention. Now if these points of contact once exist between the
 material and the psychical and spiritual processes, so that material
 functions causally influence psychical and spiritual ones, and psychical
 and spiritual functions similarly influence material ones, there must
 also exist between the laws of material processes and those of psychical
 and spiritual functions a relation which makes possible such a mutual
 effect, and we must be able to abstract from it the existence of a common
 higher law of which on the one side the material laws, and on the other
 the psychical and spiritual, are but partial laws. Precisely here lie the
 indications which appear to favor materialism in psychology. But it is
 only an appearance. For, from the acknowledgment [155]and scientific
 investigation of a reciprocal action, to an identification of the two
 factors which act upon one another, is still an infinite step. If science
 is not even able to identify material motion and sensation, still less
 can it identify material motion and the spiritual and ethic activities.
 When this is done, it is done only in consequence of the same confounding
 of condition and cause which we had to expose on the occasion of the
 assertion of the possibility of explaining the origin of life or of
 sensation, and of consciousness or of self-consciousness. But we here
 also willingly admit that the realm in which causality reigns in the form
 of mechanism, aims at being the support, foundation, and instrument of
 another realm where causality still reigns, but mechanism ceases. How far
 investigation may still proceed in the direction of those interesting
 points and lines where both realms touch one another in causal reciprocal
 action, we do not know. We are hardly able to indicate the direction in
 which the investigation must proceed, and this direction seems to be
 assigned to it by the idea of Auslösung.[8] The idea of Auslösung, which plays
 such an [156]important rôle in physics, seems to
 be still fruitful for the knowledge of psycho-physical life: bodily
 functions lösen aus spiritual ones, spiritual functions bodily
 ones. But so much the more clearly does this theory show the limits of
 mechanism: mechanism reigns in the world of bodies from the
 Auslösungen and to the Auslösungen, with which the mind
 induces the body to activity, and the body the mind; beyond these limits
 causality still reigns, but no longer mechanism.
Now if thus the mechanical view of the world has within its own most
 proper realm—the realm of material phenomena—its limits, even
 if they are capable of being moved farther; and if it is without any
 scientific acceptance in the realm of soul and mind: its usurpations
 reach the highest possible degree when it pretends to [157]explain the
 last causes of things. For from its very nature it follows that it is
 only able to explain the reciprocal action of material things among
 themselves, when these things in their finalities, or the causes of their
 qualities and conditions, are already present, and the laws which they
 follow are already active. As to the origin of those qualities or their
 causes, and of these laws, this view leaves us entirely in the dark.
[158]
METAPHYSICAL CONCLUSIONS DRAWN FROM THE DARWINIAN THEORIES.
§ 1. Elimination of the Idea of Design in the World.—Monism.
From this mechanical view of the world, quite a peculiar conclusion
 has been recently drawn—not by Darwin, who does not give any
 opinion at all about the mechanical view of the world, as such, or about
 its extension and influence, nor, indeed, by Darwinians, not even by all
 followers of a mechanical view of the world, but only by a part of them;
 namely, by those who have in a high degree attracted to themselves the
 attention of reading people. This conclusion is nothing less than the
 elimination of the idea of design in nature. This phenomenon
 demands our attention. Heretofore, the proof of plan, design, and end in
 nature, at large and in detail, was looked upon as the most beautiful
 blossom and fruit of a thoughtful contemplation of nature; it was the
 great and beautiful common property, in the enjoyment of which the
 direct, the scientific, and the religious contemplation of nature
 peacefully participated. Now this view is to be given up forever, in
 consequence of nothing else than Darwin's selection theory. With an
 energy—we may say with a passionateness and confidence of
 victory—such as we were accustomed to see only in the most advanced
 advocates of materialism, Ludwig [159]Büchner, D. F. Strauss,
 Häckel, Oskar Schmidt, Helmholtz, the editor of the "Ausland" and some of
 his associates, and our often-mentioned "Anonymus,"—in a common
 attack, assail every idea of a conformity to an end in nature,
 every idea of a goal toward which the development at large and
 individually strives; in a word, the whole category of
 teleology.[9]
In order to be just in our judgment, we shall have to let the
 advocates of this view speak for themselves;—the advocates of
 Dysteleology, as Häckel, who is so extremely productive in forming
 new exotic words, calls it; or of Aposkopiology, as Ebrard, in his
 "Apologetik" ("Apologetics"), correcting the etymology, [160]somewhat
 pedantically calls it; or of Teleophoby, as it is called by K. E.
 von Baer, in humorous irony.
The anonymous author of the book called "The Unconscious from the
 Standpoint of Physiology and Descent Theory", asserts that, while the
 descent theory but puts the teleological principle in question by
 withdrawing the ground for a positive proof—an assertion which we
 certainly have to reject most decidedly (compare Part II, Book II, Chap.
 I, § 2-§ 6)—the
 selection theory directly rejects it. Natural selection, he says, solves
 the seemingly unsolvable problem of explaining the conformity to the end
 in view, as result, without taking it as an aiding principle. And
 Helmholtz says: "Darwin's theory shows how conformity to the end in the
 formation of organisms can also originate without any intermingling of an
 intelligence by the blind administration of a law of nature."
Häckel really revels in these ideas. He says (Nat. Hist. of Creat.,
 Vol. I, p. 19): "These optimistic views [of the much-talked-of
 purposiveness of nature or of the much-talked-of beneficence of the
 Creator] have, unfortunately, as little real foundation as the favorite
 phrase, 'the moral order of the universe,' which is illustrated in an
 ironical way by the history of all nations.... If we contemplate the
 common life and the mutual relations between plants and animals (man
 included), we shall find everywhere, and at all times, the very opposite
 of that kindly and peaceful social life which the goodness of the Creator
 ought to have prepared for his creatures—we shall rather find
 everywhere a pitiless, most embittered Struggle of All against
 All. Nowhere in nature, no matter where we turn our eyes, does that
 [161]idyllic peace, celebrated by the poets,
 exist; we find everywhere a struggle and a striving to annihilate
 neighbors and competitors. Passion and selfishness—conscious or
 unconscious—is everywhere the motive force of life.... Man in this
 respect certainly forms no exception to the rest of the animal world."
 And on page 33: "In the usual dualistic or teleological (vital)
 conception of the universe, organic nature is regarded as the purposely
 executed production of a Creator working according to a definite plan.
 Its adherents see in every individual species of animal and plant an
 'embodied creative thought,' the material expression of a definite
 first cause (causa finalis), acting for a set purpose. They must
 necessarily assume supernatural (not mechanical) processes of the origin
 of organisms.... On the other hand, the theory of development carried out
 by Darwin, must, if carried out logically, lead to the monistic or
 mechanical (causal) conception of the universe. In opposition to the
 dualistic or teleological conception of nature, our theory considers
 organic as well as inorganic bodies to be the necessary products of
 natural forces. It does not see in every individual species of animal and
 plant the embodied thought of a personal Creator, but the expression for
 the time being of a mechanical process of development of matter, the
 expression of a necessarily active cause, that is, of a mechanical cause
 (causa efficiens). Where teleological Dualism seeks the arbitrary
 thoughts of a capricious Creator in miracles of creation, causal Monism
 finds in the process of development the necessary effects of eternal
 immutable laws of nature." Häckel's "Anthropogeny" also is replete with
 attacks upon a teleological [162]view of nature, which leave nothing
 wanting in distinctness and coarseness. On page 111, Vol. I, we read:
 "The rudimentary organs clearly prove that the mechanical, or monistic
 conception of the nature of organisms is alone correct, and that the
 prevailing teleological, or dualistic method of accounting for them is
 entirely false. The very ancient fable of the all-wise plan according to
 which 'the Creator's hand has ordained all things with wisdom and
 understanding,' the empty phrase about the purposive 'plan of structure'
 of organisms is in this way completely disproved. Stronger arguments can
 hardly be furnished against the customary teleology, or Doctrine of
 Design, than the fact that all more highly developed organisms possess
 such rudimentary organs." (Compare also Vol. II, p. 439: "The rudimentary
 organs are among the most overwhelming proofs against the prevailing
 teleological ideas of creation.") According to his opinion (Vol. I. p.
 245), comparative anatomy may no longer look for a "pre-arranged plan of
 construction by the Creator." Besides, he calls it an anthropocentric
 error to look upon man as a preconceived aim of creation and a true final
 purpose of terrestrial life; and on page 17, of Vol. II, he supports this
 judgment by comparing the relative shortness of the existence of mankind
 with the length of the preceding geological periods: "Since the awakening
 of the human consciousness, human vanity and human arrogance have
 delighted in regarding Man as the real main-purpose and end of all
 earthly life, and as the centre of terrestrial Nature, for whose use and
 service all the activities of the rest of creation were from the first
 defined or predestined by a 'wise providence.' How utterly baseless these
 [163]presumptuous anthropocentric conceptions
 are, nothing could evince more strikingly than a comparison of the
 duration of the Anthropozoic or Quaternary Epoch with that of the
 preceding Epochs." And on page 234, Vol. II: "Hence it is that, in
 accordance with the received teleological view, it has been customary to
 admire the so-called 'wisdom of the Creator' and the 'purposive
 contrivances of His Creation' especially in this matter. But on more
 mature consideration it will be observed that the Creator, according to
 this conception, does after all but play the part of an ingenious
 mechanic or of a skillful watchmaker; just, indeed, as all these
 cherished teleological conceptions of the Creator and His Creation are
 based on childish anthropomorphism.... But it is exactly on this point
 that the history of evolution proves most clearly that this received
 conception is radically false. The history of evolution convinces us that
 the highly purposive and admirably constituted sense organs, like all
 other organs, have developed without premeditated aim."
Strauss, in his "The Old Faith and the New," gives to this idea its
 philosophic and universalistic finish. In § 67-§ 70, he eliminates not
 only the idea of design in individual cases, but also the idea of a
 design in the world as a whole; allows us to speak of design in the world
 only in a subjective sense, so far as we understand it to be what we
 think we perceive as the common final aim of the concert of the powers,
 active in the world; and finds, when in such a sense it is spoken of as
 design in the world, that the universe reaches its end in every instance.
 Only the parts develop themselves, driven by the mechanical laws of
 causality, and after having lived [164]their period of life,
 sink back again into the universe, in order to make place for new
 developments and to prepare them in their turn.
For the view of the world which the antagonists of teleology construct
 out of this "mechanical" and "causal" view, they, as we have repeatedly
 seen, have invented the name "monism." In contrast to all dualism
 in reasoning about the relation of body and soul, God and universe, time
 and eternity, and especially in contrast to the dualism with which the
 theistic view of the world is said to be loaded, monism claims that what
 was formerly divided into God and universe, force and matter, matter and
 spirit, body and soul, is but one; and it thus exhibits a reconciliation,
 a higher unity, of materialism and idealism, of pantheism and atheism,
 which unity in the scientific and the practical ethic realm has no
 antagonist to fight more energetically, and none which it is better able
 to fight successfully, than dualism, which the monistic view of
 the world, by a queer mistake as to the theistic position of God in
 nature, especially considers the whole theistic view of the world.
The scientific antagonists of teleology show such a scientific
 intolerance against their own associates, that one of the latest
 exhibitors of Darwinism, Oskar Schmidt, in his "Theory of Descent and
 Darwinism," bluntly classes one of the greatest and most deserving
 investigators in the realm of comparative anatomy and palćontology,
 Richard Owen, of London, with the "'Halves' who, fearing the conclusions,
 with one word come to terms with the scientific conscience." And
 why?—because Owen still sees ends in nature, and by his inclination
 to the acceptance of a descent, does not allow himself to [165]be prevented
 from giving adhesion to a teleological view of the world. And this
 invention of monism is proclaimed to the world in such a full
 consciousness of its great importance in the history of culture, that
 Häckel closes his "Nat. Hist. of Creat." with the following words:
 "Future centuries will celebrate our age, which was occupied with laying
 the foundations of the Doctrine of Descent, as the new era in which began
 a period of human development, rich in blessings,—a period which
 was characterized by the victory of free inquiry over the despotism of
 authority, and by the powerful ennobling influence of the Monistic
 Philosophy." At the end of the lecture, next to the last, in the same
 Vol. II, page 332, he pays the following compliment to the antagonists of
 monism: "The recognition of the theory of development and the Monistic
 Philosophy based upon it, forms the best criterion for the degree of
 man's mental development." In his "Generic Morphology," and in the first
 edition of his "Nat. Hist. of Creat.," he, in a geological scala, which
 closes with the human period, even divides the whole past, present, and
 future history of mankind into two halves: first part, dualistic period
 of culture; second part, monistic period of culture. Still, we will not
 omit to mention, with credit, that this anticipatory historiography has
 discreetly disappeared from the geological scala of the following
 editions of his "Natural History of Creation."
As to the further scientific consequences to which this
 anti-teleological monism leads, the advocates of it are in tolerable
 accord; although they are subject to the most incomprehensible illusions
 regarding the practical consequences of it, as we have seen in the
 above-quoted [166]concluding words of Häckel's "Natural
 History of Creation." As to the scientific consequences, they express
 themselves plainly enough: the belief in a living Creator and Lord of the
 world no longer find any place; everything, even all the rich treasures
 of human life and history, become a result of blindly acting forces; the
 history of the world, ethics, and all spiritual sciences, are in the
 progress of perception dissolved into physiology, and physiology into
 chemistry, physics and mechanism. In his "Natural History of Creation,"
 Vol. I, page 170, Häckel frankly calls the whole history of the world a
 physico-chemical process.
Whoever refers to a view of another person, is in duty bound to enter
 into that view, if possible objectively, even if he does not agree with
 it. The author of this book tries to comply with this obligation in all
 his representations, but must confess that in regard to the just
 described view of the world, he does not succeed in making it conceivable
 to himself in a manner to be justified even from a relatively scientific
 standpoint; a want for which, it is true, we have beforehand the
 explanatory cause in the quotation from Häckel's "Natural History of
 Creation," Vol. II, p. 332, given above.
Perhaps it appears relatively conceivable, when it is asserted that
 the observation of an order, a connection, a development, a plan, in the
 world, leads to the perception of such a quality of the laws, primitive
 elements, and forces of the world, that something like it had to
 result from them; but that it does not lead to the acknowledgment of a
 personal author of the world. We call such a view relatively conceivable,
 not because we agree with it—for we find a logic which, in [167]contemplating the universe, starts from an
 intelligent author of the world, infinitely less surrounded by
 difficulties than one contrary to it—but because the acknowledgment
 or denial of a living God is in the last instance not the result of any
 scientific investigation or logical chain of reasoning, but the moral act
 of the morally and religiously inclined individual, and because, if the
 individual has once refused the strongest factor of faith in
 God,—namely, his self-testimony in the conscience,—it is no
 longer impossible for the individual to ignore his other testimonies as
 such, or to declare them deficient. Now we certainly can say that we see
 order and many results in the world, which are conformable to the object
 in view, and in consequence of this observation must admit that no
 imaginable quality of primitive beginnings, elements, and forces of the
 world had caused this result, but that this result must have already been
 in the plan. But there certainly are imaginable, in abstracto,
 infinitely many possibilities of other elements and primitive beginnings
 of the world,—perhaps of some whose result would have been but an
 eternal chaos, or of others whose result would have been but an eternal
 rigidness, or of still others whose result would also have been a certain
 order and variety of phenomena and processes, but less beautiful than
 that of the really existing world. Thus, then, this world now exists as a
 special chance of infinitely many chances; and who knows whether,
 in the course of thousands of millions of terrestrial years in the
 struggle for existence, it did not obtain its existence among infinitely
 many possibilities of worlds through a natural world-selection, and thus,
 by the result of its existence, fully legitimate its conformity to [168]the
 end in view? With this deduction, we do not make, as it may seem, an
 awkward attempt at rendering the whole standpoint ridiculous by a wild
 phantasy; but we quote it from a celebrated and otherwise very
 meritorious book, namely the "Geschichte des Materialismus" ("History of
 Materialism"), by the too early deceased Friedrich Albert Lange. The
 reader will find it, in the second part, page 275, simply a little
 shorter and, as it seems to us, less clear, but as the only "correct
 teleology" which Lange professes. This whole view, like all
 world-theories and cosmogonies of pantheism, naturalism, or atheism, and
 even like the latest of Eduard von Hartmann, is to us but a proof that
 the rejection of the reality of a living Creator and Lord of the world
 requires of its advocates mysteries and mysticisms of atheism compared to
 which the greatest difficulties of the Christian view of the world are
 but the merest trifles.
Therefore, if that first and second step in the rejection of the
 highest intelligence and omnipotence as the final cause of the world, are
 once made, it is easy for us to comprehend still other supports which
 this view of the world draws to itself. However large the number of
 things in the world for whose existence we can give a reason, or of which
 we can show that that, which preceded, aimed at their appearance, still
 the number of those to which we can not ascribe aim and design is just as
 large. There are even phenomena enough which in their main effects appear
 to us directly irrational; as, for instance, those which operate
 destructively,—all the tortures which animals inflict on one
 another, etc. Besides, we can also find imperfections in the degree of
 the [169]conformity to the end in view in all those
 phenomena which appear to us as properly planned; for instance, the
 organic appears to us higher than the inorganic, and yet it is in its
 existence not only dependent on the inorganic, but is often destroyed
 prematurely by it. Of course, all these limits and barriers of our
 teleological perception are abundantly used by all antagonists of a
 teleological view of the world for the basis of their position.
 Furthermore, the way and manner in which man fixes his ends and reaches
 them, is essentially different from the way and manner in which nature
 acts. Man seeks to attain his ends with less expenditure of power and
 means, the more he acts conformably to the end in view; while nature, it
 often enough appears to us, when we have reason to imagine an effect of
 its processes also as the probable end of them, reaches this end only by
 an immense squandering of means—for instance, the preservation of
 organic species simply by the production of thousands of germs and eggs,
 most of which perish, and but very few of which are developed, and still
 less are transmitted. This is a difference to which Lange points, in
 order to reject a theory which recognizes a striving toward an end
 (Zielstrebigkeit) in nature, or at most to allow it a little place as the
 lowest form of teleology, and to reject every attempt to regard it as
 analogous to human striving toward an end, as anthropomorphism.
 Nature, he says, acts, as if a man, in order to shoot a hare, should in a
 large field discharge millions of guns in all possible directions; as if
 he, in order to get into a locked room, should buy ten thousand different
 keys and try them all; as if, in order to have a house, he should build
 up a town and [170]leave the superfluous houses to wind and
 weather. Nobody should call such actions conformable to an end in view,
 and still less should we suppose behind this action any higher wisdom,
 hidden reasons, or superior sagacity. It is true, Wigand is right in
 replying to this, that when we observe such things in nature, we have to
 draw the conclusion that the very end supposed by the observing
 man—in this case, the preservation of the species—is not the
 only end, but that it has other ends besides; as, for instance, richness
 of life, inexhaustible abundance, preservation of other organisms, etc.
 Besides, this is but a single side of the comparison between the action
 of man and that of nature; and from this side action of man, conformable
 to an end in view, appears as a higher form of teleology, that of nature
 as a lower. But there are other sides of comparison, which just as
 clearly strike the eye; nature builds from within in full sovereignty of
 its process over matter and form. Man approaches his materials from
 without; nature works with never-erring certainty (Häckel's latest
 theory, that nature falsifies its laws and processes, can surely
 not be meant in earnest!); man often enough with error, false
 calculation, awkwardness, failure and capricious arbitrariness. In these
 directions, teleology of nature is infinitely superior to that of
 man.
We must be very careful in using anthropomorphism as a term of
 reproach. It may be used as a reproach in warning against careless
 reasoning and hasty comparison, but the idea of anthropomorphism is so
 extensible that it can be extended over all human reasoning and
 conception. Are not the reasons on account of which the so-called
 anthropomorphism is to be rejected, often [171]enough just as
 anthropomorphistic as the ideas which are attacked? For instance, when
 the idea of the personality of God is attacked as an anthropomorphistic
 one, are not the reasons with which it is assailed exactly as
 anthropomorphistic as the conceptions which are to be assailed? Do we not
 derive all our reasoning, logic, our views, and in fact everything, at
 first from our human nature, and do we not in our most abstract reasoning
 always operate simply with the laws, as they inhere in our human nature?
 Is there even a single scientific description conceivable without its
 being full of anthropomorphisms? Even the works of Darwin which,
 according to the opinion of these opponents of anthropomorphism, destroy
 anthropomorphism and teleology, are the most striking proof in favor of
 it. The discovery of the general reign of the law of causality
 invalidates, as they say, the reign of the category of teleology; for the
 one category contradicts the other. Suppose it were so (we will, however,
 immediately see that the contrary is true) whence do we know that the
 category of causality has the preference over that of finality or
 teleology? The one, as well as the other, is anthropomorphistic, and is
 an undoubtedly necessary form of our human reasoning. We believe
 in their objective validity, because we cannot believe that the sum of
 existences and the relations between the perceiving subject and the
 perceived object aim at deceiving man; we do not want to be robbed of
 either the one or the other category; but if the question is as to the
 preference of the one category over the other (which we contest), who
 knows whether the category of finality has not more reasons for its
 superiority than causality? Compare, in reference [172]to this whole question,
 also the clear analyses in the second volume of the work of Wigand, and
 the instructive lecture of the Duke of Argyll upon anthropomorphism in
 theology.
Nevertheless, all the points against teleology thus far quoted can be
 understood by us as attempts at rejecting the necessity of
 acknowledging a teleologically acting principle of the world—or, to
 express ourselves more clearly, of a living God—after having once
 rejected the deepest motive for this acknowledgment, namely: the
 self-testimony of God in the human conscience and mind. But it is one
 thing to declare that we are not obliged to accept a certain conclusion,
 and quite another to declare that we are obliged to accept directly the
 opposite of such a conclusion. It is one thing to declare that the
 phenomena in the world do not yet oblige us to suppose an author with a
 preconceived plan, and still another to declare that because I have found
 or still hope to find the causal connexion of phenomena conformable to
 the end in view, no author with a preconceived plan exists. This last
 assertion is one which the author of this work confesses not to
 understand, and in whose conclusion he cannot agree. Knowledge of the
 origin of something certainly does not exclude the question
 wherefore it exists, and does not even take its place, and when I
 have answered both questions satisfactorily, then I may and must justly
 ask whether both that for which something exists and that by which
 something exists, is intended or not, whether that which in the language
 of causality I call cause and effect, also belongs to the category of
 finality, according to which that very cause is at the same time called
 means, and that very effect also design. [173]The one way of viewing
 postulates the other as its necessary completion; and the teleological
 point of view is so little an impediment for the causal, that we are much
 more fully convinced scientifically of the correctness of the
 teleological way of viewing, when first the causal chain of causes and
 effects lies plain before our perception without any wanting links.
We still have to mention two monstrosities which, as it seems to us,
 necessarily result from the rejection of teleology, although the
 opponents of teleology contest the fact.
The one is the reduction to chance of all single formations in
 the world. It is true, necessity reigns in laws and their effect; but if
 the degree and the sum of all qualities in the world are not based the
 one upon the other, if especially the single organizations originate by
 the way of natural selection, every coincidence of each single causal
 chain in the world with any other causal chain is something accidental
 for the one as well as for the other. Now, an explanation of that in the
 world which is conformable to the end in view, by chance, is a
 scientifically illogical idea. An accidental coincidence of many
 circumstances can in a single case produce something which is conformable
 to an end in view; but the probability that the formation conformable to
 the end in view is again nullified by the next throw of the dice of
 chance, is so great, and with every following throw grows so decidedly in
 geometrical progression, that this probability after a few terms becomes
 a certainty, and we can directly demonstrate mathematically that the
 world without a teleological plan would be and remain a chaos. As we have
 seen, even Lange finds himself obliged to [174]admit this plan, with
 the exception that he makes this plan itself chance—special chance
 among infinitely many possibilities.
The other consequence of that elimination of the idea of design is
 that it forbids every difference between higher and lower,
 and changes everything into an indifferent and equivalent continual
 stream of coming and going. For the whole idea of higher and lower
 belongs to the category of teleology. If the new which originates is
 but a product of that which was already in existence, and if the
 latter does not aim at the production of the new, then the new is
 equivalent to the preceding; and it is but an illusion of man,
 preconceiving an end, when in the products of nature he discriminates
 between higher and lower. A beginning of the acknowledgment of this
 consequence is made, when Häckel, in his Anthropogeny, so violently
 attacks the idea that man is end and design of the terrestrial creation.
 But generally the antagonists of teleology are guilty of the
 inconsequence which, although from the principles of their system to be
 rejected, is indelibly impressed on our thinking mind and especially on
 our moral consciousness, that they still discriminate between higher and
 lower, and particularly that they willingly assign to the moral
 disposition and demand, and to the morally planned individual, the
 priority among existences. This fact is pronounced in a very striking way
 in the concessions of Strauss, which we have quoted on page 126, according to which nature, where it can no
 longer go beyond itself, wishes to go into itself, and in man has wished
 to go not only upwards but even beyond itself.
Therefore, not only theology, but also philosophy, [175]and even
 natural science, in their most prominent advocates, have in a uniform
 chorus protested against this destruction of the idea of design. That it
 was unanimously done on the part of theology, is quite natural,
 and needs no further proofs. When we, nevertheless, mention expressly a
 single essay on these questions, it is done on account of the fact that
 in its energetic defense of the teleological point of view it is
 especially effective by frankly and impartially admitting the strongest
 positions of the opponent's standpoint—a thing which rarely happens
 on the part of theologians. It is the essay of Julius Köstlin "Ueber die
 Beweise für das Dasein Gottes" ("Proofs of the Existence of God"), in the
 "Theologische Studien und Kritiken," 1875, IV and 1876, I; especially
 1876, I, p. 42 ff. On the part of philosophy, we have to mention Ulrici,
 Fichte, Huber and Frohschammer, who have rejected the attack against
 teleology with inflexible criticism. Even Friedrich Vischer in the sixth
 part of his "Kritische Gänge" ("Critical Walks"), has forcibly maintained
 the right of teleology, especially of its highest revelation, the moral
 order of the world—in contrast to his friend D. F. Strauss, whose
 "The Old Faith and the New" he criticises; but it is true, in consequence
 of his pantheism, he reaches the wholly imaginary conclusion of supposing
 a moral order of the world without a regulator. And, to be able to make
 the systematized order and beauty of nature conceivable to himself
 without a Creator, to be able to make conceivable to himself a design in
 nature, an ideal, according to which nature works as an unconscious
 artist, he gives to philosophy the certainly unsolvable problem of
 finding the idea of [176]timeless time, to which the "afterward"
 can just as well be a "beforehand"; he prefers to do this rather than to
 find the equally clear and deep solution of that teleological difficulty
 in the simple idea of a Creator, who, as such, also stands above time.
 One of the most remarkable philosophic testimonies for the right of
 teleology is the philosophic system of Eduard von Hartmann who, although
 he calls his absolute the unconscious, ascribes to it an unconscious
 intelligence and an unconscious will, and makes the observation and
 acknowledgment of designs and ends, which he sees in the whole realm of
 the world of phenomena, an essential part of his entire system. All
 attempts of this kind, as those of Vischer and Hartmann, fully and
 correctly to understand the language of facts on the one side and to
 reject on the other the necessary conclusion to which it
 leads—namely, the acknowledgment of a creative intelligence
 above the facts, and having an end in view—only increase in
 like manner as the above-quoted cosmogonic idea of Lange by the
 monstrosities of reasoning to which they lead, the power of demonstration
 for that which they undertake to contest. Natural scientists, finally,
 even Darwinians, have not only in casual utterances often spoken a
 weighty word in favor of teleology—as, for instance, those who,
 like Oswald Heer, Kölliker, Baumgärtner, believe in a metamorphosis of
 germs, but also men who are quite favorable to the idea of an origin of
 the species through descent—as, for instance, Richard Owen, at the
 end of his "Comparative Anatomy of the Vertebrates," separately published
 as "Derivative Hypothesis of Life and Species"; Alexander Braun, in his
 lecture "Ueber die Bedeutung der Entwicklung in der Naturgeschichte" [177]("On
 the Importance of Development in Nature"), Berlin, 1872; A. W. Volkmann
 "Ueber die Entwicklung der Organismen" ("On the Development of
 Organisms"), Halle, 1875; Schaaffhausen, in his opening address to the
 Wiesbaden Anthr. Versammlung, Braunschweig, 1874, and others; but they
 have also given to teleology entire treatises. Besides a more popular
 treatise of the astronomer Mädler in "Westermann's Monatshefte," October,
 1872, there belong to them the frequently mentioned work of Wigand, and
 especially three essays of great importance from the pen of a man who in
 questions of development and its extent has among all contemporaries the
 first right to speak, namely, Karl Ernst von Baer. They are the essays on
 the conformity to the end in view in general, on the conformity to the
 end in view in organic bodies, and on Darwin's doctrine, published
 together with two other essays in the already mentioned "Studien aus dem
 Gebiete der Naturwissenschaften," (Reden und Kleinere Aufsätze, 2ter
 Theil), Petersburg, 1876. Nay, even the two founders of Darwinism, Darwin
 himself and A. R. Wallace, as we shall see in defining their position in
 reference to religion, express themselves decidedly teleologically; this
 is especially true of Wallace, and likewise of their active and able
 second, Huxley. Only a single utterance of Darwin in a later publication
 seems to take a sceptical position in regard to teleology; compare below
 Part Second, Book I, Chapt. III, § 1.
Finally, we have to say a word concerning the name which the
 anti-teleological view of the world gives to itself: the name
 "monism." The view of the world which monism gives us, seems
 hardly comprehensible; and [178]just as little does the name which it
 gives itself, seem justifiable.
If this name is to indicate only a maxim of
 investigation—the directive which scientific investigation
 has to take, in order to reach more general points of view—we could
 declare ourselves in full accord with it. All investigation strives after
 a unity of principle; this impulse is a scientific leading motive of our
 nature. Besides the absolute limits of our knowledge, there are still
 enough relative and provisory limits to it; and there also are enough low
 points of view, mistakes, and imperfections in science, to justify us
 when we expressly form and establish monism as a maxim of scientific
 investigation. All those theories and points of view need such a spur and
 corrective, which are hastily satisfied with a dualistic or a still
 farther expanded limit of our knowledge. Among them we rank in theology
 the antique heathenish dualism which separates God and the world in such
 a way that God is but the architect of the eternal matter, existing
 independently of God; and also the modern deistic dualism which considers
 only the elements, principles, and beginning of the world, as dependent
 on God, but not the entire course of their developments as a whole and in
 detail. In philosophy, taken in a narrower sense, we reckon with them the
 one-sided atomism which can no longer find the connecting link between
 the single elements of the world, or the one-sided assertion of realism
 or idealism, since at this time all views of the world which win
 acceptance from the present generation claim the praise of showing the
 reconciliation and higher unity of realism and idealism. In anthropology,
 there belongs to them [179]such a treatment of psychology and
 physiology, that the one science does not trouble itself about the other,
 and the investigation does not seek or keep in mind that which is common
 to both, or that which is higher and superior to them; and in all natural
 sciences, every mode of investigation belongs to them, where the single
 science retains no sympathy with all other sciences and with the
 principles of all scientific investigation. In regard to these low points
 of view, mistakes, or imperfections, monism certainly is a correct and
 necessary maxim of investigation; but this maxim ought not to lead us so
 far that we—as very often happens from the unity or the
 possibility of grouping several forms of existence under general
 conceptions—make an identity, that we efface the differences
 instead of explaining them, and then think the effacement is an
 explanation; that we set forth the assumed form of unity as if one
 we had found, and in this manner falsify the method of knowing. For as
 certainly and as much as man is subject to the dangers of error and
 falsification, just so certainly and so little is nature subject to
 falsification.
But if the name "monism" is to designate a certain view of the
 world, it is for such a designation either too comprehensive and
 quite applicable to all views which have a right to the name of
 view of the world; or it is misleading, and not applicable to any. For
 the name, as if it were properly called henism, either expresses only the
 unity of the principle of the world, and designates a quality
 which is the characteristic of every view of the world, and which
 especially belongs to theism in a clearer and more perfect way than to
 any other standpoint; or the name is used to attest that the world
 alone [180]exists, and that monism knows of but
 one existence,—namely, that of the world; while the contrary
 view of the world—that of theism, which in a manner wholly
 incompetent, and historically wholly unjustified, is called
 dualism—supposes two existences, God and the world. But then
 this name does not correctly represent either itself or theism. It does
 not correctly represent itself: for the so-called monism does not,
 indeed, suppose that that which appears in the world is the really
 existing, or that the processes which come into appearance have again
 their final cause only in the appearance, but it seeks the final
 causes of the phenomena in laws and principles which can no longer be
 observed by our senses, and of those it again seeks the common, highest,
 and very last principle, the perception of which it either, with Häckel,
 renounces or finds it, with other theories, now in atomism, and in
 attraction and repulsion, then in the law of causality. Thus it has not
 only a single existence and mode of existence, but it does exactly the
 same thing that theism does: it seeks the final principles of the world.
 And it does not correctly represent theism: for theism also does not know
 of two existences to which the idea of existing is applicable in fully
 the same way—namely, the world and God—-but in seeking
 a cause for the existence of the world, it finds it in God; the world,
 according to its view, only exists by the fact that it exists in and
 through God. So theism in this sense also contests with monism for the
 right of the name.
Therefore, when teleology allows the opponent's view of the world to
 appropriate the name monism exclusively to itself, it can do this only in
 the same [181]sense as that in which, in order to avoid
 disputes, we are satisfied with many irrational names which have forced
 themselves upon us; as, for instance, we can perhaps call the clerical
 party in Bavaria the patriotic, because it calls itself so, or as we
 accept the title of the ultramontane paper "Germania," at Berlin, without
 conceding to the bearers of those names the care of patriotism and of the
 interests of the German empire in a higher degree than to parties and
 papers of a different standpoint. In fact, this linguistic arbitrariness
 does not particularly tend to clearness of conception and to the
 avoidance of obscure phrases.
[183]
[185]
PLAN OF TREATMENT.
In discussing the conclusions which have been drawn by Darwinism in
 reference to religion and morality, it would seem appropriate to treat of
 the two realms together. For the grouping which we have to give to the
 different conclusions of Darwinian tendencies, in their position in
 reference to religion, is nearly the same which they also receive in
 their position in reference to ethical questions.
But, nevertheless, we prefer to separate the two questions; not only
 because in fact one author has laid more stress upon the religious realm,
 another more upon the ethical, but because in reality, and also in the
 solution which we shall try to give to the problems presented by them,
 both realms, although closely interwoven, and limited by one another,
 still are theoretically to be treated apart.
In order not to exceed too much the limits of our task, we must avoid
 going more into the details of the relations between religion and
 morality in general, than is absolutely necessary for the solution of our
 main problem. This restriction we can easily put on ourselves. For,
 first, every one who reflects at all on human life and action, and on his
 own religious and [186]moral conduct, generally has a very
 correct, instinctive, and direct conception and perception as to the
 realm of the religious as well as of the moral—as to their mutual
 differences, as well as to their reciprocal relations—even if he
 has not yet tried to bring this conception into ideas and formulas; and,
 secondly, it will not be difficult to present a short formula as to the
 ideal relation between the religious and the moral, sufficient for the
 wants of science as well as for the practical needs of a more detailed
 investigation. The religious is the relation of our personality to
 God; the moral, the relation of it to the world, comprehensively
 taken, ourselves included. We purposely call it a relation of our
 personality, and not merely a relation of man, because in the religious
 the ethical moment of self-determination which is included in the idea of
 personality, is an essential factor; and because we gladly make it
 conspicuous, partly in opposition to the one-sidedness of
 Schleiermacher's feeling of absolute dependence, partly to prevent a
 contrary misunderstanding of our own view, as if we found the seat of
 religion in the activity of knowledge. For when, in our representation of
 the Darwinian conclusions and in our own investigation, we proceed as
 objectively as possible, and try to avoid all systematization which is
 unfruitful for our task, in discussing the Darwinian theories in
 reference to religion, we shall have to take chiefly into consideration
 their relation to religion in an objective sense, and chiefly also their
 relation to the contents of religion; but this would make it appear that
 we supposed religion in a subjective sense, religiousness, to be in the
 first place an activity and a possession of knowledge. Nothing lies
 farther from us [187]than this thought; although religiousness
 certainly has and asks for solid, objectively true, and really possessed
 salvation, and however little we would overlook the word of the Lord:
 "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only
 true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John xvii, 3.)
Those who wish to inform themselves in regard to the relation of
 religion and morality, will find the necessary information in Martensen's
 "Ethik" ("Ethics"), in Otto Pfleiderer's monograph, which partly assumes
 a contrary point of view, and in a thorough essay of Julius Köstlin
 (Theol. Studien und Kritiken, 1870, I), which appeared before the
 "Ethics" of Martensen.
In undertaking now to represent the conclusions which have been drawn
 from Darwinism, we treat of the religious realm as the higher, a realm
 demanding a sound morality prior to the moral realm; and we begin with
 those conclusions which take a hostile position in reference to religion,
 in order to proceed from them to the moderate and friendly relations.
[188]
MORE OR LESS NEGATIVE POSITION IN REFERENCE TO RELIGION.
§ 1. Extreme Negation. L. Büchner and Consistent Materialism.
The common point of beginning and attack of all those who take a
 negative position against religion, is the rejection of teleology. The
 most advanced of all materialists, Ludwig Büchner, in his self-criticism,
 which he gives in his "Natur und Wissenschaft" ("Nature and Science"), on
 page 465, openly declares, and quite correctly, that with the success or
 failure of the attacks upon teleology materialism itself stands or
 falls.
Now while many, as we shall immediately see, although opposed to a
 teleological view of the world, still are inclined to give a more or less
 lasting value to certain psychical processes which may be called by the
 name religion, Büchner, on the contrary, makes a direct attack upon
 everything which is thus called. He does not render it difficult for us
 to review his position. For, after having given it openly, but still with
 certain relative modifications, in different publications (especially in
 his book "Force and Matter," which appeared in 1855 in the first edition,
 and in 1872 in the twelfth) he gives it in cynical nakedness in the
 lectures with which he travelled through America and [189]Germany in
 1872-1874, and the contents of which he has made public in his pamphlet:
 "Der Gottesbegriff und dessen Bedeutung in der Gegenwart" ("The Idea of
 God, and its Importance at the Present Time"), Leipzig, 1874, Theo.
 Thomas. As is said in the preface, the design of the lecture is "to give
 a renewed impulse to the final and definitive elimination of an idea
 which, according to the opinion of the author, obstructs our whole
 spiritual, social, and political development, as no other idea does." He
 means the idea of God; not merely the theistic idea of a personal God,
 but the idea of God in general. For even the pantheistic idea of God,
 which he had formerly treated with a certain polite reserve, finds in his
 eyes even less favor than the theistic. He says: "If the absurdity is
 already great enough in theism, it is possibly still greater in
 pantheism, which moreover has always played a great rôle in
 philosophy;" and, "Christianity has but injured the spiritual and
 material progress of mankind." In agreement with Strauss, he sees the
 earliest origin of the idea of God only in ignorance and fear. "Every
 creating, preserving, or reigning principle in the world is done away
 with, and there remains as highest spiritual power present in the world
 only human reason. Atheism or philosophic monism alone leads to freedom,
 to reason, progress, acknowledgment of true humanity,—in short to
 humanism."
This materialistic opposition to everything which is called religion,
 is certainly independent of Darwinism, and originated before its time;
 but since Büchner himself sees in Darwinism but a grand confirmation of
 his view of the world, and believes that he has found in it [190]that principle
 which, with urgent necessity, banishes teleology from the contemplation
 of nature—teleology, with the defeat or victory of which
 materialism stands or falls,—we are entitled and obliged to rank
 even this view of the world among the conclusions which in reference to
 religion have been drawn from the theories of Darwin. And, indeed, it is
 a most extreme conclusion, and simply puts itself in the category of
 negation to the contents of religion, as well as to religion in a
 subjective sense, to religious and pious conduct. It can be clearly seen
 how firmly a view of the world which makes war against religion and the
 idea of God its special life-task, is connected with all those
 destructive elements which lie in human nature, and especially in the
 social circumstances of the present, and which have their only and final
 ethical limit in the consciousness of God which, as a power never wholly
 to be effaced, lies in the depth of the soul of even those who wander
 farthest from a moral and spiritual life.
§ 2. Replacement of Religion through a Religious Worship of the Universe. Strauss, Oskar Schmidt, Häckel.
Strauss, in that testament of his scientific life and activity, "The
 Old Faith and the New," takes a somewhat different position in reference
 to religion. Even for him, the whole idea of God is abolished and
 replaced by the idea of the cosmos; but he makes this cosmos the object
 of religious worship, and has exactly the same feeling of absolute
 dependence in regard to it, which, according to Schleiermacher,
 constitutes the nature of religion. When Arthur Schopenhauer or [191]Eduard von
 Hartmann bring forth their pessimistic accusations against the universe,
 his religious sensation reacts against it in the same manner as the
 organism against the prick of a needle. This pessimism, he says, acts
 upon reason as an absurdity, but upon sensation as blasphemy. "We demand
 the same piety for our cosmos that the devout of old demanded for his
 God. If wounded, our feeling for the cosmos simply reacts in a religious
 manner." While, therefore, Strauss, to the question, "Are we still
 Christians?" gives an emphatic "No," he answers the question, "Have we
 still a religion?" with "Yes or No, according to the spirit of the
 inquiry."
Among men of science who wrote about Darwinism, Oskar Schmidt, in his
 before-quoted publication, "The Doctrine of Descent and Darwinism," seems
 to take exactly the same position in reference to religion. At least, he
 unreservedly professes monism, rejects all teleological conceptions as
 imperfections, speaks of the caprice of a personal God, and sees the
 conception that the idea of God is immanent in human nature invalidated
 by the fact "that many millions in the most cultivated nations, and among
 them the most eminent and lucid thinkers, have not the consciousness of a
 personal God; those millions of whom the heroic Strauss became the
 spokesman."
Häckel, it is true, mentions Strauss only in the preface of the fourth
 edition of his "Natural History of Creation," but here he greets "The Old
 Faith and the New" as the confession which he also makes, and thus gives
 us an express right to place him in this class, although he calls his
 worship of the universe religion; [192]it is, however, a
 classification which his whole position compelled us to give him. It is
 true, he speaks very warmly of his own religion, which is founded on the
 clear knowledge of nature and its inexhaustible abundance of
 manifestations, and which, as "simple religion of nature," will in the
 future act upon the course of development of mankind, ennobling and
 perfecting it in a far higher degree than the various ecclesiastic
 religions of the different nations, "resting on a blind belief in the
 vague secrets and mythical revelations of a sacerdotal caste." (Nat.
 Hist. of Cr., Vol. II, p. 369.) He also repeatedly speaks of
 "manifestations of nature," and even of a "divine Spirit which is
 everywhere active in nature." In that respect he seems to take in
 reference to religion, without regard to the historical form in which it
 appeared as Christian religion, a still more friendly and less
 problematic position than Strauss. Moreover, he demands for every
 individual the full right of forming his own religion; among the more
 highly developed species of men, he says, every independent and highly
 developed individual, every original person, has his own religion, his
 own God; and it would certainly, therefore, not be arrogant if he should
 also claim the right of forming his own conception of God, his own
 religion. But when we try to form a more complete idea of his position in
 reference to religion, we really do not find any essential difference
 between it and that of Strauss. According to repeated utterances, he can
 not imagine the personal Creator without caprice and arbitrariness; again
 and again he advocates monism with great warmth, and also identifies, in
 express words, God and the universe, God and nature. [193]"Corresponding
 to our progressive perception of nature and our immovable conviction of
 the truth of the evolution theory, our religion can be only a religion
 of nature." "In rejecting the dualistic conception of nature and the
 herewith connected amphitheistic conception of God, ... we certainly lose
 the hypothesis of a personal Creator; but we gain in its place the
 undoubtedly more worthy and more perfect conception of a divine Spirit
 which penetrates and fills the universe." Furthermore, the faith in a
 personal Creator is called a low dualistic conception of God, which
 corresponds to a low animal stage of development of the human organism.
 The more highly developed man of the present, he says, is capable of and
 intended for an infinitely nobler and sublimer monistic idea of God, to
 which belongs the future, and through which we attain a more sublime
 conception of the unity of God and nature. According to his Anthropogeny,
 the belief that the hand of a Creator has arranged all things with wisdom
 and intelligence is an ancient story and an empty phrase.
§ 3. Pious Renunciation of the Knowability of God. Wilhelm Bleek, Albert Lange, Herbert Spencer.
A more friendly position in reference to religion is taken by those
 who hold, not directly negative, but only decidedly sceptical views of
 the existence of God; who reduce the relative unsearchableness of God,
 which every religious standpoint admits, to an absolute unknowability;
 and who find the nature of religion either in a pious acknowledgment of
 this unknowability, or in a poetical substitute for the knowledge of God,
 i.e., comprehending the unknowable in a figure. The most prominent
 [194]advocates of this position are, on the
 side of exact investigation, Wilhelm Bleek; and on that of philosophy,
 Albert Lange in Germany and Herbert Spencer in England. Since all three
 use the Darwinian theories for their systems, they also belong to the
 ranks of our historico-critical essay.
Wilhelm Bleek, in the preface to his "Ursprung der Sprache" ("Origin
 of Language"), rejects all claims of a positively revealed religion to an
 objective truth—not in such a way as to substitute the universe in
 place of God, but so that he remains sceptical in reference to every
 attempt at forming an idea of God, demands a pious and modest confession
 of this non-understanding by man, and sees in this reverential modesty
 the certainly not very significant nature of his religion. In the preface
 he says that all worship originates in reverence for ancestors, and that
 even the doctrine of the atonement of modern theology has its origin
 there. The next step after reverence for ancestors was the worship of
 nature. But the grand turning-point at which the mythological mode of
 view gives way—in which mode of view he also reckons
 Christianity—is the giving up of the idea of the necessity of an
 atonement; for this whole idea is but anthropomorphism. It is when man
 has recognized the impossibility of a being, similar to man, as the final
 cause of all existences, and in reverential modesty has admitted his
 ignorance in reference to the nature of the origin of things, that he
 learns to understand how narrow a view he has of God when he thinks that
 he understands him.
On the side of philosophy, Albert Lange and Herbert Spencer reach
 similar results. Albert Lange, in his [195]"History of
 Materialism," starting especially from premises of Kant, reaches the
 conclusion that the "thing per se," the "intelligible world," is
 absolutely hidden to us. What we perceive is but the world of
 appearances; and the fact that we perceive it, and perceive it as we do,
 is originally founded in the human organization. By virtue of this
 organization we are bound, in all our knowledge of the world of
 appearances, to the law of causality. Science does not get beyond this
 causal chain of finite and relative causes and effects; to the "thing
 per se" there is nowhere to be found a bridge, not even as Kant
 supposes, in the categoric imperative, nor in ideas. Inasmuch as science
 does not get beyond this chain, it is materialistic; inasmuch as it must
 nevertheless perceive the existence, or at least the possibility of the
 existence, of a "thing per se," even if it does not see any way to
 its perception, it is idealistic. But man also has ideal impulses, and he
 has to follow them just as much as the impulse of perception. By virtue
 of these ideal impulses, he makes in imagination a picture of the "thing
 per se" in the activity of philosophic speculation, art, and
 religion. Philosophic speculation is but imaginative conceptions. It has
 always a value in the history of culture, as a summing-up of the elements
 of culture and of the spiritual impulses and treasures of a certain time;
 but it errs as soon as it claims to be more than imaginative
 conceptions—namely, an adequate representation of the final cause
 of all things—for it lacks the necessary basis of experience. Art
 does not claim this, and therefore is not exposed to that danger of
 deception. Religion satisfies a need of the heart, to have a home of the
 spirit in the "thing per se"; but [196]since the "thing per
 se" is not accessible for us, religion creates in mind that home, in
 order to rise above the common reality to it. Lange finds the highest
 realization of a perfect satisfaction of that impulse in the philosophic
 poems of Schiller. He sees the quintessence of religion expressly "in the
 elevation of minds above the real, and in the creation of a home of the
 spirit." Religion remains untouched in its full vital power, as long as
 it retains that as its quintessence; but it is exposed to all the dangers
 of a destructive criticism as soon as it seeks its quintessence in
 something else—for instance, in certain doctrines of God, the human
 soul, creation of the world, etc.
Herbert Spencer is in full accord with Lange in regard to the theory
 of an absolute indiscernibleness of the final cause of all things; but he
 reaches this result in a somewhat different way, and from his premises
 infers a different modification of the nature of religion. In his "First
 Principles" he appears to be a true scholar of the English and Scotch
 schools of philosophy, from which he takes his start in conscious and
 express opposition to the German modes of speculation, and begins with an
 empiric comparison of all actual contrasts existing in the world and in
 human life. He follows the axiom that a particle of truth lies at the
 basis of every error, and that each contrast becomes a contrast only by
 the fact that the two poles of the contrast have something in common.
 Now, in comparing with one another all contrasts between religion and
 science, and all forms of religiousness and irreligiousness, from
 fetishism up to monotheism, pantheism, and atheism, all imaginable
 cosmogonies, he finds, as the last truth common to all, and therefore
 [197]alone absolutely certain, the absolute
 indiscernibleness of the final cause of all things. On page 44 he
 says, that religions diametrically opposed in their overt dogmas, are yet
 perfectly at one in the tacit conviction that there is a problem to be
 solved, that the existence of the world with all it contains is a mystery
 ever pressing for interpretation; and on page 45, that the omnipresence
 of something which passes comprehension, is that which remains
 unquestionable. And on page 46 he concludes: "If Religion and Science are
 to be reconciled, the basis of reconciliation must be this deepest,
 widest, and most certain of all facts—that the Power which the
 Universe manifests to us is utterly inscrutable." The acknowledgment of
 this fact is religiousness; the contrary of it is irreligiousness and
 anthropomorphistic arrogance, even if it appears in the name of
 religiousness. "Volumes might be written upon the impiety of the pious"
 (p. 110).
A comparison of the two philosophers is interesting.
In one direction, Lange does more justice to the religious need than
 Spencer does. While he sees in religion the metaphorical realization of
 the needs of the heart, of a "creation of a home of the spirit," he gives
 to the heart full play to satisfy its need, and to create and arrange for
 itself a spiritual home entirely according to its need. He especially
 acknowledges repeatedly the need of the heart for atonement, and
 vigorously defends this need and its satisfaction against Liberal
 Theologians (Reformtheologen), like Heinrich Lang; he also stands, as we
 see, in satisfactory contrast to Wilhelm Bleek. Without reserve, he
 admits into the hymn-book of his religion of the future hymns like that
 of Gerhard: "O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden" ("O Sacred Head, [198]now wounded").
 To be sure, all the concessions he makes to religion sink again to the
 value of a beautiful illusion, from the fact that for him they are but
 metaphorical approaches to the cause of all things, which after all still
 remains inaccessible. But nevertheless, in consequence of that idea of
 religion, religious life, and especially also religious service, has
 infinitely more room for rich development in Lange than in Spencer. For,
 according to the view of the latter, religiousness consists in nothing
 else but the perception and acknowledgment of this indiscernibleness of
 the final cause. All other things which may be still connected with
 religious life and reasoning, are but a misty veil. The acknowledgment of
 the indiscernibleness of the final cause of all things alone is the
 quintessence of religion. But such a religiousness, which expressly
 forbids imagining any quality or any state of the highest being,
 certainly would be, as Prof. Huxley correctly says in his "Lay Sermons,"
 for the most part of the silent sort.
While thus Lange's conception of religion is superior to that of
 Spencer in admitting a richer development of religious life, a more
 various satisfaction of the religious need, in another direction Spencer
 is superior. He comes considerably nearer to a correct and full
 conception of God than Lange. His idea of the final cause of all
 things does not lie entirely in the conception that it is the absolute
 indiscernible; but Spencer is fully in earnest with the idea that this
 indiscernible is the real cause of the world and of all single existences
 in it. He accordingly forbids giving certain attributes to the
 absolute—not because it would be doubtful whether it has attributes
 or not, but because it stands above all these [199]imaginable
 attributes as their real cause. Therefore he forbids, for instance,
 attributing personality, intelligence, will, to the highest
 being—not because it could also be impersonal, and in want of
 intelligence and will, but because it stands above all these
 attributes as their highest real cause, and because we can think of all
 these attributes only in human analogy, and therefore, when attributed to
 the highest being, can think of them only in rejectable anthropomorphism.
 He says, on page 109: "Those who espouse this position [personality of
 God], make the erroneous assumption that the choice is between
 personality and something lower than personality; whereas the choice is
 rather between personality and something higher. Is it not just possible
 that there is a mode of being as much transcending Intelligence and Will,
 as these transcend mechanical motion? It is true that we are totally
 unable to conceive any such higher mode of being. But this is not a
 reason for questioning its existence; it is rather the reverse.... The
 Ultimate Cause cannot in any respect be conceived by us because it is in
 every respect greater than can be conceived."
Thus we find in Lange a fuller and richer conception of the subject of
 religion; but this conception is in want of one thing—without which
 it is in want of everything—namely, of nothing less than of the
 objective reality. Spencer's religiousness has a much more meagre and
 less varied character: the acknowledgment and veneration of the
 indiscernible; but he nevertheless gives us with this content and object
 a real object, even an object of veneration, in which the
 abundance of all reality is hidden, with the only conception that the
 indiscernible [200]does not let us look into its cornucopia,
 but only lets us judge of the abundance of its contents by the richness
 of that which it pours over us in the world of the relatively
 perceptible.
It will not be difficult to show the points at which each of these
 writers would have been able, had he so wished, to lead his conception of
 religion, the one to a real, the other to a full content.
Lange finds the last principle of perception which is accessible to
 us, in our organization. Now from our organization originate not
 only all modes of the perception of the empirical world, but just as well
 all our ideal impulses, especially the ethical. Which one of all those
 dispositions, impulses, and activities has the precedence, mainly depends
 upon the value which man places upon them. Now, when man attributes to
 the ideal and ethical a higher value than to the empirical, when in
 reflecting about himself he finds that even in the normal individual the
 empirical, sensual, and material is subordinate and subject to the ideal
 and especially to the ethical, then from the standpoint of Lange he is
 right, and obliged to estimate the truth of that ideal and ethical as
 higher than the truth of the empirical world, and to look at the whole
 empirical world only as being in the service of that ideal world. When,
 at the same time, we observe an inner harmony in our organization, this
 observation gives us the right and the duty of controlling the truth of
 our empirical perception by the truth of the results of our ideal and our
 ethical activity, and the latter again by the former. For if we do not
 wish to suppose that the human organization aims at a grand deception of
 mankind, we have, in spite of [201]the superiority of the ideal and ethical
 activities, to establish the axiom that the empirical and the ideal and
 ethical cannot remain in lasting contradiction. Besides, if we should add
 to this that a religion like Christianity offers to man that which it
 gives to him on the ground of historical facts, then the reports of these
 facts will certainly be subject to historical criticism just as surely as
 all historical reports; but if they are confirmed, the ideal and ethical
 convincing power which lies in this religion, unites for us with the
 whole weight of the convincing power of the historical and empirical
 facts, although the reproduction and systematization of its contents is
 still deficient and capable of further development.
In Spencer's system, there are two points by which his own course of
 reasoning is able to bridge over the poverty of his conception of
 religion. The first point, given on pages 107-108 of his "First
 Principles," and also elsewhere in his works, is the acknowledgment that
 the final cause of all things is higher than all that we know, and
 is of such a nature that it really can be the real cause of everything,
 even the real cause of the spiritual and ethical. Thus he forbids us to
 think of qualities of the highest being, but he himself thinks of them;
 for this conception of the highest being as an impersonal is
 certainly something else and something much more valuable than the mere
 negation of personality. The other point which might be able to lead him
 out of the vacuum of his idea of God, lies in the method of his own
 investigation. When he seeks the truth by collecting what is common in
 all the contrasts, he also must seek and find something common between
 the highest cause [202]of all things on one side and of the world
 as a whole and in detail on the other; and this something will consist of
 the necessity of the highest cause of all things being so qualified that
 it is able to bring into existence the world as a whole and in
 detail. If such ideas are also rejected as anthropomorphisms, then all
 reasoning and investigating is anthropomorphistic; and in that respect we
 refer to what we had to say above, when treating of teleology (p. 170
 ff.). The same Duke of Argyll whom we there had occasion to quote, in an
 article in the "Contemporary Review" (May, 1871), upon "Variety as an Aim
 in Nature," has admirably shown that it is the mind of man from which we
 may draw conclusions as to the nature of the Creator, and that the
 picture which we thus get of him, can at the same time be seen true and
 yet dim, at the same time real and yet from a distance; for the human
 mind does not feel anything so much as its own limitations, and therefore
 can easily imagine each of his powers and talents as being present in the
 highest being in infinite perfection. If Spencer had made this
 comparison, and drawn the conclusions which follow from it for the nature
 of the final cause of all things, the indiscernibleness of God would for
 him be reduced to an unsearchableness, the unknowable be changed into an
 unsearchable, and we could willingly acknowledge the humble modesty in
 regard to the infinity of the deity, which his philosophy requires, as a
 factor of all true religiousness. But we have to present to him as an
 expression, not only of true religiousness, but also of true science,
 that passage of the Psalms: "He that planted the ear, shall he [203]not hear?
 He that formed the eye, shall he not see?" (Psalm XCIV, 9.)
§ 4. Spinoza and Hegel in the Garb of Darwin: Carneri. Eduard von Hartmann.
To the Austrian philosopher Carneri in his "Sittlichkeit und
 Darwinismus" ("Morality and Darwinism"), three books of Ethics, Vienna,
 Braumüller, 1871, we shall have to give a place of his own.
Inasmuch as religion and the beautiful are to him but a preliminary
 stage of truth which has to dissolve itself into philosophy—a
 philosophy which, inclined to monism, prefers to call itself
 pantheism—he takes a position in reference to religion similar to
 that toward materialism, namely: a negative position. But inasmuch as he
 still grants to religion in a subjective sense, to "religion in the form
 of piety," a lasting position and truth (religion, he says, has truth,
 but the positive God of religion has no reality, page 114), and inasmuch
 as he ascribes to it not only a transitory pedagogical value for the
 masses, which are not yet elevated to the height of philosophic
 reasoning, but a value also for the philosopher—namely, the value
 of religiousness and of piety—he rather belongs to the second and
 third of the before-mentioned groups.
Carneri, in his "Three Books of Ethics," gives us a whole philosophic
 encyclopedia. In thoughts sometimes rich, but without regularly arranged
 and quiet reasoning, and in full command and employment of modern terms
 which he uses sometimes like a genius, but often superficially and
 unjustly, he develops a view of the world which, although it appears in
 an independent way [204]in all its fundamentals, as regards its
 contents takes its origin from Spinoza, and as regards form and
 dialectics from Hegel, but sometimes, it is true, sinks into weaknesses
 of which these philosophers would hardly have been guilty. So, for
 instance, when he simply identifies religious faith with conjecture, he
 takes a superficial view which he has in common with Häckel who, among
 other things, repeatedly says that faith begins where knowledge ceases.
 Dialectical motion is everything to him. In pursuing this dialectical
 motion, he gives us a multitude of outlooks into all imaginable realms of
 knowledge and life, but he always follows at the same time the formula of
 dialectical motion, and, where the difficulties of the real world are
 most invincibly opposed to this dialectics, knows, like his master, with
 almost chivalric ease, to mingle and confound abstract formalistic
 reasoning and thoughts naturally following from the given thought. Want
 of clearness in general makes the reading of this otherwise not
 unimportant book very difficult. On a Darwinian foundation in his
 conception of nature and its development, he puts a Hegelian structure
 into his conception of human spiritual life, but finally lets mankind,
 although it is the highest form of appearance in this development, sink
 back into death and destruction.
The God of this view of the world is the causal law; the conception of
 this causal law is the worship of the philosopher—a God, of course,
 so incapable of filling and quieting a mind longing for God—a