# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2018
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, Jinny the Carrier
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57836/57836-h/57836-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Will did not deny the feat—the explanation would really have
been too complicated. In his embarrassment, he overlooked that
his father had not really answered his question. “And how’s
mother?” he said.
“Mother’s in a great old state. ’Nation mad with Jinny.”
“Why, what’s Jinny done?”
“Sow neglectful. ‘Bein’ as you passed him by,’ says mother
to she, ‘why dedn’t you stop and pick up the chest?’ ”
He looked uncomfortable. “And what did Jinny say?”
“She said she dedn’t reckonize the old you when she dreft by,
and besides she was singing-like.”
He winced at the reminder of the song, but was grateful to her
for telling so truthful a lie: instinctively he felt that his folks
having accepted a woman carrier with such brainless acquiescence
would fail to enter into the fine shades of his feeling.
“Mother hadn’t a right to make a noise with Jinny,” he said.
“She only kitched of a fire for a moment. ’Twas more over
you than over Jinny, Oi should reckon. Bust into tears, she did,
and when Oi said maybe as Jinny was mistook she nearly bit
my head off. ‘Too lazy-boned to goo and give a hand to your
own buoy-oy,’ says she. ‘Ain’t he shifted for hisself nigh ten
years?’ says Oi. ‘Can’t you wait ten minutes more? Oi count
he’ll be here before the New Jerusalem,’ says Oi. That dedn’t
pacify her much, bein’ a female. Cowld-blooded—she called me.
‘There’s feythers,’ says she, ‘as ’ud be trimmed out with colours
like Jinny’s hoss—not leave it to a gal as is no relation to decorate
even her dog in his honour.’ ‘That’s for May Day,’ says Oi.
‘All wery fine,’ says she. ‘But May Day’s over and gone six
days’—she’s a rare un for figgers is mother—‘time enough,’ says
she, ‘for God to create the world in.’ ‘Maybe you’d like flags
flourishin’ and flutterin’, says Oi, jocoshus like, ‘but Oi ain’t got
no flags save my old muckinger.’ And with that, bein’ more
shook than I let on, Oi blowed my nose into it, wery trumpet-like,
and that seemed to quieten her, for her tantarums be over
now, and the onny noise she’s makin’ is the fryin’ o’ them little
old weal sausages for you.”
“Good!” cried the Prodigal Son, his face transfigured. “She
remembered my passion for veal sausages!”
“ ‘And there’s pickled walnuts too! Put them out likewise,’
says Oi, ‘for ’tis a poor heart that never rejoices.’ ”
“But that’s your passion, not mine.”
“That’s what mother said. ‘But baint Oi to get no compensation?’
says Oi. And why dedn’t you write to her all these
years, Willie?”
His face darkened again. “I’m no great shakes with a quill.
And there wasn’t anything to say. I did write once to tell you
I was safe across the Atlantic and was gone to make my fortune.”
“We dedn’t never get no letter.”
“No—it came back months after. I forgot to put England
on it, thinking maybe Essex was enough. But it seems there’s
a Mount Essex in the States, down Wyoming way, and the Yanks
always think everything is for them. So I thought I’d best let
things be, being on the go in those days.”
Caleb fully sympathized with the plea. “And have ye made
your fortune, Will?” he inquired meekly.
“That depends on your idea of a fortune,” Will parried. But
he had a complacent consciousness of those bank-notes behind
the glove.
“My idea of a fortune be faith in God,” said Caleb.
“Yes, yes, I know.” The young man got off the box impatiently.
Caleb tugged at one of its handles.
“Lord, that’s lugsome!” he said, letting the long heavy chest
subside. “Ef you ain’t come back rich, you’ve come back
middlin’ powerful. All the way from Chipstone!” He clucked
his tongue admiringly.
Having once left the miracle undenied, and feeling the situation
now altogether beyond explanation to the bucolic intellect, Will
again silently acquiesced in the Herculean imputation and took
the other handle. “But why didn’t you bring a cart or a
truck?” he asked as they began walking cumbrously towards
the bridge.
“Ain’t got nowt but a wheelbarrow,” Caleb explained. “Times
is changed—-Oi ain’t looker no more, and there’s two housen
now. Old Peartree got to have a separate door, but ’twas a
good bargain Oi put my cross to with the son o’ the Cornish
furriner what Oi warked for these thirty-nine year. Mother will
have it she’d ha’ made a cuter deal, she bein’ a dapster in figgers
and reckonin’ out to a day when the New Jerusalem will be
droppin’ down, but Oi don’t howd with women doin’ men’s
business, bein’ as your rib can’t be your head.”
“I quite agree,” said Will, surprised to find such enlightened
sentiments in his queer old parent. “But tell me about Ben
and Isaac and the others.”
“They don’t write neither. We was lookin’ to you to tell us
about the others as went furrin. Ben should be a barber in
America, and they say as Christopher’s got a woife, colour o’
coffee.”
“Nonsense, dad!”
“Well, maybe ’twas Isaac.”
“No Flynt would marry a nigger woman,” said Will decisively.
“Oi’m right glad to hear it,” said Caleb. “For Oi count the
young ’uns ’ud come out streaky and spotty like pigeons or
cattle, and though they likely turn white when they die, and
their souls be white all the time, Oi could never be comfortable
along o’ finch-backed gran’childer.”
With such discourse they beguiled the heavy way, trudging
behind their tall shadows, till at the gate of the drive of Frog
Farm they saw Martha peering eagerly along the avenue of
witch-elms. In another instant Will, letting go his box-handle,
was choked in her hug and wetted by her tears.
“I can smell those sausages right here, mother,” he said, with
a smile and a half sob. “How do ye howd?” And he emphasized
the homely old idiom by patting her wrinkled cheek. She
caught his hand in hers, and he was touched by the thin worn
wedding-ring on the gnarled and freckled hand. His eyes roved
round. “But surely this ain’t the house I was born in. Why,
that was a giant’s castle.”
Caleb looked a bit uneasy: “You’re sure this be Will?” he
asked Martha in one of his thundrous whispers.
“Why, I’d know him in a hundred.”
“Well, there’s onny nine or ten.” And he laughed gleefully.
“Do be easy, Caleb. You’re getting as unrestful as Bundock.”
“I’m Will right enough,” Will intervened. “Only everything
seems to have got so small. Come along, dad.” He took up
his side of the box:
“Gracious goodness!” cried Martha, perceiving it at last.
“My poor Will! Lugging that from Chipstone! Why didn’t
you call to Jinny to stop and take it?”
“How was I to know that that was Jinny’s cart dashing by?”
he said, moving forward quickly. “I suppose you didn’t ask
her to stay for the sausages?” he added lightly.
“I couldn’t ask her, dearie,” said Martha. “She was terrible
late, she said, and I know how crotched her wicked old grandfather
gets at feeding-time.”
“How big she’s grown!” he observed carelessly.
“Big!” They both repeated the word, but from a different
surprise.
“You said you didn’t see her,” said Martha sharply.
“I saw a big young woman flying by in the cart—I didn’t know
then it was Jinny.”
“But you just said everything’s growed so little,” chuckled
Caleb.
“So it has—all except Jinny.”
“And she isn’t so very big,” said Martha, “rather undersized,
some folks would say.”
“Well, I’m not so oversized myself,” said Will.
“Will’s seen her toplofty over Methusalem,” explained Caleb.
“Wait till he sees her on her pegs.”
“But I did see her on her pegs,” said Will, “at ‘The Black
Sheep’!”
“Then why did you goo and carry that little old box?”
inquired Caleb.
“She wasn’t in the cart then—how was I to guess she was the
Carrier?” he answered crossly.
“But you could ha’ ast for the Bradmarsh carrier.”
“The coach was late,” he snapped.
“But Jinny hadn’t started yet,” persisted Caleb. “Bein’ as
you seen her there.”
“Legends, my boy, legends.” Tony Flip’s euphemism for lies
rang in Will’s brain. But legends, he was finding, are not easy
to sustain. One lie breeds many, and he was sorry now he had
allowed himself to be made a champion weight-lifter. “I
thought being so late ’twas no use asking for the Carrier—’twas
you I expected,” he said, turning the war back into the enemy’s
country.
But they had now lumbered up with the box to the twin
doors, and the task of dumping down the subject of discussion
in a convenient place stayed the cross-examination.
The feast for the Prodigal Son had been laid in the parlour,
and the scent of the fried sausages came appetizingly on the
evening air, more poetic than any of Nature’s competing odours.
“Why, there’s my letter!” cried Will at the parlour door,
beholding it on the mantelpiece. “You might have let me know
you couldn’t meet me.”
He went in and took it down. “Not opened?” he cried
crossly, the muggy atmosphere of the sealed chamber adding to
his irritation. “And I told you exactly the day and hour I was
coming!”
“We haven’t had time to get it read yet, dearie,” said Martha
mildly. “I was going to take it to the dressmaker, but Saturdays
I’m so busy and Sunday was Sunday, and yesterday I felt as if
my ribs were grating together, and to-day was too hot.”
“Well, I shan’t write again in a hurry,” he said peevishly, and
was about to tear the letter in twain. But Martha snatched it
from him with a cry and slipped it into her bosom.
“Sit down, Will,” she pleaded. “Your sausages are spoiling.”
But the Prodigal Son would not batten at once upon the fatted
calf. He felt too dusty, he said, and then, imperiously pushing
at the diamond-paned casement and realizing with disgust it
would not open, vanished in search of soap.
“He can’t be well,” whimpered Martha.
“Don’t worrit, dear heart,” Caleb consoled her. “Oi count
even Samson wanted a wash arter he’d lugged that little old
gate up the hill from Gazy.”
WILL AT HOME
Is not this the merry month of May,
When love-lads masken in fresh array?
   How falls it, then, we no merrier be’n,
   Like as others, girt in gaudy green?
              Spenser, “The Shepheards Calendar.”
Time hung heavy on Will’s hands the first few days of his return,
as heavy as the meals heaped before him by the adoring Martha.
There was as much for “bever” as for breakfast, yet quantity
did not suffice him. He became almost as finnicking and
fractious as Cousin Caroline, not content, for example, to strain
the pond-water through muslin for the larger insects, but insisting
on its being boiled: indeed hinting preposterously that the
mortality among his unknown brothers and sisters might have
been connected with potations on which Caleb and Martha had
patently flourished. He held views on the house-refuse, ignoring
Caleb’s plea that “the best drain be a pig,” and by making
hinges the very first evening for the lower windows to open by, he
had raised such a draught in the house that it was all they could
do to keep their bedroom and their kitchen air-tight, and even
Martha was glad when on the Wednesday afternoon he went
off to get some fishing in the Brad, and the windows could
all be closed up again.
But the few dace and bull-heads that rewarded his rod left too
many intervals for reflection, and in the unsettlement of his
thoughts, before settling down to a judicious expenditure of his
ninety pounds, he felt he needed more deadening exertion. He
tried poling against the stream to that ancient faery island—somebody’s
half-decked shooting punt was doing no good rusting
on the bank in the off-season, he thought—but the process soon
became automatic and his mind was still restless, while after the
islands of the St. Lawrence this enchanted playground of his
youth seemed tame and its prettiness trivial.
He fed his fancy on a salt-water expedition for the Thursday:
recalled the great catches of flat-fish he and his brothers had
made, the sport to be got out of the voracious if inedible “bull-rout,”
but it would be a very long walk, and what if when one
arrived the tide should be too low? So he walked inland around
Bradmarsh Common. But though it was, he told himself, the
“old haunts” that he went out for to see, he omitted to revisit
that venerable landmark, Gaffer Quarles. Conscience adjured
him he ought to look up the old carrier, whether for respect or
reproof—and he actually did hover around Blackwater Hall—but
pride forbade his entering, lest he stumble upon the new
Carrier. The Hall appeared even more dwindled to him than
Frog Farm as he stood surlily surveying it; even the Common—after
the Canadian prairie—seemed no longer to roll towards the
blue infinities. He had a strong impulse to burst in on that
careless old Daniel and give him a piece of his mind, even at the
risk of meeting his gadabout granddaughter; but the bleating
of the goats sounded forbidding, and as he was hesitating he
found himself under the gaze of another gaffer, the crown of
whose battered beaver tied on to its brim with coloured strings
gave him a festal grotesquerie. Will remembered this ancient,
though despite his gay headgear he now seemed inexpressibly
grimy in his patched corduroys, his two ragged coats, and the
dirty towel wound round his throat. It was the Quarles’s
nearest neighbour, “Uncle” Lilliwhyte, who lived in a cottage
also on the Common; trading in cress, cherries, and mushrooms,
driving home obstreperous cows and doing other odd jobs. This
worthy was now exercising his equal right of gathering sticks on
the Common, and the sordid association seemed to reduce Jinny
to the same shrunken proportions as her cottage.
“Buy a nadder, sir?”
“Sir!” Yes, after all, his father had been a “looker,” not
a mere labourer, he himself had a waistcoat lined with bank-notes
and cut by Moses & Son, why should he expect a sense of
dignity from a girl of so lowly a status? Let her earn her
livelihood as she wished—it was not his affair, except in so far
as she should have none of his custom. A cock crew lustily, and
it subtly heartened him up. Yes, he would go in now, give her
back her glove, professing to have just picked it up, and wash
his hands of her for ever.
“No, thank you, uncle,” he said, with an irrelevant memory of
the ancient’s blind mother, “what should I do with an adder?”
“But that’s a real loive nadder, just kitched, sir.” He
cautiously displayed its hissing head and darting tongue.
“There’s many a slowworm killed for a woiper, pore things.
Onny fowrpence, sir!”
“Well, here’s sixpence,” said Will graciously. “No, no,” he
explained hastily, as the ancient began handing over the wriggling
reptile. “Kill the beggar.” And he hurried homewards. On
second thoughts—inspired perhaps by some dim impression of a
female figure flitting among the clothes-lines behind the Hall—he
would not risk an encounter with Jinny, but make a special
call upon poor, lonely old Daniel on the morrow. Jinny would
then be out on her rounds. And if he took care to go at about
the hour she was due at Frog Farm, he could avoid her at
both places. Yes, that were tactics worthy of a man of the
world.
Casual conversation with his elders reminded him, however,
that Jinny was not expected that Friday. She had already left
the parcel of groceries on the Tuesday. He was thus safe from
her for eight days—he had only to remain at home. But the
discovery that the whole of Friday was free from any possibility
of her appearance at Frog Farm, and that Blackwater Hall was
equally immune from her presence, seemed to remove the zest
of his diplomacy. Neighbour Quarles remained unvisited, his
solitude unmitigated, and Will wandered aimlessly on the high
road between Bradmarsh and Chipstone.
The year was at its most beautiful moment. The hedges were
white with hawthorn, and the fresh young leaves on the
trees gave an exquisite sense of greenness without blurring the
structural grace of the branches, while the unspoiled cadence
of the cuckoo’s cry came magically over the sunny meadows.
But Will could only swish viciously with his stick at the hedges
and litter the lanes with ruined blossom.
It was with no little surprise that, as he and his elders sat at
high tea on this same evening, they heard the windings of Jinny’s
horn. The three sprang up: then Will sat down again.
“Ain’t you comin’ out to see Jinny?” asked Caleb.
“Let the boy drink his tea,” said Martha.
“But you ain’t never spoke to her yet,” persisted Caleb.
“And you used to give her eggs.”
“Let the boy eat his eggs himself,” said Martha sternly.
“Oi dedn’t mean they eggs,” laughed Caleb.
“Do go and see what Jinny can want,” Martha commanded him.
“I shouldn’t be surprised if it is eggs—now that Mr. Flippance
has opened his show he’ll be wanting them regularly.”
“Whatever for?” asked Will.
“He sucks ’em raw, like weasels, him and his darter,” explained
Caleb. “They should say it’s good for the woice, and by all
accounts showmen fares to have a mort o’ pieces to speak.”
“But why doesn’t Jinny sell him her own eggs?” asked
Will.
“How do you know she has them?” asked Martha quickly.
“Hasn’t she?” he said lightly, reddening like the comb of
the cock he had heard crowing.
“Not enough. That old sinner eats her out of house and
home.”
“Mr. Flippance?” murmured Will.
“No, no. Her grandfather. Why don’t you go, Caleb?”
Will sat on stolidly, helping himself to more tea and pouring
the milk into the slop-basin. Presently Caleb returned, announcing
that Jinny had brought something for Will—she could only
legally deliver it to Mr. Flynt, junior, she said.
Will turned redder than at the egg-talk. “But I never
ordered anything,” he said.
“You can’t prewent folks sendin’ you presents, same as
they’re foolish enough,” Caleb reminded him.
A fantastic fear that the blue-eyed girl of the train was discharging
some proof of devotion at him made him drum nervously
with his teaspoon. “But who knows I’m back home?” he
answered Caleb.
Through the open house-door came the gay strains of a fresh
young voice:
“But still he’d sing fol de rol iddle ol!”
“Don’t she sing pritty?” sighed Caleb.
“I’d sooner hear her singing about Zion,” said Martha. “She’s
rather flighty, to my thinking.”
“That’s the first time Oi heard ye say a word agen Jinny,”
said Caleb, “leastways behind her back.”
Will, tingling between the two tortures—the song without and
the table-talk within—sprang up brusquely. “Drat the girl—my
tea’ll get cold. Sit down, dad, I’ll see what she’s brought.”
Jinny sat stiffly on her seat, Nip clasped in her arms. The
singing had ceased. Despite himself Will felt an odd pleasure in
the sight of the trim figure so competently poised above Methusalem,
and he was touched to note Nip’s tail agitating itself
amicably at the sight of him.
“Good evening,” she said politely. “I am glad to see it has
not developed.”
“What hasn’t developed?”
“Your hydrophobia. And I am keeping the dog tight, you
notice.”
He winced. “Oh, I’m not afraid of him.”
“But I am—he’s already bitten you once: get the cages,
please, while I hold him.”
“The cages?” He had a confused idea that Nip was to be
caged, was dangerous after all.
“They’re near the tail-board. Nothing to pay.”
He went behind the cart, wondering, semi-incredulous; did
indeed perceive a couple of cages in the dusk, and reaching for
one, drew back his hand in a hurry from some darting, snapping,
creamy, pink-eyed yellowness.
“Oh!” he cried involuntarily.
“What’s the matter? Oh, I had forgotten they bite too.”
“What is this practical joke?” he cried angrily.
“Eh?” said Jinny. “Didn’t you order a pair of ferrets to
be sent by the Carrier?”
His eyes grew wide. “I beg your pardon—I’d quite forgotten.”
“I thought Deacon Mawhood wasn’t a likely joker. Polecats,
he said. Have you got the cages?” she asked, not looking
back.
“I’m—I’m getting them,” he stammered, and began cautiously
haling them towards him.
“The Deacon asked me to say the hob and the jill must be
kept apart.”
“I know,” he grunted, almost as shocked as over her mention
of Maria’s litter. The impudicity of her calling was again borne
in on him.
“Anything else?” burst from him sardonically.
“No—except there’s no need to cope them. I don’t know
what coping is.”
“It’s what you want,” he said brutally. “Muzzling.”
“Afraid of my bite, too?” asked Jinny, and turning towards
the interior shelf that held the smaller parcels, she began to sing
softly to herself:
“A dashing young lad from Buckingham.”
He had been expecting “Canada” at the end, and felt somehow
disappointed at its absence. “But when I gave the order,”
he rejoined notwithstanding, “I didn’t know that the Bradmarsh
Carrier was a girl.”
“That didn’t prevent you using her when you did know,” she
said quietly.
“When have I used her?” he cried hotly.
“Well, what about this?” She produced from the shelf in
the cart a long parcel half enclosed by a string in broken, dirty
paper, within which showed a layer of grimy straw.
“But what is it?”
“That’s not my business.” She tendered it downwards.
“I never ordered this.”
“Hadn’t you better open it?” she asked with a twinkle. He
dumped down the cages violently, to the alarm of the ferrets, and
tore it open, only to shudder back before the clammy-looking
coils.
“An adder as well?” said Jinny. “You going to open a
menagerie?”
“It’s dead,” he said.
“Did you want a live one?”
“I didn’t want one at all—I never ordered it.”
“Why, Uncle Lilliwhyte told me he sold it to you for fourpence
and you gave him twopence extra to kill it.”
“I beg your pardon—he misunderstood.” It was his second
apology. “But what a dirty way to deliver it.”
“Did you expect me to nurse a viper in my bosom?”
Again this indelicate speech, hardly atoned for by its wit.
“The old ragamuffin!” he muttered furiously. “How did the
idiot know it was me?”
“Fellow-feeling, I suppose,” said Jinny.
“Now you’re saucy again. You must have told him it was me.”
“Right for once. Honest uncle was upset at your forgetting
to tell him where to send your purchase. I was milking my
goats and saw you hanging about.”
Again he flushed uneasily. “And how much do I owe you?”
he asked hurriedly.
“Twopence for the viper, being only a short way. The
Deacon says he prefers to pay the freightage on the ferrets, and
to collect it from you himself.”
He put down the straw-entangled snake on top of one of the
cages, and pulled out a coin. “Have you got change for
sixpence?”
“Not unless I loose Nip.” She fumbled with one hand in her
pocket.
He glowered. “Oh, next time will do,” he said angrily.
“Oh, then, there is to be a next time!”
“Not so far as I am concerned.”
“Sure you don’t want any more wild animals?”
“No,” he shouted.
“Don’t be so fierce. The drumstick is found, you will be glad
to hear.”
He grunted.
“And the show is doing big business, Mr. Flippance tells me.
He was so set up he gave me a pair of new gloves.”
“That old braggart! What business had he to give you
gloves?”
“Didn’t I lose one through his drumstick?”
“But then ’tis me ought to pay for them,” he protested.
“You? What nonsense! Why?”
“It was on my account you lost the glove—through trying to
get a bite.”
She smiled. “You talk as if I were an angler.”
“I wish you were! Anything but a carrier.”
“Don’t say that. Would you like me to buy another pair of
gloves—on your account?”
“If you would!” he said eagerly.
“Thank you!
But still he’d-sing fol de rol iddle ol.
“What size do you take?”
“Stow that fol-de-riddling—you know I don’t mean gloves
for me.”
“Are you taking back the order?” she said, with feigned
disappointment.
“I never gave you an order!” he said, goaded. “I’d cut my
tongue out sooner.”
“Keep your tongue between your teeth. You’ll want it to
give me an order with before you’re a week older.”
“Never! I’d as soon shoe a horse with a hairpin.” He
snatched up his cages decisively, one in each hand, and the
adder rolled on to the ground, bursting its strawy cerements.
The girl’s grey eyes flashed steel-like. “And can’t I drive as
well as Gran’fer? And don’t I know the roads?” And she
uplifted her horn from her girdle and blew a resounding blast of
defiance. It set all the cocks crowing behind the house and
brought Caleb bustling from within it.
“Did you summon me, Jinny?” he asked. “Gracious, Will,
whatever you got there?” His eyes expanded to see the
sinuous animals swirling fiercely against their wires; in coming
nearer to peer at them, he stumbled over the snake and uttered
a cry.
“It’s all right,” called Jinny. “It’s dead.”
“You killed it, Willie?” he asked.
“With a drumstick,” said Jinny gravely.
“Fiddlesticks, father!” said Will angrily.
“Oi don’t care what sort o’ stick you killed that with,” said
Caleb, “so long as it’s a dead corpse. But do ye come in now—mother’s
grousin’ about the tea gittin’ cold.”
“I like cold tea. Go in, father. I’m just coming.” He
harked back to her blast of rebellion. “You may be able to
drive, and you may know the roads. But can’t you see how
unnatural it is, you perched up there and blowing a horn like
Dick Burrage of the County Flyer?”
“And do I blow it as fine as he?” she asked eagerly.
“Anybody can blow a horn,” he answered curtly.
“Can they now?” She was piqued again. “I’d like to see
anybody do it. Why, Gran’fer can’t.”
“Gran’fer hasn’t got much breath left. I’m not talking of
men in their eighties.”
“He is in his nineties,” she corrected.
“Exactly. I meant anybody with proper lungs.”
“Can you blow it?”
“Why shouldn’t I be able to blow it?”
“All right! Blow it!” said Jinny gravely. She unslung it
with one arm and held it down. He gazed at it, taken aback,
sandwiched between his cages.
“It’s no good opening your mouth,” she said. “I’m not
going to stick it in. You’ll have to put down those horrible
beasts and do that yourself. Why don’t they keep still? They
make my head ache.”
He moved to the back of the house to place the ferrets out of
the way, kicking the poor adder before him—it was a needed
relief to his feelings. Returning, thus purged, he took the
proffered horn—it was not a professional coach-horn or post-horn,
but just the little instrument of a master of foxhounds curling
into a circle above—and with but scant misgiving put it to his
mouth, and blew. But the silence remained unbroken. He
puffed on and on with solemn pertinacity. Not a sound issued.
His cheeks swelled to bursting-point, and grew redder and
redder with shame and vexation. But silence still reigned.
“You mustn’t put it inside your lips,” corrected Jinny.
“Think you’re tum-tumming into a comb.”
He readjusted it sullenly, but the music within was still
coy.
“Slacken your lip,” she advised. “Try to splutter br-r-r-rr
into it.”
But whatever he spluttered into it, nothing came out.
“I never realized it was quite so difficult, even the lipping,”
said Jinny simply. “Of course I didn’t expect you to do the
double or treble tonguing at once.”
“What do you mean, tonguing?” he inquired morosely.
“Dividing the notes. Say ‘Tucker, Tucker, Tucker’ into it.”
“But it’s blowing, not saying,” said Will obstinately.
But secretly he modified his methods, and at last a ghostly
plangency or a staccato squeak began to reward his apoplectic
agonizings, and the still prisoned Nip, who had been yawning in
utter boredom, now accompanied the music with a critical and
lugubrious howling.
Upon this spectacle and situation reissued the guileless Caleb,
and had the Crystal City itself come down upon earth, his eyes
could scarcely have orbed themselves more spaciously.
“He didn’t summon you,” observed the merciless Jinny.
“Go away, father! What are you staring at?” yapped the
tortured young man.
“You do be a fine musicianer!” And Caleb grinned. “But
do ye don’t play now—mother’s gittin’ into her tantarums over
your tea.”
“The instrument must be out of order,” said Will, handing it
up crossly to Jinny. Remorselessly she drew from it a clarion call
that made the welkin ring and the poultry-yard respond in kind.
“How the cocks crow!” she observed artlessly.
“Thinks because she blows a horn she’s a devil of a fellow,”
Will remarked witheringly to his receding father. “Say, Jinny,
why don’t you wear the breeches?”
“Like those Bloomerites you told me of? I will,” she
responded sweetly, “if you think it more becoming.”
“Me! You don’t suppose I notice what you wear.”
“Then how do you know I’m not wearing ’em now?”
“You have me there!” And he smiled despite himself. The
smile lit up the face under the aureole of red hair—it seemed to
Jinny a sudden glimpse, through a rift of Time, of the boy she
had known. “All the same,” he protested, “if I had a horn, I
could learn it in an hour.”
“Well, get one,” said Jinny.
“Where can I get one?” he retorted fretfully.
“Dearie! Your tea——!” It was Martha herself now.
“Oh, I’d get you one,” said Jinny carelessly, “but I’ll wager
you won’t blow it properly in a week, much less an hour!”
“A week! What nonsense! In a moment.”
“In a moment?”
“I was speaking to mother. What’ll you wager?”
“A pair of gloves,” said Jinny.
“Done!” said Will.
She clucked to Methusalem. “Good-bye,” she called to the
couple as the cart moved off. “I’ll deliver your order next
Friday, Will—without fail.”
“Dearie, whatever are you running after her for?” cried
Martha.
He came back sheepishly: “I thought the gate wasn’t open.”
From the Bradmarsh road the sound of the “fol-de-rol”
refrain came sweetly on the quiet air.
“I wish she would sing of Zion,” repeated Martha wistfully.
The pair of polecat ferrets—creamy white albinos, pink of eye
and black of belly—hung in the cages on the back wall of the
farmhouse, with a spare cage beside them as a retiring-place
when a hutch was turned out. But only once—on the Saturday
in the first ardour of possession—had Will taken them out
a-hunting: on which occasion they had refused to rat or rabbit.
Indeed their leaps and gambols persuaded Will that they pursued—as
he remembered the Deacon once maintaining sympathetically
about rats—their “private sports.” Why indeed should sensible
creatures, comfortably fed on chicken-head and blackbirds, and
provided with straw to cocoon themselves against cold, go
squeezing into holes or drains? Restored to captivity, these
fainéant ferrets spent most of their day in squirming with
desperate restlessness from one end of the cage to the other and
perking their quivering noses and little black claws through the
wires. And their master’s own plight was much the same, for
after the prairie, Frog Farm was only a hutch to him: his
father, too, being so unexpectedly on the shelf, there was nothing
that really needed him, nor was there any land for sale in the
vicinity on which he might commence operations. Like his
ferrets, if with a larger run, he swayed restlessly to and fro;
from farm to river, from river to Common, from Common to
Steeples Wood, from Steeples Wood to Frog Farm.
When he was not thus oscillating on the landscape, he was
sweating in intellectual indecision in the parlour: trying to write
a little note to Jinny to inform her that she was to come to Frog
Farm no more, inasmuch as he intended to go into Chipstone
himself once or twice a fortnight, and could easily bring home
whatever was necessary. He had thought that when he had
found a feather dropped by a green goose, cut his quill, concocted
an ink out of soot and water, and discovered a piece of white
paper wrapped round his bank-notes, that his difficulties were
over. But the worst now remained, for he could not satisfy
himself as to the phraseology of this note, being, as he had truly
pleaded, no great shakes at letter-writing. Such glibness as he
could muster in conversation was paralysed in fact by a pen.
There was not even one of those word-books he had seen scholarly
people use to ensure the spelling, and one must not unnecessarily
afford material to a minx who—having obviously to do with bills
and accounts—might conceivably be literate. He had a vague
remembrance of her reading texts quite easily at the Sunday-school,
young as she was. Even if she could spell no better
than he, she might possess one of these spelling-protectors.
The only book at Frog Farm being his mother’s Bible, he tried
to secure accuracy by limiting himself to its words. But its
vocabulary seemed strangely lacking. He had decided, for
example, to begin with “Maddam.” One could not call such a
stranger as the new Jinny “Dear Miss,” he thought, and “Miss”
alone sounded thin and abrupt. No, “Maddam” was the
mouth-filling resonance necessary: it struck a note of massive
dignity. But did it really have two “d’s”? And to his
amazement and anguish neither “Maddam” nor “Madam”
was to be discovered from Genesis to Revelation. Adam, the
nearest analogue, who came in his reference volume with welcome
promptitude, even precipitateness, had, he found, only one
“d,” but was he a sure guide to the orthography of the creature
formed out of his spare rib? This and the many other curious
and amazing passages that beguiled him on his route—presented
thus to a fresh and world-experienced eye—ran away with so
much time that Martha would be summoning him to the next of
his many meals before he had even dipped his quill into the soot.
“Mr. William Flynt presents his complements” was another
promising start—he had got a debt-demanding letter once at a
boarding-house with this austerely courteous overture—but
alas!—marvel on marvel—there did not appear to be a single
“complement,” whether in the Old Testament or the New. Not
a very courteous people, the Jews, he thought, under either
dispensation. This happy-go-lucky hunt for words—an exciting
steeplechase in which one skipped over spacious histories and
major prophets with the chance of tumbling on the very word—began
to be an absorbing substitute for ratting.
“The Epistles of James” suddenly caught his eye. Ah, here
was a complete guide to letter-writing, he felt hopefully; what
was good enough for James would do for William. But when
written out, “William, the son of Caleb, of Frog Farm, to Jinny
Quarles of Blackwater Hall, Little Bradmarsh, greeting” did not
seem quite the correct opening. An Epistle of John was, even
more misguiding. “The Elder to the Elect or Well-Beloved!”
Clearly inappropriate to the point of absurdity!
Still, with modifications, Epistles must surely be valid models.
So he started writing and re-writing, wrestling and hunting and
polishing. But the word-chase had now to be supplemented by
a paper-chase. How keep pace in paper with this orgy of penmanship?
Every corner of the house was ransacked, with
meagre results: he even meditated stealing back his own letter
from his mother, knowing it had a blank fly-sheet, but it was
always jealously guarded. It was not till he came on Farmer
Gale’s boy—schoolward bound—and paid him twopence for the
remains of a penny copy-book that he could surrender himself
freely to the labours of the file. An hour before this large
laying-in of material, he had gone through a curious crisis. He
had found in his purse, in a last desperate quest, a piece of paper
which, unfolded, afforded a welcome white surface. He was
composing quite a successful letter upon it when, on turning it
over, he came upon the address of the forgotten blue-eyed
charmer of the Chelmsford train. With frowning brow he tore
it into small pieces. It was not merely that the letter was
spoilt for sending: it was the juxtaposition with Jinny—back
to back—that seemed suddenly profane.
After several days’ gestation, many words and turns of expression
having to be rejected and replaced by phrases whose spelling
could be ascertained from the Bible, the letter emerged as
hereunder in a pale and aqueous ink:
“William Flynt to the Damsel of Blackwater Hall greeting.
This epistle doth proclaim in the name of the generations of
Frog Farm that Methuselah shall not come to pass here henceforward,
inasmuch as behold here am I to purchase whatsoever
is verily to be desired from Chipstone, be it candles or oil or
spice or any manner of thing whatsoever, nor shall you carry
forth aught hence, for lo! we will make no further covenant
with you or aught that is yours. Peace be with you, as thank
God it leaves me at present.
“Yours truly,
“William Flynt.
“P.S.—Let not your horn be exalted, nor speak with a stiff
neck, for surely this is not the way to find grace in the eyes of
the discerning.”
But even this exalted effusion did not survive the first glow of
satisfaction, for although it was treasured up as too good to
destroy, and did not sound unlike the language that the Brothers
and Sisters held in the meeting-house, he could not remember
ever seeing a letter thus couched. It was succeeded by a homelier
version, in which the word “Epistle” stood out as the only
connecting-link. With a composition playing now for safety,
and mainly monosyllabic, it would be a poor diplomacy not to
work in one high-class word, of whose spelling he was sure.
“This Epistle is to say,” the new version began abruptly,
“that we don’t need you to call on Frydays——”
Good heavens! Even Friday was not to be found in the
Bible. Pursuing this astonishing line of investigation, he realized
that Sunday itself was absent from its pages. The Bible without
Sunday! O incredible discoveries of the illuminated!
He altered it, following Genesis, to the “sixth day,” but then
came a paralysing doubt whether it was not the fifth, for how
could you rest on Sunday if that was not the seventh? He
casually remarked to his mother that it was odd they did not
rest on the seventh day, as commanded in Genesis. She explained
to him that Sunday was the Lord’s Day, but he seemed dissatisfied
with the argument. Perhaps Moses & Son were not
so wrong, he remarked, repenting of his resentment against
them for being closed that Saturday.
He woke up the next morning with the solution of dodging
the mention of the day and merely relieving Jinny of the duty
of “markiting” for them. He felt sure that this word could
be found, remembering a text about two sparrows being sold
for a farthing. But to his chagrin it was not in the “markit”
that they were sold. In steeplechasing for the word, he tumbled
on a text in Hosea: “Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the
trumpet in Ramah,” and that seemed like an omen. Yes, he
would blow it in Bradmarsh, if not in Ramah. Let him wait
till she came with the horn; then after whelming her with the
wonder of his execution, he could, face to face and free of orthography,
bid her trouble Frog Farm no more. And the postscript
of his great letter, “Let not your horn be exalted, nor speak
with a stiff neck,” rang through his mind again, like a prophetic
warning against overweening damsels.
“He’s come back a new soul,” Martha reported to Caleb, with
shining eyes. “He’s found God.”
Caleb shook his head sceptically. “He’s too boxed up for
that—he don’t open his heart enough.”
“But he opens the Bible,” urged Martha, “and he won’t
close it even for meals. I can never get it for myself nowadays.”
“Dedn’t you read me as the Devil can spout Scripture?”
said Caleb shrewdly.
“For shame, Caleb. Anybody can see how changed the boy
is—the only thing that makes me anxious is his Sabbatarian
leanings. Suppose he should go and join the Seventh-Day
Baptists.”
“Dip hisself o’ Saturdays?”
“No, no—’tis those that keep Sunday on Saturday. There’s
two in Long Bradmarsh, but I hope Will won’t go straying into
strange paths.”
“You better enlighten him,” said Caleb. “Them as is
powerful enough to carry boxes from Chipstone ain’t allus bright
in the brain-pan. Oi count it ’ud be aukard if he fared to
keep Sunday on Saturday, bein’ as he’d want the Sunday dishes
fust and we’d get ’em cold.”
“There’s higher considerations than the stomach,” said
Martha severely.
“The stomach ain’t low and it ain’t high,” maintained Caleb.
“The Lord put the stomach in the middle so as we shouldn’t
neither worship it nor forgit it.”
“The only Sunday meal that matters,” persisted Martha,
“is the bread and the wine, and though there’s no Lord’s table
nigh, such as I could find dozens of in London, nor nobody to
worship with except you, yet if you go on scoffing, my duty to
my Brethren and Sisters of the synagogue will be to withdraw
from you.”
“And where will you goo?” he asked in alarm.
“I won’t go anywhere—‘withdraw’ only means that it is
forbidden to break bread with you.”
He was relieved. “Oi don’t mind so long as you don’t goo
away.”
“And what will you do in the day of Ezekiel thirty-eight,
when Gog and Magog dash themselves to pieces against Israel?
And when the eighth of Daniel comes to pass, and the Great
Horn is broken and the Little Horn stamps upon the host of
heaven?”
“Oi count it won’t be just yet,” he said uneasily.
“You count wrong. To my reckoning the two thousand three
hundred days of Daniel are nigh up. In the great day of Isaiah
four, when the Tabernacle rises again with the cloud and smoke
and the flaming fire, the people of God shall rise too from their
graves while the others sleep.”
“Then you can wake me up, dear heart,” he said, “bein’ as
you’re sure to be up.”
She shook her head. “You were always up first, sweetheart,
but that day you’ll sleep on and I’ll have no power to rouse
you—unless, says Isaiah, you ‘look unto me and be saved.’
‘Dust to dust’—that shows we’re not immortal by nature.”
“But ef it’s comin’ so soon, Oi shan’t be in my grave at all,” he
urged anxiously, “and Oi can push into the Tabernacle.”
“No more easy than for wasps to push into the hive. You’ve
seen the bees push ’em back.”
“But one or two does get in and Oi reckon Oi’ll take hold o’
your skirt, same as you been readin’ me.”
“I read you there’ll be ten men to take hold of it,” she said.
“Nine other men!” he cried angrily. “But they won’t have
no right to take hold o’ my wife’s skirt.”
“That’s what Zechariah says—‘ten men of all languages.’ ”
Caleb’s gloom relaxed. “He was thinkin’ o’ Che’msford and
sech-like great places full o’ furriners,” he said decisively. “Here
there’s onny Master Peartree, and the shepherd ain’t a Goloiath.
Oi’ll soon get riddy o’ him, happen he don’t hook hisself to you
with his crook.”
“But I’ll pull in Will too,” said Martha.
But Jinny did not appear on Friday with the musical instrument.
Only the unexpected arrived—in the shape of Bundock.
That royal messenger was visibly hipped as he delivered the
letter to Will.
“A woman’s writing!” he observed reproachfully. “That
means dragging me here time and again!”
But Will had broken open the high-class adhesive envelope
and was already absorbed in the letter.
“Sir,—Mr. Quarles thanks Mr. William Flynt for his
esteemed order, but regrets to inform him that a coach-horn of
suitable size for a man is not to be had in Chipstone. They
have not even got a little hunting-horn like mine. I will,
however, superscribe to Chelmsford and get you one without
fail. Trusting for your further patronage,
“Yours truly,
“Daniel Quarles.
“N.B.—All orders carried out—or in—with punctuality and
dispatch. Goods sent off without fail to any part of Europe,
America, and Australia.
“P.S.—Please inform your hond. parents that as she
brought q.f. of groceries that Tuesday I shall not call again till
I deliver your instrument.”
So Jinny had got in first in the pen-fight! And her letter
bowled him over, not only by its bland assumption that she was
already established as his carrier, but by the fluency and scholarship
of its style, with its incomprehensible “superscribe” and
“q.f.” He felt baffled too and even snubbed by the signature,
which gave her a businesslike remoteness, and even a legitimate
status as a mere representative of the masculine, besides making
him feel he had lost a chance by not sending off one of his many
scrawls to the address of this same “Daniel Quarles.” His
answer would now require the profoundest excogitation, he felt,
as he adjusted her missive between the bank-notes and the glove.
There was, moreover, the material problem of vying with this
real and fashionable correspondence paper. Ultimately he became
conscious that Bundock was still standing at attention.
“Do you want anything?” he asked tartly.
“I’m waiting for the answer,” said Bundock nobly, “or you
won’t catch a post till to-morrow night unless you trudge to
Long Bradmarsh.”
“Oh, there’s no answer—none at all! Thank you all the
same.”
“Thank you!” said Bundock. “It’s not often folks consider
me nowadays—especially when there’s a woman in the case.
They just go on shuttlecocking letters till my feet are sore.”
“But it isn’t a woman!” said Will stiffly. “It’s just a
business letter from Gaffer Quarles.” And he pulled it out, and
the little glove fell out with it: which did not lessen his
annoyance.
“Daniel Quarles never put his fist to a pen this ten year,”
asserted Bundock. “He was glad to be done with writing, says
my father, for Daniel was never brought up to be a carrier, his
parents never dreaming he’d inherit the business.”
“Why not, isn’t he the eldest?”
“The contrairy. Blackwater Hall and the bit of land is one
of those queer properties that go to the youngest, if you die
without a will.”
“The youngest?”
“Ay, and that’s what Daniel was. Borough English, ’tis
called by scholars,” said Bundock impressively. “However, he
picked up a little from his brother Sidrach, who had already set
up as a carrier on his own account round about Harwich, and a
pretty business he did, old Sidrach, says my father, before he
was discovered to be an owler and had to fly to America.”
“Were they so persecuted?” murmured Will.
“And didn’t they deserve it—smuggling our good English
wool into France! Pack-horses they loaded with it, the rascals.”
“Oh, I thought they were a sect!”
Bundock laughed. “That’s with an aitch; though I dare say
many a man owled all the week and howled on Sunday—he,
he, he! Do you know—between you and I—who it is writes
the hymns?”
“The village idiot!” answered Will smartly. “You told me
so when I was a boy,” he added, seeing the postman’s disconcerted
expression.
Bundock brightened up. “Ah, I thought ’twas too clever for
you. But as for this letter o’ yours, it’s clearly a woman’s
handwriting, and if Jinny once begins writing to her customers,
it’s a bad look-out for me.”
Bundock might well feel a grievance, for this was the first
letter Jinny had ever written to a client, indeed to anybody with
the exception of old Commander Dap, who, clinging to the
friendship struck up at his wife’s funeral, sent her birthday
presents and the gossip of the Watch Vessel. To him she had
written as her heart and her illiteracy prompted, but the elegant
epistle received by Will Flynt was not achieved without considerable
pains. She had the advantage, however, of not being
limited to the Bible for her vocabulary, possessing as she did an
almost modern guide in the shape of an olla podrida of a Spelling-Book,
whose first edition dated no further back than 1755, the
year of the Lisbon Earthquake. “The Universal Spelling-Book”
had originally belonged to the “owler,” and it was from the
almost limitless resources of this quaint reservoir that, with a
pardonable desire not to be outshone by her much-travelled
neighbour, she culled both the “superscribe” defined as “to
write over” and the q.f. (given in the “List of Abbreviations”
as standing for the Latin of “a sufficient quantity”), except
that she misread the long “s” for an “f.” The immaculate
spelling was, however, no mean feat, for the book’s vocabulary
was very incomplete and devoid of order, so that she had almost
as much steeplechasing to do as her rival letter-writer. Moreover,
she must fain study whole columns of traps for the unwary,
where the terms of her own occupation appeared with disconcerting
frequency. If there was not in the letter any necessity for
distinguishing between “glutinous” and “gluttonous,” “rheum”
and “Rome,” or any risk of confusing a “widow” with a “relic,”
still “seller,” “fare,” “due”—any of which she might have needed—all
had their dangerous doubles, and she did not write “call”
without carefully discriminating it from “Cawl, of a Wig or
Bowels.” “Punctuality and dispatch” was lifted bodily from
Miss Gentry’s billheads, and if she did not offer to send off goods
to Asia and Africa, it was because only “Europe, America, and
Australia” figured on Mr. Flippance’s posters.
The recipient of this impressive communication was staggered
by the strides in female education made since his boyhood. He
betook himself at once—to his mother’s joy—to the Bible, like
a Cromwell before a great battle. Martha had stolen the book
back to the kitchen and was pondering texts anxiously when he
wandered in to hunt for it.
“Who sent you a letter?” she inquired uneasily.
“Old Quarles,” he answered readily. “It’s about an order he
can’t supply, and he asks me to tell you his granddaughter won’t
be coming to-day.”
Martha’s face lit up. “What a pity!” she cried. “She
might have taken my bonnet to Miss Gentry to be re-trimmed.”
Martha had become reconciled to this minor vanity, now it was
strategically unnecessary. “However, your young legs can do
that, dearie, now they’re back, can’t they?”
“With pleasure, mother,” he said, all unconscious of the lapsed
plan. “Why waste money on carriers?”
She kissed him passionately, but seeing his anxiety to be at
the Bible, she released him.
“I should look at Revelation, one, ten, Willie,” she advised,
“and you’ll understand why the Sabbath——”
“Yes, yes,” he interrupted soothingly.
“Also Colossians, two, sixteen and seventeen—the seventh
day is but a shadow of things to come.”
“I see,” he said, escaping.
It took hours of hard theological study—indeed till Saturday
morning—before the reply to Jinny shaped itself:
“Sir,—Mr. William Flynt thanks Mr. Daniel Quarles for
his esteemed epistle, and regrets to learn that a coach-horn of
suitable size for a gentelman is not to be had in Chipstone. I
beseech you, however, not to superscribe to Chelmsford as
Methuselah cannot fetch such a compass, and the righteous
man regardeth his beast. Neither do I require a horn at her
hand now or henceforwards.
“Yours truly,
“William Flynt.
“P.S.—Do you think that a maiden of your years aught to
superscribe alone to Chelmsford, a city full of lewdness and
abominations, where men use deceit with their tongues and
the poison of asps is under their lips?”
“What are you writing, Will?” said his mother, coming in
to sun herself in his holy studies.
“Nothing.” He put his hand over the page of the copy-book,
forgetting she could not read it.
“Are you writing to Jinny?” she inquired suspiciously.
“No, no—-it’s Daniel,” he corrected.
“Daniel!” she said in amaze. “About the Sabbath?”
“No, about the horn,” he blurted out petulantly.
“The Horn!” She was wildly excited. “Is it the Little
Horn or the Great Horn?”
He was amazed. “Well it began with the little horn——”
Martha was radiant. She poured forth her own theory of the
Beast in Daniel, and emboldened by his silent agreement—when
his daze changed into comprehension of her misunderstanding—she
proceeded to elaborate her interpretation of the two thousand
three hundred days of sacrifice. He, meantime, was finally deciding
to turn “Daniel” into “Miss” except in the address.
But Will’s letter could not be posted—for many reasons. He
possessed neither an envelope to vie with Jinny’s, nor one that
was closed with outside devices, nor any sealing-wax to make
his letter its own envelope; he could only fold it into a cocked-hat
and deliver it himself. Apart from these material reasons,
he could not well let Bundock carry an answer, when he had
denied there would be any, and he shrank from conducting his
affairs under that official inquisition: moreover, haste was
imperative if he was to save the girl from that difficult and
dangerous journey, for “superscribe” conveyed to him a sense
of precipitation, and he saw her cart almost stampeding to
Chelmsford. At any moment she might set out in quest of the
Great Horn. That was why he abandoned the idea of toiling to
Chipstone to emulate her refined writing materials. He must
hie to Blackwater Hall that very afternoon and play postman.
He would not, of course, enter the house, but would find a way
of slipping the letter in.
The surreptitious deed he meditated gave him almost a
skulking air as he neared the Common, and he shrank from the
observation of all he met, though with the exception of Uncle
Lilliwhyte in a corduroy sleeved waistcoat, driving cows with
a weed-hook, and an old crone who stopped and muttered
with twisted head, he saw only frightened partridges whirring
above or rabbits and field-mice scurrying at his feet. Near
Blackwater Hall he encountered two of Jinny’s milch-goats
tethered, pasturing on the hedgerows, and their bleat had a
cynical ring. The Common itself seemed almost to meet the
sky, for clouds had gathered as suddenly as the crowd by the
Silverlane Pump. He was feeling dispirited as he stole towards
the house, but as he caught sight of the stables and barn at the
rear, it seemed a happy idea to plant his note in some obtrusive
coign. His heart beat like a raw burglar’s as he stood surveying
from afar the primitive sheds whose roofs were thatch, whose
gates palings, whose sides faggots, and in one of which he could
see Methusalem’s head in a trough of oats. The stable-shed
would be the surest place, he thought, or perhaps he could pin
the note on to the harness he saw hanging in an adjoining shed
from nails in the beams. Coming nearer to peer at Methusalem’s
manger, he was startled by the sight of a brown smock-frocked
figure crouched on the littered, dungy floor and belatedly brushing
Methusalem’s fetlocks. Before he could escape he saw the
wizened, snow-bearded, horn-spectacled face turned up at him,
and heard himself recognized in a weakened but unmistakable
voice.
“Why, bless my soul! Ef that bain’t little Willie Flynt!”
Daniel Quarles rose and straightened himself to his full height,
but nothing in Little Bradmarsh had seemed to Will so pitifully
shrunken. “Little” Willie Flynt indeed towered over the
patriarch who had once seemed Herculean to him. Yet if the
robustiousness that the old carrier had preserved in his eighties
had vanished at last, there was still fire in his eye and a fang or
two in his mouth.
“Hope you are well, Mr. Quarles,” said Will, recovering from
the double shock of discovering and being discovered.
“No, you don’t, my lad,” piped the Gaffer. “Did, you’d a
come sooner, seein’ as Time is gettin’ away from me.”
“Did Jin—did your granddaughter tell you I was back?”
“She ain’t scarcely told me nawthen else.”
Will’s cheeks burned.
“You ain’t come back improved, says she.”
Will’s flush grew redder.
“But Oi don’t agree with her—you’ve growed like a prize
marrow. Come into the house and she shall make you a dish
o’ tay—Oi don’t drink it myself, bein’ as Oi promised John
Wesley.”
“No, thank you—I’d rather talk where we are.”
“Well, Oi can’t inwoite you in here—’tis too mucky.” He
gave Methusalem’s tail a final flick with the brush. “And it’s
blowin’ up for rine. We’ll goo into the barn.” And he led the
way imperiously round by a great and ramifying apple-tree that
hid a little black door secured by a padlock and infinite knots of
string.
“One has to be witty,” he commented, patiently undoing the
complications, “with so many thieves about to steal my dole
hay.”
Will had not heard of these thieves, and thought Little
Bradmarsh must be changed indeed, but he waited silently,
wondering what to do with his note. And as he stood thus,
there came from the cottage the sound of a girl’s singing.
Fortunately it was not satirical, so Will could hear it with
pleasure:
“Of all the horses in the merry greenwood
 The bob-tailed mare bears the bells away.”
“Always jolly, my little mavis,” said the patriarch,
fumbling on, and, unable to resist the infection, his sepulchral
bass voice took up the Carters’ Chorus:
“There is Hey, there is Ree,
 There is Hoo, there is Gee——”
“Oi wouldn’t unlock the barn,” he broke off to explain as the
door swung open, “ef Oi hadn’t such good company.” He stood
peering suspiciously into the tall raftered and beamed glooms;
redolent of old hay and punctuated with a few cobwebbed and
rusty instruments amid the endless litter. Will’s eye was
fascinated by an old wine-barrel flanked by a chaff-cutter and a
turnip-cutter and covered with boards and weights. He divined
it held corn and was thus closed against rats, and a whiff of
aniseed came up in memory, and in a flash he saw the faces of
Tony Flip and the Deacon—and himself flying after a carrier’s
cart.
“They’ve stole my flail,” cried the Gaffer.
“Why, there it is, under that straw,” said Will.
“Oh, ay. But there was more logs, Oi’ll goo bail. Drat ’em,
can’t they chop for theirselves? It’ll be that Uncle Lilliwhyte.”
“Oh, but he’s only too honest,” said Will incautiously.
“There ain’t nobody honest,” barked the Gaffer.
“But he sent me an adder——” he began.
“Not he. ’Twas Jinny told him to send the adder. He’d ha’
kept your sixpence and let you whistle for your sarpint. But
next time you want an adder, you come to me.”
“Do you sell ’em too?” he murmured, surprised.
“Oi be an adder!”
“What do you mean?”
His spectacles glowed strangely. “Read your Bible, young
man—Dan is an adder in the path, what biteth the horse’s heels,
so that the rider should fall backwards—that’s the blessing of
Jacob—and let no man try to ride roughshod over the likes
o’ me.”
Will shrank back before the passion of his words. Indeed in
that gloomy old barn he began to feel a bit nervous.
“I’ve brought a note for Jinny,” he said hastily. “Will you
give it to her?”
The old man took the cocked-hat. “Mr. Daniel Quarles!” he
read slowly. “But it’s for me!”
Will’s blush was now papaverous. “No—no!” he stammered.
It was a conjuncture he had not foreseen.
The fire in the old eye leapt up at the contradiction, shot
through the spectacles. “Plain as a pikestaff—Mr. Daniel
Quarles! And then you has the imperence to say there ain’t no
thieves. But ye can’t bamboozle me. Oi could read afore you
could woipe your nose with a muckinger, ay, and my feyther
afore me. Carriers ha’ we been for over a hundred year, and my
big brother Sidrach he had his own pack-horses loaded up with
waluable stuff and writ me a piece ten year ago come haysel,
sayin’ as he hoped Oi should jarney to see him, and please God
Oi will, he gittin’ old.”
“But where is he?” asked Will, glad that the Gaffer’s monologue
had drifted from its angry beginning.
“In Babylon!”
“Babylon?” gasped Will, whose recent theological excursions
had made him almost at home in that purpureal city.
“That’s my nickname for Che’msford, chuck-full o’ lewdness
and Church-folk. But Oi’ve been meanin’ to goo and look
Sidrach up and hear all about his travels, he bein’ a rare one for
adwentures, but somehow what with my carryin’ work and one
thing and the tother my days fly by—like the Book says—swifter
than a weaver’s shuttle. Happen lucky, though, Oi’ll
git over there to-year.”
“I hope so,” murmured Will vaguely.
“No you don’t, drat you!” said the veteran with sudden
viciousness. “Tain’t your care whether Oi ever clap eyes on
my beloved brother agen. A ’nation cowld day it was he had
to goo away—the Brad all ice and they should be tellin’ of the
Che’msford coach as come in without the driver, and he fallen
down on the road, frozen stiff as a sparrow.”
“What year was that?” asked Will, to keep the conversation
on this more agreeable level.
“It was the year my brother Sidrach went away,” said Daniel
Quarles simply. “ ’Nation cowld. We heerd that in Lunnon
the river was as froze as ourn, and flue-full o’ sports—booths
and turnabouts and pigs roasted whole, and great crowds to see
a young bear baited. But feyther’s cart went to and fro Chipstone
just the same, and brought the news as how a woman was
burned at Newgate for coinin’—it dedn’t seem wery dreadful in
that weather. Waterloo year that was another cowld winter—all
the marsh ditches was solid ice, and all the eels was found
dead and frozen. Couldn’t eat ’em neither, not after the first
day, they stank so. That numb was my fingers Oi could scarce
howld the reins, and you’d ha’ thought by my breath Oi was a
wicked smoker. But ’twas wunnerful times, and we heaped up
a deadly great pile o’ fagots and bushes for the beacon, top o’
yonder rise where ye see Beacon Hill Farm.”
“Ah, the bonfire to celebrate the victory!” said Will, rejoiced
to find irascibility cooled into reminiscence.
“Wictory! That was the name o’ Nelson’s ship as that silly
old Dap should say he sarved in. Nay, this was but a bonfire
to be lit when Bony landed. All along Blackwater we was
ready for the inwasion, and when the beacon was fired, that was
to be the signal. The soldiers was to goo to the coast and the
ciwilians inland. But Bony never come, and ’twas a great
waste. And Sidrach never come neither. ’Nation cowld the
day he went away—Oi moind me gooin’ through a foot o’ snow
across Chipstone poor-piece to the Church to see the Knight
Templar what was dug up in the north aisle, pickled inside three
coffins, but they’d put him back in the outer lead time Oi
arrived. They should say it was a sort o’ mushroom ketchup as
kept him together for the Resurrection Day—a bit blackish, but
wellnigh as sound and good-lookin’ as you.”
It was a compliment that made the young man shudder again.
“Ah, there is the rain!” he exclaimed, with relief at the hearty
patter on the apple-tree.
But the old man would not be fobbed off so enjoyable a topic.
“Three coffins—lead, ellum, and a shell—’twas a witty way agin
them body-snatchers—you ain’t safe agin thieves even in your
tomb. And when you’re above ground they tries to steal your
wery letters.” He pulled open the note.
“It’s merely addressed to you as head of the business,” Will
explained.
“Ay, that Oi be, though the youngest. He that is last shall
be fust, says the Book, ay, and the Law too, though ’twasn’t
fair to Sidrach to my thinkin’, bein’ agin nature. And next
time a letter comes for me, do ye don’t bring it and play your
tricks, but let it come natural through Bundock’s grandson.
What’s this? ‘Mr. William Flynt thanks Miss Quarles for her
esteemed epistle.’ And who is Miss Quarles, and what’s she been
writin’ to you?”
“About—about business,” said Will.
“There ain’t no Miss Quarles in the business,” said the old
man testily. “That be my business, and Oi lets Jinny amuse
herself jauntin’ to and fro, pore gal, she bein’ that lonely on the
Common and afeared o’ dangerous charriters. Rare mistakes,
she makes, bein’ onny a gal, and costs me a pritty penny. But
it ’ud cost me more ef Oi dedn’t stop at home and guard the
house from thieves. And now she wastes more o’ my hard-earned
dubs writin’ to you as is a neighbour—drat the child,
ain’t that got a tongue? ‘A suitable horn?’ Dash my
buttons! What do you be wantin’ with a horn—you bain’t a
guard or a postman, be you?”
“No, but——!” he stammered. The explanation was not
simple.
“ ‘Oi beseech you, however, not to superscroibe to Che’msford’
. . . ‘the righteous man regardeth his beast.’ Dang your
imperence! Why shouldn’t Oi goo to Che’msford? Oi ain’t
seen him these sixty year, and do ye don’t come interferin’ ’twixt
brothers. Sidrach writ me a piece ten years agoo come haysel,
arxin’ me to superscroibe to Che’msford, and Oi’ll not be put off
by the likes o’ you. You look here, my lad, ef you’re come
home to meddle or make, the sooner you goos furrin agen, the
better.”
“But it’s not you—it’s Miss Quarles I don’t like journeying to
Chelmsford. Look at the P.S.”
It was imprudent counsel, for, as the Gaffer followed it, his
face became a black cloud, the fire in his eye was lightning, the
odd fangs in his mouth showed like tigers’ tusks, and his beard
seemed like a tempestuous besom sweeping all before it.
“ ‘Lewdness and abominations.’ You call my Jinny a
Jezebel! Git out o’ my house!”
“I’m only in your barn,” Will reminded him, “and it’s
raining, and you just said yourself that Chelmsford is a Babylon
chock-full of abominations. And you’d let a young girl superscribe
there all alone!”
“Jinny shall superscroibe where she pleases!” roared the
Gaffer. “For over a hundred year the Quarleses have superscroibed
in foul weather or foine, with none to say ’em nay, and
it ain’t for a looker’s son to come here dictatin’.”
“I didn’t dictate,” said Will, with a fleeting schoolboy memory.
“I wrote it with my own hand. Look here, Mr. Quarles,” he
went on, trying another tack, “you’re a sensible old gent with
great experience of the world, and it makes me frightened to see
that grandchild of yours gadding about so far from home, and
sometimes not getting back here till dark.”
“That ain’t timorsome—onny when she’s alone here,” he
added cunningly.
“Maybe, but with such a pretty girl——!”
“Ay, she’s like a little bird with her little fitten—and allus
singin’ like one too—all the day that goos about singin’, ‘Fol
de rol——’ ”
“Yes, yes,” said Will, wincing.
“And Oi’d best tear up your letter—she don’t want to read
about lewdness and abomination except in the Howly Book. And
Oi count she has enough o’ that on Sunday with you Peculiars.”
“It is better she should read about it than scutter about seeing
it. A cart ain’t a suitable place for a girl.”
“A cart’s as suitable for Jinny as a horn for you,” retorted
the old man, bridling up again. “Oi suspicion you’re plottin’ to
steal her away from me.”
“What!” Will’s cheeks burned with indignation.
“And Oi count you’ve got your eye on the cart too, like you
bolted off to Harwich with your feyther’s wagon. There won’t
be naught left for me but the poorhouse. But Oi’d die sooner.”
He was almost blubbering now with self-pity.
“Oi saved a mort o’ money once,” he said, “though it took a
deadly time scrapin’ the dubs together, what with the expense o’
dinner at “The Black Sheep” and the hoss’s feed—fower parcels
or fowerty, Oi never stinted him o’ his peck o’ chaff, and three
and a half pound o’ oats and the same o’ ground beans, and
there’s folks as grumble to pay accordin’ to the soize and compass
o’ the parcel, though there’s nights your hoss goos so lame and
you’re that pierced with wind and snow you got to knock up a
farm and borry a hoss to git home with, and them days it was
the barges took away custom. Old Bidlake used to goo along
canals and cricks as ain’t there no longer, thank the Lord, bein’
as they sea-walls have made a many willages high and droy.
But Oi had to pay all my savin’s away to keep our name from
disgrace, so as Emma should howd up her head in Kingdom Come.
He hadn’t the bed he died in, for all his traipsin’ around in
Tommy Devils; but time Oi went down to git Jinny, Oi made
inquirations among the tradespeople and paid ’em to the last
farden, aldoe soon as my back was turned, my own sister plots
with her one-eyed little ship’s monkey to pay for a stone, as ef
Oi’d neglected my own darter, and all spiled with wicked words—did
you ever see such words in a Christian churchyard?”
“No, of course not,” soothingly murmured Will, to whom the
long rigmarole conveyed nothing except: a sense of pathetic and
loquacious senility.
“Ha!” said the Gaffer with satisfaction. “Oi says to Dap,
says Oi, ‘A Churchman like you may not see the blarsphemy, but
think what John Wesley would ha’ said to it.’ ‘Sir,’ Oi says to
the old gentleman, ‘you jump into my cart,’ says Oi, ‘and not
a sowl here shall harm a hair o’ your wig’; and with that Oi
wheeled round my whip, and bein’ then an able-bodied young
man (’twas the wery fust year arter feyther died), them as was
throwin’ stones and cryin’ ‘Knock his brines out’ slunk away
like blackbeadles, which was a pity, seein’ as they missed the
be-yutiful words he preached from my cart. From Chipstone to
Che’msford Oi carried him—a dogged piece out o’ my way, bein’
as he wanted to preach there and his own hoss had gone lame—’twas
the wile o’ that great old murderer, Satan, says he, but
the Almoighty sent you to confound his knavish tricks. That
was a man of God, my lad, never out of heart, roighteous and
bold as a lion, would preach even in front of a gin-shop where
’twas writ up: ‘Drunk a penny, dead-drunk twopence, clean
straw for nawthen.’ Pounded glass mixed with mud the sons
of Bellal threw in his face, but his eye-soight was not dimmed,
nor his nat’ral force abated. Used to preach as much as foive
times a day, gittin’ up at fower o’ the clock, and travellin’ a
bigger round than me, but wunnerful healthy, slept like a baby
in my cart, and that saintly he said all his life he’d never done
naught as ’ud bear lookin’ at. He made me sing a hume with
him and we was singin’ it as we come into Babylon:
Oi the chief of sinners am,
But Jesus died for me.”
As the sepulchral bass quavered out the tune, Jinny’s fresh
voice could be heard from the back door calling “Gran’fer!
Gran’fer! Where are you?”
“She thinks Oi’m out in the rine,” chuckled the old man, “but
let her come and find me. His blessin’ he gave me at partin’,
did John Wesley, and do ye don’t never smoke nor drink that
pison stuff, tay, says he. ‘Oi’ll promise ye tay and gin too,’ says
Oi, bein’ as Oi liked beer best. ‘But to give up baccy, that’s
main hard,’ Oi says. ‘There’s harder,’ says he, lightning-like.
‘Promise me as ye won’t be friends with a woman as is younger
than your wife, for there’s unhowly sperrits about,’ says he, ‘as
brings gales and earthquakes and tempitations, and the best o’
men may git capsoized same as the Royal George, our best ship,
t’other year.’ Lord, that fair capsoized me, for how could this
furrin ole gen’leman in his eighties know about Annie, as wasn’t
seventeen yet for all her wunnerful fine buzzom, and the missus
older than me, in looks Oi mean, bein’ as she was two years
younger the fust time that worritin’ census paper come along.”
“When was that?”
“That would be the year Oi put new thatch on this wery
barn for the new century.”
“And what year did you meet John Wesley?”
“Ye’d best git Jinny to work that out. But it couldn’t be
many year afore the Jew Mendoza boxed Dick Humphreys for
the Championship, for Oi wouldn’t goo, ne yet bet on it, bein’ as
my sowl was saved, and when Oi lifted up my woice at the
camp-meetin’s and chapels in praise and repentance and shouted
‘Glory! Glory!’ dancin’-like, with the tears for my sins
runnin’ down my cheeks, that was more joy to me than Annie
and the prize-ring and cock-foightin’ rolled into one. And Oi
ain’t never backslided, praise the Lord, bein’ as Annie married a
sedan-chair man and was hiked away to Cowchester, and Oi hope
for your immortal sowl’s sake, my lad, you bain’t like what Oi
was at your age.”
“I hope so,” said Will, not without uneasiness.
The patriarch shook his head. “There’s the old Adam in you,
plain to discern. Ye won’t be safe till ye’re married. But do
ye don’t marry an old gander of a widow like that potboy they
should be tellin’ of,”—he began to cackle—“that’ll onny lead to
wuss mischief. Wait till you happen on a clean little lass, rosy
and untapped.”
“A girl like your granddaughter, you mean?” Will heard
himself saying.
The cackle ceased abruptly and the grin was replaced by a
glare. “That ain’t gooin’ to be married! That’s got to goo
out with my cart, whenever Oi’m too busy workin’. Ef a rich
man like Farmer Gale as drives her to chapel Sundays should be
wantin’ her all the week, Oi don’t say Oi wouldn’t goo with her
to the big house, but that ain’t likely, and she can’t have nawthen
to say to a rollin’ stone as mebbe left a pack o’ wives among
they Mormons.”
Will was nettled. “And who asked for your granddaughter?”
he retorted. “Besides, you’re quite right. I married dozens of
wives in America—all widows too!”
The veteran chuckled afresh. “Dash my buttons! How you
do mind me o’ your feyther when he was your age—always had
his little joke. Not that Oi count him growed up yet, he havin’
never cut his wisdom teeth, but gooin’ off as skittish as a colt
arter peculiar doctrines and seducin’ sperrits.”
“Oh, there you are, Gran’fer!” And pat as to a cue a most
“seducin’ sperrit” flashed, like a shaft of sunshine, through
the half-open door into the gloomy old barn. But she was
aproned and bare-armed to the elbow, and rain-spotted, and a
ringlet of hair was blown almost across her mouth, and the
instant she perceived Will, she drew back in confusion, patting
her hair tidy.
“Sorry, Gran’fer. I didn’t know you had visitors.”
But Will, to whom the sense she conveyed of brooms and
dusters was sweetly reassuring of a still unsubmerged femininity,
cried out as hastily:
“No, I was just going. You’ll get drowned.”
And he tried to pass her.
But the old man dramatically extended the uncocked hat.
“Howd hard, sonny.”
Will, disconcerted, found his feet sticking to the floor.
“He’s writ me a letter, imperent little Willie, and brought it
hisself.” Then a flash of amusement toned down the asperity.
“Aldoe he had his tongue with him!” And the old man
chuckled.
“Shall I read it?” murmured Jinny, putting forth her hand.
“Nay, nay!” He snatched the note back and tore it into
careful pieces. “Ain’t fit to be seen.”
“No more am I,” said Jinny with an uneasy laugh, and again
she essayed to escape.
“Stop!” commanded the ancient, kindled afresh. “Willie’s
got to tell you what’s in they scraps.”
Will was silent.
“Don’t stand gawmin’. Out with the abomination.”
But no sound issued from the young man’s lips. It was not
merely that this new housemaidenly figure seemed safe enough
even in Chelmsford, wrapped in its own sweet domesticity, and
that adjurations designed for the minx bade fair to blunt themselves
against this sober angelhood; but that the girl’s radiance
against the littered gloom within and the rainfall without, robbed
him literally of breath.
“Speak out, Willie!” said the Gaffer, softened to contempt
by his obvious confusion.
“Perhaps he hasn’t brought his tongue,” suggested Jinny,
recovering herself.
“Then Oi’ll lend him mine. You ain’t to goo to Che’msford,
he says.”
“But I don’t want to go to Chelmsford, Gran’fer. Why
should I go to Chelmsford?”
“To get his horn, you baggage. And he don’t be wantin’ it.”
“Oh, but he ordered it—it’s too late now.”
“Ay,” said Daniel Quarles, “and goo you shall to git it ef
the adder has to bite Methusalem’s heels.”
“But I don’t have to go to Chelmsford for it!”
“You said you’d go to Chelmsford,” burst out Will at last.
“Nothing of the sort.”
“But I’ve got your letter!” He pulled it out, and again
that awkward glove fell out. “Ah, there’s your glove I’ve
found on the road,” he said, crimsoning furiously.
“Thank you!” She took both letter and glove placidly.
“Now I shall have two pairs! But where do I say anything
about going to Chelmsford?”
Thus invited, he came and looked down at the paper she held,
and gripped an end of it himself, very conscious of her near
fingers, and her bared arm, and her bending head. He was
about to cry: “Why, there!” when a horrible doubt lest “superscribe”
did not mean dashing away, or stampeding, or scurrying,
or driving, or even going, checked the exclamation.
“I must ha’ misread it,” he said. “I beg your pardon.”
“Spoken like a Christian!” said the Gaffer. “And Oi count
John Wesley ’ud a said let bygones be bygones. Sow bring out
the beer, Jinny.”
“Thank you—I’m afraid I can’t stay,” said Will. He had a
sullen sense of defeat, which the loss of the glove seemed to
accentuate and symbolize. “My folks’ll expect me home to
tea.”
“Your Mormon wives? Ay, Jinny, you may well blush,”
the Gaffer chuckled. “Willie’s been and married a pack o’
widows in America.”
“And left them there!” said Will, permitting himself a faint
smile.
“Left all those widows!” laughed Jinny. “How deadly dead
you must be!”
But despite the merriment in which the episode had so unexpectedly
ended, and despite the rain which had now grown
torrential, he tore himself obstinately away, even refusing the
“umberella” which the old man suggested and Jinny offered
to fetch; though as he stepped under the plashing apple-boughs,
he felt himself doubly foolish to refuse what would have been a
literal handle for a return visit. And now that he had caught
a glimpse of what he told himself was the real Jinny, not the
Tuesday and Friday swashbuckler, but the Saturday-cleaning-up-for-Sunday
house-angel, he did not despair of inducing her to
shed these husks of bravado. But he had said “no,” and “no”
to his great annoyance it must be.
“When do you propose to superscribe?” he asked with crafty
lightness, as he raised his hat.
“Oh, but I have superscribed,” said Jinny. “But of course
if it doesn’t come soon, I shall write over to Chelmsford again.”
The first Sunday of Will’s home-coming, nothing had been said
about chapel. That, his elders thought, might be still a sore
subject with the boy whose resentment at sacrificing his buttons
on the altar had driven him “furrin.” Still more delicate was
the theological position into which the couple themselves had
gradually drifted, and of which they now—before a spectator
and critic—grew uneasily conscious. Martha’s Ecclesia in Long
Bradmarsh having collapsed almost as soon as she had been
converted to it, she had no meeting-house to go to, and, almost
simultaneously, Caleb, whose farm-wagons had recently been
shifted to the new “looker’s” headquarters, ceased to attend
his Chipstone Chapel. This was partly to keep his wife company
of a Sunday, partly because so many miles there and back was
getting too much for his legs. In consequence the pair had
arrived by compromise at a Sunday ritual of their own, a sort of
Peculiar Christadelphianism, and Uncle Lilliwhyte, who never
entered any of the many houses of God—it was popularly
supposed he would not or could not remove his gay-stringed
beaver—would often loiter outside Frog Farm in Church hours,
listening to their loudly trolled and hybrid hymnology in a sort
of pious eavesdropping. That was Uncle Lilliwhyte’s individual
contribution to the chaos of creeds that reigned in Bradmarsh.
But even this minimum of religion was denied the honest snake-seller
when Will returned. The first Sunday, Caleb and Martha
held their services furtively in their hermetically sealed bedroom,
hardly daring to hum what they had so lustily intoned: by a
common instinct they shrank from obtruding their departure
from that straitness of doctrine in which Will had been reared.
They were indeed secretly relieved that he made no reference to
religion, nor seemed to expect them to go to the old chapel, nor
even noted the Sundayness of the dishes that Martha served
up with the same careful everyday air with which Caleb consumed
them. They were equally relieved, however, that he
did not go out rabbiting on the holy day with his new pet
ferrets. “Oi’ve known some as dedn’t consider that work,”
said Caleb, as they discussed this dread possibility. “But to
my thinkin’, if ye goo out with a spade, ye might as well be
ploughin’.”
That was what they said in bed on the first Saturday night.
Very different was their conversation on the eve of the next
Sunday. The problems all came now from Will’s over-interest
in religion. True, the Sabbatarian peril had not yet materialized:
he had neither worn his best clothes on the Saturday nor demanded
priority in the Sabbath dishes. But he had dropped
more than one perturbing remark. Old Quarles, he supposed,
was now too old to worship at his Wesleyan Chapel in Long
Bradmarsh, to which Caleb had replied naïvely: “Ay, he sleeps
at home Sunday mornings.” Presumably, then, Jinny would not
leave the old man alone on Sunday as well as on Tuesday and
Friday: to which Caleb had answered cautiously—and without
admitting that his observations were not up to date—that
doubtless Jinny could only worship occasionally with the Peculiars
and it depended on her getting a lift, Methusalem being a strict
Sunday observer. Yes, he had heard Farmer Gale sometimes
gave her a lift—who had told Willie? he wondered—but he
supposed it was because the farmer, like her grandfather, was a
Wesleyan. Later, Will had remarked casually to his mother
that he didn’t suppose Miss Quarles would be able to get to
chapel on the morrow, as he had happened on her old grandfather,
who seemed quite breaking up. Martha, murmuring
sympathetically that Mr. Quarles must be getting old, was likewise
compelled to gloss over her inacquaintance with Jinny’s
latest Sunday habits: she shocked and surprised herself by
remarking that one’s grandfather would hardly count against
Farmer Gale, and hastened to add—especially as Will seemed
shocked too—that such was Jinny’s devotion to her grandfather
that not for some years had she been able to stay longer than the
Morning Service. Rejoiced though the old woman was at Will’s
mingled concern for the religion of the young and the weal of
the old, she was a little uneasy at this personal turn of his theological
thinking, and she quickly changed the conversation to
the Great Horn and the Beast, a discussion which in her eagerness
she hardly noticed was practically a monologue.
By nightfall that Saturday Caleb had gathered, with a sinking
of the heart, that Will designed to accompany his elders on the
morrow—and to Early Service! The boy had apparently failed
to remark the breach in the old chapel routine the previous
Sabbath: the Sunday had been hushed up only too successfully.
It was as far as Caleb dared go, in the first plunge of confession, to
say that, in the absence of a vehicle, Early Service at Chipstone
was out of the question nowadays.
Such was the situation that faced the old couple in the sleepless
watches of the second Saturday night, and dimmed even Martha’s
joy in the prodigal’s return to religion.
“Best go with him, like when he was little,” she decided. “We
mustn’t unsettle him so soon, now he’s found God again.”
“Ain’t so sure he’s found God,” said Caleb shrewdly. “God
ain’t in a goose-quill, and writin’ a piece about Daniel ain’t the
road to heaven, else where would me and most o’ the Brethren
be? To my thinkin’ Will’s onny lost the Devil.”
“It’s the same thing. What else does he want to go to
chapel for, and Early Service at that?”
“To make trouble,” said Caleb fretfully. “We was all so
happy till he come—and you had Maria.”
“Oh, Caleb, you don’t deserve the Lord should give him back
to you! And if you don’t go to-morrow, I’ll withdraw from
you.”
“That ain’t right,” said poor Caleb, puzzled by the unscrupulous
threat. “But ef it’s onny for Morning Sarvice he’ll expect
you to goo too.”
“He knows about my rheumatics, dear heart,” she said
casuistically. “He knows I couldn’t walk even to get my
bonnet cleaned.”
“But ef you were to tell him about the New Jerusalem——?”
“He’d best find that himself, now he’s on the way. It’s not
far from Daniel.”
Thus it was that Uncle Lilliwhyte was again defrauded of his
ritual and that after a still more furtive and still earlier service
in the sanctity of their airless bedroom, with hymns muted and
prayers guiltily whispered, the couple appeared at an eight
o’clock breakfast with an air of devotions unpaid, and Caleb,
hurrying the meal, remarked that ’twas time to get ready for
chapel or they would miss even the Morning Service.
At this, Will, who was in his fashionable London jacket—to
the admiring awe of his elders—sprang up, and rushing to the
back of the house near the water-barrel, brushed away hastily
at a dull speck on his boot where a spurt from the boiling kettle
had blotted out the shine he had so laboriously imparted. The
male ferret, caged just above his stooping head, awoke at the
agitation, and started rubbing itself under the neck as if in
parody, but far more swiftly and persistently; then it jerked
its nose and its thin whiskers through the wires.
“Not to-day,” laughed Will, jabbing its nose with the blacking-brush.
He felt very gentlemanly and happy, for the brief rain
of the evening before had dried up, and the day was as fine as
his clothes. As Caleb came out in quest of Will, the ferret was
just snuggling back to slumber, and the old man, yawning with
the loss of his Sunday morning sleep, looked enviously at the
creature coiling itself so voluptuously in its straw.
“Lucky Jinny brought me sech a noice Sunday neckercher,”
he said, “or Oi’d ha’ been ashamed to walk with ye. Ye look
like our Member o’ Parlyment.” He himself looked, however, a
respectable figure enough in his tall hat and finely stitched and
patterned Sunday smock, his high-lows and gaiters, and it was
not till they were getting over the stile that led to the short cut
through the Green Lane that Will observed that his senior
carried, like a tramp, a bundle in his handkerchief.
“What’s that?” he inquired fretfully, becoming aware too
that the Green Lane, even at its best, offered perils to his boot-polish.
“That’s my hume-book and our dinner and tea. There’s two
packets for each on us, and we must be home for supper. Don’t,
your poor mother will be lonely.”
Will had forgotten these meals: they had, in his boyhood,
been carried decorously in the wagon. But the sunshine of the
mid-May morning did not permit ill-humours, and they strode
happily along the dappled by-ways, bounding over the shrunken
sloughs, the son uplifted even beyond boot-polish by the intoxication
of the Spring, and the father by the intoxication of the
Spirit. For, the moment Caleb had crossed the stile, the old
rapture of fellow-worship had returned, and the absence of
Martha seemed to lift the shadow of her criticism; while doubts
of his son’s regeneration could hardly survive the sight of his
springy step chapelwards.
Will was indeed living over again his childish memories of
these Sunday journeys, and, somewhat to his surprise, something
fresh and delicious seemed to emanate from them. It had after
all been a pleasant change in the weekly round, this family jaunt
with the big double-lidded provision basket, while the congregational
picnicking in the chapel had not been without its jollity.
But Caleb did not leave him long to his memories. The old
Peculiar was anxious to have a problem solved that had been
weighing upon him these two years. In the New Jerusalem,
whose descent to earth—ready-made and complete—was, according
to Martha, imminent, to the impending confusion of disbelievers,
there was to be “A street of pure gold, as it were
transparent glass.” Martha—as if to immunize him against his
visit to the old Peculiar Meeting-house—had read out the text
that very morning at their surreptitious service. And his ear
had always heard “brass” instead of “glass.” But how could
gold be brass or either transparent? He did not like to shock
her by questioning the letter of a text—his differences from her
turned merely on the relative importance and significance of
her texts as compared with those he had picked up from the
Peculiars. Yet this puzzle was perhaps what really prevented
him making the final plunge into Christadelphianism. It is
true he might have demanded her solution of it—often through
those long months of controversy as he looked at her saintly face
so quiet on the pillow beside him, it was borne in upon him that
in that bookish brain, under that frilled cotton nightcap, lay the
explanation of the holy mystery. But possibly, with the subterranean
obstinacy of the peasant, he shrank from an elucidation
which might have left him irremediably at her mercy. A vindication
of the text by Will, on the other hand, would give him time to
turn round, take his new bearings. And a young man who was
capable of composing a thesis upon the Little Horn and the
Great Horn, could surely wrestle with this mystery.
“Oi hear you writ a piece about Daniel,” he began tactfully, as
they crossed the bridge.
Will frowned. He had forgotten Martha’s misunderstanding.
“Has he been round telling you?” he asked angrily.
“Me!” Caleb stared. “Oi bain’t howly enough for wisions.”
Will was puzzled in his turn. “You mean he can’t walk so far!”
“Oi wouldn’t say that: happen he can fly if he wants to.”
“Fly!”
“Surely! A man so howly in his life—him what——”
Dead! So suddenly! Will stood still. This altered many
things. The winged image of the Gaffer faded before the picture
of a lonely Jinny. “When did he die?”
“You know that better than me,” said Caleb meekly.
At this the thought that his “epistle” had over-excited the
patriarch and stilled that aged heart, shot up, agitating the young
man. That was why relief mingled with a vague disappointment
when Caleb went on: “They lions couldn’t kill him, but Oi
reckon he had to die some time. But many of them what sleep
in the dust of the earth shall awake, he tells us, and maybe”—he
added with a flash—“they’ll wake up in that golden city.”
Will grunted a vague “Maybe.”
“Touching that there city,” said Caleb, “the gold of the street
thereof will be transparent.”
“I know,” murmured Will, suppressing a yawn.
He knew! And the contradiction did not strike him! Instantly,
as by another flash, the text solved itself in the old
man’s mind—gold in those millennial days, while it retained its
sacred splendour would also lose its gross opaqueness, becoming
rarefied, disembodied, spiritualized, so that gold was as brass
since both were like glass, making thus a harmony of light with
the jasper wall, clear as crystal, and the twelve giant pearls of
the gates.
“It’ll be a pritty sight!” he mused aloud.
“Yes, like the Crystal Palace,” sneered Will.
“You seen that?” asked Caleb eagerly.
“A man couldn’t be in London and escape seeing it,” said
Will. “Every cad drags you into his omnibus bound for Hyde
Park. Such a crowd!”
“Yes, the chimney-sweep got his pocket picked, Bundock’s
buoy-oy was a-tellin’,” said Caleb, “but the streets thereof, be
they of gold?”
“The streets of London?” said Will, smiling.
“Noa, the streets of the Crystal City?”
“No, of course not, father.”
“Then they can’t be brass neither?”
“More like grass,” Will laughed. “For there’s real trees left
standing inside.”
Caleb joined in the boy’s laugh. Though he had never really
believed that the Crystal Palace represented the Millennial City,
it was well to have the danger finally cleared away. And,
abandoning the gold-brass puzzle, his mind flew back illogically
but passionately to his Peculiar Brethren and the joy of the
awaiting ritual.
“Ah, here’s Plashy Hall!” said Will. “And the dog seems
having his Sunday nap.” He threw open the white gate marked
“No thoroughfare!”
“But that’s closed.”
“Closed!” said Will in fiery accents. “I shan’t even close
it after us.”
“I count they won’t mind you in your Parlyment coat,
but——”
“Go along, dad.” And Will pushed the old man into Plashy
Walk and strode forward like a village Hampden. Within a
minute he missed Caleb, and looking back, saw him hurrying
back from the gate.
“Must allus shut ga-aites!” he apologized with his rising
accent.
“I’ll burn it next time,” said Will. “Why, this saves us a
mile.”
“But we’ll miss the Early Sarvicers,” complained Caleb.
“You’ve forgot how they walk out to meet the Brethren, what
come footin’ it from afar, and have an extry sarvice at a half-way
house back o’ Long Bradmarsh.”
“Surely the regular services will be enough.”
“But ’tis noice to git an extry snack,” said Caleb wistfully.
“Many’s the Sunday Oi’ve had foive sarvices.” He sighed
voluptuously.
“Well, better luck next time,” said Will lightly.
The tone was not unkindly, but Caleb took it in full earnest,
and his long secret grievance against Martha began to ooze into
speech under the spell of his son’s sympathy. Her warning against
unsettling the boy was forgotten in this natural gravitation of
male to male against female fantasy.
“Yes,” he said, “I’ve allus been fast and faithful all along.
’Tis mother that’s allus gooin’ forrard. And woundily wilful—Oi
never met nobody loike her, barrin’ old Quarles. When we
married we was both Sprinklers, but scarcely had we got six
childer afore she says she must be baptoized. Wait till the
summer, says Oi, for ’twas a black Feb’ary. But no—sow
headlong is her natur’ they had to break the ice. She give a
deep soigh when the water took her—it a’most unhinged me.
But she would have it she felt sow happy and contented. She
drilled me hard to make me take the total immersion too—’nation
obstinate is mother, but Oi’ve allus stood out stubborn
for the Truth. Fast and faithful,” he repeated, as if to reassure
himself.
“Well, but you changed too!” Will reminded him less kindly.
“You weren’t born a Faith-Healer.”
“That ain’t my fault, bein’ as the truth wasn’t found out in
my young days, though they warses o’ Jeames was there all the
time. But the fust day Oi met the Brethren Oi knowed they
were the people for me. There was one on ’em among my own
labourers. When Oi said as we didn’t know ’zactly what God
was, he said, says he: ‘God’s like you and me, bein’ as He made
man in His own image.’ That was an eye-opener to me. But
the others parsecuted him and called him Brother Jerusalem as
a rewoilin’ word. He had a fork to pitch a high load—cost
foive shillin’s, fancy what a good fork that must ha’ been—and
they went and broke it. Oi was grieved, but naught grieved
him except to grieve the Lord. He dedn’t drink neither, and
you look so odd if you don’t drink. But when they wanted to
stand treat, he said he’d take bread and cheese. ‘Goo to hell,’
says they. ‘There ain’t no hell, even for you,’ he answers soft;
‘you’ll be in the same darkness as now, that’s all.’ That was
another eye-opener. Oi was taken with that hell—not bright
and burnin’, but all black and cowld—so Oi came out o’ my
darkness and jined the Brethren, and gave up beer, barrin’
harvest-time, which rejoiced mother and was money saved for
the childer. Be-yu-tiful things were brought to pass and be-yu-tiful
things were said the day Oi went to my fust sarvice,
and ef the Lord is with you to-day when you speak o’ your
experiences, Oi count be-yu-tiful things will be brought out
agen.”
Will shuddered. He stopped abruptly and was nigh turning
back. He had forgotten that the Brethren would expect his
soul-experiences and confessions—especially after this spacious
and adventurous interval.
“What’s-a-matter?” asked Caleb.
“Nothing, nothing,” he said, remembering his own power of
sullen silence. And to say something, he asked, as he walked
on: “And what’s wrong with mother now?”
“Wrong?” Caleb was shocked at this crude interpretation.
“Oi don’t be meanin’ she ain’t in her rights to hunt out new
texts, she bein’ a scholard. There was allus a bran-span-new
one, Oi mind me, the Sundays I used to goo a-courtin’ her. A
wery long way she lived—they talk broad and careless where
she comes from, not moist and proper like here—and Oi had to
git up early and goo along the sea-wall—deadly dark and lonesome
it was winter nights and mornin’s, but her face was allus
with me like the moon.”
“Why, was she pretty then?” asked Will.
“Can’t you see?” replied Caleb, with a faint surprise. “She
ain’t changed much, she havin’ allus the peace of God in her
heart.”
Will was touched and astonished by this revelation of romance
in the two elderly people foisted upon him as parents, whom he
had all his life taken as eternally elderly. But still more surprising
was the realization forced upon him that the religion which
to him was a bore was to them a thrill.
“Shall I carry the parcel, father?” he asked gently.
“Nay, nay, that don’t goo with Parlyment clothes. And it
ain’t as sizeable as the box you carried from Chipstone.” He
chuckled in freshly admiring glee.
Passing adown the long hawthorn avenue, they now issued
from Plashy Walk, the rights of leg vindicated, and soon they
began to see signs of other pilgrims faring towards Chipstone,
that great gathering-place of faiths and creeds.
SUNDAY AT CHIPSTONE
             This zealot
Is of a mongrel, diverse kind;
Cleric before, and lay behind;
   A lawless linsey-woolsey brother,
   Half of one order, half another.
Butler, “Hudibras.”
As old England has always been rich in “characters,” in those
grotesque or gnarled individualities that have escaped the
common mould, the superabundance of sects, which, in conjunction
with the paucity of sauces, amused Voltaire, has its natural
explanation.
John Bull—himself a “character” among nationalities—could
not long endure the Papal leading-strings, and ever since the
days of Wycliffe a succession of free spirits has founded
“heresies,” not a few based on misunderstood mistranslations of
Greek or Hebrew texts, torn from their literary and, above all,
their historical context. But why during these five centuries
Essex has been a breeding-place for Nonconformity, second to
no other county, is a problem to tempt the philosopher. For its
ministers have been silenced or ejected in numbers almost unparalleled;
some indeed merely for tippling, dicing, carding, and
womanizing, but the majority for the more serious offences of
heresy or disrespect towards Parliament; while simple peasants—men,
women, and girls—for their participation in seditious
conventicles or practices, have been fined, jailed, transported to
“His Majesty’s plantations,” and even nailed to stakes and
burnt alive, clapping their hands the while with joy. Some of
the most moving scenes of “Foxe’s Book of Martyrs” and
Bloomfield’s “History of the Martyrs” are laid in Essex.
Triumphant descendants of these opinionated saints were now
converging on Chipstone from every quarter of the compass—it
was but a toy-model of a town, yet it held in its petty periphery
chapels, meeting-houses, or churches—ancient-towered or drably
wooden or offering the image of a tinned congregation, tightly
packed—for Baptists (Particular or General), Quakers, Wesleyans,
Congregationalists, Peculiars, and Primitive Methodists,
as well as your everyday Churchgoer; nothing indeed was
wanting except an Ecclesia for the variation represented by
Martha. And as most of these structures were in the High
Street, or just off it, you beheld in that ancient thoroughfare of
a Sunday a crowd of Christians, as like to the naked eye as a
flock of sheep, sorting themselves into their denominational
pigeon-holes, and disappearing as suddenly to right or left as
the pedestrians in “The Vision of Mirza” vanished downwards
through the trap-doors in the bridge.
Of all these types of Christian none seemed so indigenous to
Essex as that aptly christened “Peculiar”: it was as though
peculiar to the marshes, an emanation of the soil. Though the
first apostolic fervour was over in Chipstone, and the spirit was
moving rather towards Woodham and Southend, the sect was
still young and persecuted enough to be a devoted brotherhood,
as Will soon realized from the greetings which his father exchanged
with fellow-pilgrims, who grew more and more frequent as they
drew nigh the outskirts of the theological town.
There was, among others, a cheerful-looking woman pushing a
four-wheeled baby-cart, which held an infant back and front, and
a food-parcel sandwiched between them. Caleb, addressing her
as Sister, offered to wheel it, but she replied that the children
would cry at a stranger. “Well, you’ll soon be comin’ to your
destiny,” said Caleb. But before Will and he had forged ahead
of her, she had begun pouring out a premature confession. Two
or three were gathered together, and the Spirit seemingly blew
through her. That time last year she hadn’t trusted the Lord:
when they were wheeling the cart to chapel, she had wondered
to her husband how she could fit in the coming baby. And the
Lord had now made room by taking the prior baby, so that
she was well chastised: moreover they had “parsecuted” her
husband before a magistrate for not calling in a doctor for the
child, but as it wasn’t insured, they had only put him in prison
for a little. All the same he was “broke up,” having always
been a “forthright” man. The Lord was indeed trying him
by fire.
“Ay, ’twas the same, Willie, when your brother what’s-a-name
died,” said Caleb as they drew ahead of the labouring baby-cart.
“But the Brethren now exhort one another not to insure their
childer, Satan being swift to cry child-murder.”
“But isn’t it child-murder if a doctor might have saved it?”
asked Will coldly, for the woman’s story had shocked him.
Caleb looked pained. “Ef the Lord wouldn’t listen even to
prayers, is it likely He’d regard doctors? Howsomever the
Brethren stand fast and faithful—they goo to prison even at
harvest-time when you’re worth forever o’ money. But the
Lord’s people are wunnerful good to one another, and the Elders
look arter the families. Oh, what a joyous Harvest Thanksgivin’
we had two years agoo, time the martyrs came out o’ their cells.
All in the open air it was, and Deacon Mawhood brought out
be-yu-tiful lessons. No matter you lost your harvest money, he
says, you won the palm and the crown, and ’tis the Second
Harvest in the heavenly fields with angels to squinch your thirst
from golden wessels that shall be yourn, says the Deacon.”
Will received the rat-catcher’s rhetoric with a snort, which put
Caleb again on the defensive.
“Oi’ve never took no medicine for ten year,” said Caleb.
“And look at me!”
“Well, I’ve taken plenty,” said Will. “And look at me!”
“Oi allow Oi ain’t a Samson like you,” admitted Caleb
honestly, “nor couldn’t carry a box that far. And when Oi say
no medicine, Oi don’t mean when Oi’m not ill. For same as
Oi’m well, mother makes me take a little pill afore meals, bein’ a
wegeble as stops the gripes. There ain’t naught about that in
the Bible, seein’ as the text starts onny when you git sick. And
arter she lost your brother Jim—or maybe he was Zecharoiah—she
did fetch a doctor for the tothers, argufyin’ that when
the child’s too young to seek grace of itself, oil inside ain’t no
wuss than oil outside. And then they Christy Dolphins come
along——”
“Who are they?” inquired Will.
But Caleb drew up with a sudden remembrance. “You’ll
find that out for yourself. They ain’t far from Daniel.”
“Live on the Common, do you mean?”
“Noa—there ain’t none near us—there was two in Long
Bradmarsh, but they’ve gone back to the Joanna prophet
woman, so your poor mother ain’t got—” he broke off again.
“Oi don’t say ef mother was took real bad, Oi shouldn’t goo and
git Doctor Gory, seein’ as she threatens to goo for him same as
Oi’m ill. It ain’t the doctor, it’s the faith, says mother, and so
long as you don’t believe in the doctor, there ain’t no harm in
lettin’ him thump you about. So long as your heart turns to
God, says mother, the doctor can listen to it all he likes.”
“Then you do have the doctor!” Will was amused at these
compromises exacted by his masterful mother, whose heretical
evolution after the loss of offspring he could, however, well
understand.
“Noa—noa, not for us—leastways not yet,” Caleb protested.
“That was onny for the childer. That made us feel free.”
“Free?” Will queried.
“Not responsible like.” He was somewhat embarrassed.
“Faith-healin’ ain’t the main thing,” he expounded anxiously,
“it’s faith-gittin’; it’s lovin’ God and seekin’ His grace, just
as you’re doin’ to-day.”
Will was silent.
“Bless me!” cried Caleb suddenly. “Ef that don’t look
tempesty!”
Will’s eyes went skywards and found indeed a livid patch of
gloom, like a ghastly sag of sky, suddenly splotched in the warm
blue. And as he looked, a zigzag flash stabbed through it.
“Quick,” cried Caleb, indicating a fairly leafy oak, “git under
that tree!”
“No, no,” said Will, “it’s dangerous.” And a terrible peal
of thunder accentuated his words.
“Oi’ll hazard it,” said Caleb, hastening towards the shelter.
“The Lord is marciful—He can kill us when He pleases. He
ain’t got no need o’ lightnin’. But that’s gooin’ to pour like
billyho—and the rine falls alike on the just and the unjust—unless
the roighteous man’s got an umberrella.”
Will smiled, though humour was as far as ever from Caleb’s
intentions. Unwilling to desert the old man, and perhaps
weighing the improbability of an electric stroke against the
certainty of spoiling his jacket, and the last surviving sheen of
his boots, Will stood pluckily beside his parent, while, after
another celestial salvo, great drops began to patter on the leaves
and even to drip through them. “Lucky that thunder dedn’t
come in the middle o’ last night,” mused the old man gratefully
as it roared on. “It’s sech a bother dressin’ yourself agen to
set up till it stops. Hark at they Tommy Devils squealin’,” he
cried, indicating the startled swifts. But after a few minutes
Caleb’s patience gave out: the distant chiming of Chipstone
Church bells, with which the way had been piously enlivened,
was now chillingly inaudible; the thought that they would be
late for chapel gnawed at his heart; and dryness seemed a poor
equivalent for those missed moments of spiritual ecstasy. He
was about to dash through the storm, when the rain ceased as
suddenly as it came, the blackbirds began to whistle and forage
merrily, and the sun, bursting out more brilliantly than ever,
soon licked up the modicum of moisture that had percolated to
their Sunday exterior. But Caleb’s apprehensions were justified.
He had overrated the pace of his aged legs, and despite the gain
through Plashy Walk, he got no compensation for the missed
Half-Way Service, for when they arrived at the little meeting-house,
the Morning Service proper had begun.
The chapel of the Peculiars was one of the minor religious
edifices that did not aspire to the High Street. Behind an iron
gate and a petty stone courtyard, it displayed a gabled front,
with a roof of pantiles, and a row of dull windows of an ecclesiastical
order on either side.
As Will passed through the door, all his tardily born sympathy
vanished, and a wave of the old insufferable boredom smote him
like a breath of the steerage on his Atlantic steamer. Almost
ere his hat was off, his eye had taken in the whole once-familiar
scene, the painfully crude walls, a little dingier with the passing
of the years, the broad table-desk at the head of the hall, at
which Deacon Mawhood and the Elders throned it in Sunday
black, the rows of spruce wooden chairs sexually divided by a
gangway, and exhibiting in its left section a desert of elderly
females with a few oases of hobbledehoy girls. He thought of
St. Paul’s Cathedral, and calculated whimsically that if that
cost twopence to see, how much ought one not to pay to escape
seeing this!
But if his entry meant ennui to himself, it was a most dramatic
event to the congregation. At first, indeed, this stranger in the
fashionable jacket was not associated with Caleb, whose return
to the fold was a separate thrill. It was believed for an instant
that a veritable gentleman had succumbed to the Truth, and even
when it was perceived that he was no other than Will Flynt, the
news of whose home-coming had reached the majority, the sensation
did not abate, for was not God still visibly with His peculiar
flock, turning back the hearts of the wanderers, whether of the
old generation or the young? A breath of new inspiration
shook the hall, and the grey-haired Brother who had just begun
reading the thirteenth chapter of Acts faltered in his mispronunciation
of Cyrene. As he went on droning out the chapter—surely
the longest in the Bible, chosen maliciously to depress him
further, thought Will—its burden of the people of God, set for
a light to the Gentiles, evoked a mounting exaltation, and those
who had come with no thought of testifying, found themselves
possessed of the Spirit. There was in particular a man with
mutton-chop whiskers, on the bench in front of Will, whose
body swayed with excitement, and who punctuated the reading
with breathless jerks of nasal interpolation. “Be-yu-tiful!”
“Yes!” “Amen!” “Thank Gord!” “Mercy!” and the like.
And when at last the chapter ended on the verse “And the disciples
were filled with joy and with the Holy Ghost,” it lifted the
man to his feet and he poured forth the story of his sinful past.
“Oi was Church of England—in the choir—and wore black
and whoite gowns—and rang the bells—and was confirmed and
all—but Gord had never pardoned my sins.”
Will stifled a yawn and looked towards the door. But the
rest of the audience hung upon the tale—the tale of a death-bed
repentance of Churchmanship and the miraculous recovery to
lead the better life of the Peculiar Brotherhood.
“Oi asked the Elder to howd up my hands, so that Oi might
die praising Gord for the revelation.”
Sobs came from the left benches, but they only fevered Will.
He sat in a dull fury, dazed by words that passed over his brain
without leaving a meaning.
“Oh, what a thronging boy and boy—a land where we shall
never say ‘Good noight’—engraved in eternal brass—the Lord
shoines on your heart—sheep and goats—streets paved with pure
gold as it were transparent glass!” It was not till he felt his
arm clutched by Caleb in the old man’s excitement at hearing
this last phrase that Will connected such words with reality at
all, and they faded back into mere religion till a sudden mention
of “John in the oil of Patmos” shot up a quaint picture of a
too profuse anointment.
Other speakers followed with the same transcendental vocabulary,
and then hymns, in an interval between which, the
black-garmented Deacon with a royal gesture, that seemed to
sweep away the remotest effluvium of aniseed or moleskins, sent
Will a hymn-book by a deferentially wriggling Brother. It
seemed an ironic revenge for the book he had flung into the
bushes, but it saved him from the oppressive proximity of his
father’s, which he had been sharing; for the old man, though he
could not read the book, liked to hold it as he had always held
it with Martha, and indeed could not have sung without feeling
it at his fingers’ ends. Will turned its pages with curiosity,
thinking of Bundock’s “village idiot,” and noting that it was
still published by a village barber. Then a gaunt, horn-spectacled
man was seized of the Spirit.
“I’ve been looking for a han’kercher,” he began, to Will’s
surprise. “I’ve been looking for a han’kercher,” he repeated.
“I’ve been looking for a han’kercher,” he recapitulated with
rising rhetoric, “to wipe my tears away.” But the thrilling
level, of this exordium was not maintained, and the stock phrases
started again, merciless, unendurable, beating on Will’s brain till
they beat vainly against the depths of his reverie—or was it his
doze? Ah, surely that was Jinny’s horn at last! No, it was
only his father blowing emotionally into his red cotton handkerchief—too
huge to need looking for—a duplicate of that which
held their meals. Besides, Jinny wouldn’t be blowing her horn
of a Sunday. But why didn’t she come to chapel, the graceless
minx? Was she careering around with that Farmer Gale, or
was it her grandfather’s illness?
If flighty young girls, with hearts sound at bottom, would
come here and unfold the error of their independent ways, the
practice of confession might be justified, and chapel-service
become both useful and exciting. But these faded people, these
ungainly men and fubsy females! Who on earth cared for their
drab histories? Ah, there was Mother Gander, not so podgy as
most—in the blue silk of auld lang syne—if only she would get
up—or even Charley Mott—there would be some spark of interest.
But no, the horn-spectacled bore held the floor pitilessly, and
the phrases beat on.
“Be-yu-tiful, be-yu-tiful words—I thought I should die!—Poor
me! What a comfort in them words!”
And the nasal voice, its fervour unallayed by its own outpouring,
still punctuated the other speeches with jerky interpolations.
“Praise the Lord!” or “Glory!” came with fiery iteration, and
sometimes this saint with the mutton-chop whiskers said “Lord
bless me!” or “Lord bless my soul!” and these frayed and almost
meaningless ejaculations seemed full of a startling significance in
his mouth and nose.
“Brother Bridges, they said to me, how’s your soul? I
couldn’t give ’em a straightforward answer.”
Will woke up again. It was not now the horn-spectacled
speaker—he had apparently been wiped off the floor at last, and
was not even visible—it was a man with a humorous twinkle
and a red beard.
“But if they had asked me, how’s your body——?”
There was a faint snigger from a thick-set girl, instantly
repressed by her shocked mother; but after Will had extracted
what relief he could from this incident, he tried vainly to extract
from the anecdote the exciting edification it held for the others.
“How can I go to Romford and tell people I haven’t got salvation?”
A dramatic crisis indeed for all save Will, who did not
even stifle his yawn. The man’s journey to Romford seemed
infinitely unimportant compared with journeys going on every
Tuesday and Friday, and despitefully checked on Sunday.
Once the door opened, but it was only for a shambling youth
in his teens, and Will did not share the satisfaction of the congregation
at this new, if belated, proof of their vitality.
“We’re not afeared, no, not the humblest of us,” pursued the
red-bearded man, catching fresh inspiration from this continuous
rise in their numbers. “And why? Because we don’t go to
work without a Partner.”
Here at last was a definite image through the blur, and if Will
in a vivid flash saw a working-partner for himself in a less sublime
incarnation than the speaker had in mind, he was for once as
a-quiver as his father, who now, albeit with the stock exclamation
of “Be-yu-tiful!” proceeded to add real tears to the contents
of his capacious handkerchief.
When Will became attentive again, it was a new voice testifying,
and the matter seemed quite sensational.
“They used to be carried away and buried in a day. But
when our Brother Bundock’s boy got it, we had a special prayer-meeting,
and even the marks were light!”
Oh! So it was only the postman’s smallpox. He looked
round in vain for Her Majesty’s servant: indeed a general
consciousness that the hero of the story was ungratefully absent,
damped its appeal—only the man with the mutton-chop whiskers
called out with unabated ardour, “Glory!” Will felt that the
glory was to Bundock, thus valiantly sticking to his lack of
convictions. More than even during the last week, life at Little
Bradmarsh seemed impossible, as impossible as in his boyhood;
better had he rushed with the mob of his mates to California;
even now it was probably the best thing to do with his ninety
pounds, unmanly though it were to flee and leave this girl
carrier with her arrogance unbroken.
In her absence, if only one of the females would get up! That
would be at least a change. But no! The sex was shy to-day,
though the forenoon was, he remembered, the traditional time
for its testifyings. Perhaps it was the presence of this stalwart
young stranger that tongue-tied it.
But the males seemed to be telling their soul-stories at him,
challenging his eye, appealing to his black jacket—or was that
only a morbid impression of his? An outsider might have been
touched by the thread of spiritual poetry in these outwardly
commonplace lives, but Will, being of them, had the familiarity
that breeds boredom, if not contempt. And contempt, too, was
not wanting to this elegantly clad and much-travelled connoisseur
of men and women and creeds, who had seen even French cathedrals
in Canada, and knew that Roman Catholics were not the
scarlet beasts his infancy had somehow imagined them. Once he
caught Mr. Charles Mott’s eye fixed upon him with a curious,
wondering gaze, which seemed to change to a wink as eye met
eye. Will’s eye, however, remaining serious, a flush overspread
the ex-potboy’s face, and he looked away.
But Will’s contempt passed into alarm when, at a sudden pause
in the testifyings, all other eyes unquestionably converged on
him. He turned as red as Charley Mott, and glued his eyes to
his hymn-book, not daring to look up till another voice indicated
that the Spirit had found a more willing tongue for its organ.
But his relief was mixed with disgust, for it was the dry voice of
the original grey-haired reader, and it seemed bent on a sermon
which had not even the mitigated brightness of a confession.
Then, autobiography seemed suddenly to break through it, for
Will’s wandering thoughts were fixed by an anecdote about
riding to Rochester seven miles on a donkey on a winter’s
evening. “Lord bless me!” interpolated the nasal voice, so
distracting Will that he never understood how the story led up
to a doctor’s remark: “I must have your leg off,” a design the
medical materialist appeared to have carried out.
Will tried to peer under the table to see the preacher’s peg,
but failing to perceive any signs of corkiness, concluded that the
anecdote was not personal. He gathered that after this melancholy
amputation by impotent Science, Faith had sufficed to
keep the rest of the man together. Medicine had subsequently
proclaimed he was in a galloping consumption, “but he ain’t
dead yet—he’s still sound and whole,” cried the preacher paradoxically,
to the applausive “Glory!” of the tireless commentator.
Another illustrious example of regeneration—the preacher kept
Will awake by recounting—had begun life as a parson. But
none is beyond hope; even in the sacristy one is not safe from
the Spirit, and unable to go any longer through the flummeries
and mummeries of the Established Church, he had given up his
living and fallen—at one time—so low that he was glad to become
a potman in a public-house.
All eyes were here turned towards the unfortunate Charley
Mott, and from his squirming figure to Mother Gander, sitting so
stern and stiff; but the tension relaxed when the preacher—perhaps
tactfully—went on to mention that it was at “The
White Hart” in Colchester: where the landlord and landlady
had both “parsecuted” him. They were now both dead.
(“Glory!” from the nasal punctuator.) “I am sorry they are
dead,” said the preacher magnanimously. “But the Lord’s arm
is not short.” And while they were well dead, Will learnt that
their poor, persecuted potman had now a chapel of his own,
where he preached “Full Salvation.” Twenty or thirty were, it
appeared, saved regularly and punctually every Sunday evening.
“Glory!” trumpeted the nasal voice, and again Will, sullen
and glowering, felt that the whole congregation was palpitating
with expectation that he would leap to his feet and declare
himself similarly saved, or at least not lost during his long
absence. But he was not going to make a fool of himself, he
told himself harshly. He would sooner face the ordeal of escape,
of running the gauntlet of the Brothers and Sisters, and he
looked round wildly towards the door, perceiving with satisfaction
that the late youth had left it slightly ajar. Then, to his
joy and the congregation’s disappointment, another worshipper
took the word, or was taken by it; Bidlake, the bargee, with his
dog-eyes now shining and his shaggy face sublimated, who
declared with touching fervour that he would praise God as long
as breath was in him, and with the death-rattle in his throat he
would cry: “You can do, Gord, what you like with me!”
Ephraim recalled the coup by which he had converted his wife,
whom family sorrows had made an infidel. “Ef you won’t goo
to heaven with me, says Oi, Oi’ll goo to hell with you!” Now
they both pulled and poled together and were happy—so happy,
despite family losses and troubles. “Most men ain’t fit to live
nor ready to die. Just drifters. Throw ’em the life-line—the
life-line afore they drift away!” And with a vivid gesture he
threw an imaginary rope. By accident or design it was in Will’s
direction, and again the poor young man, with a stifling sense of
being lassoed, became the cynosure of every eye. But, fortunately
for him, Ephraim Bidlake did not pause here, and his
rhapsody poured on; “Glorious truth”—“one generation to
the tother”—“the prayer of roighteousness”—“come as you
are”—“wain to trust in man”—a veritable cascade of phrases
that, falling on Will’s head, gradually lowered it in sleep. An
impromptu speech is usually one the speaker cannot wind up,
and the worthy bargee went on tangling himself up more and
more, till it looked doubtful if he would ever have come to a
stop, had not something happened which stole even his breath
away.
Through the interstice of the door came suddenly sidling a
little white dog. But this accession to the congregation produced
no joy, merely a sense of profanity as it pattered up the
central parting, leaving, moreover, wet prints of its paws.
Springing without hesitation or apology upon the sleeper’s best
trousers, it curled itself up comfortably with a grunt. Assuredly
Will was not fated to-day to escape the centre of the stage.
The young man recognized Nip instantly, and his yawn of
awakening changed into a gasp, and his somnolent pulse into a
precipitate beat. The animal’s leap was indeed sudden enough
to startle the strongest heart. Will turned his head instinctively
towards the door—oblivious even of his damped trousers—but
there was no sign of Nip’s mistress. Still, whether she was in
the vicinity or not, the dog was clearly out of place. Grasping
his pretext of escape firmly by the collar and clasping his
struggling opportunity to his breast, he stole from the meeting-house.
He expected to see Nip’s owner outside. In his reading of the
situation she had arrived so late that while she was hesitating
whether to come in, the shameless dog had burst through the
door, attracted doubtless by the aroma of all those dinner-packets,
and this had made her still more ashamed to enter.
But the quaint little street was bare of Jinny. So sunless did
it appear without her, that he scarcely noticed that the sky
was actually overcast again, and that the black cloud had regathered.
He stood still, hesitating; in which relaxed mood of
his the spasmodic struggles of the animal were successful, and
Will became painfully aware that he was alone with his moist
trousers and his London coat snowed over with little hairs, while
Nip, after some preliminary gambollings and barkings at the
recovery of the liberty he had himself abandoned, was vanishing
into the High Street. So assured were Nip’s movements that
Will divined at once he had only to follow him to restore him to
his mistress, and without waiting even to brush off the little
white hairs, he darted towards the street corner, and was happily
just in time to see the excellent creature trotting into the courtyard
of “The Black Sheep.”
His pleasure was not, however, free from surprise. What was
Jinny doing at her business headquarters on the Lord’s Day?
Or had she come in her cart to chapel, and put it up there? He
ran towards the picturesque stable-yard. There were a good
many chaises, gigs, dog-carts and even carriages standing—the
countryside drove to its churches—but there was no trace of
either Jinny or Methusalem, while Nip was standing with hang-dog
air by the doorstep, under a poster of “Duke’s Marionettes.”
But as Will drew nearer, he turned tail, sauntered down the
passage, surveyed the painted hand, and then with an air of
decision bounded up the stairs. Ah, she would be in the parlour!
And Nip’s follower bounded upstairs too, keeping closely to heel.
But no! Nip was not on dining bent, though the door was
open. Rejecting all the appetizing scents that already emanated
from the eating-room, Nip pit-patted along the dusky corridor
and began whining and scrabbling outside a closed and numbered
door. Very soon it receded before his pleadings; and as he
scampered in, “You poor dog!” came out in the girlish voice that
had so lacerated him with “Fol de rols!” But not the worst
of that musical torment could vie with the jar to his heart-strings
when, through the reclosing door, came another unforgettable
voice with the jovial interrogatory: “Well, Nip, and what was
the parson’s text?”
He remembered now—with a cold sick horror—that this was
the very bedroom from which indignant housemaids had excluded
its tenant—yes, there was Reynard opposite with his glassy eye
and his erected brush. Possibly Tony Flip was not even up.
That was what came of minxes driving Methusalems! Instead
of being at divine service, like all God-fearing humanity, she was
coquetting—or worse—with a mountebank in an inn bedroom.
Yet he felt he must not spy upon her—any moment, too, she
might come out—and he hurried downstairs and stood on the
step under the ironwork lamp, louring like the great black
cloud, which he now perceived to be in heaven-sent harmony
with his mood. And that drivelling patriarch had foamed at the
mouth when he had hinted that woman’s place was not a cart!
But Jinny did not keep him more than five endless minutes.
“Hullo, Will,” she cried gaily, as she tripped from the passageway
with Nip in her arms. “What are you doing here?”
How the broad frame of her bonnet set off the picture of her
face! Small wonder a loose-living showman found it bewitching.
Not so William Flynt—with his high ideals of womanhood!
Even to be called “Will” was provoking rather than flattering:
he felt it now less the perquisite of the old friend than the proof
of an indiscriminating levity.
“I’ve come for the dinner,” he said coldly. Nip gazed straight
at him with his mild brown eye, but although Will did not suppose
that the brute would open its mouth like Balaam’s ass and give
him away, he could not look it in the head. He turned his
shoulder on dog and damsel and stared at the poster.
“I wish I could have dinner with you,” replied Jinny frankly.
“But I must be off to feed Gran’fer. Farmer Gale’s trap should
be here by now.”
“He drives you home too?” He turned towards her, startled.
“Within half a mile—it is a treat for me to have another
carrier.”
“But he isn’t a Peculiar,” he observed severely.
“No, he’s a Wesleyan like Gran’fer, who used to drive his
father about. He puts up at ‘The Chequers’ hard by his
chapel—his service ought to be over. I hope his horse hasn’t
taken fright again—we had just got to the High Street when
the storm broke, and at the first flash the horse was off,
galloped miles beyond the town before he could be got to a
standstill.”
“He might have killed you, the silly!” cried Will, meaning
the farmer.
“Yes,” said Jinny simply, meaning the animal. “By the
time he was walked warily back, it was too late to go in. But
I don’t wonder Nip was worried about me. You see he likes to
run behind the trap, poor fellow”—she wasted a kiss upon his
unresponsive head—“and he always comes up in time to say
good-bye at the chapel door, where he hangs about till I come
out. But this time, of course, he must have been wandering
about in search of me. He wasn’t there when I passed just
now. Mr. Flippance declares he must have gone to Chipstone
Church, in the idea I’d suddenly joined it.”
And the girlish laugh rang out, dissipating some of his humours
as much by its joyousness as by the innocent mention of the
Showman.
“But why shouldn’t you join it, Miss Quarles?” he said.
“It can’t be duller than chapel.”
“Now, now, Will.” She shook a serious finger. “You ought
to have gone to chapel yourself this morning. And don’t call
me Miss Quarles.”
“But I prefer to call you Miss Quarles.”
“But why not Jinny?” Her voice was plaintive.
“Because everybody else calls you that.”
“Is that any reason why you should call me Miss Quarles?”
“If you can’t see it——!” he began.
“I can’t, and I hope you won’t call me Miss Quarles.”
“And why shouldn’t I?”
“Because I won’t answer to it.”
“And why not?”
“Because, Will, it’s not my name.”
He gasped. “Not your name?”
She laughed merrily at his discomfiture. “It’s a long story
and Farmer Gale will be here. Hulloa,” she went on, making
his confusion worse confounded, “how did Nip’s hairs get on
you?”
He flushed, and flicked nervously at his coat. “There are
other white dogs,” he said evasively.
“Well, don’t let him spoil your coat.”
“And what about your bodice?”
“Oh, mine isn’t new and Londony.”
He was gratified at her perception: still more at her setting
down Nip. That animal, however, was in the rampageous mood
which always followed his restoration to freedom, and he began
leaping up at his mistress’s hand.
“Down, Nip, down! Oh, I do believe he’s bitten through my
new glove!” She pulled it off ruefully to examine the damage.
“Sensible dog!” Will growled. “He knows you oughtn’t to
be wearing Mr. Flippance’s gloves.”
Her own little white teeth flashed out in a mocking smile:
“Lucky you are going to buy me another pair!”
“Me! Why, you wouldn’t let me when I offered.”
“Of course not. I’m thinking of the pair you’ll be owing me.”
“Owing you?”
“You don’t suppose you’ll win the wager, do you?”
“Oh, that!” He was disconcerted again. “Of course I’ll
win it,” he said defiantly in a bombastic burst. “It won’t take
me a day’s practice to blow down the walls of Jericho.”
She laughed. “So you do remember your Bible. Well, I’ll
be satisfied if you blow Nip back from a rabbit.”
“We shall see. Have you superscribed again?” he asked
pompously, assured of his accuracy this time.
“Not yet—I expect the horn’ll be at Chipstone by Tuesday—you
shall have it the same evening.”
“And the next day I’ll be wanting gloves,” he said loftily.
“We shall see—or rather hear. What size do you take,
though?”
“Oh, I don’t know—twice yours, I suppose.”
“Oh, not twice!”
“Why, sure!” And he suddenly prisoned her little ungloved
hand between his brawny palms. “I could easily crush it,” he
said, with a strange desire to do so, pressing it indeed almost to
hurting-point. At that instant a far-palpitating blueness transfigured
the courtyard, and from above-stairs came a terrific
racket as if all the plates and dishes in the dining-room were
hurling themselves at one another. Will felt the girl’s fingers
curl spasmodically round his and hold them tight: her face went
white, and he seemed to hear her heart thumping.
“Don’t be frightened!” he said, with his first manly satisfaction
in her. Surely she was clinging to him for protection.
“That’ll be a fireball down the chimney,” she observed with
disappointing coolness. “There was one came down last year
in Long Bradmarsh and killed a poor little chimney-sweep who
had got stuck in the flue. It’ll set the chimney on fire, I expect.”
“This rain will put it out,” he said, still cheerfully conscious
of her warm fingers, and feeling a joy in the deluge that had
been so damp in his father’s company. She drew back, however,
into the passage to avoid the big plopping and ricochetting rain-drops
and her hand got disentangled. “What fun if it’s fallen
down Mr. Flippance’s chimney,” she laughed. “Make him get
up early.”
Her laughter seemed to ring untrue, hysterical.
“Isn’t he up yet?” he asked, trying to speak lightly.
“Oh, he never gets up on a Sunday—not properly, I mean.
I saw him half up, but he’s gone back to bed and is already
snoring—I heard him.”
“But how could you hear him?” he asked, with careful
carelessness.
“Oh, I was in his daughter’s room, whiling away the time of
waiting—she’s got ten times his sense—when, woke up by our
voices, I suppose, in he trails through the communicating door
in his fancy dressing-gown, yawning like a mouse-trap, and asks
me to buy him a horse at the fair.”
“A horse at the fair!” Scarcely had he enjoyed the relief of
working out that he had taken the harmless adjoining bedroom
for the Showman’s, when this new blow struck him, like hooves
on his chest.
“Of course I wouldn’t listen to him,” she said.
“Of course not!” His breast expanded again. “How can
a woman understand buying horses?”
“Oh, I don’t mean that.” Jinny was distinctly colder. “I
mean it’s the Lord’s Day. He’ll have to repeat his order on
Tuesday.”
“But surely you wouldn’t go to a horse fair?”
“Why not?”
“Because—it’s—it’s so horsey.”
She laughed again. “And so fairish, too, isn’t it?”
“What does he want a horse for?” he asked sullenly.
“I don’t suppose it’s for dinner—he isn’t a Frenchy. But he’s
got a caravan, hasn’t he?—and he has to begin his summer
tour soon.”
“And why can’t he buy his own horses?”
“That infant? Why his last horse died of old age at four!”
“And what about that sensible daughter of his?”
“She hasn’t got horse-sense,” said Jinny, smiling.
“Well, I don’t see how it comes into your business.”
“A carrier has to buy whatever she’s asked.”
“Whatever she can carry. You can’t carry a horse.”
“No, but it can carry me. Besides, I’ve often carried a calf
or a pig, and where am I to draw the line?”
“You’ll be buying elephants next,” he said, with a bitter
remembrance of Mr. Flippance’s story.
“I’m too old for gingerbread,” she replied unexpectedly.
“But I haven’t forgotten the one you gave me once.” He
trembled under her radiant gratitude, with its evocation of the
poetry of childhood. But a convulsive bound forward on the
part of Nip broke up the argument. “Ah, here’s Farmer Gale
coming along,” she said cheerfully.
Just like the fellow, he thought, to come just at that moment.
And his resentment at the arrival of the dog-cart was not even
mitigated by the watery spectacle presented by its red-faced
driver, whose personable and still youthful figure rose from a
streaming tarpaulin, to which a hat with an unremoved mourning-band
contributed its drippings.
“You can’t go in that rain,” Will protested. “Let him go
without you—I’ll order a trap myself.”
“But you said you were dining here—I can’t wait.”
He winced—his white lie had come home like a curse to roost.
“You can dine with me!”
“And what about Gran’fer?”
“Well, I can dine at home.” But she scarcely heard him.
She was already fastening a handkerchief over her Sunday
bonnet—a fascinating process. “There’s a good cover—I’ll
snuggle right in.”
Shameless, he thought, riding about cheek by jowl and skirt
by trouser with a young man not even of her own faith. That
thin tiny boy sandwiched between was no real separation: why,
the tarpaulin almost swallowed him under! They ought at
least to sit back to back, and if there was any chivalry in the
pudding-faced lout, he would transfer the tarpaulin to the back
seat. How could Jinny forget that the magnate of Little
Bradmarsh—cursèd Cornish interloper—was no fit company for
the likes of her? He wondered that people did not warn her:
but they were inured to her vagaries, he supposed. And even if
the man meant honourably, in his reckless passion, how dare a
widower with a great thumping boy approach a rosebud? Ah,
now she was talking to this second-hand, warmed-up aspirant,
who had already killed off one wife; inquiring sweetly about his
animal’s behaviour under the recent flash.
“Steady as a plough-horse!” came the cheery reply. “My
eye, Jinny, you did handle him wonderful. I reckon you saved
my life!”
“And what about my own?” With a laugh whose gaiety
stabbed, she sprang upon the step. “Good-bye, Will. Hope
you’ll enjoy your dinner.”
“Good-bye, Miss Quarles,” he said coldly. “I mean, Miss——”
But before he had realized he could not fill up the blank, the
trap had started, and he could not even bound behind, like the
joyous-barking Nip. Nothing tangible was left of the whole
delectable and distressing episode except some white hairs on the
fashionable fabric of Moses & Son.
“Hope you’ll enjoy your dinner!” Her last words still rang
in his ear. His dinner! Cold meat wrapped in a “muckinger,”
and consumed on chapel benches among drab Elders and elderly
Sisters and better-lost Brothers and dismal rat-catching Deacons.
No, sooner a crust and cheese at the bar. But why not roast
beef and Yorkshire pudding in the parlour—why not make his
lie true? Yes, lies were reprehensible: truth was always best,
and his chaps began to water with ethical excitement. But
alas, with a sudden misgiving he put his hand in his pocket.
Not a farthing! In the agitation of his chapel-going, he had
forgotten to transfer his purse to the Sunday suit—nay, even the
ninety pounds were left in the discarded waistcoat, he remembered
with an unreasonable chill. He was to be nailed to his lie, then.
True, he might possibly get credit, but it was an awkward
situation at best. No, better go back to his cold meat—besides,
his poor old father would be wondering and waiting. It would
be cruel to desert and distract him, and, the rain appearing
somewhat thinner, he turned up his coat-collar and started out,
almost colliding at the archway with the Mott couple, lovingly
entwined under a spacious umbrella. They at least had no need
to dine in chapel. Mr. Charles Mott looked at him again with
the same curious wonder. “You’re not going back?” he cried
involuntarily.
“I can’t desert my dad!” Will answered, somewhat shamefacedly.
“And he must eat, Charley darling,” Mother Gander intervened.
“You know how bad our Sunday dinners are.”
“I haven’t even got any money with me,” he cried, with a last
wild hope. But Mother Gander did not respond to his longing
for truth. “Lend him the umbrella, dearest,” she said ruthlessly.
“We’ve another for the afternoon service.”
Accepting it with mitigated gratitude—the umbrella he was
trusted with was worth more than the dinner, he thought
bemusedly—he moved more slowly to the chapel; wondering,
too, how hotel-keeping could be reconciled with the Sabbatarian
conscience.
He found the meeting-house now turned into an eating-house.
The congregation had, however, visibly thinned: only those who
had no hosts or homes in Chipstone remaining for this love-feast,
with the exception of Deacon Mawhood, who, rather than go
home to his wife, remained at the table as presiding dignitary,
flanked by great glass jugs of water. The ravages in the ranks
appeared to Will an eloquent testimony to the spread of the
doctrine in Chipstone proper: in his young days the sect had
been more suburban and rural, and the chapel at that hour had
seethed with hungry pilgrims. Still, there was quite a happy
hubbub, and the spectacle, with its real sense of brotherhood,
struck from him more sympathy than anything in the service;
and when a Sister told her cherub not to “goffle” so, he was
mysteriously touched by the old word, and the memories it
roused, to a sincerer respect for the creed which satisfied Jinny.
What fun the boys had had in the wagon, driving home with her!
Caleb was chewing a hunk of bread and meat. The handkerchief-parcel—shrunk
like the congregation—incarnadined the
bench. “Oi had to begin,” he explained apologetically, “seein’
as Oi’d said grace, expectin’ you back every second, and it
seemed foolin’ with the Lord to wait more than ten minutes.
Pity that dog worrited you. Be-yu-tiful things were brought
out when you was gone. Where did you git to?”
He evaded the question. “I’m not hungry.”
“Not arter that walk of ourn!” cried Caleb incredulously.
“Oi count you’ve had your dinner somewhere else.”
“Yes, off the dog!” he said a bit crossly.
Caleb smiled. “Oi’ll not believe that,” he said with an air of
infinite cuteness.
“I’ll have a drink,” condescended Will.
“Do!” Caleb passed him a large tin mug of water. “And
there’s plenty more where that come from.” Will knew it was
Brother Quint—the “snob” or shoemaker who lived next door—who
supplied these limitless streams.
“Ain’t she beautifully polished?” Caleb went on naïvely, when
his thirsty son set the mug down. “Holds noigh a quart—Oi
never see sech mugs nowhere else! And Brother Quint’ll fill it
with biling for our tea. There, Will! There’s your favourite
sausages mother put in for you, special. None o’ your dogs in
that!” And he chuckled, brimming over with holy glee.
Cooled by the long draught, Will allowed himself to be seduced
by the veal sausages, and, finding with surprise that the first
slid down his throat in a twinkling, he was soon depleting the
parcel into a mere “muckinger.” And at this Caleb’s innocent
happiness was complete.
But the fate that stalks mortals at their culminating felicities
now sped its arrow. In excavating a pickled walnut from the
remains of the parcel, Caleb loosed a minute cardboard box,
which sprang maliciously to the floor and then, to the agitation
of the neighbours, rolled round and round towards the table
under the very eyes of the rat-catcher.
The Deacon stooped down zealously to pick it up, and then
held it on high. It was a pill-box! “Who brought this?” he
cried in stern prophetic accents, across the table.
The happy hubbub ceased, the holy glee was frozen. In a
tense silence all eyes were turned on the profane symbol. Will
saw his wretched father’s face go red and white, and his scraggy
throat work painfully below the ragged white beard. Both the
Flynts guessed at once that the careful Martha had slipped into
the packet her husband’s usual pill before meals!
It was a dreadful moment. For a space in which all nature
seemed to hold its breath, Caleb sat rigid and dumb.
“Whose propity is this?” asked the Deacon still more sternly,
and Will divined the mighty struggle going on in his father’s
quaint conscience; casuistic questions as to how far a pill-box
conveyed unconsciously had been “brought” by him, or in
what sense pills administered to him remorselessly from without
could be said to be his “property.”
Then suddenly Caleb’s lips opened. “Oi count ’twas in my
parcel,” he said in tremulous accents.
The sublimity of the confession thrilled Will: he even felt a
curious moisture at his eyes. But before the Deacon, sitting
there like a judge about to pronounce sentence, could say a
word, a blinding glare, followed almost instantaneously by an
appalling crashing and smashing right overhead, showed that
nature had indeed held its breath and had now spoken in flame
and thunder. Will’s first reflection when the daze had passed
away, and the congregation found itself and its building providentially
safe, was that it was indeed lucky his father had spoken
first; otherwise his confession might have seemed extorted by
terror. But Joshua Mawhood was not the Deacon to let such
a situation pass without profit. “The Lord havin’ spoke,
brethren,” said he, “there ain’t no need for my opinion. The
thing Oi hate most in this lower world is hypocrisy and dissemblin’.
‘Roight up and down, Jo Perry,’ as the sayin’ goos.
Ef we ain’t been destroyed, as we sat here guzzlin’ and guttlin’,
’tain’t no merit of the congregation, ’tis because the Lord bein’
marciful don’t destroy Sodom and Gomorrah so long as there’s
one roighteous man.” He rose majestically and drew himself
up to his full height, and held the pill-box even higher. “Brother
Flynt, if you’ll kindly step out, Oi’ll hand you back your propity.”
No fiercer punishment could have been devised for Caleb’s
gentle soul: the sinner, isolated, passing through his shrinking
Brethren and Sisters, must come forward as to a confession table.
No wonder the poor man held back.
“Oi don’t need it now, Deacon,” he said, with lips almost as
white as his hair. “You can throw it away ef you like.”
With malicious enjoyment the Deacon slowly and solemnly
lifted the lid of the pill-box and dipped in his fingers, to hold up
the impious contents to the public execration. Then his face
changed.
“Why, it’s salt!” he cried in angry disappointment. It was
as if the devil were playing thimblerig with him.
“Oi was thinkin’ the missus had ought to put some in,” said
Caleb, beaming again.
The woman of the baby-cart now found herself possessed of
the Spirit. She sprang to her feet, a baby on either arm.
“We are the salt of the earth,” she shrilled, “wherewith the
others shall be salted.”
“Hallelujah!” burst from the mutton-chop whiskers.
“Hallelujah!” responded the congregation, and a great
anthem rolled out, outshouting the thunder.
To the disappointment of his father, who still hoped he would
testify, Will would not stay for the Afternoon Service. But his
worthy sire could bear a disappointment after the revulsion in
his favour, he thought. He had to take back the umbrella to
the Motts, he insisted, or, with this weather, the good Samaritans
might be unable to return to their worshipping: in any case he
had to see somebody at “The Black Sheep” on urgent business:
business, he corrected hastily, of a spiritual nature, calculated to
save certain souls from temptation.
“Well, Oi’m glad the Sperrit’s workin’!” said Caleb, “and
do ye git back to mother quick as you can, for it ain’t fair as
she should be left at home, time Oi’m enjoyin’ myself. Not that
’tis my fault there ain’t no chapel for Christy Dolphins—!” He
checked himself and added hurriedly: “Do ye don’t tell her
about the pill-box: happen she’d think Oi was wexed.”
“And do ye don’t say you can’t carry a box to Chipstone!”
mocked Will gaily, glad to be released. “And of a Sunday too—you
old Sabbath-breaker!”
Caleb did not smile: the episode had left too deep a scar.
“Oi count the Deacon’s in the roight,” he said. “ ’Tis hypocrisy
and dissemblin’ to take pills at home and salt in public. Oi
count Oi’ll testify to the truth this arternoon.”
“But you only take pills to keep off the indigestion, not to
cure it,” urged Will, giving him his own plea back. “Besides,
salt is a sort of medicine too: without it you might get scurvy
and goodness knows what.”
Caleb shook his head. “Lot’s wife wasn’t turned into a
medicine. Any man in his seven senses knows the difference
’twixt puttin’ salt or medicine on his wounds.”
Leaving his father to execute his sublime purpose, Will went
off on his own mission under protection of the big Mott umbrella.
In returning it, he learnt that even its great ribbed dome had
not saved Mr. Mott from a wetting, in consequence of which and
his delicate health he was now imbibing stiff glasses of grog in
his bedroom, hovered over by the anxious Mother Gander. It
was pathetically out of the question, Will gathered, for Brother
Mott to attend chapel again that day. Will’s “urgent business”
lay, however, with Mr. Anthony Flippance: the soul to be saved
being Jinny’s, now menaced with still further soilure from the
gross contacts of horse-copers, cadgers, kidders, butchers, drovers,
shepherds, swineherds, touts, tramps, and all the tricksters and
pickpockets of the cattle-market.
The mission did not loom unpleasant, for although he resented
the fiction about the Crystal Palace and the stuffed elephant, the
tall talk was harmless enough—he had heard taller in America—and
he was not indisposed for ungodly society after the reek of
the chapel. That the genial Showman would instantly see the
matter from his point of view he did not doubt.
But Tony Flip was not in the dining-room even in dishabille,
and the waiter was still so occupied with late or leisurely diners
as apparently to be unable to conjure him up. “I’ve just taken
him up his breakfast,” he said, with an envious sigh. “No. 42.
You’ll find him.”
But to intrude thus on the Showman’s privacy seemed indelicate:
he waylaid a chambermaid in the corridor and asked her
to tell Mr. Flippance a gentleman would be glad to see him when he
had finished his meal. She brought back a mysterious answer as
from Miss Flippance that he never saw clean-shaven gents.
Will fired up as at an insult. Evidently the rogue was not
going to be so malleable: that daughter of his, too, he remembered,
had no proper respect for Jinny. “Tell ’em I’ll wait here
till my beard grows!” he commanded.
The chambermaid hung back, giggling. He felt in his pocket
for a sixpence—again encountering only lining. “If you don’t
take my message, I’ll kiss you,” he menaced. It was a jest that
never failed him, and it did not fail now, though the fleeing
“tucker-in” giggled more than ever. He watched her enter the
lion’s den, but hardly had she done so, when the noble animal
himself padded forth, grinning like a Cheshire cat, his fork
protruded like a claw, and just-spluttered coffee dripping from
his great jaws over the breast of his flamboyant hundred-stained
hide.
“Where is he?” he roared genially to the dark corridor.
“Come in! Come in!”
Will advanced defiantly.
“So it’s you! I was wondering what wit heaven had dropped
with the thunder! Yankee yumour—I ought to ha’ guessed it.”
And he nearly spitted Will on his fork in his enthusiastic effort
to shake hands. “ ‘I’ll wait till my beard grows’—ha, ha, ha!
That goes in this very night—no, there’s no show to-night, hang
it! Don’t go, Polly,” he called, as he pulled Will into the room
over a barrier of Bluchers and Wellingtons and even Hessian boots
with silken tassels, “we must get that into Hamlet. When I
say to Ophelia, ‘Get thee to a nunnery; go, farewell’— I’ll
wind up ‘Until thy beard grows.’ That’ll be your new cue,
Polly.”
“But that’ll spoil the scene,” Miss Flippance protested, poised
in a morning wrapper in the open doorway between the two
rooms. She was mysteriously mantled in aromatic clouds, like
the spirit in The Mistletoe Bough, yet her father did not seem to
be smoking.
“Not at all, Polly,” he persisted, “it’s just the right grotesque
spirit.”
“There’ll be a laugh.”
“The one thing Hamlet needs. Even the ghost don’t carry
it off.”
“You’d better give me the line,” persisted Miss Flippance.
“It’ll come better in the mad scene.”
“Well, we’ll talk about it—I think you’ve seen our American
friend before.”
“Before and behind,” said Miss Flippance viciously, a scowl
traversing her pockmarks. “And since he left me in the lurch,
I wasn’t sorry to think I’d seen the back of him.”
“But as Miss Quar—as the Carrier hadn’t got your drumstick,
there was nothing to return for,” apologized Will.
“Then why have you?” she snapped, and closed the door
behind her with a similar snap.
“Polly’s in a pet,” commented her parent. “She don’t like
being worried by actors in search of jobs, specially on Sundays.
It’s your hairless phiz, you know.”
“But I’m not an actor.”
“Of course not—she ought to have seen you haven’t the face—only
the razor: ha, ha, ha!”
Will was vaguely resentful. “But I dare say I could black
my face.”
“There’s more to the drama than Othello, and more to Othello
than burnt cork.” And Mr. Flippance laughed again as he
dropped into his wooden arm-chair and resumed his breakfast at
a little table ’twixt the bed-canopy and the window. “Sit
down, won’t you? Excuse my back—I can hear all you say
behind it. Ha, ha! That’s another good gag, eh?”
Will, glancing round, saw that the chair not occupied by his
host was hopelessly littered by his garments, mixed with papers:
he therefore dropped on the high four-poster—it was now made—and
cleared his throat for action.
“You’ll have a drop of something,” Mr. Flippance threw
backwards, mistranslating the sounds.
“No, thank you!” He must not be bribed or drugged, Will
felt: he had stern work before him. It was as well, however,
to placate the adversary. “Glad to hear the show’s a big
draw,” he said.
“And who told you that?”
“Er—the Bradmarsh Carrier!”
“Bless her—she carries all the lies I tell her.”
“Aren’t things rosy then?”
“I never lie on Sundays. Ha, ha, ha! Perhaps it’s just as
well Jinny won’t do business with me to-day. No, old man, I
ought to be middling mollancholy, as they say here. But I’m as
happy as the day is long—and it’s getting longer every day.” He
drained his coffee-cup voluptuously. “Never mind my business—what’s
yours?”
“Mine? I haven’t come on business.”
“Then you must have a brandy.” He reached out and pulled
the green bell-rope.
“No thank you. You see—” Will swung his legs hesitatingly.
“Surely you don’t think she ought to carry lies——?”
“Who?”
“The Bradmarsh Carrier.”
“Jinny! She has to carry anything—at the proper tariff.”
“But is it fair to her?”
“If you mean our doing bumper business, she don’t know it’s
a lie, and her telling it helps to make it true. Why, you were
itching to see the show yourself, as soon as you heard other fools
were flocking.” He turned a grinning face. “Come now,
confess.”
“I didn’t come to see the show,” Will contradicted, feeling
vaguely baffled.
“Of course not, being Sunday. But what did you come for?
Cut the cackle and come to the ’osses.”
“I will,” he said eagerly. “I hear you want to buy one.”
Mr. Flippance swung round, chair and all. “Then you have
come on business!”
“No, I haven’t.”
“Well, have you got a horse?”
“No, but I could get one.”
“And you don’t call that business!”
“I didn’t mean to—!” Will was getting embarrassed. “It
just slipped out. What I want to ask of you is——”
“Where the devil is that waiter?” broke in the Showman,
reaching for the cord again.
“What I mean is,” said Will, determined to get it out before
the waiter popped up, “that there’s a girl you’re leading into
brazen courses!”
“A girl! Me!” Mr. Flippance pulled himself angrily to his
feet, and stood glaring at Will, with the snapped bell-cord in his
hand like a green serpent. “You son of Ananias, if you’ve
listened to any of those scandal-mongering swine you ought to be
jolly well ashamed of yourself. There isn’t a cleaner man—for
a widower—in all the circuit. Why, I could pile up the dollars—as
you call it—if I’d only darken my tent a bit, so that the
lovers of the drama could go rubbing their noses and licking one
another like the calves in the next field. But there isn’t a
brighter show this side of the Atlantic. Besides, my girls are
all wood—there’s not a flesh and blood female with me except
Polly, and she’s my own daughter, born on the right side of the
blanket, too. Which is more than can be said for all of us.
What may be your name, now?”
“What has my name to do with it?” He got off the bed.
“What has his name to do with it?” asked Mr. Flippance of
the waiter, who now shot in with a well-divined bottle and
appurtenances.
“Beg pardon, sir?”
“And so you may, you son of a slug. Here, take this rope
and hang yourself with it! So you won’t tell your name, you
son of a flea,” he went on, when the waiter had spirited off
the breakfast-tray. “Well, here’s my back—bite away.” And
with a high tragic gesture he turned to open the brandy-bottle.
“I’m not a backbiter,” said Will angrily. “I’m a front-puncher,
and my name is——”
“Never mind your name. I accepted you. You came like
the spirit of the May Day—mixed with the Mayflower. I
opened my heart to you. I gave you three names. I was Duke,
I was Anthony Flippance, I was Tony Flip.” He gurgled the
brandy into his glass. “I demanded no references. I entrusted
you with posters for my daughter.”
“Which I delivered honestly.”
“But anonymously.”
“My name is——”
“Hush! Not for a million pounds would I hear it now. But
the girl’s name?” he turned round, glass in hand. “That at
least I beg.”
“I’ve mentioned it already. It’s—it’s the Carrier.”
“Jinny!” Tony Flip burst into an explosive laugh of relief.
“Fancy calling Jinny a girl!”
“And what else would you call her?”
“What you just called her—the Carrier.”
“Then if she is a carrier, why should you degrade her into a
horse-broker?”
“Oh, that’s all you mean, is it?”
“Isn’t that enough?”
“Don’t be an idiot. Here, have a drink.”
Will waved the glass away.
“Would you like to send your daughter bargaining among a
lot of rough men?”
Tony grinned. “I don’t think Polly ’ud mind the men. It’s
the horse she’d come a cropper over. Jinny’s had a long experiance
of horses, and she’s smart enough to buy anything. If I
wanted the moon, she’d get it for me—and cheap too!”
“And why can’t you buy your own horses?”
“Why? Because I’m a child of nature—a simple player—who
wears his heart on his sleeve for daws to peck at. My last
mare crocked up in a week in the flower of her youth—seems to
have been bought in a knacker’s yard, shaved and singed and
brushed and combed till she was as shiny as a Derby winner.
They gingered her ears and jaws and cayenne-peppered her
nostrils till she seemed clothed in thunder, like the war-horse in
the Bible.”
Will smiled despite himself. “And you expect a girl to see
through all that! Look here, I’ll buy your horse.”
Mr. Flippance paused in the act of imbibing. “Oh, there we
are,” he said, looking shrewd. “Want to cut out Jinny’s
business!”
Will’s cheeks became chromatically indistinguishable from his
hair.
“Me! Do you think I want your dirty commission?”
“And do you think I want your stinking horse? Why the
devil do you come interfering?”
Will was silent. Tony finished his glass like a victor.
“If it ain’t the commission, what are you after?”
“That’s my business,” said Will sullenly.
“Just what I said!” crowed Tony. “But I’d rather pay
Jinny a quid than you a bob. She’s got her old grandfather
to keep!”
“Yes, and he’s as selfish and inconsiderate as you. But she
shan’t get you a horse, and there’s an end of it.”
“Oho!” Brandy had made him genial again. “Who’s
going to prevent it? Now don’t say ‘I will,’ because that’s in
our dramas—attitude and all. Though judging by the way
you’ve been going on, Mr. Anon, I’m not so sure you wouldn’t
make an actor! Perhaps Polly smelt right and you are one after
all. But don’t you come disturbing my peace of mind, you son
of a star. Wild horses wouldn’t drag me back to the legitimate.”
“We’re talking of caravan horses,” said Will, at once mystified
and mollified.
“You seem to know all about it. I guess you ran a show
yourself in the States.”
Will smiled darkly. “That’s not your affair.”
“But it might be. I’m not above a partner with capital.
Duke’s Marionettes are getting shabby. The ghost is nearly
black; Ophelia wants a new coat of paint. Harlequin is out of
joint and the Clown’s cheeks are worn white. And we’ve got
too few characters and too many plays. The public are on to
it when they see Hamlet turning up again in The Beggar of
Bethnal Green. Some new scenery too would smarten up the
show. I shan’t expect you to pull the strings—just put up the
chinkers and we’ll divvy up, you and me and Polly. Now don’t
say ‘No’ too quick. Drink it over.” And, beaming beneficence,
he again tendered Will the other glass.
This time Will took it, hearing himself clink it against Tony’s
through a daze, as he asked himself whether, after all, this notion—utterly
fantastic and unexpected as it was—mightn’t be as
good a way as any other of investing his ninety pounds: he
would certainly be in a position then to stop Jinny from buying
the horse!
“Well, what do you say?” cried Tony.
“But you don’t know my name?” murmured Will, with the
stir of adventure and brandy in his veins.
“Pooh! What’s in a name? A nose by any other name
would swell as red.” And, laughing, he clapped Will on the
shoulder. “We’ll spruce up the tent too, and slick up the
caravan—a dingy old hearse ain’t the best advertisement on a
tour. And why shouldn’t you take some of the parts? Pity to
waste your twang. We’d get some American figures made—cowboys
and slave-dealers and such—and spice our ghosts and
goblins with Colonel Bowie knives and Yankee yumour. We
might even turn the bridegroom in The Mistletoe Bough into a
rich New-Yorker, and make the bride moulder away in an
American trunk. There’s a fortune in it. I don’t mean in the
trunk—ha, ha, ha!”
With a last instinct of sanity Will observed maliciously that it
was Sunday. He merely meant to remind Tony that that was
his day for truth. But the Showman’s glass nearly fell from his
fingers.
“You too!” he said. “And that Jinny—as lively a girl as
ever stepped. And Mother Gander—as buxom a landlady as
ever bussed a bagman. What’s come over the East Anglian
circuit? And I took you for a man of the world.”
Unwilling to repudiate that status, Will remarked flabbily that
precisely as a man of the world he didn’t see any money in
marionettes.
“No money!” Mr. Flippance swelled with indignation as he
pointed out that Drury Lane and the mines of Golconda were not
in it with marionettes, properly equipped and spring-cleaned; the
public was simply panting for high-class puppets.
It goaded Will to emphasize his meaning. “Is this your
Sunday talk or your week-day talk?” he interrupted dryly.
“Didn’t you just tell me that you’re doing badly?”
Mr. Flippance admitted it almost without a wince. And
had he not given the reason? To take money out you
must put money in. “I tell you there’s a fortune in it,” he
repeated.
“Sunk?” asked Will blandly. He added vengefully that he
would consider a partnership when the stuffed elephant came
home from the Crystal Palace. Tony, in crimson comprehension,
rushed at the litter on the spare chair and dragged out a newspaper
from under the neckties. “Read that!” he said
sublimely, “the Essex County Chronicle!” And his semi-gilded
forefinger indicated a heavily blued passage. “Our
readers will be interested to know,” read Will, “that it is a
local showman who supplied the great stuffed elephant that
holds Her Majesty’s gorgeous howdah in Mr. Paxton’s marvellous
glass——”
He dropped the paper. “I beg your pardon!” he said, too
disconcerted to realize that the “local” showman need not
necessarily be Tony Flip. “But I really would rather not talk
business to-day, and I don’t know anything about yours—that
wasn’t my line in the States. I never even saw a puppet-show
in my life, outside Punch and Judy. A real live drama now——”
he concluded vaguely, meaning that he had at least seen real
plays, and utterly unforeseeing the effect the remark would have
upon his host.
For Tony Flip bounded like a large mechanical toy, plumped
down again in his chair, turned its back and his own to his
guest, and stuffing jewelled forefingers into both his ears cried
out: “Get thee behind me, Satan! Avaunt! Avaunt!”
“Me, Satan!” said Will, astonished. “Who ever heard of
Satan refusing to do business on Sunday?”
If his last innocent remark had produced convulsive effects in
a perpendicular direction, this set Tony Flip rolling from side to
side in his chair. “Yankee yumour,” he gasped between the
spasms. “Lord!” he said at last. “You’ll drive me to set
up a minstrel show, only to get that in.”
Will, though puzzled, could hardly help being flattered by
these proofs of his facetious talents. It was strange, he thought,
how different the conversation went when he was with Jinny.
Then the laugh seemed always at his expense.
“I should think a minstrel show would be more fun,” he
observed.
Tony veered round with his arm-chair, ceased to laugh, and
regarded Will with large, reproachful eyes. “And you cant
about Sunday!” he said. “And then to come tempting me
back to that Witches’ Sabbath of a profession.”
“Nigger minstrels?” Will murmured, more dazed than
ever.
“As if nigger minstrels weren’t half-way to your Othello. No,
you son of Satan. To hell with your capital! Didn’t you hear
me say ditto to the rat-catcher? They are dens of the devil—theatres.”
“Then why do you run one?”
“Me! I don’t class my show as a theatre. Marionettes keep
themselves to themselves.”
“But you play Shakespeare.”
Tony held up his fat glittering forefinger. “We pull Shakespeare’s
strings—Polly and me. But there’s no actors the
public can drag before the curtain.”
Will admitted the difference, but not the moral distinction.
“You ever met any actors and actresses?” said Tony.
Will could not pretend to that privilege—if Mr. Flippance and
his daughter refused to be counted—and there was a long silence,
in which Tony seemed to the outer eye to keep sips of brandy-and-water
lingering on his palate, though he was really—it
transpired—chewing the cud of bitter memories. For suddenly
he burst out: “I lived all my life with ’em. I’ve managed ’em
for years—or, rather, failed to manage ’em. Born in a Green
Room, rocked in a Witches’ Cauldron, and baptized in grease-paint.
My ma was a leading lady—she played heroines and my
father wrote the melodramas. And they know a good melodrama
at the ‘Eagle.’ ”
“Yes—I’ve heard of the ‘Eagle’ in London,” said Will.
“Ah, you know it by the song, perhaps:
Up and down the City Road,
  In and out the ‘Eagle.’
That’s the way the money goes,
  Pop goes the weasel!”
“I never heard a weasel go pop,” Will laughed. “It was the
mouse, if anything, though I did once see a stoat crack up before
a cat.”
Tony’s mien relaxed in a faint smile.
The weasel was a tailor’s iron, he explained, pawned by the
reckless snip to raise money for treating the damsels who danced
with him on that open-air platform to which the “Eagle’s”
audience streamed out betwixt the drama and the farce. He
added simply: “That’s where my Don Juan of a dad first
clapped eyes on a girl, pretty, of course, but with no more acting
in her than Mother Gander. Yet, would you believe it, he
shoved her into the lead instead of ma, and wrote a piece all for
her, and what was worse it was a big go. That was the last straw,
and clasping me to her wounded bosom, she left him, poor ma.”
“I should have thought she’d ha’ left him sooner,” murmured
Will, vaguely uncomfortable under these frank domestic revelations.
“It isn’t so easy to leave a man you’re not married to!” said
Tony.
Will gasped.
“Ah, that surprises you?” said the Showman complacently.
With a cautious glance at his daughter’s door of communication,
he produced two cigars furtively from his washstand drawer—was
he forbidden to smoke, Will wondered. “You’ll find that
good,” he said, pressing one upon his guest.
“You see,” he explained, as they puffed at these excellent
weeds in a new intimacy, “if a woman leaves her husband it
makes a scandal he don’t like, whereas a man that’s not tied is
only too glad to be rid of her. Oh, I ain’t defending ma, mind
you—it only shows she was a born actress. I dare say she’d
only sucked up to pa to get parts. But when he unstarred her,
fine emotional actress as she was, she could never get her foot in
again in London, to play leads I mean, for she was too proud
to play anything else. ‘I can play anything except second
fiddle,’ she used to say, and rather than cave in, she married a
fifth-rate manager, called Jim Flippance, who had only a fit-up
theatre (carries its own props, scenery, and proscenium, but not
open-air, you know), and made him put up pieces with a kid in
’em to keep me out of mischief, but it wasn’t long before I soared
out of the parental nest, and by the time they both joined the
majority, poor old birds, I’d been leading man or manager or
both in half a dozen theatres, two of ’em London houses.” Will
receiving this information with a silent curl of his smoke, as
though it were another elephantine claim, Mr. Flippance added
vehemently: “Real London theatres, mind you, not those
swindling gaffs for paying amateurs described by Boz—that’s
Charles Dickens, you know. You’ve read Dickens?”
Will shook his head. “Too heavy and high-class for me.
They don’t like him in the States either—I’ve heard he wrote a
piece against them——”
“Ah, but you should hear him read his ‘Christmas Carol!’
There’s a wasted actor for you! Lord, if I’d had the running
of that chap!”
Will was more interested in the girl who cut out Mr. Flippance’s
ma. “I hope your father—your pa—” he substituted politely,
“married his new flame,” he said. Even through the glow of
the brandy and the blur of the smoke he was dismayed by this
dishevelled life.
“How could he? He had a wife in Cork. Yes, I forgot to
say pa was Irish. I’ve always gone by my mother’s married
name, but you can have my father’s name if you wish!”
“Not for a million pounds,” said Will.
“You Yankee yumorist!” Tony blew a playful puff of smoke
at him. “Well, you’ll see it if you come across the old ‘Eagle’
playbills or those of Flippance’s Fit-Up for that matter, for we
did all pa’s plays—ma had played them so long she knew all
the parts. Pa sent her a lawyer’s letter—for she didn’t even
trouble to change the titles or the author’s name—but she defied
him to wash his dirty linen in court, knowing how virtuous
his ‘Eagle’ public was, and that it might ha’ ruined him and
his moral melodramas.”
“They seem a funny lot—stage folk,” Will commented.
“Bless you, there’s no bearing of ’em.”
Will, relieved, said he was glad Mr. Flippance didn’t approve
of such morals.
“Morals!” Tony glared at him. “Who’s talking of morals?
Men will be men and women women whether they’re pro’s or
public. You didn’t find America a Sunday-school, I reckon?”
Will, coughing over his liquor, supposed a man could have his
fun anywhere.
“That’s what I say!” said the Showman. “And on the
other hand I’ve known actors as respectable as your rat-catcher.
I’m one of ’em myself, as I told you just now. I’d seen too
many dead flies in the honey—and my Polly’s as pure as her
poor dead mother. No, it ain’t their morals that bother me, it’s
their ways. Holy Moses! To think of the time I had travelling
round managing these sons of dragons and hell-cats! I envied
ma and Flippance in the churchyard under their favourable
stone notices. The jealousies! The cat-and-dog bickerings!
The screams and hysterics! Who should play this or that, who
should be largest on the programmes and posters, who should
stand in the limelight, who should take the call—they never
quarrelled who should take the bird: that’s the hiss in our
lingo. They were always hissing at one another, or at the poor
manager, that’s me! I’ve seen the leading man and the leading
lady take their call hand in hand, and the moment the curtain
was down resume spitting fire at each other. It wasn’t that
they had any vanity, they said, it was only that their position
demanded they should take calls singly or be printed larger than
each other. Cocks and catamarans! I tell you if I hadn’t
swopped with Duke for his marionettes, I should have had little
rose-bushes growing out of me now, and that favourable stone
notice over me. Oh, the peace of it—it’s Sunday all the week!”
“I can see marionettes would be easier to manage,” said Will,
smiling.
“Ah, but to feel it as I do, you must have lived through it.”
Mr. Flippance rose in his emotion and paced animatedly. “You
must have had a hornets’ nest for your seat and a brood of vipers
in your bosom, and shared diggings with the Furies. Oh, my
radiant juvenile, your sun-coloured hair would have been snow
if you had gone through what I have! If you’d had Ophelia in
hysterics and Hamlet in liquor and even the ghost hardly able
to walk, and the call-boy crying the curtain was up, and the
audience stamping and whistling, and short-tempered people at
the box-office demanding their money back, you’d be able to
measure the feeling of thankfulness that comes over the cockles
of my heart when I stand in my theatre and see my leading lady
sitting so angelic on her wires unable to move hand or foot
without me, or when I jerk my leading man out of the centre of
the stage all in a heavenly calm; And to see the curtain come
up and down with nobody scuffling behind it to bob and smirk—oh,
the Jerusalem restfulness! There mayn’t be as much rhino
in marionettes as in flesh and blood——”
“You just said there was more,” Will reminded him, unkindly.
“I meant compared with the capital put in,” said Tony,
without turning a hair. “You don’t risk much when you don’t
have to pay your actors. But Duke wasn’t mercenary, and it
was the glory that appealed to him, poor man. He’d inherited
the business, like me, but he’d always been ambitious after high
art, he told me, and Flippance’s Fit-Up was his boyhood’s
dream. We did the swop over mulled claret last Christmas Eve
in this very inn. Peace and goodwill, thinks I, as we clinked
tumblers on the deal. You’ve got the goodwill, but peace, no,
that you’ll never see again.”
Will smiled. “I’ll really have to come and see those blessèd
puppets,” he said, as the Showman replenished the glasses.
Tony replied that he should see the whole boiling of them
either before or after the show, neatly packed in their big box.
“And if there’s any you’d like to kick, you’re welcome,” he said.
“What! Damage your property?”
“It would work off my bitter memories.”
“But they’re not the real live actors.”
“No—there’s the pity!” said Tony. “But they look so
real—they’re life-size, you know—that I sometimes yell at ’em
and abuse ’em just for the satisfaction of their not answering
back. And the leading lady looks as if she had a tongue to her—I
promise you. A tongue—but thank the Lord it can only talk
Shakespeare or noble sentiments—can’t even nag the management
for a new dress. As for the juvenile lead, I can’t help
tweaking his nose sometimes for the sake of auld lang syne.
Polly can’t understand my spoiling his beauty—I can’t make
her see I’m getting a bit of my own back—and when she catches
me punching the low comedian’s head with a boxing-glove she
saucers her eyes, as though I was going dotty. But she never
had to manage ’em. And I had to travel ’em too—don’t forget
that. Fancy carting around a menagerie, all in the same cage!
But I have my revenge when I travel ’em now—into the box
they go—leads below and the heavy man sitting on their heads,
ha, ha, ha!—and utilities and supers on top of all! And it
don’t raise a whisper. Talk of the lion lying down with the
lamb. Believe me, old cock, that there millennium will never
come till we’re all on wires.” He drew vigorously at the cigar
his eloquence had all but extinguished.
“There’s a lot of the brutes,” he mused between the puffs,
“that don’t know Tony Flip’s escaped out of hell, and they
write and call for engagements—same as Polly thought you did—and
if it isn’t Sunday I take ’em to see my company and rub
their noses into ’em, so to speak. Look at ’em, I say, every man
and woman knowing their place, and when to speak and when
to hold their blooming tongue, every one knowing their parts
too, which is more than you ever did, I’ll be bound. No wigs, no
make-ups, no dresses, no young bloods or decrepit dandies
coming behind, no prompter, nobody missing their cue, or
unpunctual or hysterical. No Bardell versus Pickwick. Nobody
drunk, married, divorced, deceased, laid up, locked up, or run
over, between the dress rehearsal and the first night. No
understudies, eating their heads off: in the way when they’re
not wanted, and missing their cues when they are. No sore
throats, no funerals to go to, no babies to get—if there’s a baby
wanted, I order it from the makers. And above all, my boy,
say I to ’em, no treasury.”
“What’s that?” inquired Will.
“What’s that? Well I’m blowed. That’s pay-day. And
kindly note, I say to ’em, that lead don’t get more than utility,
nor responsibles than walking gentlemen. It’s Owenism, you
sons of Mammon, I tell ’em, sheer Owenism. Everybody getting
the same nothing, and nobody coming carneying for advance
half-crowns. As for curtain-calls, the singing chambermaid’s
got the same chance as Lady Macbeth. And when it is a
leading man that’s come for a berth, I take him to the front of
the booth where there’s a retired village idiot I picked up,
banging the drum. Look there, says I, he’s not got much brains
but he isn’t wood, and that’s the only flesh-and-blood job I’ve
got left in this blooming shop. If you like to take it, why, in recognition
of your position, I’ll throw in an extra naphtha flare.”
“And what do they say?” laughed Will.
“It can’t be repeated on a Sunday! But you can picture ’em
black in the face—all except the nose. That gets redder than
ever! Hullo, Charley! Come in! Come in!”
Through the open door he had caught sight of the landlord in
the corridor.
“Can’t stop, Tony.” Mr. Mott was, in fact, hurrying to take
advantage of his spouse’s return to chapel.
“Gander-pecked again, I suppose,” laughed the Showman.
“Ah, Charley, you’d be much happier if you had a wife on
wires.”
“There you go again!” And Mr. Mott, eager to join old
pals at their fishing, sniggered past, leaving a reek of hair-oil.
“Poor chap!” sighed Tony. “But there’s always hope for a
man whose wife won’t call in a doctor.”
Will laughed, and cunningly took advantage of all this expansive
geniality to escape from the room and the threatened
transaction and to call from the doorstep as he took his farewell,
“Then it’s settled—I get the horse.”
“If you bring it into the partnership,” cried Tony after him,
“not otherwise.”
Will found himself waylaid by Polly as he passed her doorway.
She beckoned him within with a mysterious, masterful forefinger,
and he, seeing the moreen curtains of her four-poster discreetly
drawn, entered, though not without Puritan misgivings. She drew
another curtain over the closed door communicating with her
father’s room, and turned the key. “Don’t waste my cigar,” she
said as he held it behind him. “I can see pa’s given you one of
mine.” And taking up her glowing fag-end from the ash-tray,
she resumed her suction of it, sipping in the intervals at a glass
of milk. “I suppose you won’t share my drink,” she said simply.
“No, thank you,” he said, hardly believing his eyes, though he
now understood whence came the clouds in which he had found
her mantled. Perhaps she was really a man in disguise, despite
her long ear-rings. But then, would ever a male take milk with
his cigar? What with tobacco and horsiness, what was the sex
coming to? And yet there seemed something symbolic in this
combination of stimulants, this masculinity mitigated by milk!
“What do you want to say to me?” he asked, keeping the
front door open with his hand.
“What’s this about a partnership?” she said softly. “I
couldn’t help hearing.”
“Don’t ask me,” said Will in tones hushed as cautiously.
“Mr. Flippance did speak of it, but I’ve never thought of the
theatre as a business, only as a spree.”
“Did he want you to take a theatre?” she asked anxiously.
“Good heavens, no! He called it hell!”
Miss Flippance smiled sadly. “That’s his way of consoling
himself. He’s dying to get a stock company again. But he
mustn’t have even a theatre for amateurs. I’d fight it tooth
and nail.”
“It’s bad for him, I know.”
“It’s bad for me,” said Miss Flippance. She puffed out a
cloud. “You see, there’d be no place for me. I can wipe most
actresses off the stage, but I’m not pretty—at least, not since
my illness—and the public won’t have me—except at the piano
where I turn my back on them. Plain actresses must be heard
and not seen.”
“Oh!” Will was taken aback by such candour.
“Besides, one of the women would probably entangle him into
marriage. I don’t mind his having a wife on wires!” And a
smile came travelling over the pits of her face.
“You don’t mean to say he really wants to go back to hell?”
said Will, dazed.
“Don’t the moths after you’ve saved ’em from the lamp?
And it was no easy task saving him. Christmas after Christmas
I used to jest: ‘Peace and goodwill indeed! You’ll never have
peace till you’ve got rid of your goodwill.’ ”
“But that’s what he says himself,” said Will naïvely. “So
he can’t be craving to go back—it’s the marionettes he wanted
me to stand in with.”
“That’s all my eye. He don’t know how happy he really is
nowadays, playing all the men’s parts. That was always the
trouble in a real theatre, especially when he was cock-of-the-walk—he
never could make up his mind which part he wanted. First
he’d try one, and then think another was better and throw it
up in the middle and take away the other man’s part. Nobody
likes to give up a half-digested part, and it doesn’t make things
easier when, after all, you get it back again. Imagine the
ructions he was always making, and I’m not going to have it all
over again. He’s got all the parts now, and so it’s going to
stay.” With which ultimatum she held out her hand and
gripped him with what he felt a manly clasp, and an honest.
“Don’t you be his partner,” she counselled. “He’s lost all his
own money and it’s not likely he’d multiply yours. He might
have been a big London actor or manager, but the Bible sized
him up before he was born. ‘Unstable as water, thou shalt not
excel.’ If only at least one can keep him to water! No, you
stick to your cash. There’s no money in the show for more than
him and me—my last jewellery will have to go for the horse—and
if you’ve really got the dollars, he’d have a theatre, with
you as juvenile lead, before you could say Jack Robinson, and
then he’d steal your part and drive you to drink.”
Will replied firmly, still holding her hand, that he was going
to put his money into farming, and by the way, would she
countermand that order to the Carrier for the horse?
“Oh, but we must have a horse,” said Polly.
“Quite so, but why through Jinny?” He was prepared
himself, he explained, to get them the best animal at the lowest
price.
“And for what commission?” she queried.
“For love!” said Will.
Polly withdrew her hand. “No, thank you. We’d best let it
go through Jinny—like everything else.”
COMEDY OF CORYDON AND AMARYLLIS
Among the rest a shepherd, though but young,
  Yet harten’d to his pipe, with all the skill
  His few years could, began to fit his quill,
Willie he hight. . . .
 
  Fair was the day, but fairer was the maid
  Who that day’s morn into the green-woods stray’d.
Sweet was the air, but sweeter was her breathing,
Such rare perfumes the roses are bequeathing.
Browne, “Britannia’s Pastorals.”
It was the shepherd-cowman, and not Jinny, who delivered the
horn to Will. She had “happened of him,” Master Peartree
explained tediously, in the remote field to which he had taken
the sheep to feed off the winter barley. “Powerfully trumpeting”
for him with it just when he was looking for fly, when indeed
in the very act of discovering a maggoty rump, she had besought
him to convey that “liddle ole horn,” she being so late and
Gran’fer likely to be “in a taking.”
Now this “liddle ole horn”—when Will saw Master Peartree
and his sheep-dog coming along in the evening light—he took to
be the shepherd’s crook or his great umbrella folded, so lengthy
did it loom, and when he perceived that it was what he was
expected to perform on, he was taken aback. It was not that
he had not seen coach-horns in plenty, but he had seen them in
their proper environment and at their proper altitude, their
elemental straightforwardness making an exhilarating right-angle
with the guard’s mouth, a sort of streaming pennon. But a
coach-horn in its bare quiddity, quite as tall as the shrunken old
shepherd, and hardly a foot shorter than Will himself, dissociated
from jovial visions of scarlet, rum-soused visages and spanking
steeds, was as ungainly to behold and as awkward to handle as
it was difficult to explain away. Evidently the jade had bought
him the largest size on the market; he knew not whether to be
flattered or vexed at her idea of the appropriately virile. But
to send it by this alien hand—to make a village wonder and
scandal of it! How, indeed, was he to explain to the bucolic
mind his sudden passion for the instrument? Flutes and concertinas
folks could understand, even tin whistles; but what
could a man looking round for a farm want with a colossal
coach-horn? He was glad at least he had met Master Peartree
out of sight of his parents. There was a note attached to the
case, and he opened it the more eagerly that it delayed the
explanation which Master Peartree seemed to his morbid vision
to be grimly awaiting.
“Sir,—Mr. Daniel Quarles has pleasure in forwarding per
favour of bearer Mr. William Flynt’s esteemed order. Bill
enclosed. I hope you will find the stature agreeable to you—it
was only by casualty I got such a protracted one, and as
the compass protracts with the stature you could easily educe
three octaves from it. Half-tones of course I shall not expect
as without holes only a musical Arabian spirit like my granddaughter
can evoke them, but when you can play the ‘Buy a
Broom’ Polka with concinnity, I shall consider the gloves
fairly conquered.
“I remain
“Yours obediently,
“Daniel Quarles.
“P.S.—The mouthpiece unscrews being mutable, so I can
exchange it for another, if this does not suit Mr. William
Flynt’s lips.”
How the deuce was he to play a polka he had never heard,
especially “with concinnity” (whatever that might be), was the
dominant thought in his perturbed brain. But as Master
Peartree seemed still expectant—was it even of a tune?—Will
stooped down to pat the dog, whose black-tipped tail was hoisted
like a friendly signal. It was a ragged animal just between two
coats—a canine counterpart of its shabby, straggly-haired master—but
Will caressed it like a velvety lapdog while he inquired
carelessly—his horn tucked like a telescope under his arm—how
the Carrier had carried herself, what exactly she had said. But
he only provoked—after the briefest glimpse of the girl—a
rambling narrative about a sheep that had broken its arm in a
“roosh,” in the panicky restlessness of the thundery Sunday: it
had fallen down a steep and another had rolled on top of it.
And even with this “meldoo” the sheep were so pernickety you
could do naught with ’em. Doubtless in this cloudy heat they
felt the weight of their wool—he should be shearing some for
the early market as soon as they could get the labour, which was
not easy in these migrating days. Even young men who came
back lazed about, he added pointedly, when they might be
earning good money. Will hastened to inquire whether the
shearers were as merry at their work as he remembered them.
He could never forget the beautiful bass voice of Master Peartree,
but he supposed time had now abated its resonancy, or was he
mistaken? He was mistaken, he admiringly admitted, for the
ancient was soon quavering out in a piping voice:
“There was a sheep went out to reap”
and Will, beating time with the great horn, was solemnly singing
the chorus:
“Chrissimus Day, Chrissimus Day”
And now would the famous singer oblige with the “Buy a Broom
Polka”? Alas, he did not know it, with or without “concinnity”!
But young Ravens might know it, he who was as
full of tunes as a dog of fleas, and with his perpetual flow of
melody made bread and tea like harvest suppers, and shearing
days as jolly as Chrissimus. But where was this musical box?
Alas! he had “gone furrin,” being somewhere beyond Southend.
But master expected him back for the shearing; he was a
rolling stone, was Ravens, but he usually rolled back this time
o’ year. No, not rolled with liquor, nor yet like the sheep that
broke its arm. Had it been a fat sheep, he would have butchered
it, but as it was only store he had set the arm himself. No, he had
no need of a vet. for that, like the degenerate young shepherds
nowadays; he wouldn’t be beholden to cattle-doctors, not he,
keeping for ever o’ salts and gentians and bottles of lotion in his
hut, although “suspicioning shab”—it might even be rot from
the river-marsh—in one of the sheep which he had just been
examining for fly, he had taken the opportunity to ask Jinny to
send round Elijah Skindle. ’Tis a long talk that has no turning,
and Will, when the narrative thus came, by a wide detour, back
to Jinny, ceased fidgeting with the horn, and demanded what
she had said to that. It transpired that she had refused to order
Elijah, despite that Mrs. Flynt had recommended him as cheaper,
alleging, drat her, that Jorrow was the better man. Will,
curiously forgetting Mr. Flippance and his horse, concurred in
the view that carriers cannot be choosers. He also started
another current of indignation against carriers getting other
folks to fetch and carry for them. Would the hard-working
shepherd, who was too easily put upon, kindly not encourage the
girl in future to shirk her job?
Touched by the sense of his own magnanimity and the sixpence
slipped into his palm, the good shepherd promised to repress his
obligingness in the interests of the higher ethics, and Will,
bidding him farewell, slipped behind the row of stag-headed
poplars opposite the gate of Frog Farm, and strove—before entering
the house—to adjust his horn down his trousers and up his back.
It was no easy process with such a “protracted” object: fortunately
it was thin, save at the swelling end, but by keeping
this bulge below, he could avoid humping his back. To walk
with such a ramrod up it and adown one leg would, however,
have taxed the talents of the most graceful damsel training for
deportment. He hobbled painfully to the rear of the farmhouse,
designing to hide the horn before entering, but lo! there was
his mother filling the food-pot of his neglected ferrets.
“Oh, my poor Will!” she exclaimed. “I told your father
you’d have rheumatics—sitting in chapel in your damp clothes.”
She tried to take him pitifully in her arms but he limped away,
fearing she would imagine his backbone had come outside.
“It’s only one leg a bit stiff,” he said ungraciously. But she
hooked her arm in his and drew her halt offspring towards the
back door; a brief but parlous journey, for he felt the horn
slipping towards his boot.
“Why, your ankle’s swollen,” said Martha tragically.
“It’ll soon go down,” he assured her.
A terrible struggle agitated the maternal heart. Even Will,
preoccupied with his grotesque position, could see her face
working.
“You’re sure you wouldn’t like to have the doctor?”
“Oh no, mother. What nonsense!”
Her clouds lifted a little. “But this may be Jinny’s evening
for coming—I could tell her to go for him to-morrow.”
“To-morrow it’ll be better—I feel certain, mother.”
She beamed. “I’m so glad you’ve found faith, dearie. I
knew when once you began studying the texts you couldn’t miss
it. King Asa, too, suffered from his feet. But he sought to the
physicians and displeased the Lord. Have no confidence in man,
dearie. There’s days I get pains in my side as if my ribs grated
together. But I’d be afraid to put myself out of the Lord’s
hands, after I’ve trusted to Him all these years.”
Will winced. He seemed to himself vaguely blasphemous. As
soon as he was alone in his bedroom, the swelling was transferred
to the capacious box so miraculously carried from Chipstone.
He dared not descend to supper: so speedy a miracle might
have seemed too “Peculiar.” But next morning (after a family
breakfast which was for his elders a veritable feast of faith) he
stole out with the horn and his fishing-rod and creel to the river,
which in the watches of the night he had decided upon as the
loneliest spot for practising, while the open ramshackle boat-house,
where the rusty punt usually nested, was to afford a
hiding-place for the instrument.
It was worth while going down that pastoral slope these days,
even were one not bent on music, solitude, and the winning of
gloves. In weather so prematurely sultry, the river was so
sweet and still and green, with its shadowy reflections, its blobs
of duckweed, the sedges and flags along its banks, and the
willows—grey-white or silvery—along its borders: gliding so
tranquilly in its reaches and lapping so lazily round its islands
that only at bends did the water seem to flow at all. In the
undulating meadows that sloped to it, silted with cow-droppings,
Master Peartree’s kine lay around chewing, and the sense of
brooding heat gave to the landscape a dreamy magic, suffused
with a sense of water.
It was to this idyllic retreat that our Tityrus or Corydon
repaired to essay his metallic pipe. And, standing on the bank
like a watchman, his horn to his lips, “Tucker, tucker,” he
breathed industriously into the unresponsive instrument. In
vain did he lip and tongue the notes as instructed, nothing broke
the sultry silence. Surely the mouthpiece could not suit Mr.
William Flynt’s lips. Suddenly, in his shamed impotence, he
had a sense of a breathing presence. In his agitation the horn
slipped from his nervous fingers and went souse into the water,
while the startled beast—for the observer proved to be only one
of Master Peartree’s cows—lumbered bouncingly back along the
pasture.
Fortunately the instrument had lodged in the shallow mud of
the bank. Fishing it up—it was his sole catch that week—he
found to his joy that it emitted a faint toot, and he rightly
divined that a little water was just what it had needed. Encouraged
by this intervention of Providence in his favour, his
performance bore henceforwards some proportion to his pains.
It was embarrassing though to return from these painful puffings
without a single bite. Every dinner-time he had to sneak in as
best he could with empty basket after a morning of pertinacious
tooting, successful enough to frighten off the deafest fish. Once,
indeed, going home by a somewhat roundabout route that
skirted Blackwater Hall, he chanced on a Chipstone fishmonger
serving Long Bradmarsh, and was able to take home some fruits
of his rod. But the only time our piscatorial swain ever tried
for an honest bite was when he saw or heard somebody or something
coming along. Then, drawing in his horn like a snail, he
presented the picture of the complete angler. Usually it was
only Bidlake’s barge that disturbed his strenuous solitude, and the
transient mockery of the twins was for the futile fisher, not for
the unsuspected musician. Not even Master Peartree’s cows
ever munched their way again to the bank while the horn was
at its fell exercises, for, like the horn which the fairy Logistilla
presented to Astolpho in “Orlando Furioso,” its blast seemed
to put all creation to flight. His sole auditors were a pair of
swans who refused to quit their normal haunt, though they
hissed him fiercely. Possibly they were accustomed “to hear
old Triton blow his wreathèd horn,” and so had a standard of
musical taste. Is not the swan’s own song, too, celebrated,
though it appears only to perform before it dies, as if to evade
criticism?
But however soundly the swans might hiss, Will, after three
days of red-faced rehearsal on the pleasant bank of the Brad, felt
ready to challenge his female critic in all save the polka she had
set for examination, and this he determined—after failing to hunt
it out—was no fair part of the wager. A whole evening he had
spent reknitting the thread of old acquaintanceship with carolling
cottagers, gleaning much gratitude for his kindly attentions, but
not the melody he was after, and being forced politely to abide
while gaffers piped “Heave away, my Johnny,” or gammers
ruthlessly completed “Midsummer Fair” or “Dashing away
with the Smoothing Iron.” However, he could now turn out
such complicated military flourishes that he excited his own
military ardour, and felt like marching in his thousands, and
doing such deeds of derring-do that the lips of all the damsels of
Essex would vie to change places with that mouthpiece. It was
high time then that this particular damsel should understand
how vain was her hope that he could be baffled by a tube.
Though he might not know that polka, he was sure that whatever
“concinnity” might be, he could perform with it, and impatience
began to steal over him at the delay in the test performance.
For if Jinny had fobbed him off with the shepherd on Tuesday,
she evaded service altogether on Friday. Even Nip might
conceivably crop up with some small groceries tied on to
him, and he could not try it on the dog. Also, unless he saw
her soon, the cattle fair would be upon them, and she still unsaved.
He must, with the relics of his copybook paper, compose a new
note, formally citing her to stand and hear, and deliver the
gloves.
But it was not easy to fix the place for deciding the wager.
The riverside meadows she could not well get at in her cart, and
for her to come specially on foot was hardly to be expected, in
view of her household labours. To cut her off and perform to
her on a high road was to run risks of being publicly ridiculous:
even by-ways have ears. Suppose his nerve or his breath failed,
suppose some impish accident muffled up the horn: there would
he be with swollen cheeks, a mountain in labour, producing not
even, a mouse-squeak; the mock of man and beast. But there
was Steeples Wood—not too far back off the high road, but
approached by a tangly brake that few ever penetrated: there—if
he could persuade her to it—was the ideal place for the great
horn solo. In a postscript he would express his willingness to
take off her hands the purchase of the Showman’s horse. To
convey all this by correspondence involved almost as much effort
as the practising, though his renewed call upon the Bible came
to Caleb and Martha as the natural sequel of his faith-cure. It
was no small feat of composition, this particular letter, in face
of a people, which, however abundant its horses, appeared to
have had neither “wagers” upon them, nor “gloves,” riding or
other.
That gloves were unknown to the ancient Hebrews, Will could
hardly bring himself to believe, even by hours of searching,
especially after coming upon a Fashion Catalogue for Ladies,
which showed a surprising wardrobe. Bonnets they had, it
would appear, and headbands and tablets and changeable suits
of apparel, and mantles and wimples and crisping pins and
fine linen and hoods and vails, and mufflers and girdles and
stomachers: as for their jewel-cases, they seemed stuffed not
only with rings and ear-rings and charms and bracelets and
moony tires, but likewise with jewels that dangled at the nose or
tinkled at the feet. How then should so elegant a world have
dispensed with gloves? But so—after scouring the sacred Book
from Genesis to Revelation—he must finally fain believe. Not
a single patriarch, priest, satrap, shepherd, physician, apostle,
publican, or sinner had ever sported gloves, and the Queen of
Sheba fared no better in this respect than the Witch of Endor.
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed with even one of these.
The Pharisees, it would appear, covered their foreheads with
phylacteries—whatever these might be—but left their hands
bare. And yet, Will thought wistfully, reading so early in the
sacred Book how Rebekah “put the skins of the kids of the
goats upon Jacob’s hands,” they might surely in all those
centuries have gone on to the idea of gloves, especially for winter
wear. But no, thousands of years after Rebekah, the knuckles
of Dives were apparently as raw as those of Lazarus. Oh, why
had he not betted something Biblical—a muffler now would have
suited either sex: even handkerchiefs were available. Not that
he could not risk spelling “gloves” to accord with “loves,”
which he found with no great difficulty in the holy text: he felt
it romantic to throw himself thus trustfully upon “love,” even
should it prove misleading.
Yet the search was not altogether vain, for though he could
find no gloves, the prophets, he found, were full of exhortations
to Jinny, which he carefully dog-eared and committed to memory
and kept up his sleeve for contingencies. “How canst thou
contend with horses?” Jeremiah asked her. Ezekiel warned
her against the cattle-dealer. “By reason of the abundance of
his horses their dust shall cover thee.” As for Isaiah, he remarked
plumply: “Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of
vanity, and sin as it were with a cart rope.”
To himself, on the other hand, the prophets were kind;
abounding in promises for the prosperity of his horn. And it
was Amos who supplied his letter with its opening sentence,
abrupt but dramatic:
“Can two walk together except they be agreed?”
But the letter written, there was the problem of sending it.
The intervention of either Bundock or Daniel was intolerable.
He must find an individual way. One verse that he came upon—it
was in the Book of Esther—enchanted him with its images,
telling how Mordecai wrote an order in the King’s name “and
sealed it with the King’s ring and sent letters by post on horseback,
riders on mules, camels, and young dromedaries.” How
he would have liked to seal his letter too with a royal ring, and
send it “by post on horseback.” He had a vision of the long
procession of mules, camels, and dromedaries filing along the
grass-grown lane to Blackwater Hall. How old Daniel would
rub his eyes at the strange humped beasts—yes, and Jinny too.
She would perhaps think that Mr. Flippance had acquired a new
show and was paying her a processional visit. Possibly these
animal images did lead him to the invention of his postal method,
or possibly it was his prior apprehension of Jinny’s utilizing Nip
as a package-bearer. At any rate, after having wondered
whether Martha’s pigeons could be trained up in the way they
should go, he hit on the device of tying his note to Nip’s collar.
The creature was friendly, and that Saturday afternoon it would
be at home. He would only have to hover long enough around
Blackwater Hall for his post-dog to fawn upon him. Of course
there was no certainty the dangling missive would escape Daniel’s
spectacles, but Nip being providentially of the colour of paper,
it was possible heaven had not blanched him in vain. Besides,
this time the note was carefully addressed to Miss Jinny Quarles,
with the “Quarles” scratched out by an afterthought when he
remembered that it was not her name.
But, alas! Nip did not play up; that longed-for quadruped did
not appear in the purlieus of the Hall. Will, tired of carrying
about the note, thought again of sticking it up in the stable and
ventured near, but his fear of encountering Daniel Quarles was too
lively, and finally he essayed—with some obscure remembrance of
Bowery melodrama—to fix it gleamingly in the fork of a tree
by which Methusalem stood when harnessing and unharnessing.
To his amaze a chaffinch flew out of the fork in violent protest,
while her gaily coloured consort dashed up from another quarter,
crying “U-whit” at him like an avine Flippance. Peeping into
the hollow of the fork he saw a couple of rather belated youngsters,
ugly, bald-headed, and featherless, apparently new-hatched and
almost savouring of the egg: yet when he touched them with
the note, opening great eyes and yawning with yellow beaks and
kicking each other with skeleton legs. But before he could
bethink himself of a new posting-place, lo! as sudden as the
chaffinches but far more welcome, with a yelp of joy and a
perpendicular tail wagging like a mad pendulum, Nip was upon
him; and having succeeded with a desperate bound in licking
the tip of his stooping chin, rolled himself on mother-earth with
voluptuous grunts. Will profited by this supineness to attach
the note by the thread he had passed through it.
The new postal system was a success. For when Will after
high tea sneaked out to the Common and sounded his horn—with
a happy combination of challenge, salute, and signal—Nip actually
appeared with a reply.
It was, however, unsatisfactory. Miss Boldero—the very
name, though he divined it denoted the same Jinny, came like
a glacial blast—presented her compliments to Mr. William Flynt,
but she had no time to be romantic in woods (she said) nor, even
at their homes, could she ever pay more than volant visits to
anybody, and that strictly in the way of Daniel Quarles’s business.
He could almost always find her at Blackwater Hall except
Tuesdays and Fridays, but she trusted he would not be too
turgid and thrasonical about his playing, even if his contumacious
serenade should be puissant enough to extort the pair of gloves.
All these strange words came, of course, from “The Universal
Spelling-Book.” Will, though he would still have refused to toot
before her grandfather, might have felt less crushed had he
known that in that ancient authority, “romantic” was defined
as “idle.”
It is possible that persons of strict ethics—like Miss Gentry,
say—would have lost sympathy with Jinny in these epistolary
efforts of hers to stand on tiptoe, so to speak, and write beyond
her education. But in thus titivating her style with gems of
speech she knew not to be false, she was moved by the necessity
of countering an overweening, overbearing, interfering young
man, who was subtly assuming a sort of critical wardenship over
her and her life: he needed a good vibration (“shaking or
beating”), she must teach him by her gelidity (“coldness”) to
be less conversant (“familiar”), and that she was quite his
parallel (“equal”). He must be made to feel that her company
was not to be had for the rogation (“asking”), in short that she
was no housekeeping ignoramus to be ridden over by world-travelled
wisdom, however genuine. No, she was not going to
incurvate (“bow or bend”) to Mr. William Flynt.
This rigidity was the more necessary as, ever since in that
thunderstorm his hand had tightened on hers—or was it the
reverse?—the lightnings seemed to pass through her, the reverberations
to shake her, whenever she thought of him, and even
when she did not. What there was in him to rend her thus
elementally she could not understand; doubtless it was the
memory of the storm now for ever associated with him. He
seemed—it was perhaps his life of adventure—to be in mystic
unison with tempests and floods and that sea-creek of her childhood,
now remembered exclusively as tossing and white-flecked.
Even when she was turning over her Spelling-Book to find words
to “vibrate” him with, it was the pages that vibrated: when
she copied its gelid trisyllables, she felt her hand again in his,
and her quill quivered as if the lightning were going through it.
And even Miss Gentry, though she would have derided Jinny’s
new vocabulary, might have admitted that there was a laudable
side to her pursuit of learning: the Spelling-Book itself overflowed
with commendation of such scholastic zeal. Jinny no
longer knitted or sewed in her evening hour of leisure. It was
occupied—even after the concoction of the grandiose letter—in
a feverish study of the volume neglected since her first scholastic
period. She must make herself a greater intellectual power, she
felt: she must master all human knowledge. And that all
human knowledge lay in the hundred and fifty pages of this
little book, our simple village girl, who was not romantic in any
sense of that word, who, except for Bible and hymn-book, had
never read a book—not even a novel—and who approached life
with senses fresh and virginal, sincerely and crudely believed.
Nor was the pose of “The Universal Spelling-Book” calculated
to dissipate her delusion. This wonderful work, which was now
destined to become Jinny’s guide, philosopher, and friend, had
nothing in common with those shallow productions of a later
period, concerned mainly with correct combinations of letters.
Dating from the age of folios and exhibiting, despite its diminutive
size, the same solid solemnity, it did really take all knowledge
for its province. (You learnt, for example, how to make
the very ink you spelled with—and although you may rarely
have possessed those best blue galls of Aleppo which formed the
base of black, still you might hope to get the three pints of
stale beer that were the substratum of red.) And not only all
knowledge, but all morals formed the farrago of this book. Well
might it ostentate among its “Patronizers” clergymen, private
gentlemen, philomaths, writing masters, and heads of academies.
Originally published—as already related—in the year of the
Lisbon Earthquake, and creating apparently as great a sensation
(in England at least), it constituted an omnium gatherum so
peculiar and extensive that there was no earthly (or heavenly)
subject you could be certain of not meeting there, though there
was one subject you could be certain of never escaping, for it
cropped up in the quaintest connexions—and that was Virtue.
As the author—who hailed oddly from the Royal Exchange
Assurance Office—justly claimed in his dedication to the Right
Honourable Slingsby Bethell, Esq., Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and One of its Representatives in Parliament (an
encourager of everything tending to “the Practice of Piety”
and “the Good of Mankind”), it was designed to do more than
barely teach the young idea how to spell. “To inculcate into
the Minds of Youth early Notices of Religion and Virtue, and to
point out to them their several Duties in the various Stages of
Life” was no less its aim. “And I should be very thankful,”
explained His Lordship’s obliged, obedient, and most humble
servant, “should I prove an instrument in the Hand of Providence
in preventing but one of the rising Generation from falling a
sacrifice to the pernicious Doctrines, secret Whispers, and
perpetual Insinuations of Popish Emissaries.”
It was a passage that had always swelled Jinny’s bosom with
emotion and the vow to ensure the gratification of this saintly
aspiration by supplying in herself the minimum one member of
the rising Generation to baffle these minions of the Scarlet
Woman. It had been at first a little bemusing to reflect that for
her Peculiar friends, the Established Church was little less
pernicious: still, fended by the double buffer of her sect and
Protestantism, she had thus far resisted the Emissaries she had
never encountered (for certainly the Rev. Mr. Fallow, whatever
the Chipstone curate might say of his Puseyite practices, had
never tried to pervert her even to the Establishment).
With three generations brought up on this pious pabulum—the
copy from which Sidrach the Owler had educated himself for
smuggling was already beyond the fiftieth edition—-it seemed
strange that the century should have had any declensions from
virtue to note; that papistry should have progressed was
incredible.
If in her dim, childish way, Jinny had ever felt a jarring note
in this treasure-house of virtue and information, it was the
assumption that both these existed primarily for little boys.
True, among the fascinating woodcuts was one depicting little
girls at school, but even there the mistress occupied the stiff
chair, while the Dominie of the boys’ school, majestic in a full-bottomed
wig, sat throned on a chair with arms. “A good child
will love God,” she read with humid eyes, only to be pulled up
short by “he will put his whole trust in Him.” Everything
seemed to be masculine, from God downwards: there was no
place for women even in punishment: to be “well whipt at
School and at Home, Day and Night”—a recommendation she
found it difficult to reconcile with the definition of “Ferula,” as
“a foolish Instrument, used in some Schools”—was a Nemesis
held out only to the boy who minded not his Church, his School,
and his Book. Such a one would live and die a Slave, a Fool,
and a Dunce. But as to the fate of bad little girls there was a
mysterious silence. Even for their goodness there was no sure
reward: for though presumably they were included in the well-behaved
who would be clothed in Garments of Gold and have a
Crown of Gold set on their Head, while Angels rejoiced to see
them, these joys were never definitely attached to an exclusively
feminine pronoun. A virtuous “woman” appeared once to her
relief, but it was only to be a crown to her husband. Even in
the foot-notes Jinny could not find a female. “If the young
learner has learnt to read these lessons pretty perfectly,” said
one note, “let him go over them once more.” As for the Useful
Fables, it was the boy that stole Apples or went into the Water
instead of going to School; and when it came to the longest
story of all, “Life truly painted in the Natural History of Tommy
and Harry”—the story that professed to show “Youth the ways
of life in General,” and did indeed show how wickedness wrecks
you on the Coast of Barbary, where you are torn to pieces by
wild beasts as per woodcut, while the pattern of Virtue and
Goodness still lives happy—it appeared that even a realistic
picture of life may be complete without girls.
Behold, however, Jinny—despite her sex—embarked on a
learned career, and burning the midnight oil in her fat little lamp
instead of curling up in her chest of drawers. Puckering her
brow she sat on a squat wooden arm-chair in that dun papered
living-room, imbibing virtue and information, till the Dutch
clock in the outer box-room startled her with its emphatic
declaration of the hour, and the cracked mirror revealed eyes
heavy-lidded. Far out over the Common streamed the curtained
light of that midnight oil, for the shutter could not be closed,
owing to a pair of blackbirds that had set up house in the eaves.
Jinny had found one of the young fallen on the grass: she had
fed it with morsels of meat which it swallowed with great yellow
gulps, following up the meal with a fluted grace. She had
restored it to its nest—touched to mark the domestic virtue of
its co-incubating parents. It had grown quite big now and
flown hoppingly away with short sharp cries, but Jinny still
cherished the nest and felt no need of the barring shutter. In
the silence the creakings of the cottage often sounded like footsteps
outside, but Jinny was not nervous, and a real footstep
would rouse Nip, she knew. Sometimes, these warm May
nights, she heard the cuckoo keeping hours as late as hers, sometimes
the nightingales would sing passionately in the lane.
There was one, she knew, that niched in a mutilated, ivy-swathed
trunk bordering on the Common, and she would hear it answering
the faint melancholy calls from afar with throbs and gushes of
melody as well as with a series of quick, piercing notes. And
sometimes when the air was clear she could hear the distant
church clocks. But all these sounds, like Nip’s and the Gaffer’s
snoring, were but a restful accompaniment to the acquisition of
omniscience: even the nightingale, in her ignorance of literature,
failed to romanticize her thoughts, painfully bent on mastering
all there was to know.
Meanings, we have seen, played a great part in these studies:
“Dollar—a Dutch coin”; “Engineer—an Artist”; “Gambadoes—a
Sort of Boots”; “History—an Account of Things”;
“Interview—Mutual Sight”; “Logarithms—Artificial Numbers”;
“Mahomet—the Turkish Impostor”; “Replevin—a
Writ so called”; “Stolidity—Foolishness”; “Tarantula—a
Baneful Insect”; “Valentine—a Romish Festival”; “Upholsterer—an
Undertaker”; “Zodiac—a Circle in the Heavens”:
such were the strange vocables she kept muttering and misunderstanding:
believing indeed that “Paramour” was merely
a grander word for “Lover” and connecting divorce with
“Schismatic—one guilty of unlawful separation.” It pained her
to meet the “Sadducees—a People that Denies the Being of
Angels,” slurring, as did these unimaginable heretics, the status
of her own mother. Surely it was for such that “Damnation—the
punishment of Hell Torments” had been designed. Punctuation
too she studied, growing learned in Apostrophes, Asterisks,
Carets, Crotchets, and Obelisks; other hours were devoted to
Grammar, Tenses, Degrees of Comparison (always between good
and better Boys), Genitives, and even Scraps of Latin. Pronunciation,
however, was her great stumbling-block. How was it
possible to keep one’s feet in the chaos, say, of four-syllabled
words, each accented on a different syllable? Antiquary,
Ambassador, Affidavit, Animadvert—it was heart-breaking and
head-splitting. Her memory, so marvellous when vivified by
realities, broke down before this procession of shadows.
With what relief she turned to the rich riot of “Moral and
Satyric Poems”—though her sex was still distressingly ignored,
and through every loophole the eternal male popped up.
He most improves who studies with Delight
And learns Sound Morals while he learns to write.
Still, where “Swearing, Gaming, and Pride” were rebuked in
lashing lines, she was not sorry to find the petticoat conspicuous
by its absence. It was a rare joy to come on Queen Anne in a
“List of Abbreviations” under the unexpected guise of A.R.;
in the list of kings, too, she appeared again, together with Mary
and Elizabeth; not a large proportion, Jinny thought, rejoicing
at the Victoria unforeseen by the learned author, whose “Chronological
Account of Remarkable Things” stopped, like her friend
Commander Dap’s, at the Battle of Trafalgar.
This table was indeed one of her favourite pages—it gave her,
she felt, a bird’s-eye view of all history—and with her head for
figures she never forgot that the Ten Commandments and the
Ten Plagues were given in 1494 B.C., and that the sun stood still
at Joshua’s word in 1454, while Daniel was in the Den of Lions
in 536. She was puzzled, though, at the destruction of Troy
which intervened between Joshua’s interference with the sun and
Saul’s anointment. Of the twenty-two great events that preceded
the Christian era, this was the only one that the Bible
forbore to mention. Subsequently to Christianity things seemed
to her to have moved fast, for up till the year 1600 alone, fourteen
“remarkable Things” occurred—two-thirds as many as
had happened in the whole previous 4007 years since the world
was created—while after 1600, extraordinary events sprouted
like blackberries, no less than fifty crowding to their grand
climacteric in Trafalgar.
In these fifty she was glad to see included the Confutation of
Popery by Martin Luther—a personage with whom Miss Gentry
had made her familiar—and she thrilled almost with local pride
to find “Arts and Sciences first taught at Cambridge, 1119,” for
the Cambridge carriers sometimes penetrated eastwards as far as
Chipstone itself. As a carrier, indeed, she was immensely
excited by the “Eleven Days successive Snow” of 1674, the
“Frost for thirteen Weeks” of 1684, “The Terrible high Wind
of November 26, 1703,” “the great and total Eclipse of the
Sun, April 22, 1713,” and the “severe Frost for nine Weeks”
beginning on Christmas Eve, 1739. She could vividly sympathize
with the unfortunate carriers of those days, and she did not
wonder that these brumal phenomena should form so great a
proportion of the few score happenings of Universal History, for
frosts and winds must be terrible indeed to be recounted as on a
level with the shooting of Admiral Byng, the American Declaration
of Independence, the Birth of the Prince of Wales, and the
“Attempted Assassination of George III at Drury Lane by
Hadfield, a lunatic.”
These studious vigils were invariably wound up with a prayer
from this same limitless thesaurus: on her knees by the transmogrified
chest of drawers, and with her hair hanging down her
back, and the lamplight falling on the coarse grey-typed page of
the Spelling-Book, Jinny repeated one or other of its masculine
supplications, prose or verse, and only a cynic (“Cynic—a Sour,
Crabbed Fellow”) would have laughed at the solemnity with
which she swallowed all those motley lucubrations, whether lay
or clerical. An impromptu prayer for her grandfather was
invariably slipped in, for this holy book of hers finished as
terribly as the Old Testament, and what made it worse was that
this awful culmination of the Spelling-Book was printed in black-letter.
It was a gruesome recital of the miseries and follies of
“the Seven Stages of Life”—none of which seemed worth living
even with the correctest of spelling, while death seemed worth
dying to escape the depravity and decrepitude of the final
stadium. But although her grandfather, with all his peevish
humours, could hardly be counted so steeped in sin as the old
man of the text, while his infirmities were still rudimentary, yet
the physical prognostication was terrifying—“for when we come
to those years, that our Eyes grow dim, Ears deaf, Visage pale, Hands
shaking, Knees trembling, and Feet faltering, then it is evident the
Dissolution of our mortal Tabernacle is near at Hand.”
Jinny could never read those dreadful words but she would
creep anxiously to the foot of the dark, twisting staircase and
listen for the reassuring sound of the Tabernacle snoring. And
if she bore so patiently with his whims and crotchets, not none of
the credit must be given to this sanctimonious Spelling-Book.
While Jinny was thus pursuing omniscience and equipping
herself to meet the masterful young man, and while the young
man in question was adding the mastery of the horn to his
conquests, their roads failed to cross. Jinny went to chapel the
Sunday following the thunderstorm, but Will was too alarmed
by the communal expectation of public autobiography to venture
there again, and his parents were only too glad to ignore his
home-staying and to resume their private Christa-peculiar-delphian
service, being sufficiently fortified by his preoccupation
with the Bible. What had driven Will to the Book again was
the outrageous appearance on Saturday night of Uncle Lilliwhyte
as parcel-bearer. Recovering from his relief that the
parcel did not contain snakes, but the conventional household
stores, Will found himself angry on his mother’s behalf. What
right had Jinny to foist such a fusty ragamuffin upon them, the
gay strings of whose rotting beaver only accentuated his griminess?
Jinny must know that his mother ranked uncleanliness
next to ungodliness. And Uncle Lilliwhyte would be a fixture
too, unless violently shaken off—he was Jinny’s neighbour; as
natural a go-between as Will’s own neighbour, Master Peartree.
He had already bribed off the shepherd: must he be blackmailed
by both?
And so, while Essex was at prayer, Will was concocting a
furious Oriental epistle, demanding a clean envoy, if Jinny was
too lazy to come herself. This was not so difficult to demand,
though laziness seemed as unknown to the Hebrews as gloves.
He had dallied, indeed, with his original idea of fetching the
household parcels from Chipstone himself, but somehow he could
not bring himself to so complete a severance of relations with
Jinny, especially as after the appearance of Uncle Lilliwhyte in
the new rôle of goods-deliverer, his mother had surprisingly
suggested that to spare Methusalem’s legs, the old nondescript
might always in future bring the weekly parcel for a penny or
two. Will had put this suggestion emphatically aside—it would
mean exposing his mother to a contact she detested—but he
wound up his letter to Jinny by threatening to become his own
carrier unless the service was conducted with propriety. Nip
duly returned that same Sunday afternoon with the answer that
if he would send his esteemed order in writing, Mr. Daniel Quarles
would have pleasure in executing his commission through a
scrupulously scoured ambassador. Will started replying instantly
that it was not his order: let her mark that he was not
the householder, merely the “scribe.” To write out the order,
however, gave him unexpected pause. Who could have realized
that “parrafin,” “sope” and “shuggar” were alike unenjoyed
by the heathen Jews? A pity that Frog Farm was itself so
“flowing with milk and honey”: with what confidence he could
have drawn on the resources of Palestine! True, one might
dodge—lamps and oil were abundant enough in Judæa, and
purification and sweetness could be suggested with airy allusiveness.
But in the end he only wrote grandly, “Household order
the same as uzual.”
Before this order had been executed, however, chance brought
about a meeting. Not that Miss Gentry, near whose wayside
cottage it occurred, would have called it chance. For that deft
needlewoman, besides believing in her own stained-glass miracle,
cherished, as we know, a naïve faith in “Culpeper’s Complete
Herbal”—a faith doubtless sustained by the attacks on the Pope
or on infidel physicians that might lurk snakelike in its most
innocent-seeming herb. Under the stimulus of this elementally
indelicate work—never permitted to stray from her bedside,
though imparted in filtered form to Jinny—she would tie woody
nightshade round her neck for her dizziness, and buy watercress
from Uncle Lilliwhyte to wash away pimples with the juice.
And if these herbs were, as Culpeper testified, under the respective
governance of Mercury and the Moon, how much more so human
life! Miss Gentry had indeed remarked to Will that very
afternoon (when he at last brought his mother’s bonnet to be
“bleached as good as new”) that her own horoscope, cast in
infancy by her aunt, had shown that the first time she went
upon a voyage she would be drowned: a reading whose infallibility
her happy survival demonstrated, since she had never been
foolish enough to set foot upon a vessel. “But for the deciphering
of this horoscope,” she had pointed out, “I should surely
now have been drowned, for I am naturally as fond of voyages
as you.”
It must be admitted that if Miss Gentry had thus pathetically
perished, Will would not have taken his mother’s bonnet to her,
nor met Jinny that afternoon. But then would he have met
Jinny but for the foolish sheep? Even the ovine fates, it would
appear, are interblent with the human.
This sheep suddenly dawned upon Jinny’s vision as Methusalem
with his cunning nose was trying to open a gate that led over a
private road, on either side of which its fellows grazed. Preoccupied
with the task of clasping Nip so that he should not
frighten the flock in his passage, she did not at first observe that
in the gap between the hinge of the gate and the post, a sheep’s
head was jammed, and that Methusalem’s success in lifting the
latch bade fair to asphyxiate it. The silly creature, having
escaped from the flock, had evidently tried to jump back again
through this gap, at a point just large enough to admit its head,
and with the failure of the leap, the head had descended into
the narrowest portion and there remained in pillory. In the
creature’s terror at the approach of the cart and Nip’s excited
barking, its efforts to free itself became more convulsive than
ever. Checking Methusalem in the middle of his pet trick, and
fastening up Nip, Jinny jumped down and with soothing words
seized the head of the frantic sheep, which was still thrusting itself
backward and forward, though without the sense to jump
upwards towards the broader space. But alas, its spasmodic
struggles prevented her from getting a sufficient grip on it to lift
the wedged and weighty head. She saw its ear was torn and
bleeding, and to her imagination it was going black in the face.
She looked round desperately. On the other side of the gate
lay the flock, scattered apathetically over the pasture they had
reaped and manured, chewing a tranquil cud, like self-righteous
citizens before the writhings of one of their own black sheep: of
a good Samaritan or shepherd there was no sign. She climbed
over the gate and strove to lift the agonizing head from the
other side, but she only increased the sufferer’s frenzy as well
as Nip’s.
“Be quiet, Nip!” she shouted, almost hysteric herself. And
as she raised her eyes to admonish the yapping terrier, she espied
to her joy a puffing pipe and a stick advancing towards her cart;
whether a young man or old she was not aware. He was simply
man as saviour, and he was at the gate and working at the rear
of the struggling head before she had quite realized it was Will,
and a certain added pleasure at the sight of this man in particular
had scarcely time to well up before it was swamped by the far
greater pleasure of seeing the sheep deftly released. It staggered,
however, as Will let it go, and lay sideways on the road, gasping,
and Jinny observed with horror a raw ring round its throat
where the wool was cut through as by a cord. But before she
could get through the gate to its assistance, it had risen feebly,
and as she came towards it, it trotted off timidly. Vastly
relieved, she tried to coax or chevy the truant back to its
companions. But it refused to go: on the contrary, it
retreated, and in solitary self-sufficiency began to crop the wayside
grass.
“Hasn’t spoiled her appetite!” said Will, with a laugh.
“They don’t seem to feel things as much as us,” agreed Jinny.
“No, indeed.” He knocked the ashes out of his pipe and
pocketed it. “Fancy, if you’d got your head nipped like
that!”
There seemed something aggressive in the suggestion. “I
should have known to lift it up without waiting for a man,”
she said.
“All very well, but when one’s head’s caught, one is apt to
lose it: one struggles blindly.”
“We’re not all like sheep to go astray,” she said uneasily.
“But thank you for your kind help.” She jumped up and drove
slowly through the gate. He closed it behind her and ran to
open the gate at the opposite end of the private road.
“Thank you again,” she said, passing through.
“But surely you’ll come into the wood now you’re so near,”
he cried through the arch of the vanishing tilt.
The cart unexpectedly slackened, Jinny’s head was turned
backwards. “If you won’t be long,” she said.
He shut the gate briskly and kept pace with her slow progress
along the leafy lane towards the wood-path they both knew.
Nip, untied, sprang to fawn at his feet, and then bounded into
the hedge after something smelt, and barking raucously, wormed
his way along like a weasel.
“Why didn’t you come, Will?” said Jinny softly.
“Why didn’t you?” he evaded. “Why did you send Uncle
Lilliwhyte?”
“I didn’t come because you didn’t,” she answered simply.
“I—I—your grandfather,” he stammered. “I couldn’t well
play before him.”
“You mean you couldn’t play well,” she flashed.
“That’s all you know about it. I can blow better than Dick
Burrage.”
“Then why be nervous of poor old Gran’fer? He might have
been umpire.”
He was shocked again. “Good gracious, Jinny! Where did
you get those betting words from?”
“That’s my affair.” She pursed her pretty lips. “But never
mind—however you blow—you’ve deserved a pair of gloves
to-day—in sheepskin.”
He smiled. “I’m not above taking two pairs.”
“If you win!”
“Of course I’ll win.”
“Don’t brag. Save your breath for your blowing. We shall
soon be there.”
“Oh, but I’m not going to blow now,” he pointed out.
“Not now? Then why have you lured me here?”
“But how could I guess I should meet you? How could I
lure you? You could see I hadn’t got my horn.”
“I hadn’t noticed,” Jinny murmured.
“It’s big enough,” he said grimly.
“Then I certainly shan’t go into the wood. I’m much too
busy. Good-bye, Will.” She flicked her whip, but ere Methusalem
could quicken a leg, a terrible yelping came from the bushy
hedgerow—it was the voice of Nip, but not of Nip the hunter,
rather of a hunted, trapped Nip.
“Oh, poor Nip!” And in a moment Jinny had leapt down
and was peering and pushing into the hedge. But she could
penetrate scarcely at all: the wood behind was firmly guarded
by a broad chaotic belt of thistle and nightshade, burr and
bramble, furze and stinging-nettle, a veritable riot of prickliness;
and this thorny tangle had closed upon Nip—trespassers prosecuted
indeed!—though it was a relief to his mistress to find the
trap was natural, not wickedly human. Stuck full of burrs, and
looking like a spotted pard, her pet was shrieking for first aid.
But even while she was hesitating to pierce farther, despite her
gloved hands, Will brushed by her, thrilling her with the sense
that this was his second feat of animal salvation; while the
woodland savours and the rich prodigality and ruin of nature—for
dead wood lay around as profusely as rank vegetation sprouted—seemed
to stir in her the same sense of elemental forces as the
thunderstorm. She scarcely noticed that Will had the aid of
his stick in parting the jungle, and when he restored the whining
animal to her arms, gratitude and hero-worship mingled in her
emotion, though for a moment she was too occupied in picking
Nip clean to say much, while Will, for his part, was engaged
with equal industry in removing thorns from his sleeves and
burrs from his trousers.
“Oh, you’ve hurt yourself!” she said at last, catching sight
of blood and scratches on his hands and wrists.
“It’s nothing.” He tried to pluck out something from a
finger.
“Shall I help you?” She pulled off her driving-gloves, took
his finger and squeezed at the flesh, perceiving the microscopic
protrusion of the thorn, but her own fingers were shaking and
she could not extract it. He said it did not matter, it would
work out; then he started sucking it. She somehow would have
liked as with a child to kiss the place and make it well—the
whole back of his left hand seemed reticulated in red—but
instead she carried Nip back to his basket in the cart. He, too,
was scored in red, though he did not seem to mind any more
than the sheep. As she bent over her scratched pet, Will came
up to the tail-board, still sucking at his finger.
“I shall need gloves now,” he said, glancing with comic
ruefulness at his scratches.
“You poor hero!” she said, with eyes softly flashing. “I will
come into the wood and you shall win them.”
His face lit up; then fell. “But how?” he asked.
“Isn’t there my horn, silly?”
He laughed gleefully. “You’re right to call me that.” She
leaped down, the horn dangling at her girdle, and fastened
Methusalem to a tree. “Not that he’s likely to move: still his
head is homewards.” Methusalem’s head, however, was already
grasswards: he was munching with gusto, while his great tail
swished at the flies.
“But suppose somebody steals the parcels!” said Will with
sudden compunction.
“This isn’t Babylon—or America,” said Jinny witheringly.
“Besides, there’s Nip.”
Only a few yards farther was the opening they had been
making for, but they now found it almost as overgrown as the
entry chosen by Nip, and had it not been for the rare fern-leaf
elders in the hedge, that marked their memory of the spot, they
might have passed it by. “Might be in Canada,” said Will.
However, he pioneered with his stick, and, following him closely,
she had a sense of safety and protection unknown since the days
she was escorted from chapel. It was quite strange—yet not
unsweet—to be thus guarded from the venomous vegetation
thrusting at her from all sides, and she was not sure she was
relieved when the menace and novelty were over, and they were
in the wood. The struggle, moreover, had made the humanized
part of the wood, on which they emerged, somewhat tame. The
grove of young ash, beautiful as the slim silver-grey trunks were
with their new green livery—too light to cast a shadow—suggested
commerce to both of them, and the suggestion was
emphasized by the charred remains of a bonfire of elm-loppings,
and by a deserted charcoal-burner’s hut in a clearing. But
poetry had gathered on the mossy stumps of other trees, long
since felled, and they came down a wonderful azure river of
bluebells running as between wooded green banks. As they
waded through the tall thin stalks, they chanced here on a patch
of late-lingering primroses and there on green advance waves of
foxgloves, with their long leaves. Primrose, bluebell, foxglove—what
a beautiful succession, thought Jinny. How marvellous
was earth in its changing loveliness, and Heaven in its unchanging
bounty! On another slope, crowned by Spanish chestnuts,
glittered a stream purling down to lose itself in scrub. Here
rosemary was in bloom, humming with bees, and yonder was
broom, its yellow blossoms showing against a lighter green than
the earlier gorse, which flowered in great golden clumps.
“The gorse looks fine,” said Jinny.
“And smells finer,” said Will. “Let’s sit down.”
“Not here,” said Jinny, coyly shrinking. “There’s nettles.”
“They’re dead!” he said, grasping their yellow brittleness.
But they walked on.
They came over baby bracken and crisp beechnuts to a sort
of ring surrounded by blushing young oaks, and little silver
birches with their flat green leaves, and tall aspen-trees, and one
lonely mountain-ash with white flowers. Overhead, early as it
was, the moon had long been hanging at three-quarters, white
and magically diaphanous: a dream-planet. Unseen wood-pigeons
purred, and a tomtit was singing.
“Here!” said Will, beginning to sit down.
“No, no!” She clutched his arm to keep him up. “An
ant-heap!” This time her shyness had found sounder cover.
He gave a comical “Oh!” and stood watching the squirm of
seething life, absolutely black at the central congestion, where
ants walked indifferently under or over one another: they were
like the moving grains in an hour-glass, Jinny thought. Will
poked his stick into the great piazza.
“Don’t,” said Jinny.
“I’m not hurting them.” The ants were, in fact, already
using the rod as a causeway. “Why, they’re like you, Jinny!”
“Like me?”
“All carriers and all busy.”
She laughed, and followed their movements with a new
sympathy, though she was rather disgusted by those that carried
dead flies or dead ants.
“Those are not carriers—those are undertakers,” she insisted.
They sat down at last on a mound of spongy moss, free from
formic activity, and there was a silence. The little purling
stream was too far off to break it, but they heard a chaffinch
and the peep-bo-playing cuckoo, with that golden human note
that floats through the warm, brooding May. And then the
irrepressible and unbasketable Nip came rushing and tearing,
not making straight for them, but appearing and disappearing
like a giant fungus in the rich masses of blues or greens or yellows.
He made an opening for conversation, and presently when he
came snuggling into Jinny’s arms—poor scotched creature!—an
opportunity for joint patting and petting: a process in which
hands do not always succeed in partitioning out the pattable
and pettable surface rigidly, but graze and brush each other, and
even lie passively in abstracted contact.
“Why shouldn’t I buy this wood?” said Will, after one of
these sustained manual juxtapositions.
“Wouldn’t that be lovely?” said Jinny.
“Yes—I must settle something soon. Those aspens, though,
I’d cut ’em down. They’re only a weed. And yonder ashlings
weren’t planted quite close enough—you’ve got to make ’em
fight for air if you want ’em straight enough to sell.”
Jinny was vaguely disappointed at the turn of this conversation;
not following the romantic dream vaguely underlying it.
“But could you afford to buy such a big wood?” she murmured.
“Big wood? Why, in Canada you get forever of land for
nothing!”
“Then why didn’t you stay there?” she asked.
“This is better than America,” and his hand touched Jinny’s
too consciously.
“Why, what was the matter with America?” she murmured,
withdrawing the hand from Nip’s flank with a little blush.
Everything was the matter with America, it appeared. He
was, indeed, more anxious to explain how nothing was the matter
with Essex, but under Jinny’s physical bashfulness and intellectual
curiosity he found himself headed off his native county
and kept closely to Transatlantic territory. And under the spell
of her eager attention he was soon discoursing fluently enough,
sketching a discreetly selected picture of his adventures, beginning
with the emigrant sailing packet in which he had gone out as
a stowaway, but wherein he fared little worse than the emigrants
proper, who in the first six of the thirty-seven days’ voyage had
had none of the stipulated provisions served out to them, despite
their contract tickets, and no meat during the whole voyage.
They had had to be satisfied with their daily water and the right
of cooking, and complaints were met with oaths from the officers
and doctors, and sometimes even with fists or rope-ends from
the sailors. Once or twice the hose had been turned on them,
but there were over nine hundred of them, he said, so she might
imagine the Babel and confusion, though there were two great
passenger decks on which the tallest man could stand, and on
whose shelved sides they could all find sleeping-space, with never
more than six to a berth. And then from the moment America
had burst upon the vessel in the guise of touts, runners, and
employers, all anxious to mislead or enslave, he had borne
through the continent the banner of a steady disapprobation.
In the States, where his first clutches at Fortune had been made,
peculiar perils awaited the British immigrant. If he gravitated,
as was natural, to the cliques and boarding-houses of his countrymen,
he was likely to be soon “used up” by the gambling and
drinking sets that feigned to make him welcome. And if he
escaped this pitfall by his resourcefulness, he would strike the
native American prejudice against English immigrants, popularly
supposed to consist of the paupers and wastrels whom the parish
overseers of Old England, anxious to be quit of the burden of
supporting them, bribed with free Atlantic passages and dumped
on the struggling New World: a prejudice, Will admitted laughingly,
which his own purse had done nothing to diminish.
At first he had got a job as car-driver and fed at the market-houses,
but though the food was good and cheap, the company was
rough of manner and language. And even when he was earning
good money—at a boot-store with the sign of a gigantic boot
made of real leather reaching to the first-floor windows—he had
disliked the “go-along-steamboat” pressure of existence, and
the Mechanics’ Boarding House where gabbling Yankees gobbled
at a pace both unhealthy in itself and unchivalrous to the
unpunctual. The habit of loading the table with all the courses
simultaneously took off the edge of his appetite if he was early,
and left only universal ruins if he was late. He had no patience
with clams that were not oysters, egg-plants that were not eggs,
and corn that had to be munched cow-like. Accustomed to the
clean linen of the paternal farm, he loathed the insect-ridden
bedrooms one divided with a varying number of strangers. He
liked to see pigs, but not perambulating and scavenging the
streets; why, in New York they were more numerous than the
dogs! Providence had designed tobacco, he opined, for smoking
and not for chewing; and saliva for swallowing, not for spitting.
It was, in fact, a most unpleasant America that loomed up to
Jinny’s vision that day, especially in contrast with this lovely
wood, overbrooded by the white moon now growing faintly
golden: a sort of spittoon of a continent, mitigated by dollars
and dancing. Even in Canada, for which Will had felt a more
personal responsibility—accentuated by the British soldiers to
be met at every turn—and in which he gladly picked out points
of superiority to the States, a similar sense of massive untidiness
had weighed upon him and jarred every home-born instinct.
He tried to convey to Jinny the desolation of zigzag rail-fences
that took the place of these hedges now glorious with hawthorn
and fool’s-parsley and the starry stitchwort; the raw settlements,
the half-built log huts hardly superior to yon derelict charcoal-burner’s
hut (their windows stuffed sometimes with old straw
hats), the unachieved roads, full of mud or dust, the ubiquitous
stumps that were once trees, the piles of logs that were not yet
habitations, all that crude civilization arising shoddily out of the
virgin forest on the sole principle of the cheapest practicable,
with nothing whole-hearted but the lust for dollars. Caleb
Flynt’s slow English conservatism, Caleb’s unworldly standards,
spoke again through his son. But even Will was too inarticulate
to put his feeling precisely into words—and when Jinny reminded
him that in this very wood trees had been cut down and burned,
and that he himself had spoken of cutting down the aspens, he
could not quite make clear to her, who had never known any
but long-humanized places, the peculiar indecency of a forest at
the stage of semi-transformation into a mushroom settlement.
Beautiful enough the backwoods, he laboured to explain, where
man’s fight with the forest was only begun, where great beeches
and maples, and wild flowers still possessed the black mould the
settler was to lay bare for wheat; where his pioneer hut was
circled by a green gloom, and the chink of his cow-bells or the
laughter of his children alone vied with the ring of the axe and
the thunderous fall of the giants. But later on—“it’s like that
plover’s egg you opened once,” he burst forth with a sudden
inspiration. “No longer an egg, not yet a bird; only a smell!”
“But it was you who gave it me,” laughed Jinny. There was
a great content at her heart, sitting here and seeing her little
world open out in forests and seas and emotions still stranger.
And he—he for the first time enjoyed the society of woman as
spiritual counterpart, had moments in which he forgot Jinny was
pretty, in which her hand—now unconsciously nestling in his in
her absorption in his narration—was felt as a friendly rather
than as a physical glow. Unfortunately in this sense of a
sympathetic Jinny lay the serpentine temptation which shattered
their paradise. For, beguiled by her apparent subjugation, he
went on to improve the occasion. “And it’s just the same with
women who are neither women nor men. A woman’s place is
the home.”
The slipping of Jinny’s hand out of his was the first sign that
he had roused her to reality. Her cry, “How late it is!” was
the next. And she looked at the sunset glowing in glamorous
gold through the trees. There was a magic peace in the air, and
a rare thrush sang as in a dream. It seemed a tragedy to move.
Will protested vehemently. “It’s not late at all. You were
unusually early this afternoon. No, don’t go—you’ll wake up
poor Nip.”
“Did your story send him to sleep? Rude dog! But I must
go—a woman’s place is the home!” She got up, smiling, with
the snoring dog in her arms, but her mockery was friendly
enough: the intimate atmosphere could not be dissipated at a
jerk. He was constrained to follow her, if only to precede her
through that jungly path: the prospect of driving home with
her still shone rosy.
“By the way,” he said lightly, “I’ve been talking with Mr.
Flippance about getting that horse for him.”
“What!” She stopped and turned on him, her eyes blazing.
“His last animal was faked,” he explained mildly. “He was
badly taken in, and you can’t know all the tricks of the trade as
well as a man.”
“And isn’t Mr. Flippance a man?”
“Yes, of course. But—but——”
“It all depends on which man, you see—and which woman.”
“But I’m sure no woman knows properly about horses,” he
said. “How would you tell the age, for instance?”
“By the teeth, of course.”
“Which teeth?”
Jinny flushed. She really did not know, and that made her
only angrier: “If I wanted your help in my affairs, I should
have asked you.”
“Well, there’s nothing to be mad about.”
“There is everything to be mad about. How did you know
he wanted me to get a horse? Only because I told you. And
then you go to him and interfere with my business and insinuate
I’m incapable.”
“It’s not so much you’re incapable——” he began.
“It’s because a woman’s place isn’t the cattle-market, I know.
But why can’t we buy cows as well as butter, and horses as well as
horse-collars?”
“Because only men go—and it’s rough.”
“Well then, let women go and it won’t be.”
“And do you want women to be horsemen too, get up at four
o’clock and go ploughing?”
“Why not?”
“They haven’t the strength, for one thing. There’s lots of
things they can’t do, and never will. Take thatching, for
instance—you can’t imagine a woman sprawling along a roof.”
“Yes, I can.”
“Of course you can,” he sneered. “You can imagine her in
breeches.”
“If petticoats get in the way.”
“There’ll never be Bloomerites in England,” he said grimly.
“You mark my word. If a woman can’t plough or dig without
leggings, that’s a proof she wasn’t meant to plough or dig.”
They had reached now the pleached and tangly path back to
the road, but she darted ahead of him, battling with the branches
herself in her revolt from dependence. He could not regain the
lead unless he jostled rudely, and every now and then—not
with wilful malice, but no less maddeningly—she held back for
him the boughs she had parted. And all the while the sleeping
Nip was protected too: clasped by one hand to her bosom.
Suddenly the circle of her little horn got caught in the bushes
like the horn of Isaac’s ram. “Why, Jinny,” he cried, “we
forgot all about the horn! Wait! Wait!”
She disentangled it calmly. “You shan’t blow mine. You
must blow your own now.”
He fired up. “You want to get out of the gloves.”
“Now you’re going horn-mad,” she jested icily, emerging on
the high road. “Good-bye, Mr. Flynt.”
It was the first time she had withheld the Will.
“Good-bye, Miss Boldero,” he said as frigidly, removing his
hat with an exaggerated gallantry. Each felt that the parting
was final: never would they even speak to each other again.
But they had yet to reckon with Nip. For that intelligent
creature, waking into the distressing atmosphere that had been
generated while his vigilance was relaxed, would be no party to
the breach. When he perceived that the cart was to go off
without Will, he jumped down and tried to chevy him into it,
and as the parties went off at a tangent, he ran desperately from
one to the other, striving to shepherd them together, barking
and pleading and panting like a toy engine. It was only a peremptory
blast from a distant horn that at last persuaded the
distracted animal where his first duty lay.
The dying day still flooded the earth with warmth and
radiance: the little coffee-and-cream-coloured calves still frisked
in the meadows that the buttercups turned into fields of the
cloth of gold: the forget-me-nots were still gleaming in the
cottage gardens, the lilac was still peeping over manorial walls,
the laburnum still hanging down its yellow chandeliers, and the
horse-chestnut upholding its white candelabras. But for these
twain, obstinately and against the best canine advice going their
separate ways, the colour had been sucked out of the landscape
and the clemency from the air. Before Will, wandering deviously,
had remembered his evening sausages, these also had grown
cold; mist and clouds had turned the moon to a blood-red
boat, and the bats were swooping and the wood-owls shrilling
where larks had soared and sung.
CUPID AND CATTLE
Wit she hath without desire
To make known how much she hath;
And her anger flames no higher
Than may fitly sweeten wrath.
  Full of pity as may be,
  Though perhaps not so to me.
Browne, “Britannia’s Pastorals.”
It is to be feared that the sting of Mr. Will Flynt’s offence lay
precisely in Jinny’s ignorance of horses, and that if her old
companion had come to her aid more tactfully, she would have
welcomed his co-operation in the great purchase. But her pride
in her work would hardly allow her to admit even to herself
that here was a commission perhaps beyond her capacities. Had
she not enjoyed an almost lifelong experience of Methusalem?
As a monogamist would resent being told he knew nothing of
matrimony, so Jinny repudiated the notion that she knew
nothing of equinity. Besides, the cattle-market was far from
seeming so strange a world to her as Will had imagined. Had
her cart not often conveyed thence or thither a netted calf, had
she not marketed even his own mother’s piglings? A fig for
the masculine aura! If Mr. Flippance exaggerated after his
fashion in declaring she would have undertaken to get him the
moon—at any rate it was not the man in it that would have
kept her back.
It was, therefore, with a bruised and burning but indomitable
heart that Jinny went about her work these ever longer days. For
women must work, though men may mope. Poor Will, who had
nothing to do but to chew his bitter cud of memory, was the
more pitiable, and his temper was not improved when early
Friday evening the comparatively clean Master Gale, evidently
caught on his way home from school, arrived with “the same as
uzual.” This apple-cheeked and white-collared understudy for
Jinny was no less an eyesore than Uncle Lilliwhyte, and Will
made Martha refuse the parcel on the ground that if they encouraged
the lad, it would lead to truancy. Such was his
solicitude for the schoolboy whose copy-book he had diverted
from its scholastic function. But he was not less furious when
Farmer Gale brought back the parcel the next morning on horseback
and explained amiably that he had seen Jinny about it,
and that henceforward this overburdened damsel would leave
the Flynt parcel with his, and he would have pleasure in delivering
it in the course of riding about his farms.
The rain and the cold snap, that had come so suddenly after
the quarrel in the wood, was welcome to Jinny in her present
mood. For her the summer was over. True, she espied its first
wild rose, but it reminded her only of a round strawberry water-ice,
such as her well-to-do clients spooned at the Chipstone
confectioner’s. Everything was gelid, except Nip’s nose, and that
but added to her depression. Was the darling feverish from the
scratches of his spiny crawlings, or did he share his mistress’s
heavy humours? Her distraction might have led to a nasty
accident had not the last of the trio kept his head, for in a lonely
lane Methusalem, who in these days seemed to whinny his
sympathy and nuzzle into her palm with enhanced tenderness,
deftly avoided the prostrate antlered trunk of an oak-tree which
had been split and splintered by lightning. Possibly it had lain
there since that Sunday’s storm, for her work had not brought
her that way. The bark of the whole tree had been peeled off,
save for a small patch where a few buds still suggested vitality,
and Jinny had a grandiose sense that all nature sympathized
with the strange desolation that had come over her joyous self.
Her mind turned to fate and constellations as she drew up at
Miss Gentry’s door and summoned with a blast that fantastic
female, who was feeding the chickens with which she variegated
life and tantalized Squibs. Miss Gentry did not need anything
beyond her usual depilatory. It was a standing grief and
astonishment to her that though white lilies (under the domain
of the moon) will “trimly deck a blank place with hair,” neither
Culpeper nor the planets had provided against the contrary
contingency: even fig-wort (owned by Venus) merely removing
wens and freckles. Hence she was reduced to a mere chemist’s
prescription: a solution of barium sulphide swayed by no
known planet. The stuff came in a pot.
Miss Gentry in ordering it did not shirk the word “depilatory.”
On the contrary she pronounced the five syllables with a pomposity
which was the more impressive to Jinny because even
“The Universal Spelling-Book” stopped short at four syllables.
Not for worlds—whether to her client or the public at large—would
Jinny have betrayed her knowledge that the hair-destroyer
represented a never-ending battle with Miss Gentry’s moustache.
And for the sensitive dressmaker herself the polysyllable was a
soothing cover. Ostrich-like she hid her head in its spacious
sandiness.
There was, however, the little matter of Martha’s bleached
and new-trimmed bonnet, which Jinny might convey to Frog
Farm, and the casual mention that it was Will who had brought
it led to considerable conversation. Jinny’s equipage was drawn
up outside the little garden, where tulips (red, damask, and pink)
stood like tall guards before a tropical palace; and Miss Gentry,
despite the chill wind, leaned on her garden-gate, carefully
nursing her black cat against Nip’s possible swoops.
The excellent lady, whose erudition Jinny had always absorbed
with the reverence due to a reader of The Englishwoman’s
Magazine, was always delighted to have the girl sitting at her
feet—even though to the crude physical vision Jinny always
appeared to be sitting above her head, and Miss Gentry to be
looking up to her. Sometimes real information from the aforesaid
magazine, which bore the sub-title of “The Christian Mother’s
Miscellany,” was thus transmitted to Jinny; but Miss Gentry’s
brain was obviously too cluttered up with archaic notions to be
really beneficial to her young devotee. Thus, although Miss
Gentry enlarged Jinny’s mind, it was more a matter of range
than of accuracy.
The conversation to-day, however, was on a more personal
plane. Jinny was resolved to speak no further word to Mr.
William Flynt: his interference was unforgivable. But when it
transpired that he had brought the bonnet, she did not attempt
to check Miss Gentry’s flow of favourable comment, still less to
contradict it. For a Peculiar he was quite the gentleman, Miss
Gentry opined, especially after that coarse and flippant Bundock.
Not tall enough for her taste, because she thought you ought
always to look up to a man; still, handsome in a rough way,
despite his ginger hair.
“Not ginger!” Jinny protested.
“It shades to ginger,” the dressmaker replied severely, as an
authority upon colours. “But it served to brighten up his face,
which was none too cheerful. Born under Saturn, I should
think, and the sign of the Scorpion.”
“And what effect has that?” asked Jinny, alarmed.
“Well, for one thing it qualifies the unruly actions and passions
of Venus.”
“The goddess of Beauty,” observed Jinny, airing her Spelling-Book.
“Of Love,” corrected Miss Gentry.
Jinny’s face shaded towards the colour under discussion, and
she cried: “Down, Nip,” to that recumbent animal’s amusement.
“He nearly jumped on the bonnet-box,” she explained.
“He should eat herbs under the dominion of the Sun,” said
Miss Gentry.
“Nip?”
“No—Mr. Flynt. He needs vital spirits.”
“Still, ginger is hardly the word,” murmured Jinny.
“It looks ginger against his clothes,” persisted Miss Gentry.
“Of course a man can’t understand dressing himself.”
“Why, he’s better dressed than anybody in Long Bradmarsh—except
Mr. Fallow,” said Jinny.
Miss Gentry was mollified by the compliment to her pastor.
“All the same his coat wrinkles at the shoulders,” she said.
“You notice next time.”
“I’ve got better things to do than to look at Mr. Flynt’s coat-sleeves,”
said Jinny. “And I’ll be going on.”
“Well, if you do see him, give him my kind regards,” said Miss
Gentry, “and say that any time he’s passing and would like a
cup of tea, I’d be glad to discuss the tract I gave him.”
“Oh, it’s no use trying to convert him,” said Jinny. “He’s
nothing at all.”
“Then why did he go to your chapel the other Sunday?”
“Did he go?” said Jinny, amazed. “I dare say that’s what
has depressed him.”
“He not only went, but with your peculiar ideas of the House
of God, he had his dinner there!”
“Oh, no! Why he was dining at ‘The Black Sheep.’ ”
“Nothing of the sort. A dressmaker has ears.”
“But a carrier has eyes. And I saw him there.”
“Then I’ll never believe Isabella Mawhood again.”
“I hope you haven’t been making her more vanities,” said
Jinny, as she slowly turned Methusalem’s nose the other way.
“Only a new bonnet, you funny little Peculiar. You see the
case was coming on at the Chelmsford Sessions, and I should have
got a verdict against Mr. Mawhood not only for his wife’s silk
dress, but for the chickens his ferrets killed——”
“You issued a replevin, I suppose,” put in Jinny grandly.
“I could have had a tort or a subpœna or anything,” assented
Miss Gentry, with equal magnificence. “But the defendant
thought best to compromise. He’s got to clear this cottage of
rats for nothing this winter—you know how they come gnawing
my best stuffs—and in return my landlady has to pay for a new
bonnet for his wife.”
“But Mrs. Mawhood’s silk dress—who pays for that?” asked
Jinny mystified.
“Oh, Mrs. Mott pays for that.”
“But why Mrs. Mott?”
“She didn’t want to have a scandal in the community, and
your so-called Deacon swore he hadn’t got the money. They
make Mrs. Mott pay for everything nowadays.”
“It’s too bad,” said Jinny. “And Mrs. Mawhood comes out
of it all with her dress paid for and a new bonnet.”
“Well, she does become clothes more than her sister-Peculiars,
I must say that—present company excepted! That old rat-catcher’s
lucky to have got such a young wife for his second, even
though he was her third.”
“She’s not so young,” said Jinny.
“She’s no older than I am,” persisted Miss Gentry. “And
born, like me, under Venus.”
Jinny suppressed a smile. Despite her respect for Miss Gentry
she had never accepted her standing invitation to explore the
Colchester romance. Unread in the literature of love though
she was, the girl’s natural instinct refused to see the middle-aged
moustachio’d dressmaker as the heroine of a love-drama. Her
affair with the angel seemed, indeed, to place her apart. “I
think it’s disgraceful to have had three husbands,” she insisted.
“Not at all, when each is a Christian marriage, and the first
two spouses have been duly taken by an overruling Providence.
Of course the unhallowed romance one inspires is another thing.
As I always say to Bundock—oh, we ought not to have mentioned
names, ought we, Squibs dear? Please forget it.” She
stroked the cat in her arms. “But there, Jinny! You can’t
understand these things—you too were born under Saturn.”
“How do you know that?” Jinny was vaguely resentful.
“You’re so cold-blooded—perhaps it was even under the constellation
of the Pisces—the Fishes, that is. You’ve never taken
the faintest interest in Love. Do you know, I made a rhyme
about you the other day.”
“A rhyme!” Jinny was excited. “Do tell me!”
Miss Gentry shook her head. “You wouldn’t like it.”
“Oh, but I must hear it.”
Miss Gentry continued obstinately to stroke Squibs. But
finally, as if electrified by the fur, she broke out like an inspired
pythoness, in a weird chanting voice:
“When the Brad in opposite ways shall course,
 Lo! Jinny’s husband shall come on a horse,
 And Jinny shall then learn Passion’s force.”
Jinny was so overwhelmed with admiration at the poetry—quite
on a par, she felt, with the pieces of “The Universal
Spelling-Book,” especially as the Rhyme or “jingle in the ear”
was on the very pattern of the model verse there given:
Prostrate my contrite Heart I bend,
My God, my Father and my Friend,
Do not forsake me in the end
—that she could hardly take in the sense at the moment.
“How lovely!” she said.
“I’m glad you’re satisfied. It means, of course”—Miss
Gentry firmly explained the oracle—“that you’ll never marry,
being as incapable of Passion as the Brad of flowing backwards
and forwards at the same time.”
A strange protest as written in letters of fire crept through all
Jinny’s veins. Even her face flamed. She began “clucking”
to Methusalem to start.
“And I’ve made one about Mrs. Mawhood too,” pursued the
pythoness, now irrepressible. “I don’t wish her ill, but I’m
afraid it’ll prove true, poor thing.” And without waiting to be
discouraged, indeed, following the already moving cart, she
chanted:
“She may look to South, she may look to North,
 But the finger of fate hath forbidden a fourth,
 And the rat-slayer, clinging to life and his gold,
 Shall dance on the grave where she lieth cold.”
“Not dance!” laughed Jinny, relieved at this diversion.
“Well preach—it’s just as bad, when a man’s not ordained,”
said Miss Gentry, and this being the signal for a theological
assault, Jinny drove off rapidly.
But she had no intention of bearing the bonnet to Frog Farm.
Nor, despite the account that Farmer Gale had given of the new
parcel arrangement, had she really agreed to establish him as
sub-carrier-in-ordinary. He was too moneyed and important for
that, and she found it hard enough to accept the favour of being
driven to and from chapel in his dog-cart—a favour necessitated
by her grandfather’s and even her own ideas as to the indecorum
of their business cart. Besides, she had almost resolved to seek
his advice, perhaps his help, in the famous horse-purchase: anything
rather than break down before Will! So she must not
overdo it. No, Master Peartree, for all his novel churlishness,
must convey the bonnet. He could scarcely be treated like
Farmer Gale’s boy, and if they did refuse it at his hands, still it
would only abide next door.
The shepherd-cowman was not, however, to be found in his
accustomed haunts, and she lost a good hour in hunting for him
in the various mutually distant pastures to which he led his
ever-edacious sheep. None of the men ploughing the great red
fields for turnips had seen him pass. At last, by the aid of a
taciturn lout, who was driving a tumbril laden with hurdles and
backed with a tall crate, Master Peartree was located in the
farm buildings at the other extremity of Farmer Gale’s estate in
a barn-like structure facing a long row of cart-sheds.
Skirting a sunless pond that was scurvy and ill-smelling, she
drew up at the gate and blew a summons on her horn, but its
only effect was to startle the chickens pecking in the litter, and
the piglings fighting to snatch their mother’s garbage from her
tub or to nuzzle at her teats. There was nothing for it but to
carry the bonnet-box to the barn, for the great farmyard was
too mucky to drag her cart through. Picking her way among
the strawy compost heaps, she divined why her horn had brought
no answer: it had been deadened by a melody proceeding in a
lusty tenor voice from the tall folding-doors, and this—somewhat
to her surprise—was none other than the air of “Buy a Broom.”
It forced her to polka to it the rest of the way, and although
she must fain trip gingerly mid the manure-heaps and the melody
had ended with applause before she reached the thatched
structure, still it was with a brighter feeling that she found
herself at the open doors. But the first glimpse within made
her turn pale and draw back a little. The scene she had so
unexpectedly stumbled upon was the stranger and grimmer for
the silence that had now fallen, though the faces of the shearers
astride the struggling sheep were still lively enough. Master
Peartree had his boot over the head of a recalcitrant lamb, which
but for her recent adventure she would have imagined choking.
But it was not the ungentle shepherd that made for
her the centre of the picture, for among these men in dirty
green corduroys and rolled-up check shirt-sleeves, whose legs
gripped grunting, wheezing, struggling or feebly kicking sheep,
was one in cleaner clothes, whose bare, brawny arms gave her a
sharp sensation, almost as if he had nipped her with the shears
he held in his palm. Was it boredom or the need for his labour
that had enlisted Mr. William Flynt in this service? She did
not know, but pale and dumb she retreated from the unconscious
Will, whose sheep, wedged between his legs, hung limp with
meek, helpless eye, the very image of a sacrificial victim, and
was being sheared with the meticulous concentration of the
outsider bent on showing he is not inferior to the professional.
And indeed Will’s was the sole sheep, she saw at once and with
admiration, that though nearly bare of its wool showed without
blood-fleck: a consummation to which its prudent lethargy had
doubtless contributed. Young Ravens, on the other hand, who
was now lying with both feet on his animal, had nicked it on ear,
leg, and breast: apparently one could not serve two masters—song
and scissors.
Perceiving Jinny with her bonnet-box, this young humorist
now sang out the old street-cry: “Buy a band-box!”
The chaff stayed her retreat and stiffened her trembling form.
“Hullo!” she retorted, with less than her usual wit. “Back
again like a bad penny.”
Even as she spoke she saw Will and his sheep give a spasmodic
start, and the first speck of blood appear on the flawless skin.
But the shearer did not look up, although he automatically
stretched out his hand for the ointment.
“Do ye don’t struggle,” observed Master Peartree amiably to
his youthful ewe. “Oi’m not so strong.”
As nobody said anything further, and Master Peartree, intent
on his lamb, did not look up, Jinny too stood silent for a moment
with her incongruous bonnet-box; recovering her sang-froid, and
watching a catcher trying to drive in an unshorn lamb from the
pen in which it had cowered and which it now ran round, bleating,
terror-stricken and unseizable. She wondered if its heart were
thumping more wildly than hers. Not that there was terror in her
own breast—rather a strange exultation that her presence had had
power to incarnadine the immaculate sheepskin. But her eyes
roamed shyly from Will and his nipped victim, and studied with
elaborate attention the divers coloured show-cards of the successful
ram lambs that made their vaunt upon the beams or
along the sloping walls, through which the thatching stuck
pleasantly. Her mind went back to that sunny, bracing day in
February, to the immense pastoral landscape of straw-roofed
sheep-pens, ooze, mangold heaps, and haystacks, on which she
had chanced when the lambs now so agitated were new-yeaned:
some only an hour or two old, with long skeleton legs and bodies
smeared as with yellow gold. How friskily they had soon learnt
to leap on their mother’s back! That day she, too, had been
as untroubled, needing no outside melody to brisk up her pace.
Young Ravens, inspired by his new audience to a fresh burst
of melody, started on “The Mistletoe Bough,” the old ballad she
had heard sung in the cottages at Christmas sing-songs, and
which she now for the first time connected with the play on
Mr. Flippance’s posters.
“Hullo, Jinny,” said Master Peartree at last, her presence
slowly percolating. He finished his rebellious lamb and patted
it forgivingly on the back, remarking genially: “Get up and
let’s have a squint at you.” And as it trotted out happily, he
threw its fleece—too small to wind up—on to a great heap in
the corner and fell to work on a sheep.
“You’ve just done’em when it’s turned cold,” protested Jinny.
“Ay, ’tis a pity,” said Master Peartree. “But first we
couldn’t get the labour, and then that rined and their wool was
too damp, but Oi need ’em now for the early market.”
“I know. I’m buying a horse there,” said Jinny.
Another tinge of red appeared on the blameless skin of Will’s
victim.
“Methusalem ain’t damaged hisself?” asked Master Peartree
in concern.
“Oh, no, he’s outside your gate, damaging your hedge.”
“Then whatever do you need another for?”
“Oh, just to ride over somebody. But I wish I’d known you
needed labour.”
“Why, want a job?” grinned Jim Puddifoot, a giant in a
brimless hat, who was sharpening his shears on a piece of steel.
There was a snigger from his mates.
“What’s the pay?” said Jinny, who had been thinking of
Uncle Lilliwhyte, lately gravelled for lack of purchasers of his
woodland pickings.
“There’s half a suvrin a hundred,” said Master Peartree as
seriously, “and four quarts o’ beer.”
A great shout of laughter rose from the hired men: only Will
went on shearing with apparent imperturbability, while a third
carmine speck defaced the smooth surface of his martyred
sheep.
“Where’s the laugh?” inquired Master Peartree.
“Don’t rob a poor man of his beer,” carolled young Ravens.
“She don’t drink,” he broke off to explain.
“Yes, I do, I drink like a fish. Water, that is, like that does.”
This time even Master Peartree laughed, while Jim Puddifoot,
raising his tin mug without a handle to his mouth, cried “Here’s
to you,” and young Ravens lifting up his pleasant voice trolled
forth:
“Robin he married a wife in the West,
   Moppety, moppety, mono.”
Little stabs and pricks were going through Will’s breast, and
still more through the skin of his sheep. As the chorus, from
which Jinny’s little trill was not excluded, took up:
“With a high jig jiggity, tops and petticoats,
   Robin-a-Thrush cries mono,”
 it seemed to Will as if Jinny was carrying on like a flash lady
in a boon company. A high jig jiggity, indeed! Releasing his
victim at last, he picked up its fleece sullenly and teased a tail
out of it, wherewith, rolling up the rest, he proceeded to tie the
bundle in a silence that the singing rendered still grimmer.
“What’s that you’ve got there, Jinny?” asked Master Peartree,
becoming suddenly aware of the bonnet-box.
“That’s for you,” she said.
“Me! Oi ain’t got no womankind, thank the Lord.”
Again Master Peartree had touched unintentionally the springs
of laughter. Will pinned the frightened ewe-lamb, now caught
and as dumb as himself, between his legs, and plucked a few preliminary
bits from its breast with his fingers.
“But it’s Mrs. Flynt’s bonnet,” explained Jinny, “and will
you oblige me by taking it back to-night?”
The snick of young Flynt’s shears sounded savage.
“That Oi won’t,” said Master Peartree, “seein’ as here stands
her boy Willie hisself.”
“Oh, does he?” said Jinny. “I hadn’t noticed.”
“Ay, that he do. And even dedn’t, he arxed me not to do
your job agen, time Oi took in that liddle ole horn.”
The new ovine martyr bounded. Quite a patch of its skin had
been replaced by blood.
“Steady, Willie, steady!” cried Master Peartree. “Oi was
afeared musicianers ain’t no good for shearing.”
“It’s this silly, jumping beast,” growled Will, breaking his
obstinate silence.
Jinny was still tendering the bonnet-box to Master Peartree.
“Well, give it to him then.”
“Can’t he take it straight?” asked the shepherd, clipping
busily.
“That silly, jumping beast is too much for him as it is. He
daren’t let go. I’ll leave the bonnet-box for him.”
“Ain’t no place here—’tis too mucky.”
“ ‘Buy a Broom,’ ” hummed Jinny, and young Ravens, smiling,
seized a besom and swept vigorously at the stale and droppings.
“Oh, I can’t leave it here—the sheep might stave it in,” she
said.
“Leave it in the store acrost the yard—the key’s in the
padlock,” said the shepherd. “Oi count Willie’ll take it home,
same as he ain’t cut hisself to pieces.”
Another roar from the others—this time Master Peartree
beamed, and it might have gone ill with Will’s lamb had the
shears not slipped from his palm.
“Well, but when folks go woolgathering,” remarked Jinny
blandly, “they forget things. I’ll put it in the store, but I won’t
be responsible.”
“Tell her I won’t forget it,” roared Will, who was picking up
his shears in the gymnastic attitude necessitated by the palpitating
sheep between his legs.
“Oi reckon she can yer for herself,” said the shepherd naïvely.
“Of course I can hear,” said Jinny. “But tell him to tell his
mother that the bill’s inside.”
“Oi reckon he can yer too,” said the puzzled Peartree.
“He doesn’t listen much to women,” explained Jinny. “You
ask him if his family wants anything else from Chipstone.”
“Well, there he stands—you can arx him, can’t you?”
“Well, don’t I stand here, too?” said Jinny. “And why
doesn’t he answer?”
“He’s too shy,” sniggered Ravens, and burst out again:
“With a high jig jiggity, tops and petticoats.”
“Shut up!” snarled Will.
“ ’Twas you asked me to sing,” retorted Ravens.
“That’s so, Willie,” said the shepherd. “You should say you
loved to yer ‘Buy a Broom’ and all them old songs. Why don’t
you answer, Willie?”
“Because there’s nothing to say,” Will roared. “We don’t
want nothing whatever from her.” He was not often so ungrammatical,
but anger knows no pedantry.
“Well, why couldn’t he say so at once?” said Jinny, and
whistling “A dashing young man from Buckingham,”—whistling
was a new brazenness in Will’s ears—she picked her way across
the miry yard to the weather-boarded, tarred, and tile-roofed
structure that stood on six mushroom-topped pillars, whose
smoothness offered no purchase for rats. Ascending the steep
steps, she deposited the bonnet-box betwixt the chicken-corn
and the eggs. While padlocking the door again, she saw to her
surprise that Methusalem was inside the gate, labouring towards
her through the mud. The faithful animal, impatient for her,
had evidently lifted the latch with its nose, aided perhaps by its
teeth. The tears came into her eyes: some one at least did
want her, and there was a long, affectionate contact between
that clever, velvety nose and Jinny’s palm. Then she returned
to the shearing-barn and handed Master Peartree the key.
“Good day and thank you,” she said. “I reckon I shall meet
you at the cattle fair.”
She did not wait to see if she had drawn blood from the sacrificial
lamb; but, rounding her lips again, whistled her way
jauntily back to her cart. As she drove along, the sun, struggling
through a high cloud-rack, showed like a great worn silver coin,
and the shorn sheep gleamed fairily white on the great green
pastures. But there was an ache at her heart, which the delicious
wafts from the early-mown hayfields only made emptier.
The shabby little cart with the legend of “Daniel Quarles,”
and the smart dog-cart of Farmer Gale, rolled side by side of a
Monday morning in the restored June sunshine towards the
Chipstone cattle-market. Jinny had timed this coincidence, and
meant to extract the farmer’s opinion of the horses for sale. She
had already gleaned from her grandfather what particular teeth
were chronological, but such confidence as she possessed in her
own “horse-sense” had been rudely dissipated by a volume on
the noble animal, which she had unearthed in Mother Gander’s
sanctum. The lists of diseases and defects from which it might
suffer was paralysing, and even when it was a thing she had
heard of—like grogginess—it grew more sinister by being called
“navicular disease.” Methusalem’s maladies had been simple
enough, and she had dared to drench or anoint him with divers
remedies. But now that knowledge had dissipated the bliss of
ignorance—now that warts had enlarged into “angleberries,”
rheumatism had darkened into “felon,” and farcy, quittor, Ascaris
megalocephala, and countless other evils were seen hovering
around Methusalem, thick as summer gnats, she marvelled how
he had staved them off. That poor Methusalem! An affectionate
animal by nature was the horse,—the book told her—he
wanted to please man, only sometimes he was in agony and the
flesh could not obey. Good heavens, what if sometimes when
she was in a hurry to get home, she had wronged Methusalem,
even in her thoughts! Remorsefully, and with a new and
morbid anxiety, she caressed his delicate, nose, amazed at her
ancient, easy assurance of his immortality. It even shook her
faith in the all-sufficiency of the Spelling-Book that it contained
no intimation of the ills that horseflesh is heir to.
And the animal she had now to buy for Mr. Flippance might
be affected with all or any of these ills, and even if one could
detect such obvious defects as windgalls, spavin, thorough-pin, or
broken wind, how avoid a crib-biter or a wind-sucker, how
grapple with the bot-fly, two hundred of which could hook themselves
horribly to a single equine stomach, or with the still more
formidable Palisade Worm, which even its name of Strongylus
armatus could scarcely worsen, a thousand of it having been
counted by a patient authority on a surface of two inches, and
its census taken at a million for a single horse!
Farmer Gale, however, failed to throw much light on these
alarming questions, which he did not know, indeed, were being
asked. His conversation kept gliding away to his grievances,
for it consisted, like that of most farmers, of grumbles. Usually
these started from the little string-tied sample bags of threshed
grain he carried in his pocket to be blown and tasted by hard-bargaining
customers. But to-day, though he was not bound
for the corn-market, he was nevertheless not to be baulked of
his grievances. They were not, this time, against Nature, but
against Man; for, as the fields they passed showed, the corn was
particularly forward. It was not Providence that had run down
wheat to thirty shillings a quarter. Free Trade was in reality
the ruin of free Britain. For the labour of Continental slaves,
who went with the soil, and were sold with it like cattle, who
subsisted on black bread, skim-milk, and onions, was brought
into competition with that of the freeborn Briton, who must
thus be dragged down to the same level.
The bluff, freeborn Briton was Farmer Gale’s favourite rôle,
and his ruddy face, grey bowler, and smart gaiters made him
sympathetic enough superficially, while the potent landowner’s
consideration for Jinny’s religious necessities had not failed to
evoke a flattered gratitude in her humble breast when they drove
together of a Sunday to their respective chapels. This amiable
image of himself the breezy Briton was now destined to shatter.
For after some critical comment on the ploughing of the fields
they passed and the activities of the poachers—he would certainly
have to get rid of that suspicious character, “Uncle Lilliwhyte,”
who occupied a cottage badly needed for a farm-hand—he pointed
out the impossibility of building another cottage as Jinny had
so crudely suggested. Prices were simply ruinous.
“I tell my labourers as man to man,” he said emphatically,
“that they can’t have regular employment and their present
wages. Take your choice, boys, says I. Look at other countries,
do they get more than their six or seven shillings a week? No!
Then that’s what you’ll have to come down to.”
“But how can they live on it?” asked Jinny.
“How can farmers live?” he retorted. “We must go by the
price of corn.”
“But did you go by the price of corn after the Battle of
Waterloo?” asked Jinny shrewdly. “For I remember Gran’fer
once telling me you got—I mean your father got—a hundred
shillings a quarter then, yet folks were so starved they went
burning the ricks.”
“I was only a baby then. I can’t say what happened.”
“But the same thing happened nearer our time,” she reminded
him, thinking of the Bidlake tragedy.
“Oh, that silly rioting and machine-smashing. That always
came out of the poor not understanding politics. If things were
bad after Waterloo, it was all Bony’s work. And as for the
unrest twenty years ago, we caught that from France, too, I
remember dad telling me. They had risen against their king—such
an unsettled people. But to-day it’s our own British
Government that’s the enemy, and the money we farmers have
lost this year is something dreadful.”
“But you don’t look as starved as some of our labourers’
families. I’ve seen the Pennymole children crying for dry
bread, and the father saying, ‘I darsn’t cut you no more—do,
ye’ll have none Saturday.’ And Mr. Pennymole’s always worked
for you.”
“You don’t understand politics, Jinny.”
“I understand poverty. The Pennymoles are better off, now
they’ve got two boys grown up and earning sixpence a day. But
I’ve seen Mrs. Pennymole making tea with charred bread, and
her husband compelled to steal the cabbages left for the cows. . . .
Oh, I oughtn’t to have said that,” she added in alarm.
“You certainly oughtn’t! Compelled to break the Eighth
Commandment—a pretty doctrine! And such liars, too. I
saw quite a little girl munching a turnip she’d just filched from
my field, and when I complained to her mother, the woman
unblushingly said, ‘’Tis me fats her up with swedes and
turnips.’ ”
“They can’t see their children hunger.”
“They can put some of them in the poorhouse.”
“Look at the mites there, white and half-starved. Sometimes
I’ve got to deliver a parcel to Mr. Jims, the porter, and I hear
the Master thrashing ’em with a stick.”
“And it’s what boys need—even my brat. Carrying parcels,
indeed!” He stopped abruptly.
“Well, but they make the old folks of eighty and ninety scour
the stone steps and do the washing!”
“They needn’t go in—they can get relief from the parish.”
“The parish! Eighteenpence a week for the family when the
father’s bedridden.”
“There’s the parish loaves!”
“Have you ever seen one? Half-baked, without real crust,
all raw and soft, where it stuck to the next loaf.”
“Beggars can’t be choosers. Besides, there’s plenty of work
after harvest.”
“Yes, even for babies of six,” said Jinny bitterly. “And to
keep boys from their beds after hard field-work. And at White
Notley where they make the silk, there’s little girls standing
on stools to reach the weaving-desk.”
“If you understood politics,” Farmer Gale persisted, “you’d