# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2018
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, Jinny the Carrier
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/57836/57836-h/57836-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

“I didn’t rightly hear, I’m tellin’ you, seein’ how he tore
towards the bridge. But ’twas summat about ’Lijah! I yeard
that!”
“Good heavens!” cried Jinny, and thanking Mrs. Pennymole,
she tore equally towards the bridge, wondering if she could get
a vehicle at “The King of Prussia.” It was clear the old wretch—there
was really no other name for him—had gone to sell
Methusalem again. Set up with all that gold, he meant to
retire, and, inflamed by it, he could not resist the extra five
pounds offered by the vet. And this time Mr. Skindle would
not risk impounding her horse, he would slaughter instanter.
Yes, her eerie premonitions had been justified, but they were
warnings about Methusalem, not about her grandfather.
At the repaired bridge Farmer Gale’s dog-cart came along with
himself and his wife, but she was too shy to ask for a lift. Nor
was there anything to be got immediately at “The King of
Prussia.” She toiled on through footpaths grey-silted from the
flood till she reached the by-way that branched off to Foxearth
Farm. Here she paused, wondering if it was worth while to go
down it on the chance of finding Barnaby’s trap available. And
while she hesitated, there came bowling by from church the
Skindle wedding-party in grand carriages. But though she
cowered into the hedge, their insolent prosperity only soothed
her somewhat by reminding her that Elijah had other work
to-day than killing, and that, in any case, there was now no
motive for it, unless perhaps revenge. To her surprise, in the
rear of the procession, sharing Barnaby’s bepranked trap, rode
Will. His face beside Barnaby’s seemed one large smile: even
the unexpected sight of herself would hardly explain such broad
cheerfulness in a man who, though profiting by a wedding, had
come from arranging a pauper funeral, not to mention an inquest.
But perhaps he was rejoicing at his escape from that overblown
Blanche.
As if to corroborate this interpretation, he jumped down and
caught her to him in the open daylight, while Barnaby’s vehicle
sympathetically disappeared after the others round the by-way.
“Oh, Jinny, Jinny!” he cried. “Such a lark!”
“But Gran’fer——!” she gasped, extricating herself.
He burst into a roar of laughter. “Have you heard it
already?”
“Heard what? I’m looking for Gran’fer!”
“Haven’t you met him on the road? He started back ahead
of me!”
She drew a breath of relief. “With Methusalem?”
“And a fare,” he grinned. “I had to go on to the coroner
or else I too——”
But she no longer heard. “I must have missed him on the
footpaths,” she said happily.
“You’ll find him at Mr. Fallow’s,” he said, and then laughter
caught him again and rapt his breath.
“But do speak! Do speak! What’s this mystery?”
“Your Gran’fer’s eloped!”
“What?”
He wiped the tears from his eyes.
“Do speak!” She almost shook him. “Eloped with who?”
“ ’Lijah Skindle’s mother.”
“Annie?” she murmured involuntarily.
“Carried her off from the poorhouse! I was only in time for
the tail-end of the fun.”
“But how could he get at her?”
“Well, I tell you I only saw it at the point the Master
came into it. But others saw more, and I’ve picked up spicy
details from the paupers and the wretched porter—Jims, you
know.”
“Yes, I know Mr. Jims.” A vision of the fat little man in
his peaked cap and blue uniform rose before her. The dismal
brick building in its iron enclosure was half a mile before you
got to Chipstone—administered under the Gilbert Act by half a
dozen parishes clubbed together.
“Well, your Gran’fer, rigged up to the nines with his best
smock and beaver, and ribbons on his whip and a bunch of wallflowers
and primroses sticking out of the spout of the teapot he
carried, rings at the gate, and when Jims came to take in the
parcel, as he thought, the old man pushes through and makes
for the wards, Jims runs after him, and when he asks him what
he wants, he answers, ‘Annie! I’ve come for Annie!’ ‘Who’s
Annie?’ asks Jims. ‘We don’t keep Annies—there’s only old
women, and it ain’t visiting day.’ ‘Do ye don’t tell me no
fibs,’ says your Gran’fer, and when Jims tries to stop him, he
catches him in the stomach with his teapot and leaves him
winded. Then off he scuttles to the stairs, and ‘Where’s
Annie?’ he cries to an old pauper woman sweeping them. This
creature happened to know Mrs. Skindle was Annie, so she says,
‘She’s washing Mr. Robinson in his bedroom.’ ‘What?’
shrieks your Gran’fer, swelling like a turkey-cock with jealousy.
‘You just show me where that bedroom is!’ The frightened
old woman takes him up the stone stairs to the little yellow-ochred
room where they had stowed the old dotard all by himself—I
don’t think he’s as old as your Gran’fer, but he’s quite a
helpless driveller—and there, the old woman told me, your
Gran’fer gives a great cry ‘Annie!’ and Mrs. Skindle drops the
flannel, and there they were crying and laughing and kissing like
two children, and he calling her ‘My darling! My beautiful
Annie!’ ”
“More than you’ve ever called me,” said Jinny, herself
inclined to laugh and cry and even to kiss.
The story was interrupted by an idyllic interlude. “But I
expect Gran’fer’s rather short-sighted without a telescope,” she
commented, disentangling herself blushingly.
“I was in the Master’s room,” resumed Will, “speaking to
him about the funeral, and hearing a lot about the guardians
and the parish authorities and such-like grand folk, when in
rushes Jims and pants out his tale, and we all race around till
we find the old couple coming down the staircase with arms round
each other’s waists, and your Gran’fer tells us fiercely he’s taking
her away, and opens the teapot to show he can support two wives
if he wants to! ‘Hold hard!’ says the Master. ‘I won’t stop
you, though I ought to have twenty-four hours notice, because
I know the guardians haven’t made such a good bargain with
Mr. Skindle that they’ll try to keep her, but you can’t take
away the parish clothes.’ For of course the old woman was
wearing that blue cotton dress——”
“It’s got white stripes if you look close,” put in Jinny.
“ ‘Well, Oi can’t take her away without clothes,’ roared your
Gran’fer. He said he counted it unrespectable enough that they
should allow her to wash a strange old man, alone in a room, and
that if they didn’t mend their ways he’d have a piece put in the
paper about it all. ‘Well, let ’em give me back my own clothes,’
says Mrs. Skindle. ‘I’ve got to have twenty-four hours’ notice
about that,’ says the Master. ‘Ha, you’ve stole ’em!’ says
your Gran’fer. ‘You be careful what you’re sayin’,’ says the
Master, bridling up. ‘Who wants her rags and jags?’ But in
the end it was all settled friendlywise—your Gran’fer buying up
some of the cast-off grandeur of the matron’s (they drove a good
bargain with your Gran’fer, the pair of screws, but he was free
and flush with his teapot), and off the happy pair went at last,
the bride as spruced up as the bridegroom, and I saw him hand
her into the wedding-cart with her bouquet, while the old
gentlemen in the corduroys and the old ladies in blue, and
especially the little orphans, raised a cheer. Even Jims waved.
I expect he’d had a drop out of the teapot.”
“Daniel Quarles, Carrier-Off,” laughed Jinny, half hysterically,
for scandalized and startled though she was, a rosy light, whose
source was yet unclear to her, seemed rising on her horizon.
“I went up to the cart under pretence of patting Nip,” Will
went on, “and asked the old boy where he was off to. ‘Home,
of course,’ he answers friendly. ‘You should be going to chapel
first, you old rip,’ I told him. ‘We’re going to be married in
church,’ answers Mrs. Skindle stiffly. ‘I’m Church of England.’
‘That’s all right, Annie,’ he says, patting her hand, ‘we’ll look
in on Mr. Fallow about they banns,’ and singing ‘Oi’m Seventeen
come Sunday,’ drives off with her.”
But Jinny refused to sympathize with the course of true love.
“He’s not really going to marry her?” she now cried. “But
that’s dreadful!”
“You scandalous creature! It would be more dreadful if he
didn’t!”
“But at his age!”
“Why, he’s quite young yet,” laughed Will. “One hundred
and fifty-two is his little span, remember.”
She let herself relax under his laughter. “Will they ring a
peal of Grandsire Triples at his wedding?” she asked whimsically.
Then with renewed anxiety: “Oh, but I do hope it
hasn’t all excited him too much,” she cried. “I’d best get
home as quick as possible.”
“Home? You don’t mean Blackwater Hall?”
“Where else?”
“You can’t go there. As your Gran’fer remarked to the
Master, that’s no place for a respectable female.”
She stared at him. “Besides,” he said, “you don’t want to
interfere with the young couple.”
“But I’ve not cooked the dinner!”
“Let the bride do that. She’s as strong as a horse. It’s the
best thing that could have happened for both of ’em. After
fending for all of us at Rosemary Villa, Blackwater Hall will be
a holiday to her.”
“But I must go and see about things. She won’t know where
anything is. And even if she cooks the dinner, she’ll want my
apron. She can’t spoil her fineries.”
“That’s enough,” he said sternly. “I don’t often quote my
father, but I’m bound to say some people are near-sighted and
can’t see God, their friend. You’ve done with Blackwater
Hall.”
“But where am I to go then?”
He laughed. “And what about Frog Farm?” He took her
arm. “And we, too, must get tied up as soon as possible. No,
Jinny, we can’t do better than follow in your Gran’fer’s footsteps.
The way he held that grey-headed old woman’s hand
in the wedding-cart, while I—you’re right, I haven’t called you
‘beautiful’ enough.” He paused to do so without words.
“The old boy’s taught me a lesson, dashing in like that, while
I’ve been sitting growling and grizzling and wasting our best
years.”
“But you see, Will, it couldn’t be before. And he was sacrificing
himself to me, poor Gran’fer, if he wanted her so badly
all the time. Just see how he waited till he could support
her!”
“On your money! Under the roof you re-thatched for
him!”
“It wasn’t my money. And it was Ravens who did the roof.”
“You paid for it!”
“No, I didn’t,” she protested.
“Why not?”
“He won’t send me in the bill.”
“Oh, won’t he!” Will clenched his fist. “I’ll jolly soon
stop his singing if he don’t hurry up with it! And why didn’t
you ask me to mend your thatch?”
“You couldn’t come in.”
“You don’t come in to the roof.”
“That might have been a way of coming in,” she laughed,
“it was so leaky. Anyhow you might have done Uncle Lilliwhyte’s—it
is his money that has saved us all.”
“In a roundabout way,” he admitted.
She snuggled to him. Happiness, which had hitherto seemed
like the soaped pig at village sports, was seizable at last. “Won’t
it be wonderful when we’re in the hut!” she said.
He opened his eyes. “You don’t propose to live in Uncle
Lilliwhyte’s hut with the three top-hats!”
“Of course not,” she said, blushing. “It’s in Australia.
There’s just poles stuck in the ground.”
“Why, when have you been in Australia?”
“Never you mind! You see, I’ve already saved up a little
towards my passage and——”
But her words died on his lips. “I don’t know that we need
pull up our stakes,” he said when he released her. “Farmer
Gale’s looking for a looker.”
“You don’t really mean that?” she said.
“He does, anyhow. I just met him in his dog-cart and he’s
mad about his flood-losses. ‘You should have paid a good man,’
I told the hunks to his head.”
“Oh, but, Will,” she said, shrinking, “you don’t like Farmer
Gale!”
“Well, he’s safely married now, and after all, my father had
the place first. . . . It belongs to the family. . . . Anyhow,” he
broke off masterfully, “I’d pay my wife’s passage-money.”
“Then I’ll be able to buy Methusalem,” she said in cheerful
submission. “He’s only five pounds—I suppose your father
would take care of him.”
“Rather! It would be a refuge from the New Jerusalem.”
“But we’ll take Nip with us, sweetheart—it won’t be the goldfields,
you know, just a farm. And we can take over the Bidlake
girls too, if you like.”
“Lord, what a crowd! But I don’t see Nip on an emigrant
ship.”
“Haven’t I heard of dog-watches?” she smiled.
“I guess you’d smuggle him in somehow,” he laughed. “I’ve
noticed you generally get your own way. And captains are
but men.”
“I thought they were sea-dogs,” she laughed.
“You generally get the last word too,” he grumbled with
adoring admiration. “But I tell you, Jinny, though there may
be more money, all these new countries are terribly raw.”
“I know—‘no longer an egg, not yet a bird, only a smell,’ ”
she quoted with wistful humour, and these words of his in the
English wood last May evoked again for both of them all the
magic of their love at its dawning.
They walked on in silence towards Frog Farm. After all,
with their united treasure of youth, energy, and love, their livelihood
was no grave problem. Larks were carolling, the little
wrens piping, and ringdoves calling, calling, for the Spring was
near after all, and the daffodils had already come. It seemed
indeed a vain snapping of the heart-strings to leave such a homeland.
“That’ll be winter soon in Australia,” mused Will tenaciously.
“Not if we were together,” Jinny whispered, although the
more she pondered during that wonderful walk the more the
Antipodes receded to their geographical distance, the more
shadowy grew the danger of falling off her planet. But, however
they were to decide, she could see no reason—once her grandfather’s
wedding-bells had rung—why they should not all live—wherever
they all lived—happy ever after.
 
 
PRINTED AT THE COMPLETE PRESS
WEST NORWOOD
LONDON, S.E.
 
THE NOVELS OF ISRAEL ZANGWILL
CHILDREN OF THE GHETTO
DREAMERS OF THE GHETTO
GHETTO COMEDIES
GHETTO TRAGEDIES
THE GREY WIG
THE KING OF SCHNORRERS
THE MANTLE OF ELIJAH
THE MASTER
THEY THAT WALK IN DARKNESS
THE CELIBATES’ CLUB
 
  WITH LOUIS COWEN
THE PREMIER AND THE PAINTER
 
NEW NOVELS: 7s. NET EACH
THE THREE BLACK PENNYS
Joseph Hergesheimer
(In preparation, by the same author)
JAVA HEAD
THE MOON AND SIXPENCE
Somerset Maugham
STORM IN A TEACUP
Eden Phillpotts
THE ROLLING STONE
C. A. Dawson Scott
A SAILOR’S HOME and Other Stories
Richard Dehan
THE OLD MADHOUSE
A posthumous novel by William de Morgan
THE BONFIRE
Anthony Brendon
Transcriber’s Notes:
The list of other works by the author has been moved from the front of the book to the end. Spelling and hyphenation have been left as in the original. A few obvious typesetting and punctuation errors have been corrected without note.
 
 
[The end of Jinny the Carrier by Israel Zangwill]

 
Jinny the Carrier
 
 
By
Israel Zangwill
 
 
 
 
 
LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN
Dear Mistress of Bassetts,
You and Audrey have so often proclaimed the need—in
our world of sorrow and care—of a “bland” novel,
defining it as one to be read when in bed with a sore throat,
that as an adventurer in letters I have frequently felt
tempted to write one for you. But the spirit bloweth
where it listeth, and seemed perversely to have turned
against novels altogether, perhaps because I had been
labelled “novelist,” as though one had set up a factory.
(Two a year is, I believe, the correct output.) However,
here is a novel at last—my first this century—and there
is a further reason for presuming to associate you with it,
because it is largely from the vantage-point of your Essex
homestead that I have, during the past twenty years,
absorbed the landscape, character, and dialect which finally
insisted on finding expression, first in a little play, and now
in this elaborate canvas. How often have I passed over
High Field and seen the opulent valley—tilth and pasture
and ancient country seats—stretching before me like a great
poem, with its glint of winding water, and the exquisite
blue of its distances, and Bassetts awaiting me below,
snuggling under its mellow moss-stained tiles, a true English
home of “plain living and high thinking,” and latterly of the
rural Muse! I can only hope that some breath of the inspiration
which has emanated from Bassetts in these latter
days, and which has set its picturesquely clad poetesses
turning rhymes as enthusiastically as clods, and weaving
rondels as happily as they bound the sheaves, has been
wafted over these more prosaic pages—something of that
“wood-magic” which your granddaughter—soul of the
idyllic band—has got into her song of your surroundings.
The glint of blue where the estuary flows,
  Or a shimmering mist o’er the vale’s green and gold:
A little grey church which ’mid willow-trees shows;
  A house on the hillside so good to behold
With its yellow plaster and red tiles old,
  The clematis climbing in purple and green,
And down in the garden ’mid hollyhocks bold
  Sit Kathleen, Ursula, Helen, and Jean.
And yet it must not be thought that either “Bassetts”
or “Little Baddow” figures in the “Little Bradmarsh”
of my story. The artist cannot be tied down: he creates
a composite landscape to his needs. Moreover, in these last
four or five years a zealous constabulary can testify out
of what odds and ends the strange inquiring figure, who
walked, cycled, or rode in carriers’ carts to forgotten hamlets
or sea-marshes, has composed his background. Nor have I
followed photographic realism even in my dialect, deeming
the Cockneyish forms, except when unconsciously amusing,
too ugly to the eye in a long sustained narrative, though
enjoyable enough in those humorous sketches which my
friend Bensusan, the true conquistador of Essex, pours forth
so amazingly from his inexhaustible cornucopia. I differ—in
all diffidence—from his transcription on the sole point
that the Essex rustic changes “i” into “oi” in words like
“while,” though why on the other hand “boil” should go
back to “bile” can be explained only by the perversity
which insists on taking aspirates off the right words and
clapping them on the wrong, much as Cockney youths and
girls exchange hats on Bank Holiday. I have limited my
own employment of this local vowelling mainly to the first
person singular as sufficiently indicative of the rest. In the
old vexed question of the use of dialect, my feeling is that
its value is simply as colour, and that the rich old words,
obsolete or unknown elsewhere, contribute this more effectively
and far more beautifully than vagaries of pronunciation,
itself a very shifting factor of language even in the
best circles. It is not even necessary for the artistic effect
that the reader should understand the provincial words,
though the context should be so contrived as to make
them fairly intelligible. In short, art is never nature,
though it should conceal the fact. Even the slowness and
minuteness of my method—imposed as it is by the attempt
to seize the essence of Essex—are immeasurable velocity and
breadth compared with the scale of reality.
In bringing this rustic complex under the category of
comedy I clash, I am aware, with literary fashion, which
demands that country folk should appear like toiling insects
caught in the landscape as in a giant web of Fate, though
why the inhabitants of Belgravia or Clapham escape this
tragic convention I cannot understand. But I do not think
that you, dear Aunt by adoption, see the life around you like
that. Even, however, had you and I seen more gloomily,
the fashionable fatalistic framework would have been clearly
inconsistent with the “blandness” of your novel. Such
a novel must, I conceive, begin with “once upon a time”
and end with “they all lived happy ever after,” so that my
task was simply to fill in the lacuna between these two
points, and supply the early-Victorian mottoes, while even
the material was marked out for me by Dr. Johnson’s definition
of a novel as “a story mainly about love.” I am hopeful
that when you come to read it (not, I trust, with a sore
throat), you will admit that I have at least tried to make my
dear “Jinny” really “live happy ever after,” even though—in
the fierce struggle for literary survival—she is far from
likely to do so. But at any rate, if only for the moment,
I should be glad if I had succeeded in expressing through
her my grateful appreciation of the beautiful country in
which my lot, like Jinny’s, has been cast, with its many
lovable customs and simple, kindly people.
Your affectionate Nephew,
THE AUTHOR
Sussex
New Year 1919
JINNY THE CARRIER
I’ll tell you who Time ambles withal.
“As You Like It.”
Once upon a time—but then it was more than once, it was, in
fact, every Tuesday and Friday—Jinny the Carrier, of Blackwater
Hall, Little Bradmarsh, went the round with her tilt-cart
from that torpid Essex village on the Brad, through Long
Bradmarsh (over the brick bridge) to worldly, bustling Chipstone,
and thence home again through the series of droughty hamlets
with public pumps that curved back—if one did not take the
wrong turning at the Four Wantz Way—to her too aqueous
birthplace: baiting her horse, Methusalem, at “The Black
Sheep” in Chipstone like the other carters and wagoners, sporting
a dog with a wicked eye and a smart collar, and even blowing a
horn as if she had been the red-coated guard of the Chelmsford
coach sweeping grandly to his goal down the High Street of
Chipstone.
Do you question more precisely when this brazen female
flourished? The answer may be given with the empty exactitude
of science and scholarship. Her climacteric was to the globe at
large the annus mirabilis of the Great Exhibition, when the lion
and the lamb lay down together in Hyde Park in a crystal
cage. But though the advent of the world-trumpeted Millennium
could not wholly fail to percolate even to Little Bradmarsh, a
more veracious chronology, a history truer to local tradition,
would date the climax of Jinny’s unmaidenly career as “before
the Flood.”
Not, of course—as the mention of Methusalem might mislead
you into thinking—the Flood which is still commemorated in
toyshops and Babylonian tablets, and anent which German
scholars miraculously contrive to be dry; but the more momentous
local Deluge when the Brad, perversely swollen, washed
away cattle, mangold clamps, and the Holy Sabbath in one fell
surge, leaving the odd wooden gable of Frog Farm looming
above the waste of waters as nautically as Noah’s Ark.
In those antediluvian days, and in that sequestered hundred,
farm-horses were the ruling fauna and set the pace; the average
of which Methusalem, with his “jub” or cross between a lazy
trot and a funeral procession, did little to elevate. It was not
till the pride of life brought a giddier motion that the Flood—but
we anticipate both moral and story. Let us go rather at
the Arcadian amble of the days before the Deluge, when the
bicycle—even of the early giant order—had not yet arisen to
terrorize the countryside with its rotiferous mobility, still less
the motor-mammoth swirling through the leafy lanes in a dust-fog
and smelling like a super-skunk, or the air-monster out-soaring
and out-Sataning the broomsticked witch. It is true
that Bundock, Her Majesty’s postman, had once brought word
of a big-bellied creature, like a bloated Easter-egg, hovering over
the old maypole as if meditating to impale itself thereon, like a
bladder on a stick. But normally not even the mail or a post-chaise
divided the road with Master Bundock; while, as for the
snorting steam-horse that bore off the young Bradmarshians,
once they had ventured as far as roaring railhead, it touched the
postman’s imagination no more than the thousand-ton sea-monsters
with flapping membranes or cloud-spitting gullets that
rapt them to the lands of barbarism and gold.
Blessèd Bundock, genial Mercury of those days before the
Flood, if the rubbered wheel of the postdiluvian age might have
better winged thy feet, yet thy susceptible eye—that rested all-embracingly
on female gleaners—was never darkened by the
sight of the soulless steel reaper, cropping close like a giant
goose, and thou wast equally spared that mechanic flail-of-all-work
that drones through the dog-days like a Brobdingnagian
bumble-bee. For thine happier ear the cottages yet hummed
with the last faint strains of the folk-song: unknown in thy
sylvan perambulations that queer metallic parrot, hoarser even
than the raucous reality, which now wakens and disenchants
every sleepy hollow with echoes of the London music-hall.
Rural Essex was long the unchanging East, and there are still
ploughmen who watch the airmen thunder by, then plunge into
their prog again. The shepherds who pour their fleecy streams
between its hedgerows are still as primitive as the herdsmen of
Chaldea, and there are yokels who dangle sideways from their
slow beasts as broodingly as the Bedouins of Palestine. Even
to-day the spacious elm-bordered landscapes through which
Jinny’s cart rolled and her dog circumambiently darted, lie
ignored of the picture postcard, and on the red spinal chimney-shaft
of Frog Farm the doves settle with no air of perching for
their photographs. Little Bradmarsh is still Little, still the
most reclusive village of all that delectable champaign; the
Brad still glides between its willows unruffled by picnic parties
and soothed rather than disturbed by rusty, ancient barges.
But when Gran’fer Quarles first brought little Jinny to these
plashy bottoms, the region it watered—not always with discretion—was
unknown even to the gipsy caravans and strolling showmen,
and quite outside the circuit of the patterers and chaunters
who stumped the country singing or declaiming lampoons on
the early Victoria; not a day’s hard tramp from Seven Dials
where they bought their ribald broadsheets, yet as remote as
Arabia Felix.
BUNDOCK ON HIS BEAT
He comes, the herald of a noisy world,
With spattered boots.
Cowper, “The Task.”
It had rained that April more continuously than capriciously,
but this morning April showed at last her fairer face. The sunshine
held as yet no sense of heat, only the bracingness of a glad
salt wave. Across the spacious blue of the Essex sky clouds
floated and met and parted in a restful restlessness. The great
valley swam in a blue sea of vapour. Men trod as on buoyant
sunshine that bore them along. The buds were peeping out
from every hedge and tree, the blackthorn was bursting into
white, the whole world seemed like a child tiptoeing towards
some delightful future. Primroses nestled in every hollow: the
gorse lay golden on the commons. The little leaves of the trees
seemed shy, scarcely grown familiar with the fluttering of the
birds. All the misery, pain, and sadness had faded from creation
like a bad dream: the stains and pollutions were washed out,
leaving only the young clean beauty of the first day. It was a
virgin planet, fresh from the hands of its Maker, trembling with
morning dew—an earth that had never seen its own blossoming.
And the pæan of all this peace and innocence throbbed exultingly
in bird-music through all the great landscape. Over the orchard
of Frog Farm there were only two larks, but you would have
thought a whole orchestra.
A blot against this background seemed the blood-red shirt of
Caleb Flynt in that same orchard; a wild undulating piece of
primeval woodland where plum-trees and pear-trees indeed
flourished, but not more so than oaks and chestnuts, briars and
brambles, or fairy mists of bluebells. The task of regenerating it
had been annually postponed, but now that Caleb was no longer
the Frog Farm “looker,” it formed, like his vegetable garden,
his wheat patch, or his wife’s piggery, a pleasant pottering-ground.
He worked without coat or smock, chastening the
ranker grass while the dew was still on it—or in his own idiom,
“while the dag was on the herb.” White-bearded and scythe-bearing,
he suggested—although the beard was short and round
and he wore a shapeless grey hat—a figure of Father Time,
incarnadined from all his wars. But in sooth no creature
breathed more at one with the earth’s mood that morning than
this ancient “Peculiar,” whose parlour bore as its text of honour—in
white letters on a lozenge of brown paper: “When He
giveth quietness, who then can make trouble?”
Quietness was, indeed, all around him in this morning freshness:
the swish of the scythe, the murmurous lapse of shorn
grass, the drone of insects, the cooing of pigeons from the cote,
the elusive cry of the new-come cuckoo, seemed forms of silence
rather than of sound. And his inner peace matched his outer,
for, as his arms automatically wielded the scythe, his soul was
actually in heaven—or at least in the New Jerusalem which,
according to his wife’s novel Christadelphian creed, was to be
let down from heaven for the virtuous remnant of earth—and at
no distant date! Not that he definitely believed in her descending
city, though he felt a certain proprietary interest in it. “Oi
don’t belong to Martha’s Church,” he reassured his brethren of
the Peculiar faith, “but Oi belongs to she and she belongs to
me.”
In this mutual belonging he felt himself the brake and Martha
the spirited mare who could never stand still. No doubt her
argument that we were here to learn and to move forward was
plausible enough—how could he traverse it, he who had himself
changed from Churchman to Peculiar? But her rider: “We
don’t leave the doctrine, we carry it with us,” struck him as
somewhat shifty. And her move from “Sprinkling” to “Total
Immersion”—even if the submergence did in a sense include the
sprinkling—was surely enough progression for one lifetime. He
did not like “this gospel of gooin’ forrard”: an obstinate
instinct warned him to hold back, though with an uneasy recognition
that her ceaseless explorations of her capacious Bible—to
him a sealed book—must naturally yield discoveries denied to
his less saintly and altogether illiterate self. Discoveries indeed
had not been spared him. Ever since she had joined those new-fangled
Christadelphians—“Christy Dolphins” as he called
them—she had abounded in texts as crushing as they were
unfamiliar; and even the glib Biblical patter he had picked up
from the Peculiars was shown to imply at bottom the new
teaching. Curtain lectures are none the less tedious when they
are theological, and after a course of many months—each with
its twenty-eight to thirty-one nights—Caleb Flynt was grown
wearisomely learned in the bold doctrine launched by the great
John Thomas that “the Kingdom of God on earth” actually
meant on earth and must be brought about there and nowhere
else, and that Immortality enjoyed except in one’s terrestrial
body—however spiritualized—was as absurd a notion as that it
was lavished indiscriminately upon Tom, Giles, and Jerry.
The worst of it was he could never be sure Martha was not in
the right—she had certainly modified his belief in “Sprinkling”—and
he fluttered around her “New Jerusalem” like a moth
around a lighthouse. Had anybody given a penny for his
thoughts as he stooped now over his scythe, the fortunate
investor would have come into possession of “the street of pure
gold, as it were transparent glass,” not to mention the sapphires
and emeralds, the beryls and chrysolites and all the other shining
swarms of precious stones catalogued in Revelation. If he had
kept from her the rumour that had reached his own ears of such
a treasure-city of glass actually arising in London at this very
moment, it was not because he believed this was veritably her
celestial city, but because it might possibly excite her credulity
to the pitch of wishing to see it. And the thought of a journey
was torture. Already Martha had dropped hints about the
difficulties of “upbuilding” in the lack of local Christadelphians
to institute a “Lightstand”: the wild dream of some day
breaking bread in an “Ecclesia” in London had been adumbrated:
it was possible the restless female mind even contemplated
London itself as a place to be seen before one died.
But surely the New Jerusalem, if it descended at all, would—he
felt—descend here, at Little Bradmarsh. A heaven that meant
girding up one’s loins and wrenching out one’s roots was a very
problematic paradise, for all the splendour with which his inward
eye was now, despite himself, dazzled.
From this jewelled Jerusalem Caleb was suddenly brought
back to the breathing beauty of our imperfect earth, to pear-blossom
and plum-blossom, to the sun-glinted shadows under his
trees and the mellow tiles of his roof. The sound of his own
name fell from on high—like the city of his daydream—accompanied
by a great skirring of wings, and looking up dazedly, the
pearly gates still shimmering, his eye followed the tarred side-wall
of the farmhouse till, near the roof, it lit upon his wife’s
night-capped head protruded from the tiny diamond-paned
casement that alone broke the sheer black surface of the wood.
A sense of the unusual quickened his pulses. It stole upon
him, not mainly from Martha’s face, which, despite its excited
distension, wore—over wrinkles he never saw—the same russet
complexion and was crowned by the same glory of unblanched
brown hair that had gladdened his faithful eyes since the
beginning of the century; but, more subtly and subconsciously,
through the open lattice which framed this ever-enchanting
vision. In the Flynt tradition, windows—restricted at best by
the window tax still in force—were for light, not air. Had folks
wanted air, they would have poked a hole in the wall; not built
a section of it “of transparent glass.” People so much under
the sky as Caleb and Martha Flynt had no need to invite colds
by artificial draughts. They were getting a change of air all day
long. But their rooms—their small, low-ceiled rooms—were not
thus vivified, even in their absence; the ground-floor windows
were indeed immovable, and an immemorial mustiness made a
sort of slum atmosphere in this spacious, sun-washed solitude.
Hence Caleb’s sense of a jar in his universe at the familiar, flat
pattern of the wall dislocated into a third dimension by the out-flung
casement: a prodigy which he was not surprised to find
fluttering the dovecot, and which presaged, he felt, still vaster
cataclysms. And to add to the auspices of change, he observed
another piebald pigeon among his snowy flock.
“Yes, dear heart,” he called up, disguising his uneasiness and
shearing on.
Martha pointed a fateful finger towards the high-hedged, oozy
path meandering beyond the orchard gate, and dividing the
sown land from the pastures sloping to the Brad. “There’s
Bundock coming up the Green Lane!”
“Bundock?” gasped Caleb, the scythe stopping short.
“You’re a-dreamin’.” That Brother Bundock, who had been
prayed over for a decade by himself and every Peculiar in the
vicinity, should at last have taken up his bed and walked, was
too sudden a proof of their tenets, and the natural man blurted
out his disbelief.
“But I see his red jacket,” Martha protested, “his bag on his
shoulder.”
“Ow!” His tone was divided between relief and disappointment.
“You mean Bundock’s buoy-oy!” He drew out the
word even longer than usual, and it rose even beyond the high
pitch his Essex twang habitually gave to his culminating phrases.
“Whatever can Posty be doin’ in these pa-arts?” he went on,
with a new wonder.
“And the chace that squashy,” said Martha, who from her
coign of vantage could see the elderly figure labouring in the
remoter windings, “he’s sinking into it at every step.”
“Ay, the mud’s only hazeled over. Whatever brings the silly
youth when the roads be in that state?”
“It’ll be the Census again!” groaned Martha.
Caleb’s brow gloomed. He feared Martha was right, and
anything official must have to do with that terrible paper-filling
which had at last by the aid of Jinny been, they had hoped,
finally accomplished some weeks before. Ever since the first
English census had been taken in the first year of the century,
Martha had been expecting a plague to fall upon the people as
it had upon the Israelites when King David numbered them.
But although she had been disappointed, there was no doubt of
the plague of the Census itself.
“Haps it’s a letter for the shepherd,” hazarded Caleb to
comfort her.
“Who’d be writing Master Peartree a letter? He can’t read.”
“Noa!” he answered complacently, for his wife’s learning
seemed part of their mutual “belonging.” The drawbacks of
this vicarious erudition were, however, revealed by his next
remark; for on Martha crying out that poor Bundock had sunk
up to his knees, Caleb bade her be easy. “He won’t be swallowed
up like that minx Cora!”
But Martha’s motherly heart was too agitated to recognize the
Korah of her Biblical allusions—she vaguely assumed it was
some scarlet woman englutted in the slimy saltings of Caleb’s
birthplace. “Run and lead him into the right path,” she
exhorted.
But Caleb’s brain was not one for quick reactions. Inured for
nigh seventy years to a world in which nothing happened too
suddenly, even thunderbolts giving reasonable notice and bogs
getting boggier by due degrees, he stood dazedly, his hands
paralysed on the nibs of his arrested scythe. “Happen the logs
Oi put have sunk down!” he soliloquized slowly.
“If I wasn’t in my nightgown I’d go myself,” said Martha
impatiently. “ ’Tis a lesson from the Lord not to lay abed.”
“The Lord allows for rheumaties, dear heart,” said Caleb
soothingly.
“He’ll be up to his neck, if you don’t stir your stumps.”
“Not he, Martha. Unless he stands on his head.” Caleb
meant this as a literal contribution to the discussion. There
was no wilful topsy-turveydom. He was as unconscious of his
own humour as of other people’s.
“But he’ll spoil his breeches anyways,” retorted Martha with
equal gravity. “And the Lord just sending his wife a new
baby.”
“Bundock’s breeches be the Queen’s,” said Caleb reassuringly.
But laying down his scythe, he began to move mazedly adown
the orchard, and before the postman’s mud-cased leggings had
floundered many more rods, the veteran was sitting astride his
stile, dangling his top-boots over a rotten-planked brook, and
waving in his hairy, mahogany hand his vast red handkerchief
like a danger signal.
“Ahoy, Posty!”
Bundock responded with a cheerful blast on his bugle. “Ahoy,
Uncle Flynt!”
“Turn back. Don’t, ye’ll strike a bog-hole.”
“I never go back!” cried the dauntless Bundock. And even
as he spoke, his stature shrank till his bag rested on the ooze.
“The missus was afeared you’d spoil the Queen’s breeches,”
said Caleb sympathetically. “Catch hold of yon crab-apple
branch.”
“Better spoil her breeches than be unfaithful to her uniform,”
said the slimy hero, struggling up as directed. “I’ve got a
letter for you.”
Caleb’s flag fell into the brook and startled a water-rat. “A
letter for us!”
He splashed into the water, still dazedly, to rescue his handkerchief,
avoiding the plank as a superfluous preliminary to the
wetting; and, standing statuesque in mid-stream, more like
Father Neptune now than Father Time, he continued incredulously:
“Who’d be sendin’ us a letter?”
“That’s not my business,” cried Bundock sternly. He came
on heroically, disregarding a posterior consciousness of damp clay,
and picking his way along the grassy, squashy strip that was
starred treacherously with peaceful daisies and buttercups, over-hung
by wild apple-trees, and hedged from the fields on either
hand by a tall, prickly tangle and congestion—as of a vegetable
slum—in which gorse, holly, speedwell, mustard, and lily of the
valley (still in green sheaths), strove for breathing space. At
the edge of a palpable mudhole he paused perforce. Caleb, who,
when he recovered from his daze at the news of the letter, had
advanced with dripping boots to meet him, was equally arrested
at the opposite frontier, and the two men now faced each other
across some fifteen feet of flowery ooze, two studies in red;
Caleb, big-limbed and stolid, in his crimson shirt, and Bundock,
dapper and peart, in his scarlet jacket.
The postman’s face was lightly pockmarked, but found by
females fascinating, especially under the quasi-military cap.
Hairlessness was part of its open charm: his sun-tanned cheek
kept him juvenile despite his half-century, and preserved from
rust his consciousness of a worshipping womanhood. Caleb, on
the contrary, was all hair, little bushes growing even out of his
ears, and whiskers and beard and the silver-grey mop at his
crown running into one another without frontiers—the “Nonconformist
fringe” in a ragged edition.
“Sow sorry to give ye sow much ill-convenience,” he called
apologetically. “Oi count,” he added, having had time for
reflection, “one of our buoy-oys has written from furrin parts.
And he wouldn’t be knowing the weather here.”
“ ’Tain’t any of your boys,” said Bundock crossly, “because it
comes from London.”
“That’s a pity. The missus’ll get ’sterical when she hears
it’s for us, and it’s cruel hard to disappoint her. There ain’t
nobody else as we want letters from. Can’t you send it
back?”
“Not if I can deliver it,” said Bundock stiffly.
“But ye can’t—unless you chuck it over.”
The slave of duty shook his head. “I daren’t risk the Queen’s
mail like that.”
“But it’s my letter.”
“Not yet, Uncle Flynt. When it reaches your hand it may
be considered safely, legally, and constitutionally delivered. But,
till then, ’tis the Queen’s letter, and don’t you forget it.”
Caleb scratched his head.
“If ’twas the Queen’s letter, she could read it,” he urged
obstinately.
“And so she can,” rejoined Bundock. “She has the right to
open any letter smelling of high treason, so to speak, and nobody
can say her nay.”
“But my letter ain’t high treasony,” said Caleb indignantly.
“And if Wictoria wants to read it, why God bless her, says
Oi.”
Bundock sighed before the bovinity of the illiterate mind.
“The Queen has got better things to do than read every
scribble her head’s stuck on to.”
“Happen Oi could ha’ retched it with a rake,” Caleb mused.
“What a pity you ain’t got spladges, like when Oi was a buoy-oy,
and gatherin’ pin-patches on the sands. And fine and fat they
was too when ye got ’em on the pin!” His tongue clucked.
Bundock looked his contempt. “A pretty sight, Her Majesty’s
uniform lumbering along like a winkle-picker!”
“Bide a bit then,” said Caleb, “and Oi’ll thrash through the
hedge and work through agen in your rear.”
It was a chivalrous offer, for a deep ditch barred the way to
the freshly ploughed land, and a tough and prickly chaos to the
pasture land; but Bundock declined churlishly, if not unheroically,
declaring there was a letter for Frog Cottage too.
And when Caleb, recovering from this vindication of his wife’s
prophesyings, offered to transmit it to the shepherd, “What
guarantee have I,” asked Bundock, “that it reaches him safely,
legally, and constitutionally? Nay, nay, uncle, a man must do
his own jobs.”
“Then work through the bushes yourself. Don’t, ye’ll be fit
to grow crops on.”
“Lord, how I hate going round—circumbendibus!” groaned
Bundock. “I might as well be driving a post-cart.”
“There’s a mort of worser things than gooin’ round,” said
Caleb. “And Oi do be marvelling a young chap like you should
mind a bit of extra leg-work, bein’ as how ye’ve got naught else
to do but to put one leg afore the ’tother.”
“Indeed?” snapped Bundock, this ignorant summary of his
duties aggravating the moist clayey consciousness that resided
at the seat of Her Majesty’s trousers.
“Ef ye won’t keep to the high roads, you ought to git a hoss
what can clear everything,” Caleb went on to advise.
“And break my neck?”
“Posty always had a hoss when I was a cad.”
“Or lay in the road with a broken back and Her Majesty’s
mail at the mercy of every tramp?” pursued Bundock. “No,
no, one cripple in a family is enough.”
Caleb looked pained. “You dedn’t ought to talk o’ your
feyther like that. And him pinchin’ hisself and maybe injurin’
his spinal collar to keep you at school till you was a large
buoy-oy!”
Bundock’s irritation at his Bœotian critic was suddenly diverted
by the spectacle of a female figure bearing down upon him
literally by leaps and bounds—it seemed as if the steeplechase
method recommended by Caleb was already in action. The
postman felt for his spectacles, discarded normally in the interests
of manly fascination. “Lord!” he cried. “Has your missus
joined the Jumpers?” Caleb turned his head, not unalarmed.
With so skittish a theologian anything was possible. But his
agitation subsided into a smile of admiration.
“She thinks of everything,” he said.
The practical Martha was in fact advancing with an improvised
leaping-pole that had already carried her neatly over the brook
and would obviously bring Bundock over the boglet. But why—Caleb
wondered—was she risking her “bettermost” skirt? His
own mother, he remembered, had not hesitated to tuck up her
petticoats when winkles had to be gathered. And why was
Martha’s hair massed in its black net cap with a Sunday
stylishness?
“Morning, Mrs. Flynt,” cried Bundock, becoming as genial as
the weather. Females, even sexagenarian, so long as not utterly
uncomely, turned him from an official into a man.
“Morning, Mr. Bundock!” Martha called back across the
mudhole. “I hope your father’s no worse!”
Bundock’s brow clouded. Still harping on his father.
“He’s not so active as you,” he replied a bit testily.
“Thank the Lord!” said Caleb fervently. Then, colouring
under Bundock’s stare, “For the missus’s legs,” he explained.
And to cover his confusion he snatched the pole from her and
hurled it towards Bundock, who had barely time to jump aside
into a still squidgier patch. But in another instant the dauntless
postman secured it, and with one brave bound—like Sir Walter
Scott’s stag—had cleared the slimiest section, and his staggering,
sliding form was safely locked in Caleb’s sanguineous shirt-sleeves.
Safely but not contentedly, for at heart he was deeply
piqued at this inglorious position of Her Majesty’s envoy; the
dignified newsbearer, the beguiler of loneliness, the gossip
welcomed alike in the kitchens of the great and the parlours of
the humble. Morbidly conscious of his unpresentable rear, he
kept carefully behind the couple, while Caleb explained the
situation to Martha, breaking and blunting the news at one
hammer-blow.
“There’s a letter for us! From Lunnon!”
Martha was wonderful. “What a piece! What a master!”
he thought. One might live with a woman for half a century,
yet never fathom her depths. Not a gasp, not a cry, not a sigh
of vain yearning. Merely: “Then it’ll be from Cousin Caroline.
When she went back to London at Michaelmas she promised to
let us know if she reached home safe, and if your brother George
was better.”
“Ay, ay!” he assented happily. “Oi’d disremembered
Cousin Caroline.”
It was a merciful oblivion, for his Cockney cousin had come
from Limehouse in August and stayed two months, protesting
that it was impossible to bide a day in a place where there wasn’t
a neighbour to speak to except a silly shepherd who was never
at home; where water was scooped filthily from a green-scummy
pond instead of flowing naturally from a tap; where on moonless
nights you could break your leg at your own doorstep; where
frogs croaked and cocks crowed and pigeons moaned and foxes
barked at the unholiest hours; where disgusting vermin were
nailed on the trees and where you broke out in itching blotches,
which folks might ascribe to “harvesters,” but which were
susceptible of a more domestic explanation. Moreover, Cousin
Caroline had brought a profuse and uninvited progeny, whose
unexpected appearance in Jinny’s cart, though vaguely comforting
as recalling the days when the house resounded with
child-life, was in truth at disturbing discord with the Quakerish
calm into which Frog Farm had subsided after the flight of its
teeming chicks. As Caleb came along now, convoying Bundock
through the lush orchard grass, the echo of Cousin Caroline’s
querulous voice rasped his brain and made him wish she had
pretermitted her promise to write. As for his ailing brother
George, information about whom she was probably sending, it
was obvious that he was no worse, else one would assuredly have
heard of his funeral. Had not George carefully let him know
when he got married? Caroline was a Churchwoman—he
remembered suddenly—she had compromised Frog Farm by
eking out Parson Fallow’s miserable congregation. And now
she had sent her letter just at a season to plague and muddy
a worthy Dissenter.
“Sow sorry to give ye sow much ill-convenience, Mr. Bundock,”
he repeated, as they reached the farmhouse.
Frog Farm, before which Bundock stood fumbling in his bag,
was—as its name implies—situated in a batrachian region,
croakily cheerless under a sullen sky, a region revealed under the
plough as ancient sedge-land, black with rotted flags and rushes.
But the scene was redeemed at its worst by the misty magnificence
of great spaces, whose gentle undulations could not
counteract a sublime flatness; not to mention the beauty of the
Brad gliding like the snake in the grass it sometimes proved.
The pasture land behind the farmhouse and sloping softly down
to the river—across which, protected by a dyke and drained by
little black mills working turbine wheels, lay the still lower Long
Bradmarsh—was the salvage of a swamp roughly provided with
a few, far-parted drains by some pioneer squatter, content—on
the higher ground where a farmhouse was possible—to fell and
slice his own timber and bake his own tiles. At the topmost
rim, on a road artificially raised to take its wagons to the higher
ground or “Ridge” of the village, rose this farmhouse with its
buildings, all dyked off from the converted marsh by a three-foot
wall of trunk-fragments and uncouth stones, bordered by
bushes. The house turned its back on the Brad, and had not
even hind eyes to see it—another effect of the window tax—and
had the rear of the house not been relieved by the quaint red
chimney bisecting it, the blankness would have been unbearable.
But if little of good could have been said of its architecture
behind its back, and if even in front it ended abruptly at one
extremity like a sheer cliff or a halved haystack, with one gable
crying for another to make both ends meet, it was as a whole
picturesque enough with all that charm of rough wood, which
still seems to keep its life-sap, and beside which your marble hall
is a mere petrifaction. Weather-boarded and tarred, it faced
you with a black beauty of its own, amid which its diamond-paned
little lattices gleamed like an Ethiopian’s eyes. In the
foreground, haystacks, cornricks, and strawstacks gave grace and
colour, fusing with the spacious landscape as naturally as the
barns and byres and storehouses, the troughs and stables and
cart-sheds and the mellow, immemorial dung.
But what surprised the stranger more than its lop-sidedness was
the duplication of its front door, for there were two little doors,
with twin sills and latches. It had, in fact, been partitioned
to allow a couple of rooms to the shepherd-cowman, when that
lone widower’s cottage was needed for an extra horseman.
Master Peartree’s new home became known as Frog Cottage.
The property was what was here called an “off-hand farm,” the
owner being “in parts,” or engaged in other enterprises, and for
more than a generation Caleb Flynt had lived there as “looker”
to old Farmer Gale, the cute Cornish invader who had discovered
the fatness of the oozy soil, and who had been glad to install a
son of it as a reconciling link between Little Bradmarsh and
“the furriner.” Caleb belonged to that almost extinct species
of managers who can dispense with reading and writing, and his
semi-absentee employer found his honesty as meticulous as his
memory. While the Flynt nestlings were growing up, the
parent birds had found the nest a tight fit, but with the gradual
flight of the brood to every quarter of the compass, the old pair
had receded into its snugger recesses—living mainly by the
kitchen fire under the hanging hams. Thus when last year
Farmer Gale’s son, succeeding to the property and foolishly
desiring a more scientific and literate bailiff, delicately intimated
that having bought all the adjoining land, he had been compelled
to acquire therewith the rival looker, the old Flynts were glad
enough to be allowed for a small rent the life-use of the farmhouse
and the bits of waste land around it, subject to their providing
living room for old Master Peartree, who was to pasture his flock
of sheep and a few kine in the near meadows. Martha, indeed,
always maintained that Caleb had made a bad bargain with the
new master—did not the whole neighbourhood pronounce the
young widower a skinflint?—but Caleb, who had magisterially
negotiated with the new bailiff the swapping of his wood-ashes
for straw for her pet pig, Maria, limited his discussions with her
to theology. “When one talks law and high business,” he
maintained, “we must goo back to the days afore Eve was dug
out of Adam.”
Bundock, restored to his superiority by the deprecatory
expectancy of the old couple, observed graciously that there was
no need to apologize: anybody was liable to have a letter.
Indeed, he added generously, with nine boys dotted about the
world, Frog Farm might have been far more troublesome.
“Eleven, Mr. Bundock,” corrected Martha with a quiver in
her voice.
“I don’t reckon the dead and buried, Mrs. Flynt. They don’t
write—not even to the dead-letter office.” He cut short a
chuckle, remembering this was no laughing matter.
“And the other nine might as well be dead for all the letters
you bring me,” Martha retorted bitterly.
“No news is good news, dear heart,” Caleb put in, as though
to shield the postman. He was not so sure now that this unfortunate
letter had not disturbed her slowly won resignation.
“We’ve always yeared of anything unpleasant—like when
Daniel married the Kaffir lady.”
“That was Christopher,” said Martha.
“Ow, ay, Christopher. ’Tis a wonder he could take to a
thick-lipped lady. Oi couldn’t fancy a black-skinned woman,
even if she was the Queen of Sheba. Oi shook hands with one
once, though, and it felt soft. They rub theirselves with oil to
keep theirselves lithe.”
Martha replied only with a sigh. The Kaffir lady, for all her
coloured and heathen horror, at least supplied a nucleus for
visualization, whereas all her other stalwart sons, together with
one married daughter, had vanished into the four corners of the
Empire—building it up with an unconsciousness mightier than
the sword—and only the children who had died young—two girls
and a boy—remained securely hers, fixed against the flux of life
and adventure. Occasionally indeed an indirect rumour of her
live sons’ doings came to her, but correspondence was not the
habit of those days when even amid the wealthier classes a boy
might go out to India and his safe arrival remain unknown for a
semestrium or more. The foreign postage, too, was no inconsiderable
check to the literary impulse or encouragement to the
lazy. Indeed postage stamps were still confined to half a dozen
countries. It was but a decade since they had come in at all
and letters with envelopes or an extra sheet had ceased to be
“double”; postcards were still unknown, and in many parts
postmen came as infrequently as carriers, people often hastening to
scrawl replies which the same men might convey to the mail-bags.
“Kaffirs ain’t black,” corrected Bundock. “They’re coffee-coloured.
That’s what the name means.”
Martha sighed again. So far had her brooding fantasy gone
that she sometimes pictured baby grandchildren as innocently
dusky as the hybrid young fantails which no solicitude could
keep out of her dovecot, and which were a reminder that heaven
knew no colour-boundaries.
“Don’t be nervous,” Bundock reassured her. “I’ll find it.”
“Oh, no hurry, no hurry!” said Caleb, beginning to perspire
distressingly under the postman’s exertions and to mop his hairy
brow with his brook-sopped handkerchief. How these youngsters
grew up! he was thinking. Brats one had seen spanked waxed
into mighty officers of State. “Shall I brush your breeches,
Posty?” he inquired tactlessly.
“What’s the use till they’re dry?” snapped Bundock.
“Come in and dry them before the kitchen fire,” said Martha.
“This sun’ll dry them,” he said coldly.
“Not so slick as the fire,” Caleb blundered on. “ ’Tain’t like
you was a serpent walking on your belly.”
Bundock flushed angrily and right-wheeled to hide the seat of
his trousers. “Why you should go and catch your letter when
the roads are in that state——!” he muttered.
“You could ha’ waited till they dried!” Caleb said deprecatingly.
“I did wait a post-day or so,” said Bundock with undiminished
resentment. “But there’s such a thing, uncle, as duty to my
Queen. Things might have got damper instead of drier, like the
time the floods were out beyond Long Bradmarsh, and I might
have had to swim out to you.”
Caleb was impressed. “But can you swim?” he inquired.
“That’s not the point,” growled Bundock. “I don’t say I’d
ha’ faced the elements for you, but if somebody with real traffic
and entanglement were living here, e.g. the Duke of Wellington,
I should have come through fire and water.”
“The Dook at a farm!” Caleb smiled incredulously.
“In the Battle of Waterloo,” said Bundock icily, “the whole
fight was whether he or Boney should hold a farm.”
“You don’t say!” cried Caleb excitedly. “And who got it?”
“Well, it wasn’t Froggy’s Farm.” And Bundock roared with
glee and renewed self-respect. Caleb guffawed too, but merely
for elation at the Frenchy’s defeat.
The calm and piping voice of Martha broke in upon this
robustious duet, pointing out that there was no Duke in residence
and no need for natation, but that since Jinny called for orders
every Friday he might have given her the letter.
“Give the Queen’s mail to a girl!” Bundock looked
apoplectic.
“Jinny never loses anything,” said Martha, unimpressed.
“She’ll lose her character if she ain’t careful,” he said viciously;
“driving of a Sunday with Farmer Gale.”
“That’s onny to chapel,” said Caleb.
“A man that rich’ll never take her there!” sneered Bundock.
“Why, Jinny’s only a child,” said Martha, roused at last. “And
the best girl breathing. Look how she slaves for her grandfather!”
“Jinny! Jinny!” Bundock muttered. “Nothing but Jinny
all the day and all the way.” How often indeed had she snatched
the gossip from his mouth, staled his earth-shaking tidings, even
as the Bellman anticipated his jokes! “Let me catch her carrying
letters, that’s all. I’ll have the law on her, child or no child.
I expect she blows that horn to make the old folks think she’s
got postal rights!” He did not mention that in his vendetta
against the girl it was he who never hesitated to poach on the
rival preserves, and that he was even now carrying a certain
packet of tracts which he had found at “The Black Sheep”
awaiting Jinny’s day, and which he had bagged on the ground
that he had a letter for the same address.
“Jinny would have saved your legs,” said Martha dryly.
Caleb turned on her. “Ay, and his leggings too!” he burst
forth with savage sarcasm. But at great moments deep calls to
deep. “Women don’t understand a man’s duty. And Posty’s
every inch a man.”
Bundock tried to look his full manhood: fortunately the discovery
of the letter at this instant enabled him to gain an inch
or two by throwing back his shoulders, so long bent under the
royal yoke.
“Mrs. Flynt,” he announced majestically.
“For me?” gasped Martha.
“For you,” said Bundock implacably. “Mrs. Flynt, Frog
Farm, Swash End, Little Bradmarsh, near Chipstone, Essex. Not
that I hold it’s proper to write to a man’s wife while he’s alive—but
my feelings don’t count.” And he tendered her the letter.
“It does seem more becoming for Flynt to have his Cousin
Caroline’s letter,” admitted Martha, shrinking back meekly.
Bundock relaxed in beams. “I’m wonderfully pleased with
you, Mrs. Flynt,” he said, handing Caleb the letter. “You’re a
shining example, for all you stand up for that chit. When I
think of Deacon Mawhood’s wife and how she defies him with
that bonnet of hers——!”
“What sort of bonnet?” said Martha, pricking up her ears.
“You haven’t heard?” Bundock’s satisfaction increased.
“It’s like the Queen’s—drat her! I mean, drat Mrs. Mawhood—made
with that new plait—‘Brilliant’s’ the name. They turn
the border of one edge of the straw inwards and that makes it
all splendiferous.”
“Pomps and wanities,” groaned Caleb. “And she a deacon’s
wife!”
Bundock sniggered. His sympathy with the husband was
deeper and older than theology.
“I told you,” Martha reminded Caleb, “what would come of
electing a ratcatcher a deacon.”
“A righteous ratcatcher,” maintained Caleb sturdily, “be
higher than a hungodly emperor.”
“You haven’t got any emperors,” said the practical Martha.
“And how many kings have joined your Ecclesia?” put in
Bundock.
“All the kings of righteousness!” answered Martha in trumpet-tones.
Bundock was quelled. “Well, I can’t stop gammicking,” he
said, shouldering his bag.
“Won’t you have a glass of pagles wine?” said Martha,
relapsing to earth.
“No, thank you. I’ve got a letter for Frog Cottage
too!”
“For Master Peartree!” cried Martha. “And all in one
morning. Well, if that’s not a miracle!”
“You and your miracles!” he said with a Tom Paine brutality.
“Why I saved up yours till another came for Swash End. And
so I’ve managed to kill——” His face suddenly changed. The
brutal look turned beatific. But his sentence was frozen. The
good couple regarded him dubiously.
“What’s amiss?” cried Martha.
Bundock gasped for expression like a salmon on a slab. “To
kill” burst from his lips again, but the rest was choked in a
spasm of cachinnation.
“You’ll kill yourself laughin’,” said Caleb.
Bundock mastered himself with a mighty effort. “So as to
kill—ha, ha, ha!—to kill—ha, ha, ha!—two frogs—ha, ha, ha!—with
one stone!”
Martha corrected him coldly: “Two birds, you mean.”
“Ay,” corroborated Caleb, “the proverb be two birds.”
“But here,” Bundock explained between two convulsions,
“it’s two frogs.”
Caleb shook his head. “Oi’ve lived here or by the saltings
afore you was born, and brought up a mort o’ childer here. Two
birds, sonny, two birds.”
Bundock’s closing chuckles died into ineffable contempt.
“Good morning,” he said firmly.
“You’re sure you won’t have a sip o’ pagles wine?” repeated
Martha.
He shook his head sternly. “If I had time for drinking I’d
have time to tell you all the news.” He turned on his heel,
presenting the post-bag at them like a symbol of duty.
“Anything fresh?” murmured Martha.
Bundock veered round viciously. “D’you suppose all Bradmarsh
is as sleepy as the Froggeries? Fresh? Why, there’s
things as fresh as the thatch on Farmer Gale’s barn or the paint
on Elijah Skindle’s new dog-hospital or the black band on the
chimney-sweep’s Sunday hat.”
“Is Mrs. Whitefoot dead?” inquired Martha anxiously.
“No, ’twas only his mother-in-law in London, and when he
went up to the funeral he had his pocket picked. Quite spoilt
his day, I reckon—ha, ha, ha!”
“Buryin’ ain’t a laughin’ matter,” rebuked Caleb stolidly.
“It depends who’s buried,” said Bundock. “I shouldn’t cry
over Mrs. Mawhood. Which reminds me that the Deacon sent
out the Bellman to say he couldn’t be responsible for her debts.”
“Good!” cried Caleb. Martha paled, but was silent.
“Only the Bellman spoilt it as usual with his silly old jokes.
Proclaimed that the Deacon had put his foot down on his wife’s
bonnet.”
“He, he, he!” laughed the old couple.
Bundock turned a hopeless hump. “Good morning!”
“And thank you kindly for the letter,” called Martha.
“Don’t mention it,” said Bundock. “And besides I killed—ho,
ho, ho!—two frogs!”
They heard his explosions on the quiet air long after he and
his royal hump had vanished along the Bradmarsh road.
Caleb’s eyes followed the heaving mail-bag.
“Bundock’s buoy-oy fares to be jolly this mornin’.”
“He does be lively sometimes,” agreed Martha.
Suddenly Caleb became aware of the letter in his hand.
“Dash my buttons, Martha! We disremembered to ask him
to read it.”
It can no longer be concealed that despite her erudition
Martha could not read writing nor write save by imitating
print. The cursive alphabet was Phœnician to her.
“I didn’t forget,” she answered with her masterly calm.
“Bundock’s too leaky. You heard him tell all the gossip and
scandal. And it ain’t true about Jinny, for Master Peartree saw
them riding in the other Sunday and Farmer Gale’s little boy
sat between them. Besides, Bundock’s a man, and I don’t want
a man to read my letter from Caroline.”
The point seemed arguable, but Caleb meekly suggested
the little boy she had just mentioned—only a mile and a half
away. He would be at school, Martha pointed out.
Caleb looked at the letter as a knifeless cook at an oyster.
“What’s the clock-time?” he asked.
“Not quite certain. I set the clock by Jinny last Friday, but
it stopped suddenly yesterday, when I was reading you St. Paul’s
Epistle to the Corinthians. Haven’t you heard it not striking?”
Caleb shook his head.
“Afeared Oi’m gooin’ deafish, dear heart. But we’ll know
the clock-time on Friday,” he added philosophically. “And
when Jinny comes she can read the letter likewise.”
But Martha was blushing. “No, no, not Jinny! She’s a
young girl.”
“Thank the Lord for her lively face!” agreed Caleb.
“Maybe she oughtn’t to read a letter to a married woman,”
explained Martha shyly, “being a girl without mother or sisters,
brought up by her grandfather.”
“But Cousin Caroline wouldn’t write naught improper.”
“Of course not—but it mightn’t be proper for an orphan girl
to read. Maybe it’s not even proper for you, and that’s why she
addressed it to me.”
Caleb felt as bemused as before a Bundock witticism.
“Joulterhead!” said Martha, with a loving smile. “And
you’ve had fourteen!”
The letter fell from his nerveless fingers. “Cousin Caroline
confined again!” And the clacking of all those innumerable
infants filled the air—like the barking of the black geese on the
wintry mud-flats. But he recovered himself. “Why, she’s a
widow, not a pair.”
“Widows can be re-paired,” said Martha.
“Must have been a middlin’ bold man to goo courtin’ a family
that size,” Caleb reflected.
He picked up the letter and poised it in his hand.
“Don’t feel as weighty as St. Paul’s letters,” he said.
“The text doesn’t mean his letters were heavy,” explained
Martha. “ ‘His letters, say they, are weighty and powerful’—that’s
what I was reading you when the clock stopped. Any
fool can write a heavy letter—he’s only got to write on a slate.”
“That’s a true word,” said Caleb, admiring her.
“Whereas,” pursued Martha, “the whole Bible has been got
inside a nutshell.”
“Lord!” said Caleb. “I suppose it was a cokernut!”
“Not at all. Only a walnut.”
“Fancy! But was there walnuts in the Holy Land?”
“I didn’t say ’twas done in Palestine.”
“Then there wasn’t walnuts there?” His face fell.
“I don’t remember—oh, yes—Solomon asked his love to come
into the garden of nuts.”
“But it don’t say walnuts?” he inquired wistfully.
“I can’t say it does.”
“Then maybe there won’t be pickled walnuts in the New
Jerusalem?”
“Not all the righteous have your carnal appetite,” said Martha
severely.
“You just said Solomon’s sweetheart liked nuts,” said Caleb
stoutly. “And dedn’t the Holy Land flow with milk and
honey?” He had a vision of it, seamed and riddled like his
native mud-flat, but with lacteal creeks and mellifluous pools.
“You put me out so,” snapped Bundock, suddenly reappearing
before the engrossed couple, “that I forgot to kill my two frogs
after all!” And going to the Frog Cottage doorway, he knocked
officially before opening it and committing the letter to the
empty interior.
“You’ll be witness that I delivered it constitutionally,” he
said, “for I can’t be expected to come a third time.”
“ ’Tis a windfall your coming a second,” cried Caleb eagerly,
“bein’ as we can’t read the letter.”
Martha made facial contortions to remind him that Bundock
was barred. “ ’Tain’t you we want to read it,” he hurriedly
added, “but when a letter comes all of an onplunge, time a man’s
peacefully trimmin’ the werges, he ain’t prepared like. You
haven’t got a moment—did, Oi’d be glad o’ your counsel on the
matter.”
“Well, since I’ve wasted so much of the Queen’s time——!”
said Bundock, flattered.
They adjourned to the parlour to give him a rest, and denuding
himself of both cap and bag of office, he occupied oracularly the
long-unused arm-chair, while Caleb, uncomfortably perched on a
seat of slippery horsehair, started to unfold the situation.
“Take off your hat,” broke in Martha. “Mr. Bundock will
be thinking you’ve no manners.”
“Oi’ll be soon gooin’ outside again,” said Caleb obstinately,
and re-started his story.
“Do let me explain,” interrupted Martha at last.
“Do let me get a word in,” cried Caleb.
“Well, take off your hat.”
“Oi’ll be gooin’ outside soon, Oi tell ye.”
“Then you can put it on again.”
“Oi shall never make Bundock sensible, ef you keep interruptin’
me.”
“You see, Mr. Bundock, it’s this way——” began Martha.
“Oi’ve told him all that,” said Caleb. “Let me speak.”
“Well, take off your hat,” said Martha.
“Oi’ll be gooin’ outside agen, won’t Oi?”
Bundock was examining the letter which had been laid on the
table as for an operation.
“But it don’t look like a woman’s writing,” he interrupted.
“That would be spidery.”
“ ’Tain’t likely she could write herself in that condition,” began
Caleb, but Martha’s face again hushed him down.
“There’s neither seal nor sticking envelope,” pursued the
expert. “Nothing but a wafer. Comes from a poor man.”
“Her new husband,” said Caleb, and set Martha grimacing
again.
“Oi’ll be soon gooin’ outside,” he protested, misunderstanding.
“What you want,” summed up Bundock judicially, “is a
mixture of discretion with matrimony, seasoned with a sprinkle
of learning.”
“He talks like the Book!” said Caleb admiringly.
“But where is this mixture?” inquired Martha eagerly.
“She don’t exist,” said Bundock. “But Miss Gentry is the
nearest lady that can read, and Fate is just sending me with a
letter and a packet to her.”
The couple looked doubtful.
“She ain’t matrimony,” said Caleb.
“No,” admitted Bundock, “but I guess she’s old enough to
be, though I haven’t seen her census paper—he, he! And besides
she’s a dressmaker!”
“What’s that to do with it?” asked Caleb.
“I see your missus understands,” said Bundock mysteriously.
“But she won’t walk five miles to read my letter,” urged
the blushing Martha.
Caleb had one of the great inspirations of his life.
“And ain’t it time you got a new gownd?”
Martha flushed up. “Oh, Caleb! Don’t let us run to
vanity!”
“Wanity, mother! It ain’t tinkling ornaments nor cauls nor
nose-jewels,” protested Caleb, with a vague reminiscence of her
Biblical readings. “And ye’ve had naught since the sucking-pig
Oi bought ye for your sixtieth birthday.”
But Martha shook her head, quoting firmly:
“Let me be dressed fine as I will,
 Birds, flowers, and worms exceed me still.”
“Then why not a bonnet?” suggested Bundock. “That
would be cheaper than a gown.”
“Ay, a bonnet!” agreed Caleb, though he sounded it a
“boarnt.”
Martha flashed a resentful glance which, however, Bundock
took for but another thrust at Caleb’s obstinate hat.
“I don’t want a new bonnet,” she cried indignantly.
“It needn’t be new,” said Bundock helpfully. “Just have
your old bonnet whitened. That’s on her bill-paper:
‘Bonnets Bleached As Good As New.’ ”
“That’s a good notion,” said Caleb. “You don’t want it
bran-span-new. Posty’ll tell her to come over here to get your
old boarnt and then we’ll spring Cousin Caroline’s letter on
her for her to read!” He chuckled. Bundock chuckled too,
swelling at the adoption of his advice.
“And now that I’ve stopped gammicking so long, I may as well
sample that cowslip wine, Mrs. Flynt,” he observed graciously.
But Martha had vanished.
Miss Gentry had apartments in one of the most elegant
cottages to be found in Little Bradmarsh. Protected by palings,
it stood all alone on the high road, painted a vivid green, with
three pollarded lime-trees in front like sentinel mops. At the
base of the trim little garden the front door rose above two
wooden steps with a little porch and ostentated a brass plate
with the inscription:
 
Miss Gentry
Late of Colchester
Practical Dressmaker and Milliner.
 
In proof of which, from the cottage window, whose green shutters
lay folded back, a visite or jacket of black silk, and a polka
jacket, and a trio of straw bonnets, Tuscan or Leghorn, appealed
to the passing eye: one of them a bonnet cap with a quilting of
net and broad blue strings, another resplendent with purple
ribbons and the new-treated straw plait that the Queen and
Mrs. Mawhood favoured, and the third of drawn silk on little
wires. The pictures of the period with a wonderful unanimity
and monotony display a single style of bonnet, but artists in
those days were men, and Miss Gentry could have told you
better. “I’ve looked down from a pew in the gallery of my Colchester
Church on Easter Sunday,” she told Jinny once, “and
tried in vain to find two fellow-bonnets.”
But her professional door with its immaculate paint and shining
brass was so forbiddingly respectable that clients mostly preferred
to seek access through her landlady’s back door, where the
flutter of washing from the clothes-line on its green square poles
in the little orchard was reassuring; not to mention her chickens.
“Practical” was the unfailing adjective in those parts. Miss
Gentry was not undeserving of it, for her dresses were cheap
without being vulgar, while her knack of whitening the straw
enabled the poorest, in the succession of new bonnets, to keep
pace with Victoria on the throne. A stranger might have
thought another species of dressmaker existed, whose confections,
though exquisite, would never fit, or who designed, but could not
execute; whereas the only other person for miles round at all
in the sartorial line was an equally “Practical Breeches-Maker,”
placarding from a flower-potted cottage window his “Strong,
Stylish Pantaloons.” But the thought of unpractical pantaloons—say,
without buttons or belts—or of theoretical trousers, was
simple compared with the image evoked by Mr. Henry Whitefoot’s
door-plate, proclaiming that victim of the London pick-pocket
a “Practical Chimney-Sweep”: as by contrast with
some exquisite dream Ethiopian, only platonically black, darkly
revolving flues and fireplaces, sweeping shadow-chimneys with
fleckless brushes, and carrying off ideal bags of the soot that
never was on sea or land.
But perhaps in Miss Gentry’s case the word “Practical” was
necessary to offset the business-damage of the tradition that had
followed her from her native Colchester. For Miss Gentry had
had a “revelation.” It had occurred in her girlhood, but the
halo of it still circled round her chignon. Seated in church, full
of worldly thoughts—possibly studying the infinite variety of
bonnets—she had seen the stained-glass angel move. What this
flutter of wing and lifting of leg “revealed” had never been
clear: unless—as a wag maintained—it portended the flight of
Miss Gentry herself. That hegira of hers from Colchester to
Bradmarsh had not, alas, increased her prophetic prestige: what
right has a “furriner” to come with “revelations”? Even her
fellow-Churchfolk—she was one of the few Bradmarshians that
clung to the Establishment—looked askance on the miracle,
feeling it indeed as reprehensibly Papish, and as lending colour to
the suspicion that she was a “French” dressmaker: a suspicion
strengthened at once by her elegant handiwork, and by her full-bosomed
plenitude, swarthy complexion, and more than embryonic
moustache. It was forgotten that if these did imply
Gallic blood, it would have been, not the Papish, but that Huguenot
strain whose inpour into the county had at one time carried
the French liturgy into Essex churches. As a matter of fact
Miss Gentry was so fanatical a Church woman that she supplemented
all her bills and receipts by tracts in defence of the
Establishment, purchased at her own expense from a mysterious
reservoir in Colchester. Nevertheless, such is the contrariety of
mankind, the large accession she represented to the parish
church—where on wet Sundays only the Apostle’s two or three
were gathered together—was discounted by her felt queerness.
And it was, still more oddly, from the Peculiars that she
received the bulk of her custom, and this despite her top-lofty
airs towards them, and the tracts suggesting that souls, no
less than bonnets, could be bleached as good as new. Possibly
their more elastic spirituality vibrated more readily to the
moving angel: perhaps the real bond of sympathy was that they
knew her unpopular with the Church: like themselves a butt of
legend, and lacking even their advantage of Bradmarsh birth.
But even the Churchwomen did not utterly deny patronage
to this talented needlewoman, nor refuse her the deference due
to weekday gloves, a parasol, and bills with printed headlines;
they did not even discountenance her crusade against Dissent,
though her copious allusions to Providence “moving in a
mysterious way” were felt to be too broadly autobiographic.
Moreover, in view of the caustic remarks upon cardinals,
Puseyites, black-robed priests, and winking pictures, by which
her tracts began to diversify the attack upon Dissent—for John
Bull was getting alarmed at the new Roman invasion—it was a
source of surprise that she failed to see the beam in her own
eye. For if Virgins could not wink in Rimini, why should
Angels wobble in Colchester? To add to her oddity, her brain
was full of ancient maggots of astrology and medicine, crept in
from “Culpeper’s Herbal,” her one bedside book.
That Bundock should be bringing a bonnet commission to this
excellent and industrious, if freakish female, was the more laudable,
inasmuch as he nourished a prejudice against her and her
tracts. Not that he held with Catholic or evangelical Dissenters
any more than with the Church proper. As a follower of Tom
Paine, whose “Age of Reason” he read piously in bed every Sunday
morning—the passage asserting that to make a true miracle
Jonah should have swallowed the whale was a regular Lesson—he
regarded himself as a great free spirit in an illiterate and
priest-ridden world, one whose God was everywhere except in
Church. Not that he could follow the Master’s excursions into
trigonometry or astronomy or knew anything of his idol’s
“Rights of Man,” being indeed singularly free from the contemporary
unrest of the industrial townsman, and combining,
like greater men, a crusty conservatism for the old order with a
radical rejection of its spinal creed. Possibly his devotion to
the still youthful Queen was part of his softness for the sex, for
the only part of “The Age of Reason” that left him unconvinced
was its impugnment of the wisdom of Solomon, its contention
that “seven hundred wives and three hundred concubines are
worse than none.” But it was not Tom Paine, nor even Bob
Taylor’s “The Devil’s Chaplain,” it was the long years of his
father’s paralysis that had first sapped his faith in the pharmacopœian
aspects of prayer, though he considerately concealed
his defection from his bed-ridden parent, and even the visiting
elders withheld the racking information. The old Bundock was
not, however, to be deceived, on this point at least.
“My son is moral, only moral,” he would say, with a sigh.
To such a temperament Miss Gentry must needs be antipathetic,
and to mark his distaste, Bundock was wont to leave
the Colchester packets of tracts as well as the “practical”
correspondence at the side door, shedding the light of his countenance
only on the landlady. But on this occasion, having a
message to deliver as well as a missive and a packet, he performed
resoundingly on the green knocker, and Miss Gentry herself,
attended by Squibs, her ebony cat, appeared in the narrow, little
passage, frenziedly stitching at a feminine fabric. Behind her,
through the open back door, was a gleam of blossoming orchard
and dangling chemises.
“Good morning, Bundock,” she said graciously; “lovely
weather.”
“It’s all right overhead,” he grumbled, “but underfoot,
especially at Frog Farm—whew!”
“You had to go to Frog Farm?” she inquired sympathetically.
“Yes, but there was a letter for Frog Cottage too. So I—he,
he!—I killed two frogs with one stone.”
“Two birds, you mean,” said Miss Gentry, embosoming her
letter with a romantic air and laying her packet on a chair.
She added in alarm: “Would you like a glass of water?”
“I don’t need drink,” said Bundock, mastering the apoplectic
assault, “it’s other folks that need brains.”
“My, were the old Flynts unusually trying?” she asked
sympathetically.
“They want you to clean the gammer’s bonnet,” he answered
brusquely.
“That’s not so foolish.” Her needle was moving busily again.
“Have you brought it?”
“No.”
“That does seem foolish.”
“I’m not a bonnet-bearer! They want you to fetch it.”
“Me! Five miles to clean a bonnet! When I’m so busy!
And in all that mud!”
“It ain’t so muddy this side o’ Swash End, and it’s not two
miles each way by the fields.”
“Yes, with horrid cows!”
Bundock felt protective. “Cows ain’t bulls.”
“Well, I won’t go. You tell Mrs. Flynt she must come to me.”
“How can I tell her? I shan’t likely be going that way for
months, thank my stars.” Miss Gentry quivered a little at the
expression, wondering under what planet he was born.
“Well, I’ll write to her,” she said conclusively.
“What! And me take the letter!” In his indignation he
almost blurted out that the same difficulty of reading it would
arise.
“Then I’ll tell Jinny to bring the bonnet!”
Bundock felt baffled. Instead of cunningly helping the Flynts
to get their letter read, he had only secured that minx of a
carrier a commission. He scowled at the dressmaker, seeing her
moustache as big as a guardsman’s and believing the worst of
the legends about it: even that the real reason she left Colchester
was that the bristly-bearded oysterman to whom she was engaged
had refused to shave unless she did. “I’ll be wishing you a
good morning,” he said icily, hitching up his bag.
“Good morning,” said Miss Gentry. But she omitted to slam
the door in his face as he expected, indeed she had gradually
advanced into the porch, stitching unrelaxingly. And Bundock
now became acutely aware that he could not turn his back on
her without revealing the stain on Her Majesty’s uniform, that
even by lowering the mail-bag he had just hitched up, he could
not cover up what certain rude ploughboys had already commented
on. He understood it was green. In this dreadful
situation he began backing slowly as from the presence of
royalty, making desperate conversation to cover his retreat.
“I did give you your tracts, didn’t I?” he babbled.
“If you mean the packet,” said Miss Gentry in stern rebuke,
“there it lies. I haven’t opened it!”
“Do you mean that I have?” he asked indignantly, gaining
another yard in this rear-guard action. “We don’t have to open
an oyster to know what’s inside.”
Miss Gentry’s brow grew as swarthy as her moustache—at the
reminder of her lost oysterman, Bundock supposed in dismay.
“Don’t you always send out tracts after I bring you packets?”
he explained hastily, still retreating with his face to the foe.
“Not when they’re patterns,” said Miss Gentry crushingly.
“And how do you know it’s not The Englishwomen’s Magazine?”
She turned back into the passage, and he hoped she would
slam the door on her triumph, but she took up the packet instead.
“We shall soon see,” and snipping the string with mysteriously
produced scissors, she read out unctuously: “Ishmael and the
Wilderness.”
Bundock did not know which way to turn. Why in the name
of propriety did she not go back to her workroom and close her
door? Miss Gentry, without the clue to his lingering attitude,
observed invitingly, tapping the packet: “If this won’t make
you see the beauties of the Establishment, nothing will.”
He grinned uncomfortably. “Always willing to see the
beauties of any establishment.”
It was very strange. Give him a female, even with a moustache,
even tepefied by tracts, and something from the deeps
rose up to philander. Not that there wanted a lurid fascination
in this exotic and literate lady: his very loathing was a tribute
to a vivid personality.
Miss Gentry, however, was shocked. She put down the tracts.
She knew herself “born under Venus,” but romance and respectability
were never disjoined in her day-dreams, and as the
channel of a revelation she felt profaned. “Don’t talk like
that,” she said sharply. “You’re a married man.”
“ ’Tis a married man knows how to appreciate beauty,” he
replied, receding farther nevertheless as in ironic commentary.
“For shame!” Her needle stabbed on. “And you setting
up to be holy!”
“Me?” Surprise brought his strategic retreat to a standstill.
“I never set up to be a stained-glass saint.”
Again he had blundered. The black eyes flashed fire. “You
who move mountains!” she cried angrily.
“Me move mountains?” Bundock was bewildered.
“A little grain of mustard-seed,” he heard her saying more
tremulously. “And if a sycamine-tree could move—! Surely
you don’t hold with the unbelievers!”
It was precisely whom Bundock did hold with, but the big
black eyes seemed suddenly tearful and appealing, her needle
seemed entering his breast, and she swam before him as a fine,
voluptuous female. Through the passage he saw the apple-trees
in bridal bloom and the white feminine washing, and the Master’s
remark on the apparent miracle of the extraction of electric
flashes from the human body thrilled in his memory.
“Of course not,” he heard himself saying soothingly, while his
legs felt going forward, losing all the ground so laboriously won.
“Then you do believe the angel moved?” she asked eagerly.
“Don’t I see her moving?” he replied.
Miss Gentry looked down from her doorstep more in sorrow
than in anger. “You’re a married man!” she reminded him
again.
“And does marriage pick out a man’s eyes—like a goat-sucker?”
He felt too near her now to back out, and he put
forth his hand for hers, not without nervousness at the needle.
Could his father have seen him now, he might have thought his
son not even “moral.” But Miss Gentry dexterously met the
amorous palm with a tract. “That’ll open your eyes,” she said.
To feel a flabby piece of paper instead of a warm hand is not
conducive to theological persuasion: all Bundock’s dissenting
blood rushed to his head.
“There’s two opinions about that,” he snorted.
“There are two opinions,” Miss Gentry assented placidly;
“one wrong and the other mine.”
“Oh, of course!” he sneered. “The Church is always infallible.”
“We’re eighteen and a half centuries old,” said Miss Gentry
freezingly.
“Did you put that in your census paper?” retorted the
humorist.
Miss Gentry winced. She was weary of the jokes that had
desolated Bradmarsh, yet she was conscious of having let her
landlady’s estimate of her age go by default.
“I had no paper to fill up,” she reminded him frigidly. “But
if there was a census of religions, you’d certainly be among the
mushrooms.”
“Better than being among the mummies.” Bundock’s father
might have clapped his palsied hands, to hear this defender of
the faith. But Miss Gentry mistook this fair retort in kind for
another allusion to the personal census.
“I thought you could discuss like a gentleman!” It was a
cunning shaft, and Squibs, seizing this moment to rub herself
against the postman’s leggings, he replied more mildly: “What’s
the use of going by age—except the Age of Reason?”
“Then be guided by Reason.” Miss Gentry stitched implacably.
“If the Almighty meant prayer to be medicine, why did
He create castor-oil?”
Bundock was dumbfounded.
“Or Epsom salts?” she added triumphantly.
“They’re for cattle which can’t pray,” he answered with an
inspiration.
Miss Gentry’s needle stabbed the air. But she recovered
herself. “Then why do you eat rhubarb pie?”
“Because it’s nice.” He grinned.
“But rhubarb’s a medicine!”
He countered cleverly. “We don’t mind taking medicine—so
long as we’re well!” We! He was identifying himself with his
despised Brethren: such is human nature under attack. But
Miss Gentry was not at the end of her resources.
“Well, what do you do when you break your legs? Pray the
bones straight?”
“But we don’t break our legs. I never heard of a Peculiar
breaking his leg.”
“But why shouldn’t a Peculiar break his leg?”
“That’s not my affair. He don’t. I’ve got Peculiars all over
my beat, and never have I known one to break a leg. A broken
heart, now——!”
“But if he did break a leg?” persisted Miss Gentry.
“If any one could break a leg, it would be me!” he said
crossly.
“Well, then what would you do—if you broke your leg?”
Bundock was worn out. “What’s the good of meeting
troubles half-way?” he snapped, turning on his heel.
“Yours seem to have come more than half-way,” scoffed Miss
Gentry.
Bundock clapped his hand to the mud-patch, stung in his
tenderest part. He wheeled round prestissimo, raging with
repartee. But the door had closed—too late! Solitary, the
sable Squibs dominated the doorstep—like a sardonic spirit.
Bundock was turning away angrily, though now fearlessly,
when with a sudden thought he caught up the cat and plucked
out one of her hairs. It was not revenge—it was merely that his
youngest daughter had a sty, for which he believed the black
hair an infallible remedy.
JINNY ON HER ROUNDS
Give me simple labouring folk,
Who love their work,
  Whose virtue is a song
  To cheer God along.
Thoreau.
Thus it was that the days passed without any literate and
discreet female descending on Frog Farm or any rejuvenation
appearing in Martha’s bonnet; and the unread letter lay—guarded
by two china dogs—on the parlour mantelpiece awaiting
the carrier. For it had been decided, after nightly discussions
that were a change for Caleb from the Christadelphian curtain-lectures,
to fall back on Jinny after all. She was to read it to
Martha in Caleb’s careful absence, and was to be stopped if the
improper seemed looming.
Alas, the best-laid schemes of mice and Marthas gang agley,
and by the day that Jinny’s horn resounded along the raised
road that led to the farm, the world was changed for Caleb and
Martha. There was, in fact—for the first time in Jinny’s
experience—neither of the twain to meet her as Methusalem
ambled under the drooping witch-elms towards the twin doors.
It was a tilt-cart,—with two tall wheels, and although Jinny
steered it and packed it and unpacked it, and scoured it and
hitched Methusalem to it, its weather-beaten canvas blazoned in
fading black letters the legend:
 
Daniel Quarles
Carrier
Little Bradmarsh.
 
You gather that she operated under the shadow of a great
name, greatest as being masculine. Self-standing careers for
women had not yet dawned on the world. If the first faint
cloud of feminism had appeared that very year in New York, no
bigger than a man’s pants, the Bloomerites had but added to
the gaiety of mankind, and in rural Essex, with the exception of
dressmaking, wherein man appeared unnatural, women were the
recognized practitioners only of witchcraft or fortune-telling or
the concoction of philters; professions that were the peculiar
province of crones scarcely to be considered sexed. Though
women earned money by plaiting straw, they had husbands on
the premises. Widows, of course, for whom there was no provision
outside the Chipstone poorhouse, were allowed to maintain
themselves more manfully than spinsters: but then they were
“relicts” of the masculine, had served—so to speak—an
apprenticeship under it. But the business of plying between
Chipstone and Bradmarsh was a peculiarly male occupation, and
even the venerable name of Daniel Quarles would not have
sufficed to shield or install Jinny had she jumped into his place
as abruptly as Nip was apt to jump into the cart.
No, Rome was not built in a day, nor could Jinny have become
the carrier “all of an onplunge,” as Caleb would have put it.
That would have shocked the manners and morals of Bradmarsh,
both Little and Long, and upset the decorum of Chipstone. A
gradual preparation had been necessary, a transition by which
Jinny changed into the carrier as imperceptibly as she had
ripened into the girl. At first the small “furriner”—the carried
and not the carrier—reposing in the cart because, after smallpox
had snatched away both her parents in the same week, her
grandfather, who had imported her, had nowhere else to put
her; playing in the great canvas-covered playground that held
as many heights, depths, and obstacles as a steeplechase course;
petted by every client for her helplessness before her helpfulness
gave her a second lease of favour; bearing a literally larger and
larger hand in “Gran’fer’s” transactions as he grew older and
older; correcting with cautious tact his memories, his accounts,
his muddled bookings and deliveries, in due course ousting the
octogenarian even from his place on the driving-board and
carrying him first by her side and then inside in his second
childhood, just as he had carried her in her first—a stage in
which his cackle with the customers carried on the continuity of
the male tradition; leaving him at home on bad days—whether
his own or Nature’s—and then altogether in the winter, and then
altogether in the spring, and then altogether in the autumn, and
finally—when he reached his nineties—altogether in the summer;
Jinny the Carrier was—it will be seen—a shock so subtly prepared
and so long discounted as to have been practically imperceptible.
She might crack Daniel’s heavy whip, but nobody felt the
flourish as other than vicarious, if not indeed a sort of play-acting
evoking the pleasure a more sophisticated audience finds
in Rosalind’s swashbucklings. Not that she made any brazen
pretences to equality in lifting boxes; she sat with due feminine
humility while male muscles swelled and contracted under her
presiding smile and the rippling music of her thanks.
Here was, in fact, the prosaic purpose of the little horn slung
at her side—her one apparent embellishment of the tradition:
it summoned her slavish superiors so that she might be spared
alighting and re-climbing with goods. In face of the accuracy of
her operations, this display of helplessness probably helped to
remove the sting of an otherwise intolerable feminine sufficiency:
it was perhaps the secret of her popularity. Even with the most
Lilliputian packets nobody expected Jinny to descend and knock
at their doors—one blast and old and young tumbled over one
another to greet the coming or speed the parting parcel. It was
indeed as if a good fairy should condescend to do your marketing,
a fairy in a straw bonnet (piquantly tied under the chin in a bow
with drooping ends), a fairy whose brilliant smile and teeth and
flowing ringlets could convert even an order for jalap into poetry,
nay, induce in the eternal masculine a craving for more. In fine,
so topsy-turvily had this snail-paced transition worked, so
slowly had Jinny’s freedom broadened down from precedent to
precedent, that when strangers expressed disapproval at these
mannish courses, Little Bradmarsh was shocked, Long Bradmarsh
surprised, and Chipstone scornful. Not that they were at all
prepared to argue the question in the abstract. Their prejudice
against carrying as a profession for women remained as rooted
and unshaken as the critic’s. Women? Who was speaking of
women? Jinny was Jinny—a being unique and irreplaceable,
“bless her bonny fice.” It contributed to her unquestionability
that the Quarleses had been carriers for a hundred years—and
more.
Nor did Jinny, for her part, generalize on the other side or
take any conscious interest in the emancipation of her sex. Her
horn blew no challenge to the world. It did not even occur to
her that she was doing anything out of the common—the tilt-cart
had been her nursery, it was now her place of business. She had
come into its foreground so unconsciously that it was not as a
good fairy that she saw herself, nor even as an attractive asset
of the Quarles concern, but as a busy toiler—driven from morning
to night rather than driving—and handicapped not only by her
household and garden work, her goats and poultry, but by a
nonagenarian grandfather, shaky in health and immovable in
opinion. Fortunately for her temper—and for the chastening of
a tongue only too a-tingle with rustic wit—Jinny regarded the
cantankerous patriarch as no more an object for back-talk than
a suckling. It had become second nature to soothe and humour
him; and she knew him as she knew the highways and byways
in the dark or the snow: where to turn and where to go round,
where to skirt a swamp and where to shave a ditch. By way of
compensation there was his affection—as primitive as Nip’s or
Methusalem’s—and evoking as primitive a response. For Jinny
was none of your genteel heroines with ethereal emotions and
complex aspirations.
It was not that Nature had not cast her for a poetic part—she
was small and slender enough, and her light grey eyes behind
dark lashes sufficiently subtilized her expression, and when she
was hesitating between two words—not two opinions, for she
always had one—her little mouth would purse itself enchantingly.
There was gentility too about her toes. As her grandfather
remarked with his archaic pronouns and plurals: “That has the
smallest fitten I ever saw to a wench!” She certainly did not
dress the part, for despite the witchery of the bonnet, her workaday
skirt and stout shoes proclaimed the village girl, as her
hands proclaimed the drudge who scoured and scrubbed and
baked and dug and manured: indeed what with her own goats
and her farmyard commissions, she was almost as familiar with
the grosser aspects of animal life as that strangely romanticized
modern figure, the hospital nurse. The delicate solicitude of
Martha on her behalf was thus a pure morbidity, for in going to
and fro like a weaver’s shuttle, Jinny could scarcely remain
ignorant that women were as liable to offspring as any other
females, though it seemed a part of Nature’s order that had no
more to do with herself than the strange, hirsute growths on the
masculine face—or for the matter of that on Miss Gentry’s.
Mr. Fallow, the old pastor of Little Bradmarsh, who, though
despised and rejected of Dissent, required—being human—comestibles,
candles, and shoe-strings from Chipstone, as well as
the disposal of his honey and his smaller tithes, was among
Jinny’s favourite clients, her original horror of Bradmarsh
Church having been early modified by an accidental peep one
weekday morning, which revealed its priest as its sole occupant.
Yet, standing in his place in his white surplice, he was going
through the service with such devout self-forgetfulness that the
confused child wondered whether the Satan of worldliness had
him so entirely gripped as she had been given to understand.
She did not know that this very praying all to himself would
have shocked Miss Gentry as savouring of the abhorred High
Churchmanship. Indeed “little better than a Papist” the
Chipstone curate had pronounced the harmless old widower.
He for his part had long admired the little carrier, and perceiving
the fine shape of her calloused fingers, no less than the smallness
of her sturdy shoes, and enjoying the tang of her tongue—for the
cottage women, though nimbler than their lords, were not witty—he
had indulged his antiquarian vein (and the abundant leisure
due to the ravages of Dissent) by tracing for her a less plebeian
and more Churchy pedigree. Foiled in the hope of connecting her
with Francis Quarles of “Emblems” fame, he found in Norden’s
list of the Ancient Halls of Essex a Spring Elm Manor appertaining
to one Jonathan Quarles. The flockless pastor had even
journeyed in quest of this Hall and found illogical confirmation
in the fact of its continued existence, in all the pride of mullioned
windows and lily-strewn if muddy moat, though with its private
chapel turned into a stable and its piscina bricked over. Henceforward
he saw in the exuberant vitality and imperious obstinacy
of Daniel Quarles only an impoverished reincarnation of hard-living
but ecclesiastically correct squiredom, while in Jinny, with
her generous visits to the ailing and bed-ridden on her route, he
elected to behold a re-embodied Lady Bountiful, pride of a
feudal parish. What was prosaically certain, however, was that
Jinny had not even the education of Bundock’s bunch of girls,
the only school she had ever attended being the Peculiars’
Sunday-school held at a house adjoining the chapel in an interval
between the services. Thither, as to the services—her grandfather
being a Wesleyan—she had been convoyed regularly by
Caleb, packed into a cart with as many of the Flynt boys as had
not yet flown off.
But the business itself forced reading and writing upon her,
though when its sole responsibility devolved on her, and it was
no longer necessary to confute the old man’s memory by the
written word or figure, she found herself agreeably able to
dispense with the learned arts.
Welcomed at lonely farmyards where fierce dogs sometimes
broke their chains for the joy of licking her hand or of flying at
Nip’s throat; not less welcome in village High Streets, where
every other house would ply her fussily with orders that she took
coolly and without a single note, her bosom knowledge of everybody’s
business and her dramatic interpretation of any abnormal
commission infusing life into her work that saved her from slips
of memory; adored by all the swains and yokels who hauled her
goods and chattels up and down, but radiating only a frosty
sunshine in return, for none had ever been able to pass the ice-barrier
that separated her private self from her professional
geniality; jumping down herself only to give Christian burial to
hapless moles, rats, shrews, leverets, and blood-stained feathers,
or to glean for lonely old women or the numerous and impoverished
Pennymole family the unconscious largesse of more
careless drivers—turnips, lumps of coal, wisps of hay; chaffering
with beaming shopkeepers on behalf of her clients, and hail-fellow-well-met
with her fellow-carriers, encountered at cross-roads
or “The Black Sheep”; Jinny pursued her unmaidenly
career in fine weather or foul, sometimes wayworn, wind-whipped,
rain-drenched, and with aching forehead, but more often with a
vital joy that was not least keen when Methusalem—cloud-exhaling
and clogged by snow that sometimes raised the road as
high as the hedges—had to plough his way along a track hewn
out by labourers, with here and there a siding cut in the glittering
mass for carts to pass each other by. Those were days not
devoid of danger: road, hedge, ditch, and field obliterated in one
snowy expanse. Once Jinny’s cart had to be dug out like a
crusted fossil of the Ice Age—and only the agonized howling of
Nip had brought rescue.
It was the first time he had justified his air of managing the
whole concern round which he barked and bounded and scurried
as though Methusalem and Jinny were his minions. He had
indeed commandeered them—jumping originally out of nowhere
on to the tail-board—and however he strayed from the path of
their duty in his numberless tangential excursions and expeditions,
they knew he would never abandon them.
Like many other great characters Nip was a mongrel. His
foundation was fox-terrier, and he had preserved the cleverness
of the strain without its pluck. To strangers, indeed, he seemed
a very David among dogs, attacking, as he sometimes did,
canine Goliaths. But no dog is a hero to his mistress, and after
he had adopted her, Jinny discovered that these resounding
assaults on the bulkier were but bravado passages, based on his
flair that the bigger dog was also the bigger coward. That was
where his brains came in, as well as his baser breed. A sniff at
a real fighter and Nip would evade combat, sauntering off with
a nonchalant air. A splash of brown on his brainpan and about
his ears, and a dab of black on his snout were—with his leathern
collar—the sole touches of relief in his sleek whiteness. His
head—beautifully poised and shaped—with its bright dark-brown
eye, eloquently expressive and passing easily from love
to greediness, from shyness to shame, invited many a pat from
lovers of the soulful. Yet to hear him bolt a rabbit was to
imagine a demon on the war-path: in a flash the cart would be
left a furlong behind or athwart; his raucous staccato yells filled
the meadows with echoes of blood-lust and revenge. But long
experience had dulled Jinny’s solicitude for Bunny: never once
was there a sign of a kill. Sometimes, indeed, when Nip was
hunting a rat, the creature would run across the path under his
very nose, but that nose, pushing eagerly for far-off game, never
seemed able to readjust itself to what was under it. All the
which maladroitness was probably artfulness, Nip scenting
shrewdly that a successful sports-dog would have been hounded
out. He knew well the foolish, treacherous heart of his mistress,
who actually misled the hunt those autumn mornings that
brought the high-mettled hares across their path with ears taut
and every muscle tragically astrain. Up would come the beagles,
with a long processional flutter of waving white tails, nosing
forlornly and barking dismally, while he—panting to put them
right—was tied paw and paw. How they set him quivering,
those horn-tootlings of the gorgeous Master, though they did
not go to his bowels as much as those staccato chivies that
suggested that the green-and-white gentleman was one of themselves
rather than a biped, or as those more elaborately contorted
cries and rousing thong-cracks of the Whipper-in. A fellow-feeling
makes us wondrous kind. And when all these hunters—four-footed
or two-footed—including the draggletail of fat,
breathless farmers and wheezing females, were remorselessly sent
the wrong way by his brutal mistress, the poor dog could not
refrain from wailing.
Even when the hare did not cross her path, her horn, imitating
the professional toot, would allure and misguide the distant dogs.
Nip’s own relatives, the foxhounds, more rarely came his way,
but though his mistress’s sympathies with the quarry were less
marked—her chickens being precious—Nip was still held in.
But amid all his disgust the cunning dog remembered that his
days of foraging for himself—before he had picked up Jinny—had
not been rosy and replete: caterers like Jinny, he realized,
did not grow on every cart, not to mention the cushioned basket
from which he could bark at everything on the road, or within
which, with a huge grunt of satisfaction, he could curl into an
odorous dream.
A contrast in all save colour was the stolid Methusalem,
though he too was of hybrid stock. While his hairy fetlocks
proclaimed a kinship with the draught-breed of the shire, he
lacked that gross spirit, and while his flying mane and tail
flaunted an affinity with the fiery Arab, he was equally deficient
in that high mettle. By what romantic episode he had come
into being, whether through the wild oats of an Arabian ancestor,
or the indiscretion of a mere circus-horse, or whether his tossing
hair and tail were the heritage from a Shetland pony—as his
moderate stature suggested—is not recorded in any stud-book.
But it was impossible to see him without the word “steed”
coming into the mind, and equally impossible to sit behind him
without thinking of a plough-horse. “When Oi first see that
rollin’ in the brook afore ’twas broke in,” Gaffer Quarles would
relate, “Oi was minded of the posters of Mazeppa at the Fair,
and christened that accordin’.” It was only when he discovered
that this blonde beast was a whited sepulchre, that “Mazeppa”
was exchanged for “Methusalem,” as though that antediluvian
worthy had always been a doddering millenarian, and not at one
time in the prime of his hundreds. The name had at least the
effect of banishing expectation; his mere amble was an agreeable
surprise. As a matter of fact Methusalem had still his Mazeppa
moments. They came on Tuesday and Friday evenings when
he was loosed from the shafts; at which moments he would roll
on his back, kick up his heels and gallop madly round the goat-pasture
to the alarm of the tethered browsers. And even at his
professional pace he always kept his mane flying. One accomplishment,
however, Methusalem had which no “Mazeppa”
steed could have bettered, nay, which made a circus pedigree
plausible. He could lift the latch of gates with his nose and
walk through. It was a trick which Jinny, with her habit of
not alighting, had fostered in him: if the gate did not swing to,
she could usually close it with the butt-end of her whip—through
the cart-rear at the worst—a procedure which, with her further
habit of using short cuts and even private tracks like that at
Bellropes Park, saved not a little time, and was some compensation
for Methusalem’s general crawl.
If the local carrying business had grown indistinguishable from
Jinny, it seemed no less bound up with her four-footed companions,
whose ghostly figures, seen looming through the wintry
dusk, sent a glow of warmth through the bleak countryside.
But to-day Jinny’s horn, Nip’s yap, and Methusalem’s pseudo-spirited
pawing, were alike powerless to evoke the familiar forth-bustling
of Caleb and Martha. Only cocks crowed and doves
moaned, while from the river-slope came the lowing of cattle.
Alarmed for the lonely and aged couple, Jinny jumped down and
tapped at the door. Nobody replying, she lifted the latch and
came from the joyous spring sunshine on a chill, silent piece of
hall-way in which even the tall clock had stopped dead. She
peeped perfunctorily into the musty parlour on her way to the
kitchen—the lozenge-shaped motto: “When He giveth quietness,
who then can make trouble?” seemed to have taken on a
strange and solemn significance. But she knew that the kitchen
was the likeliest lair, so not pausing to examine, the ominously
unopened letter addressed to Mrs. Flynt which she espied on the
mantelpiece, she pressed on to the rear. The kitchen, however,
was still more desolate, not only of the couple, but of the habitual
glow on the cavernous hearth. What wonder if Nip, who had
followed her, set up an uncanny whining! She halloaed up the
staircase, but that only aggravated the silence. She dashed
next door to the shepherd’s section—similar solitude! With a
feeling of lead at her heart she rushed back into the ironic sunshine
and towards the orchard—now unbearably beautiful in its
blossoming—and as she was approaching a remote corner that
harboured the pigsty in which Martha’s pet sow carried on a
lucrative maternity, she was half relieved to collide with Caleb
who was moving houseward with haggard eyes and carpet
slippers.
“Is anything the matter?” she gasped.
“Sow glad you’ve come. The missus keeps arxing for you.
We’ve been up all night with her.”
“With your wife?”
He looked astonished. “Noa, Maria!”
Jinny’s full relief found vent in a peal of laughter.
“It’s no laughin’ matter—the missus wants ye to tell the wet
to come at once.”
“But what’s the matter with her?” inquired Jinny, still
unable to rise to his seriousness. “A snout-ache?”
“She’s a goner,” said Caleb solemnly. “We’ve reared up
nine boys, but Maria’s been more trouble than the lot. The
missus would bring her up by hand, and Oi always prophesied
she wouldn’t live.”
Amusedly aware that Maria’s progeny had already exceeded
sixty, Jinny offered to visit the patient.
“Do—that’ll comfort the missus and ye’ll know better what
to tell Jorrow. Oi’ll hold your hoss. You know the way—behind
the red may-tree.”
Jinny smiled again. The idea of Methusalem needing restraint
amused her, but she did not dispel Caleb’s romantic illusion.
The sick sty was visible through a half-door that gave at once
air and view, and over which Nip at once bounded on to the
startled Martha’s back as she hung over the prostrate pig on its
bed of dirty straw. Maria belonged to the Society of Large
Black Pigs, and snuffed the world through a long, fine snout;
but life had evidently lost its savour, for the poor sow was
turning restlessly.
“Oh, Jinny!” moaned Martha. “She had thirteen last time,
and I knew it was an unlucky number.”
“Nonsense!” quoth Jinny gaily. “Twelve would have been
less lucky—at the price I got you!”
“Yes, dearie, but I’m not thinking of prices. She was a
birthday present for my loneliness.”
“I know,” said Jinny gently.
“No, you don’t.” She wrung her hands. The self-possession
Caleb had admired when the letter broke on their lives was no
longer hers. “You’ve got lots of Brethren and Sisters, but I’ve
got nobody to break bread with, no fraternal gatherings to go
to, and even Flynt won’t be immersed, though he’s in his sixty-nine
and we must all fall asleep some day. So it was a comfort
to have Maria following me about everywhere like Nip does you,
and I do believe she’s got more sense than the so-called Christians
here, and would be the first to pray for the peace of Jerusalem
with me if she could only speak. But now even Maria may be
taken from me. You’ll send Jorrow at once, won’t you, dearie?”
“But what’s the matter with her?”
“Can’t you see? All night she kept rooting up the ground.
Oh, I hope it isn’t fever.”
“Rubbish! Look at the skin of her ears. And she isn’t
coughing at all. What’s she been overeating?”
“Nothing—only the grass Flynt has been cutting.”
“Why don’t you give her a dose of castor-oil?”
“She won’t take it. She knows we’ve covered it up—I told
you she’s got as much brains as a Christian.”
“Let me try and get it down.”
“It is down. The piglets ate the mess up.”
“Oh dear!” laughed Jinny. “That will need Jorrow.
Anything else, Mrs. Flynt?”
“I can’t think this morning. Ask Flynt.”
Caleb, however, proved equally distraught.
“There was summat extra special, Oi know,” he said, his red-shirted
arm clinging heroically to Methusalem’s bridle, “for
here’s the knot in my hankercher. But what it singafies Lord
onny knows.”
“It wasn’t a new shirt?” she suggested slyly.
He shook his head. “Noa, noa; this keeps her colour as good
as new. But the missus did make a talk about my Sunday
neckercher.”
“I’ll get you a new one. Plain or speckled?”
“Oi leaves that to you, Jinny—you know more about stoylish
things.”
On her winding and much-halting way to Chipstone, Jinny
took advantage of the absence of the noble family and the complaisance
of her customer, the lodge-keeper, to smuggle her
plebeian vehicle through Bellropes Park, which was not only a
mile shorter, but dodged the turnpike with its aproned harpy of
a tollman; she loved the great avenues of oaks, and the shining
lake, the game of swans, and the sense of historic splendour;
and Nip, as if with a sense of stolen sweets, sniffed never more
happily, though when they got within view of the water, he had
to be summoned back to his headquarters-basket by a stern
military note, a combat between himself and the swans not
commending itself to his mistress. Some of these irascible
Graces floated now on the margin, meticulously picking their
tail-feathers, contorting their necks. But vastly more exciting
were those of the flock far out on that spacious sparkle of brown
water. They seemed to be going spring-mad and threshing the
scintillating water with their wings, oaring themselves thus along,
each one infecting the other, till the water itself seemed to be
leaping in a shimmering frenzy of froth. Even the ducks reared
up or stood on their heads in a sort of intoxication. And this
sense of the joy and beauty of the spring communicated itself to
the girl, not in jubilance, but in some exquisite wistfulness: some
craving of the blood for mysterious adventure. Something
seemed calling at once out of the past and out of the future.
And then her thoughts wandered back to Frog Farm and the
Flynts and the far-scattered youths with whom she had formerly
ridden to Sunday-school, and suddenly by a flash from her
subconsciousness she recognized the writing of the unopened
letter on Martha’s mantelpiece: of the letter she had scarcely
looked at. Surely, though the curves were bolder, it was the
work of the very same male hand that had written on the fly-leaf
of a Peculiar hymn-book the inspired quatrain—which she had
admired from her childhood—beginning:
Steal not this book for fear of shame:
an admonition she thought peculiarly appropriate to the holy
book it guarded. And with the memory of the fly-leaf surged up
also the face—the long-forgotten, freckled face of the youngest
and most headstrong of the Flynt boys: the Will, flouted
as “Carrots,” but in her opinion the handsomest of the batch,
who had always loomed over her with such grown-up if genial
grandeur, and had given her his bull-roarer and threaded birds’
eggs for her before she had come to think their collection wicked.
What a hullabaloo when the boy disappeared—he must have
been hardly thirteen, she began computing—and she, the child
of nine or so who could have comforted the distracted Martha,
had dared say no word, because he had made her swear on that
very hymn-book to keep his flight silent. Just as she was
permeated by the solemnity of the book and the oath on it, he
had thrown it away, she remembered, thrown it into the
bushes from the wagon in which he was driving her home from
chapel.
The details of that forgotten summer Sunday began to come
back: most vividly of all, the boy struggling and sobbing when
his buttons were cut off. He had been so proud of his new
velvet jacket with its manifold rows of blue buttons, and lo!
after Sunday-school his father had appeared with a somewhat
crestfallen look and a pair of scissors, saying, “You don’t want
all this flummery,” while Elder Mawhood—evidently the
admonishing angel—had stood grimly by, intoning “Pride is
abominable. Wanity must be rooted out.”
The boy had choked back his sobs, and apparently found
solace in the evening hymns, and was further soothed by being
allowed at his own request to drive the party home. It was felt—especially
by Martha—some compensation for the buttons was
due to him. Thus when the wagon had reached Swash End and
the bulk of the Flynt family got off according to custom—mud
and weather permitting—and walked up to Frog Farm, leaving
Jinny to be driven round the long detour to her home at Blackwater
Hall, she was left alone with Will.
It was then that, having asked her if she could keep a secret
and being assured she could, he informed her to her admiring
horror that the moment he had safely delivered her on the road
by the Common, he would turn his horse’s head for Harwich,
where (stabling the horse and wagon so that his parents might
trace his intention) he would take ship as a cabin-boy or a
stowaway for America, where he was sure to come across his
brother Ben, and never would she see him again in Bradmarsh
till he had made his fortune.
She could see him now, under a late sunset that was like his
hair, with his flashing, freckled face, his blazing blue eyes, and
his poor, defaced jacket, the thready stubs of the big buttons
showing like scars. Their quaint dialogue came back vividly to
her.
“Oh, Will, but can’t you make your fortune here?”
“No, thank you—no more chapel for me!”
“I know it’s hard—and you did look beautiful with the
buttons—but isn’t it more beautiful to please God?”
“Rubbish! What does God care about my buttons?”
“He’s pleased, just as I like your giving me birds’ eggs.”
“But I didn’t give my buttons—they were snatched from me—through
that, beastly old Mawhood.”
“But Elder Mawhood knows what God wants.”
“Let him cut off his own nose and not go smelling into everybody’s
business. The other day he made poor old Sister Tarbox
get riddy of her cat.”
“That was kindness, because it had to be shut up alone all
Sunday while she was at chapel.”
“I believe it was only to make more rats for him to kill.”
“That’s not true, Will. You know Sister Tarbox is too poor
to have her cottage cleared.”
“Well, let him look after his rats and cats—not me.”
“An elder must do his duty.”
“I hate elders and deacons and hymn-books. Yah! I’m
done with religion, thank God.”
“Oh, Will, you mustn’t speak like that!”
“Fancy stewing in chapel in weather like this!”
“Isn’t this just the weather to thank God for?”
“No—it’s all silliness.”
“Oh, Will!”
“Yes, it is! You ask Brother Bundock—I don’t mean old
Mr. Bundock. I asked him once who wrote our hymn-book and
he said, ‘’Twixt you and I, the village idiot!’ ”
“You are talking wickedly, Will”—there were tears in the
voice now. “You mustn’t run away, that’s more wicked.”
“Oh—I was an idiot myself to tell you. You are going to
peach on me, I suppose.”
“Peach?”
“Tell your grandfather about my running away.”
“Not if you don’t do it.”
“But I shall do it! And you promised to keep the secret. To
tell would be more wicked than me.”
“I won’t tell, but you mustn’t go.”
“I must. Swear not to betray me. Kiss my hymn-book.”
It was with some soothed sense of restored sanctities that she
had pressed her lips to the holy cover—she still remembered its
smell and taste, salted with a tear of her own—but what a fresh
and mightier shock, that throwing of the book into the bushes!
“Stop! Stop!” She heard the little girl’s horror-struck cry
over the years; remembered how, as he laughed and drove on
furiously with her, the phrase “drive like the devil” had come
to her mind, charged for the first time with meaning.
Wilful boy had had his way: he had escaped from England
and even—despite his diabolism—by the aid of the ninepence she
had insisted on bringing down from her money-box while he
waited trustfully outside her grandfather’s domain. But she had
not responded in kind to the lordly kiss he had blown her as he
drove off to America.
“Good-bye, little Jinny!”
“Good-bye, Will. Say your prayers!”
“Not me!”
“Then I shall pray for you!”
When the hue and cry was out, and bellmen were busy with his
carroty head and velvet jacket with the buttons cut off, little
Jinny had also gone a-hunting—but for the outraged hymn-book.
It lay now still hidden in a drawer—the one secret of her life—unmentioned
even when by the bulky clue of the horse and
cart the fugitive had been traced, as he designed.
Yes, she must disinter this hymn-book of his from its hiding-place,
compare the inscription—she knew by now the rhyme was
not original—with her memory of Martha’s letter. What was its
postmark, she wondered. Well, she would find that out, indeed
the whole contents, on her return to Frog Farm. Perhaps he
was coming back—his fortune already made. And the revived
sense of his wickedness was mixed with a sense of her own soon-forgotten
resolve—or threat—to pray for him, and was blurred
in some strange emotion, in which the glamorous freshness of
child-feeling mingled with a leaping of the heart that was like
the spring-joy of the swans.
But Jorrow could not make the journey that day to that
remote farm. There were more important animals more expensively
endangered and more easily accessible. Old sows were so
fussy, and to judge by the symptoms it was a mere case for
castor-oil. But precisely because Jinny had herself recommended
this drug-of-all-work she felt unconvinced: it seemed a
mere glib formula for being “riddy” of her. There was another
resource, Elijah Skindle, who, having settled in Chipstone only
five years ago, practised only among parvenus like himself. It
was not because he was a “furriner,” nor even because he had
started as a knacker and still had a nondescript status, that
Jinny shrank from calling him in now: she had more than once
deposited damaged dogs with him or deported them mended. But
she objected to the appraising gaze he fixed upon her on these
occasions, though to be sure her objection to these jaunts was not
so strong as Nip’s, who, seeing in every canine co-occupant of
the cart a possible supplanter, bristled and whined and barked till
the rival was safely discharged. But, on her way home, overcoming
her repugnance—for Martha’s sake, if not Maria’s or
duty’s—she stopped her cart outside his pretentious black gauze
blind and blew a rousing blast. A tall, black-eyed, grey-haired
woman, issuing from the office door with a broom, who appeared
to be Mr. Skindle’s mother, informed her that ’Lijah was “full
up”: however, he could be found at the kennels if Jinny insisted
on seeing him. She pointed vaguely to a field behind the house,
visible through an unpaved alley yawning between the sober
Skindle window and its flamboyant neighbour, the chemist’s.
But it was in vain that Jinny clucked to Methusalem to thread
the alley. The beast refused absolutely.
Alighting with some dim understanding of his instinct, she
walked to the field-gate over which a horse was gazing at her.
Lifting the latch, she wandered among other happily scampering
horses in search of the kennels, finding at first only a barn-like
structure, a glance through whose doors at the flagstoned paving
that sloped to a centre turned her sick. For a pyramid of
horses’ feet was the least repulsive indication, though even the
homely skewers so agreeable to Squibs took on a sinister hue.
The spectacle, however, served to make the kennels, when at
last discovered, a lesser horror. But it was the first time she
had seen dogs so far gone in distemper, and these rheumy-eyed
skeletons, each chained in its niche, sullied the springtide and
haunted her for days. She caught up Nip, who had come to
heel, as though he too might pine suddenly into skin and bone.
Nip himself, it must be confessed, regarded these shadows of his
species with indifference, if not with satisfaction, as negligible
competitors.
Elijah Skindle, discovered on his knees in the act of feeding a
pathetic poodle, was as unstrung by the sight of Jinny as Jinny
by the sight of the dogs. His black cutty pipe fell from his lips
and he nearly stuck the dog’s spoon into his own open mouth.
But mastering himself, and without raising his cap or his pipe
or changing his attitude, he gasped out: “Hullo! Nip ill?”
Jinny replied curtly—for there was a familiarity that repelled
her in his calling Nip by his right name—, “No, a sow at Frog
Farm—Little Bradmarsh, you know.”
His heart leapt. Frog Farm meant an old inhabitant, local
prejudice was then beginning to melt at last! But, “Rather
out of my radius,” he said with pretended indifference. “Besides,”
as he reached for his pipe, “my nag’s gone lame.”
“I could give you a lift,” said Jinny, outwitted for once, since
it never struck her that this was precisely what Elijah had
fished for and why he had lamed his beast. The spoon trembled
in his hand, but he replied grumblingly, “But then I should
have to come at once.”
“I’m afraid so,” said Jinny.
Mr. Skindle rose and brushed his knees. “Anything to oblige
a lady,” he said.
“It isn’t me, it’s Maria,” said Jinny icily.
But Jinny was not altogether outmanœuvred, for while Mr.
Skindle was getting his case of utensils, she filled up the rest of
her seat—it was a stuffed seat covered with sacking—by means
of a peculiarly precious parcel, needing a vigilant eye: no new
device this, but her habitual protection against bores or adorers,
and Skindle, she feared, was both. This swain-chaser or maid-protector
was kept in a corner of the cart ready for emergencies,
being an elongated package of stones, marked “Fragile.” The
stones had to be jagged and uncouth or Nip would have squatted
on it and roused suspicion. This was the only parcel she lifted
herself, and it figured in her own mind as “The Scarecrow.”
And so, despite Mr. Skindle’s offer to nurse it on his knees,
she put him behind her—not as a Satan, for his seductiveness was
small. He had, it is true, a good styside manner, and his slim
figure, outlined by a trimly cut pepper-and-salt suit, effused a
sense of vitality. But his straw-coloured moustache, which was
not without its female votaries, was for Jinny more of a puzzle
than a decoration, for she could not reconcile its flowingness with
the desolating baldness that any shifting of his cap revealed. His
cranium was, in fact, like the advertisement of a hair-restorer in
the picture preceding the application thereof. As fixed a feature
of his face as the grey cap which concealed his calvity was the
black cutty pipe stuck in his stained teeth, nor had Jinny ever
seen him without a large pearl horseshoe pin in his tie.
“Please don’t smoke,” she said, as he climbed in by the tail-board,
“Gran’fer would smell it.”
“And why shouldn’t he?”
“He’s a Wesleyan.”
“Oh!” He laughed without comprehension, a shade scoffingly.
“And the smell might get into people’s parcels,” she added.
Bestowing himself under the tilt as well as he could on a box,
grazed at his side by a ledge he considered too narrow to sit on, and
threatened with decapitation through a plank holding the smaller
parcels that ran athwart the cart just above his head, Mr. Skindle
gazed up over this shelf at the glorious view of the back of
Jinny’s bonnet and feasted his eyes on her graceful dorsal curves
and the more variegated motions of her driving arm, not to
mention the succession of lovely rural backgrounds made for her
figure by the arch of the awning. And his ill-humour melted,
and though his pipe grew cold his heart began to glow. But
Jinny took no more notice of him than if he had been himself a
box. No wonder he began to feel closed and corded up, bursting
though he knew himself to be with soul-riches. For a full mile,
his extinct pipe in his teeth, he heard only the monotonous snap
of Methusalem’s hoofs as if everything along the road was
snapping in a frost. The unjaded steed had actually started off
at almost a trot, and as the Gaffer explained once, “a hoss what
has long lopes knocks his fitten together.” Then—as if to mark
how completely her passenger was forgotten—one of her grandfather’s
songs began to steal from her lips. It was not “High
Barbary” nor “Admiral Benbow,” nor yet his favourite “Oi’m
seventeen come Sunday,” which the nonagenarian sang daily
with growing conviction. It was—and Nip would have been
the first to be surprised, had he understood it—the old English
air:
The hunt is up, the hunt is up, and it is wellnigh day,
And Harry our King has gone huntynge, to bring the deer to bay.
Perhaps it was the influence of her horn; perhaps she was an
artist who could enjoy in song what she could not suffer in life.
Or perhaps she loved the lilt of the old song and never thought
of the meaning, or only of the bravery of the spectacle and the
gay coming of the dawn. For, all untrained as she was, she
vibrated peculiarly to music, and one of the wonderful moments
of her young life was when she first heard a hymn sung in parts
at the Sunday-school; to her ear, accustomed only to the solo
quavering of the Gaffer, was revealed harmony; a starry new
universe and a blood-tickling enchantment in one.
Almost at the first outbreak of the hunting song Nip appeared
at a run, and with two bounds he established himself in his
mistress’s lap—invidiously enough in Elijah’s eyes. For that
silvery little voice, rippling along the lonely road with the
unconscious joyance of a blackbird’s, completed the spell which
the spring landscape—seen in that series of pictures framed by
the arch of the tilt—was weaving on the doomed veterinary
surgeon.
There were sheep, big and little, lying in the wide fields and
great, newly ploughed spaces of red, freshly turned earth—for
the first time Elijah felt the scarecrows as a degradation of all
this primeval beauty. Apple-trees flowered in the cottage
gardens and in the hedges was early May-blossom, and on the
brinks primroses, anemones, and even a few precocious bluebells
rioted in an intoxicating fertility of beauty. Larks rose palpitating
with song, bumble-bees boomed, butterflies flittered, and
ever and anon came the haunting cry of the cuckoo. And when
Jinny’s voice soared up too, Elijah Skindle’s heart seemed melting
down his spine.
“That’s a lucky dog of yours,” he said desperately, when the
music ceased.
“That’s what I thought at your place,” she replied through
the back of her head.
“Not had distemper yet?”
He saw her shoulders shudder. There was an awkward silence.
“You know I’d gladly look after him gratis,” he blundered on,
“and you too.” Then, in a horrible consciousness of the pathological
implication, he awaited the lash of her tongue.
But she must have been abstracted. For she only said
politely: “Thanks very much. But I always go to Jorrow’s.”
Yes, he reflected bitterly, and always went there for other
people unless Skindle’s was expressly stipulated.
But they were now approaching the first village after Chipstone,
and the outside world intruded on the idyll. A dozen times he
vaulted up and down to prevent interloping young men—sometimes
armed with nosegays—receiving parcels too proximately;
and he had a proud and malicious pleasure in their disconcerted
unspoken surmise as to his privileged situation. The small coin
of conversation appertaining to these deliveries Jinny did not
refuse him, and every cluck she gave to Methusalem, every ripple
of laughter on her busy way, deepened the spell. The unexpected
faces; the quaint cottage interiors; the cheerful-smiling women
in high green aprons who received stay-laces or bobbins, sugar or
tea-packets, in bare dough-powdered or soap-frothed arms; the
panting figures that tolled after the cart with forgotten bundles;
the dogs—the fiercer in their barrels and boxes, the milder
waving free and friendly tails; the quaint commissions and
monitions, the salutations and farewells—“I’ll remember the
twopence,” “And tell my brother, won’t you, about the christening,”
“I don’t want any more of her puddings, they put the
miller’s eye out”—all this fascinating bustle and chatter, spiced
with friendly laughter, seemed to belong to an enchanted earth
of which gaiety was the ground-note, not animal groaning. The
windings of her horn completed his sense of fairyland.
In the remoter woodland regions he was possessed alternately
with a disapprobation of her recklessness in trusting herself thus
alone with a male, far from help, and a surprise at his own
passivity in so provoking and romantic a situation. Of course he
was going to behave like the gentleman he was, but why was she so
irritatingly sure of it? Did she think he wasn’t flesh and blood?
She might at least show some consciousness of his chivalry!
But his resentment at her professional nonchalance only
served to confirm his long-standing suspicion that here at last
was the girl for him: that he was choosing well if not wisely.
Doubtless Chipstone and his mother would say he was marrying
too much beneath him. But look at the farmers’ daughters—what
lumps beside her! He admitted, of course, that the
Blanche of Foxearth Farm to whom his mother mainly aspired
was an exception, but then this Purley minx was hopelessly out
of reach, stuck up on her pedestal of beauty, conceit, and culture,
and throwing over even her affianced wooers. As for his neighbour,
the chemist’s girl—what could his mother see in her except
that annuity which would not even survive her, and she not
looking particularly strong! No, with the present satisfactory
amount of sheep-rot, glanders, and distemper he could afford to
please himself. And if Jinny couldn’t play the piano like the
land-surveyor’s widow, why one must content oneself with the
horn, pending initiation into the higher life. Together they
would work up the business. With Jinny’s connexion—though
of course she must give up carrying and become a lady—there
would surely be a trail of sick beasts in her wake: Jorrow would
soon be out-distanced. They would live away from his office;
that could all be turned into dog-hospital.
Such were the kennels in the air built by the enamoured
Elijah as he sat on boxes or hampers or panted under their
weight in his officious deliveries: an officiousness which drove
out of her head the keg of oil destined for Uckford Manor.
“Oh, dear!” she murmured suddenly, a mile later.
Forcing the explanation from her, he cried joyfully, “Let’s go
back.”
Jinny shook her head. “No time,” she said, and flicked at
Methusalem.
“But I don’t mind being late.”
“I’m not thinking of you—but of the pig.”
“Bother the pig.”
“Is that the way you study your patients?”
“I’ve got better things to study.” He could only say it to
her back, but he threw enough intensity into it to come out on
the other side of her.
“Indeed!” The back seemed impenetrable. “You going
into another business?”
“Why ever should I when I’m getting on so famously—ten
pound a week, if a penny.” It was an opportunity made to his
hand. “I know,” he went on, as the back remained rigid, “that
folks pretend it’s not as high-class as real doctoring, but believe
me it needs more brains.”
“Does it?”
“Stands to reason. A human being can tell you what he feels
and where the pain lays, but with a dumb beast you’ve got only
your own sense and skill to go on: it’s us vets that should really
be at the top of the profession.”
“But sick babies are dumb too,” Jinny reminded him.
“Sick babies have talking mammas,” he replied genteelly.
Jinny did not imitate them, and silence fell again, tempered by
Methusalem’s snappings. Really, it was very awkward, Elijah
felt, thus proposing to a girl behind her back. But he struggled
gallantly. “Take stomach staggers now—if those horses you
saw waiting to be killed this evening had been treated in
time——!”
“The horses in your field?” cried Jinny, shocked. “But
they looked so lively.”
“They’re all like that,” he explained. “Once out of harness
they get a bit jaunty again, but they’re worth more dead than
alive.”
“It’s dreadful killing off a horse that has served one!” Jinny
burst out. “Just for a few shillings!”
“A few shillings? Why there’s horses over two-fifty pounds!
Flesh, I mean,” he explained, with a chuckle. “Not to mention
the skin, hair and bones. Why, there’s eighty pounds of
intestines for sausage-skins!”
“Oh, do hold your tongue!” cried Jinny, feeling sick again.
“Yes, and what about his tongue!” retorted Elijah triumphantly.
“It ain’t only Frenchies that get that. And his
tail waving for funerals! And his hoofs in your own shoe-buttons!”
Jinny felt indeed as though hoofs had descended on her feet,
and she could almost have sacrificed Methusalem’s high-waving
tail to adorn her passenger’s obsequies.
“My neighbour, the chemist—he buys the blood!” continued
the ghoulish Elijah. “He makes it into——”
But just here at a cross-road Jinny’s horn signalled to a smart
young man in a velvet waistcoat, who was driving a trap, and
brought him to a standstill. Would Barnaby deliver a keg of
oil at Uckford Manor if he was passing that way?
That Manor was, it transpired, the one goal and purpose of
Barnaby’s journey.
Jinny—well aware young Purley was homeward bound for
Foxearth Farm—gave him a radiant smile, and Elijah threw him
the keg and a furious look, a reliable fellow-feeling informing
him that the velvety liar was going at least two miles out of his
way. Downright dishonest he felt it, seeing that neither the
young man’s time nor his trap was his own, but belonged to his
father, the hurdle-maker. But what could you expect of
Blanche’s brother? Let Jinny beware of the family fickleness,
let her lean on a less showy but manlier breast.
“I wonder you don’t arrange your things village by village
instead of letting ’em lay all over the vehicle,” he observed as
she drove on.
“I shan’t forget where to drop you,” came the answer over
her cold shoulder.
Then silence fell more painfully than ever, and the monotonous
tick-tack of Methusalem maddened his conscious ear. The monstrous
possibility began to loom up that Jinny’s affections were
pre-engaged to some one of these numerous young men. His
eye fell upon a coil of rope hung round a loose hoop of the tilt,
and morbid thoughts of using it—whether on the young men or
himself was not clear—floated vaguely in his usually serene soul.
Presently he noted other coils on other ribs, and their plurality
suggested it was for the young men, not himself, that rope was
appropriate. What else were they there for, he wondered dully?
Yes, let her fiancés go hang: engagements could always be
broken off—nothing venture, nothing have!
To nerve himself for the great question he took advantage of
the pause at Long Bradmarsh while Methusalem was drinking
at the trough of “The King of Prussia.” But this imitation of
Methusalem on a stronger fluid was fatal, for in Jinny’s persistent
silence, the animal’s tick-tacks now grew soothing: he settled
himself more comfortably on the emptier floor of the cart, with
his head on a soft bundle, and watched the nape of Jinny’s neck
till it faded into a great white sea of floating ice. He was
struggling in it for hours, but at last the cold waves passed over
his head, and Jinny, turning to throw out a parcel, saw that his
cap had fallen off in his writhings, leaving his baldness almost
indecently glaring.
So deep was he in his daymare that he was quite unaware of
Jinny’s colloquy with another male whom her horn had hailed
as they passed over the bridge to Little Bradmarsh. Not that
there was anything in Ephraim Bidlake to excite apprehension,
for he was a stalwart Peculiar, safely married, and residing with
his family and two twin-nieces of his wife’s—Sophy and Sally—on
board the billyboy whose great boomless black sail Jinny had
espied darkening the water with its shadow. Bidlake’s barge
was a cross between a Norfolk wherry and a ferry-boat, and
plied up and down the Brad, loading at the wharves with its
half-lowered mast for crane, or carrying man and cattle across
the bridgeless sections when it had nothing better to do. There
was not much money coming in at the best, and it was often
Jinny’s privilege to eke out the barge’s larder under pretence of
presents for the motherless Sophy and Sally, so tragically
fathered. For Ephraim Bidlake, a shaggy giant with doglike
eyes, had brought the “little furriners” from Hampshire when
their mother died after their father—Mrs. Bidlake’s brother—had
been transported to Botany Bay for burning a rick in some
old agricultural riot against the introduction of machinery. The
blot on their scutcheon had been concealed from the new neighbourhood,
but had been gradually confided by Mrs. Bidlake to
Jinny with protestations of her brother’s innocence—had he not
been made a constable in the very convict ship? By degrees,
too, she had conveyed to the girl a vivid picture of the trial and
deportation. For the devoted sister had walked the bulk of the
way to Winchester, in the hope of proving his innocence by
collecting testimonies to his character, and had joined the mob
of weeping women who hung round the gaol gates night and day,
or crowded the court, only to witness the sanctimonious cruelty
of the bewigged judges, and the tragic exodus of the damned in
the prison coach, guarded by a file of soldiers, to lie in the hulks
at Southampton till they were shipped to savage Australia, there
to be assigned to brutal stockowners. It was an experience
which had cost Mrs. Bidlake dear; her next child had been
stillborn, and to this day she had never reared but one more
infant, and that a still delicate one. But for the comfort of the
Peculiar faith it would have been a cheerless household. She
was now again brought to bed: it was to inquire about her
that Jinny had hailed the barge, and very sad she was to learn
from Brother Bidlake—when he had punted within earshot—that
the new baby had succumbed after a few hours, though the
“missus,” thank God, was recovering and the twins were
“wunnerful good and helpful.” She was not sorry, however,
that the undoctored infant had departed with a precipitation
which rendered an inquest unlikely, for inquests were the bane
of the Brotherhood.
It was twilight when Methusalem drew up again before the
twin doors. This time Caleb did not fail.
“Sow glad you ain’t brought the wet!”
“But I have—he’s snoring inside,” Jinny called down.
“Lord!” said Caleb, taking another look. “Oi did see his
head, but by this owl-light Oi thought ’twas a cheese.”
Jinny’s laugh rippled out and Elijah Skindle started up and
sneezed. He looked round dazedly for his cap.
“We’ve arrived?” he asked shamefacedly, clapping it on.
“Yes,” said Jinny, “but the pig’s all right. I fear you’ve had
a wasted journey.” She jumped down.
“Wasted?” He sat up ardently. “Don’t say wasted.”
“A good nap is a comfort,” she agreed.
“I may have dozed off—your singing rocked me to sleep, I
reckon. But all the while I’ve been trying to tell you——”
His voice broke.
“I know,” she said softly. “I heard you.”
“Did I talk in my sleep?” he asked innocently.
“Through your nose.”
He winced as at a blow on it. “That’s—that’s nature,” he
stammered: “I don’t suppose even females are free from
snoring.”
“Maria isn’t,” observed Jinny, patting Methusalem.
Martha hurried out happily, with a piece of sugar for the same
favoured beast.
“Maria’s been walking with me!” she cried rapturously.
“And eating hearty,” added Caleb. “If you ask me, she was
drunk.”
“Oh, Flynt!” cried Martha. “Aren’t you ashamed to speak
like that about your own pig; and before strangers?”
“But that rolled and kicked last night same as a sow Oi seen
once that swallowed a thick wine. Happen Maria got swillin’
at old Peartree’s beer-barrel!”
“How could she do that?” Jinny protested.
“Turned on the tap like a Christian. Same as your Methusalem
opens our gate.”
Elijah picked up his pipe and his cap and scrambled down.
“Appears to me I’ve been brought here under false pretences.”
“We’ll pay you all the same,” said Caleb with dignity.
“But how am I to get back to Chipstone?” He had followed
Maria in reckless abandonment, and now came the prose of life
with its questions.
“If we’re going to pay the gentleman,” put in Martha, “he
may as well have a look at Maria.”
Mr. Skindle agreed it was as well to make a possible future
patient’s acquaintance, but repeated his inquiry.
“There’s Shanks’s mare,” said Jinny blandly.
Caleb pointed towards the brook. “It’s onny seven miles by
Swash End through Plashy Walk.”
“Plashy Hall has a dog,” objected Elijah.
“Well, you’re used to dogs,” said Jinny.
“My instrument-case is too heavy. You’ll have to give me
a lift to your house.”
“With pleasure,” she said. “But Blackwater Hall is still
farther from Chipstone.”
“Anyhow I can get a trap from the village,” he said firmly.
“No, you can’t, and even if you walk to Long Bradmarsh it’s
a toss-up if you’ll get anything at ‘The King of Prussia.’ ”
“Well, take me as far as the bridge—I’ll pay extra.”
“I can’t guarantee Methusalem will go back.”
“That’s all right,” he said cheerfully. “Horses know I stand
no nonsense. And now, Uncle, as soon as I’ve lit my pipe, I’ll
be ready for the pig. Got a match?”
To his disgust, Caleb produced a lucifer and a phial of sulphuric
acid for dipping it in. The now well-established friction matches—that
boon to the idle and extravagant—had not yet reached
Frog Farm, where even flint and steel had been dispossessed but
slowly. But the relit pipe was comforting.
“Wait a moment, Mr. Flynt,” said Jinny, tendering a packet
as he started convoying the vet. “Your neckerchief!”
“Neckerchief!” cried Martha. “And what about my new
bonnet?”
“ ’Twas only to be cleaned,” Caleb reminded her. “And by
the same token, mother, don’t forget we settled the wet was to
read the letter.”
Elijah raised his eyebrows.
“Ah, yes—I’ll get it.” And Martha hurried within.
“You see, Jinny,” Caleb explained, “the missus got a letter
from Cousin Caroline, and we thought the gentleman here could
make one job of it with the pig.”
“But why can’t I read it?”
“You ain’t married.”
“No more is Mr. Skindle.” Elijah flushed furiously.
“Noa—but ef it’s too—too womanish, Oi’ll arx him kindly to
break it to me, sow Oi can break it to the missus when he’s gone.”
“Is this the letter?” asked Jinny, as Martha reappeared
with it.
“That’s her—came all of an onplunge,” he repeated.
“But that’s not from your Cousin Caroline!” said Jinny, with
a thrill of excitement as she took it.
“Noa?” gasped Caleb, as if the world was tumbling about
his ears. Then he smiled. “You’re making game—you ain’t
opened her yet.”
“But who else is it from?” cried Martha, catching her excitement.
“Can’t you see? It’s from Will.”
“Will!” Martha gave a great cry, and clutched at the
letter. “My baby Will!”
Caleb scratched his head. “Now which would be Will?”
“Will was the freckled, good-looking one,” said Jinny.
“Oh, Jinny,” said Martha. “They were all good-looking—took
after Flynt. Dear heart, you can’t ha’ forgotten our tot after
all that flurry. ’Tis only seven or eight years since he——”
“Ay, ay,” cried Caleb. “Him what mowed the cat’s whiskers.”
“No, dear heart, that was Ben.”
“To be sure. Ben’s the barber in New York—or some such
place.”
“No, Caleb. That’s Isaac.”
“Isaac? Then Will ’ud be the one what married the coffee-coloured
lady.”
“I told you the other day that was Christopher.”
“Ay, him in Australia.”
“Africa surely,” put in Elijah, puffing at his pipe with superior
amusement.
“They furrin places be much of a muchness,” said Caleb.
“And my buoy-oys were as like as a baker’s dozen.”
“There were girls in the batch,” corrected Martha. “But
how you can forget that dreadful Sunday night, you who snipped
the darling’s buttons——!”
“If I don’t see the pig soon,” interrupted Elijah, losing
patience, “the light’ll be gone altogether.”
“Oi’ll git a lantern,” said Caleb placidly. “Oi often used to
set and wonder how they lads knowed theirselves, the one from
the ’tother. Well, the Lord bless ’em all, says Oi, wherever they
goo, and whichever they be.”
“So you see,” said Jinny, with a faint blush hardly visible by
owl-light, “there’s no need to waste Mr. Skindle’s time over the
letter.”
“No more there ain’t!” said Caleb dazedly. “Come along,
sir!”
But Martha still clung strangely to the letter she had snatched
back. “You mustn’t strain your eyes, Jinny,” she said. “I’ll
light the lamp. And you’ll take a cup of tea first. You must
be tired out.”
“But I can see quite well,” said Jinny. Indeed the sky,
despite the risen moon, remained blue, and splashes of dying
sunset burned magically through the yet empty branches of the
quiet trees. There was a great sense of space and peace and
beauty: a subtle waft from the stacks; the note of the thrush
was full of evening restfulness. Jinny took the letter from the
reluctant Martha.
“He must be back in England!” she cried. “Look at the
stamp.”
Martha staggered against the cart. “It’s very good of God,”
she said simply.
Her emotion communicated itself to Jinny. Through misty
eyes the girl watched a solitary heron winging on high through
the great spaces, its legs sticking out like a tail.
“Ah, dearie,” said Martha, recovering herself, “never forget,
to say your prayers.”
“I don’t,” said Jinny with equal simplicity. But she remembered
with fresh remorse that she had forgotten those for the
runaway.
“Ever since I was a little girl,” said Martha, “I’ve wanted to
please God. But of late, Jinny, I fear I’ve wanted Him to
please me.”
“Well, now He has,” said Jinny. “You’ll have Will as well
as Maria,” and plucking out a hairpin she inserted it to rip open
the loose wafer-closed envelope.
“Stop!” cried Martha. “Suppose it’s bad news.”
“Nonsense, Mrs. Flynt! Look how firm the writing is.”
“Firm—yes, he always was firm—even before he drove off
with the cart. Don’t you remember that night—no, ’twas
before your grandfather fetched you to these parts—he wasn’t
seven, but that pig-headed he sulked in the wood all night—roosted
up a tree like a bird, and never a move or a word when
we came halloaing with torches!”
“Well, he’s not hiding now, for the postmark’s London
and——”
“No, don’t open it yet, Jinny—suppose he should be married
like Christopher!”
Jinny laughed uneasily. “Two black daughters-in-law aren’t
very likely. Much more likely she’ll be blonde.”
“No, he can’t be married,” said Martha on reflection. “He
never could abide girls. I don’t mean you, dearie; you scarcely
had your second teeth, had you?”
Jinny began to rip the envelope. “We shall soon see.”
But Martha snatched away the letter again. “I’m sure
you’ll spoil your pretty eyes,” she persisted. “Day-stars, Will
called ’em once.”
Jinny laughed still more uneasily. “Then I ought to be able
to read by ’em. But I’ll light my night-star.” And she moved
towards the cart-lamp.
“It isn’t your lighting-up time yet, is it? You don’t want to
be wasteful.”
“Well, come in and light me a candle a moment.”
“You seem in a great hurry to read it!” said Martha fretfully.
“Me?” Jinny flushed furiously. “I thought you’d want
to hear what he says.”
“Don’t I know what he says? That he is in England again
and coming to see his old mother? Isn’t that enough for one
night?”
“It’s a great deal, certainly. But suppose—he wants something.”
“Ah, that’s true!” Martha was visibly perplexed. She did
not herself understand the suddenly awakened jealous instinct
that resented Jinny’s superior acquaintance with Will’s handwriting,
that was subconsciously urging her to hug this letter to
her bosom and not share its sacred contents with a girl she at
last—especially after Bundock’s recent innuendo—realized as
grown-up, and who seemed, moreover, to be claiming a co-proprietorship.
And so it was difficult for her to frame an
objection satisfactory to her conscious intelligence. But the
letter was now in her possession, and that was a strong asset for
her subconsciousness.
“ ’Tis a pity to tear open such a beautiful envelope,” she said.
“You have your cup o’ tea. I’ll steam it over the kettle.”
“I’m afraid I haven’t time for tea, especially having to take
Mr. Skindle a bit back,” said Jinny, almost as mystified as
Martha herself. “I’m late already, and Gran’fer will be roaring
for his supper. I must read it now or never.”
“If it was anything unpleasant,” wavered Martha, “Flynt
would be very upset. And after sitting up all night with Maria—no,
he must have a good sleep—better put it off till the morning.”
“To-morrow, I won’t be here. No, not till next Friday.”
“But I’ve got to go to-morrow to Miss Gentry and she can
read it.”
“Oh!” said Jinny.
“Yes, Flynt wants to have my bonnet cleaned—vanity and
waste, I call it.”
“But won’t that tire you—such a long walk? Why can’t I
take the bonnet to-night? I’ll be passing her house.”
“We haven’t finished talking it over yet, Flynt and me,”
parried Martha. “I might be having a new bonnet, you see,
dearie.”
“Well, of course, it’s just as you wish. But suppose it rains
to-morrow.”
“Rains?” repeated Martha, feeling—she knew not why—like
an animal at bay. Then she drew a great breath of relief.
Footsteps and voices were borne towards them. “Caleb!” she
cried joyfully, “Will’s in London—he’s coming to see his old
mother.”
“Good buoy-oy!” cried Caleb jovially. It was only what he
had expected the letter would say, but at heart he shrank from
the change—he had finally equated himself to the dual solitude,
and the home-coming prodigal loomed as menacing as Cousin
Caroline.
“Good boy?” echoed Martha. “I should think he is—never
cared for girls. And still unmarried.”
“There’s a chance for you, Jinny,” chaffed Caleb.
“Oh, how can you talk such nonsense!” Jinny was furiously
angry. “Basket, Nip,” she called sharply, and climbed up to
her seat almost as swiftly as he leapt into his.
“Are you coming, Mr. Skindle?” In her abstraction and to
busy herself about something, she automatically removed the
parcel of stones from the driving-seat.
“In a jiffy.” Elijah did not bound as obediently as Nip—he
could not lose the chance to pontificate before her. “Not at all
so well as you think, Mrs. Flynt. We experts can see what even
the breeder can’t. Keep her upon corn and peas—give her just
soft stuff.” And he vaulted not ungracefully to Jinny’s side.
“Thank you, sir,” said Martha, impressed. “Have you paid
him?” she inquired of Caleb in a formidable whisper.
“Dedn’t Oi say Oi’d pay him for nawthen?” he answered still
more audibly.
“Well, take off your hat for good-bye.”
“But Oi ain’t inside,” said the obstinate, if confused,
Caleb.
Jinny cracked her whip fiercely, and Methusalem joyously
turned his nose for home.
“Good night, Jinny. Thank’ee for reading Cousin Caroline’s
letter,” Caleb called after the receding vehicle.
It was symptomatic of Jinny’s new mood that she scarcely
noticed that Mr. Skindle now shared her sacking. Her mind was
wandering again over the ground covered by the Sunday-school
wagon, and certain birds’ eggs, losing their later cloud of guiltiness,
lay suffused with childhood’s holy light. Methusalem went
unguided through quiet ways. The large, low moon, a pink
clown’s face, peered through leafless elms and gradually grew
golden. To the right of the winding road rooks cawed persistently,
and once a small flight flew towards the cart; to the left
more melodious birds whistled slow, high notes, or thrilled and
gurgled plaintively, or scurried off, startled, as the cart passed.
One kept on crying “Quick, quick, quick,” with a metallic sound
as of shears snipping the grass, but Methusalem was not to be
hurried. There was time to admire wherever a thatched cottage
made a picturesque point or a pond mirrored the dying sunset;
time to savour the subtle balm, where hayricks stood at the far
margin of fields. Sometimes a little pig would run round
terrified and finally squeeze itself under the fence, or a big
gander would stand and hiss. Sometimes the road narrowed to
a Gothic nave, but for the most part there was nothing but a far-diffused
sense of keen air and great flat spaces, the dark blue
circle of sky with rolling white clouds, the large green fields with
their distant border of thin trees; a view unclosed and unbounded
save by the horizon, though impalpably veiling itself as they
journeyed.
Elijah Skindle’s mood had changed no less than Jinny’s.
Though he now sat in the coveted proximity to her, and could
propose to her profile instead of her nape—and her bonnet was
of the narrow-flanked pattern, condemned by the more prudish
of her sex, that left the profile visible—he was subtly conscious
that he was really farther from her than before. Even when
the delivery of the few remaining parcels necessitated a slight
thawing on Jinny’s part, the whole spirit seemed to have gone
out of the adventure. It was grown tasteless as a thrice-warmed
dish. The very horn had lost its thrill. Even if he found a
vehicle at “The King of Prussia,” he was thinking, it would be
an expensive trip: they might charge him all Caleb’s half-crown.
He found himself morbidly counting the coils of cord—there
were five in all, he made out. And when the rooks he called
crows sailed towards him, they gave a still more sable hue to his
thoughts. He counted them, too, remembering how his peasant
mother—now installed as his woman-of-all-work—used to curtsy
to a solitary magpie, and the rhyme she taught him about the
crows: “One’s unlucky, two lucky, three is health, four is
wealth, five is sickness, and six is death.” Odd that matrimony
was not mentioned, unless it was included in “two.” There
were certainly five crows, he thought dismally—a sinister coincidence
with the coils of cord. Then, cheering up, he interpreted
the omened sickness as that of the local live-stock, a sickness
greater than Jorrow could cope with, and he reflected that after
all Jinny’s was a hard and toilsome life and her frigidity was
perhaps due to its never occurring to her that he was willing to
raise her to his status. Perhaps she thought he was just itching
to take liberties. Well, he could understand her coyness: other
men might indeed exploit such a chance; but he, he assured
himself again, was a gentleman.
“That’s a slow couple,” he said, boldly breaking the long
silence.
“Seems to me they fly as fast as the other rooks,” said
Jinny.
“I mean the Flynts,” he said.
“Oh!” said Jinny.
There was resentment in her tone. She had not liked his
calling Caleb “Uncle,” understanding well the urban contempt
that lurked in declaring oneself a rustic’s nephew, and feeling,
too, that however slow in the uptake Caleb might be, his wealth
of homely crafts, knacks, instincts, life-wisdom, and nature-knowledge
gave him a richer and deeper quality than this pert
townsman. But Elijah persisted in his urban appraisal.
“No go in them!”
“Dear old turtles!” sighed Jinny. “But so long as they go
at the same pace——!”
“Ah!” he said eagerly. “You believe in like to like?”
“Well, fancy a turtle married to a hare!”
“But a pair of hares now—?” He seized his opportunity.
“You and me, eh?”
“Speak for yourself, Mr.—Bunny!”
“I’m paying you a compliment, Jinny, classing you with me
for smartness. There isn’t a girl from Bradmarsh to Chipstone
that can hold a candle to you. So that’s why, seeing a man
must marry somebody sometime, and looking around as becomes
a man who’s getting a bit—a bit——”
“Bald?” prompted Jinny blandly.
“And what does that matter?” he said, too intent now to be
fobbed off by raillery. “The point is that with the practice and
position I’m getting now, it would be a good lift for you.”
“I thought I was giving you a lift,” said Jinny icily.
“So you were—so you are—in that sense. But I didn’t need
even that. My nag wasn’t really lame. I only made an excuse
to talk this over. See?”
“A very lame excuse,” flashed Jinny.
“There was never any way of talking to you—you always so
busy with parcels and me with patients. I’m not one of your
flirting kind with fancy waistcoats, I want to settle down, and
I’ve taken a favour to you.”
Even Jinny’s ready tongue had no repartee to this massive
complacency. She could only articulate: “Have you, now?”
“Yes, I have. And I’d like to see you driving of a Sunday in
my smart trap. Come, what do you say?”
“Thank you,” she said coldly. “I’d rather stay in my old
cart.”
“But it’s such a shame—you so spruce and spry—tied to this
ramshackle cart, when you might be adorning a higher sphere
and sitting in my parlour instead of being at everybody’s beck
and call.”’
He had chosen precisely the worst form of appeal. Confronted
with this picture of parlour-stodginess, her rôle of Jinny the
Carrier—Jinny the pet and friend-in-need of the countryside—seemed
infinitely dear and desirable. And what subtly added to
her anger was some dim presentiment in herself of other forces
coming into her life, forces threatening to emerge from their
picture-past, and to trouble the placid current of her career.
Like Caleb she shrank from change. To shuttle for ever ’twixt
Bradmarsh and Chipstone; with her grandfather, Nip, Methusalem,
all immortal and unchanging as herself—this was all she
asked of heaven: this and not too much rain and wind.
“You want me to sit in your parlour?” she cried in white
revolt.
He took off his cap and bowed gallantly: “In silks and satins.”
Then suddenly realizing his baldness, he clapped it on again.
“And give up my work!” There was an ominous light in
Jinny’s eyes. But love is blind! Even the bats now beginning
to swoop in the dusk could see more clearly than Elijah.
“I promise you you shan’t do a stroke!” said the fatuous
young man. “As the wife of a veterinary surgeon, you’d be a
lady.”
“And what would become of Gran’fer?”
“He’d have warm corduroys and plenty of gruel in the
Chipstone poorhouse.”
“You heartless knacker! Get off my cart. Whoa! Methusalem,
whoa!”
“How you fly at a man! I’ve already got my mother living
with me, and she and your grandfather wouldn’t get on, being of
a different class. But I’d be willing to pay his rent and get a
woman to look after him.”
“Nobody shall look after him but me. And his business—who
is to look after that?”
“Don’t worry. Some other carrier’ll crop up.”
“There isn’t going to be any other carrier here but Daniel
Quarles, understand that.”
“Well, if you think you’ll find anybody to marry your grandfather——”
he said sullenly.
“Who wants to marry? I shall never give up the road.”
“If you’re so fond of driving, there’s always my trap.”
“No good setting traps for me. I’ll hang in a cage in no
man’s parlour. I must fly about in the woods like now—free!”
“Birds in the woods are sometimes hungry,” her wooer
reminded her. “Suppose your business falls off—or things go to
famine prices like five or six years ago. The gallon loaf ain’t
always a shilling. Ten years ago I remember flour was two and
ten the stone, and that only seconds, and tea was five shillings.
With me you’d be sure of the fat of the land always—there’s no
difference with me ’twixt Sundays and weekdays.”
“Oh, it’s a stuffed bird you want for your parlour.”
“Rubbish, I’ve got six stuffed birds in my parlour—in the
loveliest glass cases!”
“But they don’t sing!” And Jinny burst mockingly into a
song that had hitherto been a mere tune to her:
“I’ll be no submissive wife,
 No, not I——”
He lost his temper. “Oh, you needn’t make such a fuss over
yourself. I dare say I can find plenty of wives—with my
connexion.”
“Among pigs?” she said sweetly. She jumped down and
began to light the lamp. “This is your getting-out place.”
“It’s nothing of the sort—I go on to the bridge.”
“Impossible. My horse is lame.”
“I know all about that.” And snatching up the reins she had
dropped, “Gee-up!” he called suddenly.
But Methusalem knew better.
“You’ll never get home that way,” said Jinny, smiling.
“Then how the hell——?” he began furiously.
“Shanks’s mare,” she reminded him again. “That’s not
lame.”
He gave her a long, nasty look as though meditating the law
of the stronger. But he tried pleading first.
“By the time I walk home, my mother’ll have locked up;
thinking I’m sitting up with a patient.”
“There’s the poorhouse!”
He winced. “You’ve got to carry me,” he said sullenly, “or
I’ll have the law on you.”
“There’s no law to make me carry aught save goods.” And
she sang on carelessly:
“Should a humdrum husband say,
 That at home I ought to stay——”
The little voice, rippling through those demure lips, wellnigh
stung him to close her mouth with the masterful gag of kisses,
but a remnant of sanity warned him not to spoil a fine animal
practice by a scandal. Besides Jinny had her whip, and what
was still more formidable, her horn.
“I’ll be even with you for this!” And jumping down, he
strode off furiously.
“Hullo! Mr. Skindle! Hullo!”
“Keep away from me!” It was at once an appeal and a
warning.
“Don’t you want your case of instruments? Not that you’ll
be in time to kill those poor horses to-night.”
With an unsmothered oath he turned back and clambered into
the interior, upsetting Nip’s basket in his fury; the result of
which neglect to let sleeping dogs lie was that the unsagacious
animal mounted growling guard over the instrument-case, as
before a burglar.
“You’d best get it for me,” he said sullenly. “And by the
way, how much do I owe you?”
“Never mind,” she said blandly, handing him his burden.
“You promised to be even with me.”
“The little vixen!” he thought, as he trudged towards a farm
where he remembered doctoring a horse. “She ought to be put
in the ducking-pond! What a lucky escape!”
JINNY AT HER HOMES
I remember the black wharves and the slips
  And the sea-tides tossing free,
And Spanish sailors with bearded lips
And the beauty and mystery of the ships
  And the magic of the sea.
Longfellow, “My Lost Youth.”
Blackwater Hall, the home of Daniel Quarles and his granddaughter,
was none of your old manor-houses with mullioned
windows and carven music-galleries, fallen in grandeur and rent.
It had barely done yeoman’s service, being just a low whitewashed
and thatched cottage, whose upper windows under the
overhanging eaves seemed deep-set eyes under jutting brows.
Nor was it near the Blackwater, though from its comparatively
high ground the broadening river first began to glimmer on the
view when you came to the edge of Bradmarsh Common and
looked across its brown expanse towards the bluish haze of the
background.
It was in reality nearer the Brad, which as seen foreshortened
from it seemed to lave the roof of Frog Farm and sentinel it with
its willows. Blackwater Hall should in fact—Jinny would jest—have
been called Common Cottage. For it was just a way of
living on the Common, protected from the elements, yet sucked
up into them: a sort of transparent, transpirable shell amid this
universal flying, fluttering, hopping, creeping, crawling, soaring,
swooping, scampering, twisting, droning, humming, buzzing,
barking, chirping, croaking, cawing, and singing: a human nest
niched on the edge of a chaos of twigs, roots, old amorphous
trunks, tangled faded fern-branches, mossy patches, gorse,
ferruginous-leaved oaks, shrubs, ant-heaps innumerable, rabbit-warrens,
wild apple, wild plum, black heather, and endless stubs
to catch the feet, or branches to whip the face, or thorns to prick
the fingers. A garden path to the Hall lay between homely
flowers, periwinkle and marigold and the like.
Behind the Hall lay the Quarles estate of an acre and a lug or
two, with its poultry-run, its tethered goats, its vegetables, its
clothes-lines, its thatched stables, its odd sheds and little barn,
and its well. If Daniel Quarles was not nid-nodding over his big
Bible or on the bench in the front porch, or pruning the vine
over the kitchen door, or exercising his lopping and topping
rights on the Common, it was here the nonagenarian was to be
found pottering: planting, hoeing, watering, or weeding. He
would usually groom Methusalem of a morning—it was his way
of asserting his hold over the business—and on Tuesday and
Friday evenings, when the wayworn Jinny drove up along the
grassy path ’twixt cottage and Common, rutted only from her
own wheels, he would generally rub down Methusalem after high
tea. Otherwise the multiform labour of house and land, of
cooking and bread-baking and goat-milking and scrubbing and
washing, all fell upon the little Carrier. And even the work the
Gaffer did was far outbalanced by the work he made.
And yet it was Daniel’s personality, not Jinny’s, that was
impressed on the house, even as his name remained on the cart.
Her own exiguous claim upon life combined with piety and
affection to leave everything as she had found it when he brought
her here; not only in the big attic where eight had once huddled
and which he now occupied in solitary state, sadly conscious of
the great, snoreless silences, but in both the ground-floor rooms
over which it stretched. The one with the window was the
living-room, and the other—on which the front door opened
and where a Dutch clock with hanging weights greeted the
visitor with a cheery tick that relieved its deadness—was piled
pell-mell with old cypress chests and other-litter of the progeny
he had outlived, as well as with a few boxes or parcels left by
neighbouring clients or as yet undelivered to them. These two
rooms communicating, the box-room served both as a business
office and a passage to the living-room, from the rear of which
you ascended by a door the wriggling staircase to the patriarch’s
big bedroom, or tumbled down two steps from another doorway
to a combination of kitchen, larder, wood-cellar, and scullery, lit
up and aired by one small swinging pane, a den which even
Jinny could not keep free of cobwebs and smells. Here was the
Gaffer’s beer-barrel, and the thumb-hole tray, painted with tigers,
on which she brought in his morning draught from it. Here also
were the jug and basin of her toilette, for bedroom Jinny had
none; the need of disturbing the ancient chests or the office—which
would have been a sad blow to her grandfather—being
avoided through the fortunate talent of the chest of drawers in
the living-room for turning into a bed. Its drawers, in which
the bedding was concealed, would come out and hook on to
one another, while legs would swivel out from beneath them.
It was not gay—this room-of-all-work—despite its over-population
of china shepherdesses with their swains and hounds
and its rank growth of dried grass in vases—all doubled and
distorted by the cracked, fustily gilt mirror on the mantelpiece—for
the oaken beams of the ceiling, from which hung a gigantic
rusty key, had been plastered over, and the walls—in a similar
quest of gentility—dulled with a grey paper, sedulously rematched
when it fell to pieces; far livelier was the staircase
paper—all hearts and roses—if only you could have seen it in
the dusky windings and under the menacing bulge of the plaster
ceiling.
Apart from the shepherdesses and vases, among which Jinny
was not sorry to see a growing mortality, as the Gaffer fumbled
for his spectacles, the room was not over-furnished, a small
carved wooden settle by the cavernous hearth, a small square,
central table without flaps, two squat and cushioned arm-chairs,
with one prim wooden chair, and a little lamp with a monstrous
fat globe, constituting almost the minimum of necessaries; even
their united libraries, the Gaffer’s Family Bible and Jinny’s
“Peculiar Hymn-Book” and “Universal Spelling-Book,” being
constrained to repose, like the shepherdesses, on top of the chest
of drawers—that shifty piece of furniture whose mysterious
recesses secreted also the hymn-book recovered from the bushes.
That article of bigotry and virtue, hurled from him by the angry
boy, lay—long-forgotten—in the top drawer behind the rolled-up
wire mattress that uncoiled by a spring.
Yet this shabby room with its drab paper and squat furniture—vivified
most of the year only by that tireless tick of the Dutch
clock from the office, or the purring of the kettle from the kitchen—made
for Jinny the holy conception of home. The very cracks
in the mirror had become second nature; a glass that looked
one squarely in the face would have put her eye out, and if
in an utterly impossible moment the Gaffer had considerately
replaced the old one, the tresses she tamed into seemliness by it
would have been a sorry sight. Here, without books or friends,
mere living was a happiness, especially at night after Gran’fer,
whose big Bible invariably turned from a table-book into a
pillow, had woke up and remarked he was getting sleepy, and
been steered up the corkscrew staircase to his bed. Then, in a
silence broken by no human sound—save the snoring of the
Gaffer from above—and in a security symbolized by the unlocked
gates and doors, Jinny would sit in delicious relaxation with her
sewing or knitting or bonnet-trimming, finding compensation for
the long laborious day: listening in summer to the late singing
birds or gazing in winter at the glowing logs with their delicate
flicker of blue, while Nip in his virtuous basket snored in harmony
with the Gaffer or uttered joyous yells in his dream-hunting.
In those hours Jinny demanded nothing of man or God,
though when she had produced her bed like a conjurer out of its
mahogany recesses, prayers came automatically to the sleepy
little figure kneeling beside it, with the dark hair flowing over
the white shoulders.
That was a pretty sight, but only the cracked mirror saw it.
Yet back, deep back in Jinny’s baby consciousness, lay
another home altogether, a home richer in comfort and love;
giving not on a tumbling common, but on a strange, flat waterside—with
stately dream-ships in swelling white, and black
barges, and little boats with ochre or orange sails, and a pervading
savour of salt and mud; the real Blackwater Hall she felt dimly,
though its name escaped her.
In this overlaid life there was a filmy female figure that fed
and bathed and rocked one, and kissed the place one had banged,
and sometimes held one as passionately as if against some monster
that was trying to tear one’s face from that flower-soft cheek; it
could scarcely be that burly figure, spasmodically appearing and
disappearing, for that too was kind in its different way, and had
a knee less cumbered by clothes across which one could ride
astride, and pullable hair on its face and curling smoke issuing
from its mouth more profusely than from the kettle’s. Out of
this general background, like mountains from a plain, stood out
a few episodes of peculiar vividness, but of no apparent significance—in
one she sat on a rough sea-wall playing with innumerable
tiny white shells while a bird hovered over her crying,
as if trying to induce her to follow it seaward, but before she
could do so the female figure had appeared, frantically scolding
and caressing, and had carried her, struggling and kicking, back
to a cot. In another she was carried by the burly being to a
little room with a strange little bulbous window and a queer
smell, where she was kissed by an elderly figure with a cocked
hat and a fixed eye that had a strange affinity to the window.
Later she seemed to be living in the strange building that held
this room: it had a canvas roof, a flag at one end and a mast
with ropes at the other, yet puzzlingly was not a ship, for she
saw herself running down the stairs to pat Methusalem in the
road.
But these shadowy and usually submerged images all leapt
into renewed vitality one delectable Wednesday when, clad in a
new black dress, hurriedly stitched together by Miss Gentry, she
divided the driving-board with her grandfather (looking odd in
his white funeral smock beside her blackness), while Methusalem,
equally refreshed and exhilarated by the novel roads, almost
hurried them by square-towered hamlets and dear little bridges
spanning crawling streams to the quaint cemetery where the old
man’s sister was to lie. How Nip would have loved the expedition
she thought in after days! But he had not yet adopted
her.
It was on this trip that she began to hear things that solidified
the filmy figures—but it was only from the Gaffer’s spasms of
imprecation tailing off into anecdote that she was able in the
course of years to piece together her parental history. Boldero,
she learnt incidentally, was her real name, not Quarles: a
correction that mattered less, since nobody had ever called her
anything but Jinny. She gathered that the Gaffer had purposely
neglected to perpetuate her father’s name: he was cancelled
and annulled.
Roger Boldero, she came gradually to understand, was one of
those superior souls of uncertain status who, having got command
of a little sailing vessel, were wafted joyously to and fro, exchanging
the silks and spirits of France and the tobacco of Holland
for the coins of England without any regard for the benighted
principles handicapping human intercourse by taxation. Although
her father finally came to own the cargoes he ran, he was
at first the mere carrier for speculative capitalists; under cover,
moreover, of an honest freight of non-dutiable articles. Carrying
was thus in Jinny’s blood, both by land and sea, and it is no
marvel she made a success of it. But the conjuncture of the two
bloods came by the queerest of accidents. The Tommy Devil—the
fearsome name of Roger Boldero’s boat was only the Essex name
for the swift that flew gigantically in gay wood over its cutwater—being
caught one night in a sudden gale at a season of high
tides, found herself driven towards a lee shore of her native
county. It was a perilous situation, and rather than be dashed
on the beach broadside on, Skipper Boldero put his helm up and
daringly essayed to land nose first on the mud. But the lugger,
whose lightness was so admirable against the King’s cutters, and
which had been still further lightened of her ankers of brandy
and stone bottles of Schiedam—these, through an interruption
by the blockade men, “waiting to be called for” in certain
“fleets” and ditches farther along the coast—could not keep
her head against the veering welter. With desperate resourcefulness
Boldero improvised a drogue by lashing spars and a
spare sail to a rope and trailing it at the stern, and, thus steadied
before the wind, the Tommy Devil escaped broaching to, and
despite the following sea that tilted her figurehead into the
depths, she was finally dumped high and wet on the beach, on
the very verge of the sea-wall—both uninjured.
It was a fine piece of seamanship (though aided by the rare steepness
of this bit of beach and the high water), and the storm beginning
to abate and the water to recede, the sails were lowered and
the skipper and crew turned thankfully in. They were not wanting
in men—carrying of this kind needed large and able-minded
crews—yet all hands being worn out by hours of battling with
wind and wave—“dilvered,” as old Daniel put it—a watch was
deemed superfluous for a vessel no longer at sea, and the Tommy
Devil reposed from stem to stern with all the soundness of
conscious virtue watched over by Providence.
Now it happened that Lieutenant Dap, commander of His
Majesty’s Revenue Cutter, then prowling in the offing in quest
of gin-tubs—he had been pressed as a youth, served under
Nelson, and had exchanged to the Preventive Service when he
married that rustic beauty Susannah Quarles, sister of Daniel—was
returning with a lantern at the first peep of dawn to the
“Leather Bottel,” to knock up his boat’s crew. His anxious day
in Brandy Hole Creek—as everybody called the little place—had
ended happily: Susannah’s seventh baby had been safely and
punctually launched—and the proud and prolific father was
anxious to be back sweeping up the prizes that led to preferment.
It being a high occasion, and to impress Mrs. Dap’s
neighbours, he had come ashore in a cocked hat, and he felt
almost knocked into one when he beheld, towering over the sea-wall,
the great masts of a vessel that loomed gigantic in that
place and light. He rubbed his one eye—the other he had lost
in his original struggle against the pressgang—but the mysterious
jetsam remained, and a closer inspection showed it the kind of
longish craft whose huge lugsails his clumsier man-o’-war could
rarely overtake, despite his square sail yards. But boldly, as
befitted a man with a Nelsonic eye, and without waiting even to
summon his men, he hailed the stranded stranger. No reply.
Nor did even a shower of such small stones as the muddy beach
afforded have any effect on the uncanny bark. There was
nothing left but to board her—which the hero achieved single-handed,
clambering over the sagging bulwark and standing alone
on the slanting deck.
Roger Boldero, aroused to find himself challenged by the
cocked hat and stony eye of the Law, displayed, though blinking
at the lantern, as great a sang-froid as in the presence of the
elements. There was, in fact, far less danger. Of the forbidden
articles only lace was left on board, and lace has been designed
by the said watchful Providence to occupy small space and be
easily invisible. A wink to his second in command, and two of
the crew who were in excess of the legal number for that small
tonnage, smuggled themselves overboard—here being one of the
advantages of terra firma. The few odd kegs, flagons, and
cigar-boxes were the ship’s own stores Boldero maintained, and
he would be very glad if the “Commodore” would join him in
sampling them now. Softened by the title, the bold Dap
nevertheless declined: the vessel was his prize, he declared.
“And what is to prevent us taking you as our prize?” asked
Roger blandly, having by now discovered that Dap was alone.
“You can’t move an inch,” said Dap.
“But we shall float off as soon as the tide rises.”
“Precisely. But it won’t come as high again, not till the next
spring tide. Meanwhiles I’ve a gig’s crew ashore and a cutter
within gunshot.”
Boldero was taken aback. He realized that he was—in
nautical parlance—“neaped.” What a miserable misadventure!
What a reward for his seamanship! But, masking his consternation,
he rejoined with a smile, “Then you can’t take your prize
in tow either.” He proceeded to point out laughingly that there
was no question of capture on either side, that there was not a
tittle of evidence against him, that he was an honest trader, as
his manifest and cargo would show—and that even if His Majesty,
through his admirable if over-zealous representative, insisted on
taxing his own little modicum of alcohol and tobacco, it had not
been technically landed. The nice point whether a cargo which
lands inside its ship instead of outside can be said to have landed,
side-tracked the question of the status of the ship herself, and
entailed so great a consumption of the cheroots and liquor—despite
the unearthly hour—that their fiscal value must have
been considerably reduced. But the obdurate Dap still insisting
they were dutiable, Roger Boldero invited him to seal them up
till he sailed, as he had certainly no intention of landing them
here. He pointed out, however, that though the tide, like Time,
waited for no man, he would have to wait for the tide; and that
during this disagreeable interval the hope of again offering the
“Commodore” the cordial, if lop-sided, hospitality of his cabin
must disappear if the fomenters of friendship were put in bond.
Even this argument might have shattered itself against Dap’s
fuddled sense of duty had not the twice aforesaid Providence
now sent on board a rival cocked hat with a feather salient. With
the growing light the local exciseman—of the shoregoing branch
of the service—had likewise discovered the strange quarry. But
the gleam in the hunter’s eye died when Lieutenant Dap introduced
him to his friend Boldero, who was celebrating with him
the birth of his seventh baby, and whose society for the next
month would, he was sure, add to the amenities of life in Brandy
Hole Creek.
And “my friend Boldero” did not fail to become it, for
Lieutenant Dap’s cruising was confined to the waters on whose
border he had built his nest: and he was frequently hove to.
And during those tedious four weeks, made still more tedious by
rain, Boldero had himself rowed out more than once to the
“Channel groper” whose black hull, copious white boats,
formidable guns and flaming-flannelled red-capped crew were
plainly visible from the beached lugger; and he moved genially
among the blue-trousered tars and did full justice to the Lieutenant’s
gin-toddy and had his fingers often in the Lieutenant’s
snuff-box and lent a sympathetic ear to his methods and devices
against those rascally smugglers with their manœuvre of rowing
dead to windward.
Their spirit-casks were slung with ropes, the Lieutenant
explained, so that their confederates on shore could load them
easily on their horses, but only the other night the blockade-men
had discomfited a formidable shore-gang of fifty who, despite
their stout ashpoles, had been unable to carry off anything
except their wounded. He would have caught the lugger, too,
had she not kept doubling.
The commander of the amphibious Tommy Devil even shared
in an exciting, if unsuccessful, chase after a suspicious landing-party,
going out with a galley-crew in a rain-storm in a borrowed
tarpaulin petticoat. And once the one-eyed hero—who felt
himself none the less a Nelson because his eye had been lost in
resisting entry into the navy—returned Roger Boldero’s visit,
and after broaching sundry of the happily unsealed kegs, the
two skippers repaired arm in arm—the attitude was necessary—to
see the seventh baby and present the fond mother with
material for a lace cap.
Now while Daniel Quarles’s sister had been lying as helpless
as the lugger, his last unmarried daughter, Emma, a beauty still
more engaging, was housekeeping for Aunt Susannah and minding
the other four children (two were dead). She had come in Daniel
Quarles’s cart, and her father was to fetch her again as soon as
Susannah was up (or down). He should already have come for
her, but the rains had made such glue of the roads that a queerly
spelt letter came instead, saying he would wait till they hardened.
This delay, brief as it was, sufficed to bring the neaped mariner
under the spell of the landlocked village maid, so sweet to look
on, so serviceable about a house, and so motherly with a baby
that the novel thought of matrimony was popped into a rover’s
head. She, for her part, was still more swiftly subjugated by
the jolly Roger and the Tommy Devil, and the mutual confession
was precipitated by the opposite menaces of tide and cart, each
threatening to bear them apart. It was a race between these
and the course of true love, which must flow rapid to flow at
all. But it did not flow smooth, for when Daniel Quarles arrived
to convey his daughter home and found a rival vehicle waiting
uncouthly on the beach to bear her off, he roundly damned the
“furriner” who aspired to be his son-in-law, and he included in his
maledictions the Preventive Service and all its works, especially
the new baby, not to mention the times and the tides. For
though he had long ago found grace and become a Wesleyan, he
had embraced the new doctrine with the old robustiousness. The
natural man was no more to be mitigated than a hedgehog. Had
he become a Quaker, he would have turned the other cheek in
a violent collision with the striker’s jaw. He enjoyed being
angry, and that his wrath was “righteous” only added to its
zest. And “righteous” it now was.
The trouble was not that Captain Boldero was a Churchman:
the fellow was flippantly ready to embrace anything on earth
that included Emma. It was not even that Daniel “suspicioned”
him a smuggler. Smuggling—even if you had a brother-in-law
in the Government—was quite as respectable as poaching, and
in days when the rural labourer could not have lived had he not
eked out his obolus by occasional rabbits (with the necessary
vegetables), only an obtuse squirearchy could hold that sinful.
But even the squire had no opprobrium for the smuggler:
gentry and peasantry were at one in backing up the manly
patriot who thwarted a wicked Government, supplied Britons
with the cup that cheers and their country with a fine naval
reserve and early information of Froggy’s movements. The
shores of Essex as of all Britain were honeycombed—apart from
their large natural resources and their ruins and haunted houses—with
artificial hiding-places, cellars, vaults, and secret passages,
and every man’s hand was against the Ishmael of the Customs
House. Farmers left their gates open at night to facilitate the
cavalcades and coaches-and-six, and were but little surprised to
find tea or tobacco coming up overnight on their fields like
mushrooms. Even parsons were disposed to regard such treasures
as drifted their way as heaven-sent flotsam, and Government
circles themselves—in that era of purchasable votes and votable
purchases—had not the ethical toploftiness which characterizes
all Governments to-day. No, it was not Boldero the Smuggler,
but Boldero the Smoker that found himself hurled into outer
darkness the day poor shrinking Emma was borne off in her
father’s cart. “No puffing pirate shall cross my threshold,”
swore Daniel, but the accent was on the puffing, not the pirate.
For tobacco had become tabu in the Wesleyan ranks: the
godless practice of smoking was formally forbidden to the
ministers. Swiss Protestantism indeed had once included its
prohibition in the Ten Commandments. If Methodism did not
thus re-edit the Decalogue, its horror of the abomination was no
less keen, and a change of practice being always easier than a
change of heart, Daniel Quarles had poured a deal of spiritual
energy into the sacrifice of his pipe. The “rapscallion Boldero,”
he declared, not only sinned himself, but was the cause of sin
in others, trafficking as he did in the unholy weed. If Emma
insisted on a “smoker,” wasn’t there the miller at Long Bradmarsh,
he inquired with grim facetiousness, meaning that the
grotesque Griggs had a vote by living in a house with a chimney.
But Emma for all her gentle airs had proved “obstropolus.”
She had discovered that Susannah’s husband smoked as prodigally
as Roger—though it had been hidden from the old man on
his rare visits—and that so far from bedevilling men, tobacco
tended to angelicize them. Would indeed that her father haloed
himself with these clouds! Besides, she shrewdly suspected
that even a Wesleyan archangel, appearing suddenly as a suitor,
would have fared similarly, and that the smoke was only a cover
for a wish to keep his last girl. And so, though the lover was left
lamenting, and the Tommy Devil duly floated off without the lass,
it was not long that Emma was left stranded in Blackwater Hall.
With a parent removed by Providence every Tuesday and
Friday, even the flabbiest female may be stiffened, and the end
was smuggled matrimony; though very soon the blessing of a
minister brought Methodism into their madness. Roger Boldero
not only became a Wesleyan like his wife and her father, but was
one of the first Dissenters to be married in their own chapel by
their own clergy under the new Act.
The odd union had turned out happy, but with one dismal
drawback—the Bolderos could not rear children. They fared
worse even than the Bidlakes, and with no such obvious reason.
One hapless infant after another died, and when at last, in their
late middle years, little Jinny was safely steered through three
winters, it was they who were taken as if in lieu of their progeny.
The pair had finally settled down by the same waterside that
had united them—the attractions of “Brandy Hole Creek”
having been enhanced by the perpetual presence of their relative
by marriage, Commander Dap, who with the subsidence of spirit
duties and smuggling had found his mobile cutter replaced by
the moored “Watch Vessel 23.” Here with Susannah and his
children and five satellites (and their wives and families) the
veteran lived in domestic beatitude under the title of Chief
Coast Guard Officer. High on the beach, and boarded by a
commodious staircase, the houseboat seemed a standing reminder
of the adventure of the Tommy Devil. Under its challenging
eye, that adventurous bark had sailed out and home, till that
last fatal voyage when the lugger foundered almost within sight
of a little Sussex port, which for weeks after was mysteriously
littered with washed-up tobacco-bales. Though Roger Boldero
was rescued, it had been the beginning of the end of his prosperity,
already undermined by the diminution of duties, and
a few years later both he and Emma were dead simultaneously
of smallpox. Again the carrier’s cart must fare to the Creek to
fetch the penniless little orphan, and there—soon after Will
Flynt’s flight—Daniel brought her back for the burial of his
sister Susannah. It was what buried Will’s memory too and
replaced him in her prayers by a new being, conceived as her
“Angel Mother.”
The moment she saw and smelt the creek she knew she had
carried it in her soul all along: the white hut with its flagged
mast, the great Watch Vessel, the tumble of cottages, sheds,
barrels, pecking fowls, grubbing black pigs, recumbent ladders,
discoloured boats with their keels upwards, black rotting barges,
and rigged smacks stranded on hard steep mud. The sea came
in sluggishly through a broad green chine, half slime, half green
water, spitted with gaunt encrusted poles to mark the channel.
The water seemed even wider than she remembered, and yet
not so wide, for it was split by an island or a promontory that
gave a second sail-dotted expanse between her and the farther
shore. She yearned now towards that ultimate hump of hazy
woodland, and it was to remain for ever bathed in the quiet
beauty which wrapped it around as Methusalem toiled up to the
“Leather Bottel.” They were to stay the night there, for Daniel
would have none of the Commander’s hospitality, he being still
unforgiven. Besides, the child might be afraid of the corpse.
It was while sitting on that sea-wall with the octogenarian that
evening, her great grown-up fingers toying once again with tiny
white shells that strewed its top, and pewits again trying to lead
her from their young, that she first heard in broken outlines
how these waters had washed her into being. Something, too,
she gleaned from her refound relative-in-law, the chief mourner,
whose cocked hat, tattooed arm and genial senescence—not to
mention his house-boat—were one of the pleasantest impressions
or re-impressions of the funeral; and whose fascinating trick
of rolling one eye while the other was fixed in a glassy stare
almost made the child lose the sense of what he was saying. The
death of his wife had reminded the veteran of the death of
Nelson—nearly forty years before—and his tremulous tones grew
still shakier as he recalled how the flags over the hut and the
Watch Vessel and every other flag in England had flown at
half-mast, though of course there were more joyous aspects of
“Trafalgar” to be celebrated in bottles of Bony’s own brandy.
He frankly admitted he had himself been “three sheets in the
wind”—an image of bed-linen fluttering on a clothes-line that
long puzzled her. He took her abaft the Watch Vessel—it was a
way of leaving Daniel Quarles alone with his dead sister—and
recounted his astonishment at seeing her father’s boat spued up
like Jonah out of the whale.
“A handsome man,” he told her to her pleasure. But he
spoilt it all by adding, “though he would talk the hind leg off
a dog.”
“But wasn’t that cruel?” the little girl faltered.
Dap laughed. “He never did it really, dearie, and if the leg
had come off, he’d have helped the lame dog over a stile. And
so many lingos—parleyvooing in French and swearing in Double
Dutch. I don’t wonder your angel mother fell in love with him.”
“My angel mother!” echoed Jinny excitedly. “Was my
mother an angel?”
The veteran was taken aback. For a child who must be past
nine such primitiveness was startling. He had spoken loosely,
hardly knowing whether he alluded to Emma’s present heavenly
abode or to her sweet-temperedness on earth. He did not know
that little Jinny read nothing but literature in which angels
were a common feature of the landscape, and that Miss Gentry
had not measured her for her blacks without dwelling on her
own stained-glass specimen.
“She was as pretty as one,” said the Commander after an
instant, “and now she is one.” Thus it was that Jinny’s mother,
already felt as a hovering sweetness, took on definite wings, and
even when Jinny’s maturer experience amputated them from her
earthly existence, they were what she still hovered over her
child with.
“Susannah and she’ll make a pair now,” he added, feeling
suddenly disloyal to the corpse at home.
“Susannah?” queried Jinny, for her grandfather had been
calling his sister “Pegs”—“poor Pegs!”
“Your mother’s aunt.”
It was a new idea, an angel’s aunt. She saw the twain flying,
Susannah sailing with more sweeping pinions, her mother softly
rustling.
The funeral was in style, and Jinny helped to set out the
refreshments in the saloon. There was some dispute as to whether
her grandfather could join the grand procession in his tilt-cart,
but though he urged that squires were proud to be buried from
farm-wagons, he consented to ride—like a fish out of water—inside
a mourning-coach, and not even on the box.
The Commander and Jinny shared his dismal grandeur, she
sitting bodkin though there was an empty seat opposite, which
“the seventh baby” had been expected to occupy. But Toby
had not arrived from his ship—he was a gunner—in time, and
the earlier progeny were still more scattered.
The widower held his handkerchief in his fist, but owing to the
heat of a discussion on the manner the Navy had gone to the
dogs—or returned from them—since the Admiralty had set up
a gunnery school on a Portsmouth ship, he used it only to mop
his brow.
“Excellent, indeed!” He was mocking at the ship’s name.
“The ruination of the sarvice I tell you. It all comes from
doing away with the pressgang—stands to reason they picked
out the finest chaps—” here the Gaffer snorted—“Oh you may
sniff, but for fighting you want guts and muscle. Look what
England was in them days and what she is coming to now.”
“To my lookin’-at-it-an’-thinkin’-o’t-too”—the Gaffer made
one breathless word of it—“ ’tis a blessin’ to be riddy of all them
gaolbirds, swearers, drinkers, smokers, and fornicators.”
“Hush!” The Commander tried to wink his glass eye
towards Jinny.
“She don’t understand. Oi remember, the year my good-for-nawthen
Gabriel smashed up a threshin’-machine (and the poor
farmer dedn’t git no compensation neither, though ef his furniture
had been smashed ’twould have come on the Hundred) that wery
same year Ebenezer Wagstaff—for ’twas the coronation year of
King William, Oi remember, just afore my Emma desarted
me——”
“That was a Sailor King,” interrupted Dap, half to stave off
fulminations against Jinny’s dead mother. “Began as middy
under Cap’n Digby in the unlucky Royal George—a ninety-eight
gun ship she was——”
“Ye put me off the track, drat ye, aldoe it leads back to
Ebenezer Wagstaff all the same, seein’ as the Prince might ha’
rubbed showlders with a thief as was sentenced for stealin’ half-a-suvran
from a barge on the Brad. He could ha’ been hanged
for it in them days, mind you—the case bein’ as clear as day or
rather as black as night. But they marcifully brought him in
guilty to stealin’ nine and ’levenpence and that saved his neck,
being a navigable river, and the judge give him the option of
gaol or jinin’ the Navy.”
“And a proper thing too. Set a thief to catch a Frenchy, and
him used to taking prizes by water. Nowadays before the
captain hoists his pennant he’s got a crew dumped on him that’s
no choice of his—mealy-mouthed lubbers, full of book-larnin’,
who don’t know a brigantine from a topsail schooner: it’s the
red ensign that gets all the good stuff, not the white. You mark
me, it’ll be the downfall of England.”
“England’ll never fall down while she’s got God-fearin’ congregations,”
maintained Daniel Quarles, and Jinny’s devout
little heart thrilled to hear it.
In the pleasant sunny graveyard there were apiaries and a
dismantled tower almost smothered by blackberry-bushes, and
the tombs and gravestones passed imperceptibly into a garden
of monkey-trees and weeping willows. These wrought in her no
stirring of memories, but as she had got off the coach, the standing
church tower, square and ivy-wrapped, had composed beautifully
with ricks of all sorts, with trees, old tiles, and thatch, into a
picture that seemed as much hers as the waterside.
The parson—Susannah had remained a Churchwoman—was
some minutes late, and Jinny was gratified to note how strong
her grandfather was: how pillar-like he stood in his long black
mourner’s cloak under the weight of the coffin at the churchyard
gate, while all the other bearers, his obvious juniors, shifted and
sweated. Nor did he blubber either like the Commander, whose
weakness, considering how often she had been adjured to be
“spunky,” and not—now that she was “grown up”—to cry,
was as disconcerting as the double existence of his wife in the
coffin and the empyrean. However, Dap grew “good” again
when the thrilling if still more disconcerting episode of lowering his
Susannah as far as possible from the skies and banking her safely
against ascent, was over; and—Daniel Quarles having gone
vaguely roving over the churchyard—the widower led her
stealthily in his absence to a stone behind the ruined tower—in
the “unconsecrated” or Dissenting area—and read to her
the inscription, following it for her confirmation with his black-gloved
forefinger:
 
Here Lies Roger Boldero
After Many Stormy Voyages
Safely Neaped in Christ.
 
He arrested himself suddenly and whisked her round the tower.
“But we didn’t read it all,” she protested.
“Oh, it only says: ‘And also Emma Boldero, Wife of the
Above.’ But don’t tell your grandfather.”
The child wondered why she was to keep Emma’s relationship
to the Above a secret—she had already gathered from her
grandfather that he knew it—and she was distressed as well as
puzzled at the strange quarrel that broke out in the homeward
coach.
“It ain’t at all a proper word,” said Daniel Quarles. “You
might as well put ‘carted to Christ’ on mine.”
“That’ll be your affair,” persisted the widower, “but this
ain’t. And how you came to see it gets over me.”
The Gaffer flushed uneasily. “Oi’ve got two eyes, I suppose,”
he jerked.
The naval veteran glared glassily. “Them that pay the
piper call the tune,” he retorted defensively. “Besides,” he
added more gently, “Emma always said she’d have it somehow
on her tombstone.”
“Emma was a silly.”
“Hush!” Dap again indicated the child with his glassy eye,
now trickling without the other as in half-mourning.
“Oi won’t hush it up. That’s got to goo. The mason’s got
to cut another for me. Who arxed you to pay pipers?”
“Such a handsome stone to be torn up! It’s a desecration,
it’s unlawful.”
“Unlawful? Whose darter is she, mine or yourn?”
“Not yours. You cut her off.”
“She cut me off. And ef poor Pegs and you had done your
duty by my gal, he’d ha’ never crossed your doorstep.”
“He’d ha’ met her on the sea-wall. I couldn’t help his
beholding her looks, any more than you could help having a
handsome daughter—or for the matter of that, a handsome
sister.” His handkerchief came out again.
“Oi’m not denying their looks—a man with half an eye could
see that. ’Tis just the handsome gals as seems to throw theirselves
away,” he added musingly.
“Maybe they are unhappy at home,” suggested the widower,
with equal philosophic aloofness.
“Or in the housen they stays at,” assented the Gaffer. “But
let bygones by bygones. It may be the Lord dumped him down
for our good. All Oi say is, that word’s got to goo. A Churchman
may not see the blasphemy, but think o’ what John Wesley
would ha’ said to it.”
“He’d ha’ said ’twas a wicked extravagance to waste such a
fine stone.”
“The mason’ll take it back. Happen there’ll be another
Roger Boldero dead and neaped some day.”
“Very likely,” sneered the veteran. “And also an Emma,
Wife of the Above.”
“Hush!” The little maid nudged him, wondering he should
forget his own monition.
“That has more sense than you!” cried the Gaffer in high
glee. “Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings!” And
drawing the astonished Jinny to his bristly beard, he kissed her
lips with a hearty smack.
Despite these half-understood discords, Jinny was very sorry
to leave the stony-eyed veteran and the motley waterside.
“Sometimes,” she confided to the more sympathetic swivel
eye, as her grandfather was harnessing Methusalem for their
return, “I wish I had never come to earth at all.”
Again Dap was startled by her simplicity—had not Daniel been
telling him what a useful little body she was in the business?
“But then you’d never have had your grandfather—or me,”
he said, stroking her cheek.
“I should have had God—and my angel mother!”
“Noa, arter she run away with her Boldero Oi’d never cross
her doorstep, never,” confessed the old carrier, picking up the
story later, as she rode beside him on their day’s work. He
was getting so old now that he preferred to talk of twenty rather
than of two years before, and the veneer of book-education
which his unexpected inheritance of the business had necessitated
had fallen away, and he was speaking more and more in the
idioms of his illiterate youth, curiously tempered at times by
the magnificent English of his Bible.
“But that was wicked!” said Jinny decisively. She felt it
wrong indeed that a father should thus cut off his daughter, but
to have done this when that daughter was an angel (even if only
in the making), still more when that daughter was her own
mother, seemed to her confused consciousness the climax of
iniquity.
“Wicked! The contrairy! Oi’d taken my Bible oath never
to set foot over her doorstep. So Oi dedn’t have no chance, you
see.”
Jinny was silenced. She herself had succumbed to an oath,
and that indeed on a less awful book.
“Arter she had lost two childer,” he went on, “and the third
got measles, she sent a man on hossback to beg me to take off
the spell. Thought, d’ye see, dearie, that for her frowardness
and disobedience Oi’d laid a curse on ’em all. Like one of our
Methody preachers, the chap seemed, with all the texts to his
tongue’s tip, and pleaded that wunnerful he ’most made me
believe Oi did have the evil eye. But though of course Oi
hadn’t no more to do wi’ the deaths of your little brothers and
sisters than a babe unborn—or you yourself, for the matter o’
that, as was a babe unborn—Oi couldn’t break my oath and
goo and pretend to cure the wean, and so when the measles
turned to pneumonia and it died, she got woundily distracted,
and writ me two sheets sayin’ as Oi was a child-murderer. That
didn’t worrit me no more than the child’s death, seein’ as the
Lord does everything for the best, though Oi had to pay double
on the letter. But one fine arternoon the preachin’ chap comes
again and says she’d been layin’ paralysed-like for a month and
wouldn’t Oi come and forgive her afore she kicked the bucket!”
“Oh, Gran’fer!” Jinny protested.
“Oi’m givin’ you his words,” said the Gaffer defensively.
“At least that was the meanin’, though ’haps he put it different,
me not havin’ his gift o’ the gab. But bein’ never a man to
nuss rancour, when folks own up, Oi said that even ef Oi could
forgive my darter, never could Oi enter a house harbourin’ that
rascal Boldero——”
“Oh, Gran’fer!” she protested again.
“There’s no call to bristle up—he wasn’t your father yet.
‘But Boldero ain’t at home, he’s off on a jarney,’ says the chap.
‘D’ye swear that?’ says Oi. ‘By God, Oi will,’ says he. ‘Then
od rabbet, Oi’ll goo,’ says Oi.”
“But,” urged Jinny, “if you had taken your oath——”
“You wait till Oi’ve broke it! Oi knew ’twould be dead o’
night by the time Oi got to Brandy Hole Crick and Oi made him
swear too he wouldn’t let on to a soul, partic’ler to that rascal
Boldero or my sister Pegs and her cock-eyed son of a cocked hat;
and off we scuttles in a twinklin’, him on his hoss and me on
mine——”
“Methusalem?”
“Noa, Jezebel. Methusalem and you wasn’t born yet!”
“Were we both in heaven, then?”
“Hosses don’t come from heaven.”
“From where then?”
“From stables o’ course. And you should see them two
animals gallopin’ like hell. ’Twas a race for the Crick. We
went down this wery road like fleck and turned off by the
smithy——”
“And who won?” asked Jinny breathlessly.
“He hadn’t a chance, his hoss bein’ that winded already, and
him a heavyweight; Oi had the best part of an hour with your
mother afore he crossed the doorstep.”
“But how could you break your Bible oath?” persisted Jinny.
He chuckled. “Oi dedn’t cross her doorstep. Oi’d sworn not
to, and a Quarles never breaks even his plain word, bein’ a forthright
family. ’Twas gettin’ on to bull’s-noon and like pitch, but
Oi could see her bedroom above by the light in it, and up Oi
climbs on Jezebel’s back and lifted myself up by the sill and got
my knee acrost it and pushed open the casement. Lord, how
she screamed! Up she flew from her dyin’-bed—no more
paralysis or sich-like maggots and molligrubs Oi warrant you!”
And his chuckle broadened into a hearty laugh.
Jinny was strangely relieved. “Then she didn’t die!”
“How could she die, silly, when you wasn’t there yet? Od
rabbet, wasn’t your feyther flabbergasted to see her up and
bobbish and me holdin’ her hand!”
“My father! But he was on a journey!”
“Yes, to me, the great ole sinner. You ain’t guessed ’twas
him with the gift o’ the gab? But no more did Daniel Quarles,
never conceivin’ a sailor on hossback and him swelled in the
stomach with prodigal livin’ since the day he diddled Pegs’s
husband and tried to diddle me out o’ my darter. But Oi’ll do
him the justice to say he never did blab to the Daps about my
comin’—and no more dedn’t your mother.”
Jinny’s hand sought her grandfather’s, though through the
whip-handle in his she could only secure a finger. “But why
should you hide your goodness, Gran’fer?”
“ ’Twasn’t no goodness, only nat’ral, Emma bein’ punished
and chastised enough from on high. Why, if Pegs and her false-eyed
mannikin’d a-got wind as we’d made it up, Emma and me
and Roger, they’d ha’ come to think they was in the right arter
all, lettin’ Emma be kidnapped by a furriner. And that ’ud ha’
been the last straw. As ill luck would have it Dap come knockin’
there that wery dead o’ night, he havin’ just come home from a
trip and heard from Pegs as her niece was dyin’. Oi shan’t
soon forgit the start Oi got at that knockin’, all on us settin’ so
hearty at supper, and Emma in her scarlet dressin’-gownd, smart
as a carrot. Noigh quackled Oi was, with the brandy gooin’ the
wrong way. Your feyther he goes to the door with his face full
o’ lobster and sputters through the crack as they’d got a new
doctor who was operatin’ on her and wery ’opeful.” He chuckled
again. “And Oi count ’twas a better doctor than any in Brandy
Hole Crick, for wery soon there was a new baby—though that
died too, Oi’m thankful to say!”
“You aren’t!” The little listener loosed his finger.
“Yes, Oi am, dearie.” He cracked his whip. “Otherwise
wouldn’t Pegs ha’ gone to her grave believin’ it was my onforgiveness
laid a spell on the tothers? That’s what womenkind
be. Same as when the Faith Healers got hold of her. Arter
you was oiled and prayed over, they said ’twas want o’ faith
had killed all the tothers.”
“Was I oiled and prayed over?”
“Well, you see when you come, poor Emma felt elders and
oils was all there was left to try—there’s a rare lot of you Peculiars
down them parts and all the way to Southend, and they’d been
gettin’ round her like gulls round the plough—so the instant you
started barkin’——”
“Barking?” gasped the little girl.
“You had the croup—so she turned Peculiar,” he explained.
“Like you,” he added reproachfully. “And a wery dangerous
thing to do, bein’ as you might ha’ died like the tothers. Did,
she’d ha’ been had up for child-murder—what she accused
me of.”
“And why weren’t the doctors had up, that didn’t save all
my little brothers and sisters?” asked Jinny.
“That’s just how your mother used to argufy,” he said angrily,
flicking at poor Methusalem. “Turnin’ everything topsy-tivvy,
Oi says. And what was the result? Two years arter you was
prayed and oiled out o’ croup, she was took herself with smallpox
and wouldn’t see a soul except elders and deacons and sich-like
truck. Oi will say for your father though, that he was allus
firm with her; naught she could say could turn him from his
Wesleyan principles, and when he caught her smallpox he had
the doctor in like blazes and took all the medicine he could lay
hands on. But Emma would stick to her own way—though she
died of it, poor thing.”
“But didn’t you tell me father died the same day as my angel
mother?”
“Ain’t that why Oi come for you in my cart, bein’ as the
creditors sold up everythin’ except the infected beddin’?”
“I know, Gran’fer,” she interrupted. “But then didn’t
father die of his way just as much as mother of hers?”
“That’s a nat’ral death when you die with a doctor,” he
maintained.
“And were you there when they died?” said the child after
a mournful pause.
His brow clouded obstinately. “How could Oi be, dearie,
bein’ as Oi’d taken my Bible oath?”
“You could ha’ gone through the window?”
“With folks lookin’ on and nusses about, as ’ud ha’ thought
me loony. Why, ’twas impossible for me even to goo to the
funeral.”
“Oh, Gran’fer!”
He looked fiercer, and poor Methusalem got another flick.
“Wouldn’t Pegs be there, she havin’ her nat’ral feelin’? Could
Oi let her think Oi’d come ’cos Oi was sorry Oi hadn’t made
it up with my darter afore she died? Nay, that ’ud a-been
right-down deceit, bein’ as there wasn’t no ground for remorse.
Happen he’d a-been at the churchyard too with his fish-eye—dedn’t
you see the stone he put up, drat his imperence, as ef
Emma and Roger was aught of hisn—mebbe he’d a-preached to
me as Oi ought to ha’ forgiven my darter time she was still alive.
’Twas on the cards he’d say Oi’d broken your mother’s heart, the
blinkin’-fool, he not knowin’ ’twas me as raised her from the
dead and had her goffling lobster with your feyther in a scarlet
dressin’-gownd time he was knockin’ at her door to make
inquirations——”
“Yes, I’ve heard about that,” she interrupted.
“Who told you?” he said suspiciously. “There was only
three of us inside the door and two’s dead.”
“You told me.”
“Me! Oi never told a soul—Oi’ll take my Bible oath.”
“You told me just a minute ago.”
“Ah!” He was appeased. “That may be. But Oi never
told you afore—Oi’ll take my oath.”
“No, never before, Gran’fer.”
There was a pause of peace.
Jinny was afraid to stir up the subject for weeks. But her
little brain had been busy with the story, and finally taking
advantage of a not unfriendly reference to Roger Boldero, she
asked: “And was that the last time you saw father, when he
was eating lobster with my angel mother in the dead of night?”
“Nay, nay, Oi seen lots of ’em both, afore Oi was shet out
agen by molloncholy circumstances.”
“Ah!” Jinny brightened up. “And did you always go in
by the window?”
“ ’Twasn’t in the house: ’twas on board the Tommy Devil.
And that ain’t got no doorstep.” He laughed gleefully.
“Then did you go in by the porthole?” asked Jinny, smiling.
“Lord, missie, wherever did ye get that word? Ah, Oi mind
me now—you was aboard the Watch Wessel the time we buried
poor Pegs. No, dearie, Oi just shinned up the ladder, loight as
a bird with that liddle ole oath off my showlders. But Pegs and
her one-eyed fool of a pardner never suspicioned naught, for Oi
never would set foot on the Tommy Devil except she was layin’
up in coves and cricks where the Gov’ment turned its glass eye—he,
he, he! Not that Oi had much stomach for his etarnal
brandy—you can’t take a satisfactory swig o’ that and keep
your sea-legs—but your feyther he kept a cask o’ beer special
for me, and Emma she ’ad allus cold roasts and kickshaws to be
washed down with it. Oi reckon Oi was on board with your
parents nigh once a month.”
“Then what a pity they didn’t invite you on board years
before!”
“Ay, ’twas a pity. Only none of us ’ad never thought o’ that
way out.”
“Or that way in,” added Jinny excitedly. “Why, you might
have gone to my mother the day after your oath!”
The Gaffer sighed. “Mebbe that ’ud only ha’ ruinated your
folks quicker. For Oi ain’t been on the lugger a dozen times afore
she went down and your feyther was picked up by the revenue
cutter, bein’ the onny toime he was took at sea—he, he, he!
Thussins there wasn’t no place to meet in, and to goo over Emma’s
window-sill was too risky, for Pegs and her friends was allus spyin’
around, and there wasn’t a sharper eye in the Gov’ment than
that dirty little Dap’s—when he was off duty.”
“But why didn’t they come to see you at Blackwater Hall?”
“Nay, they couldn’t do that. That was in my oath too.
Never shall they cross my doorstep, neither—Oi’d sworn it on
the Book!”
“But why didn’t they come in through our window? There’s
hardly ever anybody on the common?”
“We never thought o’ that, neither.” He heaved a deeper
sigh. “Ay, ’twas a pity,” he repeated.
That night Jinny caught his eye resting more than once on
the vases of dried grass before their casement.
“He was a bonkka man, your feyther,” he observed at last.
“Wery big-built, and it’s a middlin’ weeny window.”
Though Jinny winced at her grandfather’s attacks on the
Peculiar Faith of her angel mother, she grew in time to understand
the odd magnanimity he had evinced in letting her go to
Sunday-school with the Flynt family and pick up the doctrine.
That her one surviving child should be brought up of the sect
that had saved it, was, it transpired, poor Emma’s dying request,
as conveyed by his sister Susannah Dap to the unforgiving
father, whose oath never to cross his daughter’s doorstep still
held when he drew up Methusalem at it after the double funeral,
and found the house empty even of Jinny.
“ ‘Child-stealin’, that’s what it is,’ Oi told Pegs when Oi boarded
the Watch Wessel,” he recounted once to his granddaughter in
the cart. “ ‘Ain’t you got enough o’ your own?’ says Oi. ‘’Twas
through your havin’ one too many that Jinny’s here at all,’ Oi
says. ‘Then,’ says she, sharp as a needle, ‘the more reason she’s
mine. You cut off her mother,’ says she, ‘and now, Daniel,
Jinny cuts you off.’ ‘Not so fast, sister,’ says Oi. ‘Whatever
my conduct to Emma—and folks with stone eyes don’t allus see
through stone walls—the poor little brat haven’t enough sense
to cut me off, and Oi don’t cut her off, for Oi ain’t got to wisit
sins to the fourth generation, not bein’ the Almighty, thank the
Lord. That’s my lawful property, Pegs,’ Oi says, ‘and same as
you don’t hand her over, Oi’ll summons you and carry off two o’
yourn in my cart—and what’s more Oi’ll ill-treat ’em cruel and
hide ’em twice a day with my whip.’ ”
“You didn’t mean it,” said Jinny.
“Dedn’t Oi, though?”
“But they were your nephews and nieces!”
“The more right to wallop ’em. You should ha’ seen Pegs
climb down. She know’d well as Oi never broke my word, she
bein’ o’ the same forthright family. Right up and down, Jo
Perry, as the sayin’ goos. Do to others as they’d like to do to
you—that’s good Christian gospel. Pegs she went as pale as a
white butterfly and hiked you out on deck in your little yaller
frock lookin’ as pritty as a gay. Lord, Oi reckonized you on the
nail, though Oi’d never clapped eyes on you afore.”
“You’d never seen me before?” cried Jinny, amazed.
“How could Oi see you—you came arter the Tommy Devil
was at the bottom, and your feyther never got the dubs from the
insurance company, bein’ a flaw in the articles as swallered up
all the rest of his cash in the lawsuit. But you’d got his ways
and your mother’s looks”—Jinny flushed with pleasure—“and
’steddy cuttin’ me off, you—ha, ha, ha!—made straight for my
great ole beard and pulled out a great ole fistful.”
“Ought I to have cut it off?” laughed Jinny happily.
“ ‘D’ye see that, Pegs,’ says Oi, ‘blood’s thicker than
water. Will you come along o’ your gran’fer, liddle maid?’ says
Oi.”
“And what did I say?” asked Jinny breathlessly.
“You dedn’t say naught—you bust into tears, bein’ as you
thought Oi was the auctioneerer and you’d been sold with everything
else, poor liddle ole orphan, and then Pegs catches hold o’
you and says you was clinging to her. But Oi soon stopped that
lob-loll, for Oi holds you over the rail and shows you Methusalem
all prancin’ in his pride, and ‘Won’t you go with your gran’fer’s
hoss, liddle maid?’ says Oi.”
“And what did I say then?”
“You dedn’t say naught, but in a twinklin’ you jumps
out o’ Susannah’s arms, scrambles down the accommodation
ladder, and was rubbin’ noses with Methusalem. And Oi
count his was as damp as yourn, bein’ as he’d come without
a stop.”
“Dear old Methusalem!” And nothing would content Jinny
but she must jump down and rub noses with him now, and again
both noses were damp. But as Methusalem had seized the
opportunity to come to a standstill, and Jinny, lost in shadowy
memories, continued the caress ten seconds too long, the old
carrier declared with sudden querulousness that he hadn’t got
time for foolishness, and that since he had burdened himself
with Jinny his business had gone “to rack and ruination.”
“Peculiar, Pegs warned me, Oi’d have to bring you up,” he
added, as Jinny hastily clambered back to his side. “And
Peculiar’s the word for your gooin’s on. Not that Methusalem’s
got more sense nor you. Oi count ef there was churches for
cattle, he’d a-stoyled hisself Brother Methusalem and kicked
over his drench.”
It was the Gaffer’s instinctive conviction that faith went with
the father. In thus yielding to Emma’s dying breath he may,
apart from the pressure of death-bed wishes, have found vent for
a lingering resentment against the seductive Boldero. Or was
it that he had a lurking apprehension that the one child of
Emma’s which had at least survived prayer, might really be a
testimony to the teaching, and as such entitled to share it? Jinny
at any rate had absolute faith in the doctrine. It rested on the
fifth chapter of James as clearly as the big Bible containing that
chapter rested on the chest of drawers. Once indeed when the
Gaffer was unbearably mocking, she had been goaded to read
him the basal verses:
“Is any sick among you? let him call for the elders of the
church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in
the name of the Lord:
“And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up: and if he have committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him.”
But the Gaffer had not collapsed as she expected. It only meant
a spiritual saving, in case he died, Daniel Quarles maintained,
unruffled: otherwise why speak of his sins being forgiven?
Moreover it didn’t say you couldn’t have a doctor, too.
Crestfallen, the child wept in a corner and did not recover her
spirits till at Sunday-school Elder Mawhood had supplied her
for the first part of the Gaffer’s contention with Mark xvi. 18:
“They shall lay hands on the sick and they shall recover”;
while Martha, who was still at that date a Peculiar, comforted
and equipped her against the second part with Asa, King
of Judah, who (II Chronicles xvi) was diseased in his feet:
“yet sought not to the Lord but to the physicians.” The
Lord’s wishes in the matter were thus seen to be clearly indicated.
“And the Lord’s the same now as then, isn’t He?”
Martha wound up crushingly. “You ask your grandfather
that.”
The courage to launch this counter-attack never came to her,
however, and henceforward she and her grandfather lived in that
kindly toleration of each other’s folly which comes from holding
the proofs of it, yet letting sleeping dogmas lie. What after all
was the old man’s obduracy, Jinny told herself, but part of the
perverseness and obstinacy of age? The fact that she now
never needed either doctors or elders saved her from any personal
problem. Such waverings as she had felt at fifteen were not
towards Wesleyanism, but towards Martha’s mushroom doctrine.
The texts of this convert to the latest thing in creeds were certainly
staggering, and her scorn for the still unconverted, sublime.
“We don’t take some bits o’ the Word and leave others.” That
was an argument not easy to answer, and the bits now exhumed
in support of Christadelphianism by the tireless discoverer of
King Asa were ever accumulating. Fortunately Jinny was far
too busy for religious discussions or doubts, and the “angel
mother,” softly hovering, made a restful background for the one
true Faith.
And a sensational episode in the history of the local Brethren
came to strengthen the sect as well as to add to the number of
Jinny’s homes: came too, at the very crisis when the impossibility
of carrying the Carrier with her through the coming winter
threatened to leave her stranded alone at “The Black Sheep”
during the midday rest at Chipstone. It would have been easy
enough in summer to sit in her cart in the courtyard munching
her bread and cheese, while Methusalem was lost in his nosebag,
and clients were coming with commissions, but the parcel-shed
had no stove, and to wait in the bar or taproom or even the
parlour—all alike masculine haunts where one could hardly
dump the “scarecrow” or swain-chaser beside one—was not a
pleasant prospect.
Jinny’s and the Brotherhood’s good fortune began—such are
the ways of Providence—with the death of the landlord.
Mother Gander—so everybody called Jeff Gander’s buxom
spouse—had fought like a lioness to save him. “Not a doctor
for miles around,” as the paralysed old Bundock put it triumphantly
from his bed-of-all-news, “but she carted him over, and
set ’em all consulting and quarrelling. There was two from
London, one of ’em a bart, and all wasted. Charlie the potboy,
as he was then, feelingly told my boy, the postman, that he
could ha’ set up a public-house with the fees. Not that I approve
o’ public-houses, but leastways they give you more waluable
drinks than doctors does. And when poor Jeff was gone, and
Mother Gander was carrying on like crazy, comes the Parson and
tells her ’tis the Lord’s will.
“ ‘Then if it’s the Lord’s will,’ says she, like lightning, for she
was always quick in the uptake, ‘why do you run down the
Peculiars as just begs the Lord to alter His will, instead o’ throwing
their hard-earned gold to the doctors?’ That was the way
her eyes opened to the Truth, and she learnt how to save her
soul as well as her money.”
The Peculiars, they often lamented, were “not strong enough”
in Chipstone: they looked yearningly “over the water”—to
Rochford where the great Banyard himself was prophesying; or
to Woodham where no less than five hundred Brethren and Sisters
fevered themselves in a hall too small for the throngs that sought
admission. But their own meetings, though, if we may trust Caleb,
“noice things were brought out,” were numerically disheartening.
The capture of “The Black Sheep”—a hostelry to which all social
roads radiated—was thus an event of considerable importance.
Nevertheless the dismay of the Congregationalists, of whose
community Mother Gander was a fallen pillar, was not counter-poised
in jubilation by the Brethren. For if a stronghold had
been captured, the devil had not been dispossessed. Mother
Gander doffed her gold chain, but Sister Gander gave no sign of
emptying her liquor into the gutters, and to be proud of a convert
against whose establishment you have to admonish one
another is not simple. The Peculiars managed it, however, after
some heart-searching. It was true old Bundock had been wont
to make great play with Banyard’s declaration—universally
admired as a gem of humour—“If you want to get me to a
public-house, you’ll have to take a horse and hook me.” But
after all, Elder Mawhood pointed out, “The Black Sheep” was
far more than a public-house: as the headquarters for the mail-coach
it was part of the constitution of the country, and it was
better for the farmers to eat their ordinary under a God-fearing
roof—even if they would drink with it—than for the profits of
their custom to go to a rival house which would contribute no
farthing to the Brethren’s treasury. It was Brother Flynt,
however, who supplied the finest soothing-powder. “Oi used to
condemn myself,” he said, “but ’twasn’t no good. You must
drink when you’re harvestin’. Don’t, you’ll be drippin’ as you
goo.” If he did not drink now that his harvesting days were
over, that did not prove other drinkers were wicked. You had
to consider circumstances. And playing the Sancho Panza still
more unexpectedly, he hinted that there was such a thing as
over-zeal. “They used to call me a Banyard as a revilin’ word,
them as made fun of us, but to tell the truth Oi’ve never got out
o’ my warm bed in the middle o’ the noight to pray as he exhorted—leastways,
not in winter. We’ve got to be thankful for Sister
Gander, and not expect her to goo all the way at the start. She
don’t want to lose her business as well as her husband.”
But it appeared that Mother Gander did not want to go
without a husband either. She suddenly, and before her year
of mourning was up, married Charley Mott, the aforesaid potboy,
not half her age, and this was a fresh upset for the Brethren,
modified only by the conversion of Charley. The Congregationalists
took the opportunity to give the couple “rough music,”
and the whole neighbourhood joined in with kettles and pokers.
Brother Bundock from his omniscient bed at first proclaimed the
scandal as a divine chastisement on his Brethren for having
failed to “admonish” her to give up purveying “beer and
’bacca”—he himself would have dared it, he declared without
fear of contradiction, had he only had his legs—but finally, when
the storm blew over, he would relate with gusto how she had
weathered it.
“What with hating us and hating her marriage and hating the
new landlord with his jackanip’s airs, they quit her, nearly all
her customers, and them as was faithful looked askance at her
between the drinks. So she offs with her silks and on with her
apron and up with her sleeves, and back to the kitchen! She’d
been poor Jeff’s cook, you know, in the long, long ago, and ’twas
her steak and kidney puddens and her gravies and sauces that
he married, and now she was back at the old game. Whether
’twas partly to escape the sour looks that she burrowed in her
kitchen or whether the whole thing was female artfulness I don’t
pretend to say, but in two months she’d cooked ’em all back
again. Don’t come in good time, you couldn’t get a chair at
the ordinary for all the tips at Chipstone, and my boy, the
postman, he told me he hears everybody joking over the rhubarb
tart and saying as the Lord’s will is best. And she never come
out o’ that kitchen till she’d cooked it all down.”
It was during the dark interval that Jinny and Sister Mott
alias Mother Gander were first drawn together, the girl being
summoned to the kitchen to receive instructions for such purchases
from local tradesmen as the lady-hermit found indispensable
yet dreaded to make in person. The fact that the little
carrier was of the despised sect cemented the relationship.
Jinny passed her midday respite in the warm kitchen, even
sharing the cook’s meal. And when at last Sister Mott resumed
her blue silk bodice and faced her tradesmen and her customers,
new and old, the run of the kitchen and the freedom of the joint
remained gratuitous to the lucky Jinny. Here under the great
bacon-hung oak beams of the ancient apartment, before a huge
fire mirroring itself rosily in the copper pans and skillets, she
could sit thawing her toes beside the clanking smokejack, while
the wind howled through the arch of the sleety courtyard.
WILL ON HIS WAY
Permit me of these unknown lands t’inquire,
  Lands never till’d, where thou hast wandering been,
  And all the marvels thou hast heard and seen:
Do tell me something of the miseries felt
In climes where travellers freeze, and where they melt.
Crabbe, “Tales of the Hall.”
The coach from railhead to Chipstone was an hour and a half
late, and not all the flourish of its horn as it thundered into the
courtyard of “The Black Sheep” could disguise the fact. Not
that it was the fault of the coach: it had waited for the mail
train, and this, for those parts, parvenu monster had found an
obstruction on the line, and was helpless to go round it, as the
driver and the guard complacently pointed out. Their glory
and their tips were shrunk like their circuit—unchanged along
the short route, they could no longer prod the slumbering
traveller with insinuatory farewells: they knew themselves,
these Chipstone worthies, a last lingering out-of-the-way survival
of the old order, doomed like the broad coaching road and the
old hostelries to decay; already they had seen the horned guard
decline in places to the omnibus cad, even as the ancient
“shooter” of highwaymen had sunk to the key-bugler; yet
they preserved the grand manner before the revolution that was
deposing them—the Tom Pratt and Dick Burrage of a generation
of travellers—and while dispensing their conversation like
decorations and drinking your health as a concession, they
retailed with gloomy satisfaction every railway collision and
holocaust, as though coaches never overturned, and declared the
English breed of horses would be ruined. And when certain lines
set up third-class carriages they denounced the cruelty of packing
the poor in roofless, seatless trucks, as though they themselves
had never brought into port frost-bitten peers or dames sodden
through their oilskin umbrellas.
But to-day “Powerful warrum” was the grumble of the
passengers, even of those on the roof, the majority being—thus
early in May—still smothered in box-coats; as for the unfortunates
compressed inside, who had likewise not yet cast a clout,
and had similarly mistrusted the sunshiny spell with which that
pouring April had ended, they mopped their brows and cursed
the fickle British climate. But though the sun had suddenly
become hot enough to sour milk, it could not sour the temper of
the bronzed young man—his face nigh as ruddy as his hair—who
sat on the box-seat and conversed with Tom Pratt almost
as an equal. Even the long delay on the line had left him
unruffled, thanks largely to the blue-eyed girl in the train who
before his clean-shaven cosmopolitan air had shown signs of
tenderness, and whose address his purse now held—more precious
than a fiver. Verily a pleasant change after the Eveless back-blocks
of Canada.
And the idea of calling this “warrum”! He smiled to think
of the hells he had known—Montreal with mosquitoes, New York
in a damp heat. Why, this couldn’t even melt a man’s collar.
And how refreshing was the trimness of the Essex countryside—the
comfortable air of immemorial cultivation—after the giant
untidiness of the New World. How soothing these long, green,
white-sprinkled hedgerows with their ancient elms, this old,
historic highway with thatch and tile, steeple and tower, after
the corduroy roads of round logs or the muddy, dusty, sandy
tracks. How adorable these creeper-covered cottages after log-cabins
in backwoods; rotting floors on rotten sleepers and the
mud paste fallen out of the walls. He forgot that it was precisely
this that he had fled from nearly a decade ago—this dead,
walled-in life, so petty and pietistic—and he congratulated
himself afresh on the wisdom of that abrupt resolution to sell his
clearing to a second-hand pioneer and to farm at home with the
profits.
His clothes alone would have kept him in good humour. Not
only were the heavier in what he had learned to call his trunk,
but those on his back were the first he had ever had made to
measure. And they were made too—like the neckcloth and
shawl and fal-lals he was bringing to his parents “from America”—by
the world-famous firm of “Moses & Son” (opposite Aldgate
Church), whose imposingness was enhanced in his eyes by
finding it—on the Saturday he first hied thither—haughtily
aloof: a blank wilderness of shutters in a roaring world, with
no gleam through their chinks from the seven hundred gas-burners.
But he had finally stormed the “Private Hall,”
toiling—as invited by rhyme—up “the stairs of solid oak,” and
had gained the heights “where orders were bespoke,” and there—in
that rich-carpeted “showroom with the giant chandelier,”
in a setting of Corinthian columns, sculptured panels, and
arabesque ceilings—dark enchanters with tape-measures like
serpents over their shoulders had made obeisance to him and
enfolded him with their coils. Even his billycock hat verified
the bardic boast:
There’s not another Hat-mart in the town
Which casts such lustre on the human crown.
Left to himself he would have liked a wideawake, but that
arbiter elegantiarum, the small boy, he was warned, had not quite
acquiesced in that. If it was not a coat of many buttons that
he now sported, it was scrimp enough to show off the fine lines
of his figure; for the movement towards ample waistcoats and
wide trousers was not yet encouraged by his Aldgate mentors,
and pockets on the hips had been conceded him with reluctance.
In his large American trunk reposed a still grander suit of Sunday
sable, though he had shied at a frock coat, and was glad to learn
from these hierophants of the mode that morning jackets were
no longer confined to the stable-yard or the barrack-room, but
were permissible even in the country house—and there was no
question but Frog Farm was that. He had already worn his
blacks once, on his visit to the Great Exhibition, and they made,
he found, a distinct difference to the policemen in top-hats
whose guidance he sought in the labyrinths of the metropolis.
The delay in this visit to the Exhibition—the goal of his
journey to London—had turned out an advantage, he felt, giving
him time for these measured elegancies. If he had been
unable to be in at the opening, as he had grandly designed in
Canada when ignorant that this involved guineas and season-tickets,
he had managed to squeeze for a glimpse of the Queen
outside if not inside the Park, and the first five-shilling day—after
all, only the fourth—was grandeur enough for a whilom
ploughboy and cabin-boy. Although nine ten-pound notes made
a warm waistcoat-lining, he was not under the illusion that he
had returned with more than a competence.
One would have thought London itself a Greater Exhibition
to a young man who had never seen it before: especially London
at carnival with its colossal crowds swollen by visitors from all
countries in all complexions and costumes: London with its
numberless gay ’buses (plying mostly to Hyde Park), its swifter
gliding cabriolets of the new pattern invented by Mr. Hansom,
and the more stolid procession of four-wheeled clarences, not to
mention the fashionable and civic carriages with the scarlet-and-gold
pomp of flunkeys and outriders: London with its countless
curious street-criers, costermongers, ballad-mongers, watercress
sellers, muffin and hot-pie men, birdcage dealers, tract-peddling
Lascars in white robes, and vendors of everything from corn-salves
to speeches on the scaffold; blowsy, rowdy London that
turned into a dream-city when those strange figures with rods
glided through the twilight, flecking the long, grey streets with
points of fire.
But though Will Flynt was not insensitive to these fascinating
phenomena, and even rode about recklessly in the cabriolets at
eightpence a mile, yet London had not the spell to hold him.
Only the Great Exhibition had drawn him across the Atlantic.
While awaiting impatiently for the five-shilling day, he duly did
the Tower and the Zoo (sixpence extra for Mr. Gould’s humming-birds
in the twenty-five glass cases), paid twopence to go into
St. Paul’s, and a shilling to see the Great Globe in Leicester
Square, patronized Phelps at Sadler’s Wells, and the horses at
Astley’s, had a peep at Vauxhall, enjoyed “Rush, the Norwich
Murderer,” at Madame Tussaud’s, and submitted the boots these
operations begrimed to the red-coated shoeblacks of the Ragged
Schools—London’s new word in philanthropy. But though he
liked the quarter in which his quaint galleried hotel, “The
Flower Pot,” was situated, with the Spitalfields Market and the
tall old houses of the silk-weavers, whose vast casements with
their little panes rose story on story, he was no sooner through
with the visit to the Exhibition than without a day’s delay—as
promised in that letter to Martha—he took train and coach to
Little Bradmarsh.
Beholding him thus on the County Flyer hurrying towards
Frog Farm, after only a single visit to the stupendous spectacle,
one may suspect that he did not know his own heart as well as
he imagined. But he himself had no doubt of the magnet he
obeyed, and he had found on his boat not a few rich Canadians—and
the Dominion already boasted four thousand carriage-folk—who
confessed to have yielded to the same irresistible attraction.
There was indeed little else talked of on the voyage: even the
wonders of the boat itself—a new Yankee iron and screw steamer
of nearly two thousand tons and quite five hundred horse-power
that brought them to Liverpool in eleven days from Halifax,
and had spittoons and wedding-berths like the Yankee river-steamers,
and to see which the Liverpudlians had flocked with
their sixpences—paling before the world-marvel awaiting them
in London.
And London itself was talking of it no less: for once London
was staggered. And if London was thus shaken, how much
more the provinces and the world at large? Did not indeed the
flags of all nations wave over the great glass building, whose
mere material would have been enough to set the globe agog,
even if it had not contained contributions from every corner of
civilization except Germany, which in that antediluvian age
figured in the catalogue only as “The States of the Zollverein.”
What wonder if with all the excursions and alarums and millennial
visions that attended its birth, the Press reeking with
paragraphs, poems, discussions, wrangles, skits, prophecies, and
forebodings, crowds equal to the population of provincial towns
gathered at the Park to watch it rise, and to stare at the endlessly
inrolling vans and the sappers and miners at work in
their uniforms. One M.P.—military and moustachio’d—won the
immortality of the comic prints by fulminating against the
invasion of Freethinking foreigners who would pillage London
and ruin the honour of British womanhood: more sober minds
feared the Chartist mobs and the Red Republicans: even the
Catholics, already flaunting their cardinals and ringing their
unhallowed church bells, would profit by the Continental wave.
The House of Lords resounded with protests and petitions
against the profanation of the Park, and apprehensions as to the
fate of the building erected therein were equally rife: the great
glass roof would be splintered by hailstones, the walls would be
overturned by the wind, the galleries would collapse under the
swarming multitudes, and Anarchism would seize its opportunity
amid the dismantled treasures of the globe. But one unfailing
factor was on the Exhibition’s side: the scheme was attacked
by the Times. And so Paxton’s building rose steadily till the
great day when through an avenue of three-quarters of a million
spectators the Queen and “that Queen’s indefatigable husband”—as
a panegyrist of the period put it—drove to declare it open
to the elect thirty thousand who had already found it so, while
through glittering nave and transept, with their fountains, trees,
flowers, and statues, the “Hallelujah Chorus” thundered from
a thousand voices, two hundred orchestral instruments, and a
dozen giant organs; and the millennial hope welled up in a
grand climax of universal emotion. And hoary grandsires
should hereafter tell—proclaimed the poet of the Great Catalogue—what
in this famous century befell: grey Time should chronicle
the victories gained, since Mercy o’er the world and Justice
reigned:
What time the Crystal Hall sent forth her dove
And signed the League of Universal Love.
But although our Canadian pioneer had thus ample excuse for
the unrest that forbade him to miss this Messianic spectacle, it
was not—even he would have admitted—the Great Exhibition
which had first unsettled his stolid labours. That oscillation
had been communicated some two years earlier, and by a shock
that had set the New World rattling even more noisily than the
Old was shaken by the Great Exhibition. The discovery of gold
in California was a seismic vibration that depopulated Eastern
towns, shot sober lawyers into wagons, sent clergymen flying
along mule-trails, swept timid tradesmen across the foodless and
robber-haunted Rocky Mountains, whirled schoolmasters fifteen
thousand miles round Cape Horn, and dumped them all waist-high
in auriferous mud and shimmering water, to be fed by
Indian squaws. It was under the lure of the Californian legend
that Will had originally looked about for a purchaser of his
cleared acres. But by the time the farm was off his hands, the
glamour of easy gold had faded, and with a sum in his pockets
sufficient for a little respite, life seemed suddenly larger than
lucre, and he found himself possessed by a strange craving not
to be away from the old country in that year of years—the year
of the Great Exhibition.
Chipstone had seemed strangely shrivelled as the County
Flyer tore through it; the High Street unexpectedly narrow
and the great, gorgeous shops, against whose panes he had
flattened his youthful nose, curiously small and drab, with
diminutive sun-blinds; yet the quaint, blistered bulge of the old
timbered houses was fascinatingly as he remembered it, and
when the spirited quartet of tinkling steeds slackened under the
archway crowned by the ironwork sign of “The Black Sheep,”
he saw through a warm dimness that the ancient inn still gave
on the stable-yard with this same Tudor bulge, and that the
courtyard itself was little less rambling than the picture he
carried in his memory. There was the same mass-meeting of
cocks crowing on the same golden dunghill, the same litter of
barrels, boxes, baskets, and parcels of laundry-work, while the
gardens of the whitewashed old cottages backing the black-tarred
stables and cartsheds seemed caught up as incongruously
as ever in the horsey medley. Why, there was the very shed
which had sheltered the farm-wagon the Sunday he was to drive
it to Harwich. And there—yes, actually there on the same
doorstep, under the same hanging ironwork lamp, was Ostler
Joe, the shambling, bottle-nosed hunchback, whose figure—in its
reassurance of stability—struck him as positively beautiful, and
whose head seemed aureoled by the mist. But where was that
more expected face, where was the hair-swathed visage of Caleb
Flynt? Brushing the mist from his eyes, he looked anxiously
round the seething, sun-drenched courtyard. “Hullo, Joey,” he
said at last. “Wouldn’t my dad wait?” It was a pleasant
voice with something of a twang: but the twang was no longer
local.
“Oi dunno your feyther from Adam,” said Joe cheerfully,
mopping his face with his shirt-sleeve.
“Yes, you do—old Mr. Flynt—Frog Farm.”
Joe shook his head—it seemed no longer a saint’s. “Oi never
heerd nobody mention Frog Farm nowadays. It’s a dead place.”
He shambled off on his many tasks with an aliveness that
tightened the contraction Will felt at his heart. His father dead?
“But look here, Joe!” He pursued the factotum. “You
remember me—little Will Flynt?”
“Can’t say as Oi does—moind that box now.”
“It’s my box—and I wrote to dad to meet me with a trap.
Guess he got tired of fooling around.”
“There’s warious traps.” The hunchback waved a busy
hand.
“No—he’s not here. And how am I to get my trunk home?”
“Bradmarsh carrier goos at three—you’re in luck.”
He heaved a parcel now into a driverless tilt-cart, where a
little white dog boisterously mounted guard. “That’s ’er!” he
said. “Take you too if you’re smart.”
“Daniel Quarles!” A fresh wave of reassurance radiated
from that old household word on the familiar tilt. So the
venerable carrier was still plying, how then could the comparatively
juvenile Caleb be extinct? The May Day ribbons not
removed from Daniel’s horse, and making it a snow-white steed
from fairyland, dispelled the last funereal images. Surely had
Caleb Flynt really died, old Quarles would never have left so
lively a topic untapped with Joey.
But here Will’s meditations were agreeably cut short by
another vision from auld lang syne—the laced mob-cap and
blonde kiss-curls of Mother Gander, to whom Dick Burrage was
gloating over the train’s misadventure. There were pouches
under the blue eyes, and no gold chain now heaved with her blue
silk bosom: otherwise she was her old comely self. But fresh
from his grand hotel in Spital Square, Will no longer regarded her
as an awful and aristocratic personage, able to eat meat at every
meal. An easy accost and inquiry about the old Flynts of Frog
Farm brought him soothing information. Lord bless his soul,
people living a healthy life like that never died—unless they took
medicine. She couldn’t say they had been to chapel lately—indeed
she had gathered from the postman that the old wife had
taken up with some New Jerusalem crankiness. “But you’ll
find the Bradmarsh carrier in the parcel-shed—that black one.
You ask her!” And with a wave towards the arch she turned
again to the beaming Dick Burrage.
Will thought the “her” referred to a chambermaid who was
just passing, but he saw no need of such guidance—the parcel-shed
was obvious enough. His mind was occupied with the odd
fact that Mother Gander had apparently become a sister in the
spirit to his own father, while his mother had moved on to another
eccentric doctrine. Ah well, changes were bound to come. Not
everybody could be of the same immutable granite as himself.
He found the parcel-shed deserted save for a young girl who,
busily heaping up parcels into the willing arms of Joey, did not
even look up. Somewhat depressed by the chapel-memories the
landlady had conjured up, he stood a moment, absently watching
the operation, and wondering why the agreeably pretty creature
should be dispatching so many parcels—wedding-cake came into
his mind, though the oddly varying shape of the parcels was not
consistent with the hypothesis. He would willingly have loitered—the
chapel-cloud was dissipating—but the carrier was clearly
not here, and, as the church clock opposite was booming three, he
was afraid old Daniel might be starting off without him, so he
hurried back to the pranked and pawing steed, only to find
himself derided and defied by the little dog, which he now
observed was also adorned with a May Day bow.
And then he remembered he was hungry. The block on the
line had robbed him of his dinner, and he wondered whether to
go off with that grim Gaffer Quarles would be so enjoyable as
walking—after a square meal. No, why should he be thus
whisked off? Why not a leisurely spread at “The Black
Sheep” preceded by another glimpse of the girl in the shed, and
then a long stroll home by the dear old field-paths, through
Plashy Walk and Swash End, dry enough doubtless under this
sun? Besides, his slow old parent might be on the way after
all—there was no certainty the carrier with his compulsory
windings and detours would not miss him. Yes, it would be
kinder to his father to give him another hour or so. “The May
Queen” he murmured to the air, brooding over Methusalem’s
belated ribbons. Yes, they would surely have made her that;
though perhaps the old custom was no longer kept up. True,
she hadn’t the blue eyes or the plumpness of the girl in the train,
and was not stately enough for a queen—though of course you
couldn’t really tell how Victoria looked outside her royal carriage.
But then you couldn’t imagine the blue-eyed minx in a royal
carriage at all: you placed her smiling behind bars, manipulating
beer-handles.
“It’s all right,” Joey startled him by announcing, toppling
his tower of parcels into the cart. “Oi’ve made inquirations.
The old Flynt chap be aloive and kickin’.”
“Oh, thank you.” Will’s last shade of uneasiness vanished. He
slipped a sixpence into Joey’s palm. “Put my box in—I’m not
going myself—say it’s for Frog Farm.” And he jostled back to
the parcel-shed, through the bustle of boxes and jangling of bells,
barging into other carriers from other circuits, stumbling over
dogs that yelped, tangling himself in the whip of a postboy who
was frantically buttoning his waistcoat, and nearly run over by
the great coach just wheeling round. He was more disappointed
than surprised when he at last reached the shed to find it empty,
though far fuller than before of mere people. Still, there was
always dinner.
But dinner was not always.
“No, I’m afraid it’s all gone,” said Mother Gander. She was
blocking the way at the foot of the stairs, where a painted hand
under pendent stag-horns directed you upwards to the “Parlour”—“The
Black Sheep” would have none of your new-fangled
“Coffee Rooms”—and Will Flynt, sniffing up the odours of
beer, sand, tobacco, gin, snuff, and tallow like an ambrosial air,
felt a further elation in the thought of its being now a beckoning
not a monitory hand: to ascend to those unexplored heights,
mysteriously grand to the boy, seemed symbolic of his rise in
life.
“But haven’t you got anything?” His face fell.
“Nothing fit to offer,” said the landlady.
“But I’m hungry—and I’ve got to wait here.”
“You’re not staying for the night?” she queried.
“I may,” he said, to encourage her to produce some food.
“Oh, but we haven’t a room empty.”
He reddened. Was it possible she recognized the hobnailed
lad of yore, refused to serve him or to allow him up her aristocratic
stairs?
“You haven’t a room empty?” he repeated incredulously.
“There’s a poky garret,” she said, “and another man would
have to go through it to his bedroom, and he goes to bed very
late and gets up very early. But even our best rooms are stuffy
and our corridors are that dingy people are always tumbling
against the brooms the maids leave about; when they’re not
tumbling down the stairs. Look how steep they are! The
whole house is badly built—it was never meant for an hotel—and
the service is disgraceful.”
Will, overwhelmed, stammered out deprecation of her abuse.
The inn was most picturesque, he urged, and it was not the fault
of the house if the coach was late; as for himself a crust of bread
and cheese would suffice to stay his pangs.
“Well, go up and see what you can get,” she rejoined sceptically,
moving aside. Relieved to find the barrier raised, he
ascended the dog-legged staircase; his boyish awe resurging.
Alas! even the landlady’s disparagement had not prepared him
for this dishevelled scene—dirty plates and greasy knives and
forks and tobacco-stoppers and sloppy pewter pots that had
stamped bleary rims on the fly-haunted table-cloth, and a waiter
in his shirt-sleeves dining, like a gentleman, off the ruins.
“Wegetables and pastry is hoff!” murmured this disturbed
gentleman.
Will was retreating—bread and cheese at the bar amid the
glinting bottles and shining beer-handles seemed more appetizing—but
the waiter had sprung up, his mouth still masticating but
his coat conjured on, and had him fixed instanter on a Windsor
chair at a clean little sun-splashed table by a side window that
was refreshingly open and gave on the cheery courtyard.
A cut of the devastated joint, strong mustard pickles, a hunch
of good bread, a pint of porter and the freedom of the cheese to
follow, soon dispelled the dismalness of the room; an effect to
which the attendant magician contributed more literally by his
great trick of vanishing crumbs and disappearing plates, including
his own half-eaten meal. How good it was, this cold roast beef
of old England, how equally redolent of the dear old country
those hunting pictures on the low wainscoted walls, with all
their gay bravado. There were four of them: The Meet,
Breaking Cover, Full Cry, The Death; all populous with spirited
pink gentlemen and violently animated dogs and horses, culminating
in the leading dog tearing the fox, and the leading gentleman
waving his tall hat in rapture. He quaffed voluptuously at his
frothing pewter pot. To the Queen of the May—ay, why not
drink to her?
“How’s Mr. Gander?” he asked irrelevantly, with a sudden
image of the bull-necked landlord and his massive gold scarfpin.
The waiter—on the point of disappearing—materialized himself
again, and stared at the questioner.
“He ain’t anyhow,” he gasped at last. “At least that’s a
secret ’twixt him and his Maker.”
“Dead?” It was Will’s turn to gasp. Could so much gross
vitality be extinct, or even rarefied?
“Dead and married over. She’s Mrs. Mott now, though the
old customers will keep on with the Mother Gander, just as I
have to bite my tongue not to call her husband Charley.” He
lowered his voice. “He was the potboy once.”
Will whistled. “What women are!” was in that knowing
note. How pleasant it was thus to discuss—with beer and
pickles!—life and death and the sex.
“Yes, sir—the potboy, and busting with pride if I let him
hand up the plates at the Bowling Club dinner.” A sigh accented
the cruel change. “You’ve been away, sir, I presoom.”
“Half round the world,” said Will with airy inaccuracy. “But
why didn’t you go in for her?”
“Me! With my old woman! Besides I wasn’t going to
turn Peculiar—no, not for ten ‘Black Sheep.’ You’ve heard o’
Peculiars, sir?”
“Ye-es.” A cayenne pod in the pickles made him cough.
“Thick as blackberries about these parts—and as full of texts
as the bush of prickles.” The waiter’s voice sank again. “She
made poor Charley into one of ’em. He’s got to go to chapel
three times every Sunday and once on Wednesday.”
“Poor chap!” There was sympathy as well as mockery in
Will’s tone. “But can you tell me”—he had a sudden remembrance—“why
she runs down this place so? Is it her Peculiar
conscience?”
“Ah! I’ve heard others arx that too. My opinion ain’t
worth a woman’s tip, but I can’t help fancying it’s more defiance
than conscience. Time was, you see, sir, folks kept away, and
it sort o’ soured her. I don’t want your rotten custom, she as
good as says to all and sundry. Take it to landladies who’ve
arxed your permission to marry. And so they come all the
more, sir, yes, and cringing to have rooms, and pays her whatever
she asks. There was lots o’ grumbling in the old days: now
you never hear a complaint, except from herself. My stars, the
money she’s making! But I can’t say I envy Charley—not even
when he bullies me. Although in marriage if it’s not one cross
it’s another, ain’t it, sir? Or perhaps you’re one o’ the lucky
ones.”
“I’m not married at all.”
“That’s what I mean.” And the waiter sighed again. “Got
all you want, sir?”
“Everything, thank you—not wanting a wife.”
His laugh, gurgling away into his pewter pot, evoked only a
deeper sigh, on which the waiter seemed wafted without.
Simultaneously—through the opening or closing door—something
was wafted within. Our complacent young man at his
place in the sun, with the glow of freedom at his heart and of
porter at his throat, was startled by something leaping on his
knees, which, automatically fended and thrust away, was felt as
clinging claws scraping down his new trousers. Coughing and
spluttering, and with the beery glow changing to a choke, he
perceived that it was the carrier’s little white dog, the very same
that had warned him off its master’s goods; unmistakable by
its pink bow. So the doddering patriarch had not yet started,
he thought lazily, though he must now be back in his cart or his
canine sentry would not have gone off for a farewell prowl. He
helped himself to another cut of beef, and his thoughts wandered
from Mother Gander to a builder’s widow he had known in a
Montreal boarding-house, a widow to whom he could certainly
have played the Charley had he cared to go so far. He seemed
to hear her foolish whimpering the day he left for the backwoods,
but he became aware that it was only the carrier’s dog whining.
It was begging so prettily on its hind legs, looking so appealing
in its pink bow, that he was soon feeding it rather than himself,
and morsel after morsel fell to it, each gulped down with such
celerity that from the creature’s instantly renewed and unchangingly
pathetic posture of supplication, an absent-minded man
would have doubted if he had fed the brute at all. But finally
the young man pushed away his cheese-plate, and dropping with
plenary satisfaction upon a horsehair and mahogany arm-chair
that stood by the empty grate, he lit his cherrywood pipe with a
brimstone match and followed his springtide fancies in clouds of
his own making. Thus the second pounce of the dog on to his
knees found him acquiescent, even caressing, and with a beatific
grunt the animal curled itself up as to an æon of repose.
Then a horn sounded, and with a convulsive start the creature
was off his lap and scratching and yapping at the closed door.
Will, too, had a moment of wild wishing he had engaged a seat
in the cart—the thought of walking in this heat was no longer
alluring—but it was equally unimaginable to get up now and
rush like the animal. Besides, he hadn’t paid his bill, he remembered
not discontentedly. Meanwhile the distracted little dog
had darted back to the window and leapt on the sill, but it was
obviously cowering before the depth of the jump. He was
feeling he really must get up and do its will, when to the satisfaction
of the slothful man and the bliss of the active beast, the
door opened, and like a streak of lightning the white figure had
forked across the room and vanished. He turned his head
lazily to the window to see if it would catch its cart, but was
only in time to see the tail-board with his own box disappearing
through the archway, pursued by Joe with a belated bundle.
Then the new-comers claimed his languorous attention.
Strictly speaking, there was only one new-comer and he was
hanging back at the sight of the London-tailored guest, being
himself in moleskins and bent and fusty, though Mother Gander
was clearly beckoning him forward. “The gentleman’s just
going,” she said sweetly. Will knew not whether to be drowsily
pleased at the status he had achieved in his own neighbourhood,
or sluggishly wrathful at this renewed attempt to be rid
of him.
“Plenty left,” he observed encouragingly, puffing immovably.
“Oi reckon, sister, Oi’ll feed in the taproom.” The voice sent
strange vibrations of resentment through Will’s being, and
particularly through his nostrils, where a mysterious smell of
aniseed was called up, whether from memory or the actual
moleskins he could not make out.
“You’ll do no such thing,” said Mother Gander sharply. “It’s
less trouble here. Remember what James says.”
Who was James—was her husband not Charley?—Will was
wondering dreamily.
“Chapter two, warse two—Oi take your p’int,” answered this
odd figure, whose wizened face with the straggling whiskers
seemed loathsomely familiar. But though the beady eyes under
the moleskin cap were turned for a moment full on his, remembrance
stirred but feebly through his after-dinner lethargy, and
it was not till the intruder had sinuously and softly skirted the
great dining-table and begun solemnly turning the faces of the
hunting pictures to the wall, like naughty schoolchildren, that
he was dully conscious of the secret of his abhorrence. There—on
the very first day of his return—was Joshua Mawhood, the
button-snipping villain of his story!
Mother Gander stood by silent, as one properly censured.
Neither did she protest when, slashing a giant gobbet off the beef,
he carried it on the point of the carving-knife to Will’s mustard-strewn
meat-plate, and bearing the same with its dirty knife
and fork to the remotest corner of the table, fell to with audible
enjoyment.
“I’ll send you your milk, Deacon,” she said, turning to leave
the room.
“Don’t copy Jael too far,” he answered, with a grimace.
“Copy who?” asked Mother Gander, mystified.
“Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite—her as killed Sisera.
Like me he asked for water, and, like you, she gave him milk.
But she meant to nail him like a stoat.”
“Me murder you!” said Mother Gander with a scandalized
air. But she was clearly impressed by his erudition.
“ ’Tis onny my fun. But you look up Judges, chapter fower.
They’re beacons to us—they old Hebrews and Hebrewesses—beacons.”
“Would you rather not have the milk?” Mother Gander
was still a little puzzled.
“ ’Tain’t for me to refuse a sister’s kindness. And the best
way to repay her is to take it with rum. Bein’ as there’s a
wisitor, the leetlest drop o’ rum in it, to show Oi don’t howd
with your rebukers in that regard. Send the bottle separate, to
be plain to all beholders.”
“And send me another pint of porter, please,” added Will.
He felt he must justify his stay even as the Deacon must justify
his drink. The ecclesiastical preferment that had come to Elder
Mawhood amused him—his boyish resentment faded suddenly,
and the respectable rat-catcher—after all, the motor-impulse of
his fortunes—now loomed through a cloud of kindly indulgence;
even touched with the glamour of early memories, with the
magic of those far-off winters whose approach had brought the
expert to Frog Farm, as surely as it brought in from the hedges
the creatures against whom he waged cunning battle in the war-zone
of the barns and outbuildings. How thrilled the boy had
been by the great traps and the pack of ferrets—nay, had not
the strange old man seemed himself a larger ferret, with his
tight-fitting moleskins, sidling motions, and curiously small
shining eyes? What a joy his annual visit—with what fearful
interest the bunch of children had listened to the annual contract,
made for gross sums, or for particular buildings, sometimes
calculated per tail of rats! The Elder had always made a point
of the cost of the shoe-leather involved in the isolation of Frog
Farm. Aniseed, Will suddenly remembered, had played a considerable
part in beguiling the victims, and the scent of it, coming
up again,—dream-whiff or reality—was now incongruously
mingled with a flavour of youth and innocence, touching our
rustic Ulysses almost to tears. He wheeled his arm-chair
window-wards to hide his emotion, and puffed into the courtyard.
“Oi don’t object to your smokin’,” mumbled the Deacon.
“Thank you,” said Will. “You don’t remember me, I’m
afraid, Mr. Mawhood.” “Deacon” he could not bring his
tongue to. “I’m Will Flynt, the looker’s boy you were
always so kind to. You let me set your traps and dose the
bait.”
The Deacon shot a beady look at him, but shook his
head.
“Why, you let me smell your ferret once, don’t you remember,
when it came out of the hole by the Brad, and you said that
though I hadn’t heard a squeak or a scamper, your nose could
tell there had been rats in the run.”
“There was swarms of boys at Frog Farm, all bad ’uns. Oi
never knew ’em by tail—but Oi dessay Oi do remember ye in
the rough.”
Will was strangely disappointed. “Don’t you remember I
lent you my slate to hide the trap from that cute old
rascal?”
“Ay, warmints allus runs to cover,” said the Deacon
vaguely.
“And when caught he wouldn’t eat the bait, surely you
remember?”
“They never does. Rats has more sperrit than lions,” said
the Deacon with enthusiasm.
The abortive attempt to recall himself to the rat-catcher was
ended by the return of the waiter, whose delicate balance of rum-bottle,
milk-glass, and pewter pot on the tiniest of trays, was
almost upset by the sight of the blank backs of the hunting
pictures. He seemed as startled as though he was not in the
conjuring line himself. Depositing the drinks, with his usual
sleight of hand, at both ends of the room simultaneously, he
made as if to reverse the pictures. But the Deacon emitted a
sibilance so terrifying that he did the vanishing trick instead.
The old man then produced from either pocket a pale-yellow,
pink-eyed creature, and emptied the milk-glass into a saucer.
“How thirsty they gets this weather,” he observed, as they
lapped greedily at the milk. “Pore things—their need is
greater than mine.”
Will was sipping his porter piano, and the Deacon his rum
strepitoso—the ferrets back in his pockets—when the door
opened afresh, and a new figure protruded through it, likewise
drawing back when the room which should have been empty
at that hour was seen to be in occupation. This was, however,
a very different figure from the Deacon’s: a figure
jovial and ponderous, sporting a floral dressing-gown and carpet
slippers, and with all the air of having just left an adjacent
bedroom.
“Come in—don’t mind me,” called Will cheerfully.
The smoker’s invitation not being negatived by the muncher
and bibber, the massive visitor padded forwards, revealing more
clearly his heavy-jowled hairless rubicund face and the motley
multitude of stains on his gay dressing-gown, and waving a roll
of clammy-smelling posters. “Just come by the coach—and in
the nick o’ time,” he observed genially. And espying in the
reversed pictures a favourable background for his operations, he
circumvented the table (not without surprise and disgust at the
corner where the moleskinned man grunted, guzzled, and guttled),
and hung up two of the bills on the nails without any observable
astonishment at the state of the pictures or any apparent attention
to anything but his own interests; stepping backwards to
survey the effect with such absorption of mind that through the
girdle of his dressing-gown his spine collided with the table.
“No, my boy!” he addressed Will. “They can’t print like
that in Chipstone.”
From his arm-chair Will could easily read the more glaring
headlines:
TO-NIGHT AT SEVEN—LIFE-SIZE
DUKE’S MARIONETTES
Hamlet And The Ghost
Margaret Catchpole
Pantomime-Ballet
 
THE MISTLETOE BOUGH
The Beggar of Bethnal Green
Edmund, Orphan of the Castle
The High Road to Marriage
 
As Performed Before all the Crowned Heads
Of Europe, America, and Australia
 
N.B.—Miss Arabella Flippance at the Piano
“Sounds bully,” he observed politely.
“Bully’s the word, my young American friend,” said the
Showman. “What a pity the mail-coach was late—we might
have had ’em stuck up for the ordinary and caught some shilling
patrons. You’re staying here for the night, I hope.”
“No—I’ve got to go on.”
“What a pity! I was about to offer you a front seat.”
“Me? Why?”
“Must fill up somehow,” said the Showman frankly. “People
never go to a play unless they think they can’t get in. And as
we only open to-night, there’s not been time to advertise our
bumper houses. You see, sonny, we lay up here for the winter,
and if we’d started before this heat-wave we’d have caught
more colds than coppers.”
“Is it open-air then?”
“No, but the next thing to it—a tent! By squinting out of
that window you’ll see the whole caboodle rising on the meadows
like a giant mushroom. Why not stop here and pick up a young
lady? I’ll give you two seats.”
“Don’t want more than one seat when I’ve got a girl,” laughed
Will. Then the face of the girl in the parcel-shed came up, at
once alluring and rebuking, and he repeated that seriously he
must be off.
“Never mind—better luck next act,” said the Showman, and
tugged furiously at the bell-pull, and the waiter appeared with
a glass of brandy and water, as though he added thought-reading
to his conjuring accomplishments.
“Well, here’s to our better——!” began the Showman. His
eye, raised towards Will at the window, caught suddenly something
in the courtyard, and setting down his untasted glass and
snatching up his posters he disappeared almost as frantically as
the dog.
“He’s forgot he ain’t dressed,” chuckled the waiter.
“Seems to be a merry gent,” said Will.
“Lives here all the while the show is on,” said the waiter, not
without pride. “Pays me a shilling every time I go in.”
“I hope on the same principle Mother Gander will pay me,”
said Will, laughing, and ordered his bill: which he found as
unreasonable as the food was excellent. He did not, however,
mulct the waiter of the handsome tip, designed to show him
not a woman but a man and a gentleman at that, and
the waiter finally disappeared with congees instead of with
conjurings.
“I know you will excuse me, old fellow,” said the Showman,
re-entering, “but business before pleasure. Fact is, I got up
too late to catch the carriers, but now I’ve got the postman to
leave my bills at all the public-houses on his next round. Good
fellow, Bundock, though why he should boast so over killing
two frogs with one stone, I don’t understand. It seems an
operation as cruel as it is simple.” Here he swigged at his
neglected glass. “He made a point, too, of my not employing
the Bellman.”
“You’d have done better with the Bellman here in Chipstone
and over at Latchem,” volunteered Will. “Where Bundock
mostly goes, you’ll never get ’em to come.”
“That’s what Bundock said. But don’t you believe it,
sonny.” He held up a huge hairy forefinger, half gilded with a
great ring. “They’re only a canting lot o’ sons of slow-coaches.
They’ve never had the chance of knowing what they like.
Temptation’s the thing.”
The diaconal sibilance that greeted this sinister sentiment fell
unheeded on the Showman’s ear, or rather he did not distinguish
it from the worthy Mawhood’s general medley of guttural and
nasal noises.
“There’s no greater temptation,” added the Showman, “than
Shakespeare and the Ballet.”
Will shook his head. “They don’t know one from t’other.
Did—I mean, if they did”—he had slipped into the old idiom—“they’d
be scandalized. Why, I went to see a piece of Shakespeare
at Sadler’s Wells myself last week, and I’m bound to say
’twas a bit thick—though splendidly acted, mind you.”
“You needn’t tell me that. Phelps!” He smacked his fleshy
lips voluptuously. “Lord! What a job that man had to clear
out the beer-sellers, babies, and filthy-mouthed roughs, and now
it’s the quietest show in London. What was the piece?”
“Can’t remember the name—about a nigger.”
“Othello?”
“That’s it—sounded a rather Irish name for a nigger I
thought.”
“Irish? Ah, yes—ha, ha, ha! You had me there! By
Jove, that’s a new wheeze!” And he roared genially, while the
innocent, and it is to be feared sadly illiterate, Will tried to look
like a successful humorist. “Anyhow,” he said, “you won’t
get ’em from Little Bradmarsh, no, nor Long Bradmarsh either.
They think all actors are wicked.”
“And so they be!” burst forth the Deacon at last. “Hobs
and jills ought to be kept apart!” He stuck his knife towards
the poster. “The High Road to Marriage, indeed! High road
to Hell!”
“Hear, hear,” agreed the Showman surprisingly, rattling his
glass. “Well put, old cock. But these ain’t actors; only
puppets. You can’t be wicked in wood.”
“I’m afraid I must be off,” said Will, rising.
“Then here’s luck to you.” He finished his glass. “And
may you die before you’re buried!”
“Thanks, I hope I shan’t do either, Mr. Duke.” He took his
hat and stick.
“Not Duke, old man. Flippance, Anthony Flippance, universally
docked to Tony Flip. Duke only goes with the Marionettes.
I bought ’em lock, stock, and barrel—-the oldest circuit in East
Anglia, and the name going well with the crowned heads.”
“But there are no crowned heads in America,” said Will,
smiling.
“Pardon me, sonny,” contradicted Mr. Flippance.
“But I’ve just come from there,” said Will crushingly.
“And how about the Emperor of Brazil?”
“Oh!” said Will blankly. He seemed really to have heard
of this personage. Then recovering, he said: “But have you
played before him?”
“That’s not my affair,” said Mr. Flippance. “It ain’t my
responsibility what Duke’s done or left undone—if Duke was his
name, which I take leave to question. ’Twixt you and I, I
doubt if it would pay to work Brazil. But, as I said, I bought
it as a going concern, lock, stock——”
“And lies,” snapped the Deacon.
Mr. Flippance turned his large red face benevolently towards
the moleskins.
“Lies is a harsh word. Legends, old cock, legends.”
“Oi bain’t a bird,” rasped the Deacon. “Stick to the truth.”
“Lord love us, a Quaker!” Mr. Flippance winked at Will,
who smiled—man of the world to man of the world. “As if
anybody would take a thing that size and smell for a rooster!”
The Deacon reached for the rum-bottle in deadly silence. Will,
with a fear—soon proved superfluous—that he meant it for a
missile, hastened to remark that anyhow there were no crowned
heads in Australia.
“Where were you educated, sonny?” retorted Mr. Flippance.
And he began whistling the then favourite air: “The King of
the Cannibal Islands.” He broke off to point out that kings
and queens were as thick in the man-eating islands round
Australia as old cocks in Essex, though they didn’t wear moleskins,
or indeed anything but their own skins. Besides, he
added as an afterthought, wasn’t Queen Victoria monarch of
Australia too?
Will, taken aback again, had to admit it. “But you haven’t
played before Victoria?” he murmured.
Mr. Flippance winked more widely as he explained that a
study of the posters would show that the Marionettes themselves
never claimed to have performed before crowned heads. It was
the plays that had been performed. He turned suddenly upon
the rum-soothed Deacon. “You’re not denying, my Quaker
friend, that Queen Victoria’s seen Hamlet?”
“You leave me and the Queen out of it,” growled the Deacon.
“Ha! Then you admit she’s seen Hamlet?”
“Oi don’t know nawthen about it. Why should she see
Hamlet?”
“Because he was the Prince of Denmark,” said Tony, winking
again at his now bosom friend. “But you Methody Quaker
dead-alive go-to-meeting sons of Sundayfied slugs crawl about
thinking yourselves holier than Victoria, God bless her, even
when it’s wood, never having seen society or ever had a drink
outside Chipstone.”
The Deacon was roused at last. “Never had a drink outside
Chipstone!” His breast heaved with a sinister movement—was
it a wheeze of wrath or of laughter? “Oi’ll goo bail my
round is bigger nor yourn. There ain’t scarce a barn in East
Anglia what don’t know me.”
Tony’s great jaw fell. “A barnstormer! You! Rats!
What do you play?”
“It ain’t play—it’s work.”
“Yes, I know—but what’s your repertory?”
“My what?”
“Your pieces.”
“Oi bain’t onny a piece-worker.”
“In what?”
“In what you said. It ain’t always per tail.”
“Retail, do you mean?” said the puzzled Tony.
Will, who had listened to the conversation with an ever-expanding
grin, here burst into a guffaw. Tony turned on him.
“Is he kidding me?” he asked half angrily, half amicably.
The answer—like Will’s departure from this enthralling parlour—was
staved off by the advent of yet another head popped into
the doorway. This time it was a heavily greased head with
scrupulously parted hair, and was attached to a spruce young
man with a spring posy in his buttonhole. But his bear’s-grease
out smelt his primroses.
“Hullo, Tony!” cried the aromatic apparition. “Up
already!”
“I’ve got to work for my living,” Mr. Flippance retorted.
“The dormouse season is over. You coming in, Charley, to see
the show to-night?”
“Me! I’ve got better things to do, old boy.” The young
landlord turned to the Deacon. “Can you let me have five or
six live ’uns?”
The Deacon shook his head. “Oi don’t want to disoblige
brother. Oi do my duty according to Peter—‘nat’ral brute
beasts made to be taken and destroyed’—but they bain’t meant
by the Almoighty to be taken for sport, and Oi don’t howd with
fox-hunting neither.”
“So I see.” Mr. Charles Mott glanced glumly at the backs of
the pictures.
“Ef you want to be riddy o’ warmints, shoot ’em, says Oi, or
nip their brushes in traps.”
“Oh, oh!” came involuntarily from Will at this blasphemy.
The Deacon transfixed him with his glittering eye, but went on
without pausing: “And ef you want to be riddy o’ rats, come
to me. Don’t set a-worshippin’ your prize-terriers, like Ephraim
jined to his idols.”
“I did come to you to be rid o’ the warmints, and now I want
half-a-dozen spunky ’uns. Make your own price, but if you
won’t supply ’em I’ll get ’em from Bill Nutbone.”
“That’s doubly sinful—to goo to the heathen.” He turned to
Will. “Ef you’re so fond o’ ferrets, young man, Oi could spare
you this pair—cheaper than you’ll get ’em from Nutbone.” He
let their pink eyes protrude from his pockets.
Will eagerly closed with the offer. If Frog Farm proved as
dull as he was now beginning to fear—after this contrast of
Anthony Flippance and Joshua Mawhood—ratting or rabbiting
might be a providential diversion.
“But I can’t carry them in my pockets,” he said impressively.
“Just made by Moses & Son, London. And I’ve got a long
walk. Besides, I’d like them in cages.”
“Oi’ll send ’em by the carrier on Friday,” promised the ratcatcher.
“Frog Farm, you said. Good day to you, Brother
Mott.”
“Good day, Deacon. Sorry we can’t do business. Queer old
cuss,” he said, winking at Will as the door closed. “Belongs to
the Peculiars.”
“I—I’ve heard of them.” Will coloured a bit.
Tony, who had listened to the dialogue with enlightenment,
here stalked out in half-genuine horror: “Holy Moses & Son!
The publican and sinner prefers rats to Shakespeare!”
“Stow it, Tony!” called the landlord after him. “One
preacher’s enough.” And, smiling, he changed the blanks into
hunting pictures almost as deftly as his waiter would have
done it.
He had scarcely effected the transformation, however, before
the Deacon popped his head in again. Mr. Mott looked like a
caught schoolboy, but though the beady eyes looked straight
at the flamboyant hunters, Mr. Mawhood only said: “Oi forgot
to lend a law-book.”
“What sort of a law-book d’ye want?”
“Miss Gentry’s got a counter-claim. Ef Oi won’t pay for my
wife’s silk dress as Oi never ordered, she says my ferrets killed
her chickens.”
“That’s not a counter-claim, Mr. Mawhood,” advised Will.
“It’s a lyin’ claim, anyways. What killed her chickens was
her own black devil, Squibs. Her and her angels!”
“You go down to the bar and see if the missus can find you a
book—but wouldn’t a lawyer be better?”
“The good Lord forbid! Oi’d sooner goo to a doctor. Well,
thank you kindly, brother—one good turn desarves another.
Foive, Oi think you said.”
“Or six. First thing in the morning. Spunky ’uns, remember.”
The Deacon sighed and disappeared again.
“Poor old chap!” Sure of his rats, Mr. Mott was now
touched to sympathy. “His missus is a Tartar, no mistake.
Still with them rounds of his, he dodges her a good deal.” And
he sighed like the Deacon and followed him—bear’s-grease after
aniseed—and Will, alone at last, followed too, though without
a sigh, being still—as the waiter said—“one of the lucky ones.”
In the corridor he turned the wrong way, finding bedroom
doors instead of the staircase. He paused a moment to gaze at
a stuffed specimen of the sacred animal that stood with brush
rampant against a scenic background under a glass case, and a
stuffed trout that swam movelessly through a mimic stream.