# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2005
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    Emile Zola, L'Assommoir
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/8558/8558-h/8558-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

    After that Gervaise never dared to ask him for a centime. She
got bread, wine and meat on credit; bills were running up
everywhere, for their expenditures amounted to three and four
francs every day. She had never paid anything, even a trifle on
account, to the man from whom she had bought her furniture or to
Coupeau's three friends who had done the work in Lantier's room.
The tradespeople were beginning to grumble and treated her with
less politeness.
But she seemed to be insensible to this; she chose the most
expensive things, having thrown economy to the winds, since she
had given up paying for things at once. She always intended,
however, to pay eventually and had a vague notion of earning
hundreds of francs daily in some extraordinary way by which she
could pay all these people.
About the middle of summer Clémence departed, for there
was not enough work for two women; she had waited for her money
for some weeks. Lantier and Coupeau were quite undisturbed,
however. They were in the best of spirits and seemed to be
growing fat over the ruined business.
In the Quartier there was a vast deal of gossip.
Everybody wondered as to the terms on which Lantier and Gervaise
now stood. The Lorilleuxs viciously declared that Gervaise would
be glad enough to resume her old relations with Lantier but that
he would have nothing to do with her, for she had grown old and
ugly. The Boche people took a different view, but while everyone
declared that the whole arrangement was a most improper one, they
finally accepted it as quite a matter of course and altogether
natural.
It is quite possible there were other homes which were quite
as open to invidious remarks within a stone's throw, but these
Coupeaus, as their neighbors said, were good, kind people.
Lantier was especially ingratiating. It was decided, therefore,
to let things go their own way undisturbed.
Gervaise lived quietly indifferent to, and possibly entirely
unsuspicious of, all these scandals. By and by it came to pass
that her husband's own people looked on her as utterly heartless.
Mme Lerat made her appearance every evening, and she treated
Lantier as if he were utterly irresistible, into whose arms any
and every woman would be only too glad to fall. An actual league
seemed to be forming against Gervaise: all the women insisted on
giving her a lover.
But she saw none of these fascinations in him. He had changed,
unquestionably, and the external changes were all in his favor.
He wore a frock coat and had acquired a certain polish. But she
who knew him so well looked down into his soul through his eyes
and shuddered at much she saw there. She could not understand
what others saw in him to admire. And she said so one day to
Virginie. Then Mme Lerat and Virginie vied with each other in the
stories they told of Clémence and himself—what they
did and said whenever her back was turned—and now they were
sure, since she had left the establishment, that he went
regularly to see her.
"Well, what of it?" asked Gervaise, her voice trembling. "What
have I to do with that?"
But she looked into Virginie's dark brown eyes, which were
specked with gold and emitted sparks as do those of cats. But the
woman put on a stupid look as she answered:
"Why, nothing, of course; only I should think you would advise
him not to have anything to do with such a person."
Lantier was gradually changing his manner to Gervaise. Now
when he shook hands with her he held her fingers longer than was
necessary. He watched her incessantly and fixed his bold eyes
upon her. He leaned over her so closely that she felt his breath
on her cheek. But one evening, being alone with her, he caught
her in both arms. At that moment Goujet entered. Gervaise
wrenched herself free, and the three exchanged a few words as if
nothing had happened. Goujet was very pale and seemed
embarrassed, supposing that he had intruded upon them and that
she had pushed Lantier aside only because she did not choose to
be embraced in public.
The next day Gervaise was miserable, unhappy and restless. She
could not iron a handkerchief. She wanted to see Goujet and tell
him just what had happened, but ever since Etienne had gone to
Lille she had given up going to the forge, as she was quite
unable to face the knowing winks with which his comrades received
her. But this day she determined to go, and, taking an empty
basket on her arms, she started off, pretending that she was
going with skirts to some customers in La Rue des
Portes-Blanches.
Goujet seemed to be expecting her, for she met him loitering
on the corner.
"Ah," he said with a wan smile, "you are going home, I
presume?"
He hardly knew what he was saying, and they both turned toward
Montmartre without another word. They merely wished to go away
from the forge. They passed several manufactories and soon found
themselves with an open field before them. A goat was tethered
near by and bleating as it browsed, and a dead tree was crumbling
away in the hot sun.
"One might almost think oneself in the country," murmured
Gervaise.
They took a seat under the dead tree. The clearstarcher set
the basket down at her feet. Before them stretched the heights of
Montmartre, with its rows of yellow and gray houses amid clumps
of trees, and when they threw back their heads a little they saw
the whole sky above, clear and cloudless, but the sunlight
dazzled them, and they looked over to the misty outlines of the
faubourg and watched the smoke rising from tall chimneys
in regular puffs, indicating the machinery which impelled it.
These great sighs seemed to relieve their own oppressed
breasts.
"Yes," said Gervaise after a long silence. "I have been on a
long walk, and I came out—"
She stopped. After having been so eager for an explanation she
found herself unable to speak and overwhelmed with shame. She
knew that he as well as herself had come to that place with the
wish and intention of speaking on one especial subject, and yet
neither of them dared to allude to it. The occurrence of the
previous evening weighed on both their souls.
Then with a heart torn with anguish and with tears in her
eyes, she told him of the death of Mme Bijard, who had breathed
her last that morning after suffering unheard-of agonies.
"It was caused by a kick of Bijard's," she said in her low,
soft voice; "some internal injury. For three days she has
suffered frightfully. Why are not such men punished? I suppose,
though, if the law undertook to punish all the wretches who kill
their wives that it would have too much to do. After all, one
kick more or less: what does it matter in the end? And this poor
creature, in her desire to save her husband from the scaffold,
declared she had fallen over a tub."
Goujet did not speak. He sat pulling up the tufts of
grass.
"It is not a fortnight," continued Gervaise, "since she weaned
her last baby, and here is that child Lalie left to take care of
two mites. She is not eight years old but as quiet and sensible
as if she were a grown woman, and her father kicks and strikes
her too. Poor little soul! There are some persons in this world
who seem born to suffer."
Goujet looked at her and then said suddenly, with trembling
lips:
"You made me suffer yesterday."
Gervaise clasped her hands imploringly, and he continued:
"I knew of course how it must end; only you should not have
allowed me to think—"
He could not finish. She started up, seeing what his
convictions were. She cried out:
"You are wrong! I swear to you that you are wrong! He was
going to kiss me, but his lips did not touch me, and it is the
very first time that he made the attempt. Believe me, for I
swear—on all that I hold most sacred—that I am
telling you the truth."
But the blacksmith shook his head. He knew that women did not
always tell the truth on such points. Gervaise then became very
grave.
"You know me well," she said; "you know that I am no liar. I
again repeat that Lantier and I are friends. We shall never be
anything more, for if that should ever come to pass I should
regard myself as the vilest of the vile and should be unworthy of
the friendship of a man like yourself." Her face was so honest,
her eyes were so clear and frank, that he could do no less than
believe her. Once more he breathed freely. He held her hand for
the first time. Both were silent. White clouds sailed slowly
above their heads with the majesty of swans. The goat looked at
them and bleated piteously, eager to be released, and they stood
hand in hand on that bleak slope with tears in their eyes.
"Your mother likes me no longer," said Gervaise in a low
voice. "Do not say no; how can it be otherwise? We owe you so
much money."
He roughly shook her arm in his eagerness to check the words
on her lips; he would not hear her. He tried to speak, but his
throat was too dry; he choked a little and then he burst out:
"Listen to me," he cried; "I have long wished to say something
to you. You are not happy. My mother says things are all going
wrong with you, and," he hesitated, "we must go away together and
at once."
She looked at him, not understanding him but impressed by this
abrupt declaration of a love from him, who had never before
opened his lips in regard to it.
"What do you mean?" she said.
"I mean," he answered without looking in her face, "that we
two can go away and live in Belgium. It is almost the same to me
as home, and both of us could get work and live comfortably."
The color came to her face, which she would have hidden on his
shoulder to hide her shame and confusion. He was a strange fellow
to propose an elopement. It was like a book and like the things
she heard of in high society. She had often seen and known of the
workmen about her making love to married women, but they did not
think of running away with them.
"Ah, Monsieur Goujet!" she murmured, but she could say no
more.
"Yes," he said, "we two would live all by ourselves."
But as her self-possession returned she refused with
firmness.
"It is impossible," she said, "and it would be very wrong. I
am married and I have children. I know that you are fond of me,
and I love you too much to allow you to commit any such folly as
you are talking of, and this would be an enormous folly. No; we
must live on as we are. We respect each other now. Let us
continue to do so. That is a great deal and will help us over
many a roughness in our paths. And when we try to do right we are
sure of a reward."
He shook his head as he listened to her, but he felt she was
right. Suddenly he snatched her in his arms and kissed her
furiously once and then dropped her and turned abruptly away. She
was not angry, but the locksmith trembled from head to foot. He
began to gather some of the wild daisies, not knowing what to do
with his hands, and tossed them into her empty basket. This
occupation amused him and tranquillized him. He broke off the
head of the flowers and, when he missed his mark and they fell
short of the basket, laughed aloud.
Gervaise sat with her back against the tree, happy and calm.
And when she set forth on her walk home her basket was full of
daisies, and she was talking of Etienne.
In reality Gervaise was more afraid of Lantier than she was
willing to admit even to herself. She was fully determined never
to allow the smallest familiarity, but she was afraid that she
might yield to his persuasions, for she well knew the weakness
and amiability of her nature and how hard it was for her to
persist in any opposition to anyone.
Lantier, however, did not put this determination on her part
to the test. He was often alone with her now and was always quiet
and respectful. Coupeau declared to everyone that Lantier was a
true friend. There was no nonsense about him; he could be relied
upon always and in all emergencies. And he trusted him
thoroughly, he declared. When they went out together—the
three—on Sundays he bade his wife and Lantier walk arm in
arm, while he mounted guard behind, ready to cuff the ears of
anyone who ventured on a disrespectful glance, a sneer or a
wink.
He laughed good-naturedly before Lantier's face, told him he
put on a great many airs with his coats and his books, but he
liked him in spite of them. They understood each other, he said,
and a man's liking for another man is more solid and enduring
than his love for a woman.
Coupeau and Lantier made the money fly. Lantier was
continually borrowing money from Gervaise—ten francs,
twenty francs—whenever he knew there was money in the
house. It was always because he was in pressing need for some
business matter. But still on those same days he took Coupeau off
with him and at some distant restaurant ordered and devoured such
dishes as they could not obtain at home, and these dishes were
washed down by bottle after bottle of wine.
Coupeau would have preferred to get tipsy without the food,
but he was impressed by the elegance and experience of his
friend, who found on the carte so many extraordinary sauces. He
had never seen a man like him, he declared, so dainty and so
difficult. He wondered if all southerners were the same as he
watched him discussing the dishes with the waiter and sending
away a dish that was too salty or had too much pepper.
Neither could he endure a draft: his skin was all blue if a
door was left open, and he made no end of a row until it was
closed again.
Lantier was not wasteful in certain ways, for he never gave a
garçon more than two sous after he had served a meal that
cost some seven or eight francs.
They never alluded to these dinners the next morning at their
simple breakfast with Gervaise. Naturally people cannot frolic
and work, too, and since Lantier had become a member of his
household Coupeau had never lifted a tool. He knew every drinking
shop for miles around and would sit and guzzle deep into the
night, not always pleased to find himself deserted by Lantier,
who never was known to be overcome by liquor.
About the first of November Coupeau turned over a new leaf; he
declared he was going to work the next day, and Lantier thereupon
preached a little sermon, declaring that labor ennobled man, and
in the morning arose before it was light to accompany his friend
to the shop, as a mark of the respect he felt. But when they
reached a wineshop on the corner they entered to take a glass
merely to cement good resolutions.
Near the counter they beheld Bibi-la-Grillade smoking his pipe
with a sulky air.
"What is the matter, Bibi?" cried Coupeau.
"Nothing," answered his comrade, "except that I got my walking
ticket yesterday. Perdition seize all masters!" he added
fiercely.
And Bibi accepted a glass of liquor. Lantier defended the
masters. They were not so bad after all; then, too, how were the
men to get along without them? "To be sure," continued Lantier,
"I manage pretty well, for I don't have much to do with them
myself!"
"Come, my boy," he added, turning to Coupeau; "we shall be
late if we don't look out."
Bibi went out with them. Day was just breaking, gray and
cloudy. It had rained the night before and was damp and warm. The
street lamps had just been extinguished. There was one continued
tramp of men going to their work.
Coupeau, with his bag of tools on his shoulder, shuffled
along; his footsteps had long since lost their ring.
"Bibi," he said, "come with me; the master told me to bring a
comrade if I pleased."
"It won't be me then," answered Bibi. "I wash my hands of them
all. No more masters for me, I tell you! But I dare say
Mes-Bottes would be glad of the offer."
And as they reached the Assommoir they saw Mes-Bottes within.
Notwithstanding the fact that it was daylight, the gas was
blazing in the Assommoir. Lantier remained outside and told
Coupeau to make haste, as they had only ten minutes.
"Do you think I will work for your master?" cried Mes-Bottes.
"He is the greatest tyrant in the kingdom. No, I should rather
suck my thumbs for a year. You won't stay there, old man! No, you
won't stay there three days, now I tell you!"
"Are you in earnest?" asked Coupeau uneasily.
"Yes, I am in earnest. You can't speak—you can't move.
Your nose is held close to the grindstone all the time. He
watches you every moment. If you drink a drop he says you are
tipsy and makes no end of a row!"
"Thanks for the warning. I will try this one day, and if the
master bothers me I will just tell him what I think of him and
turn on my heel and walk out."
Coupeau shook his comrade's hand and turned to depart, much to
the disgust of Mes-Bottes, who angrily asked if the master could
not wait five minutes. He could not go until he had taken a
drink. Lantier entered to join in, and Mes-Bottes stood there
with his hat on the back of his head, shabby, dirty and
staggering, ordering Father Colombe to pour out the glasses and
not to cheat.
At that moment Goujet and Lorilleux were seen going by.
Mes-Bottes shouted to them to come in, but they both
refused—Goujet saying he wanted nothing, and the other, as
he hugged a little box of gold chains close to his heart, that he
was in a hurry.
"Milksops!" muttered Mes-Bottes. "They had best pass their
lives in the corner by the fire!"
Returning to the counter, he renewed his attack on Father
Colombe, whom he accused of adulterating his liquors.
It was now bright daylight, and the proprietor of the
Assommoir began to extinguish the lights. Coupeau made excuses
for his brother-in-law, who, he said, could never drink; it was
not his fault, poor fellow! He approved, too, of Goujet,
declaring that it was a good thing never to be thirsty. Again he
made a move to depart and go to his work when Lantier, with his
dictatorial air, reminded him that he had not paid his score and
that he could not go off in that way, even if it were to his
duty.
"I am sick of the words 'work' and 'duty,'" muttered
Mes-Bottes.
They all paid for their drinks with the exception of
Bibi-la-Grillade, who stooped toward the ear of Father Colombe
and whispered a few words. The latter shook his head, whereupon
Mes-Bottes burst into a torrent of invectives, but Colombe stood
in impassive silence, and when there was a lull in the storm he
said:
"Let your friends pay for you then—that is a very simple
thing to do."
By this time Mes-Bottes was what is properly called howling
drunk, and as he staggered away from the counter he struck the
bag of tools which Coupeau had over his shoulder.
"You look like a peddler with his pack or a humpback. Put it
down!"
Coupeau hesitated a moment, and then slowly and deliberately,
as if he had arrived at a decision after mature deliberation, he
laid his bag on the ground.
"It is too late to go this morning. I will wait until after
breakfast now. I will tell him my wife was sick. Listen, Father
Colombe, I will leave my bag of tools under this bench and come
for them this afternoon."
Lantier assented to this arrangement. Of course work was a
good thing, but friends and good company were better; and the
four men stood, first on one foot and then on the other, for more
than an hour, and then they had another drink all round. After
that a game of billiards was proposed, and they went noisily down
the street to the nearest billiard room, which did not happen to
please the fastidious Lantier, who, however, soon recovered his
good humor under the effect of the admiration excited in the
minds of his friends by his play, which was really very
extraordinary.
When the hour arrived for breakfast Coupeau had an idea.
"Let us go and find Bec Sali. I know where he works. We will
make him breakfast with us."
The idea was received with applause. The party started forth.
A fine drizzling rain was now falling, but they were too warm
within to mind this light sprinkling on their shoulders.
Coupeau took them to a factory where his friend worked and at
the door gave two sous to a small boy to go up and find Bec Sali
and to tell him that his wife was very sick and had sent for
him.
Bec Sali quickly appeared, not in the least disturbed, as he
suspected a joke.
"Aha!" he said as he saw his friend. "I knew it!" They went to
a restaurant and ordered a famous repast of pigs' feet, and they
sat and sucked the bones and talked about their various
employers.
"Will you believe," said Bec Sali, "that mine has had the
brass to hang up a bell? Does he think we are slaves to run when
he rings it? Never was he so mistaken—"
"I am obliged to leave you!" said Coupeau, rising at last with
an important air. "I promised my wife to go to work today, and I
leave you with the greatest reluctance."
The others protested and entreated, but he seemed so decided
that they all accompanied him to the Assommoir to get his tools.
He pulled out the bag from under the bench and laid it at his
feet while they all took another drink. The clock struck one, and
Coupeau kicked his bag under the bench again. He would go
tomorrow to the factory; one day really did not make much
difference.
The rain had ceased, and one of the men proposed a little walk
on the boulevards to stretch their legs. The air seemed to
stupefy them, and they loitered along with their arms swinging at
their sides, without exchanging a word. When they reached the
wineshop on the corner of La Rue des Poissonnièrs they
turned in mechanically. Lantier led the way into a small room
divided from the public one by windows only. This room was much
affected by Lantier, who thought it more stylish by far than the
public one. He called for a newspaper, spread it out and examined
it with a heavy frown. Coupeau and Mes-Bottes played a game of
cards, while wine and glasses occupied the center of the
table.
"What is the news?" asked Bibi.
Lantier did not reply instantly, but presently, as the others
emptied their glasses, he began to read aloud an account of a
frightful murder, to which they listened with eager interest.
Then ensued a hot discussion and argument as to the probable
motives for the murder.
By this time the wine was exhausted, and they called for more.
About five all except Lantier were in a state of beastly
intoxication, and he found them so disgusting that, as usual, he
made his escape without his comrades noticing his defection.
Lantier walked about a little and then, when he felt all
right, went home and told Gervaise that her husband was with his
friends. Coupeau did not make his appearance for two days. Rumors
were brought in that he had been seen in one place and then in
another, and always alone. His comrades had apparently deserted
him. Gervaise shrugged her shoulders with a resigned air.
"Good heavens!" she said. "What a way to live!" She never
thought of hunting him up. Indeed, on the afternoon of the third
day, when she saw him through the window of a wineshop, she
turned back and would not pass the door. She sat up for him,
however, and listened for his step or the sound of his hand
fumbling at the lock.
The next morning he came in, only to begin the same thing at
night again. This went on for a week, and at last Gervaise went
to the Assommoir to make inquiries. Yes, he had been there a
number of times, but no one knew where he was just then. Gervaise
picked up the bag of tools and carried them home.
Lantier, seeing that Gervaise was out of spirits, proposed
that she should go with him to a cafe concert. She refused at
first, being in no mood for laughing; otherwise she would have
consented, for Lantier's proposal seemed to be prompted by the
purest friendliness. He seemed really sorry for her trouble and,
indeed, assumed an absolutely paternal air.
Coupeau had never stayed away like this before, and she
continually found herself going to the door and looking up and
down the street. She could not keep to her work but wandered
restlessly from place to place. Had Coupeau broken a limb? Had he
fallen into the water? She did not think she could care so very
much if he were killed, if this uncertainty were over, if she
only knew what she had to expect. But it was very trying to live
in this suspense.
Finally when the gas was lit and Lantier renewed his
proposition of the cafe she consented. After all, why should she
not go? Why should she refuse all pleasures because her husband
chose to behave in this disgraceful way? If he would not come in
she would go out.
They hurried through their dinner, and as she went out with
Lantier at eight o'clock Gervaise begged Nana and Mamma Coupeau
to go to bed early. The shop was closed, and she gave the key to
Mme Boche, telling her that if Coupeau came in it would be as
well to look out for the lights.
Lantier stood whistling while she gave these directions.
Gervaise wore her silk dress, and she smiled as they walked down
the street in alternate shadow and light from the
shopwindows.
The cafe concert was on the Boulevard de Rochechoumart. It had
once been a cafe and had had a concert room built on of rough
planks.
Over the door was a row of glass globes brilliantly
illuminated. Long placards, nailed on wood, were standing quite
out in the street by the side of the gutter.
"Here we are!" said Lantier. "Mademoiselle Amanda makes her
debut tonight."
Bibi-la-Grillade was reading the placard. Bibi had a black
eye, as if he had been fighting.
"Hallo!" cried Lantier. "How are you? Where is Coupeau? Have
you lost him?"
"Yes, since yesterday. We had a little fight with a waiter at
Baquets. He wanted us to pay twice for what we had, and somehow
Coupeau and I got separated, and I have not seen him since."
And Bibi gave a great yawn. He was in a disgraceful state of
intoxication. He looked as if he had been rolling in the
gutter.
"And you know nothing of my husband?" asked Gervaise.
"No, nothing. I think, though, he went off with a
coachman."
Lantier and Gervaise passed a very agreeable evening at the
cafe concert, and when the doors were closed at eleven they went
home in a sauntering sort of fashion. They were in no hurry, and
the night was fair, though a little cool. Lantier hummed the air
which Amanda had sung, and Gervaise added the chorus. The room
had been excessively warm, and she had drunk several glasses of
wine.
She expressed a great deal of indignation at Mlle Amanda's
costume. How did she dare face all those men, dressed like that?
But her skin was beautiful, certainly, and she listened with
considerable curiosity to all that Lantier could tell her about
the woman.
"Everybody is asleep," said Gervaise after she had rung the
bell three times.
The door was finally opened, but there was no light. She
knocked at the door of the Boche quarters and asked for her
key.
The sleepy concierge muttered some unintelligible words, from
which Gervaise finally gathered that Coupeau had been brought in
by Poisson and that the key was in the door.
Gervaise stood aghast at the disgusting sight that met her
eyes as she entered the room where Coupeau lay wallowing on the
floor.
She shuddered and turned away. This sight annihilated every
ray of sentiment remaining in her heart.
"What am I to do?" she said piteously. "I can't stay
here!"
Lantier snatched her hand.
"Gervaise," he said, "listen to me."
But she understood him and drew hastily back.
"No, no! Leave me, Auguste. I can manage."
But Lantier would not obey her. He put his arm around her
waist and pointed to her husband as he lay snoring, with his
mouth wide open.
"Leave me!" said Gervaise, imploringly, and she pointed to the
room where her mother-in-law and Nana slept.
"You will wake them!" she said. "You would not shame me before
my child? Pray go!"
He said no more but slowly and softly kissed her on her ear,
as he had so often teased her by doing in those old days.
Gervaise shivered, and her blood was stirred to madness in her
veins.
"What does that beast care?" she thought. "It is his fault,"
she murmured; "all his fault. He sends me from his room!"
And as Lantier drew her toward his door Nana's face appeared
for a moment at the window which lit her little cabinet.
The mother did not see the child, who stood in her nightdress,
pale with sleep. She looked at her father as he lay and then
watched her mother disappear in Lantier's room. She was perfectly
grave, but in her eyes burned the sensual curiosity of premature
vice.



That winter Mamma Coupeau was very ill with an asthmatic
attack, which she always expected in the month of December.
The poor woman suffered much, and the depression of her
spirits was naturally very great. It must be confessed that there
was nothing very gay in the aspect of the room where she slept.
Between her bed and that of the little girl there was just room
for a chair. The paper hung in strips from the wall. Through a
round window near the ceiling came a dreary gray light. There was
little ventilation in the room, which made it especially unfit
for the old woman, who at night, when Nana was there and she
could hear her breathe, did not complain, but when left alone
during the day, moaned incessantly, rolling her head about on her
pillow.
"Ah," she said, "how unhappy I am! It is the same as a prison.
I wish I were dead!"
And as soon as a visitor came in—Virginie or Mme
Boche—she poured out her grievances. "I should not suffer
so much among strangers. I should like sometimes a cup of tisane,
but I can't get it; and Nana—that child whom I have raised
from the cradle—disappears in the morning and never shows
her face until night, when she sleeps right through and never
once asks me how I am or if she can do anything for me. It will
soon be over, and I really believe this clearstarcher would
smother me herself—if she were not afraid of the law!"
Gervaise, it is true, was not as gentle and sweet as she had
been. Everything seemed to be going wrong with her, and she had
lost heart and patience together. Mamma Coupeau had overheard her
saying that she was really a great burden. This naturally cut her
to the heart, and when she saw her eldest daughter, Mme Lerat,
she wept piteously and declared that she was being starved to
death, and when these complaints drew from her daughter's pocket
a little silver, she expended it in dainties.
She told the most preposterous tales to Mme Lerat about
Gervaise—of her new finery and of cakes and delicacies
eaten in the corner and many other things of infinitely more
consequence. Then in a little while she turned against the
Lorilleuxs and talked of them in the most bitter manner. At the
height of her illness it so happened that her two daughters met
one afternoon at her bedside. Their mother made a motion to them
to come closer. Then she went on to tell them, between paroxysms
of coughing, that her son came home dead drunk the night before
and that she was absolutely certain that Gervaise spent the night
in Lantier's room. "It is all the more disgusting," she added,
"because I am certain that Nana heard what was going on quite as
well as I did."
The two women did not appear either shocked or surprised.
"It is none of our business," said Mme Lorilleux. "If Coupeau
does not choose to take any notice of her conduct it is not for
us to do so."
All the neighborhood were soon informed of the condition of
things by her two sisters-in-law, who declared they entered her
doors only on their mother's account, who, poor thing, was
compelled to live amid these abominations.
Everyone accused Gervaise now of having perverted poor
Lantier. "Men will be men," they said; "surely you can't expect
them to turn a cold shoulder to women who throw themselves at
their heads. She has no possible excuse; she is a disgrace to the
whole street!"
The Lorilleuxs invited Nana to dinner that they might question
her, but as soon as they began the child looked absolutely
stupid, and they could extort nothing from her.
Amid this sudden and fierce indignation Gervaise
lived—indifferent, dull and stupid. At first she loathed
herself, and if Coupeau laid his hand on her she shivered and ran
away from him. But by degrees she became accustomed to it. Her
indolence had become excessive, and she only wished to be quiet
and comfortable.
After all, she asked herself, why should she care? If her
lover and her husband were satisfied, why should she not be too?
So the household went on much as usual to all appearance. In
reality, whenever Coupeau came in tipsy, she left and went to
Lantier's room to sleep. She was not led there by passion or
affection; it was simply that it was more comfortable. She was
very like a cat in her choice of soft, clean places.
Mamma Coupeau never dared to speak out openly to the
clearstarcher, but after a dispute she was unsparing in her hints
and allusions. The first time Gervaise fixed her eyes on her and
heard all she had to say in profound silence. Then without
seeming to speak of herself, she took occasion to say not long
afterward that when a woman was married to a man who was drinking
himself to death a woman was very much to be pitied and by no
means to blame if she looked for consolation elsewhere.
Another time, when taunted by the old woman, she went still
further and declared that Lantier was as much her husband as was
Coupeau—that he was the father of two of her children. She
talked a little twaddle about the laws of nature, and a shrewd
observer would have seen that she—parrotlike—was
repeating the words that some other person had put into her
mouth. Besides, what were her neighbors doing all about her? They
were not so extremely respectable that they had the right to
attack her. And then she took house after house and showed her
mother-in-law that while apparently so deaf to gossip she yet
knew all that was going on about her. Yes, she knew—and now
seemed to gloat over that which once had shocked and revolted
her.
"It is none of my business, I admit," she cried; "let each
person live as he pleases, according to his own light, and let
everybody else alone."
One day when Mamma Coupeau spoke out more clearly she said
with compressed lips:
"Now look here, you are flat on your back and you take
advantage of that fact. I have never said a word to you about
your own life, but I know it all the same—and it was
atrocious! That is all! I am not going into particulars, but
remember, you had best not sit in judgment on me!"
The old woman was nearly suffocated with rage and her
cough.
The next day Goujet came for his mother's wash while Gervaise
was out. Mamma Coupeau called him into her room and kept him for
an hour. She read the young man's heart; she knew that his
suspicions made him miserable. And in revenge for something that
had displeased her she told him the truth with many sighs and
tears, as if her daughter-in-law's infamous conduct was a bitter
blow to her.
When Goujet left her room he was deadly pale and looked ten
years older than when he went in. The old woman had, too, the
additional pleasure of telling Gervaise on her return that Mme
Goujet had sent word that her linen must be returned to her at
once, ironed or unironed. And she was so animated and
comparatively amiable that Gervaise scented the truth and knew
instinctively what she had done and what she was to expect with
Goujet. Pale and trembling, she piled the linen neatly in a
basket and set forth to see Mme Goujet. Years had passed since
she had paid her friends one penny. The debt still stood at four
hundred and twenty-five francs. Each time she took the money for
her washing she spoke of being pressed just at that time. It was
a great mortification for her.
Coupeau was, however, less scrupulous and said with a laugh
that if she kissed her friend occasionally in the corner it would
keep things straight and pay him well. Then Gervaise, with eyes
blazing with indignation, would ask if he really meant that. Had
he fallen so low? Nor should he speak of Goujet in that way in
her presence.
Every time she took home the linen of these former friends she
ascended the stairs with a sick heart.
"Ah, it is you, is it?" said Mme Goujet coldly as she opened
the door. Gervaise entered with some hesitation; she did not dare
attempt to excuse herself. She was no longer punctual to the hour
or the day—everything about her was becoming perfectly
disorderly.
"For one whole week," resumed the lace mender, "you have kept
me waiting. You have told me falsehood after falsehood. You have
sent your apprentice to tell me that there was an
accident—something had been spilled on the shirts, they
would come the next day, and so on. I have been unnecessarily
annoyed and worried, besides losing much time. There is no sense
in it! Now what have you brought home? Are the shirts here which
you have had for a month and the skirt which was missing last
week?"
"Yes," said Gervaise, almost inaudibly; "yes, the skirt is
here. Look at it!"
But Mme Goujet cried out in indignation.
That skirt did not belong to her, and she would not have it.
This was the crowning touch, if her things were to be changed in
this way. She did not like other people's things.
"And the shirts? Where are they? Lost, I suppose. Very well,
settle it as you please, but these shirts I must have tomorrow
morning!"
There was a long silence. Gervaise was much disturbed by
seeing that the door of Goujet's room was wide open. He was
there, she was sure, and listening to all these reproaches which
she knew to be deserved and to which she could not reply. She was
very quiet and submissive and laid the linen on the bed as
quickly as possible.
Mme Goujet began to examine the pieces.
"Well! Well!" she said. "No one can praise your washing
nowadays. There is not a piece here that is not dirtied by the
iron. Look at this shirt: it is scorched, and the buttons are
fairly torn off by the root. Everything comes back—that
comes at all, I should say—with the buttons off. Look at
that sack: the dirt is all in it. No, no, I can't pay for such
washing as this!"
She stopped talking—while she counted the pieces. Then
she exclaimed:
"Two pairs of stockings, six towels and one napkin are missing
from this week. You are laughing at me, it seems. Now, just
understand, I tell you to bring back all you have, ironed or not
ironed. If in an hour your woman is not here with the rest I have
done with you, Madame Coupeau!"
At this moment Goujet coughed. Gervaise started. How could she
bear being treated in this way before him? And she stood confused
and silent, waiting for the soiled clothes.
Mme Goujet had taken her place and her work by the window.
"And the linen?" said Gervaise timidly.
"Many thanks," said the old woman. "There is nothing this
week."
Gervaise turned pale; it was clear that Mme Goujet meant to
take away her custom from her. She sank into a chair. She made no
attempt at excuses; she only asked a question.
"Is Monsieur Goujet ill?"
"He is not well; at least he has just come in and is lying
down to rest a little."
Mme Goujet spoke very slowly, almost solemnly, her pale face
encircled by her white cap, and wearing, as usual, her plain
black dress.
And she explained that they were obliged to economize very
closely. In future she herself would do their washing. Of course
Gervaise must know that this would not be necessary had she and
her husband paid their debt to her son. But of course they would
submit; they would never think of going to law about it. While
she spoke of the debt her needle moved rapidly to and fro in the
delicate meshes of her work.
"But," continued Mme Goujet, "if you were to deny yourself a
little and be careful and prudent, you could soon discharge your
debt to us; you live too well; you spend too freely. Were you to
give us only ten francs each month—"
She was interrupted by her son, who called impatiently,
"Mother! Come here, will you?"
When she returned she changed the conversation. Her son had
undoubtedly begged her to say no more about this money to
Gervaise. In spite of her evident determination to avoid this
subject, she returned to it again in about ten minutes. She knew
from the beginning just what would happen. She had said so at the
time, and all had turned out precisely as she had prophesied. The
tinworker had drunk up the shop and had left his wife to bear the
load by herself. If her son had taken her advice he would never
have lent the money. His marriage had fallen through, and he had
lost his spirits. She grew very angry as she spoke and finally
accused Gervaise openly of having, with her husband, deliberately
conspired to cheat her simplehearted son.
"Many women," she exclaimed, "played the parts of hypocrites
and prudes for years and were found out at the last!"
"Mother! Mother!" called Goujet peremptorily.
She rose and when she returned said:
"Go in; he wants to see you."
Gervaise obeyed, leaving the door open behind her. She found
the room sweet and fresh looking, like that of a young girl, with
its simple pictures and white curtains.
Goujet, crushed by what he had heard from Mamma Coupeau, lay
at full length on the bed with pale face and haggard eyes.
"Listen!" he said. "You must not mind my mother's words; she
does not understand. You do not owe me anything."
He staggered to his feet and stood leaning against the bed and
looking at her.
"Are you ill?" she said nervously.
"No, not ill," he answered, "but sick at heart. Sick when I
remember what you said and see the truth. Leave me. I cannot bear
to look at you."
And he waved her away, not angrily, but with great decision.
She went out without a word, for she had nothing to say. In the
next room she took up her basket and stood still a moment; Mme
Goujet did not look up, but she said:
"Remember, I want my linen at once, and when that is all sent
back to me we will settle the account."
"Yes," answered Gervaise. And she closed the door, leaving
behind her all that sweet odor and cleanliness on which she had
once placed so high a value. She returned to the shop with her
head bowed down and looking neither to the right nor the
left.
Mother Coupeau was sitting by the fire, having left her bed
for the first time. Gervaise said nothing to her—not a word
of reproach or congratulation She felt deadly tired; all her
bones ached, as if she had been beaten. She thought life very
hard and wished that it were over for her.
Gervaise soon grew to care for nothing but her three meals per
day. The shop ran itself; one by one her customers left her.
Gervaise shrugged her shoulders half indifferently, half
insolently; everybody could leave her, she said: she could always
get work. But she was mistaken, and soon it became necessary for
her to dismiss Mme Putois, keeping no assistant except Augustine,
who seemed to grow more and more stupid as time went on. Ruin was
fast approaching. Naturally, as indolence and poverty increased,
so did lack of cleanliness. No one would ever have known that
pretty blue shop in which Gervaise had formerly taken such pride.
The windows were unwashed and covered with the mud scattered by
the passing carriages. Within it was still more forlorn: the
dampness of the steaming linen had ruined the paper; everything
was covered with dust; the stove, which once had been kept so
bright, was broken and battered. The long ironing table was
covered with wine stains and grease, looking as if it had served
a whole garrison. The atmosphere was loaded with a smell of
cooking and of sour starch. But Gervaise was unconscious of it.
She did not notice the torn and untidy paper and, having ceased
to pay any attention to personal cleanliness, was hardly likely
to spend her time in scrubbing the greasy floors. She allowed the
dust to accumulate over everything and never lifted a finger to
remove it. Her own comfort and tranquillity were now her first
considerations.
Her debts were increasing, but they had ceased to give her any
uneasiness. She was no longer honest or straightforward. She did
not care whether she ever paid or not, so long as she got what
she wanted. When one shop refused her more credit she opened an
account next door. She owed something in every shop in the whole
Quartier. She dared not pass the grocer or the baker in
her own street and was compelled to make a lengthy circuit each
time she went out. The tradespeople muttered and grumbled, and
some went so far as to call her a thief and a swindler.
One evening the man who had sold her the furniture for
Lantier's room came in with ugly threats.
Such scenes were unquestionably disagreeable. She trembled for
an hour after them, but they never took away her appetite.
It was very stupid of these people, after all, she said to
Lantier. How could she pay them if she had no money? And where
could she get money? She closed her eyes to the inevitable and
would not think of the future. Mamma Coupeau was well again, but
the household had been disorganized for more than a year. In
summer there was more work brought to the shop—white skirts
and cambric dresses. There were ups and downs, therefore: days
when there was nothing in the house for supper and others when
the table was loaded.
Mamma Coupeau was seen almost daily, going out with a bundle
under her apron and returning without it and with a radiant face,
for the old woman liked the excitement of going to the
Mont-de-Piété.
Gervaise was gradually emptying the house—linen and
clothes, tools and furniture. In the beginning she took advantage
of a good week to take out what she had pawned the week before,
but after a while she ceased to do that and sold her tickets.
There was only one thing which cost her a pang, and that was
selling her clock. She had sworn she would not touch it, not
unless she was dying of hunger, and when at last she saw her
mother-in-law carry it away she dropped into a chair and wept
like a baby. But when the old woman came back with twenty-five
francs and she found she had five francs more than was demanded
by the pressing debt which had caused her to make the sacrifice,
she was consoled and sent out at once for four sous' worth of
brandy. When these two women were on good terms they often drank
a glass together, sitting at the corner of the ironing table.
Mamma Coupeau had a wonderful talent for bringing a glass in
the pocket of her apron without spilling a drop. She did not care
to have the neighbors know, but, in good truth, the neighbors
knew very well and laughed and sneered as the old woman went in
and out.
This, as was natural and right, increased the prejudice
against Gervaise. Everyone said that things could not go on much
longer; the end was near.
Amid all this ruin Coupeau thrived surprisingly. Bad liquor
seemed to affect him agreeably. His appetite was good in spite of
the amount he drank, and he was growing stout. Lantier, however,
shook his head, declaring that it was not honest flesh and that
he was bloated. But Coupeau drank all the more after this
statement and was rarely or ever sober. There began to be a
strange bluish tone in his complexion. His spirits never flagged.
He laughed at his wife when she told him of her embarrassments.
What did he care, so long as she provided him with food to eat?
And the longer he was idle, the more exacting he became in regard
to this food.
He was ignorant of his wife's infidelity, at least, so all his
friends declared. They believed, moreover, that were he to
discover it there would be great trouble. But Mme Lerat, his own
sister, shook her head doubtfully, averring that she was not so
sure of his ignorance.
Lantier was also in good health and spirits, neither too stout
nor too thin. He wished to remain just where he was, for he was
thoroughly well satisfied with himself, and this made him
critical in regard to his food, as he had made a study of the
things he should eat and those he should avoid for the
preservation of his figure. Even when there was not a cent he
asked for eggs and cutlets: nourishing and light things were what
he required, he said. He ruled Gervaise with a rod of iron,
grumbled and found fault far more than Coupeau ever did. It was a
house with two masters, one of whom, cleverer by far than the
other, took the best of everything. He skimmed the Coupeaus, as
it were, and kept all the cream for himself. He was fond of Nana
because he liked girls better than boys. He troubled himself
little about Etienne.
When people came and asked for Coupeau it was Lantier who
appeared in his shirt sleeves with the air of the man of the
house who is needlessly disturbed. He answered for Coupeau, said
it was one and the same thing.
Gervaise did not find this life always smooth and agreeable.
She had no reason to complain of her health. She had become very
stout. But it was hard work to provide for and please these two
men. When they came in, furious and out of temper, it was on her
that they wreaked their rage. Coupeau abused her frightfully and
called her by the coarsest epithets. Lantier, on the contrary,
was more select in his phraseology, but his words cut her quite
as deeply. Fortunately people become accustomed to almost
everything in this world, and Gervaise soon ceased to care for
the reproaches and injustice of these two men. She even preferred
to have them out of temper with her, for then they let her alone
in some degree; but when they were in a good humor they were all
the time at her heels, and she could not find a leisure moment
even to iron a cap, so constant were the demands they made upon
her. They wanted her to do this and do that, to cook little
dishes for them and wait upon them by inches.
One night she dreamed she was at the bottom of a well. Coupeau
was pushing her down with his fists, and Lantier was tickling her
to make her jump out quicker. And this, she thought, was a very
fair picture of her life! She said that the people of the
Quartier were very unjust, after all, when they reproached
her for the way of life into which she had fallen. It was not her
fault. It was not she who had done it, and a little shiver ran
over her as she reflected that perhaps the worst was not yet.
The utter deterioration of her nature was shown by the fact
that she detested neither her husband nor Lantier. In a play at
the Gaite she had seen a woman hate her husband and poison him
for the sake of her lover. This she thought very strange and
unnatural. Why could the three not have lived together peaceably?
It would have been much more reasonable!
In spite of her debts, in spite of the shifts to which her
increasing poverty condemned her, Gervaise would have considered
herself quite well off, but for the exacting selfishness of
Lantier and Coupeau.
Toward autumn Lantier became more and more disgusted, declared
he had nothing to live on but potato parings and that his health
was suffering. He was enraged at seeing the house so thoroughly
cleared out, and he felt that the day was not far off when he
must take his hat and depart. He had become accustomed to his
den, and he hated to leave it. He was thoroughly provoked that
the extravagant habits of Gervaise necessitated this sacrifice on
his part. Why could she not have shown more sense? He was sure he
didn't know what would become of them. Could they have struggled
on six months longer, he could have concluded an affair which
would have enabled him to support the whole family in
comfort.
One day it came to pass that there was not a mouthful in the
house, not even a radish. Lantier sat by the stove in somber
discontent. Finally he started up and went to call on the
Poissons, to whom he suddenly became friendly to a degree. He no
longer taunted the police officer but condescended to admit that
the emperor was a good fellow after all. He showed himself
especially civil to Virginie, whom he considered a clever woman
and well able to steer her bark through stormy seas.
Virginie one day happened to say in his presence that she
should like to establish herself in some business. He approved
the plan and paid her a succession of adroit compliments on her
capabilities and cited the example of several women he knew who
had made or were making their fortunes in this way.
Virginie had the money, an inheritance from an aunt, but she
hesitated, for she did not wish to leave the Quartier and
she did not know of any shop she could have. Then Lantier led her
into a corner and whispered to her for ten minutes; he seemed to
be persuading her to something. They continued to talk together
in this way at intervals for several days, seeming to have some
secret understanding.
Lantier all this time was fretting and scolding at the
Coupeaus, asking Gervaise what on earth she intended to do,
begging her to look things fairly in the face. She owed five or
six hundred francs to the tradespeople about her. She was
behindhand with her rent, and Marescot, the landlord, threatened
to turn her out if they did not pay before the first of
January.
The Mont-de-Piété had taken everything; there
was literally nothing but the nails in the walls left. What did
she mean to do?
Gervaise listened to all this at first listlessly, but she
grew angry at last and cried out:
"Look here! I will go away tomorrow and leave the key in the
door. I had rather sleep in the gutter than live in this
way!"
"And I can't say that it would not be a wise thing for you to
do!" answered Lantier insidiously. "I might possibly assist you
to find someone to take the lease off your hands whenever you
really conclude to leave the shop."
"I am ready to leave it at once!" cried Gervaise violently. "I
am sick and tired of it."
Then Lantier became serious and businesslike. He spoke openly
of Virginie, who, he said, was looking for a shop; in fact, he
now remembered having heard her say that she would like just such
a one as this.
But Gervaise shrank back and grew strangely calm at this name
of Virginie.
She would see, she said; on the whole, she must have time to
think. People said a great many things when they were angry,
which on reflection were found not to be advisable.
Lantier rang the changes on this subject for a week, but
Gervaise said she had decided to employ some woman and go to work
again, and if she were not able to get back her old customers she
could try for new ones. She said this merely to show Lantier that
she was not so utterly downcast and crushed as he had seemed to
take for granted was the case.
He was reckless enough to drop the name of Virginie once more,
and she turned upon him in a rage.
"No, no, never!" She had always distrusted Virginie, and if
she wanted the shop it was only to humiliate her. Any other woman
might have it, but not this hypocrite, who had been waiting for
years to gloat over her downfall. No, she understood now only too
well the meaning of the yellow sparks in her cat's eyes. It was
clear to her that Virginie had never forgotten the scene in the
lavatory, and if she did not look out there would be a repetition
of it.
Lantier stood aghast at this anger and this torrent of words,
but presently he plucked up courage and bade her hold her tongue
and told her she should not talk of his friends in that way. As
for himself, he was sick and tired of other people's affairs; in
future he would let them all take care of themselves, without a
word of counsel from him.
January arrived, cold and damp. Mamma Coupeau took to her bed
with a violent cold which she expected each year at this time.
But those about her said she would never leave the house again,
except feet first.
Her children had learned to look forward to her death as a
happy deliverance for all. The physician who came once was not
sent for again. A little tisane was given her from time to time
that she might not feel herself utterly neglected. She was just
alive; that was all. It now became a mere question of time with
her, but her brain was clear still, and in the expression of her
eyes there were many things to be read—sorrow at seeing no
sorrow in those she left behind her and anger against Nana, who
was utterly indifferent to her.
One Monday evening Coupeau came in as tipsy as usual and threw
himself on the bed, all dressed. Gervaise intended to remain with
her mother-in-law part of the night, but Nana was very brave and
said she would hear if her grandmother moved and wanted
anything.
About half-past three Gervaise woke with a start; it seemed to
her that a cold blast had swept through the room. Her candle had
burned down, and she nastily wrapped a shawl around her with
trembling hands and hurried into the next room. Nana was sleeping
quietly, and her grandmother was dead in the bed at her side.
Gervaise went to Lantier and waked him.
"She is dead," she said.
"Well, what of it?" he muttered, half asleep. "Why don't you
go to sleep?"
She turned away in silence while he grumbled at her coming to
disturb him by the intelligence of a death in the house.
Gervaise dressed herself, not without tears, for she really
loved the cross old woman whose son lay in the heavy slumbers of
intoxication.
When she went back to the room she found Nana sitting up and
rubbing her eyes. The child realized what had come to pass and
trembled nervously in the face of this death of which she had
thought much in the last two days, as of something which was
hidden from children.
"Get up!" said her mother in a low voice. "I do not wish you
to stay here."
The child slipped from her bed slowly and regretfully, with
her eyes fixed on the dead body of her grandmother.
Gervaise did not know what to do with her or where to send
her. At this moment Lantier appeared at the door. He had dressed
himself, impelled by a little shame at his own conduct.
"Let the child go into my room," he said, "and I will help
you."
Nana looked first at her mother and then at Lantier and then
trotted with her little bare feet into the next room and slipped
into the bed that was still warm.
She lay there wide awake with blazing cheeks and eyes and
seemed to be absorbed in thought.
While Lantier and Gervaise were silently occupied with the
dead Coupeau lay and snored.
Gervaise hunted in a bureau to find a little crucifix which
she had brought from Plassans, when she suddenly remembered that
Mamma Coupeau had sold it. They each took a glass of wine and sat
by the stove until daybreak.
About seven o'clock Coupeau woke. When he heard what had
happened he declared they were jesting. But when he saw the body
he fell on his knees and wept like a baby. Gervaise was touched
by these tears and found her heart softer toward her husband than
it had been for many a long year.
"Courage, old friend!" said Lantier, pouring out a glass of
wine as he spoke.
Coupeau took some wine, but he continued to weep, and Lantier
went off under pretext of informing the family, but he did not
hurry. He walked along slowly, smoking a cigar, and after he had
been to Mme Lerat's he stopped in at a crèmerie to
take a cup of coffee, and there he sat for an hour or more in
deep thought.
By nine o'clock the family were assembled in the shop, whose
shutters had not been taken down. Lorilleux only remained for a
few moments and then went back to his shop. Mme Lorilleux shed a
few tears and then sent Nana to buy a pound of candles.
"How like Gervaise!" she murmured. "She can do nothing in a
proper way!"
Mme Lerat went about among the neighbors to borrow a crucifix.
She brought one so large that when it was laid on the breast of
Mamma Coupeau the weight seemed to crush her.
Then someone said something about holy water, so Nana was sent
to the church with a bottle. The room assumed a new aspect. On a
small table burned a candle, near it a glass of holy water in
which was a branch of box.
"Everything is in order," murmured the sisters; "people can
come now as soon as they please."
Lantier made his appearance about eleven. He had been to make
inquiries in regard to funeral expenses.
"The coffin," he said, "is twelve francs, and if you want a
Mass, ten francs more. A hearse is paid for according to its
ornaments."
"You must remember," said Mme Lorilleux with compressed lips,
"that Mamma must be buried according to her purse."
"Precisely!" answered Lantier. "I only tell you this as your
guide. Decide what you want, and after breakfast I will go and
attend to it all."
He spoke in a low voice, oppressed by the presence of the
dead. The children were laughing in the courtyard and Nana
singing loudly.
Gervaise said gently:
"We are not rich, to be sure, but we wish to do what she would
have liked. If Mamma Coupeau has left us nothing it was not her
fault and no reason why we should bury her as if she were a dog.
No, there must be a Mass and a hearse."
"And who will pay for it?" asked Mme Lorilleux. "We can't, for
we lost much money last week, and I am quite sure you would find
it hard work!"
Coupeau, when he was consulted, shrugged his shoulders with a
gesture of profound indifference. Mme Lerat said she would pay
her share.
"There are three of us," said Gervaise after a long
calculation; "if we each pay thirty francs we can do it with
decency."
But Mme Lorilleux burst out furiously:
"I will never consent to such folly. It is not that I care for
the money, but I disapprove of the ostentation. You can do as you
please."
"Very well," replied Gervaise, "I will. I have taken care of
your mother while she was living; I can bury her now that she is
dead."
Then Mme Lorilleux fell to crying, and Lantier had great
trouble in preventing her from going away at once, and the
quarrel grew so violent that Mme Lerat hastily closed the door of
the room where the dead woman lay, as if she feared the noise
would waken her. The children's voices rose shrill in the air
with Nana's perpetual "Tra-la-la" above all the rest.
"Heavens, how wearisome those children are with their songs,"
said Lantier. "Tell them to be quiet, and make Nana come in and
sit down."
Gervaise obeyed these dictatorial orders while her
sisters-in-law went home to breakfast, while the Coupeaus tried
to eat, but they were made uncomfortable by the presence of death
in their crowded quarters. The details of their daily life were
disarranged.
Gervaise went to Goujet and borrowed sixty francs, which,
added to thirty from Mme Lerat, would pay the expenses of the
funeral. In the afternoon several persons came in and looked at
the dead woman, crossing themselves as they did so and shaking
holy water over the body with the branch of box. They then took
their seats in the shop and talked of the poor thing and of her
many virtues. One said she had talked with her only three days
before, and another asked if it were not possible it was a
trance.
By evening the Coupeaus felt it was more than they could bear.
It was a mistake to keep a body so long. One has, after all, only
so many tears to shed, and that done, grief turns to worry. Mamma
Coupeau—stiff and cold—was a terrible weight on them
all. They gradually lost the sense of oppression, however, and
spoke louder.
After a while M. Marescot appeared. He went to the inner room
and knelt at the side of the corpse. He was very religious, they
saw. He made a sign of the cross in the air and dipped the branch
into the holy water and sprinkled the body. M. Marescot, having
finished his devotions, passed out into the shop and said to
Coupeau:
"I came for the two quarters that are due. Have you got the
money for me?"
"No sir, not entirely," said Gervaise, coming forward,
excessively annoyed at this scene taking place in the presence of
her sisters-in-law. "You see, this trouble came upon
us—"
"Undoubtedly," answered her landlord; "but we all of us have
our troubles. I cannot wait any longer. I really must have the
money. If I am not paid by tomorrow I shall most assuredly take
immediate measures to turn you out."
Gervaise clasped her hands imploringly, but he shook his head,
saying that discussion was useless; besides, just then it would
be a disrespect to the dead.
"A thousand pardons!" he said as he went out. "But remember
that I must have the money tomorrow."
And as he passed the open door of the lighted room he saluted
the corpse with another genuflection.
After he had gone the ladies gathered around the stove, where
a great pot of coffee stood, enough to keep them all awake for
the whole night. The Poissons arrived about eight o'clock; then
Lantier, carefully watching Gervaise, began to speak of the
disgraceful act committed by the landlord in coming to a house to
collect money at such a time.
"He is a thorough hypocrite," continued Lantier, "and were I
in Madame Coupeau's place, I would walk off and leave his house
on his hands."
Gervaise heard but did not seem to heed.
The Lorilleuxs, delighted at the idea that she would lose her
shop, declared that Lantier's idea was an excellent one. They
gave Coupeau a push and repeated it to him.
Gervaise seemed to be disposed to yield, and then Virginie
spoke in the blandest of tones.
"I will take the lease off your hands," she said, "and will
arrange the back rent with your landlord."
"No, no! Thank you," cried Gervaise, shaking off the lethargy
in which she had been wrapped. "I can manage this matter and I
can work. No, no, I say."
Lantier interposed and said soothingly:
"Never mind! We will talk of it another time—tomorrow,
possibly."
The family were to sit up all night. Nana cried vociferously
when she was sent into the Boche quarters to sleep; the Poissons
remained until midnight. Virginia began to talk of the country:
she would like to be buried under a tree with flowers and grass
on her grave. Mme Lerat said that in her wardrobe—folded up
in lavender—was the linen sheet in which her body was to be
wrapped.
When the Poissons went away Lantier accompanied them in order,
he said, to leave his bed for the ladies, who could take turns in
sleeping there. But the ladies preferred to remain together about
the stove.
Mme Lorilleux said she had no black dress, and it was too bad
that she must buy one, for they were sadly pinched just at this
time. And she asked Gervaise if she was sure that her mother had
not a black skirt which would do, one that had been given her on
her birthday. Gervaise went for the skirt. Yes, it would do if it
were taken in at the waist.
Then Mme Lorilleux looked at the bed and the wardrobe and
asked if there was nothing else belonging to her mother.
Here Mme Lerat interfered. The Coupeaus, she said, had taken
care of her mother, and they were entitled to all the trifles she
had left. The night seemed endless. They drank coffee and went by
turns to look at the body, lying silent and calm under the
flickering light of the candle.
The interment was to take place at half-past ten, but Gervaise
would gladly have given a hundred francs, if she had had them, to
anyone who would have taken Mamma Coupeau away three hours before
the time fixed.
"Ah," she said to herself, "it is no use to disguise the fact:
people are very much in the way after they are dead, no matter
how much you have loved them!"
Father Bazonge, who was never known to be sober, appeared with
the coffin and the pall. When he saw Gervaise he stood with his
eyes starting from his head.
"I beg you pardon," he said, "but I thought it was for you,"
and he was turning to go away.
"Leave the coffin!" cried Gervaise, growing very pale. Bazonge
began to apologize:
"I heard them talking yesterday, but I did not pay much
attention. I congratulate you that you are still alive. Though
why I do, I do not know, for life is not such a very agreeable
thing."
Gervaise listened with a shiver of horror and a morbid dread
that he would take her away and shut her up in his box and bury
her. She had once heard him say that he knew a woman who would be
only too thankful if he would do exactly that.
"He is horribly drunk," she murmured in a tone of mingled
disgust and terror.
"It will come for you another time," he said with a laugh;
"you have only to make me a little sign. I am a great consolation
to women sometimes, and you need not sneer at poor Father
Bazonge, for he has held many a fine lady in his arms, and they
made no complaint when he laid them down to sleep in the shade of
the evergreens."
"Do hold your tongue," said Lorilleux; "this is no time for
such talk. Be off with you!"
The clock struck ten. The friends and neighbors had assembled
in the shop while the family were in the back room, nervous and
feverish with suspense.
Four men appeared—the undertaker, Bazonge and his three
assistants placed the body in the coffin. Bazonge held the screws
in his mouth and waited for the family to take their last
farewell.
Then Coupeau, his two sisters and Gervaise kissed their
mother, and their tears fell fast on her cold face. The lid was
put on and fastened down.
The hearse was at the door to the great edification of the
tradespeople of the neighborhood, who said under their breath
that the Coupeaus had best pay their debts.
"It is shameful," Gervaise was saying at the same moment,
speaking of the Lorilleuxs. "These people have not even brought a
bouquet of violets for their mother."
It was true they had come empty-handed, while Mme Lerat had
brought a wreath of artificial flowers which was laid on the
bier.
Coupeau and Lorilleux, with their hats in their hands, walked
at the head of the procession of men. After them followed the
ladies, headed by Mme Lorilleux in her black skirt, wrenched from
the dead, her sister trying to cover a purple dress with a large
black shawl.
Gervaise had lingered behind to close the shop and give Nana
into the charge of Mme Boche and then ran to overtake the
procession, while the little girl stood with the concierge,
profoundly interested in seeing her grandmother carried in that
beautiful carriage.
Just as Gervaise joined the procession Goujet came up a side
street and saluted her with a slight bow and with a faint sweet
smile. The tears rushed to her eyes. She did not weep for Mamma
Coupeau but rather for herself, but her sisters-in-law looked at
her as if she were the greatest hypocrite in the world.
At the church the ceremony was of short duration. The Mass
dragged a little because the priest was very old.
The cemetery was not far off, and the cortege soon reached it.
A priest came out of a house near by and shivered as he saw his
breath rise with each De Profundis he uttered.
The coffin was lowered, and as the frozen earth fell upon it
more tears were shed, accompanied, however, by sigh of
relief.
The procession dispersed outside the gates of the cemetery,
and at the very first cabaret Coupeau turned in, leaving Gervaise
alone on the sidewalk. She beckoned to Goujet, who was turning
the corner.
"I want to speak to you," she said timidly. "I want to tell
you how ashamed I am for coming to you again to borrow money, but
I was at my wit's end."
"I am always glad to be of use to you," answered the
blacksmith. "But pray never allude to the matter before my
mother, for I do not wish to trouble her. She and I think
differently on many subjects."
She looked at him sadly and earnestly. Through her mind
flitted a vague regret that she had not done as he desired, that
she had not gone away with him somewhere. Then a vile temptation
assailed her. She trembled.
"You are not angry now?" she said entreatingly.
"No, not angry, but still heartsick. All is over between us
now and forever." And he walked off with long strides, leaving
Gervaise stunned by his words.
"All is over between us!" she kept saying to herself. "And
what more is there for me then in life?"
She sat down in her empty, desolate room and drank a large
tumbler of wine. When the others came in she looked up suddenly
and said to Virginie gently:
"If you want the shop, take it!"
Virginie and her husband jumped at this and sent for the
concierge, who consented to the arrangement on condition that the
new tenants would become security for the two quarters then
due.
This was agreed upon. The Coupeaus would take a room on the
sixth floor near the Lorilleuxs. Lantier said politely that if it
would not be disagreeable to the Poissons he should like much to
retain his present quarters.
The policeman bowed stiffly but with every intention of being
cordial and said he decidedly approved of the idea.
Then Lantier withdrew from the discussion entirely, watching
Gervaise and Virginie out of the corners of his eyes.
That evening when Gervaise was alone again she felt utterly
exhausted. The place looked twice its usual size. It seemed to
her that in leaving Mamma Coupeau in the quiet cemetery she had
also left much that was precious to her, a portion of her own
life, her pride in her shop, her hopes and her energy. These were
not all, either, that she had buried that day. Her heart was as
bare and empty as her walls and her home. She was too weary to
try and analyze her sensations but moved about as if in a
dream.
At ten o'clock, when Nana was undressed, she wept, begging
that she might be allowed to sleep in her grandmother's bed. Her
mother vaguely wondered that the child was not afraid and allowed
her to do as she pleased.
Nana was not timid by nature, and only her curiosity, not her
fears, had been excited by the events of the last three days, and
she curled herself up with delight in the soft, warm feather
bed.



The new lodging of the Coupeaus was next that of the Bijards.
Almost opposite their door was a closet under the stairs which
went up to the roof—a mere hole without light or
ventilation, where Father Bru slept.
A chamber and a small room, about as large as one's hand, were
all the Coupeaus had now. Nana's little bed stood in the small
room, the door of which had to be left open at night, lest the
child should stifle.
When it came to the final move Gervaise felt that she could
not separate from the commode which she had spent so much time in
polishing when first married and insisted on its going to their
new quarters, where it was much in the way and stopped up half
the window, and when Gervaise wished to look out into the court
she had not room for her elbows.
The first few days she spent in tears. She felt smothered and
cramped; after having had so much room to move about in it seemed
to her that she was smothering. It was only at the window she
could breathe. The courtyard was not a place calculated to
inspire cheerful thoughts. Opposite her was the window which
years before had elicited her admiration, where every successive
summer scarlet beans had grown to a fabulous height on slender
strings. Her room was on the shady side, and a pot of mignonette
would die in a week on her sill.
No, life had not been what she hoped, and it was all very hard
to bear.
Instead of flowers to solace her declining years she would
have but thorns. One day as she was looking down into the court
she had the strangest feeling imaginable. She seemed to see
herself standing just near the loge of the concierge, looking up
at the house and examining it for the first time.
This glimpse of the past made her feel faint. It was at least
thirteen years since she had first seen this huge
building—this world within a world. The court had not
changed. The facade was simply more dingy. The same clothes
seemed to be hanging at the windows to dry. Below there were the
shavings from the cabinetmaker's shop, and the gutter glittered
with blue water, as blue and soft in tone as the water she
remembered.
But she—alas, how changed was she! She no longer looked
up to the sky. She was no longer hopeful, courageous and
ambitious. She was living under the very roof in crowded
discomfort, where never a ray of sunshine could reach her, and
her tears fell fast in utter discouragement.
Nevertheless, when Gervaise became accustomed to her new
surroundings she grew more content. The pieces of furniture she
had sold to Virginie had facilitated her installation. When the
fine weather came Coupeau had an opportunity of going into the
country to work. He went and lived three months without
drinking—cured for the time being by the fresh, pure air.
It does a man sometimes an infinite deal of good to be taken away
from all his old haunts and from Parisian streets, which always
seem to exhale a smell of brandy and of wine.
He came back as fresh as a rose, and he brought four hundred
francs with which he paid the Poissons the amount for which they
had become security as well as several other small but pressing
debts. Gervaise had now two or three streets open to her again,
which for some time she had not dared to enter.
She now went out to iron by the day and had gone back to her
old mistress, Mme Fauconnier, who was a kindhearted creature and
ready to do anything for anyone who flattered her adroitly.
With diligence and economy Gervaise could have managed to live
comfortably and pay all her debts, but this prospect did not
charm her particularly. She suffered acutely in seeing the
Poissons in her old shop. She was by no means of a jealous or
envious disposition, but it was not agreeable to her to hear the
admiration expressed for her successors by her husband's sisters.
To hear them one would suppose that never had so beautiful a shop
been seen before. They spoke of the filthy condition of the place
when Virginie moved in—who had paid, they declared, thirty
francs for cleaning it.
Virginie, after some hesitation, had decided on a small stock
of groceries—sugar, tea and coffee, also bonbons and
chocolate. Lantier had advised these because he said the profit
on them was immense. The shop was repainted, and shelves and
cases were put in, and a counter with scales such as are seen at
confectioners'. The little inheritance that Poisson held in
reserve was seriously encroached upon. But Virginie was
triumphant, for she had her way, and the Lorilleuxs did not spare
Gervaise the description of a case or a jar.
It was said in the street that Lantier had deserted Gervaise,
that she gave him no peace running after him, but this was not
true, for he went and came to her apartment as he pleased.
Scandal was connecting his name and Virginie's. They said
Virginie had taken the clearstarcher's lover as well as her shop!
The Lorilleuxs talked of nothing when Gervaise was present but
Lantier, Virginie and the shop. Fortunately Gervaise was not
inclined to jealousy, and Lantier's infidelities had hitherto
left her undisturbed, but she did not accept this new affair with
equal tranquillity. She colored or turned pale as she heard these
allusions, but she would not allow a word to pass her lips, as
she was fully determined never to gratify her enemies by allowing
them to see her discomfiture; but a dispute was heard by the
neighbors about this time between herself and Lantier, who went
angrily away and was not seen by anyone in the Coupeau quarters
for more than a fortnight.
Coupeau behaved very oddly. This blind and complacent husband,
who had closed his eyes to all that was going on at home, was
filled with virtuous indignation at Lantier's indifference. Then
Coupeau went so far as to tease Gervaise in regard to this
desertion of her lovers. She had had bad luck, he said, with
hatters and blacksmiths—why did she not try a mason?
He said this as if it were a joke, but Gervaise had a firm
conviction that he was in deadly earnest. A man who is tipsy from
one year's end to the next is not apt to be fastidious, and there
are husbands who at twenty are very jealous and at thirty have
grown very complacent under the influence of constant
tippling.
Lantier preserved an attitude of calm indifference. He kept
the peace between the Poissons and the Coupeaus. Thanks to him,
Virginie and Gervaise affected for each other the most tender
regard. He ruled the brunette as he had ruled the blonde, and he
would swallow her shop as he had that of Gervaise.
It was in June of this year that Nana partook of her first
Communion. She was about thirteen, slender and tall as an
asparagus plant, and her air and manner were the height of
impertinence and audacity.
She had been sent away from the catechism class the year
before on account of her bad conduct. And if the cure did not
make a similar objection this year it was because he feared she
would never come again and that his refusal would launch on the
Parisian pavé another castaway.
Nana danced with joy at the mere thought of what the
Lorilleuxs—as her godparents—had promised, while Mme
Lerat gave the veil and cup, Virginie the purse and Lantier a
prayer book, so that the Coupeaus looked forward to the day
without anxiety.
The Poissons—probably through Lantier's
advice—selected this occasion for their housewarming. They
invited the Coupeaus and the Boche family, as Pauline made her
first Communion on that day, as well as Nana.
The evening before, while Nana stood in an ecstasy of delight
before her presents, her father came in in an abominable
condition. His virtuous resolutions had yielded to the air of
Paris; he had fallen into evil ways again, and he now assailed
his wife and child with the vilest epithets, which did not seem
to shock Nana, for they could fall from her tongue on occasion
with facile glibness.
"I want my soup," cried Coupeau, "and you two fools are
chattering over those fal-lals! I tell you, I will sit on them if
I am not waited upon, and quickly too."
Gervaise answered impatiently, but Nana, who thought it better
taste just then—all things considered—to receive with
meekness all her father's abuse, dropped her eyes and did not
reply.
"Take that rubbish away!" he cried with growing impatience.
"Put it out of my sight or I will tear it to bits."
Nana did not seem to hear him. She took up the tulle cap and
asked her mother what it cost, and when Coupeau tried to snatch
the cap Gervaise pushed him away.
"Let the child alone!" she said. "She is doing no harm!"
Then her husband went into a perfect rage:
"Mother and daughter," he cried, "a nice pair they make. I
understand very well what all this row is for: it is merely to
show yourself in a new gown. I will put you in a bag and tie it
close round your throat, and you will see if the cure likes
that!"
Nana turned like lightning to protect her treasures. She
looked her father full in the face, and, forgetting the lessons
taught her by her priest, she said in a low, concentrated
voice:
"Beast!" That was all.
After Coupeau had eaten his soup he fell asleep and in the
morning woke quite amiable. He admired his daughter and said she
looked quite like a young lady in her white robe. Then he added
with a sentimental air that a father on such days was naturally
proud of his child. When they were ready to go to the church and
Nana met Pauline in the corridor, she examined the latter from
head to foot and smiled condescendingly on seeing that Pauline
had not a particle of chic.
The two families started off together, Nana and Pauline in
front, each with her prayer book in one hand and with the other
holding down her veil, which swelled in the wind like a sail.
They did not speak to each other but keenly enjoyed seeing the
shopkeepers run to their doors to see them, keeping their eyes
cast down devoutly but their ears wide open to any compliment
they might hear.
Nana's two aunts walked side by side, exchanging their
opinions in regard to Gervaise, whom they stigmatized as an
irreligious ne'er-do-well whose child would never have gone to
the Holy Communion if it had depended on her.
At the church Coupeau wept all the time. It was very silly, he
knew, but he could not help it. The voice of the cure was
pathetic; the little girls looked like white-robed angels; the
organ thrilled him, and the incense gratified his senses. There
was one especial anthem which touched him deeply. He was not the
only person who wept, he was glad to see, and when the ceremony
was over he left the church feeling that it was the happiest day
of his life. But an hour later he quarreled with Lorilleux in a
wineshop because the latter was so hardhearted.
The housewarming at the Poissons' that night was very gay.
Lantier sat between Gervaise and Virginie and was equally civil
and attentive to both. Opposite was Poisson with his calm,
impassive face, a look he had cultivated since he began his
career as a police officer.
But the queens of the fete were the two little girls, Nana and
Pauline, who sat very erect lest they should crush and deface
their pretty white dresses. At dessert there was a serious
discussion in regard to the future of the children. Mme Boche
said that Pauline would at once enter a certain manufactory,
where she would receive five or six francs per week. Gervaise had
not decided yet, for Nana had shown no especial leaning in any
direction. She had a good deal of taste, but she was
butter-fingered and careless.
"I should make a florist of her," said Mme Lerat. "It is clean
work and pretty work too."
Whereupon ensued a warm discussion. The men were especially
careful of their language out of deference to the little girls,
but Mme Lerat would not accept the lesson: she flattered herself
she could say what she pleased in such a way that it could not
offend the most fastidious ears.
Women, she declared, who followed her trade were more virtuous
than others. They rarely made a slip.
"I have no objection to your trade," interrupted Gervaise. "If
Nana likes to make flowers let her do so. Say, Nana, would you
like it?"
The little girl did not look up from her plate, into which she
was dipping a crust of bread. She smiled faintly as she
replied:
"Yes, Mamma; if you desire it I have no objection."
The decision was instantly made, and Coupeau wished his sister
to take her the very next day to the place where she herself
worked, Rue du Caire, and the circle talked gravely of the duties
of life. Boche said that Pauline and Nana were now women, since
they had been to Communion, and they ought to be serious and
learn to cook and to mend. They alluded to their future
marriages, their homes and their children, and the girls touched
each other under the table, giggled and grew very red. Lantier
asked them if they did not have little husbands already, and Nana
blushingly confessed that she loved Victor Fauconnier and never
meant to marry anyone else.
Mme Lorilleux said to Mme Boche on their way home:
"Nana is our goddaughter now, but if she goes into that flower
business, in six months she will be on the pavé,
and we will have nothing to do with her."
Gervaise told Boche that she thought the shop admirably
arranged. She had looked forward to an evening of torture and was
surprised that she had not experienced a pang.
Nana, as she undressed, asked her mother if the girl on the
next floor, who had been married the week before, wore a dress of
muslin like hers.
But this was the last bright day in that household. Two years
passed away, and their prospects grew darker and their
demoralization and degradation more evident. They went without
food and without fire, but never without brandy.
They found it almost impossible to meet their rent, and a
certain January came when they had not a penny, and Father Boche
ordered them to leave.
It was frightfully cold, with a sharp wind blowing from the
north.
M. Marescot appeared in a warm overcoat and his hands encased
in warm woolen gloves and told them they must go, even if they
slept in the gutter. The whole house was oppressed with woe, and
a dreary sound of lamentation arose from most of the rooms, for
half the tenants were behindhand. Gervaise sold her bed and paid
the rent. Nana made nothing as yet, and Gervaise had so fallen
off in her work that Mme Fauconnier had reduced her wages. She
was irregular in her hours and often absented herself from the
shop for several days together but was none the less vexed to
discover that her old employee, Mme Putois, had been placed above
her. Naturally at the end of the week Gervaise had little money
coming to her.
As to Coupeau, if he worked he brought no money home, and his
wife had ceased to count upon it. Sometimes he declared he had
lost it through a hole in his pocket or it had been stolen, but
after a while he ceased to make any excuses.
But if he had no cash in his pockets it was because he had
spent it all in drink. Mme Boche advised Gervaise to watch for
him at the door of the place where he was employed and get his
wages from him before he had spent them all, but this did no
good, as Coupeau was warned by his friends and escaped by a rear
door.
The Coupeaus were entirely to blame for their misfortunes, but
this is just what people will never admit. It is always ill luck
or the cruelty of God or anything, in short, save the legitimate
result of their own vices.
Gervaise now quarreled with her husband incessantly. The
warmth of affection of husband and wife, of parents for their
children and children for their parents had fled and left them
all shivering, each apart from the other.
All three, Coupeau, Gervaise and Nana, watched each other with
eyes of baleful hate. It seemed as if some spring had
broken—the great mainspring that binds families
together.
Gervaise did not shudder when she saw her husband lying drunk
in the gutter. She would not have pushed him in, to be sure, but
if he were out of the way it would be a good thing for everybody.
She even went so far as to say one day in a fit of rage that she
would be glad to see him brought home on a shutter. Of what good
was he to any human being? He ate and he drank and he slept. His
child learned to hate him, and she read the accidents in the
papers with the feelings of an unnatural daughter. What a pity it
was that her father had not been the man who was killed when that
omnibus tipped over!
In addition to her own sorrows and privations, Gervaise, whose
heart was not yet altogether hard, was condemned to hear now of
the sufferings of others. The corner of the house in which she
lived seemed to be consecrated to those who were as poor as
herself. No smell of cooking filled the air, which, on the
contrary, was laden with the shrill cries of hungry children,
heavy with the sighs of weary, heartbroken mothers and with the
oaths of drunken husbands and fathers.
Gervaise pitied Father Bru from the bottom of her heart; he
lay the greater part of the time rolled up in the straw in his
den under the staircase leading to the roof. When two or three
days elapsed without his showing himself someone opened the door
and looked in to see if he were still alive.
Yes, he was living; that is, he was not dead. When Gervaise
had bread she always remembered him. If she had learned to hate
men because of her husband her heart was still tender toward
animals, and Father Bru seemed like one to her. She regarded him
as a faithful old dog. Her heart was heavy within her whenever
she thought of him, alone, abandoned by God and man, dying by
inches or drying, rather, as an orange dries on the chimney
piece.
Gervaise was also troubled by the vicinity of the undertaker
Bazonge—a wooden partition alone separated their rooms.
When he came in at night she could hear him throw down his glazed
hat, which fell with a dull thud, like a shovelful of clay, on
the table. The black cloak hung against the wall rustled like the
wings of some huge bird of prey. She could hear his every
movement, and she spent most of her time listening to him with
morbid horror, while he—all unconscious—hummed his
vulgar songs and tipsily staggered to his bed, under which the
poor woman's sick fancy pictured a dead body concealed.
She had read in some paper a dismal tale of some undertaker
who took home with him coffin after coffin—children's
coffins—in order to make one trip to the cemetery suffice.
When she heard his step the whole corridor was pervaded to her
senses with the odor of dead humanity.
She would as lief have resided at Père-Lachaise and
watched the moles at their work. The man terrified her; his
incessant laughter dismayed her. She talked of moving but at the
same time was reluctant to do so, for there was a strange
fascination about Bazonge after all. Had he not told her once
that he would come for her and lay her down to sleep in the
shadow of waving branches, where she would know neither hunger
nor toil?
She wished she could try it for a month. And she thought how
delicious it would be in midwinter, just at the time her
quarter's rent was due. But, alas, this was not possible! The
rest and the sleep must be eternal; this thought chilled her, and
her longing for death faded away before the unrelenting severity
of the bonds exacted by Mother Earth.
One night she was sick and feverish, and instead of throwing
herself out of the window as she was tempted to do, she rapped on
the partition and called loudly:
"Father Bazonge! Father Bazonge!"
The undertaker was kicking off his slippers, singing a vulgar
song as he did so.
"What is the matter?" he answered.
But at his voice Gervaise awoke as from a nightmare. What had
she done? Had she really tapped? she asked herself, and she
recoiled from his side of the wall in chill horror. It seemed to
her that she felt the undertaker's hands on her head. No! No! She
was not ready. She told herself that she had not intended to call
him. It was her elbow that had knocked the wall accidentally, and
she shivered from head to foot at the idea of being carried away
in this man's arms.
"What is the matter?" repeated Bazonge. "Can I serve you in
any way, madame?"
"No! No! It is nothing!" answered the laundress in a choked
voice. "I am very much obliged."
While the undertaker slept she lay wide awake, holding her
breath and not daring to move, lest he should think she called
him again.
She said to herself that under no circumstances would she ever
appeal to him for assistance, and she said this over and over
again with the vain hope of reassuring herself, for she was by no
means at ease in her mind.
Gervaise had before her a noble example of courage and
fortitude in the Bijard family. Little Lalie, that tiny
child—about as big as a pinch of salt—swept and kept
her room like wax; she watched over the two younger children with
all the care and patience of a mother. This she had done since
her father had kicked her mother to death. She had entirely
assumed that mother's place, even to receiving the blows which
had fallen formerly on that poor woman. It seemed to be a
necessity of his nature that when he came home drunk he must have
some woman to abuse. Lalie was too small, he grumbled; one blow
of his fist covered her whole face, and her skin was so delicate
that the marks of his five fingers would remain on her cheek for
days!
He would fly at her like a wolf at a poor little kitten for
the merest trifle. Lalie never answered, never rebelled and never
complained. She merely tried to shield her face and suppressed
all shrieks, lest the neighbors should come; her pride could not
endure that. When her father was tired kicking her about the room
she lay where he left her until she had strength to rise, and
then she went steadily about her work, washing the children and
making her soup, sweeping and dusting until everything was clean.
It was a part of her plan of life to be beaten every day.
Gervaise had conceived a strong affection for this little
neighbor. She treated her like a woman who knew something of
life. It must be admitted that Lalie was large for her years. She
was fair and pale, with solemn eyes for her years and had a
delicate mouth. To have heard her talk one would have thought her
thirty. She could make and mend, and she talked of the children
as if she had herself brought them into the world. She made
people laugh sometimes when she talked, but more often she
brought tears to their eyes.
Gervaise did everything she could for her, gave her what she
could and helped the energetic little soul with her work. One day
she was altering a dress of Nana's for her, and when the child
tried it on Gervaise was chilled with horror at seeing her whole
back purple and bruised, the tiny arm bleeding—all the
innocent flesh of childhood martyrized by the brute—her
father.
Bazonge might get the coffin ready, she thought, for the
little girl could not bear this long. But Lalie entreated her
friend to say nothing, telling her that her father did not know
what he was doing, that he had been drinking. She forgave him
with her whole heart, for madmen must not be held accountable for
their deeds. After that Gervaise was on the watch whenever she
heard Bijard coming up the stairs. But she never caught him in
any act of absolute brutality. Several times she had found Lalie
tied to the foot of the bedstead—an idea that had entered
her father's brain, no one knew why, a whim of his disordered
brain, disordered by liquor, which probably arose from his wish
to tyrannize over the child, even when he was no longer
there.
Lalie sometimes was left there all day and once all night.
When Gervaise insisted on untying her the child entreated her not
to touch the knots, saying that her father would be furious if he
found the knots had been tampered with.
And really, she said with an angelic smile, she needed rest,
and the only thing that troubled her was not to be able to put
the room in order. She could watch the children just as well, and
she could think, so that her time was not entirely lost. When her
father let her free, her sufferings were not over, for it was
sometimes more than an hour before she could stand—before
the blood circulated freely in her stiffened limbs.
Her father had invented another cheerful game. He heated some
sous red hot on the stove and laid them on the chimney piece. He
then summoned Lalie and bade her go buy some bread. The child
unsuspiciously took up the sous, uttered a little shriek and
dropped them, shaking her poor burned fingers.
Then he would go off in a rage. What did she mean by such
nonsense? She had thrown away the money and lost it, and he
threatened her with a hiding if she did not find the money
instantly. The poor child hesitated; he gave her a cuff on the
side of the head. With silent tears streaming down her cheeks she
would pick up the sous and toss them from hand to hand to cool
them as she went down the long flights of stairs.
There was no limit to the strange ingenuity of the man. One
afternoon, for example, Lalie had completed playing with the
children. The window was open, and the air shook the door so that
it sounded like gentle raps.
"It is Mr Wind," said Lalie; "come in, Mr Wind. How are you
today?"
And she made a low curtsy to Mr Wind. The children did the
same in high glee, and she was quite radiant with happiness,
which was not often the case.
"Come in, Mr Wind!" she repeated, but the door was pushed open
by a rough hand and Bijard entered. Then a sudden change came
over the scene. The two children crouched in a corner, while
Lalie stood in the center of the floor, frozen stiff with terror,
for Bijard held in his hand a new whip with a long and
wicked-looking lash. He laid this whip on the bed and did not
kick either one of the children but smiled in the most vicious
way, showing his two lines of blackened, irregular teeth. He was
very drunk and very noisy.
"What is the matter with you fools? Have you been struck dumb?
I heard you all talking and laughing merrily enough before I came
in. Where are your tongues now? Here! Take off my shoes!"
Lalie, considerably disheartened at not having received her
customary kick, turned very pale as she obeyed. He was sitting on
the side of the bed. He lay down without undressing and watched
the child as she moved about the room. Troubled by this strange
conduct, the child ended by breaking a cup. Then without
disturbing himself he took up the whip and showed it to her.
"Look here, fool," he said grimly: "I bought this for you, and
it cost me fifty sous, but I expect to get a good deal more than
fifty sous' worth of good out of it. With this long lash I need
not run about after you, for I can reach you in every corner of
the room. You will break the cups, will you? Come, now, jump
about a little and say good morning to Mr Wind again!"
He did not even sit up in the bed but, with his head buried in
the pillow, snapped the whip with a noise like that made by a
postilion. The lash curled round Lalie's slender body; she fell
to the floor, but he lashed her again and compelled her to
rise.
"This is a very good thing," he said coolly, "and saves my
getting chilled on cold mornings. Yes, I can reach you in that
corner—and in that! Skip now! Skip!"
A light foam was on his lips, and his suffused eyes were
starting from their sockets. Poor little Lalie darted about the
room like a terrified bird, but the lash tingled over her
shoulders, coiled around her slender legs and stung like a viper.
She was like an India-rubber ball bounding from the floor, while
her beast of a father laughed aloud and asked her if she had had
enough.
The door opened and Gervaise entered. She had heard the noise.
She stood aghast at the scene and then was seized with noble
rage.
"Let her be!" she cried. "I will go myself and summon the
police."
Bijard growled like an animal who is disturbed over his
prey.
"Why do you meddle?" he exclaimed. "What business is it of
yours?"
And with another adroit movement he cut Lalie across the face.
The blood gushed from her lip. Gervaise snatched a chair and flew
at the brute, but the little girl held her skirts and said it did
not hurt much; it would be over soon, and she washed the blood
away, speaking gently to the frightened children.
When Gervaise thought of Lalie she was ashamed to complain.
She wished she had the courage of this child. She knew that she
had lived on dry bread for weeks and that she was so weak she
could hardly stand, and the tears came to the woman's eyes as she
saw the precocious mite who had known nothing of the innocent
happiness of her years. And Gervaise took this slender creature
for example, whose eyes alone told the story of her misery and
hardships, for in the Coupeau family the vitriol of the Assommoir
was doing its work of destruction. Gervaise had seen a whip.
Gervaise had learned to dread it, and this dread inspired her
with tenderest pity for Lalie. Coupeau had lost the flesh and the
bloated look which had been his, and he was thin and emaciated.
His complexion was gradually acquiring a leaden hue. His appetite
was utterly gone. It was with difficulty that he swallowed a
mouthful of bread. His stomach turned against all solid food, but
he took his brandy every day. This was his meat as well as his
drink, and he touched nothing else.
When he crawled out of his bed in the morning he stood for a
good fifteen minutes, coughing and spitting out a bitter liquid
that rose in his throat and choked him.
He did not feel any better until he had taken what he called
"a good drink," and later in the day his strength returned. He
felt strange prickings in the skin of his hands and feet. But
lately his limbs had grown heavy. This pricking sensation gave
place to the most excruciating cramps, which he did not find very
amusing. He rarely laughed now but often stopped short and stood
still on the sidewalk, troubled by a strange buzzing in his ears
and by flashes of light before his eyes. Everything looked yellow
to him; the houses seemed to be moving away from him. At other
times, when the sun was full on his back, he shivered as if a
stream of ice water had been poured down between his shoulders.
But the thing he liked the least about himself was a nervous
trembling in his hands, the right hand especially.
Had he become an old woman then? he asked himself with sudden
fury. He tried with all his strength to lift his glass and
command his nerves enough to hold it steady. But the glass had a
regular tremulous movement from right to left and left to right
again, in spite of all his efforts.
Then he emptied it down his throat, saying that when he had
swallowed a dozen more he would be all right and as steady as a
monument. Gervaise told him, on the contrary, that he must leave
off drinking if he wished to leave off trembling.
He grew very angry and drank quarts in his eagerness to test
the question, finally declaring that it was the passing
omnibusses that jarred the house and shook his hand.
In March Coupeau came in one night drenched to the skin. He
had been caught out in a shower. That night he could not sleep
for coughing. In the morning he had a high fever, and the
physician who was sent for advised Gervaise to send him at once
to the hospital.
And Gervaise made no objection; once she had refused to trust
her husband to these people, but now she consigned him to their
tender mercies without a regret; in fact, she regarded it as a
mercy.
Nevertheless, when the litter came she turned very pale and,
if she had had even ten francs in her pocket, would have kept him
at home. She walked to the hospital by the side of the litter and
went into the ward where he was placed. The room looked to her
like a miniature Père-Lachaise, with its rows of beds on
either side and its path down the middle. She went slowly away,
and in the street she turned and looked up. How well she
remembered when Coupeau was at work on those gutters, cheerily
singing in the morning air! He did not drink in those days, and
she, at her window in the Hôtel Boncoeur, had watched his
athletic form against the sky, and both had waved their
handkerchiefs. Yes, Coupeau had worked more than a year on this
hospital, little thinking that he was preparing a place for
himself. Now he was no longer on the roof—he had built a
dismal nest within. Good God, was she and the once-happy wife and
mother one and the same? How long ago those days seemed!
The next day when Gervaise went to make inquiries she found
the bed empty. A sister explained that her husband had been taken
to the asylum of Sainte-Anne, because the night before he had
suddenly become unmanageable from delirium and had uttered such
terrible howls that it disturbed the inmates of all the beds in
that ward. It was the alcohol in his system, she said, which
attacked his nerves now, when he was so reduced by the
inflammation on his lungs that he could not resist it.
The clearstarcher went home, but how or by what route she
never knew. Her husband was mad—she heard these words
reverberating through her brain. Life was growing very strange.
Nana simply said that he must, of course, be left at the asylum,
for he might murder them both.
On Sunday only could Gervaise go to Sainte-Anne. It was a long
distance off. Fortunately there was an omnibus which went very
near. She got out at La Rue Sante and bought two oranges that she
might not go quite empty-handed.
But when she went in, to her astonishment she found Coupeau
sitting up. He welcomed her gaily.
"You are better!" she exclaimed.
"Yes, nearly well," he replied, and they talked together
awhile, and she gave him the oranges, which pleased and touched
him, for he was a different man now that he drank tisane instead
of liquor. She did not dare allude to his delirium, but he spoke
of it himself.
"Yes," he said, "I was in a pretty state! I saw rats running
all over the floor and the walls, and you were calling me, and I
saw all sorts of horrible things! But I am all right now. Once in
a while I have a bad dream, but everybody does, I suppose."
Gervaise remained with him until night. When the house surgeon
made his rounds at six o'clock he told him to hold out his hands.
They scarcely trembled—an almost imperceptible motion of
the tips of his fingers was all. But as the room grew darker
Coupeau became restless. Two or three times he sat up and peered
into the remote corners.
Suddenly he stretched out his arms and seemed to crush some
creature on the wall.
"What is it?" asked Gervaise, terribly frightened.
"Rats!" he said quietly. "Only rats!"
After a long silence he seemed to be dropping off to sleep,
with disconnected sentences falling from his lips.
"Dirty beasts! Look out, one is under your skirts!" He pulled
the covering hastily over his head, as if to protect himself
against the creature he saw.
Then starting up in mad terror, he screamed aloud. A nurse ran
to the bed, and Gervaise was sent away, mute with horror at this
scene.
But when on the following Sunday she went again to the
hospital, Coupeau was really well. All his dreams had vanished.
He slept like a child, ten hours without lifting a finger. His
wife, therefore, was allowed to take him away. The house surgeon
gave him a few words of advice before he left, assuring him if he
continued to drink he would be a dead man in three months. All
depended on himself. He could live at home just as he had lived
at Sainte-Anne's and must forget that such things as wine and
brandy existed.
"He is right," said Gervaise as they took their seats in the
omnibus.
"Of course he is right," answered her husband. But after a
moment's silence he added:
"But then, you know, a drop of brandy now and then never hurts
a man: it aids digestion."
That very evening he took a tiny drop and for a week was very
moderate; he had no desire, he said, to end his days at Bicetre.
But he was soon off his guard, and one day his little drop ended
in a full glass, to be followed by a second, and so on. At the
end of a fortnight he had fallen back in the old rut.
Gervaise did her best, but, after all, what can a wife do in
such circumstances?
She had been so startled by the scene at the asylum that she
had fully determined to begin a regular life again and hoped that
he would assist her and do the same himself. But now she saw that
there was no hope, that even the knowledge of the inevitable
results could not restrain her husband now.
Then the hell on earth began again; hopeless and intolerant,
Nana asked indignantly why he had not remained in the asylum. All
the money she made, she said, should be spent in brandy for her
father, for the sooner it was ended, the better for them all.
Gervaise blazed out one day when he lamented his marriage and
told him that it was for her to curse the day when she first saw
him. He must remember that she had refused him over and over
again. The scene was a frightful one and one unexampled in the
Coupeau annals.
Gervaise, now utterly discouraged, grew more indolent every
day. Her room was rarely swept. The Lorilleuxs said they could
not enter it, it was so dirty. They talked all day long over
their work of the downfall of Wooden Legs. They gloated over her
poverty and her rags.
"Well! Well!" they murmured. "A great change has indeed come
to that beautiful blonde who was so fine in her blue shop."
Gervaise suspected their comments on her and her acts to be
most unkind, but she determined to have no open quarrel. It was
for her interest to speak to them when they met, but that was all
the intercourse between them.
On Saturday Coupeau had told his wife he would take her to the
circus; he had earned a little money and insisted on indulging
himself. Nana was obliged to stay late at the place where she
worked and would sleep with her aunt Mme Lerat.
Seven o'clock came, but no Coupeau. Her husband was drinking
with his comrades probably. She had washed a cap and mended an
old gown with the hope of being presentable. About nine o'clock,
in a towering rage, she sallied forth on an empty stomach to find
Coupeau.
"Are you looking for your husband?" said Mme Boche. "He is at
the Assommoir. Boche has just seen him there."
Gervaise muttered her thanks and went with rapid steps to the
Assommoir.
A fine rain was falling. The gas in the tavern was blazing
brightly, lighting up the mirrors, the bottles and glasses. She
stood at the window and looked in. He was sitting at a table with
his comrades. The atmosphere was thick with smoke, and he looked
stupefied and half asleep.
She shivered and wondered why she should stay there and, so
thinking, turned away, only to come back twice to look again.
The water lay on the uneven sidewalk in pools, reflecting all
the lights from the Assommoir. Finally she determined on a bold
step: she opened the door and deliberately walked up to her
husband. After all, why should she not ask him why he had not
kept his promise of taking her to the circus? At any rate, she
would not stay out there in the rain and melt away like a cake of
soap.
"She is crazy!" said Coupeau when he saw her. "I tell you, she
is crazy!"
He and all his friends shrieked with laughter, but no one
condescended to say what it was that was so very droll. Gervaise
stood still, a little bewildered by this unexpected reception.
Coupeau was so amiable that she said:
"Come, you know it is not too late to see something."
"Sit down a minute," said her husband, not moving from his
seat.
Gervaise saw she could not stand there among all those men, so
she accepted the offered chair. She looked at the glasses, whose
contents glittered like gold. She looked at these dirty, shabby
men and at the others crowding around the counter. It was very
warm, and the pipe smoke thickened the air.
Gervaise felt as if she were choking; her eyes smarted, and
her head was heavy with the fumes of alcohol. She turned around
and saw the still, the machine that created drunkards. That
evening the copper was dull and glittered only in one round spot.
The shadows of the apparatus on the wall behind were strange and
weird—creatures with tails, monsters opening gigantic jaws
as if to swallow the whole world.
"What will you take to drink?" said Coupeau.
"Nothing," answered his wife. "You know I have had no
dinner!"
"You need it all the more then! Have a drop of something!"
As she hesitated Mes-Bottes said gallantly:
"The lady would like something sweet like herself."
"I like men," she answered angrily, "who do not get tipsy and
talk like fools! I like men who keep their promises!"
Her husband laughed.
"You had better drink your share," he said, "for the devil a
bit of a circus will you see tonight."
She looked at him fixedly. A heavy frown contracted her
eyebrows. She answered slowly:
"You are right; it is a good idea. We can drink up the money
together."
Bibi brought her a glass of anisette. As she sipped it she
remembered all at once the brandied fruit she had eaten in the
same place with Coupeau when he was courting her. That day she
had left the brandy and took only the fruit, and now she was
sitting there drinking liqueur.
But the anisette was good. When her glass was empty she
refused another, and yet she was not satisfied.
She looked around at the infernal machine behind her—a
machine that should have been buried ten fathoms deep in the sea.
Nevertheless, it had for her a strange fascination, and she
longed to quench her thirst with that liquid fire.
"What is that you have in your glasses?" she asked.
"That, my dear," answered her husband, "is Father Colombe's
own especial brew. Taste it."
And when a glass of the vitriol was brought to her Coupeau
bade her swallow it down, saying it was good for her.
After she had drunk this glass Gervaise was no longer
conscious of the hunger that had tormented her. Coupeau told her
they could go to the circus another time, and she felt she had
best stay where she was. It did not rain in the Assommoir, and
she had come to look upon the scene as rather amusing. She was
comfortable and sleepy. She took a third glass and then put her
head on her folded arms, supporting them on the table, and
listened to her husband and his friends as they talked.
Behind her the still was at work with constant drip-drip, and
she felt a mad desire to grapple with it as with some dangerous
beast and tear out its heart. She seemed to feel herself caught
in those copper fangs and fancied that those coils of pipe were
wound around her own body, slowly but surely crushing out her
life.
The whole room danced before her eyes, for Gervaise was now in
the condition which had so often excited her pity and indignation
with others. She vaguely heard a quarrel arise and a crash of
chairs and tables, and then Father Colombe promptly turned
everyone into the street.
It was still raining and a cold, sharp wind blowing. Gervaise
lost Coupeau, found him and then lost him again. She wanted to go
home, but she could not find her way. At the corner of the street
she took her seat by the side of the gutter, thinking herself at
her washtub. Finally she got home and endeavored to walk straight
past the door of the concierge, within whose room she was vaguely
conscious of the Poissons and Lorilleuxs holding up their hands
in disgust at her condition.
She never knew how she got up those six flights of stairs. But
when she turned into her own corridor little Lalie ran toward her
with loving, extended arms.
"Dear Madame Gervaise," she cried, "Papa has not come in;
please come and see my children. They are sleeping so
sweetly!"
But when she looked up in the face of the clearstarcher she
recoiled, trembling from head to foot. She knew only too well
that alcoholic smell, those wandering eyes and convulsed
lips.
Then as Gervaise staggered past her without speaking the
child's arms fell at her side, and she looked after her friend
with sad and solemn eyes.



Nana was growing fast—fair, fresh and dimpled—her
skin velvety, like a peach, and eyes so bright that men often
asked her if they might not light their pipes at them. Her mass
of blonde hair—the color of ripe wheat—looked around
her temples as if it were powdered with gold. She had a quaint
little trick of sticking out the tip of her tongue between her
white teeth, and this habit, for some reason, exasperated her
mother.
She was very fond of finery and very coquettish. In this
house, where bread was not always to be got, it was difficult for
her to indulge her caprices in the matter of costume, but she did
wonders. She brought home odds and ends of ribbons from the shop
where she worked and made them up into bows and knots with which
she ornamented her dirty dresses. She was not overparticular in
washing her feet, but she wore her boots so tight that she
suffered martyrdom in honor of St Crispin, and if anyone asked
her what the matter was when the pain flushed her face suddenly,
she always and promptly laid it to the score of the colic.
Summer was the season of her triumphs. In a calico dress that
cost five or six francs she was as fresh and sweet as a spring
morning and made the dull street radiant with her youth and her
beauty. She went by the name of "The Little Chicken." One gown,
in particular, suited her to perfection. It was white with
rose-colored dots, without trimming of any kind. The skirt was
short and showed her feet. The sleeves were very wide and
displayed her arms to the elbows. She turned the neck away and
fastened it with pins—in a corner in the corridor, dreading
her father's jests—to exhibit her pretty rounded throat. A
rose-colored ribbon, knotted in the rippling masses of her hair,
completed her toilet. She was a charming combination of child and
woman.
Sundays at this period of her life were her days for
coquetting with the public. She looked forward to them all the
week through with a longing for liberty and fresh air.
Early in the morning she began her preparations and stood for
hours in her chemise before the bit of broken mirror nailed by
the window, and as everyone could see her, her mother would be
very much vexed and ask how long she intended to show herself in
that way.
But she, quite undisturbed, went on fastening down the little
curls on her forehead with a little sugar and water and then
sewed the buttons on her boots or took a stitch or two in her
frock, barefooted all this time and with her chemise slipping off
her rounded shoulders.
Her father declared he would exhibit her as the "Wild Girl,"
at two sous a head.
She was very lovely in this scanty costume, the color flushing
her cheeks in her indignation at her father's sometimes coarse
remarks. She did not dare answer him, however, but bit off her
thread in silent rage. After breakfast she went down to the
courtyard. The house was wrapped in Sunday quiet; the workshops
on the lower floor were closed. Through some of the open windows
the tables were seen laid for dinners, the families being on the
fortifications "getting an appetite."
Five or six girls—Nana, Pauline and
others—lingered in the courtyard for a time and then took
flight altogether into the streets and thence to the outer
boulevards. They walked in a line, filling up the whole sidewalk,
with ribbons fluttering in their uncovered hair.
They managed to see everybody and everything through their
downcast lids. The streets were their native heath, as it were,
for they had grown up in them.
Nana walked in the center and gave her arm to Pauline, and as
they were the oldest and tallest of the band, they gave the law
to the others and decided where they should go for the day and
what they should do.
Nana and Pauline were deep ones. They did nothing without
premeditation. If they ran it was to show their slender ankles,
and when they stopped and panted for breath it was sure to be at
the side of some youths—young workmen of their
acquaintance—who smoked in their faces as they talked. Nana
had her favorite, whom she always saw at a great
distance—Victor Fauconnier—and Pauline adored a young
cabinetmaker, who gave her apples.
Toward sunset the great pleasure of the day began. A band of
mountebanks would spread a well-worn carpet, and a circle was
formed to look on. Nana and Pauline were always in the thickest
of the crowd, their pretty fresh dresses crushed between dirty
blouses, but insensible to the mingled odors of dust and alcohol,
tobacco and dirt. They heard vile language; it did not disturb
them; it was their own tongue—they heard little else. They
listened to it with a smile, their delicate cheeks unflushed.
The only thing that disturbed them was the appearance of their
fathers, particularly if these fathers seemed to have been
drinking. They kept a good lookout for this disaster.
"Look!" cried Pauline. "Your father is coming, Nana."
Then the girl would crouch on her knees and bid the others
stand close around her, and when he had passed on after an
inquiring look she would jump up and they would all utter peals
of laughter.
But one day Nana was kicked home by her father, and Boche
dragged Pauline away by her ear.
The girls would ordinarily return to the courtyard in the
twilight and establish themselves there with the air of not
having been away, and each invented a story with which to greet
their questioning parents. Nana now received forty sous per day
at the place where she had been apprenticed. The Coupeaus would
not allow her to change, because she was there under the
supervision of her aunt, Mme Lerat, who had been employed for
many years in the same establishment.
The girl went off at an early hour in her little black dress,
which was too short and too tight for her, and Mme Lerat was
bidden, whenever she was after her time, to inform Gervaise, who
allowed her just twenty minutes, which was quite long enough. But
she was often seven or eight minutes late, and she spent her
whole day coaxing her aunt not to tell her mother. Mme Lerat, who
was fond of the girl and understood the follies of youth, did not
tell, but at the same time she read Nana many a long sermon on
her follies and talked of her own responsibility and of the
dangers a young girl ran in Paris.
"You must tell me everything," she said. "I am too indulgent
to you, and if evil should come of it I should throw myself into
the Seine. Understand me, my little kitten; if a man should speak
to you you must promise to tell me every word he says. Will you
swear to do this?"
Nana laughed an equivocal little laugh. Oh yes, she would
promise. But men never spoke to her; she walked too fast for
that. What could they say to her? And she explained her
irregularity in coming—her five or ten minutes
delay—with an innocent little air. She had stopped at a
window to look at pictures or she had stopped to talk to Pauline.
Her aunt might follow her if she did not believe her.
"Oh, I will watch her. You need not be afraid!" said the widow
to her brother. "I will answer for her, as I would for
myself!"
The place where the aunt and niece worked side by side was a
large room with a long table down the center. Shelves against the
wall were piled with boxes and bundles—all covered with a
thick coating of dust. The gas had blackened the ceiling. The two
windows were so large that the women, seated at the table, could
see all that was going on in the street below.
Mme Lerat was the first to make her appearance in the morning,
but in another fifteen minutes all the others were there. One
morning in July Nana came in last, which, however, was the usual
case.
"I shall be glad when I have a carriage!" she said as she ran
to the window without even taking off her hat—a shabby
little straw.
"What are you looking at?" asked her aunt suspiciously. "Did
your father come with you?"
"No indeed," answered Nana carelessly; "nor am I looking at
anything. It is awfully warm, and of all things in the world, I
hate to be in a hurry."
The morning was indeed frightfully hot. The workwomen had
closed the blinds, leaving a crack, however, through which they
could inspect the street, and they took their seats on each side
of the table—Mme Lerat at the farther end. There were eight
girls, four on either side, each with her little pot of glue, her
pincers and other tools; heaps of wires of different lengths and
sizes lay on the table, spools of cotton and of different-colored
papers, petals and leaves cut out of silk, velvet and satin. In
the center, in a goblet, one of the girls had placed a two-sou
bouquet,—which was slowly withering in the heat.
"Did you know," said Leonie as she picked up a rose leaf with
her pincers, "how wretched poor Caroline is with that fellow who
used to call for her regularly every night?"
Before anyone could answer Leonie added:
"Hush! Here comes Madame."
And in sailed Mme Titreville, a tall, thin woman, who usually
remained below in the shop. Her employees stood in dread terror
of her, as she was never known to smile. She went from one to
another, finding fault with all; she ordered one woman to pull a
marguerite to pieces and make it over and then went out as
stiffly and silently as she had come in.
"Houp! Houp!" said Nana under her breath, and a giggle ran
round the table.
"Really, young ladies," said Mme Lerat, "you will compel me to
severe measures."
But no one was listening, and no one feared her. She was very
tolerant. They could say what they pleased, provided they put it
in decent language.
Nana was certainly in a good school! Her instincts, to be
sure, were vicious, but these instincts were fostered and
developed in this place, as is too often the case when a crowd of
girls are herded together. It was the story of a basket of
apples, the good ones spoiled by those that were already rotten.
If two girls were whispering in a corner, ten to one they were
telling some story that could not be told aloud.
Nana was not yet thoroughly perverted, but the curiosity which
had been her distinguishing characteristic as a child had not
deserted her, and she scarcely took her eyes from a girl by the
name of Lisa, about whom strange stories were told.
"How warm it is!" she exclaimed, suddenly rising and pushing
open the blinds. Leonie saw a man standing on the sidewalk
opposite.
"Who is that old fellow?" she said. "He has been there a full
quarter of an hour."
"Some fool who has nothing better to do, I suppose," said Mme
Lerat. "Nana, will you come back to your work? I have told you
that you should not go to that window."
Nana took up her violets, and they all began to watch this
man. He was well dressed, about fifty, pale and grave. For a full
hour he watched the windows.
"Look!" said Leonie. "He has an eyeglass. Oh, he is very chic.
He is waiting for Augustine." But Augustine sharply answered that
she did not like the old man.
"You make a great mistake then," said Mme Lerat with her
equivocal smile.
Nana listened to the conversation which
followed—reveling in indecency—as much at home in it
as a fish is in water. All the time her fingers were busy at
work. She wound her violet stems and fastened in the leaves with
a slender strip of green paper. A drop of gum—and then
behold a bunch of delicate fresh verdure which would fascinate
any lady. Her fingers were especially deft by nature. No
instruction could have imparted this quality.
The gentleman had gone away, and the workshop settled down
into quiet once more. When the bell rang for twelve Nana started
up and said she would go out and execute any commissions. Leonie
sent for two sous' worth of shrimp, Augustine for some fried
potatoes, Sophie for a sausage and Lisa for a bunch of radishes.
As she was going out, her aunt said quietly:
"I will go with you. I want something."
Lo, in the lane running up by the shop was the mysterious
stranger. Nana turned very red, and her aunt drew her arm within
her own and hurried her along.
So then he had come for her! Was not this pretty behavior for
a girl of her age? And Mme Lerat asked question after question,
but Nana knew nothing of him, she declared, though he had
followed her for five days.
Mme Lerat looked at the man out of the corners of her eyes.
"You must tell me everything," she said.
While they talked they went from shop to shop, and their arms
grew full of small packages, but they hurried back, still talking
of the gentleman.
"It may be a good thing," said Mme Lerat, "if his intentions
are only honorable."
The workwomen ate their breakfast on their knees; they were in
no hurry, either, to return to their work, when suddenly Leonie
uttered a low hiss, and like magic each girl was busy. Mme
Titreville entered the room and again made her rounds.
Mme Lerat did not allow her niece after this day to set foot
on the street without her. Nana at first was inclined to rebel,
but, on the whole, it rather flattered her vanity to be guarded
like a treasure. They had discovered that the man who followed
her with such persistency was a manufacturer of buttons, and one
night the aunt went directly up to him and told him that he was
behaving in a most improper manner. He bowed and, turning on his
heel, departed—not angrily, by any means—and the next
day he did as usual.
One day, however, he deliberately walked between the aunt and
the niece and said something to Nana in a low voice. This
frightened Mme Lerat, who went at once to her brother and told
him the whole story, whereupon he flew into a violent rage, shook
the girl until her teeth chattered and talked to her as if she
were the vilest of the vile.
"Let her be!" said Gervaise with all a woman's sense. "Let her
be! Don't you see that you are putting all sorts of things into
her head?"
And it was quite true; he had put ideas into her head and had
taught her some things she did not know before, which was very
astonishing. One morning he saw her with something in a paper. It
was poudre de riz, which, with a most perverted taste, she
was plastering upon her delicate skin. He rubbed the whole of the
powder into her hair until she looked like a miller's daughter.
Another time she came in with red ribbons to retrim her old hat;
he asked her furiously where she got them.
Whenever he saw her with a bit of finery her father flew at
her with insulting suspicion and angry violence. She defended
herself and her small possessions with equal violence. One day he
snatched from her a little cornelian heart and ground it to dust
under his heel.
She stood looking on, white and stern; for two years she had
longed for this heart. She said to herself that she would not
bear such treatment long. Coupeau occasionally realized that he
had made a mistake, but the mischief was done.
He went every morning with Nana to the shop door and waited
outside for five minutes to be sure that she had gone in. But one
morning, having stopped to talk with a friend on the corner for
some time, he saw her come out again and vanish like a flash
around the corner. She had gone up two flights higher than the
room where she worked and had sat down on the stairs until she
thought him well out of the way.
When he went to Mme Lerat she told him that she washed her
hands of the whole business; she had done all she could, and now
he must take care of his daughter himself. She advised him to
marry the girl at once or she would do worse.
All the people in the neighborhood knew Nana's admirer by
sight. He had been in the courtyard several times, and once he
had been seen on the stairs.
The Lorilleuxs threatened to move away if this sort of thing
went on, and Mme Boche expressed great pity for this poor
gentleman whom this scamp of a girl was leading by the nose.
At first Nana thought the whole thing a great joke, but at the
end of a month she began to be afraid of him. Often when she
stopped before the jeweler's he would suddenly appear at her side
and ask her what she wanted.
She did not care so much for jewelry or ornaments as she did
for many other things. Sometimes as the mud was spattered over
her from the wheels of a carriage she grew faint and sick with
envious longings to be better dressed, to go to the theater, to
have a pretty room all to herself. She longed to see another side
of life, to know something of its pleasures. The stranger
invariably appeared at these moments, but she always turned and
fled, so great was her horror of him.
But when winter came existence became well-nigh intolerable.
Each evening Nana was beaten, and when her father was tired of
this amusement her mother scolded. They rarely had anything to
eat and were always cold. If the girl bought some trifling
article of dress it was taken from her.
No! This life could not last. She no longer cared for her
father. He had thoroughly disgusted her, and now her mother drank
too. Gervaise went to the Assommoir nightly—for her
husband, she said—and remained there. When Nana saw her
mother sometimes as she passed the window, seated among a crowd
of men, she turned livid with rage, because youth has little
patience with the vice of intemperance. It was a dreary life for
her—a comfortless home and a drunken father and mother. A
saint on earth could not have remained there; that she knew very
well, and she said she would make her escape some fine day, and
then perhaps her parents would be sorry and would admit that they
had pushed her out of the nest.
One Saturday Nana, coming in, found her mother and father in a
deplorable condition—Coupeau lying across the bed and
Gervaise sitting in a chair, swaying to and fro. She had
forgotten the dinner, and one untrimmed candle lighted the dismal
scene.
"Is that you, girl?" stammered Gervaise. "Well, your father
will settle with you!"
Nana did not reply. She looked around the cheerless room, at
the cold stove, at her parents. She did not step across the
threshold. She turned and went away.
And she did not come back! The next day when her father and
mother were sober, they each reproached the other for Nana's
flight.
This was really a terrible blow to Gervaise, who had no longer
the smallest motive for self-control, and she abandoned herself
at once to a wild orgy that lasted three days. Coupeau gave his
daughter up and smoked his pipe quietly. Occasionally, however,
when eating his dinner, he would snatch up a knife and wave it
wildly in the air, crying out that he was dishonored and then,
laying it down as suddenly, resumed eating his soup.
In this great house, whence each month a girl or two took
flight, this incident astonished no one. The Lorilleuxs were
rather triumphant at the success of their prophecy. Lantier
defended Nana.
"Of course," he said, "she has done wrong, but bless my heart,
what would you have? A girl as pretty as that could not live all
her days in such poverty!"
"You know nothing about it!" cried Mme Lorilleux one evening
when they were all assembled in the room of the concierge.
"Wooden Legs sold her daughter out and out. I know it! I have
positive proof of what I say. The time that the old gentleman was
seen on the stairs he was going to pay the money. Nana and he
were seen together at the Ambigu the other night! I tell you, I
know it!"
They finished their coffee. This tale might or might not be
true; it was not improbable, at all events. And after this it was
circulated and generally believed in the Quartier that
Gervaise had sold her daughter.
The clearstarcher, meanwhile, was going from bad to worse. She
had been dismissed from Mme Fauconnier's and in the last few
weeks had worked for eight laundresses, one after the
other—dismissed from all for her untidiness.
As she seemed to have lost all skill in ironing, she went out
by the day to wash and by degrees was entrusted with only the
roughest work. This hard labor did not tend to beautify her
either. She continued to grow stouter and stouter in spite of her
scanty food and hard labor.
Her womanly pride and vanity had all departed. Lantier never
seemed to see her when they met by chance, and she hardly noticed
that the liaison which had stretched along for so many years had
ended in a mutual disenchantment.
Lantier had done wisely, so far as he was concerned, in
counseling Virginie to open the kind of shop she had. He adored
sweets and could have lived on pralines and gumdrops, sugarplums
and chocolate.
Sugared almonds were his especial delight. For a year his
principal food was bonbons. He opened all the jars, boxes and
drawers when he was left alone in the shop; and often, with five
or six persons standing around, he would take off the cover of a
jar on the counter and put in his hand and crunch down an almond.
The cover was not put on again, and the jar was soon empty. It
was a habit of his, they all said; besides, he was subject to a
tickling in his throat!
He talked a great deal to Poisson of an invention of his which
was worth a fortune—an umbrella and hat in one; that is to
say, a hat which, at the first drops of a shower, would expand
into an umbrella.
Lantier suggested to Virginie that she should have Gervaise
come in once each week to wash the floors, shop and the rooms.
This she did and received thirty sous each time. Gervaise
appeared on Saturday mornings with her bucket and brush, without
seeming to suffer a single pang at doing this menial work in the
house where she had lived as mistress.
One Saturday Gervaise had hard work. It had rained for three
days, and all the mud of the streets seemed to have been brought
into the shop. Virginie stood behind the counter with collar and
cuffs trimmed with lace. Near her on a low chair lounged Lantier,
and he was, as usual, eating candy.
"Really, Madame Coupeau," cried Virginie, "can't you do better
than that? You have left all the dirt in the corners. Don't you
see? Oblige me by doing that over again."
Gervaise obeyed. She went back to the corner and scrubbed it
again. She was on her hands and knees, with her sleeves rolled up
over her arms. Her old skirt clung close to her stout form, and
the sweat poured down her face.
"The more elbow grease she uses, the more she shines," said
Lantier sententiously with his mouth full.
Virginie, leaning back in her chair with the air of a
princess, followed the progress of the work with half-closed
eyes.
"A little more to the right. Remember, those spots must all be
taken out. Last Saturday, you know, I was not pleased."
And then Lantier and Virginie fell into a conversation, while
Gervaise crawled along the floor in the dirt at their feet.
Mme Poisson enjoyed this, for her cat's eyes sparkled with
malicious joy, and she glanced at Lantier with a smile. At last
she was avenged for that mortification at the lavatory, which had
for years weighed heavy on her soul.
"By the way," said Lantier, addressing himself to Gervaise, "I
saw Nana last night."
Gervaise started to her feet with her brush in her hand.
"Yes, I was coming down La Rue des Martyrs. In front of me was
a young girl on the arm of an old gentleman. As I passed I
glanced at her face and assure you that it was Nana. She was well
dressed and looked happy."
"Ah!" said Gervaise in a low, dull voice.
Lantier, who had finished one jar, now began another.
"What a girl that is!" he continued. "Imagine that she made me
a sign to follow with the most perfect self-possession. She got
rid of her old gentleman in a cafe and beckoned me to the door.
She asked me to tell her about everybody."
"Ah!" repeated Gervaise.
She stood waiting. Surely this was not all. Her daughter must
have sent her some especial message. Lantier ate his
sugarplums.
"I would not have looked at her," said Virginie. "I sincerely
trust, if I should meet her, that she would not speak to me for,
really, it would mortify me beyond expression. I am sorry for
you, Madame Gervaise, but the truth is that Poisson arrests every
day a dozen just such girls."
Gervaise said nothing; her eyes were fixed on vacancy. She
shook her head slowly, as if in reply to her own thoughts.
"Pray make haste," exclaimed Virginie fretfully. "I do not
care to have this scrubbing going on until midnight."
Gervaise returned to her work. With her two hands clasped
around the handle of the brush she pushed the water before her
toward the door. After this she had only to rinse the floor after
sweeping the dirty water into the gutter.
When all was accomplished she stood before the counter waiting
for her money. When Virginie tossed it toward her she did not
take it up instantly.
"Then she said nothing else?" Gervaise asked.
"She?" Lantier exclaimed. "Who is she? Ah yes, I remember.
Nana! No, she said nothing more."
And Gervaise went away with her thirty sous in her hand, her
skirts dripping and her shoes leaving the mark of their broad
soles on the sidewalk.
In the Quartier all the women who drank like her took
her part and declared she had been driven to intemperance by her
daughter's misconduct. She, too, began to believe this herself
and assumed at times a tragic air and wished she were dead.
Unquestionably she had suffered from Nana's departure. A mother
does not like to feel that her daughter will leave her for the
first person who asks her to do so.
But she was too thoroughly demoralized to care long, and soon
she had but one idea: that Nana belonged to her. Had she not a
right to her own property?
She roamed the streets day after day, night after night,
hoping to see the girl. That year half the Quartier was
being demolished. All one side of the Rue des Poissonnièrs
lay flat on the ground. Lantier and Poisson disputed day after
day on these demolitions. The one declared that the emperor
wanted to build palaces and drive the lower classes out of Paris,
while Poisson, white with rage, said the emperor would pull down
the whole of Paris merely to give work to the people.
Gervaise did not like the improvements, either, or the changes
in the dingy Quartier, to which she was accustomed. It
was, in fact, a little hard for her to see all these
embellishments just when she was going downhill so fast over the
piles of brick and mortar, while she was wandering about in
search of Nana.
She heard of her daughter several times. There are always
plenty of people to tell you things you do not care to hear. She
was told that Nana had left her elderly friend for the sake of
some young fellow.
She heard, too, that Nana had been seen at a ball in the Grand
Salon, Rue de la Chapelle, and Coupeau and she began to frequent
all these places, one after another, whenever they had the money
to spend.
But at the end of a month they had forgotten Nana and went for
their own pleasure. They sat for hours with their elbows on a
table, which shook with the movements of the dancers, amused by
the sight.
One November night they entered the Grand Salon, as much to
get warm as anything else. Outside it was hailing, and the rooms
were naturally crowded. They could not find a table, and they
stood waiting until they could establish themselves. Coupeau was
directly in the mouth of the passage, and a young man in a frock
coat was thrown against him. The youth uttered an exclamation of
disgust as he began to dust off his coat with his handkerchief.
The blouse worn by Coupeau was assuredly none of the
cleanest.
"Look here, my good fellow," cried Coupeau angrily, "those
airs are very unnecessary. I would have you to know that the
blouse of a workingman can do your coat no harm if it has touched
it!"
The young man turned around and looked at Coupeau from head to
foot.
"Learn," continued the angry workman, "that the blouse is the
only wear for a man!"
Gervaise endeavored to calm her husband, who, however, tapped
his ragged breast and repeated loudly:
"The only wear for a man, I tell you!"
The youth slipped away and was lost in the crowd.
Coupeau tried to find him, but it was quite impossible; the
crowd was too great. The orchestra was playing a quadrille, and
the dancers were bringing up the dust from the floor in great
clouds, which obscured the gas.
"Look!" said Gervaise suddenly.
"What is it?"
"Look at that velvet bonnet!"
Quite at the left there was a velvet bonnet, black with
plumes, only too suggestive of a hearse. They watched these
nodding plumes breathlessly.
"Do you not know that hair?" murmured Gervaise hoarsely. "I am
sure it is she!"
In one second Coupeau was in the center of the crowd. Yes, it
was Nana, and in what a costume! She wore a ragged silk dress,
stained and torn. She had no shawl over her shoulders to conceal
the fact that half the buttonholes on her dress were burst out.
In spite of all her shabbiness the girl was pretty and fresh.
Nana, of course, danced on unsuspiciously. Her airs and graces
were beyond belief. She curtsied to the very ground and then in a
twinkling threw her foot over her partner's head. A circle was
formed, and she was applauded vociferously.
At this moment Coupeau fell on his daughter.
"Don't try and keep me back," he said, "for have her I
will!"
Nana turned and saw her father and mother.
Coupeau discovered that his daughter's partner was the young
man for whom he had been looking. Gervaise pushed him aside and
walked up to Nana and gave her two cuffs on her ears. One sent
the plumed hat on the side; the other left five red marks on that
pale cheek. The orchestra played on. Nana neither wept nor
moved.
The dancers began to grow very angry. They ordered the Coupeau
party to leave the room.
"Go," said Gervaise, "and do not attempt to leave us, for so
sure as you do you will be given in charge of a policeman."
The young man had prudently disappeared.
Nana's old life now began again, for after the girl had slept
for twelve hours on a stretch, she was very gentle and sweet for
a week. She wore a plain gown and a simple hat and declared she
would like to work at home. She rose early and took a seat at her
table by five o'clock the first morning and tried to roll her
violet stems, but her fingers had lost their cunning in the six
months in which they had been idle.
Then the gluepot dried up; the petals and the paper were dusty
and spotted; the mistress of the establishment came for her tools
and materials and made more than one scene. Nana relapsed into
utter indolence, quarreling with her mother from morning until
night. Of course an end must come to this, so one fine evening
the girl disappeared.
The Lorilleuxs, who had been greatly amused by the repentance
and return of their niece, now nearly died laughing. If she
returned again they would advise the Coupeaus to put her in a
cage like a canary.
The Coupeaus pretended to be rather pleased, but in their
hearts they raged, particularly as they soon learned that Nana
was frequently seen in the Quartier. Gervaise declared
this was done by the girl to annoy them.
Nana adorned all the balls in the vicinity, and the Coupeaus
knew that they could lay their hands on her at any time they
chose, but they did not choose and they avoided meeting her.
But one night, just as they were going to bed, they heard a
rap on the door. It was Nana, who came to ask as coolly as
possible if she could sleep there. What a state she was in! All
rags and dirt. She devoured a crust of dried bread and fell
asleep with a part of it in her hand. This continued for some
time, the girl coming and going like a will-o'-the-wisp. Weeks
and months would elapse without a sign from her, and then she
would reappear without a word to say where she had been,
sometimes in rags and sometimes well dressed. Finally her parents
began to take these proceedings as a matter of course. She might
come in, they said, or stay out, just as she pleased, provided
she kept the door shut. Only one thing exasperated Gervaise now,
and that was when her daughter appeared with a bonnet and
feathers and a train. This she would not endure. When Nana came
to her it must be as a simple workingwoman! None of this dearly
bought finery should be exhibited there, for these trained
dresses had created a great excitement in the house.
One day Gervaise reproached her daughter violently for the
life she led and finally, in her rage, took her by the shoulder
and shook her.
"Let me be!" cried the girl. "You are the last person to talk
to me in that way. You did as you pleased. Why can't I do the
same?"
"What do you mean?" stammered the mother.
"I have never said anything about it because it was none of my
business, but do you think I did not know where you were when my
father lay snoring? Let me alone. It was you who set me the
example."
Gervaise turned away pale and trembling, while Nana composed
herself to sleep again.
Coupeau's life was a very regular one—that is to say, he
did not drink for six months and then yielded to temptation,
which brought him up with a round turn and sent him to
Sainte-Anne's. When he came out he did the same thing, so that in
three years he was seven times at Sainte-Anne's, and each time he
came out the fellow looked more broken and less able to stand
another orgy.
The poison had penetrated his entire system. He had grown very
thin; his cheeks were hollow and his eyes inflamed. Those who
knew his age shuddered as they saw him pass, bent and decrepit as
a man of eighty. The trembling of his hands had so increased that
some days he was obliged to use them both in raising his glass to
his lips. This annoyed him intensely and seemed to be the only
symptom of his failing health which disturbed him. He sometimes
swore violently at these unruly members and at others sat for
hours looking at these fluttering hands as if trying to discover
by what strange mechanism they were moved. And one night Gervaise
found him sitting in this way with great tears pouring down his
withered cheeks.
The last summer of his life was especially trying to Coupeau.
His voice was entirely changed; he was deaf in one ear, and some
days he could not see and was obliged to feel his way up–
and downstairs as if he were blind. He suffered from maddening
headaches, and sudden pains would dart through his limbs, causing
him to snatch at a chair for support. Sometimes after one of
these attacks his arm would be paralyzed for twenty-four
hours.
He would lie in bed with even his head wrapped up, silent and
moody, like some suffering animal. Then came incipient madness
and fever—tearing everything to pieces that came in his
way—or he would weep and moan, declaring that no one loved
him, that he was a burden to his wife. One evening when his wife
and daughter came in he was not in his bed; in his place lay the
bolster carefully tucked in. They found him at last crouched on
the floor under the bed, with his teeth chattering with cold and
fear. He told them he had been attacked by assassins.
The two women coaxed him back to bed as if he had been a
baby.
Coupeau knew but one remedy for all this, and that was a good
stout morning dram. His memory had long since fled; his brain had
softened. When Nana appeared after an absence of six weeks he
thought she had been on an errand around the corner. She met him
in the street, too, very often now, without fear, for he passed
without recognizing her. One night in the autumn Nana went out,
saying she wanted some baked pears from the fruiterer's. She felt
the cold weather coming on, and she did not care to sit before a
cold stove. The winter before she went out for two sous' worth of
tobacco and came back in a month's time; they thought she would
do the same now, but they were mistaken. Winter came and went, as
did the spring, and even when June arrived they had seen and
heard nothing of her.
She was evidently comfortable somewhere, and the Coupeaus,
feeling certain that she would never return, had sold her bed; it
was very much in their way, and they could drink up the six
francs it brought.
One morning Virginie called to Gervaise as the latter passed
the shop and begged her to come in and help a little, as Lantier
had had two friends to supper the night before, and Gervaise
washed the dishes while Lantier sat in the shop smoking.
Presently he said:
"Oh, Gervaise, I saw Nana the other night."
Virginie, who was behind the counter, opening and shutting
drawer after drawer, with a face that lengthened as she found
each empty, shook her fist at him indignantly.
She had begun to think he saw Nana very often. She did not
speak, but Mme Lerat, who had just come in, said with a
significant look:
"And where did you see her?"
"Oh, in a carriage," answered Lantier with a laugh. "And I was
on the sidewalk." He turned toward Gervaise and went on:
"Yes, she was in a carriage, dressed beautifully. I did not
recognize her at first, but she kissed her hand to me. Her friend
this time must be a vicomte at the least. She looked as happy as
a queen."
Gervaise wiped the plate in her hands, rubbing it long and
carefully, though it had long since been dry. Virginie, with
wrinkled brows, wondered how she could pay two notes which fell
due the next day, while Lantier, fat and hearty from the sweets
he had devoured, asked himself if these drawers and jars would be
filled up again or if the ruin he anticipated was so near at hand
that he would be compelled to pull up stakes at once. There was
not another praline for him to crunch, not even a gumdrop.
When Gervaise went back to her room she found Coupeau sitting
on the side of the bed, weeping and moaning. She took a chair
near by and looked at him without speaking.
"I have news for you," she said at last. "Your daughter has
been seen. She is happy and comfortable. Would that I were in her
place!"
Coupeau was looking down on the floor intently. He raised his
head and said with an idiotic laugh:
"Do as you please, my dear; don't let me be any hindrance to
you. When you are dressed up you are not so bad looking after
all."



The weather was intensely cold about the middle of January.
Gervaise had not been able to pay her rent, due on the first. She
had little or no work and consequently no food to speak of. The
sky was dark and gloomy and the air heavy with the coming of a
storm. Gervaise thought it barely possible that her husband might
come in with a little money. After all, everything is possible,
and he had said that he would work. Gervaise after a little, by
dint of dwelling on this thought, had come to consider it a
certainty. Yes, Coupeau would bring home some money, and they
would have a good, hot, comfortable dinner. As to herself, she
had given up trying to get work, for no one would have her. This
did not much trouble her, however, for she had arrived at that
point when the mere exertion of moving had become intolerable to
her. She now lay stretched on the bed, for she was warmer
there.
Gervaise called it a bed. In reality it was only a pile of
straw in the corner, for she had sold her bed and all her
furniture. She occasionally swept the straw together with a
broom, and, after all, it was neither dustier nor dirtier than
everything else in the place. On this straw, therefore, Gervaise
now lay with her eyes wide open. How long, she wondered, could
people live without eating? She was not hungry, but there was a
strange weight at the pit of her stomach. Her haggard eyes
wandered about the room in search of anything she could sell. She
vaguely wished someone would buy the spider webs which hung in
all the corners. She knew them to be very good for cuts, but she
doubted if they had any market value.
Tired of this contemplation, she got up and took her one chair
to the window and looked out into the dingy courtyard.
Her landlord had been there that day and declared he would
wait only one week for his money, and if it were not forthcoming
he would turn them into the street. It drove her wild to see him
stand in his heavy overcoat and tell her so coldly that he would
pack her off at once. She hated him with a vindictive hatred, as
she did her fool of a husband and the Lorilleuxs and Poissons. In
fact, she hated everyone on that especial day.
Unfortunately people can't live without eating, and before the
woman's famished eyes floated visions of food. Not of dainty
little dishes. She had long since ceased to care for those and
ate all she could get without being in the least fastidious in
regard to its quality. When she had a little money she bought a
bullock's heart or a bit of cheese or some beans, and sometimes
she begged from a restaurant and made a sort of panada of the
crusts they gave her, which she cooked on a neighbor's stove. She
was quite willing to dispute with a dog for a bone. Once the
thought of such things would have disgusted her, but at that time
she did not—for three days in succession—go without a
morsel of food. She remembered how last week Coupeau had stolen a
half loaf of bread and sold it, or rather exchanged it, for
liquor.
She sat at the window, looking at the pale sky, and finally
fell asleep. She dreamed that she was out in a snowstorm and
could not find her way home. She awoke with a start and saw that
night was coming on. How long the days are when one's stomach is
empty! She waited for Coupeau and the relief he would bring.
The clock struck in the next room. Could it be possible? Was
it only three? Then she began to cry. How could she ever wait
until seven? After another half-hour of suspense she started up.
Yes, they might say what they pleased, but she, at least, would
try to borrow ten sous from the Lorilleuxs.
There was a continual borrowing of small sums in this corridor
during the winter, but no matter what was the emergency no one
ever dreamed of applying to the Lorilleuxs. Gervaise summoned all
her courage and rapped at the door.
"Come in!" cried a sharp voice.
How good it was there! Warm and bright with the glow of the
forge. And Gervaise smelled the soup, too, and it made her feel
faint and sick.
"Ah, it is you, is it?" said Mme Lorilleux. "What do you
want?"
Gervaise hesitated. The application for ten sous stuck in her
throat, because she saw Boche seated by the stove.
"What do you want?" asked Lorilleux, in his turn.
"Have you seen Coupeau?" stammered Gervaise. "I thought he was
here."
His sister answered with a sneer that they rarely saw Coupeau.
They were not rich enough to offer him as many glasses of wine as
he wanted in these days.
Gervaise stammered out a disconnected sentence.
He had promised to come home. She needed food; she needed
money.
A profound silence followed. Mme Lorilleux fanned her fire,
and her husband bent more closely over his work, while Boche
smiled with an expectant air.
"If I could have ten sous," murmured Gervaise.
The silence continued.
"If you would lend them to me," said Gervaise, "I would give
them back in the morning."
Mme Lorilleux turned and looked her full in the face, thinking
to herself that if she yielded once the next day it would be
twenty sous, and who could tell where it would stop?
"But, my dear," she cried, "you know we have no money and no
prospect of any; otherwise, of course, we would oblige you."
"Certainly," said Lorilleux, "the heart is willing, but the
pockets are empty."
Gervaise bowed her head, but she did not leave instantly. She
looked at the gold wire on which her sister-in-law was working
and at that in the hands of Lorilleux and thought that it would
take a mere scrap to give her a good dinner. On that day the room
was very dirty and filled with charcoal dust, but she saw it
resplendent with riches like the shop of a money-changer, and she
said once more in a low, soft voice:
"I will bring back the ten sous. I will, indeed!" Tears were
in her eyes, but she was determined not to say that she had eaten
nothing for twenty-four hours.
"I can't tell you how much I need it," she continued.
The husband and wife exchanged a look. Wooden Legs begging at
their door! Well! Well! Who would have thought it? Why had they
not known it was she when they rashly called out, "Come in?"
Really, they could not allow such people to cross their
threshold; there was too much that was valuable in the room. They
had several times distrusted Gervaise; she looked about so
queerly, and now they would not take their eyes off her.
Gervaise went toward Lorilleux as she spoke.
"Take care!" he said roughly. "You will carry off some of the
particles of gold on the soles of your shoes. It looks really as
if you had greased them!"
Gervaise drew back. She leaned against the
étagère for a moment and, seeing that her
sister-in-law's eyes were fixed on her hands, she opened them and
said in a gentle, weary voice—the voice of a woman who had
ceased to struggle:
"I have taken nothing. You can look for yourself."
And she went away; the warmth of the place and the smell of
the soup were unbearable.
The Lorilleuxs shrugged their shoulders as the door closed.
They hoped they had seen the last of her face. She had brought
all her misfortunes on her own head, and she had, therefore, no
right to expect any assistance from them. Boche joined in these
animadversions, and all three considered themselves avenged for
the blue shop and all the rest.
"I know her!" said Mme Lorilleux. "If I had lent her the ten
sous she wanted she would have spent it in liquor."
Gervaise crawled down the corridor with slipshod shoes and
slouching shoulders, but at her door she hesitated; she could not
go in: she was afraid. She would walk up and down a
little—that would keep her warm. As she passed she looked
in at Father Bru, but to her surprise he was not there, and she
asked herself with a pang of jealousy if anyone could possibly
have asked him out to dine. When she reached the Bijards' she
heard a groan. She went in.
"What is the matter?" she said.
The room was very clean and in perfect order. Lalie that very
morning had swept and arranged everything. In vain did the cold
blast of poverty blow through that chamber and bring with it dirt
and disorder. Lalie was always there; she cleaned and scrubbed
and gave to everything a look of gentility. There was little
money but much cleanliness within those four walls.
The two children were cutting out pictures in a corner, but
Lalie was in bed, lying very straight and pale, with the sheet
pulled over her chin.
"What is the matter?" asked Gervaise anxiously.
Lalie slowly lifted her white lids and tried to speak.
"Nothing," she said faintly; "nothing, I assure you!" Then as
her eyes closed she added:
"I am only a little lazy and am taking my ease."
But her face bore the traces of such frightful agony that
Gervaise fell on her knees by the side of the bed. She knew that
the child had had a cough for a month, and she saw the blood
trickling from the corners of her mouth.
"It is not my fault," Lalie murmured. "I thought I was strong
enough, and I washed the floor. I could not finish the windows
though. Everything but those are clean. But I was so tired that I
was obliged to lie down—"
She interrupted herself to say:
"Please see that my children are not cutting themselves with
the scissors."
She started at the sound of a heavy step on the stairs. Her
father noisily pushed open the door. As usual he had drunk too
much, and in his eyes blazed the lurid flames kindled by
alcohol.
When he saw Lalie lying down he walked to the corner and took
up the long whip, from which he slowly unwound the lash.
"This is a good joke!" he said. "The idea of your daring to go
to bed at this hour. Come, up with you!"
He snapped the whip over the bed, and the child murmured
softly:
"Do not strike me, Papa. I am sure you will be sorry if you
do. Do not strike me!"
"Up with you!" he cried. "Up with you!"
Then she answered faintly:
"I cannot, for I am dying."
Gervaise had snatched the whip from Bijard, who stood with his
under jaw dropped, glaring at his daughter. What could the little
fool mean? Whoever heard of a child dying like that when she had
not even been sick? Oh, she was lying!
"You will see that I am telling you the truth," she replied.
"I did not tell you as long as I could help it. Be kind to me
now, Papa, and say good-by as if you loved me."
Bijard passed his hand over his eyes. She did look very
strangely—her face was that of a grown woman. The presence
of death in that cramped room sobered him suddenly. He looked
around with the air of a man who had been suddenly awakened from
a dream. He saw the two little ones clean and happy and the room
neat and orderly.
He fell into a chair.
"Dear little mother!" he murmured. "Dear little mother!"
This was all he said, but it was very sweet to Lalie, who had
never been spoiled by overpraise. She comforted him. She told him
how grieved she was to go away and leave him before she had
entirely brought up her children. He would watch over them, would
he not? And in her dying voice she gave him some little details
in regard to their clothes. He—the alcohol having regained
its power—listened with round eyes of wonder.
After a long silence Lalie spoke again:
"We owe four francs and seven sous to the baker. He must be
paid. Madame Goudron has an iron that belongs to us; you must not
forget it. This evening I was not able to make the soup, but
there are bread and cold potatoes."
As long as she breathed the poor little mite continued to be
the mother of the family. She died because her breast was too
small to contain so great a heart, and that he lost this precious
treasure was entirely her father's fault. He, wretched creature,
had kicked her mother to death and now, just as surely, murdered
his daughter.
Gervaise tried to keep back her tears. She held Lalie's hands,
and as the bedclothes slipped away she rearranged them. In doing
so she caught a glimpse of the poor little figure. The sight
might have drawn tears from a stone. Lalie wore only a tiny
chemise over her bruised and bleeding flesh; marks of a lash
striped her sides; a livid spot was on her right arm, and from
head to foot she was one bruise.
Gervaise was paralyzed at the sight. She wondered, if there
were a God above, how He could have allowed the child to stagger
under so heavy a cross.
"Madame Coupeau," murmured the child, trying to draw the sheet
over her. She was ashamed, ashamed for her father.
Gervaise could not stay there. The child was fast sinking. Her
eyes were fixed on her little ones, who sat in the corner, still
cutting out their pictures. The room was growing dark, and
Gervaise fled from it. Ah, what an awful thing life was! And how
gladly would she throw herself under the wheels of an omnibus, if
that might end it!
Almost unconsciously Gervaise took her way to the shop where
her husband worked or, rather, pretended to work. She would wait
for him and get the money before he had a chance to spend it.
It was a very cold corner where she stood. The sounds of the
carriages and footsteps were strangely muffled by reason of the
fast-falling snow. Gervaise stamped her feet to keep them from
freezing. The people who passed offered few distractions, for
they hurried by with their coat collars turned up to their ears.
But Gervaise saw several women watching the door of the factory
quite as anxiously as herself—they were wives who, like
herself, probably wished to get hold of a portion of their
husbands' wages. She did not know them, but it required no
introduction to understand their business.
The door of the factory remained firmly shut for some time.
Then it opened to allow the egress of one workman; then two,
three, followed, but these were probably those who, well behaved,
took their wages home to their wives, for they neither retreated
nor started when they saw the little crowd. One woman fell on a
pale little fellow and, plunging her hand into his pocket,
carried off every sou of her husband's earnings, while he, left
without enough to pay for a pint of wine, went off down the
street almost weeping.
Some other men appeared, and one turned back to warn a
comrade, who came gamely and fearlessly out, having put his
silver pieces in his shoes. In vain did his wife look for them in
his pockets; in vain did she scold and coax—he had no
money, he declared.
Then came another noisy group, elbowing each other in their
haste to reach a cabaret, where they could drink away their
week's wages. These fellows were followed by some shabby men who
were swearing under their breath at the trifle they had received,
having been tipsy and absent more than half the week.
But the saddest sight of all was the grief of a meek little
woman in black, whose husband, a tall, good-looking fellow,
pushed her roughly aside and walked off down the street with his
boon companions, leaving her to go home alone, which she did,
weeping her very heart out as she went.
Gervaise still stood watching the entrance. Where was Coupeau?
She asked some of the men, who teased her by declaring that he
had just gone by the back door. She saw by this time that Coupeau
had lied to her, that he had not been at work that day. She also
saw that there was no dinner for her. There was not a shadow of
hope—nothing but hunger and darkness and cold.
She toiled up La Rue des Poissonnièrs when she suddenly
heard Coupeau's voice and, glancing in at the window of a
wineshop, she saw him drinking with Mes-Bottes, who had had the
luck to marry the previous summer a woman with some money. He was
now, therefore, well clothed and fed and altogether a happy
mortal and had Coupeau's admiration. Gervaise laid her hands on
her husband's shoulders as he left the cabaret.
"I am hungry," she said softly.
"Hungry, are you? Well then, eat your fist and keep the other
for tomorrow."
"Shall I steal a loaf of bread?" she asked in a dull, dreary
tone.
Mes-Bottes smoothed his chin and said in a conciliatory
voice:
"No, no! Don't do that; it is against the law. But if a woman
manages—"
Coupeau interrupted him with a coarse laugh.
Yes, a woman, if she had any sense, could always get along,
and it was her own fault if she starved.
And the two men walked on toward the outer boulevard. Gervaise
followed them. Again she said:
"I am hungry. You know I have had nothing to eat. You must
find me something."
He did not answer, and she repeated her words in a tone of
agony.
"Good God!" he exclaimed, turning upon her furiously. "What
can I do? I have nothing. Be off with you, unless you want to be
beaten."
He lifted his fist; she recoiled and said with set teeth:
"Very well then; I will go and find some man who has a
sou."
Coupeau pretended to consider this an excellent joke. Yes of
course she could make a conquest; by gaslight she was still
passably goodlooking. If she succeeded he advised her to dine at
the Capucin, where there was very good eating.
She turned away with livid lips; he called after her:
"Bring some dessert with you, for I love cake. And perhaps you
can induce your friend to give me an old coat, for I swear it is
cold tonight."
Gervaise, with this infernal mirth ringing in her ears,
hurried down the street. She was determined to take this
desperate step. She had only a choice between that and theft, and
she considered that she had a right to dispose of herself as she
pleased. The question of right and wrong did not present itself
very clearly to her eyes. "When one is starving is hardly the
time," she said to herself, "to philosophize." She walked slowly
up and down the boulevard. This part of Paris was crowded now
with new buildings, between whose sculptured facades ran narrow
lanes leading to haunts of squalid misery, which were cheek by
jowl with splendor and wealth.
It seemed strange to Gervaise that among this crowd who
elbowed her there was not one good Christian to divine her
situation and slip some sous into her hand. Her head was dizzy,
and her limbs would hardly bear her weight. At this hour ladies
with hats and well-dressed gentlemen who lived in these fine new
houses were mingled with the people—with the men and women
whose faces were pale and sickly from the vitiated air of the
workshops in which they passed their lives. Another day of toil
was over, but the days came too often and were too long. One
hardly had time to turn over in one's sleep when the everlasting
grind began again.
Gervaise went with the crowd. No one looked at her, for the
men were all hurrying home to their dinner. Suddenly she looked
up and beheld the Hôtel Boncoeur. It was empty, the
shutters and doors covered with placards and the whole facade
weather-stained and decaying. It was there in that hotel that the
seeds of her present life had been sown. She stood still and
looked up at the window of the room she had occupied and recalled
her youth passed with Lantier and the manner in which he had left
her. But she was young then and soon recovered from the blow.
That was twenty years ago, and now what was she?
The sight of the place made her sick, and she turned toward
Montmartre. She passed crowds of workwomen with little parcels in
their hands and children who had been sent to the baker's,
carrying four-pound loaves of bread as tall as themselves, which
looked like shining brown dolls.
By degrees the crowd dispersed, and Gervaise was almost alone.
Everyone was at dinner. She thought how delicious it would be to
lie down and never rise again—to feel that all toil was
over. And this was the end of her life! Gervaise, amid the pangs
of hunger, thought of some of the fete days she had known and
remembered that she had not always been miserable. Once she was
pretty, fair and fresh. She had been a kind and admired mistress
in her shop. Gentlemen came to it only to see her, and she
vaguely wondered where all this youth and this beauty had
fled.
Again she looked up; she had reached the abattoirs, which were
now being torn down; the fronts were taken away, showing the dark
holes within, the very stones of which reeked with blood. Farther
on was the hospital with its high, gray walls, with two wings
opening out like a huge fan. A door in the wall was the terror of
the whole Quartier—the Door of the Dead, it was
called—through which all the bodies were carried.
She hurried past this solid oak door and went down to the
railroad bridge, under which a train had just passed, leaving in
its rear a floating cloud of smoke. She wished she were on that
train which would take her into the country, and she pictured to
herself open spaces and the fresh air and expanse of blue sky;
perhaps she could live a new life there.
As she thought this her weary eyes began to puzzle out in the
dim twilight the words on a printed handbill pasted on one of the
pillars of the arch. She read one—an advertisement offering
fifty francs for a lost dog. Someone must have loved the creature
very much.
Gervaise turned back again. The street lamps were being lit
and defined long lines of streets and avenues. The restaurants
were all crowded, and people were eating and drinking. Before the
Assommoir stood a crowd waiting their turn and room within, and
as a respectable tradesman passed he said with a shake of the
head that many a man would be drunk that night in Paris. And over
this scene hung the dark sky, low and clouded.
Gervaise wished she had a few sous: she would, in that case,
have gone into this place and drunk until she ceased to feel
hungry, and through the window she watched the still with an
angry consciousness that all her misery and all her pain came
from that. If she had never touched a drop of liquor all might
have been so different.
She started from her reverie; this was the hour of which she
must take advantage. Men had dined and were comparatively
amiable. She looked around her and toward the trees
where—under the leafless branches—she saw more than
one female figure. Gervaise watched them, determined to do what
they did. Her heart was in her throat; it seemed to her that she
was dreaming a bad dream.
She stood for some fifteen minutes; none of the men who passed
looked at her. Finally she moved a little and spoke to one who,
with his hands in his pockets, was whistling as he walked.
"Sir," she said in a low voice, "please listen to me."
The man looked at her from head to foot and went on whistling
louder than before.
Gervaise grew bolder. She forgot everything except the pangs
of hunger. The women under the trees walked up and down with the
regularity of wild animals in a cage.
"Sir," she said again, "please listen."
But the man went on. She walked toward the Hôtel
Boncoeur again, past the hospital, which was now brilliantly lit.
There she turned and went back over the same ground—the
dismal ground between the slaughterhouses and the place where the
sick lay dying. With these two places she seemed to feel bound by
some mysterious tie.
"Sir, please listen!"
She saw her shadow on the ground as she stood near a street
lamp. It was a grotesque shadow—grotesque because of her
ample proportions. Her limp had become, with time and her
additional weight, a very decided deformity, and as she moved the
lengthening shadow of herself seemed to be creeping along the
sides of the houses with bows and curtsies of mock reverence.
Never before had she realized the change in herself. She was
fascinated by this shadow. It was very droll, she thought, and
she wondered if the men did not think so too.
"Sir, please listen!"
It was growing late. Man after man, in a beastly state of
intoxication, reeled past her; quarrels and disputes filled the
air.
Gervaise walked on, half asleep. She was conscious of little
except that she was starving. She wondered where her daughter was
and what she was eating, but it was too much trouble to think,
and she shivered and crawled on. As she lifted her face she felt
the cutting wind, accompanied by the snow, fine and dry, like
gravel. The storm had come.
People were hurrying past her, but she saw one man walking
slowly. She went toward him.
"Sir, please listen!"
The man stopped. He did not seem to notice what she said but
extended his hand and murmured in a low voice:
"Charity, if you please!"
The two looked at each other. Merciful heavens! It was Father
Bru begging and Mme Coupeau doing worse. They stood looking at
each other—equals in misery. The aged workman had been
trying to make up his mind all the evening to beg, and the first
person he stopped was a woman as poor as himself! This was indeed
the irony of fate. Was it not a pity to have toiled for fifty
years and then to beg his bread? To have been one of the most
flourishing laundresses in Paris and then to make her bed in the
gutter? They looked at each other once more, and without a word
each went their own way through the fast-falling snow, which
blinded Gervaise as she struggled on, the wind wrapping her thin
skirts around her legs so that she could hardly walk.
Suddenly an absolute whirlwind struck her and bore her
breathless and helpless along—she did not even know in what
direction. When at last she was able to open her eyes she could
see nothing through the blinding snow, but she heard a step and
saw the outlines of a man's figure. She snatched him by the
blouse.
"Sir," she said, "please listen."
The man turned. It was Goujet.
Ah, what had she done to be thus tortured and humiliated? Was
God in heaven an angry God always? This was the last dreg of
bitterness in her cup. She saw her shadow: her limp, she felt,
made her walk like an intoxicated woman, which was indeed hard,
when she had not swallowed a drop.
Goujet looked at her while the snow whitened his yellow
beard.
"Come!" he said.
And he walked on, she following him. Neither spoke.
Poor Mme Goujet had died in October of acute rheumatism, and
her son continued to reside in the same apartment. He had this
night been sitting with a sick friend.
He entered, lit a lamp and turned toward Gervaise, who stood
humbly on the threshold.
"Come in!" he said in a low voice, as if his mother could have
heard him.
The first room was that of Mme Goujet, which was unchanged
since her death. Near the window stood her frame, apparently
ready for the old lady. The bed was carefully made, and she could
have slept there had she returned from the cemetery to spend a
night with her son. The room was clean, sweet and orderly.
"Come in," repeated Goujet.
Gervaise entered with the air of a woman who is startled at
finding herself in a respectable place. He was pale and
trembling. They crossed his mother's room softly, and when
Gervaise stood within his own he closed the door.
It was the same room in which he had lived ever since she knew
him—small and almost virginal in its simplicity. Gervaise
dared not move.
Goujet snatched her in his arms, but she pushed him away
faintly.
The stove was still hot, and a dish was on the top of it.
Gervaise looked toward it. Goujet understood. He placed the dish
on the table, poured her out some wine and cut a slice of
bread.
"Thank you," she said. "How good you are!"
She trembled to that degree that she could hardly hold her
fork. Hunger gave her eyes the fierceness of a famished beast and
to her head the tremulous motion of senility. After eating a
potato she burst into tears but continued to eat, with the tears
streaming down her cheeks and her chin quivering.
"Will you have some more bread?" he asked. She said no; she
said yes; she did not know what she said.
And he stood looking at her in the clear light of the lamp.
How old and shabby she was! The heat was melting the snow on her
hair and clothing, and water was dripping from all her garments.
Her hair was very gray and roughened by the wind. Where was the
pretty white throat he so well remembered? He recalled the days
when he first knew her, when her skin was so delicate and she
stood at her table, briskly moving the hot irons to and fro. He
thought of the time when she had come to the forge and of the joy
with which he would have welcomed her then to his room. And now
she was there!
She finished her bread amid great silent tears and then rose
to her feet.
Goujet took her hand.
"I love you, Madame Gervaise; I love you still," he cried.
"Do not say that," she exclaimed, "for it is impossible."
He leaned toward her.
"Will you allow me to kiss you?" he asked respectfully.
She did not know what to say, so great was her emotion.
He kissed her gravely and solemnly and then pressed his lips
upon her gray hair. He had never kissed anyone since his mother's
death, and Gervaise was all that remained to him of the past.
He turned away and, throwing himself on his bed, sobbed aloud.
Gervaise could not endure this. She exclaimed:
"I love you, Monsieur Goujet, and I understand. Farewell!"
And she rushed through Mme Goujet's room and then through the
street to her home. The house was all dark, and the arched door
into the courtyard looked like huge, gaping jaws. Could this be
the house where she once desired to reside? Had she been deaf in
those days, not to have heard that wail of despair which pervaded
the place from top to bottom? From the day when she first set her
foot within the house she had steadily gone downhill.
Yes, it was a frightful way to live—so many people
herded together, to become the prey of cholera or vice. She
looked at the courtyard and fancied it a cemetery surrounded by
high walls. The snow lay white within it. She stepped over the
usual stream from the dyer's, but this time the stream was black
and opened for itself a path through the white snow. The stream
was the color of her thoughts. But she remembered when both were
rosy.
As she toiled up the six long flights in the darkness she
laughed aloud. She recalled her old dream—to work quietly,
have plenty to eat, a little home to herself, where she could
bring up her children, never to be beaten, and to die in her bed!
It was droll how things had turned out. She worked no more; she
had nothing to eat; she lived amid dirt and disorder. Her
daughter had gone to the bad, and her husband beat her whenever
he pleased. As for dying in her bed, she had none. Should she
throw herself out of the window and find one on the pavement
below?
She had not been unreasonable in her wishes, surely. She had
not asked of heaven an income of thirty thousand francs or a
carriage and horses. This was a queer world! And then she laughed
again as she remembered that she had once said that after she had
worked for twenty years she would retire into the country.
Yes, she would go into the country, for she should soon have
her little green corner in Père-Lachaise.
Her poor brain was disturbed. She had bidden an eternal
farewell to Goujet. They would never see each other again. All
was over between them—love and friendship too.
As she passed the Bijards' she looked in and saw Lalie lying
dead, happy and at peace. It was well with the child.
"She is lucky," muttered Gervaise.
At this moment she saw a gleam of light under the undertaker's
door. She threw it wide open with a wild desire that he should
take her as well as Lalie. Bazonge had come in that night more
tipsy than usual and had thrown his hat and cloak in the corner,
while he lay in the middle of the floor.
He started up and called out:
"Shut that door! And don't stand there—it is too cold.
What do you want?"
Then Gervaise, with arms outstretched, not knowing or caring
what she said, began to entreat him with passionate
vehemence:
"Oh, take me!" she cried. "I can bear it no longer. Take me, I
implore you!"
And she knelt before him, a lurid light blazing in her haggard
eyes.
Father Bazonge, with garments stained by the dust of the
cemetery, seemed to her as glorious as the sun. But the old man,
yet half asleep, rubbed his eyes and could not understand
her.
"What are you talking about?" he muttered.
"Take me," repeated Gervaise, more earnestly than before. "Do
you remember one night when I rapped on the partition? Afterward
I said I did not, but I was stupid then and afraid. But I am not
afraid now. Here, take my hands—they are not cold with
terror. Take me and put me to sleep, for I have but this one wish
now."
Bazonge, feeling that it was not proper to argue with a lady,
said:
"You are right. I have buried three women today, who would
each have given me a jolly little sum out of gratitude, if they
could have put their hands in their pockets. But you see, my dear
woman, it is not such an easy thing you are asking of me."
"Take me!" cried Gervaise. "Take me! I want to go away!"
"But there is a certain little operation first, you
know—" And he pretended to choke and rolled up his
eyes.
Gervaise staggered to her feet. He, too, rejected her and
would have nothing to do with her. She crawled into her room and
threw herself on her straw. She was sorry she had eaten anything
and delayed the work of starvation.



The next day Gervaise received ten francs from her son
Etienne, who had steady work. He occasionally sent her a little
money, knowing that there was none too much of that commodity in
his poor mother's pocket.
She cooked her dinner and ate it alone, for Coupeau did not
appear, nor did she hear a word of his whereabouts for nearly a
week. Finally a printed paper was given her which frightened her
at first, but she was soon relieved to find that it simply
conveyed to her the information that her husband was at
Sainte-Anne's again.
Gervaise was in no way disturbed. Coupeau knew the way back
well enough; he would return in due season. She soon heard that
he and Mes-Bottes had spent the whole week in dissipation, and
she even felt a little angry that they had not seen fit to offer
her a glass of wine with all their feasting and carousing.
On Sunday, as Gervaise had a nice little repast ready for the
evening, she decided that an excursion would give her an
appetite. The letter from the asylum stared her in the face and
worried her. The snow had melted; the sky was gray and soft, and
the air was fresh. She started at noon, as the days were now
short and Sainte-Anne's was a long distance off, but as there
were a great many people in the street, she was amused.
When she reached the hospital she heard a strange story. It
seems that Coupeau—how, no one could say—had escaped
from the hospital and had been found under the bridge. He had
thrown himself over the parapet, declaring that armed men were
driving him with the point of their bayonets.
One of the nurses took Gervaise up the stairs. At the head she
heard terrific howls which froze the marrow in her bones.
"It is he!" said the nurse.
"He? Whom do you mean?"
"I mean your husband. He has gone on like that ever since day
before yesterday, and he dances all the time too. You will
see!"
Ah, what a sight it was! The cell was cushioned from the floor
to the ceiling, and on the floor were mattresses on which Coupeau
danced and howled in his ragged blouse. The sight was terrific.
He threw himself wildly against the window and then to the other
side of the cell, shaking hands as if he wished to break them off
and fling them in defiance at the whole world. These wild motions
are sometimes imitated, but no one who has not seen the real and
terrible sight can imagine its horror.
"What is it? What is it?" gasped Gervaise.
A house surgeon, a fair and rosy youth, was sitting, calmly
taking notes. The case was a peculiar one and had excited a great
deal of attention among the physicians attached to the
hospital.
"You can stay awhile," he said, "but keep very quiet. He will
not recognize you, however."
Coupeau, in fact, did not seem to notice his wife, who had not
yet seen his face. She went nearer. Was that really he? She never
would have known him with his bloodshot eyes and distorted
features. His skin was so hot that the air was heated around him
and was as if it were varnished—shining and damp with
perspiration. He was dancing, it is true, but as if on burning
plowshares; not a motion seemed to be voluntary.
Gervaise went to the young surgeon, who was beating a tune on
the back of his chair.
"Will he get well, sir?" she said.
The surgeon shook his head.
"What is he saying? Hark! He is talking now."
"Just be quiet, will you?" said the young man. "I wish to
listen."
Coupeau was speaking fast and looking all about, as if he were
examining the underbrush in the Bois de Vincennes.
"Where is it now?" he exclaimed and then, straightening
himself, he looked off into the distance.
"It is a fair," he exclaimed, "and lanterns in the trees, and
the water is running everywhere: fountains, cascades and all
sorts of things."
He drew a long breath, as if enjoying the delicious freshness
of the air.
By degrees, however, his features contracted again with pain,
and he ran quickly around the wall of his cell.
"More trickery," he howled. "I knew it!"
He started back with a hoarse cry; his teeth chattered with
terror.
"No, I will not throw myself over! All that water would drown
me! No, I will not!"
"I am going," said Gervaise to the surgeon. "I cannot stay
another moment."
She was very pale. Coupeau kept up his infernal dance while
she tottered down the stairs, followed by his hoarse voice.
How good it was to breathe the fresh air outside!
That evening everyone in the huge house in which Coupeau had
lived talked of his strange disease. The concierge, crazy to hear
the details, condescended to invite Gervaise to take a glass of
cordial, forgetting that he had turned a cold shoulder upon her
for many weeks.
Mme Lorilleux and Mme Poisson were both there also. Boche had
heard of a cabinetmaker who had danced the polka until he died.
He had drunk absinthe.
Gervaise finally, not being able to make them understand her
description, asked for the table to be moved and there, in the
center of the loge, imitated her husband, making frightful leaps
and horrible contortions.
"Yes, that was what he did!"
And then everybody said it was not possible that man could
keep up such violent exercise for even three hours.
Gervaise told them to go and see if they did not believe her.
But Mme Lorilleux declared that nothing would induce her to set
foot within Sainte-Anne's, and Virginie, whose face had grown
longer and longer with each successive week that the shop got
deeper into debt, contented herself with murmuring that life was
not always gay—in fact, in her opinion, it was a pretty
dismal thing. As the wine was finished, Gervaise bade them all
good night. When she was not speaking she had sat with fixed,
distended eyes. Coupeau was before them all the time.
The next day she said to herself when she rose that she would
never go to the hospital again; she could do no good. But as
midday arrived she could stay away no longer and started forth,
without a thought of the length of the walk, so great were her
mingled curiosity and anxiety.
She was not obliged to ask a question; she heard the frightful
sounds at the very foot of the stairs. The keeper, who was
carrying a cup of tisane across the corridor, stopped when he saw
her.
"He keeps it up well!" he said.
She went in but stood at the door, as she saw there were
people there. The young surgeon had surrendered his chair to an
elderly gentleman wearing several decorations. He was the chief
physician of the hospital, and his eyes were like gimlets.
Gervaise tried to see Coupeau over the bald head of that
gentleman. Her husband was leaping and dancing with undiminished
strength. The perspiration poured more constantly from his brow
now; that was all. His feet had worn holes in the mattress with
his steady tramp from window to wall.
Gervaise asked herself why she had come back. She had been
accused the evening before of exaggerating the picture, but she
had not made it strong enough. The next time she imitated him she
could do it better. She listened to what the physicians were
saying: the house surgeon was giving the details of the night
with many words which she did not understand, but she gathered
that Coupeau had gone on in the same way all night. Finally he
said this was the wife of the patient. Wherefore the surgeon in
chief turned and interrogated her with the air of a police
judge.
"Did this man's father drink?"
"A little, sir. Just as everybody does. He fell from a roof
when he had been drinking and was killed."
"Did his mother drink?"
"Yes sir—that is, a little now and then. He had a
brother who died in convulsions, but the others are very
healthy."
The surgeon looked at her and said coldly:
"You drink too?"
Gervaise attempted to defend herself and deny the
accusation.
"You drink," he repeated, "and see to what it leads. Someday
you will be here, and like this."
She leaned against the wall, utterly overcome. The physician
turned away. He knelt on the mattress and carefully watched
Coupeau; he wished to see if his feet trembled as much as his
hands. His extremities vibrated as if on wires. The disease was
creeping on, and the peculiar shivering seemed to be under the
skin—it would cease for a minute or two and then begin
again. The belly and the shoulders trembled like water just on
the point of boiling.
Coupeau seemed to suffer more than the evening before. His
complaints were curious and contradictory. A million pins were
pricking him. There was a weight under the skin; a cold, wet
animal was crawling over him. Then there were other creatures on
his shoulder.
"I am thirsty," he groaned; "so thirsty."
The house surgeon took a glass of lemonade from a tray and
gave it to him. He seized the glass in both hands, drank one
swallow, spilling the whole of it at the same time. He at once
spat it out in disgust.
"It is brandy!" he exclaimed.
Then the surgeon, on a sign from his chief, gave him some
water, and Coupeau did the same thing.
"It is brandy!" he cried. "Brandy! Oh, my God!"
For twenty-four hours he had declared that everything he
touched to his lips was brandy, and with tears begged for
something else, for it burned his throat, he said. Beef tea was
brought to him; he refused it, saying it smelled of alcohol. He
seemed to suffer intense and constant agony from the poison which
he vowed was in the air. He asked why people were allowed to rub
matches all the time under his nose, to choke him with their vile
fumes.
The physicians watched Coupeau with care and interest. The
phantoms which had hitherto haunted him by night now appeared
before him at midday. He saw spiders' webs hanging from the wall
as large as the sails of a man-of-war. Then these webs changed to
nets, whose meshes were constantly contracting only to enlarge
again. These nets held black balls, and they, too, swelled and
shrank. Suddenly he cried out:
"The rats! Oh, the rats!"
The balls had been transformed to rats. The vile beasts found
their way through the meshes of the nets and swarmed over the
mattress and then disappeared as suddenly as they came.
The rats were followed by a monkey, who went in and came out
from the wall, each time so near his face that Coupeau started
back in disgust. All this vanished in the twinkling of an eye. He
apparently thought the walls were unsteady and about to fall, for
he uttered shriek after shriek of agony.
"Fire! Fire!" he screamed. "They can't stand long. They are
shaking! Fire! Fire! The whole heavens are bright with the light!
Help! Help!"
His shrieks ended in a convulsed murmur. He foamed at the
mouth. The surgeon in chief turned to the assistant.
"You keep the temperature at forty degrees?" he asked.
"Yes sir."
A dead silence ensued. Then the surgeon shrugged his
shoulders.
"Well, continue the same treatment—beef tea, milk,
lemonade and quinine as directed. Do not leave him, and send for
me if there is any change."
And he left the room, Gervaise following close at his heels,
seeking an opportunity of asking him if there was no hope. But he
stalked down the corridor with so much dignity that she dared not
approach him.
She stood for a moment, undecided whether she should go back
to Coupeau or not, but hearing him begin again the lamentable cry
for water:
"Water, not brandy!"
She hurried on, feeling that she could endure no more that
day. In the streets the galloping horses made her start with a
strange fear that all the inmates of Sainte-Anne's were at her
heels. She remembered what the physician had said, with what
terrors he had threatened her, and she wondered if she already
had the disease.
When she reached the house the concierge and all the others
were waiting and called her into the loge.
Was Coupeau still alive? they asked.
Boche seemed quite disturbed at her answer, as he had made a
bet that he would not live twenty-four hours. Everyone was
astonished. Mme Lorilleux made a mental calculation:
"Sixty hours," she said. "His strength is extraordinary."
Then Boche begged Gervaise to show them once more what Coupeau
did.
The demand became general, and it was pointed out to her that
she ought not to refuse, for there were two neighbors there who
had not seen her representation the night previous and who had
come in expressly to witness it.
They made a space in the center of the room, and a shiver of
expectation ran through the little crowd.
Gervaise was very reluctant. She was really
afraid—afraid of making herself ill. She finally made the
attempt but drew back again hastily.
No, she could not; it was quite impossible. Everyone was
disappointed, and Virginie went away.
Then everyone began to talk of the Poissons. A warrant had
been served on them the night before. Poisson was to lose his
place. As to Lantier, he was hovering around a woman who thought
of taking the shop and meant to sell hot tripe. Lantier was in
luck, as usual.
As they talked someone caught sight of Gervaise and pointed
her out to the others. She was at the very back of the loge, her
feet and hands trembling, imitating Coupeau, in fact. They spoke
to her. She stared wildly about, as if awaking from a dream, and
then left the room.
The next day she left the house at noon, as she had done
before. And as she entered Sainte-Anne's she heard the same
terrific sounds.
When she reached the cell she found Coupeau raving mad! He was
fighting in the middle of the cell with invisible enemies. He
tried to hide himself; he talked and he answered, as if there
were twenty persons. Gervaise watched him with distended eyes. He
fancied himself on a roof, laying down the sheets of zinc. He
blew the furnace with his mouth, and he went down on his knees
and made a motion as if he had soldering irons in his hand. He
was troubled by his shoes: it seemed as if he thought they were
dangerous. On the next roofs stood persons who insulted him by
letting quantities of rats loose. He stamped here and there in
his desire to kill them and the spiders too! He pulled away his
clothing to catch the creatures who, he said, intended to burrow
under his skin. In another minute he believed himself to be a
locomotive and puffed and panted. He darted toward the window and
looked down into the street as if he were on a roof.
"Look!" he said. "There is a traveling circus. I see the lions
and the panthers making faces at me. And there is
Clémence. Good God, man, don't fire!"
And he gesticulated to the men who, he said, were pointing
their guns at him.
He talked incessantly, his voice growing louder and louder,
higher and higher.
"Ah, it is you, is it? But please keep your hair out of my
mouth."
And he passed his hand over his face as if to take away the
hair.
"Who is it?" said the keeper.
"My wife, of course."
He looked at the wall, turning his back to Gervaise, who felt
very strange, and looked at the wall to see if she were there! He
talked on.
"You look very fine. Where did you get that dress? Come here
and let me arrange it for you a little. You devil! There he is
again!"
And he leaped at the wall, but the soft cushions threw him
back.
"Whom do you see?" asked the young doctor.
"Lantier! Lantier!"
Gervaise could not endure the eyes of the young man, for the
scene brought back to her so much of her former life.
Coupeau fancied, as he had been thrown back from the wall in
front, that he was now attacked in the rear, and he leaped over
the mattress with the agility of a cat. His respiration grew
shorter and shorter, his eyes starting from their sockets.
"He is killing her!" he shrieked. "Killing her! Just see the
blood!"
He fell back against the wall with his hands wide open before
him, as if he were repelling the approach of some frightful
object. He uttered two long, low groans and then fell flat on the
mattress.
"He is dead! He is dead!" moaned Gervaise.
The keeper lifted Coupeau. No, he was not dead; his bare feet
quivered with a regular motion. The surgeon in chief came in,
bringing two colleagues. The three men stood in grave silence,
watching the man for some time. They uncovered him, and Gervaise
saw his shoulders and back.
The tremulous motion had now taken complete possession of the
body as well as the limbs, and a strange ripple ran just under
the skin.
"He is asleep," said the surgeon in chief, turning to his
colleagues.
Coupeau's eyes were closed, and his face twitched
convulsively. Coupeau might sleep, but his feet did nothing of
the kind.
Gervaise, seeing the doctors lay their hands on Coupeau's
body, wished to do the same. She approached softly and placed her
hand on his shoulder and left it there for a minute.
What was going on there? A river seemed hurrying on under that
skin. It was the liquor of the Assommoir, working like a mole
through muscle, nerves, bone and marrow.
The doctors went away, and Gervaise, at the end of another
hour, said to the young surgeon:
"He is dead, sir."
But the surgeon, looking at the feet, said: "No," for those
poor feet were still dancing.
Another hour, and yet another passed. Suddenly the feet were
stiff and motionless, and the young surgeon turned to
Gervaise.
"He is dead," he said.
Death alone had stopped those feet.
When Gervaise went back she was met at the door by a crowd of
people who wished to ask her questions, she thought.
"He is dead," she said quietly as she moved on.
But no one heard her. They had their own tale to tell then.
How Poisson had nearly murdered Lantier. Poisson was a tiger, and
he ought to have seen what was going on long before. And Boche
said the woman had taken the shop and that Lantier was, as usual,
in luck again, for he adored tripe.
In the meantime Gervaise went directly to Mme Lerat and Mme
Lorilleux and said faintly:
"He is dead—after four days of horror."
Then the two sisters were in duty bound to pull out their
handkerchiefs. Their brother had lived a most dissolute life, but
then he was their brother.
Boche shrugged his shoulders and said in an audible voice:
"Pshaw! It is only one drunkard the less!"
After this day Gervaise was not always quite right in her
mind, and it was one of the attractions of the house to see her
act Coupeau.
But her representations were often involuntary. She trembled
at times from head to foot and uttered little spasmodic cries.
She had taken the disease in a modified form at Sainte-Anne's
from looking so long at her husband. But she never became
altogether like him in the few remaining months of her
existence.
She sank lower day by day. As soon as she got a little money
from any source whatever she drank it away at once. Her landlord
decided to turn her out of the room she occupied, and as Father
Bru was discovered dead one day in his den under the stairs, M.
Marescot allowed her to take possession of his quarters. It was
there, therefore, on the old straw bed, that she lay waiting for
death to come. Apparently even Mother Earth would have none of
her. She tried several times to throw herself out of the window,
but death took her by bits, as it were. In fact, no one knew
exactly when she died or exactly what she died of. They spoke of
cold and hunger.
But the truth was she died of utter weariness of life, and
Father Bazonge came the day she was found dead in her den.
Under his arm he carried a coffin, and he was very tipsy and
as gay as a lark.
"It is foolish to be in a hurry, because one always gets what
one wants finally. I am ready to give you all your good pleasure
when your time comes. Some want to go, and some want to stay. And
here is one who wanted to go and was kept waiting."
And when he lifted Gervaise in his great, coarse hands he did
it tenderly. And as he laid her gently in her coffin he murmured
between two hiccups:
"It is I—my dear, it is I," said this rough consoler of
women. "It is I. Be happy now and sleep quietly, my dear!"
THE END.

When Gervaise awoke about five o'clock, stiff and sore, she
burst into wild sobs, for Lantier had not come in. For the first
time he had slept out. She sat on the edge of the bed, half
shrouded in the canopy of faded chintz that hung from the arrow
fastened to the ceiling by a string. Slowly, with her eyes
suffused with tears, she looked around this miserable chambre
garnie, whose furniture consisted of a chestnut bureau of
which one drawer was absent, three straw chairs and a greasy
table on which was a broken-handled pitcher.
Another bedstead—an iron one—had been brought in
for the children. This stood in front of the bureau and filled up
two thirds of the room.
A trunk belonging to Gervaise and Lantier stood in the corner
wide open, showing its empty sides, while at the bottom a man's
old hat lay among soiled shirts and hose. Along the walls and on
the backs of the chairs hung a ragged shawl, a pair of muddy
pantaloons and a dress or two—all too bad for the
old-clothes man to buy. In the middle of the mantel between two
mismated tin candlesticks was a bundle of pawn tickets from the
Mont-de-Piété. These tickets were of a delicate
shade of rose.
The room was the best in the hotel—the first floor
looking out on the boulevard.
Meanwhile side by side on the same pillow the two children lay
calmly sleeping. Claude, who was eight years old, was breathing
calmly and regularly with his little hands outside of the
coverings, while Etienne, only four, smiled with one arm under
his brother's neck.
When their mother's eyes fell on them she had a new paroxysm
of sobs and pressed her handkerchief to her mouth to stifle them.
Then with bare feet, not stopping to put on her slippers which
had fallen off, she ran to the window out of which she leaned as
she had done half the night and inspected the sidewalks as far as
she could see.
The hotel was on the Boulevard de la Chapelle, at the left of
the Barrière Poissonnièrs. It was a two-story
building, painted a deep red up to the first floor, and had
disjointed weather-stained blinds.
Above a lantern with glass sides was a sign between the two
windows:
HÔTEL BONCOEUR
KEPT BY
MARSOULLIER
in large yellow letters, partially obliterated by the
dampness. Gervaise, who was prevented by the lantern from seeing
as she desired, leaned out still farther, with her handkerchief
on her lips. She looked to the right toward the Boulevard de
Rochechoumart, where groups of butchers stood with their bloody
frocks before their establishments, and the fresh breeze brought
in whiffs, a strong animal smell—the smell of slaughtered
cattle.
She looked to the left, following the ribbonlike avenue, past
the Hospital de Lariboisière, then building. Slowly, from
one end to the other of the horizon, did she follow the wall,
from behind which in the nightime she had heard strange groans
and cries, as if some fell murder were being perpetrated. She
looked at it with horror, as if in some dark corner—dark
with dampness and filth—she should distinguish
Lantier—Lantier lying dead with his throat cut.
Suddenly Gervaise thought she distinguished Lantier amid this
crowd, and she leaned eagerly forward at the risk of falling from
the window. With a fresh pang of disappointment she pressed her
handkerchief to her lips to restrain her sobs.
A fresh, youthful voice caused her to turn around.
"Lantier has not come in then?"
"No, Monsieur Coupeau," she answered, trying to smile.
The speaker was a tinsmith who occupied a tiny room at the top
of the house. His bag of tools was over his shoulder; he had seen
the key in the door and entered with the familiarity of a
friend.
"You know," he continued, "that I am working nowadays at the
hospital. What a May this is! The air positively stings one this
morning."
As he spoke he looked closely at Gervaise; he saw her eyes
were red with tears and then, glancing at the bed, discovered
that it had not been disturbed. He shook his head and, going
toward the couch where the children lay with their rosy cherub
faces, he said in a lower voice:
"You think your husband ought to have been with you, madame.
But don't be troubled; he is busy with politics. He went on like
a mad man the other day when they were voting for Eugene Sue.
Perhaps he passed the night with his friends abusing that
reprobate Bonaparte."
"No, no," she murmured with an effort. "You think nothing of
that kind I know where Lantier is only too well. We have our
sorrows like the rest of the world!"
Coupeau gave a knowing wink and departed, having offered to
bring her some milk if she did not care to go out; she was a good
woman, he told her and might count on him any time when she was
in trouble.
As soon as Gervaise was alone she returned to the window.
From the Barrière the lowing of the cattle and the
bleating of the sheep still came on the keen, fresh morning air.
Among the crowd she recognized the locksmiths by their blue
frocks, the masons by their white overalls, the painters by their
coats, from under which hung their blouses. This crowd was
cheerless. All of neutral tints—grays and blues
predominating, with never a dash of color. Occasionally a workman
stopped and lighted his pipe, while his companions passed on.
There was no laughing, no talking, but they strode on steadily
with cadaverous faces toward that Paris which quickly swallowed
them up.
At the two corners of La Rue des Poissonnièrs were two
wineshops, where the shutters had just been taken down. Here some
of the workmen lingered, crowding into the shop, spitting,
coughing and drinking glasses of brandy and water. Gervaise was
watching the place on the left of the street, where she thought
she had seen Lantier go in, when a stout woman, bareheaded and
wearing a large apron, called to her from the pavement,
"You are up early, Madame Lantier!"
Gervaise leaned out.
"Ah, is it you, Madame Boche! Yes, I am up early, for I have
much to do today."
"Is that so? Well, things don't get done by themselves, that's
sure!"
And a conversation ensued between the window and the sidewalk.
Mme Boche was the concierge of the house wherein the restaurant
Veau à Deux Têtes occupied the
rez-de-chaussée.
Many times Gervaise had waited for Lantier in the room of this
woman rather than face the men who were eating. The concierge
said she had just been round the corner to arouse a lazy fellow
who had promised to do some work and then went on to speak of one
of her lodgers who had come in the night before with some woman
and had made such a noise that every one was disturbed until
after three o'clock.
As she gabbled, however, she examined Gervaise with
considerable curiosity and seemed, in fact, to have come out
under the window for that express purpose.
"Is Monsieur Lantier still asleep?" she asked suddenly.
"Yes, he is asleep," answered Gervaise with flushing
cheeks.
Madame saw the tears come to her eyes and, satisfied with her
discovery, was turning away when she suddenly stopped and called
out:
"You are going to the lavatory this morning, are you not? All
right then, I have some things to wash, and I will keep a place
for you next to me, and we can have a little talk!"
Then as if moved by sudden compassion, she added:
"Poor child, don't stay at that window any longer. You are
purple with cold and will surely make yourself sick!"
But Gervaise did not move. She remained in the same spot for
two mortal hours, until the clock struck eight. The shops were
now all open. The procession in blouses had long ceased, and only
an occasional one hurried along. At the wineshops, however, there
was the same crowd of men drinking, spitting and coughing. The
workmen in the street had given place to the workwomen.
Milliners' apprentices, florists, burnishers, who with thin
shawls drawn closely around them came in bands of three or four,
talking eagerly, with gay laughs and quick glances. Occasionally
one solitary figure was seen, a pale-faced, serious woman, who
walked rapidly, neither looking to the right nor to the left.
Then came the clerks, blowing on their fingers to warm them,
eating a roll as they walked; young men, lean and tall, with
clothing they had outgrown and with eyes heavy with sleep; old
men, who moved along with measured steps, occasionally pulling
out their watches, but able, from many years' practice, to time
their movements almost to a second.
The boulevards at last were comparatively quiet. The
inhabitants were sunning themselves. Women with untidy hair and
soiled petticoats were nursing their babies in the open air, and
an occasional dirty-faced brat fell into the gutter or rolled
over with shrieks of pain or joy.
Gervaise felt faint and ill; all hope was gone. It seemed to
her that all was over and that Lantier would come no more. She
looked from the dingy slaughterhouses, black with their dirt and
loathsome odor, on to the new and staring hospital and into the
rooms consecrated to disease and death. As yet the windows were
not in, and there was nothing to impede her view of the large,
empty wards. The sun shone directly in her face and blinded
her.
She was sitting on a chair with her arms dropping drearily at
her side but not weeping, when Lantier quietly opened the door
and walked in.
"You have come!" she cried, ready to throw herself on his
neck.
"Yes, I have come," he answered, "and what of it? Don't begin
any of your nonsense now!" And he pushed her aside. Then with an
angry gesture he tossed his felt hat on the bureau.
He was a small, dark fellow, handsome and well made, with a
delicate mustache which he twisted in his fingers mechanically as
he spoke. He wore an old coat, buttoned tightly at the waist, and
spoke with a strongly marked Provencal accent.
Gervaise had dropped upon her chair again and uttered
disjointed phrases of lamentation.
"I have not closed my eyes—I thought you were killed!
Where have you been all night? I feel as if I were going mad!
Tell me, Auguste, where have you been?"
"Oh, I had business," he answered with an indifferent shrug of
his shoulders. "At eight o'clock I had an engagement with that
friend, you know, who is thinking of starting a manufactory of
hats. I was detained, and I preferred stopping there. But you
know I don't like to be watched and catechized. Just let me
alone, will you?"
His wife began to sob. Their voices and Lantier's noisy
movements as he pushed the chairs about woke the children. They
started up, half naked with tumbled hair, and hearing their
mother cry, they followed her example, rending the air with their
shrieks.
"Well, this is lovely music!" cried Lantier furiously. "I warn
you, if you don't all stop, that out of this door I go, and you
won't see me again in a hurry! Will you hold your tongue? Good-by
then; I'll go back where I came from."
He snatched up his hat, but Gervaise rushed toward him,
crying:
"No! No!"
And she soothed the children and stifled their cries with
kisses and laid them tenderly back in their bed, and they were
soon happy and merrily playing together. Meanwhile the father,
not even taking off his boots, threw himself on the bed with a
weary air. His face was white from exhaustion and a sleepless
night; he did not close his eyes but looked around the room.
"A nice-looking place, this!" he muttered.
Then examining Gervaise, he said half aloud and half to
himself:
"So! You have given up washing yourself, it seems!"
Gervaise was only twenty-two. She was tall and slender with
delicate features, already worn by hardships and anxieties. With
her hair uncombed and shoes down at the heel, shivering in her
white sack, on which was much dust and many stains from the
furniture and wall where it had hung, she looked at least ten
years older from the hours of suspense and tears she had
passed.
Lantier's word startled her from her resignation and
timidity.
"Are you not ashamed?" she said with considerable animation.
"You know very well that I do all I can. It is not my fault that
we came here. I should like to see you with two children in a
place where you can't get a drop of hot water. We ought as soon
as we reached Paris to have settled ourselves at once in a home;
that was what you promised."
"Pshaw," he muttered; "You had as much good as I had out of
our savings. You ate the fatted calf with me—and it is not
worth while to make a row about it now!"
She did not heed his word but continued:
"There is no need of giving up either. I saw Madame
Fauconnier, the laundress in La Rue Neuve. She will take me
Monday. If you go in with your friend we shall be afloat again in
six months. We must find some kind of a hole where we can live
cheaply while we work. That is the thing to do now. Work!
Work!"
Lantier turned his face to the wall with a shrug of disgust
which enraged his wife, who resumed:
"Yes, I know very well that you don't like to work. You would
like to wear fine clothes and walk about the streets all day. You
don't like my looks since you took all my dresses to the
pawnbrokers. No, no, Auguste, I did not intend to speak to you
about it, but I know very well where you spent the night. I saw
you go into the Grand-Balcon with that streetwalker Adèle.
You have made a charming choice. She wears fine clothes and is
clean. Yes, and she has reason to be, certainly; there is not a
man in that restaurant who does not know her far better than an
honest girl should be known!"
Lantier leaped from the bed. His eyes were as black as night
and his face deadly pale.
"Yes," repeated his wife, "I mean what I say. Madame Boche
will not keep her or her sister in the house any longer, because
there are always a crowd of men hanging on the staircase."
Lantier lifted both fists, and then conquering a violent
desire to beat her, he seized her in his arms, shook her
violently and threw her on the bed where the children were. They
at once began to cry again while he stood for a moment, and then,
with the air of a man who finally takes a resolution in regard to
which he has hesitated, he said:
"You do not know what you have done, Gervaise. You are
wrong—as you will soon discover."
For a moment the voices of the children filled the room. Their
mother, lying on their narrow couch, held them both in her arms
and said over and over again in a monotonous voice:
"If you were not here, my poor darlings! If you were not here!
If you were not here!"
Lantier was lying flat on his back with his eyes fixed on the
ceiling. He was not listening; his attention was concentrated on
some fixed idea. He remained in this way for an hour and more,
not sleeping, in spite of his evident and intense fatigue. When
he turned and, leaning on his elbow, looked about the room again,
he found that Gervaise had arranged the chamber and made the
children's bed. They were washed and dressed. He watched her as
she swept the room and dusted the furniture.
The room was very dreary still, however, with its
smoke-stained ceiling and paper discolored by dampness and three
chairs and dilapidated bureau, whose greasy surface no dusting
could clean. Then while she washed herself and arranged her hair
before the small mirror, he seemed to examine her arms and
shoulders, as if instituting a comparison between herself and
someone else. And he smiled a disdainful little smile.
Gervaise was slightly, very slightly, lame, but her lameness
was perceptible, only on such days as she was very tired. This
morning, so weary was she from the watches of the night, that she
could hardly walk without support.
A profound silence reigned in the room; they did not speak to
each other. He seemed to be waiting for something. She, adopting
an unconcerned air, seemed to be in haste.
She made up a bundle of soiled linen that had been thrown into
a corner behind the trunk, and then he spoke:
"What are you doing? Are you going out?"
At first she did not reply. Then when he angrily repeated the
question she answered:
"Certainly I am. I am going to wash all these things. The
children cannot live in dirt."
He threw two or three handkerchiefs toward her, and after
another long silence he said:
"Have you any money?"
She quickly rose to her feet and turned toward him; in her
hand she held some of the soiled clothes.
"Money! Where should I get money unless I had stolen it? You
know very well that day before yesterday you got three francs on
my black skirt. We have breakfasted twice on that, and money goes
fast. No, I have no money. I have four sous for the lavatory. I
cannot make money like other women we know."
He did not reply to this allusion but rose from the bed and
passed in review the ragged garments hung around the room. He
ended by taking down the pantaloons and the shawl and, opening
the bureau, took out a sack and two chemises. All these he made
into a bundle, which he threw at Gervaise.
"Take them," he said, "and make haste back from the
pawnbroker's."
"Would you not like me to take the children?" she asked.
"Heavens! If pawnbrokers would only make loans on children, what
a good thing it would be!"
She went to the Mont-de-Piété, and when she
returned a half-hour later she laid a silver five-franc piece on
the mantelshelf and placed the ticket with the others between the
two candlesticks.
"This is what they gave me," she said coldly. "I wanted six
francs, but they would not give them. They always keep on the
safe side there, and yet there is always a crowd."
Lantier did not at once take up the money. He had sent her to
the Mont-de-Piété that he might not leave her
without food or money, but when he caught sight of part of a ham
wrapped in paper on the table with half a loaf of bread he
slipped the silver piece into his vest pocket.
"I did not dare go to the milk woman," explained Gervaise,
"because we owe her for eight days. But I shall be back early.
You can get some bread and some chops and have them ready. Don't
forget the wine too."
He made no reply. Peace seemed to be made, but when Gervaise
went to the trunk to take out some of Lantier's clothing he
called out:
"No—let that alone."
"What do you mean?" she said, turning round in surprise. "You
can't wear these things again until they are washed! Why shall I
not take them?"
And she looked at him with some anxiety. He angrily tore the
things from her hands and threw them back into the trunk.
"Confound you!" he muttered. "Will you never learn to obey?
When I say a thing I mean it—"
"But why?" she repeated, turning very pale and seized with a
terrible suspicion. "You do not need these shirts; you are not
going away. Why should I not take them?"
He hesitated a moment, uneasy under the earnest gaze she fixed
upon him. "Why? Why? Because," he said, "I am sick of hearing you
say that you wash and mend for me. Attend to your own affairs,
and I will attend to mine."
She entreated him, defended herself from the charge of ever
having complained, but he shut the trunk with a loud bang and
then sat down upon it, repeating that he was master at least of
his own clothing. Then to escape from her eyes, he threw himself
again on the bed, saying he was sleepy and that she made his head
ache, and finally slept or pretended to do so.
Gervaise hesitated; she was tempted to give up her plan of
going to the lavatory and thought she would sit down to her
sewing. But at last she was reassured by Lantier's regular
breathing; she took her soap and her ball of bluing and, going to
the children, who were playing on the floor with some old corks,
she said in a low voice:
"Be very good and keep quiet. Papa is sleeping."
When she left the room there was not a sound except the
stifled laughter of the little ones. It was then after ten, and
the sun was shining brightly in at the window.
Gervaise, on reaching the boulevard, turned to the left and
followed the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or. As she passed Mme
Fauconnier's shop she nodded to the woman. The lavatory, whither
she went, was in the middle of this street, just where it begins
to ascend. Over a large low building towered three enormous
reservoirs for water, huge cylinders of zinc strongly made, and
in the rear was the drying room, an apartment with a very high
ceiling and surrounded by blinds through which the air passed. On
the right of the reservoirs a steam engine let off regular puffs
of white smoke. Gervaise, habituated apparently to puddles, did
not lift her skirts but threaded her way through the part of
eau de Javelle which encumbered the doorway. She knew the
mistress of the establishment, a delicate woman who sat in a
cabinet with glass doors, surrounded by soap and bluing and
packages of bicarbonate of soda.
As Gervaise passed the desk she asked for her brush and
beater, which she had left to be taken care of after her last
wash. Then having taken her number, she went in. It was an
immense shed, as it were, with a low ceiling—the beams and
rafters unconcealed—and lighted by large windows, through
which the daylight streamed. A light gray mist or steam pervaded
the room, which was filled with a smell of soapsuds and eau de
Javelle combined. Along the central aisle were tubs on either
side, and two rows of women with their arms bare to the shoulders
and their skirts tucked up stood showing their colored stockings
and stout laced shoes.
They rubbed and pounded furiously, straightening themselves
occasionally to utter a sentence and then applying themselves
again to their task, with the steam and perspiration pouring down
their red faces. There was a constant rush of water from the
faucets, a great splashing as the clothes were rinsed and
pounding and banging of the beaters, while amid all this noise
the steam engine in the corner kept up its regular puffing.
Gervaise went slowly up the aisle, looking to the right and
the left. She carried her bundle under her arm and limped more
than usual, as she was pushed and jarred by the energy of the
women about her.
"Here! This way, my dear," cried Mme Boche, and when the young
woman had joined her at the very end where she stood, the
concierge, without stopping her furious rubbing, began to talk in
a steady fashion.
"Yes, this is your place. I have kept it for you. I have not
much to do. Boche is never hard on his linen, and you, too, do
not seem to have much. Your package is quite small. We shall
finish by noon, and then we can get something to eat. I used to
give my clothes to a woman in La Rue Pelat, but bless my heart,
she washed and pounded them all away, and I made up my mind to
wash myself. It is clear gain, you see, and costs only the
soap."
Gervaise opened her bundle and sorted the clothes, laying
aside all the colored pieces, and when Mme Boche advised her to
try a little soda she shook her head.
"No, no!" she said. "I know all about it!"
"You know?" answered Boche curiously. "You have washed then in
your own place before you came here?"
Gervaise, with her sleeves rolled up, showing her pretty, fair
arms, was soaping a child's shirt. She rubbed it and turned it,
soaped and rubbed it again. Before she answered she took up her
beater and began to use it, accenting each phrase or rather
punctuating them with her regular blows.
"Yes, yes, washed—I should think I had! Ever since I was
ten years old. We went to the riverside, where I came from. It
was much nicer than here. I wish you could see it—a pretty
corner under the trees by the running water. Do you know
Plassans? Near Marseilles?"
"You are a strong one, anyhow!" cried Mme Boche, astonished at
the rapidity and strength of the woman. "Your arms are slender,
but they are like iron."
The conversation continued until all the linen was well beaten
and yet whole! Gervaise then took each piece separately, rinsed
it, then rubbed it with soap and brushed it. That is to say, she
held the cloth firmly with one hand and with the other moved the
short brush from her, pushing along a dirty foam which fell off
into the water below.
As she brushed they talked.
"No, we are not married," said Gervaise. "I do not intend to
lie about it. Lantier is not so nice that a woman need be very
anxious to be his wife. If it were not for the children! I was
fourteen and he was eighteen when the first one was born. The
other child did not come for four years. I was not happy at home.
Papa Macquart, for the merest trifle, would beat me. I might have
married, I suppose."
She dried her hands, which were red under the white
soapsuds.
"The water is very hard in Paris," she said.
Mme Boche had finished her work long before, but she continued
to dabble in the water merely as an excuse to hear this story,
which for two weeks had excited her curiosity. Her mouth was
open, and her eyes were shining with satisfaction at having
guessed so well.
"Oh yes, just as I knew," she said to herself, "but the little
woman talks too much! I was sure, though, there had been a
quarrel."
Then aloud:
"He is not good to you then?"
"He was very good to me once," answered Gervaise, "but since
we came to Paris he has changed. His mother died last year and
left him about seventeen hundred francs. He wished to come to
Paris, and as Father Macquart was in the habit of hitting me in
the face without any warning, I said I would come, too, which we
did, with the two children. I meant to be a fine laundress, and
he was to continue with his trade as a hatter. We might have been
very happy. But, you see, Lantier is extravagant; he likes
expensive things and thinks of his amusement before anything
else. He is not good for much, anyhow!
"We arrived at the Hôtel Montmartre. We had dinners and
carriages, suppers and theaters, a watch for him, a silk dress
for me—for he is not selfish when he has money. You can
easily imagine, therefore, at the end of two months we were
cleaned out. Then it was that we came to Hôtel Boncoeur and
that this life began." She checked herself with a strange choking
in the throat. Tears gathered in her eyes. She finished brushing
her linen.
"I must get my scalding water," she murmured.
But Mme Boche, much annoyed at this sudden interruption to the
long-desired confidence, called the boy.
"Charles," she said, "it would be very good of you if you
would bring a pail of hot water to Madame Lantier, as she is in a
great hurry." The boy brought a bucketful, and Gervaise paid him
a sou. It was a sou for each bucket. She turned the hot water
into her tub and soaked her linen once more and rubbed it with
her hands while the steam hovered round her blonde head like a
cloud.
"Here, take some of this," said the concierge as she emptied
into the water that Gervaise was using the remains of a package
of bicarbonate of soda. She offered her also some eau de
Javelle, but the young woman refused. It was only good, she
said, for grease spots and wine stains.
"I thought him somewhat dissipated," said Mme Boche, referring
to Lantier without naming him.
Gervaise, leaning over her tub and her arms up to the elbows
in the soapsuds, nodded in acquiescence.
"Yes," continued the concierge, "I have seen many little
things." But she started back as Gervaise turned round with a
pale face and quivering lips.
"Oh, I know nothing," she continued. "He likes to
laugh—that is all—and those two girls who are with
us, you know, Adèle and Virginie, like to laugh too, so
they have their little jokes together, but that is all there is
of it, I am sure."
The young woman, with the perspiration standing on her brow
and her arms still dripping, looked her full in the face with
earnest, inquiring eyes.
Then the concierge became excited and struck her breast,
exclaiming:
"I tell you I know nothing whatever, nothing more than I tell
you!"
Then she added in a gentle voice, "But he has honest eyes, my
dear. He will marry you, child; I promise that he will marry
you!"
Gervaise dried her forehead with her damp hand and shook her
head. The two women were silent for a moment; around them, too,
it was very quiet. The clock struck eleven. Many of the women
were seated swinging their feet, drinking their wine and eating
their sausages, sandwiched between slices of bread. An occasional
economical housewife hurried in with a small bundle under her
arm, and a few sounds of the pounder were still heard at
intervals; sentences were smothered in the full mouths, or a
laugh was uttered, ending in a gurgling sound as the wine was
swallowed, while the great machine puffed steadily on. Not one of
the women, however, heard it; it was like the very respiration of
the lavatory—the eager breath that drove up among the
rafters the floating vapor that filled the room.
The heat gradually became intolerable. The sun shone in on the
left through the high windows, imparting to the vapor opaline
tints—the palest rose and tender blue, fading into soft
grays. When the women began to grumble the boy Charles went from
one window to the other, drawing down the heavy linen shades.
Then he crossed to the other side, the shady side, and opened the
blinds. There was a general exclamation of joy—a formidable
explosion of gaiety.
All this time Gervaise was going on with her task and had just
completed the washing of her colored pieces, which she threw over
a trestle to drip; soon small pools of blue water stood on the
floor. Then she began to rinse the garments in cold water which
ran from a spigot near by.
"You have nearly finished," said Mme Boche. "I am waiting to
help you wring them."
"Oh, you are very good! It is not necessary though!" answered
the young woman as she swashed the garments through the clear
water. "If I had sheets I would not refuse your offer,
however."
Nevertheless, she accepted the aid of the concierge. They took
up a brown woolen skirt, badly faded, from which poured out a
yellow stream as the two women wrung it together.
Suddenly Mme Boche cried out:
"Look! There comes big Virginie! She is actually coming here
to wash her rags tied up in a handkerchief."
Gervaise looked up quickly. Virginie was a woman about her own
age, larger and taller than herself, a brunette and pretty in
spite of the elongated oval of her face. She wore an old black
dress with flounces and a red ribbon at her throat. Her hair was
carefully arranged and massed in a blue chenille net.
She hesitated a moment in the center aisle and half shut her
eyes, as if looking for something or somebody, but when she
distinguished Gervaise she went toward her with a haughty,
insolent air and supercilious smile and finally established
herself only a short distance from her.
"That is a new notion!" muttered Mme Boche in a low voice.
"She was never known before to rub out even a pair of cuffs. She
is a lazy creature, I do assure you. She never sews the buttons
on her boots. She is just like her sister, that minx of an
Adèle, who stays away from the shop two days out of three.
What is she rubbing now? A skirt, is it? It is dirty enough, I am
sure!"
It was clear that Mme Boche wished to please Gervaise. The
truth was she often took coffee with Adèle and Virginie
when the two sisters were in funds. Gervaise did not reply but
worked faster than before. She was now preparing her bluing water
in a small tub standing on three legs. She dipped in her pieces,
shook them about in the colored water, which was almost a lake in
hue, and then, wringing them, she shook them out and threw them
lightly over the high wooden bars.
While she did this she kept her back well turned on big
Virginie. But she felt that the girl was looking at her, and she
heard an occasional derisive sniff. Virginie, in fact, seemed to
have come there to provoke her, and when Gervaise turned around
the two women fixed their eyes on each other.
"Let her be," murmured Mme Boche. "She is not the one, now I
tell you!"
At this moment, as Gervaise was shaking her last piece of
linen, she heard laughing and talking at the door of the
lavatory.
"Two children are here asking for their mother!" cried
Charles.
All the women looked around, and Gervaise recognized Claude
and Etienne. As soon as they saw her they ran toward her,
splashing through the puddle's, their untied shoes half off and
Claude, the eldest, dragging his little brother by the hand.
The women as they passed uttered kindly exclamations of pity,
for the children were evidently frightened. They clutched their
mother's skirts and buried their pretty blond heads.
"Did Papa send you?" asked Gervaise.
But as she stooped to tie Etienne's shoes she saw on Claude's
finger the key of her room with its copper tag and number.
"Did you bring the key?" she exclaimed in great surprise. "And
why, pray?"
The child looked down on the key hanging on his finger, which
he had apparently forgotten. This seemed to remind him of
something, and he said in a clear, shrill voice:
"Papa is gone!"
"He went to buy your breakfast, did he not? And he told you to
come and look for me here, I suppose?"
Claude looked at his brother and hesitated. Then he
exclaimed:
"Papa has gone, I say. He jumped from the bed, put his things
in his trunk, and then he carried his trunk downstairs and put it
on a carriage. We saw him—he has gone!"
Gervaise was kneeling, tying the boy's shoe. She rose slowly
with a very white face and with her hands pressed to either
temple, as if she were afraid of her head cracking open. She
could say nothing but the same words over and over again:
"Great God! Great God! Great God!"
Mme Boche, in her turn, interrogated the child eagerly, for
she was charmed at finding herself an actor, as it were, in this
drama.
"Tell us all about it, my dear. He locked the door, did he?
And then he told you to bring the key here?" And then, lowering
her voice, she whispered in the child's ear:
"Was there a lady in the carriage?" she asked.
The child looked troubled for a moment but speedily began his
story again with a triumphant air.
"He jumped off the bed, put his things in the trunk, and he
went away."
Then as Mme Boche made no attempt to detain him, he drew his
brother to the faucet, where the two amused themselves in making
the water run.
Gervaise could not weep. She felt as if she were stifling. She
covered her face with her hands and turned toward the wall. A
sharp, nervous trembling shook her from head to foot. An
occasional sobbing sigh or, rather, gasp escaped from her lips,
while she pressed her clenched hands more tightly on her eyes, as
if to increase the darkness of the abyss in which she felt
herself to have fallen.
"Come! Come, my child!" muttered Mme Boche.
"If you knew! If you only knew all!" answered Gervaise. "Only
this very morning he made me carry my shawl and my chemises to
the Mont-de-Piété, and that was the money he had
for the carriage."
And the tears rushed to her eyes. The recollection of her
visit to the pawnbroker's, of her hasty return with the money in
her hand, seemed to let loose the sobs that strangled her and was
the one drop too much. Tears streamed from her eyes and poured
down her face. She did not think of wiping them away.
"Be reasonable, child! Be quiet," whispered Mme Boche. "They
are all looking at you. Is it possible you can care so much for
any man? You love him still, although such a little while ago you
pretended you did not care for him, and you cry as if your heart
would break! Oh lord, what fools we women are!"
Then in a maternal tone she added:
"And such a pretty little woman as you are too. But now I may
as well tell you the whole, I suppose? Well then, you remember
when I was talking to you from the sidewalk and you were at your
window? I knew then that it was Lantier who came in with
Adèle. I did not see his face, but I knew his coat, and
Boche watched and saw him come downstairs this morning. But he
was with Adèle, you understand. There is another person
who comes to see Virginie twice a week."
She stopped for a moment to take breath and then went on in a
lower tone still.
"Take care! She is laughing at you—the heartless little
cat! I bet all her washing is a sham. She has seen her sister and
Lantier well off and then came here to find out how you would
take it."
Gervaise took her hands down from her face and looked around.
When she saw Virginie talking and laughing with two or three
women a wild tempest of rage shook her from head to foot. She
stooped with her arms extended, as if feeling for something, and
moved along slowly for a step or two, then snatched up a bucket
of soapsuds and threw it at Virginie.
"You devil! Be off with you!" cried Virginie, starting back.
Only her feet were wet.
All the women in the lavatory hurried to the scene of action.
They jumped up on the benches, some with a piece of bread in
their hands, others with a bit of soap, and a circle of
spectators was soon formed.
"Yes, she is a devil!" repeated Virginie. "What has got into
the fool?" Gervaise stood motionless, her face convulsed and lips
apart. The other continued:
"She got tired of the country, it seems, but she left one leg
behind her, at all events."
The women laughed, and big Virginie, elated at her success,
went on in a louder and more triumphant tone:
"Come a little nearer, and I will soon settle you. You had
better have remained in the country. It is lucky for you that
your dirty soapsuds only went on my feet, for I would have taken
you over my knees and given you a good spanking if one drop had
gone in my face. What is the matter with her, anyway?" And big
Virginie addressed her audience: "Make her tell what I have done
to her! Say! Fool, what harm have I ever done to you?"
"You had best not talk so much," answered Gervaise almost
inaudibly; "you know very well where my husband was seen
yesterday. Now be quiet or harm will come to you. I will strangle
you—quick as a wink."
"Her husband, she says! Her husband! The lady's husband! As if
a looking thing like that had a husband! Is it my fault if he has
deserted her? Does she think I have stolen him? Anyway, he was
much too good for her. But tell me, some of you, was his name on
his collar? Madame has lost her husband! She will pay a good
reward, I am sure, to anyone who will carry him back!"
The women all laughed. Gervaise, in a low, concentrated voice,
repeated:
"You know very well—you know very well! Your
sister—yes, I will strangle your sister!"
"Oh yes, I understand," answered Virginie. "Strangle her if
you choose. What do I care? And what are you staring at me for?
Can't I wash my clothes in peace? Come, I am sick of this stuff.
Let me alone!"
Big Virginie turned away, and after five or six angry blows
with her beater she began again:
"Yes, it is my sister, and the two adore each other. You
should see them bill and coo together. He has left you with these
dirty-faced imps, and you left three others behind you with three
fathers! It was your dear Lantier who told us all that. Ah, he
had had quite enough of you—he said so!"
"Miserable fool!" cried Gervaise, white with anger.
She turned and mechanically looked around on the floor; seeing
nothing, however, but the small tub of bluing water, she threw
that in Virginie's face.
"She has spoiled my dress!" cried Virginie, whose shoulder and
one hand were dyed a deep blue. "You just wait a moment!" she
added as she, in her turn, snatched up a tub and dashed its
contents at Gervaise. Then ensued a most formidable battle. The
two women ran up and down the room in eager haste, looking for
full tubs, which they quickly flung in the faces of each other,
and each deluge was heralded and accompanied by a shout.
"Is that enough? Will that cool you off?" cried Gervaise.
And from Virginie:
"Take that! It is good to have a bath once in your life!"
Finally the tubs and pails were all empty, and the two women
began to draw water from the faucets. They continued their mutual
abuse while the water was running, and presently it was Virginie
who received a bucketful in her face. The water ran down her back
and over her skirts. She was stunned and bewildered, when
suddenly there came another in her left ear, knocking her head
nearly off her shoulders; her comb fell and with it her abundant
hair.
Gervaise was attacked about her legs. Her shoes were filled
with water, and she was drenched above her knees. Presently the
two women were deluged from head to foot; their garments stuck to
them, and they dripped like umbrellas which had been out in a
heavy shower.
"What fun!" said one of the laundresses as she looked on at a
safe distance.
The whole lavatory were immensely amused, and the women
applauded as if at a theater. The floor was covered an inch deep
with water, through which the termagants splashed. Suddenly
Virginie discovered a bucket of scalding water standing a little
apart; she caught it and threw it upon Gervaise. There was an
exclamation of horror from the lookers-on. Gervaise escaped with
only one foot slightly burned, but exasperated by the pain, she
threw a tub with all her strength at the legs of her opponent.
Virginie fell to the ground.
"She has broken her leg!" cried one of the spectators.
"She deserved it," answered another, "for the tall one tried
to scald her!"
"She was right, after all, if the blonde had taken away her
man!"
Mme Boche rent the air with her exclamations, waving her arms
frantically high above her head. She had taken the precaution to
place herself behind a rampart of tubs, with Claude and Etienne
clinging to her skirts, weeping and sobbing in a paroxysm of
terror and keeping up a cry of "Mamma! Mamma!" When she saw
Virginie prostrate on the ground she rushed to Gervaise and tried
to pull her away.
"Come with me!" she urged. "Do be sensible. You are growing so
angry that the Lord only knows what the end of all this will
be!"
But Gervaise pushed her aside, and the old woman again took
refuge behind the tubs with the children. Virginie made a spring
at the throat of her adversary and actually tried to strangle
her. Gervaise shook her off and snatched at the long braid
hanging from the girl's head and pulled it as if she hoped to
wrench it off, and the head with it.
The battle began again, this time silent and wordless and
literally tooth and nail. Their extended hands with fingers
stiffly crooked, caught wildly at all in their way, scratching
and tearing. The red ribbon and the chenille net worn by the
brunette were torn off; the waist of her dress was ripped from
throat to belt and showed the white skin on the shoulder.
Gervaise had lost a sleeve, and her chemise was torn to her
waist. Strips of clothing lay in every direction. It was Gervaise
who was first wounded. Three long scratches from her mouth to her
throat bled profusely, and she fought with her eyes shut lest she
should be blinded. As yet Virginia showed no wound. Suddenly
Gervaise seized one of her earrings—pear-shaped, of yellow
glass—she tore it out and brought blood.
"They will kill each other! Separate them," cried several
voices.
The women gathered around the combatants; the spectators were
divided into two parties—some exciting and encouraging
Gervaise and Virginie as if they had been dogs fighting, while
others, more timid, trembled, turned away their heads and said
they were faint and sick. A general battle threatened to take
place, such was the excitement.
Mme Boche called to the boy in charge:
"Charles! Charles! Where on earth can he be?"
Finally she discovered him, calmly looking on with his arms
folded. He was a tall youth with a big neck. He was laughing and
hugely enjoying the scene. It would be a capital joke, he
thought, if the women tore each other's clothes to rags and if
they should be compelled to finish their fight in a state of
nudity.
"Are you there then?" cried Mme Boche when she saw him. "Come
and help us separate them, or you can do it yourself."
"No, thank you," he answered quietly. "I don't propose to have
my own eyes scratched out! I am not here for that. Let them
alone! It will do them no harm to let a little of their hot blood
out!"
Mme Boche declared she would summon the police, but to this
the mistress of the lavatory, the delicate-looking woman with
weak eyes, strenuously objected.
"No, no, I will not. It would injure my house!" she said over
and over again.
Both women lay on the ground. Suddenly Virginie struggled up
to her knees. She had got possession of one of the beaters, which
she brandished. Her voice was hoarse and low as she muttered:
"This will be as good for you as for your dirty linen!"
Gervaise, in her turn, snatched another beater, which she held
like a club. Her voice also was hoarse and low.
"I will beat your skin," she muttered, "as I would my coarse
towels."
They knelt in front of each other in utter silence for at
least a minute, with hair streaming, eyes glaring and distended
nostrils. They each drew a long breath.
Gervaise struck the first blow with her beater full on the
shoulders of her adversary and then threw herself over on the
side to escape Virginie's weapon, which touched her on the
hip.
Thus started, they struck each other as laundresses strike
their linen, in measured cadence.
The women about them ceased to laugh; many went away, saying
they were faint. Those who remained watched the scene with a
cruel light in their eyes. Mme Boche had taken Claude and Etienne
to the other end of the room, whence came the dreary sound of
their sobs which were heard through the dull blows of the
beaters.
Suddenly Gervaise uttered a shriek. Virginie had struck her
just above the elbow on her bare arm, and the flesh began to
swell at once. She rushed at Virginie; her face was so terrible
that the spectators thought she meant to kill her.
"Enough! Enough!" they cried.
With almost superhuman strength she seized Virginie by the
waist, bent her forward with her face to the brick floor and,
notwithstanding her struggles, lifted her skirts and showed the
white and naked skin. Then she brought her beater down as she had
formerly done at Plassans under the trees on the riverside, where
her employer had washed the linen of the garrison.
Each blow of the beater fell on the soft flesh with a dull
thud, leaving a scarlet mark.
"Oh! Oh!" murmured Charles with his eyes nearly starting from
his head.
The women were laughing again by this time, but soon the cry
began again of "Enough! Enough!"
Gervaise did not even hear. She seemed entirely absorbed, as
if she were fulfilling an appointed task, and she talked with
strange, wild gaiety, recalling one of the rhymes of her
childhood:
"Pan! Pan! Margot au lavoir,
 Pan! Pan! à coups de battoir;
 Pan! Pan! va laver son coeur,
 Pan! Pan! tout noir de douleur
"Take that for yourself and that for your sister and this for
Lantier. And now I shall begin all over again. That is for
Lantier—that for your sister—and this for
yourself!
"Pan! Pan! Margot au lavoir!
 Pan! Pan! à coups de battoir."
They tore Virginie from her hands. The tall brunette, weeping
and sobbing, scarlet with shame, rushed out of the room, leaving
Gervaise mistress of the field, who calmly arranged her dress
somewhat and, as her arm was stiff, begged Mme Boche to lift her
bundle of linen on her shoulder.
While the old woman obeyed she dilated on her emotions during
the scene that had just taken place.
"You ought to go to a doctor and see if something is not
broken. I heard a queer sound," she said.
But Gervaise did not seem to hear her and paid no attention
either to the women who crowded around her with congratulations.
She hastened to the door where her children awaited her.
"Two hours!" said the mistress of the establishment, already
installed in her glass cabinet. "Two hours and two sous!"
Gervaise mechanically laid down the two sous, and then,
limping painfully under the weight of the wet linen which was
slung over her shoulder and dripped as she moved, with her
injured arm and bleeding cheek, she went away, dragging after her
with her naked arm the still-sobbing and tear-stained Etienne and
Claude.
Behind her the lavatory resumed its wonted busy air, a little
gayer than usual from the excitement of the morning. The women
had eaten their bread and drunk their wine, and they splashed the
water and used their beaters with more energy than usual as they
recalled the blows dealt by Gervaise. They talked from alley to
alley, leaning over their tubs. Words and laughs were lost in the
sound of running water. The steam and mist were golden in the sun
that came in through holes in the curtain. The odor of soapsuds
grew stronger and stronger.
When Gervaise entered the alley which led to the Hôtel
Boncoeur her tears choked her. It was a long, dark, narrow alley,
with a gutter on one side close to the wall, and the loathsome
smell brought to her mind the recollection of having passed
through there with Lantier a fortnight previous.
And what had that fortnight been? A succession of quarrels and
dissensions, the remembrance of which would be forevermore a
regret and bitterness.
Her room was empty, filled with the glowing sunlight from the
open window. This golden light rendered more apparent the
blackened ceiling and the walls with the shabby, dilapidated
paper. There was not an article beyond the furniture left in the
room, except a woman's fichu that seemed to have caught on a nail
near the chimney. The children's bed was pulled out into the
center of the room; the bureau drawers were wide open, displaying
their emptiness. Lantier had washed and had used the last of the
pomade—two cents' worth on the back of a playing
card—the dirty water in which he had washed still stood in
the basin. He had forgotten nothing; the corner hitherto occupied
by his trunk now seemed to Gervaise a vast desert. Even the small
mirror was gone. With a presentiment of evil she turned hastily
to the chimney. Yes, she was right, Lantier had carried away the
tickets. The pink papers were no longer between the
candlesticks!
She threw her bundle of linen into a chair and stood looking
first at one thing and then at another in a dull agony that no
tears came to relieve.
She had but one sou in the world. She heard a merry laugh from
her boys who, already consoled, were at the window. She went
toward them and, laying a hand on each of their heads, looked out
on that scene on which her weary eyes had dwelt so long that same
morning.
Yes, it was on that street that she and her children would
soon be thrown, and she turned her hopeless, despairing eyes
toward the outer boulevards—looking from right to left,
lingering at the two extremities, seized by a feeling of terror,
as if her life thenceforward was to be spent between a
slaughterhouse and a hospital.



Three weeks later, about half-past eleven one fine sunny
morning, Gervaise and Coupeau, the tinworker, were eating some
brandied fruit at the Assommoir.
Coupeau, who was smoking outside, had seen her as she crossed
the street with her linen and compelled her to enter. Her huge
basket was on the floor, back of the little table where they
sat.
Father Colombe's Tavern, known as the Assommoir, was on the
corners of the Rue des Poissonnièrs and of the Boulevard
de Rochechouart. The sign bore the one single word in long, blue
letters:
DISTILLATION
And this word stretched from one end to the other. On either
side of the door stood tall oleanders in small casks, their
leaves covered thick with dust. The enormous counter with its
rows of glasses, its fountain and its pewter measures was on the
left of the door, and the huge room was ornamented by gigantic
casks painted bright yellow and highly varnished, hooped with
shining copper. On high shelves were bottles of liquors and jars
of fruits; all sorts of flasks standing in order concealed the
wall and repeated their pale green or deep crimson tints in the
great mirror behind the counter.
The great feature of the house, however, was the distilling
apparatus which stood at the back of the room behind an oak
railing on which the tipsy workmen leaned as they stupidly
watched the still with its long neck and serpentine tubes
descending to subterranean regions—a very devil's
kitchen.
At this early hour the Assommoir was nearly empty. A stout man
in his shirt sleeves—Father Colombe himself—was
serving a little girl not more than twelve years old with four
cents' worth of liquor in a cup.
The sun streamed in at the door and lay on the floor, which
was black where the men had spat as they smoked. And from the
counter, from the casks, from all the room, rose an alcoholic
emanation which seemed to intoxicate the very particles of dust
floating in the sunshine.
In the meantime Coupeau rolled a new cigarette. He was very
neat and clean, wearing a blouse and a little blue cloth cap and
showing his white teeth as he smiled.
The lower jaw was somewhat prominent and the nose slightly
flat; he had fine brown eyes and the face of a happy child and
good-natured animal. His hair was thick and curly. His complexion
was delicate still, for he was only twenty-six. Opposite him sat
Gervaise in a black gown, leaning slightly forward, finishing her
fruit, which she held by the stem.
They were near the street, at the first of the four tables
arranged in front of the counter. When Coupeau had lighted his
cigar he placed both elbows on the table and looked at the woman
without speaking. Her pretty face had that day something of the
delicate transparency of fine porcelain.
Then continuing something which they apparently had been
previously discussing, he said in a low voice:
"Then you say no, do you? Absolutely no?"
"Of course. No it must be, Monsieur Coupeau," answered
Gervaise with a smile. "Surely you do not intend to begin that
again here! You promised to be reasonable too. Had I known, I
should certainly have refused your treat."
He did not speak but gazed at her more intently than before
with tender boldness. He looked at her soft eyes and dewy lips,
pale at the corners but half parted, allowing one to see the rich
crimson within.
She returned his look with a kind and affectionate smile.
Finally she said:
"You should not think of such a thing. It is folly! I am an
old woman. I have a boy eight years old. What should we do
together?"
"Much as other people do, I suppose!" answered Coupeau with a
wink.
She shrugged her shoulders.
"You know nothing about it, Monsieur Coupeau, but I have had
some experience. I have two mouths in the house, and they have
excellent appetites. How am I to bring up my children if I trifle
away my time? Then, too, my misfortune has taught me one great
lesson, which is that the less I have to do with men, the
better!"
She then proceeded to explain all her reasons, calmly and
without anger. It was easy to see that her words were the result
of grave consideration.
Coupeau listened quietly, saying only at intervals:
"You are hurting my feelings. Yes, hurting my feelings."
"Yes, I see that," she answered, "and I am really very sorry
for you. If I had any idea of leading a different life from that
which I follow today it might as well be with you as with
another. You have the look of a good-natured man. But what is the
use? I have now been with Madame Fauconnier for a fortnight. The
children are going to school, and I am very happy, for I have
plenty to do. Don't you see, therefore, that it is best for us to
remain as we are?"
And she stooped to pick up her basket.
"You are keeping me here to talk," she said, "and they are
waiting for me at my employer's. You will find some other woman,
Monsieur Coupeau, far prettier than I, who will not have two
children to bring up!"
He looked at the clock and made her sit down again.
"Wait!" he cried. "It is still thirty-five minutes of eleven.
I have twenty-five minutes still, and don't be afraid of my
familiarity, for the table is between us! Do you dislike me so
very much that you can't stay and talk with me for five
minutes?"
She put down her basket, unwilling to seem disobliging, and
they talked for some time in a friendly sort of way. She had
breakfasted before she left home, and he had swallowed his soup
in the greatest haste and laid in wait for her as she came out.
Gervaise, as she listened to him, watched from the
windows—between the bottles of brandied fruit—the
movement of the crowd in the street, which at this
hour—that of the Parisian breakfast—was unusually
lively. Workmen hurried into the baker's and, coming out with a
loaf under their arms, they went into the Veau à Deux
Têtes, three doors higher up, to breakfast at six sous.
Next the baker's was a shop where fried potatoes and mussels with
parsley were sold. A constant succession of shopgirls carried off
paper parcels of fried potatoes and cups filled with mussels, and
others bought bunches of radishes. When Gervaise leaned a little
more toward the window she saw still another shop, also crowded,
from which issued a steady stream of children holding in their
hands, wrapped in paper, a breaded cutlet or a sausage, still
warm.
A group formed around the door of the Assommoir.
"Say, Bibi-la-Grillade," asked a voice, "will you stand a
drink all around?"
Five workmen went in, and the same voice said:
"Father Colombe, be honest now. Give us honest glasses, and no
nutshells, if you please."
Presently three more workmen entered together, and finally a
crowd of blouses passed in between the dusty oleanders.
"You have no business to ask such questions," said Gervaise to
Coupeau; "of course I loved him. But after the manner in which he
deserted me—"
They were speaking of Lantier. Gervaise had never seen him
again; she supposed him to be living with Virginie's sister, with
a friend who was about to start a manufactory for hats.
At first she thought of committing suicide, of drowning
herself, but she had grown more reasonable and had really begun
to trust that things were all for the best. With Lantier she felt
sure she never could have done justice to the children, so
extravagant were his habits.
He might come, of course, and see Claude and Etienne. She
would not show him the door; only so far as she herself was
concerned, he had best not lay his finger on her. And she uttered
these words in a tone of determination, like a woman whose plan
of life is clearly defined, while Coupeau, who was by no means
inclined to give her up lightly, teased and questioned her in
regard to Lantier with none too much delicacy, it is true, but
his teeth were so white and his face so merry that the woman
could not take offense. "Did you beat him?" he asked finally.
"Oh, you are none too amiable. You beat people sometimes, I have
heard."
She laughed gaily.
Yes, it was true she had whipped that great Virginie. That day
she could have strangled someone with a glad heart. And she
laughed again, because Coupeau told her that Virginie, in her
humiliation, had left the Quartier.
Gervaise's face, as she laughed, however, had a certain
childish sweetness. She extended her slender, dimpled hands,
declaring she would not hurt a fly. All she knew of blows was
that she had received a good many in her life. Then she began to
talk of Plassans and of her youth. She had never been indiscreet,
nor was she fond of men. When she had fallen in with Lantier she
was only fourteen, and she regarded him as her husband. Her only
fault, she declared, was that she was too amiable and allowed
people to impose on her and that she got fond of people too
easily; were she to love another man, she should wish and expect
to live quietly and comfortably with him always, without any
nonsense.
And when Coupeau slyly asked her if she called her dear
children nonsense she gave him a little slap and said that she,
of course, was much like other women. But women were not like
men, after all; they had their homes to take care of and keep
clean; she was like her mother, who had been a slave to her
brutal father for more than twenty years!
"My very lameness—" she continued.
"Your lameness?" interrupted Coupeau gallantly. "Why, it is
almost nothing. No one would ever notice it!"
She shook her head. She knew very well that it was very
evident, and at forty it would be far worse, but she said softly,
with a faint smile, "You have a strange taste, to fall in love
with a lame woman!"
He, with his elbows on the table, still coaxed and entreated,
but she continued to shake her head in the negative. She listened
with her eyes fixed on the street, seemingly fascinated by the
surging crowd.
The shops were being swept; the last frying pan of potatoes
was taken from the stove; the pork merchant washed the plates his
customers had used and put his place in order. Groups of
mechanics were hurrying out from all the workshops, laughing and
pushing each other like so many schoolboys, making a great
scuffling on the sidewalk with their hobnailed shoes; while some,
with their hands in their pockets, smoked in a meditative
fashion, looking up at the sun and winking prodigiously. The
sidewalks were crowded and the crowd constantly added to by men
who poured from the open door—men in blouses and frocks,
old jackets and coats, which showed all their defects in the
clear morning light.
The bells of the various manufactories were ringing loudly,
but the workmen did not hurry. They deliberately lighted their
pipes and then with rounded shoulders slouched along, dragging
their feet after them.
Gervaise mechanically watched a group of three, one man much
taller than the other two, who seemed to be hesitating as to what
they should do next. Finally they came directly to the
Assommoir.
"I know them," said Coupeau, "or rather I know the tall one.
It is Mes-Bottes, a comrade of mine."
The Assommoir was now crowded with boisterous men. Two glasses
rang with the energy with which they brought down their fists on
the counter. They stood in rows, with their hands crossed over
their stomachs or folded behind their backs, waiting their turn
to be served by Father Colombe.
"Hallo!" cried Mes-Bottes, giving Coupeau a rough slap on the
shoulders. "How fine you have got to be with your cigarettes and
your linen shirt bosom! Who is your friend that pays for all
this? I should like to make her acquaintance."
"Don't be so silly!" returned Coupeau angrily.
But the other gave a knowing wink.
"Ah, I understand. 'A word to the wise—'" And he turned
round with a fearful lurch to look at Gervaise, who shuddered and
recoiled. The tobacco smoke, the odor of humanity added to this
air heavy with alcohol, was oppressive, and she choked a little
and coughed.
"Ah, what an awful thing it is to drink!" she said in a
whisper to her friend, to whom she then went on to say how years
before she had drunk anisette with her mother at Plassans and how
it had made her so very sick that ever since that day she had
never been able to endure even the smell of liquors.
"You see," she added as she held up her glass, "I have eaten,
the fruit, but I left the brandy, for it would make me ill."
Coupeau also failed to understand how a man could swallow
glasses of brandy and water, one after the other. Brandied fruit,
now and again, was not bad. As to absinthe and similar
abominations, he never touched them—not he, indeed. His
comrades might laugh at him as much as they pleased; he always
remained on the other side of the door when they came in to
swallow perdition like that.
His father, who was a tinworker like himself, had fallen one
day from the roof of No. 25, in La Rue Coquenaud, and this
recollection had made him very prudent ever since. As for
himself, when he passed through that street and saw the place he
would sooner drink the water in the gutter than swallow a drop at
the wineshop. He concluded with the sentence:
"You see, in my trade a man needs a clear head and steady
legs."
Gervaise had taken up her basket; she had not risen from her
chair, however, but held it on her knees with a dreary look in
her eyes, as if the words of the young mechanic had awakened in
her mind strange thoughts of a possible future.
