# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2017
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, Italian Fantasies
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/56264/56264-h/56264-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

“But why should he work?” cried Yakob, who with Yehudah
now reappeared from the stable. “Would that the wife of
Herod’s steward followed me!”
“Or even that Susannah ministered to us with her substance!”
added Yehudah. “Then I too would teach, take
no thought for the morrow!” And he laughed derisively.
“He never took thought for anything save himself,” said
Yussef, shaking his head. “Dost thou not remember, Miriam,
those three dreadful days when he was lost, as we were returning
from his Bar-Mitzvah in Yerushalaim! God of Abraham, shall I
ever forget thy heart-sickness! And what was it he answered
when we at length found him in the Temple with the doctors?
He was about his father’s business! He was assuredly not about
my business.”
“The Sabbath and Passover are drawing nigh,” she murmured,
and slipped past her sons into the house.
“And what did he answer thee at Kephar Nahum?” her
husband called after her. “ ‘Who is my mother?’ The godless
scoffer! The Jeroboam ben Nebat! I thank the Lord I did
not try to bring him back home. He might have asked, ‘Who
is my father?’ ”
There was no reply, but I heard the nervous bustling of a
broom. The carpenter turned to Yakob.
“And what said he at Cana?”
“He demanded wine, he and his disciples!”
“Methought he was an Ebionite or an Essene!”
“Nay, as thou saidst, Yeshua was ever a law unto himself.
But there was no wine.”
“No wine?” cried Yussef. “So great a wedding company
and no wine? Methought the Chosan was rich enough to plant
wine-booths all the way from Cana to Nazara, like the Parnass
of Sepphoris, and had as many gold and silver vessels as the
priests in the Temple.”
“True, my father, but Yeshua had brought with him that
vile tax-farmer Levi, who grinds the faces both of rich and
poor, and, seeing the spying publican, the bridegroom straightway
bade the servants hide the precious flagons and goblets, lest
more taxes be squeezed out for the Romans.”
Yussef grinned knowingly. “And so poor Yeshua must go
athirst.”
“Nay, but hear. When he clamoured for wine the servants
wist not what to do, and my mother said gently to him, ‘They
have no wine.’ But Yeshua turned upon her like a lion of Mount
Yehudah upon a lamb, and he roared, ‘Woman, what have I to
do with thee? My hour is not yet come to be a Nazarite.’ ”
The carpenter chuckled. “Now she will know to stay at
home. ‘Woman, what have I to do with thee?’ ” he repeated
with unction.
“Howbeit, my mother feared that his demon again possessed
him, and she besought the servants to do whatsoever he said
unto them. But they still held back. Then Yeshua, understanding
what it was they feared, said, ‘Bring the water-pots.’
So they went out and brought the earthen pots wherewith we
had washed our hands for the meal—albeit Yeshua would not
wash his—and lo! they were full of wine.”
The carpenter repeated his knowing grin. “And Levi the
publican—what said he?”
“He was the first to cry ‘A miracle!’ ” laughed Yakob, “and
Shimeon-bar-Yonah held up his hands and cried, ‘Master of
the Universe! Now is Thy glory manifest!’ ”
Yussef joined in his son’s laugh. “Is not Shimeon the lake
fisherman?”
“Yea, my father; him whom Yeshua calls the Rock.”
“The Rock, in sooth!” broke in fiery young Yehudah. “Say
rather, the Shifting Sand. It was from Shimeon I learned to be
a Zealot, and now this recreant Maccabæan is bosom friend of
Roman tax-gatherers and babbles of the keys of Heaven.”
“Babble not thyself, little one,” the father rebuked him. He
turned to Yakob. “And what said Yeshua after the wine?”
“When he beheld his disciples had drunk new faith in him,
he too was flown, and prophesied darkly that he would appear
on the right hand of power, with clouds of glory and twelve
legions of angels, whereat my mother feared that his madness
was come upon him as of yore, and she made us follow in his
train as far as his lodging in Kephar Nahum. And we spake
privily to Yudas that he should watch over him till his unclean
spirit was exorcised.”
“Yudas!” cried Yussef. “What doth an honest Israelite
like Yudas in such company? But did I not foretell what
would come of all these baptizings of Rabbi Jochanan, all these
new foolish sects with their white garments and paddles and
ablutions? Canaan is full of wandering madmen. The Torah
I had from my father, Eli—peace be upon him!—is holy enough
for me, and may God forgive me that I have not gone up to kill
the Paschal lamb.”
Yakob lowered his voice. “Thou wouldst have met the
madman.”
“What! Yeshua is gone to Yerushalaim?”
“Sh! My mother knoweth naught. We spake him secretly
as though converted, saying, ‘Lo! we have seen this day how thou
workest miracles. But if thou do these things, show thyself to
the world. Depart hence and go into Yudæa, that men may see
the works that thou doest.’ For there is no man that doeth
anything in secret, and he himself seeketh to be known openly.
So he is gone up to Yerushalaim!”
The malicious glee on Yakob’s face was reflected in his
father’s. “Now shall the mocker be mocked! Even thy
learned uncle, Ben Perachyah, they scoff at for his accent, nor
will they let him read the prayers. How much less, then, will
they listen to Yeshua!”
“And the Pharisees hate him,” said Yakob, “because he hath
called them vipers, and the Shammaites for profaning the
Sabbath; even the Essenes for not washing his hands before
meals.”
“And all the Zealots hold him a traitor!” cried Yehudah
with flashing eyes.
“Nor will the Sadducees or the Bœthusians listen to a
carpenter’s son,” added Yakob laughingly.
“Shame on thee, Yakob, for fouling thine own well!” And
Sarah, returning with her pitcher on her shoulder, went angrily
within.
Yakob grew red. “And dost thou think the nobles of
Yerushalaim who eat off gold and silver will follow him like
fishers?” he called after her. “Say they not already, ‘Can
anything good come out of Nazara?’ ”
“Yeshua is gone to Yerushalaim?” The little mother had
dashed to the door, her eyes wide with terror. The urn she had
just taken from her daughter fell from her trembling hand and
shattered itself on the rocky doorstep, splashing husband and son.
“Woman!” cried the carpenter angrily, “have more care
of my substance!”
“Yeshua is gone to Yerushalaim!” she repeated frenziedly.
“Ay, like a good son of Israel. He hath gone up for the
Paschal sacrifice. Mayhap,” he added with his chuckle, “he
will do wonders with the blood of the lamb. Come, Miriam,
let us change our garments and anoint ourselves for the festival.”
He pushed the woman gently within the room, but she stood
there as one turned into a pillar of salt, and with an Eastern
shrug he went in.
Presently Sarah came and wiped the steps with a clout and
gathered up the shards, and then, with a new pitcher on her
shoulder, she bent her steps towards the fountain.
I skirted round to meet her on her return, not a little to her
amazement; but this time she surrendered her burden to my
entreaty, though the ungainly manner in which I poised the
pitcher lightened her clouded brow with inner laughter.
“This wandering brother of thine,” I ventured to ask at
length, “dost thou think harm will befall him in Yerushalaim?”
Her brow puckered thoughtfully. “Perchance these strangers
will believe on him, not knowing as we do that he hath a
demon. Yeshua was wroth with us when he came, crying out
that a man’s foes are those of his own household, and a prophet
is nowhere without honour save in his own country. But
how should Yeshua be able to work miracles more than
Yakob or Yehudah? When he stood up in our synagogue on
the Shabbos to read and expound the prophet Yeshaiah, his
lips were touched with the same burning coal—almost he
persuaded me to be a heretic—but inasmuch as he could do no
miracles, all they in the synagogue were filled with wrath, and
rose up and thrust him out of the city.” She pointed to the
brow of the hill hanging over us. “Up there they led him, that
they might cast him down headlong. But out of compassion
for my mother, who had followed with the crowd, they let him
go, and he returned to Kephar Nahum and continued to make
yokes and wheels for his livelihood.”
“And he still works there?”
“Nay, he neglected his craft to preach in the great synagogue
built by the centurion—indeed, it is a hot place for work down
there by the lake, neither is it so healthy as here in Nazara.
Also he had free lodging with the family of Shimeon-bar-Yonah
whom they call Petros, while Shalome, the wife of Zebedee,
and other women tended him and mended his garments. But
his fever took him and he began to wander about all
Galila, teaching in the synagogues and preaching his strange
gospel?”
“What gospel?”
“How should a girl know? Some heresy anent the Kingdom.
And there went out a fame of him through all the region round
about, and some said he healed all manner of sickness, so that
there followed him great multitudes of people. But many came
to us and said, ‘Alas! he is beside himself.’ And the Messengers
of the New Moon told us many strange tales, so that my mother
was nigh distraught, and when it was bruited that he had said
Kephar Nahum shall be thrust down to hell, she journeyed
thither, she and my brothers, to bring him home and watch
over his affliction. But lo! they could not lay hold of him, for
he was surrounded by such a press of people that they could not
even come nigh unto him. So she sent a message that his
mother and brothers desired to have speech of him. And he
answered, ‘Who is my mother? Who are my brothers?’
and he stretched forth his hand towards his disciples and said,
‘Behold my mother and my brothers.’ So she returned home
sorely stricken, and put on mourning garments, and even the
birth of her grandchildren gave her no joy. But when came
the marriage of her rich kinsman in Cana my father would have
her go, being weary of her weeping and thinking to cheer her
heart; but lo! her last state is worse than her first, inasmuch
as——” She broke off abruptly as we reached the hedge of
prickly pear. “But why have I told all this to a stranger?”
“Because I have none else with whom to eat the Passover,” I
answered boldly.
She turned and looked at me. Then, taking her pitcher from
me with a word of thanks, “I will tell my father,” she answered
gravely.
I waited in the little garden, watching a patriarchal tortoise.
Presently the carpenter reappeared on the doorstep, a new
man in festal garment and mien, his head anointed with oil.
“Baruch Habaa!” he cried cordially. “Since I cannot go
up to Yerushalaim, Yerushalaim comes up to me.”
I followed him into the house, duly kissing the mezuzah as I
went through the door. The room was small and dark, with bare
walls built of little liver-coloured blocks of cemented stone, and
the matted floor seemed to hold less furniture than that which
littered the garden. The carpenter’s bench had been covered
with cushions, and I could see that the divan was used for a
bed. Very humble was the house-gear, these earthenware dishes
and metal drinking-cups and brass candlesticks on the Passover
table, and I saw no ornaments save a few terra-cotta vases, a
Hebrew scroll or two, and a rudely painted coffer. The housewife,
busy at the hearth with the roasted egg and bone of the
ritual, greeted me with wistful eyes and lips that vainly tried
to murmur or smile a welcome, and I watched her deft mechanic
movements as I sat lightly gossiping with the males over the
exegesis of the seventh chapter of Yeshaiah. I told them that
the Septuagint translator had darkened the fourteenth verse by
loosely rendering עלמה as παρθένος, or “virgin,” instead of
“maiden,” but this did not interest them, as they knew no Greek.
The room took a more cheerful air when the mother lit the
Sabbath candles with a blessing almost as inaudible as her welcome
to me, and soon my host began the Haggadah service by
holding his hands over the wine-goblet. But Yehudah asked the
ritual question, “Why does this night differ from all other
nights?” with a touch of sarcasm, and interrupted himself to
cry passionately: “How can we celebrate our deliverance from
Egypt when the Roman Eagle hangs at the very door of our
Temple?” At this the little mother turned yet paler, and every
eye glanced uneasily towards the stranger.
“Nay, I am no friend of the Romans,” I said reassuringly.
Yehudah continued the formula sullenly. It was as I had
always heard it, save for the question, “Why is the meat all
roasted and none sodden or boiled?” But the father had
scarcely begun his ritual reply when we heard a loud knocking
on the door, the latch was lifted, and in another instant we saw
a burly man panting on the threshold, and behind him, more
vaguely in the dusk, an agitated woman under a head-shawl.
“O Reb Yussef!” breathed the newcomer.
“Halphaï!” cried the carpenter in amaze. “Art not in
Yerushalaim?”
The little mother had sprung to her feet.
“They have killed my Yeshua!” she shrieked.
“Sit down, woman!” said the carpenter sternly.
But she gestured to the figure in the rear: “Speak, my
sister, speak.”
“Nay, I will speak,” grumbled her sister’s husband. “Why
else did I take horse from the Holy City without hearing the
Levites sing or the trumpets blow for the blood-sprinkling?
Thy Yeshua came up through the Fountain Gate riding on an
ass, and as one flown with new wine.”
“Yea, the wine of the water-pots!” laughed Yakob.
“And a very great multitude spread their garments in the
way; others cut down branches from the trees and strewed
them in the way. And the multitudes that went before and
that followed cried, ‘Hosanna to the son of David!’ ” He
paused for breath, leaving this picture suspended, and I saw a
new light leap into the mother’s tragic eyes, a strange exaltation
as of a secret hope incredulously confirmed.
“In Yerushalaim?” she breathed. “They cry Hosanna in
Yerushalaim?”
“Yea,” said her sister. “And Halphaï told me, even the
little children cried, ‘Hosanna to the son of David!’ ”
The carpenter was crumbling a mazzo with nervous fingers;
an angry vein swelled on his forehead. “And Pilatus permitted
this?” he cried.
“Patience, Reb Yussef!” said Halphaï. “There is more to
come. For, growing yet more swollen in his presumption,
Yeshua went to the Holy Temple, and, entering the Court of
the Gentiles, where sit those who sell the sheep and the oxen
and doves, instead of purchasing a sacrifice for his sins, he drove
them all out with a scourge of small cords and poured out the
changers’ money!”
Horror held the household dumb. I saw Halphaï look
round complacently, as though compensated for his hot ride to
Nazara. “And ye know what profit Hanan makes out of his
bazaars,” he added significantly.
The mother was wringing her hands. “Hanan will never
forgive him,” she cried. “They will kill him as they killed
Jochanan the Baptizer.”
“Peace, woman,” said Yussef impatiently. “The High
Priest and the Elders will but drive him from the city.”
“Nay, nay,” said Halphaï. “They hold him captive. And
his disciples are fled. All save Yudas, who led a multitude with
swords and staves to find him. And Shimeon-bar-Yonah too is
taken, merely because his speech betrayeth him as a Galilæan.
How then should I dare stay, who have the ill-hap to be married
to his mother’s sister!”
The little mother was moving towards the door. Her husband
stopped her. “Whither goest thou?”
“To saddle the ass. I must to Yerushalaim!”
“Thou!”
“Who else? Shall that yellow-veiled woman of Magdala give
him comfort?”
“And will he take comfort from thee? Doth he not teach
his followers to hate their father and their mother? And doth
he not scoff at the womb that bare him?”
“Not he, but his demon,” she answered obstinately, and pressed
forward again.
His brow grew black. “But it is the Sabbath!”
“It is my first-born.”
“Thou speakest more foolishly than Job’s wife. Now we see
whence Yeshua sucked his blasphemies.”
“It is my first-born!” she repeated more frenziedly.
“Thy first-born! But did he keep to-day the Fast of the
First-born?”
“Let her go, Yussef,” pleaded Halphaï. “As Rabbi Hillel
taught (his memory for a blessing), the Sabbath was handed to
man, not man to the Sabbath!”
“And the wife to the husband,” retorted Yussef, “not the
husband to the wife. I forbid thee, Miriam, to disturb the
Passover peace. Go—and I put thee away publicly!”
She blenched and sank back on the divan. “Peace?” she
moaned. “Thou callest this peace!”
“Obey thy lord, Miriam! I will go.” And Halphaï’s wife
stooped and kissed her.
Miriam burst into loud sobs. She caught her sister to her
breast, and the two women mingled their tears.
The carpenter shrugged his shoulders. “Blessed art Thou,
O Lord, who hast not made me a woman,” he said drily.
The walls of the little room seemed higher, the light stronger,
the prayer devouter, the company more numerous. Instead of
the two little Sabbath candles and the earthenware dishes, I saw
a barbaric blaze of gold and rich stuffs and jewels, and my eyes
blinked before the flames of tall candles shining in gold candlesticks
on a magnificent altar, in the niche of which stood a
black cedar-wood idol, crowned and holding a crowned doll,
and wrapped in a marvellous ornate vestment widening out like a
bell. Over my head around the rough, liver-coloured stone walls
hung lamps and bronzes and candles held by Cupids, and gilded
busts, and medallions and hearts and bronze reliefs and pictures,
and even a cannon-ball, and at my feet surged the white head-shawls
of prostrate worshippers, like a great wave breaking on
the crimson steps of the altar.
And gradually I became aware that the room had now doors
on the right and the left, and these of bronze and wondrously
wrought after the fashion of the Renaissance, through which a
stream of worshippers poured, kissing the bronze as they passed
in and out. And following one stream and vaguely looking for
Miriam and her husband and the Passover table, I was borne
back into the room, through another door, and now found myself
in a narrow and still more crowded space at the back of the
altar, where the gorgeous jewelled black idol with her doll stood
in her niche in the gleam of ever-burning silver lamps, and I saw
a golden eagle in a yellow sun flying over her head, and over the
eagle two gilded angels holding a glittering wreath, and still
higher, through a hole in the roof, as riding on clouds, a blue-mantled
Mother and Child among a soaring escort of angels,
while near the floor I beheld a large metal box with a yawning
slit, into which a kneeling, weeping press of people rained
money.
“Il Santo Camino, signore!” said an ingratiating voice, and
looking up I perceived at my side a beadle with a wand.
“The holy kitchen?” I repeated in amaze.
“Si, signore. Here is the hearth at which the Madonna
cooked for the Holy Family.”
He pointed to the money-box, and I now indeed recognised the
fireplace whence Miriam had taken the roasted bone and egg.
But it had moved to another side of the living-room, unless I was
confused by the altar planted in the place of the Passover table.
“Then this is the house of Nazara?” I said in a whisper,
for, dazed as I was, I feared to disturb the worshippers.
“Sicuro!” He smiled reassuringly. “La Santa Casa!
Here the Holy Family abode in the peace and love of the Holy
Ghost. And here there is Plenary Indulgence every day in the
year. Ecco! One of their pots!” And he produced a terra-cotta
vessel, not unlike one I had seen the little olive-eyed
woman wiping, save that it was lined with gold and adorned
with bas-reliefs of the Manger and the Annunciation.
“That must have cost money,” I murmured feebly.
“Già,” he assented complacently. “And behold the Madonna
Nera, carved by St. Luke. Her attire is worth 1,800,000 lire.”
“Come?” I gasped.
He spurned a sobbing peasant-woman with his foot and
cleared a space with his staff that he might plant me at the
centre of the money-box.
“Passi,” he said pleasantly, seeing I hesitated to displace
these passionate souls. “Regard the jewels and precious
stones of her robe, the diamonds, emeralds, and pearls in her
crown, the collars of Oriental pearl, the rings, the crosses of
topaz and diamonds, the Bambino’s diamond necklace, the ring
on his finger, the medallion with the great diamonds given by
the King of Saxony——” He trolled off the glittering catalogue,
on and on, in a joyous, dominant voice, to which the sighs and
groans of the worshippers made an undertone. Countesses and
Cardinals, Popes and Marchese had vied in dressing the idol,
and decorating the kitchen. “And you must see the Treasury,”
he wound up. “Gifts from all the royal houses of Europe to
Our Lady of Loreto!”
“Loreto?” I repeated dully.
He looked at me sharply, as at a scoffer.
“But how did the Holy House get to Loreto?” I added
hastily.
“It was carried by angels,” he answered simply.
“But when?”
“On the night of the tenth of December in the year 1294
from the bearing of the Virgin.”
“Who saw it carried?”
“You are an Englishman,” he answered briefly. “You shall
see it in English.”
He made a path through the praying crowd, and I followed
him without, and my breath failed me as I became aware that the
Holy House was inclosed in a precious outer casing of marble,
carved with beautiful reliefs of the life and death of the Virgin,
holding all round its four lofty walls niches with statues of
prophets and sybils and other gleaming altars, each with its
surf of worshippers, and that this marvellous screen, so rich in
the work of the Masters, was itself engirdled by a vast high-domed
church with rich-dyed windows, gilded like a Venetian
palace and full of arches and pillars and altars and chapels and
mosaics and statues and busts and thick-populated frescoes,
while from the centre of the choir windows a haloed Lady in
a blue mantle gazed down upon her white-hooded ghostly
worshippers filling the nave. And all around her from the
interlacing of the arches and from the painted walls haloes
gleamed like a firmament of crescent moons.
“Behold there!” said the beadle, pointing with his staff, and
I saw that round the projecting base of the marble walls ran
two deep parallel furrows. “Worn in the stone by the knees of
six centuries of pilgrims,” he said pleasantly. “Of course there
are not many to-day, being an ordinary Sunday, but in the year
there are a hundred thousand, and in the season of the pilgrimages,
or on the Feast of the Assumption——” An expressive
gesture wound up the sentence.
We passed along the aisles, just peeping into the copious
chapels, all pervaded by the ubiquitous Maria in picture or
mosaic, in statue or bas-relief—Maria Immaculate, Maria the
Virgin, Maria the Mother of God, Maria the Compassionate,
Maria the Mediatress, Maria Crowned; and the marriage of
Maria, and her death, and the visit to Elizabeth, and the
Annunciation, and her family tree, and the disputes of the
Sorbonne over the dogmas concerning her. And as we
walked the organ began pealing, and priests and choristers
chanted.
“Ecco!” cried the beadle, as he stopped in the left aisle and
pointed to a great black-framed slate between two altars. “In
your own English!”
I looked and read the headline of white letters:
“The Wondrous Flitting of the Kirk of our Blest Ledy of
Lavreto.”
Underneath ran in parallel columns these two sentences:
“By decree of the Meikle Werthy Monsignor Vincent Casal
of Bolonia Ruler of This Helly Place Vnder the protection of
the Mest Werthy Cardinal Moroni.”
“I Robert Corbington Priest of the Companie of Jesvs in the
Zeir MDCXXXV Heve Trvlie translated the premisses of the
Latin Storie Hangged vp in the seyd Kirk.”
And underneath these parallel statements were the words,
“To the Praise and Glorie of the Mest Pvre and Immaculate
Virgin.”
Then began the story proper:
“The Kirk of Lavreto was a caumber of the hovse of the
blest Virgin near Jerusalem in the towne of Nazaret in which
she was borne and treined vp and greeted of the angel and
hairin also Conceaved and norisht har sonne Jesvs.”
My eye ran impatiently over these known details and lighted
at a lower point of the great dimly lit slate.
“Pavl de Sylva an eremyt of micle godliness, wha woned in
a cell near by this Kirk whair daily he went to mattins, seyd
that for ten zeirs, one the eight of September, twelve hovrs
before day, he saw a light descend frem heaven vpon it, whilk
he said was by the bu weathair shawed har selfe [sic] one the
feest of har birth. In proof of all whilk twa verteous men of
the seyd towne of Recanah many times avowed to me Rvler of
Terreman and Govenor of the forseyd Kirk as followeth. Ane
of them, nemmed Pavle Renallvci, affirmed that his grandsyres
grandsyre sawe when the angels broght it over sea setting it in
the forseyd wood and hed oft frequented it thair, the other
nemmed Francis Prior sicklik seyd that his Grandsyre, being a
hunder and twaintie zeirs awd hed also meikle havnted it in the
same place and for a mere svr testimony that it had beine thair
he reported that his grandsyres grandsyre hed a hovse beside it
wharin he dwelled and that in his dayes it was beared by the
angels frae thence to the hill of they tweye brothers whar they
set it as seyd. . . .”
“The angels seem to have carried it about more than once,”
I interrupted.
“Già,” said the beadle. “At first they placed it on the hill
of Picino, in a grove of laurels which bowed before it and
remained in adoration. But so many thieves and assassins took
cover under them to plunder the pious pilgrims of their offerings
that the laurels raised their heads again, and after a stay of
only eight months the Holy House moved.”
“And came here?”
“Not yet. It moved first to a pleasant hill belonging to the
brothers Artici, ancestors of Leopardi.”
“Ah, the hill of they tweye brothers,” I murmured.
“But the treasure heaped upon it dazzled them. They
might have fought over it like Cain and Abel. So the house
moved on.”
“And yet even Leopardi chanted the Madonna,” I said.
“Lo credo,” said the beadle, unastonished. “And there is
still an inscription on the hill, but it does not console the
neighbourhood any more than the chapel at Ravinizza.”
“The chapel at Ravinizza?”
“Did I not say? That was where it stopped first—near
Dalmatia.”
“Quite a wandering Jew-house,” I murmured.
“That was in 1291, when the Holy Land fell into the power
of the Infidel”
“Ah, that was why it left Palestine!”
“Naturally. And you may imagine the agony of the
Dalmatians when they returned from the Crusades to find the
Holy House no longer in Ravinizza. Even to-day the pilgrims
sail out in little boats singing, ‘Return to us, Maria, with thy
house!’ But how could it return to Dalmatia, seeing that
seventy-five years before it left Palestine the blessed St. Francis
had foretold its coming here by his word Picenum, which is a
region on our side of the Adriatic, and being, moreover, interpreted
by Latin scholars is a prophetic acrostic?”
“It seems a pity the house did not come straight to Loreto,”
I ventured.
“We are fortunate it did not go straight back to Nazareth
after the battle of Lepanto,” he said simply. “It was after
our Lady’s victory over the Turks that this marble screen
was placed around it. Here is the Treasury.” And thrusting
roughly through the press of congregants, he opened a door
and ushered me into a palatial room where under the ceiling-frescoes
of Pomerancio of Pesaro I saw what seemed a vast
bazaar of every precious article known to humanity.
“The New Treasury,” he said apologetically. “The old
treasure was seized by Napoleon. It was worth 96,000,000
lire.” He looked sad.
“And how much is this worth?”
“Only 4,000,000.” And the unctuous catalogue recommenced.
“A Genoese family had given this case of jewellery; it
was worth 100,000 lire. These were the copes and vestments
of Pio Nono (150,000 lire). This was the diadem of Maria,
Queen of Spain, wife of Carlo IV—behold the amethysts, the
brilliants, the rubies. These Oriental pearls were from the
Princess of Würtemberg. Each pearl cost 150,000 lire and
there were forty-three pearls—the signore could calculate for
himself. This diamond tiara with an Oriental pearl in the
centre was given by Maria Louisa, Duchessa di Parma. It was
worth 420,000 lire.”
“Restoring some of her first husband’s plunder,” I interrupted.
“Già. And the Madonna Nera was given back too. And
this pearl and gold covering for her is from Maria Theresa,
Archduchess of Austria. It is worth 12,000 lire. And Giuseppe
Napoleon’s wife gave us this monstrance. And this cup is from
Prince Maximilian of Austria, and these regalia——”
The list went on, and I studied a coral model of the Santa
Casa with the Mother and Son riding on the roof, while from
the church came a boy’s voice soaring heavenward.
“And do you refuse offerings from those who are not royal?”
I broke in at last.
“Ah, no,” he said seriously. “See! In that glass case are
a thousand rings from a thousand pilgrims, and this standard
is from a pilgrim of Budapest, and this little wooden ship—the
Maria—was given by a sailor, and this pearl showing the
Madonna and her Son was found inside a fish by a fisherman,
and these ornaments painted with the juice of grass are
the work of priests, and this beautiful bronze candelabrum was
given by the Guild of Blacksmiths of Bologna. A Capuchin
father from South America brought us these great bouquets of
flowers made of the wings of Brazilian birds, and a Roumanian
noble this little Byzantine brass Madonna, and Prince Carraciolo
of Naples——”
“Basta!” I cried hurriedly, for he was back in the
“Almanach de Gotha,” and, slipping a large piece of silver
with a royal portrait on it into his hand, I moved towards
the door.
His face shone. “But you have not seen the cups in the
Santa Casa from which the Holy Family drank. And their
little bells, and——”
“I have seen enough,” I said.
“And the cannon-ball,” he went on in undiminished gratitude.
“The cannon-ball which shattered the pavilion of Pope
Julius II when he was besieging a city, but which by the grace
of the Blessed Virgin left him un——”
I escaped into the crowd of snooded peasant women and
worked my way along the aisle till I stood outside the portal
under a gigantic Madonna and Child.
But the beadle was beside me.
“Go and look at the Fontana della Santa Casa.” And he
pointed in parting gratitude to the centre of the piazza.
“Bellissima!”
I did not go, but I looked at the great marble fountain with
its grotesque beasts and Cupids and basins, and remembering
the humble village fountain at which the carpenter’s daughter
had filled her urn, I turned sharply to the right and found
myself descending a long sordid street of shops and stalls, all
doing a busy trade—despite the Sunday—in crosses, rosaries,
crucifixes, chaplets, picture-postcards, medals, and all the
knick-knacks of holiness. Sometimes through open windows
of the ugly one-storey houses I caught sight of the landscape
below—the path descending to the sea, bordered with buttercups
and a-flutter with birds, the rolling olive-plains, the strip of
blue sea, the wonderful headland. Never had I seen a lovelier
view shut out by meaner buildings. With its patches of refuse
and its dreary shops and booths it seemed the ugliest street in
all Italy, bearing on its face the mark of its bastard origin—a
city grown up not from natural healthy human life, but for the
exploitation of a miracle.
And this it was that drew gold like water from the crowned
heads of Europe. And this it was that had drawn hither even
Descartes, the first Apostle of Philosophic Doubt. Surely
“Non cogito, ergo sum,” is the motto of Faith, I thought.
I stood in a vast ancient market-place among canvas-covered
stalls, by a lovely fountain with a smiling little Bacchus that
faced an old cathedral, and I gazed like ten thousand others at
a lovely open-air pulpit that rose in the shadow of a tall
campanile. From a bronze capital it rose, girdled with
beautiful marble reliefs of dancing children by Donatello and
protected from the sun by a charming circular roof, and in this
delectable coign of vantage stood a priest holding something
that fevered the perspiring mob.
“La sacra cintola! La sacra cintola!”
I knew what the Virgin’s girdle would be like, for had I not
seen her handing it to St. Thomas in Lippo Lippi’s picture in
this same town of Prato, as she flew up to heaven in the
radiance of her youth and beauty, standing on cherubs’ heads
and escorted by angels? But now so far as I could see this
tasselled belt, it seemed to correspond ill with the waist
measurement of the little mother of Nazara.
Some white pigeons fluttered round the priest’s head and
settled on the pulpit, and a great sigh of ecstasy went up from
the people.
I looked round at the little Bacchus. But he was still
smiling.
I stood before an altar in a little church, but this time a sweet-faced
woman in a wimple stood beside me.
“The wall is behind the altar,” she said. “And once a year
the miraculous image of the Madonna of the Bed is shown to
the people of Pistoja and the pilgrims, exactly as Our Lady of
the Graces impressed it on this piece of wall here when she
appeared to the sick girl. Very beautiful is she in her crown
and mantle, clasping to her arms the crowned Bambino as she
flies upwards.”
“And where is the bed?”
“The bed was removed from this sanctuary, which it
blocked up disproportionately. A separate little chapel was
built for it.”
We passed to the bed-chapel by way of the old cloisters of
the Ospedale, and saw in a small room a heavy brownish
wooden bed with a red quilt, made as for an occupant. A
Madonna and Child was painted on the headpiece, and a
Madonna and Child at the foot, and a Madonna and Child hung
on the wall.
“And when was the miracle wrought?” I asked.
“In 1336.”
The very year of the death of Cino, the poet of Pistoja and
the friend of Dante, I remembered. And Dante and Cino had
receded into the dim centuries while this bed with its prosaic
quilt and pillows stood stolid, inscribed at head and foot with
inscriptions dated 1336 and 1334, begging me to pray for the
souls of Condoso Giovanni and Fra Ducchio.
“Here,” explained the sweet-faced sister, “the poor girl had
lain many long years, incurable, when one day the Virgin
appeared in dazzling beauty, holding the Child, and told two
little boys who happened to be in the hospital to fetch brother
Jacopo della Cappa. The venerable brother, being busy confessing,
refused to be disturbed, whereupon the Virgin sent a
second message bidding him come at once, for she desired him
to predict a pestilence in Pistoja, of which he would die in a
month. So he came forthwith, but he had scarcely entered the
room when the dazzling apparition disappeared. But she left
the invalid girl in perfect health, and her holy image on the
wall.”
“And did Fra Jacopo duly die?”
“To the day. And so great was the plague that there was
scarcely any one left to administer the last office.”
“As disproportionate as the bed to the church,” I thought,
“to kill off all Pistoja and save one bedridden girl.” But how
utter such a thought to this sweet-faced sister?
“Since then the bed and the image on the wall have wrought
many miracles,” she said. “The blind have had their sight, the
deaf their hearing, the paralysed their limbs. That was why
the name was changed from Our Lady of the Bed to Our Lady
of the Graces. And countless were the pilgrims that came.
But in 1780 the wicked Scipione Ricci, who was a secret
Jansenist, was made our bishop, and he tried to destroy the
faith in our sanctuary and in the Girdle of Prato. But our
neighbours of Prato rose against him, rushed into the cathedral,
smashed his episcopal chair, and sacked his palace. He had to
resign his bishopric, and so our faith was purged of the
heretic, and Maria was avenged. Ah, that jubilee of her
Immaculate Conception in 1904! It was a day of Paradise.”
Again a haze disturbs my vision. For a moment I see the
little olive-eyed Jewess of Nazara, racked between husband and
son, wringing her impotent hands; then my vision clears, and
I am reading a printed Italian prayer before a chapel of the
Madonna in a mighty fane.
“To the Holy Immaculate Virgin of Hope Venerated in the Basilica of S. Frediano
“Kneeling before you, Immaculate Virgin, Mother of God,
consoler of the afflicted, refuge of sinners, we pray you to turn
upon us your looks full of goodness, compassion, and love. You
see all our spiritual and temporal needs. Obtain from your divine
Son sincere contrition for sin, light to know the truth, force
to conquer temptations, help to believe and act as true Christians,
patience in tribulations, peace of heart, holy perseverance to the
end. Obtain for us that there may remain far from us disease,
pestilence, hunger, war, earthquakes, fires, drought, flood, sudden
death. Take this City under your particular protection, preserve
it, defend it, cause ever to reign therein the spirit of religion
and of concord, and in private families mutual charity, domestic
content, and good morals. . . . Whoever will devoutly recite
this will acquire forty days’ Indulgence already conceded by
His Most Reverend Excellence Monsignore the Archbishop
Filippo Santi.
“Lucca, 1848.”
I seemed to be back in Asia on a burning June day fifteen
hundred years before this prayer was written, much pushed about
by the crowd that surged round a church.
“Is it the Whitsuntide service?” I asked a priest at last in the
Greek I heard on all sides.
“Nay; art a barbarian or a worshipper of the Temple of
Diana that thou knowest not the Church of the Theotokos, and
the great Imperial Council of Bishops that is sitting there to
avenge the insults of Nestorius to the Virgin?”
“What insults?” I murmured.
“Surely thou hast snored in the cave in the Pion Hill with
our Seven Sleepers! This blasphemous Patriarch of Constantinople
denies our Lady the title Theotokos, would argue that she
is not Mother of God, but that the Christ born through her
was only the human part of Him, not the Eternal Logos.” His
voice trembled, his beady eyes flamed with passion. “And he
dares come defend his thesis here—in Ephesus, where the Holy
Virgin lies buried! But our saintly Cyril of Alexandria hath
drawn up twelve anathemas and will stamp him out as he
stamped out that minx Hypatia.”
“Is Cyril here too, then?”
“Ay, and what an ambrosial homily he preached! ‘Hail, Mary,
Mother of God, spotless dove! Hail, Mary, perpetual lamp at
which was kindled the Sun of Justice! Hail, Mary! Thanks to
Thee, the archangels rejoice and sing; thanks to Thee, the Magi
followed the star; thanks to Thee the college of Apostles was
established. . . .’ ” His voice died away in reminiscent ecstasy.
“Then Cyril and Nestorius are now in debate?”
“Nay, the heretic shrinks from appearing—he pretexts that
all the bishops are not arrived, and he induced the Emperor’s
commissioner to protest against the sitting. But as thou
seest, the Council is going on—hath been going on from early
morn—there are two hundred bishops.”
“There are only a hundred and fifty,” put in a voice. “It is
scandalous.”
“Ay,” assented another voice. “Where is the Patriarch of
Antioch?”
The priest turned on the Nestorians. “It is beasts like you
with whom Paul fought here,” he said.
“Beast thyself,” retorted a physician in a long robe, “to
suggest that God could be contained in the womb.” It was the
beginning of a scuffle that grew to a bloody battle between the
Nestorian minority and the orthodox. Daggers and scimitars
gleamed in the air. I saw a group of Nestorians take refuge in
a church, but fly from it again, leaving a trail of bleeding
corpses along the aisle. The survivors made for the harbour,
hoping doubtless for safety in the multitude of boats and ships.
And ever thicker grew the crowd surging round the Council-chamber,
till at last as the long summer day closed, a rumbling
as of distant thunder was heard from within—“Anathema!
Anathema!” And the cry passed to the crowd—“Anathema!
Anathema!”—till the whole firmament seemed to crash and
rock with it and men cheered and danced and tossed their
weapons in air. And as the venerable figures began to troop
out and the word came that Nestorius was deposed, a thousand
torches leapt as by magic into flame, and men escorted the
Bishops to their lodgings, leaping and singing, and lo! round
the whole city blazed illuminations and bonfires.
And my eyes, piercing through the future, beheld Italian
bottegas with immortal Masters and Pupils, turning out through
the centuries portraits of the Madonna and Child, to be blazoned
henceforward inseparable, a symbol of the true faith: delectable,
innumerable, filling the whole earth with their glory.
The close smell of the studios gave way again to the odour of
crowded humanity and I was in the arena of Seville. But never,
not even at Easter, had I seen the populace so joyous, the ladies
shrouded in such rich mantillas or flirting such precious fans,
the picadors so gaily caparisoned, the toreadors so daring, the
bulls maddened with so many banderillas or disembowelling so
many horses. It was the mutual ecstasy of slaughter. And
from all parts of the city penetrated the chiming of bells, while
the thunder of festive cannon sometimes drowned even the roar
of the ring. And at every thrilling stroke or perilous charge
there came from parted lips, “Ave Maria purissima” or
“Viva nuestra Señora,” and from all around rose the instinctive
reply: “Sin peccado concebida.”
Gradually, as I listened to the conversation in the intervals
of the bull fights, I became aware of the sense of the Fiesta.
All this overflow of religious rapture sprang not from the bulls
but the Bull—Regis Pacifici—which after centuries of passionate
controversy had at last been launched by Paul V in this sixteen
hundred and seventeenth year from the bearing of the Virgin,
forbidding the opponents of Immaculate Conception to sustain
their doctrine in public. Maria had been conceived without
sin. The last flaw had been removed from her perfection.
“Heaven rewards us for expelling the last of the Moors,”
cried a lovely Señora with a dazzling flash of eyes and teeth.
“And now that we have purged Spain and placed her and her
mighty possessions under the protection of the Immaculate Conception,
her future shall be even more glorious than her past.”
But my reply was drowned by the roar of the ring as the
dead bull was trailed off at a gallop.
“Ave Maria purissima!”
“Sin peccado concebida!”
I am still in Spain, watching Señor Bartholomé Estéban
Murillo polish off his Madonnas for country fairs or South
American convents. Presently under the guidance of Señor
Pacheco, Holy Inquisitor of pictures, he paints the popular
dogma of the day, in the shape of little angels floating below
a lovely lady in a blue mantle standing with clasped hands on
the earth-ball, and the scene shifts to France where two centuries
later the picture is purchased at a fabulous price by the Louvre,
just before Pio Nono from his refuge at Gaeta publishes the
Bull Ineffabilis, definitely declaring that the freedom of the
Virgin from original sin is a divine revelation. Cheap coloured
pictures of the “Immaculate Conception” multiply, and Bernadette,
a pious young shepherdess in the French Pyrenees,
beholds in a grotto by a spring a White Lady, veiled from head
to foot, with a cerulean floating scarf, a chaplet with golden
links, and two golden roses on her naked feet, who announces
herself as “The Immaculate Conception” and demands a
Procession to her shrine.
And before my eyes unrolls the long panorama, painted in
immortal colours by the epical brush of Zola: the mushroom
Lourdes of hotels and holy shops replacing the rude village,
the Hospital of our Lady of Sorrows, the crowned statue
of our Lady of Salvation, the Fathers of the Grotto, the
Blue Sisters, the Church of the Rosary, the Basilica
swathed in splendid banners, glittering with golden hearts
innumerable, and jewels and marbles and marvellous lamps;
the unending masses and litanies, the three hundred thousand
pilgrims a year, the thaumaturgic bathing pools, unclean,
abominable, the White Train rolling through the night with
its hideous agglomeration of human agonies, amid ecstatic
canticles to the Madonna, the thirty thousand tapers winding
round in leagues of flame to the rhythm of interminable invocations,
the perpetual thunder of supplication breaking frenziedly
on the figure of the Madonna framed in the ever-blazing
Grotto.
The thunder continued but it was again the roar of an arena,
though by the towered old palaces round the great semi-circle of
cobbled piazza and by the fountain with the bas-reliefs of Christian
virtues I knew I was back in Italy, in my beloved Siena. But
what was this smoky flame that shot skyward and what was this
tree near the Christian fountain that they were breaking up to
throw on the bonfire? What was this dreadful sport that had
replaced the Palio?
In a vast pyre burnt a great huddle of writhing figures, whose
shrieks were drowned by the fiendish roar of the drunken mob.
“Viva Maria! Viva Maria!”
And I remembered that Siena had peculiarly dedicated itself
to the Holy Mother, was the civitas Virginis, and that the
Madonna was its feudal suzerain, formally presented with the
keys of its gates. Visions from the old chronicles floated before
me—the dedication of 1260, the weeping Syndic in his shirt, a
rope round his neck, prostrate with the Bishop before the altar
of the Virgin, or walking behind her as she was carried in the
great barefoot procession to the chanting of Ave Marias; and
the victory over Florence that duly followed, when, throwing her
white mantle of mist over her city, she enabled her faithful
feudatories to slay ten thousand Florentines “as a butcher slays
animals in a slaughter house,” so that the Malena ran bank-high
with blood, and the region, polluted by the carcases of eighteen
thousand horses, was abandoned to the wild beasts, and coins
were struck in her honour; and the renewed dedications whenever
the Commune was in peril, the gorgeous processions and
“Te Deums,” the great silk standard showing the Madonna rising
into heaven over the city, the Cardinal, the Prior, the Captain
of the People, the Signoria in violet and cloaked as on Good
Friday, the trumpeters trumpeting in the striped Duomo, the
feudal keys in a silver basin, the fifty poor damsels in white,
dowered annually so long as the Virgin did her duty as
suzerain⁠——
But the shrieks from the bonfire brought me back to the
moment.
“Whom are they burning?” I cried in horror.
“Only Jews,” replied my neighbour reassuringly, and indeed,
I could now distinguish the Hebrew death-cries of the victims.
“Hear, O Israel, the Lord Our God, the Lord is One.”
“We burn them and the Tree of Liberty together!” my
neighbour chuckled. “No godless French Republic for us!” A
fierce yell from the crowd underlined his remark. He craned
forward, beaming, exalted.
“They have found another! O Blessed Virgin of Comfort,
they have found another!”
And I perceived, dragged along towards the pyre by her
greying hair, a little olive-eyed Jewish mother, whose worn face
I seemed to recognise under her dishevelled head-shawl.
“Viva Maria! Viva Maria! Viva la Madre di Dio!”
The spectacle was too horrible. With a convulsive shudder I
shook off these visions and rose, cramped, to my feet. The sun
was dipping beyond the mountains of Vicenza, the peaceful bell
from below was still tolling, the air was cool and delicious.
Now I could continue my climb to the church of Our Lady of
the Mountain. And the loving epithets recommenced—“Debellatrix
Incredulorum,” “Janua Coeli,” “Turris Davidica,” without
pause, without end. And as I walked, other of her countless
names began crowding upon me, from “Our Lady of Snows” to
“Our Lady of Sorrows,” from “Our Lady of the Porringer” to
“The Queen of the Angels,” and all the symbols of her, from
the Pomegranate to the Sealed Book, from the Dove to the
Porta Clausa; and all the myriads of churches and altars that
had been dedicated to her from Rome to Ecuador—from Milan
Cathedral with its hundred spires to the humblest wayside
shrine of Sicily or Mexico—and all the feasts, all the “Months
of Maria,” all the Pilgrimages, with all the medals and missals,
all the effigies in wood or wax or bronze, all the marbles and
mosaics, from the crude little black sacrosanct Byzantine figures
to the exquisitely tender marble Pietà of Michelangelo, and all the
convents and orders she had created, all the Enfants de Marie, and
Serviti di Maria, and Sisters of the Immaculate Conception, and
all the hymns, antiphons, litanies, lections, carols, canticles. The
air was full of organ sounds and the melody of soaring voices.
“Ave Maris Stella” they sang, and “Salve Regina” and
“Stabat Mater,” and then in an infinite incantation, sounding
and resounding from all the spaces of the world: “Sancta Maria,
ora pro nobis! Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis!” And her figure
floated before me, pure, radiant, loving, as it has floated before
millions of households for hundreds of years, consoling, blessing,
vitalising.
And I thought of her long adventure to reach this marvellous
apotheosis: in what a strange little source this mighty river
had begun; how that looseness of the Septuagint translator in
rendering the Hebrew for “maiden” by “virgin” in an utterly
irrelevant passage of Isaiah had led to Mary’s virginity; how
she had remained a virgin through all the vicissitudes of her
married life, Joseph turning into a man of eighty with children
by his former wife, or even remaining virgin himself, the
brothers of Jesus changing into his cousins; how her son had
been born as a ray of light or even as an illusive appearance;
how, with the growth of theology and Mariolatry and nunneries
and monasteries, she had grown holier and holier, immaculate,
impeccable, a model to men and maidens, the Queen of Heaven,
mighty beyond all the saints, giving four feast-days to the
Church, entering into the liturgy, redeeming souls from purgatory
on Assumption Day, and even sustaining the saintly with
her milk; how her final purification from the taint of original
sin had been a stumbling block for the more rigid theologians,
St. Bernard opposing the festival, Aquinas and the Dominicans
denying the dogma against Duns Scotus and the Franciscans;
but how the “intellectuals”—so serviceable to the mob when
their logic found contorted reasons for the popular faith—were
sooner or later swept aside, the harsh definers of heresy themselves
left heretics, when they ran counter to the popular
emotion, the popular festivals, the popular instinct for an ideal
of purity and perfection. What a curious play and interplay of
schoolman-logic and living emotion, working ceaselessly through
the centuries, combining or competing to re-shape and sublimate
the carpenter’s wife till she was wrought to the mould of the
popular need, her very parents, unknown to the Gospels, becoming,
as Joachim and Anna, the centre of a fresh cycle of legends,
pictures, Church festivals. And what uncountable volumes of
monumental learning and jejune controversy, from Augustus
and Anselm and the venerable Bede to the two thousand and
twelve pages of Carlo Passaglia of Lucca, the respondent to
Renan!
And my thoughts turned from the theologians to the poets
and painters, to the Vergine Bella e di sol vestita—the beautiful
Apocalyptic Virgin, clothed with the sun—of Petrarch, and the
weeping Virgin of Tasso, and the Vergine Madre Figlia del tuo
Figlio of Dante, and the images in all these forms created by
the artists, for whom the Madonna sufficed to open all the
mansions of art; who could cluster all the poetry of the world
round her glory or her grief, were it rural loveliness or the
beauty of lilies, or lofty architecture, or space-rhythm, or
begemmed and brocaded attire, or the sculptural nude; who
set her rich-carved throne, adorned with arabesques or hued in
strange green and gold, amid palatial pillars under diapered
ceilings or within glamorous landscapes, or in the bowers of
roses or under the shadow of lemon-trees; who even crowned
her with the Papal tiara.
But none of these images would stay with me: for not even the
triple crown, surmounted by the golden globe and cross, not even
this symbol of temporal, spiritual, and purgatorial authority,
could banish the worn face of the carpenter’s wife under the
cheap head-shawl, the little olive-eyed mother in Israel, in
whose ears sounded and resounded the terrible words:
“Woman, what have I to do with thee?”
From the swinging of the bronze lamp in the nave of Pisa
Cathedral Galileo caught the idea of measuring Time by the
pendulum; by the telescope he made at Padua he mapped
Space. Within a decade of the burning of Giordano Bruno
the heavens were opened up to show the infinity of worlds, and
the heliocentric teaching of Copernicus was confirmed by the
revelation of Jupiter’s satellites. What the Sidereus Nuncius
of Galileo announced was the end of an era. By this terrible
book and his terrible telescope the poor little earth was pushed
out of the centre of the stage. The moon—no longer teres
atque rotunda—lost her beautiful spheric smoothness, her very
light was a loan—unrepaid. Great Sol, himself, the old
lord of creation, gradually sank to the obscure coryphæus of
some choric dance veering towards and around some ineffable
pivot in a measureless choragium. The ninefold vault engirdling
Dante’s universe was shrivelled up. The cosy cosmos
was replaced by a maze of solar systems, glory beyond glory, of
milky ways that were but clouds of worlds, thick as a haze of
summer insects or a whirl of sand in the Sahara. The poor
human brain reeled in this simoom of stars, and to complete its
confusion, the philosophers hastened to assure it that with the
universe no longer geocentric, man could no longer flatter himself
to be its central interest.
“So many nobler bodies to create,
 Greater, so manifold, to this one use,”
appeared disproportionate to Milton’s Adam. Homo could not
be the Master-Builder’s main concern—the great human tragedy
was a by-product. A sad conclusion, and possibly a true—but
a conclusion utterly unwarranted by these premises. More
sanely did the beneficent and facile Raphael remind the
doubting Adam,
       “Whether heaven moves or earth
 Imports not.”
The noble astronomic questionings in the eighth book of
“Paradise Lost” testify to the ferment among the first inhabitants
of the new cosmos—Milton was born in the same year as
the telescope and met Galileo at Florence—but despite the
poet’s half-hearted protests, man has swallowed too humbly the
doctrine that our earth is not the centre of the universe. Pray
do not confound me with those pious pundits whose proofs of
the flatness of the earth are still the hope of a lingering sect,
and a witness to the immortality of human stupidity. I am
no Muggletonian whose sun is four miles from the earth. I
have no lance to tilt against the mathematicians and their
tubes. But I fail to see how the mere broadening out of our
universe can displace Terra from the centre. Till we have the
final and all-inclusive chart of the heavens—and worlds immeasurable
are still beyond our ken, worlds whose light speeding
to us at eleven million miles or so a minute is still on its way—how
can any one assert conclusively that our earth is not in the
exact centre of all the systems? That it goes round the sun—instead
of being the centre of the sun’s revolution—is nothing
against its supremacy or central status. The fire exists for the
meat, though the spit revolves and not the fire.
And if the earth be not in the centre of the systems, it
assuredly remains at the centre of Space. For by that old
definition of Hermes Trismegistus to which Pascal gave currency,
every point of an infinite area is really its centre, even as
no point is its circumference. And in a psychological sense too,
wherever a spectator stands is the centre of the universe.
But grant the earth be not the centre of Space or the systems!
What then? How does it lose its lofty estate? Is London at
the globe’s kernel? Did the axis pass through Rome? Kepler
wasted much precious time under the current philosophic
obsession that the orbits of the planets must be circular—since
any figure less perfect than a circle were incompatible with their
dignity. Hence the cumbrous hypotheses to explain their
apparent deviation from perfection, hence was the sphere girt
“With centric and eccentric scribbled o’er,
 Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb.”
The same fallacy of symmetry surely underlies the notion
that the earth is dethroned from its hegemony of the stellar
system merely because the lines drawn to it from every ultima
Thule of the universe are unequal. ’Tis a confusion of geometric
centre with centre of forces. It may be that just this
asymmetric station was necessary for the evolution of the
universe’s crowning race.
For if the Universe has not its aim and centre in man, pray
to what other end all this planetary pother? If man is but a
by-product of the cosmic laboratory, what is the staple? Till
this question is answered, we may safely continue anthropocentric.
Man abased forsooth by this whirl of mammoth worlds!
Nay, ’tis our grandeur that stands exalted, our modesty that
stands corrected. We did not dream that our facture required
such colossal machinery, that to engender us a billion billion
planets must be in experimental effervescence. A fig upon their
size! Do we rank Milton inferior to the megatherium? Can
a man take thought by adding a cubit to his stature? The ant
is wiser than the alligator, and the sprawling saurians of the
primal slime may have their analogue in the huge weltering
worlds that have never evolved a human brain. And had the
earth swollen herself to the gross amplitude of the sun, her case
were no better: she would still be—in the infinite wash of
Space—a pebble, even as a pebble is a stellar system in
miniature. There lies the paradox of infinity. Nothing
in it is large enough to be important—if quantity is the
criterion of importance. To be in one spot of Space is as
dignified or undignified as to be in another. Why, I wonder,
has position in Time escaped this invidious criticism. As well
assert that nothing important can happen or nothing that
happens can be important, because everything must happen at
a mere point of Time, which is not even Time’s central point.
It was a truer sense of values that made Christendom and Islam
boldly place their foundation at Time’s central point, up to
which or back to which all the ages lead. The year One begins
with Christ’s birth, with Mohammed’s Hegira. In the same
spirit, though with a more literal belief, did the old cartographers
draw their world round Jerusalem as a centre. Position in
Time or Space is not the measure of importance, but importance
is the measure of position in Time or Space. Where the
highest life is being lived, there is the centre of the world, and
unless a higher life is lived elsewhere, the centre of the universe.
Not, where are we in Space, but are we on the central lines of
cosmic evolution? That is the question.
Theology, then, stands where it did, wherever Terra stands.
Not the mythical theology of sacred books, but the scientific
theology of sacred facts. The expansion of the universe from a
mapped parish to a half-uncharted wilderness of worlds cannot
shake religion—a Deity is more suitably lodged in infinity than
on a roof-garden—but it did shake the Church, so recklessly
committed to a disprovable cosmogony. And the Church
burnt books and men with its habitual consuming zeal, denying
the motion of the earth as it had denied the Antipodes, clinging
to an earth surrounded by menial planets, as it had clung
to the flat plane of “Christian Topography.”
But is there nothing to be said for the Churchmen? Were
they mere venomous obscurantists? Nay, they were patriots
fighting for their father-world, for the cosmos of their
ancestors, pro aris et focis. They saw their little universe
threatened by the rise of a great stellar empire. They saw
themselves about to be swallowed up and lost in its measureless
magnificence. And so in a frenzy of chauvinism they gagged
Galileo and burned Giordano Bruno, those traitors in the
camp, in league with Reason, emperor of the stars.
But despite the Church’s defeat, our little globe still maintains
a sturdy independence. And until you bring me evidence
of a superior genus, I shall continue to regard our good red
earth as the centre of creation, and man as the focus of inter-celestial
planetary forces.
Millions of spiritual creatures may walk the earth unseen, as
Milton asserts, and millions more may be invisible in Mars and
the remoter seats of the merry-go-round, but de non apparentibus
et de non existentibus eadem est ratio. It is William James
who of all philosophers in the world would argue our fates
regulated by superior beings with whom we co-exist as with us
our cats and dogs. The analogy has not even one leg to stand
on. The cat and the dog have solid proof of our existence,
they see and hear us, and we share with them a large segment
of existence. Our anatomy and theirs are much of a muchness.
They divide with us our food and our drink and bask at the
same fire, nay, it requires a vast conceit to look them in the
face and deny our kinship. But who save Gulliver hath beheld
a bodily Superman or partaken of his meals? Even with our
spiritual superiors, with our Shakespeares and Beethovens, we
have a substantial basis of identity. The range of thought
which circumscribes ours must at the same time partially
coincide with it, and though our thoughts be not wholly their
thoughts, their thoughts must needs be partially ours.
God may be infinitely more than man, but He is not finitely
less. Even a God without humour would be—to that extent—man’s
inferior. Matthew Arnold’s gibe of the “magnified
non-natural man” is groundless. I do not become a magnified
non-natural dog because I have attributes in common with my
terrier. The God of theology is already divested of man’s
matter; deflate Him likewise of man’s spirit, and what remains?
In robbing their Deity of all human traits the de-anthropomorphic
philosophers have overshot the mark and reduced Him
to a transcendental nullity who can neither be comprehended by
His creatures nor comprehend them.
Or if they allow Him ideas and passions, they neutralise and
sterilise them in a frenzy of scholastic paradox. “Amas, nec
æstuas,” cries St. Augustine, “zelas et securus es; pænitet te et
non doles; irasceris et tranquillus es.” God repents, but without
regret; He is angry but perfectly tranquil. To evade the limitations
of any attribute we endow Him at the same time with its
opposite, as who should say a white negro. But such violent
assaults upon the unthinkable yield no prize either of understanding
or of satisfaction.
If “the love that moves the sun and the other stars” be not
that same love which a noble man may feel for his fellow-creatures
of every order of being, if it be a love that is at the
same time indifference, or even hate, then it may equally be
expressed as “the hate which moves the sun and the other
stars” (and which is at the same time love). Or it may find far
honester expression as the agnostic’s unknowable—the X that
moves the sun and the other stars. If God’s justice be not
man’s justice, then it is no justice. It must be our justice—if
it is justice at all—our justice, only occupied and obscured by
innumerable pros and cons to us unknown, and extending over
times and spaces beyond our ken, so that were we placed in
possession of all the evidence we should applaud the verdict.
The philosophers do but narrow their God under illusion of
broadening Him—or rather they broaden Him so tenuously that
He becomes an infinite impalpability, whose accidental evaporation
would scarcely be noted. It was a more consistent mystic
who said: “God may not improperly be styled nothing.”
So that our circumnavigation of the infinite brings us back to
our noble selves and our own door-step. The sun is still there
to give us light by day, and the moon and stars still shine to
give us light by night. Nor is it less their function to nourish
us with beauty and with mystery.
“When Science from Creation’s face
 Enchantment’s veil withdraws,
 What lovely visions yield their place
 To cold material laws!”
Campbell, who thus complained, was no profound poet. The
laws are neither cold nor material, nor do the lovely visions yield
their place. Their loveliness is as abiding as the laws which
produce them. ’Tis true that at first Galileo seemed to have
profaned Cynthia, the “goddess excellently bright.” The moon,
the beautiful moon of poets and lovers, lay betrayed—a dead
planet, a scarred desolation, seamed with arid ravines and pitted
with a pox of craters. Is then the moon of the poets a delusion
which science bids us put away like a childish toy? No, by her
own heavens, no. A more scientific science restores the glamour.
The moon has all the beauty she appears to have. The loveliest
woman’s face, viewed through a magnifying glass, appears equally
scarred and seamed and pitted. But here ’tis the lens that is
accused of falsification, ’tis the ugliness that is pronounced the
delusion—a face was meant to be seen at a certain distance and
with the natural eye. Even so—and the moon chose her distance
with admirable discretion.
The synthesis of everyday reality is always man’s central
verity. The peering unnatural scientific vision of the moon has
the lesser truth, is but a spectral rim of the whole-orbed reality.
’Tis the poet’s moon that is the full moon. But the poet were as
foolish as the astronomer if he in his turn imagined himself
dealing with absolutes, if he forgot that in logic as in landscape
all views depend on the point at which you place yourself. It
is only from the true point of view that the earth remains the
centre of the universe.
And what is the invasion of our consciousness by the extended
stellar system to its invasion by the intensive infinities of our
own globular parish? The endless galaxy of the centuries and
the civilisations has opened out before our telescopic thought.
We are no longer at the centre of our cosmos—we can no longer
snuggle in a cosy conceptual world, Classical or Christian, nor
can we make the best of both these worlds, like Raphael or
Milton. The dim populations have become lurid. Japan pours
her art upon us, and her equal claim to hold a chosen people—“pursuing,”
as its Emperor’s oath declares, “a policy co-extensive
with the heavens and the earth.” Egypt unrolls the teeming
scroll of her immemorial dynasties. The four hundred millions
of China lie on our imaginations like a nightmare in yellow, and
we perceive that the maker of man hath a predilection for pigtails.
India opens out her duskily magnificent infinities and we
are grown familiar with Brahma and Vishnu, with Vedas and
Buddha-Jâtakas. Persia reveals to us in the Zend Avesta of
Zoroaster a strangely modern gospel, glimmering through
grotesque images of space and time. Mohammed is no longer
an Infidel, and we recognise the subtlety alike of the
Motekallamin and the Arabic Aristotelians. We respect the
Norse Gods and the great Tree Yggdrasil. The Teutonic
divinities have reappeared in every part of the civilised earth
and their operatic voice is heard with more reverence than
any other god’s. Even the old Peruvian civilisation solicits
us, that successful social order of the Incas. The stellar
swirl of worlds is a crude puzzle in quantity beside these
mental worlds which the peoples have spun for themselves like
cocoons.
But not only the peoples. Each creature that has ever lived,
from the spider to Shakespeare, has spun for itself its own
cosmos. Microcosm we cannot call this cosmos, since that
implies the macrocosm drawn to smaller scale, and this—like all
creations—is a mere selection from the universe, excluding and
including after its own idiosyncrasy. Autocosm is the word we
need for it—a new word, but a phenomenon as old as the first
created consciousness, and a phenomenon that has never
perfectly repeated itself since that day. For no two autocosms
have ever been precisely alike. In the lower orders of being the
autocosm may be substantially identical throughout all the
individuals of the species, but as we mount in the grade of
organisation, the autocosm becomes more and more individual.
And even the large generic autocosms, how variously compounded—the
scent-world of dogs, the eye-world of birds, the
uncanny touch-world of bats, the earth-world of worms, the
water-world of fishes, the gyroscopic world of dancing-mice, the
flesh-world of parasites, the microscopic world of microbes.
These worlds do not need untrammelled orbits, they intersect one
another inextricably in an infinite interlacing. Yet each is a
symmetric sphere of being, a rounded whole, and to its denizens
the sole and self-sufficient cosmos. One creature’s poison is
another creature’s meat, one creature’s offal is another creature’s
paradise, and our cemetery is a nursery aswarm with creeping
mites. If on the one hand Nature seems a wasteful housekeeper,
scattering a thousand seeds that one may bear, on the other
hand she appears ineffably ingenious in economising every ort
and oddment, every cheese-paring and scum-drop as the seed-plot
of new and joyous existence. Life, like an infinite nebulous
spirit, bursts in through every nook and cranny of matter,
squeezing itself into every possible and improbable mould, and
even filling a chink in an existing creature rather than remain
outside organisation. And each atom of spirit that achieves
material existence takes its cramped horizons for the boundaries
of the universe and itself as the centre of creation. Woe indeed
to the creature that has seen beyond its own boundaries, that
can weave no cosy autocosm to nestle in. This is what happens
to your Shakespeares and your Schopenhauers; this is the
“Everlasting Nay” of “Sartor Resartus.” Life is become
  “A tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.”
Such an autocosm is the shirt of Nessus. Hercules must tear
it off or perish. And we are all the time changing our
autocosms. That is the meaning of experience. Only the fool
dies in the same cosmos in which he was born, and a great teacher
or a great statesman changes the autocosm of his generation.
Here be the true weavings with which Time’s Shuttle is busy,
these endless patternings and re-patternings of mental worlds,
adjusted to ever-changing creatures, and ever-shifting circumstances.
The birth and death of planets is stability compared
with this mercurial flux, which in the human world is known as
movements of thought and religion, growths and decays of
language, periods of art and politics. History is the clash of
autocosms, and every war is a war of the worlds.
As I walk into Milan Cathedral, the modern autocosm fades
out with the buzz and tingle of the electric cars that engirdle
the great old building, and the massive walls of the mediæval
autocosm shut me into a glowing gloom of unearthly radiance,
whose religious hush is accentuated by the sound of soft bells.
Only the dominating figure on the cross seems out of tone; this
blood is too violent for peace. What a paradox that the
Christians are such dominant races—perhaps they needed this
brake. But even without the blood, the cruciform dusk of the
interior is in discord with the lace-work of the exterior, recalls
the sombreness below the glittering Renaissance. All this
multitudinous microscopic work is waste, all this wealth of
fretwork and final, for it is only at a distance, when the details
have faded into the mass, that this mass appears noble. And
this, too, is like the Catholic autocosm, with its rococo detail
and its massive magnificence.
And round the Cathedral, as I said, rages the modern order—is
not Milan the metropolis of Italian science and do not all
tram-roads lead to the Piazza del Duomo?—and a ballet I saw
in La Scala danced the carmagnole of the new world. “Excelsior”
was its jubilant motto, the ascent being from Cathedrals
to Railway Bridges and Balloons. A Shining Spirit of Light
(Luce) inspired Civiltà and baffled the priestly powers of
darkness (Tenebre), while ineffably glittering coryphées proclaimed
with their toes “Eureka!”
But ah! my dear Corybants of Reason, an autocosm may be
habitable and even comfortable in despite of Science. Its
working value is independent of its containing false materials,
or true materials in false proportions. And yet, my dear
devotees of Pragmatism—that parvenu among Philosophies—its
utility does not establish its truth. A false coin will do all
the work of a true coin so long as it is not found out. Nevertheless
there exists a test of coins independent of their power
of gulling the public. And there exists a name for those who
continue to circulate a coin after they know it to be false.
The Pragmatist may apply his philosophy to justify past forms
of belief and action, now outmoded, but he will do infinite
mischief if he tries to juggle himself or the world into such
forms of belief or action because they lead to spiritual and
practical satisfactions.
Oh, what a tangled web we weave
When first we practise to believe!
Nay, it is doubtful whether satisfaction can come as the
sequel of any but a genuine and involuntary belief. There is
much significance in the story of the old Welsh lady who
desired the removal of the mountain in front of her window
and complained to her pastor that all her prayers had been
unable to move it a single inch. “Because you have not real
faith,” was the glib clerical reply. Whereupon, resolved to
have “real faith,” the old lady spent a night of prayer on
her knees opposite the mountain. When morning came, and
she rolled up the blind, lo! the mountain stood as before.
“There!” she exclaimed. “Just as I expected!”
This pseudo-faith is, I fear, all that the Pragmatist can
beguile or batter himself into, for if he has real faith he needs
no Pragmatism to justify it by.
I grant you—indeed I have always pointed out—that there is
a large area of the autocosm given over to artistic, moral and
spiritual truths which are their own justification. But it is
only where there is no objective test of truth that Pontius
Pilate’s question may be answered with the test of success and
stimulation. Wherever it is possible to compare the autocosm
with the macrocosm, contradiction must be taken as the mark
of falsity, and either our notion of the macrocosm must be
amended, or our autocosm. Of course in the last analysis the
macrocosm is only the autocosm of its age, but it is the common
segment of all the individual autocosms. And while they are
liable to shrivel up like pricked bladders, the objective universe
can only expand and expand.
Despite La Scala and its dædal Modernism, it was, I fear, the
Catholic autocosm which fascinated me most in Italy, with its
naïve poetry, its grossness, its sublimity, and its daring distortions
of the macrocosm. The very clock-wheels in their courses
fight against reality. Read in the great church of S. Petronio
the directions on the two clocks of Fornasini, one giving the
solar time in the antique Italian style—when the hour varied
with the daylight—and the other the mean time of the meridian
of Bologna. “Subtract the time on the Italian clock from
24 o’clock, add the remainder to the time indicated on the other
clock, but counted from 1 to 24 o’clock. The time thus obtained
will be the hour of Ave Maria!” The hour of Ave Maria! Not
some crude arithmetical hour. Not the hour of repose from
work, not the hour of impending sunset, but the hour of the
vesper bell, the hour of Ave Maria! How it circumlaps, this
atmosphere, how it weaves a veil of pity and love between man
and the macrocosm.
It is nearly three and a half centuries since Italy helped to
break the power of the Paynim at Lepanto, yet the belief that
the Madonna (who could not free her own land from the Turk)
was the auxilium Christianorum, is as lively as on the day when
the bigoted Gregory XIII instituted the Feast of the Rosary
to commemorate her victory. At Verona I read in a church a
vast inscription set up at the tercentenary of the battle, still
ascribing the victory not only to the “supreme valour of our
arms steeled by the word of Pius V,” but also to “the great
armipotent Virgin.” Saints that I had in my ignorance
imagined remote from to-day, shelved in legend and picture,
retired from practical life, are, I found, still in the full exercise
of their professional activities as thaumaturgists; and scholastic
philosophers whose systems I had skimmed in my youth as
archaic lore, whom I had conceived as buried in encyclopædias
and monastic libraries, blossom annually in new editions. There
is the Angelic Doctor—Preceptor as he was styled on the title-pages—whom
I had thought safely tucked away in the tenth
canto of the “Paradiso.” In the Seminario Vescovile of Ferrara I
beheld the bulky volumes of his “Summa Theologiæ” in the pious
hands of the fledgeling priests, in a class-room whose ceiling
bears the sombre frescoes with which Garofalo had enriched the
building in its palmy days as a Palazzo. And the theology has
decayed far less than the frescoes. Still, that which we look
upon as the faded thought of the Middle Ages, serves as the
fresh bread of life to these youthful souls. Little did I dream
when I first saw Benozzo Gozzoli’s picture of The Triumph of
St. Thomas, or Taddeo Gaddi’s portrayal of his celestial
exaltation over the discomfited Arius, Sabellius, and Averroes,
that I should see with my own eyes scholars still at the feet of
the Magister studentium of the thirteenth century. Well may
the Pope undaunted launch his Encyclicals, and the Osservatore
Romano remark that “the evolution of dogma is a logical
nonsense for philosophers and a heresy for theologians.”
Pascal summed it up long ago: “Truth on this side of the
Pyrenees, Falsehood beyond.” What is true in the Piazza of
St. Peter grows false as you pass the Swiss Guards. Catholic
truth, like the Vatican, is extra-territorial. Why should it
concern itself with what is believed outside? Even the
Averroist philosophers taught that their results were true only
in philosophy, and that in the realm of Catholicism what the
Church taught was true. And though “impugning the known
truth” be one of the sins against the Holy Ghost, the known
truth and the Church truth show scant promise of coinciding.
And the triumph of St. Thomas continues, as saint no less than
as teacher. “Divus Thomas Aquinas” I found him styled in
Perugia. His Festa is on March 7, as I read in a placard in the
Church of S. Domenico in Ferrara.
“Festa dell’ Angelico Dottore
S. T. d’Aquinas
San Patrono delle Scuole Cattoliche.”
On the day of the Festa there is plenary indulgence for all the
faithful. There was another indulgence “per gli ascritti alla
Milizia Angelica.” But whether the Angelic Militia are the
pupils of the Angelic Doctor I am not learned enough to say.
His even earlier saintship, St. Antony, not only continues to
dominate Padua from his vast monumental Church, and enjoy
his three June days of Festa in his nominal city, but his tutelary
grace extends far beyond. In the Church of San Spirito in the
Via Ariosto of Ferrara, the famous preacher to the fishes was—after
the earthquake of 1908—the target of three days of
prayer. The house Ariosto built himself in the fifteenth
century stands in the same street, but Ariosto’s world of
mediæval chivalry is shattered into atoms while St. Antony
still saves Ferrara from earthquake.
Yes—allowing Messina and Reggio to be annihilated—the
Saint in 1908 said to the seismic forces, “So far and no farther,”
and ’tis not for me, whose umbrella he recovered on the very
day I mocked at his pretensions, to resent his preferences.
Three days of thanksgiving (mass in the morning at his altar
and prayers and Benediction in the afternoon), “per lo scampato
flagello del Terremoto,” rewarded his partiality for Ferrara.
The town keeps doubtless a morbid memory of earthquakes, for
from an old German book printed at Augsburg by Michael
Manger, I learn that the terrible Terremoto of 1570, “in
Welschland am Po,” started in Ferrara on a 16th in the
night and lasted till the 21st, during which time two hundred
people perished, and many houses with a dozen churches,
monasteries and nunneries were destroyed in Ferrara alone.
Why St. Antony nodded on that occasion is not explained.
Nor why he should have limited his protection to the Jews, not a
man of whom was injured. Perhaps he had not yet recognised
the claim of Ferrarese Christianity upon him. There is a wistful
note in the prayer placarded in the Ferrarese church of San
Francesco. “O great saint, commonly called the saint of Padua,
but worthy to be called the saint of the world. . . . You who
so often pressed in your arms the celestial Bambino!”
Happy Paduans, to whom this chronological prodigy is
securely attached, who indeed hastened to build a Cathedral
round him in the very year of his canonisation (1232). Here
amid crudely worked flowers, crutches, photographs and other
mementoes of his prowess, the faithful may find remission of
their sins or expiation of the faults of their dead. For what
limit is there to his intercessory power? Let me English the
prayer hung up in his chapel. Every religion has its higher
and more sophistic presentation, but it is well to turn from the
pundits to the people.
“Orazione a S. Antonio di Padova.
“Great St. Antony, the Church glories in all the prerogatives
that God has favoured you with among all the saints. Death is
disarmed by your power; error is dissipated by your light. They
whom the malice of man tries to wound receive from you the
desired relief. The leprous, the sick, the crippled, by your
virtue obtain cure, and the hurricanes and the tempests of the
sea calm themselves at your command; the chains of slaves fall
in pieces by your authority, and the lost things are found again
by your care and return to their legitimate possessors. All
those who invoke you with faith are freed from the evils and
perils that menace them. In fine, there is no want to which
your power and goodness do not extend.”
Here the intermediary has practically superseded the Creator,
even if dulia be still distinguished from latria.
Rimini was likewise safeguarded from the earthquake of 1908,
but not by St. Antony. A saint of its own, the glorious Bishop
and Martyr, St. Emidio, “compatrone della città, protettore
potentissimo contro il flagello del Terremoto,” received the
Three Days’ Solemn Supplication, and the Riminese were adjured
in many a placard to repeat their fathers’ glorious outburst of
faith before the thaumaturgic images when the city was delivered
from the frightful earthquake of 1786. But on the whole the
saints can scarcely have done their duty by the old towered cities,
for all Italy is full of the legend of toppled towers.
In war-perils it is the Archangel Michael who is the power to
approach. A prayer, ordered by Pope Leo XIII to be said in
all the churches of the world on bended knees after private mass,
pleads to that Holy Prince of the celestial legions to defend
us in battle and to thrust Satan and other roving spirits of evil
back to Hell. “Tuque, Princeps Militiæ Cœlestis, Satanam
aliosque spiritus malignos, qui ad perditionem animarum pervagantur
in mundo, divina virtute in infernum detrude. Amen.”
That Satan still has the entry of the Catholic autocosm, I
was indeed not unaware. But I was certainly taken aback to
find the Plague still curable by Paternosters. Yet this is what
I was told in a little church in Brescia devoted to Moretto’s
works and monument, and summing up in letters of gold the
whole duty of man.
        “Christians!
Bless the most holy name of God and of Jesus,
        Respect the Festas,
Keep the Fasts and the Abstinences!
        In short, only by Prayer
        And Penitence will cease
        Great Mortality, Famine
        And every Epidemic.”
I had regarded the Salute and the other Plague-Churches of
Venice as mere historic curiosities, and written it down as an
asset of human thought that the Plague of 1630 was due to the
filthiness and congestion of the Levantine cities. That when
60,000 Venetians died—“uno sterminato numero” as the tablet
in the Salute says—the Venetian Republic should with
vermicular humility erect a gorgeous church in gratitude for the
Death-Angel’s moderation—this might pass in 1630, like
St. Rocco’s neglect in performing only the few desultory miracles
recorded in the wooden bas-reliefs of his choir. In the
seventeenth century one might even adore the angel of Piero
Negri’s staircase-fresco of Venice Relieved of the Pest, tardily
as he came to relieve those ghastly visions of the plague-pit
which Zanchi has painted, facing him. But that in 1836
Venice should have decreed a Three Days’ Thanksgiving to the
“Deiparæ Virgini salutari” for salvation from “the cholera
fiercely raging through Europe” shows that two centuries had
made no change in the Catholic autocosm, nor in the caprice of
its Olympians. Venice had already passed under the Napoleonic
reign of pure reason, and in an old poster of the Teatro
Civico I read an invitation to the citizens to “democratise” the
soil of the theatre by planting here the Tree of Liberty and
dancing the graziosissima Carmagnola. But revolutions,
French or other, leave undisturbed the deep instinct of humanity
which demands that things spiritual shall produce equipollent
effects in the physical sphere.
“E pur si muove,” as Galileo said a hundred and thirty
years after his death. The Catholic autocosm and the
objective macrocosm begin to rub against each other
even in the churches. Quaintly enough ’tis over the
popular practice of spitting that science and religion come
into friction. The priest who convoyed me through the Certosa
of Pavia seemed to regard his wonderful church as a glorified
spittoon, and notices in every church in Italy make clear the
universality of the offence. But whereas at Pavia you are asked
“For the decorum of the house of God do not spit on the pavement,”
in Brescia the deprecation is headed: “Lotta Contro la
Tuberculosi,” as though the most penitent and pious might be
rewarded for church-going by consumption. The Cremona and
Lucca churches compromise: “Out of respect for the house of
God and for hygiene please do not spit on the pavement.” In
Verona the formula is practically the same: “Decency and
hygiene forbid to spit on the pavement.” In Bologna the modern
autocosm was, I gather, even more victorious, for in time of
plague, some frescoes in S. Petronio were whitewashed over.
I trust for the sake of symbolic completeness these were frescoes
of St. Sebastian and St. Rocco, the protective plague-saints.
A false cosmos, I said, like a false coin, may be as useful as a
true one, so long as it is believed in. As long as the attrition
of the macrocosm outside does not wear a hole in the Catholic
autocosm, it will keep its spheric inflation. For there is nothing
to wear a hole from inside, nothing contrary to pure reason,
nothing inconsistent with something else. There is no à priori
reason why saints should not control the chain of causation by
spiritual forces as engineers and doctors control it by physical
forces at the bidding of intelligence. There is no formal ground
for denying that penitence puts cholera to flight. It is merely
a matter of experience—and even Popes and Cardinals remove
to cooler places when the pest breaks out at Rome. There is no
conceptual reason why there should not be a Purgatory, nor why
masses and alms for the dead (or still more the emotions of love
and remorse which these represent) should not enable us to
assist the posthumous destinies of those we have lost, nor why
our sainted dead should be cut off from all fresh influence upon
our lives. It seems indeed monstrous that they should pass
beyond our yearning affection. In these and other things the
Catholic autocosm gives hints to the Creator and shows how the
“sorry scheme of things” may be moulded “nearer to the heart’s
desire.” Nor is there any reason why there should not be a
Trinity or a vicarious Atonement. These concepts, indeed,
explain obscurum per obscurius⁠—
“No light but rather darkness visible⁠—”
and seem less natural and more complicated than the Jewish
theory of a divine unity and a personal human responsibility.
But complexity and incomprehensibility are not proofs of
falsity. Tertullian, indeed, in his great lyric cry of faith,
would make them proofs of truth. Certum est quia impossibile
est. And it may be conceded to Tertullian that in a universe
of mystery all compact, the word of the enigma can scarcely be
a platitude. But there is a limit to this comfortable canon.
Impossibility can only continue a source of certitude so long
as transcendental theological conceptions are concerned. But
when, leaving the tenuous empyrean of metaphysics, the Impossible
incarnates itself upon earth, it must stand or fall by our
terrestrial tests of historic happening, and the canon should
rather run: Providing it has really happened, its mere impossibility
does not diminish its certitude. So that, per contra, if it
never happened at all, its mere impossibility cannot guarantee it.
Impossibility is a quality it shares with an infinite number of
propositions, and if it wishes to single itself out from the crowd,
it must seek extraneous witnesses to character. And if it fails
in this quest, its impossibility will not save it. We may believe
the unproved, but not the disproved. The true interpretation
of the universe must be incomprehensible, my interpretation is
incomprehensible, therefore my interpretation is true—what
tyro in the logics will not at a leap recognise the fallacy of
the undistributed middle? Yet on this basis rest innumerable
volumes of apologetics.
Nay, Sir Thomas Browne himself fell into this “Vulgar Error.”
“Methinks,” he cries, basing himself upon Tertullian, “there
be not impossibilities enough in Religion for an active faith . . .
I love to lose myself in a mystery, to pursue my Reason to an
O altitudo!” As if “O altitudo” is not pursuable by the
simplest pagan, following the maze of Space and Time. The
author of “Religio Medici” confesses that certain things in
Genesis contradict Experience and History, but he adds: “Yet
I do believe all this is true, which indeed, my Reason would
persuade me to be false; and this I think is no vulgar part of
Faith, to believe a thing not only above, but contrary to Reason
and against the Arguments of our proper Senses.” Pardon me,
esteemed Sir Thomas. It is precisely the vulgar part of Faith—Religio
Populi! It is putting the disproved and disprovable
on the same plane as the unproved and the unprovable, where
alone the ecstasy of the O altitudo may be legitimately pursued.
The friction between the Bible and Science has grown raspier
since Sir Thomas’s day, and by a new turn in human folly we
are told that Science is bankrupt—with the implication that
therefore the Bible is solvent. Poor old autocosms! They are
both bankrupt, alas! Neither the ancient Bible nor the twentieth
century Science can pay twenty shillings in the pound.
Not that the Bible cannot meet its creditors honourably, nor
that Science will not be permitted to go on dealing. The salvage
from both is considerable. But neither can afford an autocosm in
which the modern intellect can breathe and the modern soul aspire.
Nor was such work ever within the capacity of Science. She,
the handmaid of religion, forgot her place when she aspired to
the pulpit. And religion, with Time and Space and Love and
Death for texts around her, stepped down from hers when she
persisted in preaching from withered parchments of ambiguous
tenor and uncertain authorship. What can be more pathetic
than the joy of orthodoxy when the pick strikes some Old
Testament tablet and it is discovered that there really was an
Abraham or a Lot. As well might a neo-Pagan exult because
the excavations in Crete prove that the Minotaur really existed—but
as a fighting bull to which toreadors imported from
conquered Athens sometimes fell victims. Not even Lot’s wife
supplies sufficient salt to swallow Genesis with. The Old Testament
autocosm is dead and buried—it cannot be dug up again
by the Palestine Exploration Fund. It is no longer literally
true, even in the Vatican, where, if I understand aright, only the
miracles of the New Testament still preserve their authenticity.
“Things are what they are, and the consequences will be what
they will be,” as the much-deluded Butler remarked. Wherefore,
though you imagine yourself living in your autocosm, you
are in truth inhabiting the macrocosm all the time and obnoxious
to all its curious laws and inflexible realities. It is as if, playing
cards in the smoking-room of a ship and fancying yourself
at the club, you should be suddenly drowned. Only by living
in the macrocosm itself can you avoid the stern surprises which
await those who snuggle into autocosms. Hence the perils of the
Catholic autocosm for its inhabitants. For in the real universe
pestilences and earthquakes are not due to the wrath of God.
The physical universe proceeds on its own lines, and the religious
motives of the Crusaders did not prevent a Christian host from
dying of the putrefying infidel corpses which it had manufactured
so abundantly. Nor did heaven endorse the theory of
the Children’s Crusade—that innocence could accomplish what
was impossible for flawed manhood. The poor innocents
perished like flies, or were sold into slavery. These things take
their course as imperturbably as Halley’s comet, which refused to
budge an inch even before the fulminations of Pope Callixtus III.
Nor is the intermission of earthquakes or pestilence to be procured
by the intercession of the saints or by the efficacy of
their relics. A phial of the blood of Christ was carried about
in Mantua during the plague of 1630, but there were not enough
boats to carry away the corpses to the lakes. It was those
marshes round Mantua that should have been drained. But it
is in vain God thunders, “Thus and thus are My Laws. I am
that I am.” Impious Faith answers, “Not so. Thou art that
Thou art not.”
Pestilence—we know to-day—can be averted by closing the
open cesspools and opening the sunless alleys of mediævalism;
malaria can be minimised by minimising mosquitos, and earthquakes
can be baffled by careful building after the fashion of
Japan, which, being an earthquake country, behaves as such.
After the Messina earthquake the Japanese Government sent
two professors—one of seismology and the other of architecture—to
study it and to compare it with the great Japanese earthquake
of 1891, and they reported that although the Japanese
shock was greater and the population affected more numerous,
the number of Italian victims was four hundred and thirty times
as great as the number of Japanese, and that “about 998 out
of 1000 of the number killed in Messina must be regarded as
having fallen victims to the seismologically bad construction of
the houses.” But where reliance is placed on paternosters and
penitence, how shall there be equal zeal for antiseptics or structural
precautions? The censer tends to oust the fumigator,
and the priest the man of action. “Too easily resigned and too
blindly hopeful,” says the Messagero of Rome, commenting on
the chaos that still reigns among the population of Messina.
“Trust in God and keep your powder dry” was the maxim of
a Protestant. Cromwell but echoed the Psalmist, “Blessed be the
Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war and my
fingers to fight.” This is the spirit that makes the best of both
cosms. The too trustful denizen of the Catholic autocosm with
his damp powder and his flaccid fingers risks falling a prey to
the first foe.
But the balance-sheet is not yet complete. For it may be
better to live without sanitation or structural precaution and to
die at forty of the plague or the earthquake, after years of belief
in your saint or your star, than to live a century without God
in a bleak universe of mechanical law. True, the believer has the
fear of hell, but by a happy insanity it does not interfere with his
joie de vivre. He has had, indeed, to pay dearly for the consolation
and courage the Church has sold him—since we are at the balance-sheet
let this be said too—and seeing how in the last analysis all
this overwhelming ecclesiastic splendour has come out of the toil
of the masses, I cannot help wondering whether the Church could
not have done the thing cheaper. Were these glittering vestments
and soaring columns so absolutely essential to the cult
of the manger-born God?
But perhaps it was the People’s only chance of Magnificence.
And after all the mediæval cathedrals were as much public
assembly rooms as churches.
Dear wrinkled contadine whom I see prostrated in chapels
before your therapeutic saints; dear gnarled facchini whose
shoulders bow beneath the gentler burden of adoration; poor
world-worn beings whom I watch genuflecting and sprinkling
yourselves with the water of life, as the spacious hush and the
roseate dimness of the great cathedral fall round you; and you,
proud young Venetian housewife, whose baby was carried to
baptism in a sort of cage, and who turned to me with that
heavenly smile after the dipping and that rapturous cry, “Ora
essa è una piccola Cristiana!”—and most of all you, heart-stricken
mothers whose little ones have gone up to play with the
Madonna’s bambino, think ye I would prick your autocosm with
my quill or withdraw one single ray from the haloes of your
guardian genii? Nay, I pray that in that foreign land of death
to which we must all emigrate, ye may find more Christian
consideration than meets the emigrants to England or America.
May your Christ be waiting at the haven ready to protect you
against the exactions of Charon, to rescue you from the crimps,
and initiate you into the alien life. Only one thing I ask of you—do
not, I pray you in return, burn up my autocosm—and me
with it. And ye, gentlemen of the cassock and the tonsure,
continue, unmolested by me, your processions and your
pageants and your mystic operas and ballets, your drinking
ceremonials and serviette-wipings; for, bland and fatherly as you
seem, you are the fiercest incendiaries the world has ever known—the
arson of rival autocosms your favourite virtue. And I
am not of those who hold your power or passion extinct. Even
in your ashes live your wonted fires, and I may yet see the pyres
of Smithfield blaze as in the days of Mary. For to hold the
keys of Heaven and Hell is as unsettling as any other form of
monopoly. Human nature cannot stand it. And by every
channel, apert or subterranean, you are creeping back to power,
carrying through all your labyrinths that terrible torch of faith.
Already relics have been borne in procession at Westminster.
But perhaps I wrong you. Perhaps your very Inquisition will
make some concession to science and the age, and electrocute
instead of burning.
But though ye burn me or electrocute, yet must I praise
your Church for its three great principles of Democracy,
Cosmopolitanism, and Female Equality. At the apogee of its
splendour, in the days before its autocosm contradicted the
known macrocosm, it made a brotherhood of Man and a United
States of Europe, and St. Catherine and St. Clara ranked with
St. Francis and St. Dominic. What can be more wonderful
than that an English menial, plain Nicholas Breakspeare, should
rise into Pope Adrian IV, and should crown Barbarossa at Rome
as Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, or that when this
Empire’s fourth Henry must fain go to Canossa, it was the
reputed son of a carpenter that kept him waiting barefooted in
the snow? Contrast all this with the commercial chauvinism,
the snobbery, and the Mussulman disdain of woman into which
Europe has fallen since the “Dark Ages.”
I grant that the Papacy was as far from ensuring a human
brotherhood as the Holy Roman Empire was from the ideal of
Petrarch, yet both institutions kept the ideal of a unity of
civilisation alive, and if they did not realise it better, was it not
because two institutions aiming at the same unification are
already a disturbing duality? The situation under which the
Emperor elected the Pope who consecrated the Emperor, or the
Pope excommunicated the Emperor who deposed the Pope and
elected an anti-Pope, was positively Gilbertian, and the grim
comedy reached its climax when Pope and anti-Pope used their
respective churches as fortresses. The old duel persists to-day
in the tug-of-war between Court and Vatican, and the Pope is
so little a force for unification that he still refuses to recognise
the unity of Italy. Yet no ironies of history can destroy the
beauty of the Catholic concept.
“I lift mine eyes and all the windows blaze
 With forms of Saints and holy men who died,
 Here martyred and hereafter glorified;
 And the great Rose upon its leaves displays
 Christ’s Triumph, and the angelic roundelays,
 With splendour upon splendour multiplied;
 And Beatrice again at Dante’s side
 No more rebukes, but smiles her words of praise.
 
“And then the organ sounds, and unseen choirs
 Sing the old Latin hymns of peace and love
 And benedictions of the Holy Ghost;
 And the melodious bells among the spires
 O’er all the house-tops and through heaven above
 Proclaim the elevation of the Host.”
That is the Catholic autocosm at its loveliest, as seen by the
poet of the Pilgrim Fathers when under the spell of translating
Dante. And ’tis, indeed, no untrue vision of its ideal.
I saw an old statue of St. Zeno in his church at Verona, and
the saint, who began life as a fisherman, appeared as proud of his
fish pendent as of his crozier. Can one imagine a British bishop
in a fishmonger’s apron? Even the Apostles are doubtless
conceived at the Athenæum Club as a sort of Fishmongers’
Company, with an old hall and a ’scutcheon. For England
combines with her distrust of High Church a ritual of High
Life, which is the most meticulous and sacrosanct in the
world.
Nor is there any record of a British bishop behaving like St.
Zeno when the Emperor Gallienus gave him the crown from off
his own head, and the saint requested permission to sell it for
the benefit of the poor. True, British bishops are not in the
habit of exorcising demons from the daughters of emperors, but
neither are they in the habit of dividing their stipends among
curates with large families.
St. Zeno, by the way, came from Mauretania, and St. Antony
was not really of Padua, but of Portugal. ’Twas a free trade in
saints. There was no protection against protectors. Virgil
and Boëthius themselves enjoyed a Christian reputation. One
does not wonder that even Buddha crept into the calendar by an
inspired error. It is heartening to come on an altar in Verona
to St. Remigio, “apostle of the generous nation of the French,”
to find Lucca Cathedral given over to an Irish saint and
honouring a Scotch king (“San Riccardo, Re di Scozia”), and to
read of King Canute treating with Pope John and Emperor
Conrad for free Alpine passes to Rome for English pilgrims.
Universities too were really universal. The Angelic Doctor
was equally at home in Naples, Paris, and Cologne.
What can be more nobly catholic than the prayer I found
pasted outside Italian churches: “My God, I offer Thee all the
masses which are being celebrated to-day in all the world for the
sinners who are in agony and who must die to-day. May the
most precious Blood of Jesus the Redeemer obtain for them
mercy!” True, the poetry of this prayer is rather marred by
the precise information that “every day in the universe about
140,000 persons die: 97 every minute, 51 millions every
year,” but not so grossly as by the indulgences accorded to the
utterers. Why must this fine altruism be thus tainted? But
alas! Catholicism perpetually appears the caricature of a great
concept. Take for another example the methods of canonisation,
by which he or she who dies “in the odour of piety” may
pass, in the course of centuries, from the degree of venerable
servant of God to the apogee of blessed saintship. What can
be grander than this notion of taking all time as all earth for
the Church’s province? Yet consider the final test. The great
souls she has produced must work two posthumous miracles,
forsooth, before they can be esteemed saints. By what a perversion
of the spiritual is it that holiness has come to be on a par
with pills! Surely a true Church Universal should canonise for
goodness of life, not for mortuary miracles. Joan of Arc, who
must wait nigh five hundred years for saintship—did not the
miracle of her life outweigh any possible prowess of her
relics?
But despite, or rather because of, this grossness, the walls
of the Catholic autocosm are still stout: centuries of friction
with the macrocosm will be needed to wear them away. The
love of noble ritual and noble buildings, of ordered fasts and
feasts, of authority absolute; the comfortable concreteness of
Orthodoxy beside the nebulousness of Modernism; the sinfulness
of humanity, its helplessness before the tragic mysteries of life
and death; the peace of confession, the therapeia of chance and
hypnotism, the magnetism of a secular tradition, the vis inertiæ—all
these are pillars of the mighty fabric of St. Peter. But
even these would be as reeds but for the massive prop of
endowments. ’Tis Mortmain—the dead hand—that keeps back
Modernism. So long as any institution possesses funds, there
will never be any lack of persons to administer them. This is
the secret of all successful foundations. The rock on which the
Church is founded is a gold-reef. And it is actively defended
by Persecution and the Index, by which all thought is equally
excluded, be it a Darwin’s or a Gioberti’s, a Zola’s or a Tyrrell’s.
Who then shall set a term to its stability?
With such a marvellous machinery at hand for the Church
Universal of the future—so democratic, so cosmopolitan, so
free from sex injustice—it seems a thousand pities that there is
nothing to be done with it but to scrap it. Surely it should be
adapted to the macrocosm, brought into harmony with the
modern mind, so that, becoming again the mistress of our distracted
and divided world, moderating the frenzy of nationalisms
by a European cult and a European culture, keeping in their
place the mediocrities who are seated on our thrones, and the
democracies when they stray from wisdom, it could send out a
true blessing urbi et orbi. But this, I remember, is an Italian
fantasy.
I did not need the lesson of the Scala ballet—Civiltà inspired
by Luce and chasing Tenebre. I know that that light is
electric. Have I not found it in the deepest crypt of the
underground cathedral of Brescia, illuminating the two
Corinthian pillars from the Temple of Vespasius? Have I
not seen in the quaint sleepy alleys of rock-set Orvieto the wayside
shrine of the Madonna utilised to hold an electric lamp?
And have I not seen that ancient marble shrine between Carrara
and Avenza supporting the telegraph wires, or the crumbling
tower of Lucca the telephones? And did I not watch the
thousand-year-old cathedral of Genoa—with St. Lorenzo’s
martyrdom on its façade—preparing to celebrate the fourth centenary
of St. Caterina—“whose mortal remains in their urn
have not felt the injury of time”—by a thorough cleansing with
a vacuum cleaner? Ceaselessly throbbed the engine, like the
purr of a pious congregation, and the hose extended to the
uttermost ledges of the roof, sucking in dust immemorially undisturbed.
And the cathedral clock of Verona that looks down
on Charlemagne’s paladins, Roland and Oliver, in rude stone—did
it not tell me the correct time? Yes, ’tis the hour of Science.
And the contribution of Italy to Science is almost as great as
her contribution to Art or Religion. A country that can
produce St. Francis, Michelangelo, and Galileo, that founded
at Verona the first geological museum and at Pisa the first
botanical garden, has indeed all winds of the spirit blowing
through her. But except in Da Vinci, Art and Science have
not been able to lodge together. Him the sketches for his
flying-machines in the Ambrosian library make a boon-fellow of
Wright, Voisin, and Santos, as Luca Beltrami enthusiastically
proclaims. Galileo had some pretensions to letters, writing
essays and verses, and is even suspected of a comedy. But the
life of Galileo practically divides Italy’s art period from her
scientific, so far at least as the material arts are concerned.
His amanuensis, Torricelli, preluded the barometer, and the
creation of electrical science by Galvani and Volta was a main
factor in the evolution of our modern world of machinery.
Venice and Florence founded statistical science, and if Sicily and
South Italy have relapsed from the Arabic-Aristotelian stimulus
administered by Frederick II—perhaps for fear of sharing the
imperial Epicurean’s furnace in the Sixth Circle of the Inferno—North
Italy has remained a pioneer of the modern. It is not
by accident that Marconi was born in Bologna, or Lombroso
in Verona—which is to hold his statue—or that the most learned
exponent of the dismal science of our day has been Luigi Cossa,
Professor of Political Economy in the Universities of Pavia and
Milan. But even Naples and Palermo have remained faithful to
astronomy and the mathematics.
Far be it from me to say a word against Science as a
magnified magical maid-of-all-work! But in so far as she
pretends to set up in the parlour, ousting her old mistresses,
Theology and Poetry, let me point out to her swains, the
electro-plated youth of Lombardy, that the facts of Science,
existing as they do outside autocosms, are as substantial to lean
upon as the shadows of reeds. Of the need of a Scientia Scientiarum
to put all these facts in their place, the average scientific
specialist is as unconscious as a ploughboy of the calculus.
For it follows from the doctrine of autocosms that a fact
cannot exist as such till it has settled to which autocosm it
belongs. It must be born into the world of meaning. The
same raw material may go to form part of autocosms innumerable,
as the same man may be the butler at a duke’s, the guest
of honour at a grocer’s, and the chief dish at a cannibal
banquet. The same fire that beacons a ship from destruction
sucks a moth to its doom, and the same election figures scatter
at once delight and despair. The “fact,” outside an autocosm,
can only be regarded as a potentiality of entering into ratios;
in other words, it is a “rational” possibility. But since there
is a definite limit to its possibilities, and an election result
cannot glut the cannibal appetite, nor a butler operate as a
beacon-fire—except in the way of Ridley and Latimer—we are
compelled to recognise an obstinate objective element fatal
to the Pragmatic Philosophy. Potential facts are stubborn
things. Pragmatism was a healthy reaction against the
obsession of a world wholly gaugeable by Reason, like the
reaction of Duns Scotus against Aquinas, but when it replaced
Reason by Will, it fell into the other extreme of error. Both
Reason and Will must enter into the Science of Sciences, and
they must even be supplemented by Emotion.
For the human consciousness, our sole instrument for
apprehending the world, is trinitarian. I should say we have
three antennæ—Reason, Will, Emotion—wherewith to grope
out into our environment, were it not that those antennæ are
triune, and no knowledge of the outer world ever comes to
us save with all the three factors intertwined in varying
proportions. Why then should we throw away all that Will
and Emotion tell us, putting asunder what God has put
together? To represent the Report of the bare intellectual
faculty as the Report of the whole Commission is fraudulence.
Will and Emotion have too meekly contented themselves with
a Minority Report. It is time they insisted on their views
colouring and fusing into the Report Proper. Even Kant,
having reached spiritual bankruptcy by his “Critique of Pure
Reason,” apologetically called in the Practical Reason to save
the situation, thereby importing into his system an absurd
dualism. Kant’s Practical Reason is simply Will and Emotion
restored to their proper rank as conjoint antennæ of apprehension.
The effort to probe the universe with an isolated
antenna was foredoomed to failure. The Practical Reason
should have been called in, not after the bankruptcy as a sort
of receiver to make the best of a bad estate, but before starting
operations, as a partner with additional capital.
A fact, then, to be a fact, must be born into an autocosm,
must be caught up not only into intellectual perception,
but into emotional and volitional relations. The so-called
scientific fact is thus two-thirds unborn. It is not a fact, but a
facet of a fact. ’Tis only by a shorthand convention, indeed,
that anything can be treated as purely an object of intellectual
discrimination. Every substantive in the dictionary is a
shrivelled leaf which requires the sap and greenness of a living
sentence to restore it to life. This is best seen in words with
more than one meaning, like “bark,” which needs to be in a
sentence to show whether it is canine or marine. But every
word is in the same ambiguous case, and acquires its nuance from
its relations with life. The molecule or structural unit of reality
being thus triune, it is obvious that the isolated presentation of
the material aspect of things in the shape of words under the
name of Science can never be a presentation of Truth. It is a
mere abstraction from the trinitarian wholeness of experience.
Full life exists in three dimensions, Art in two, and Science in
one, like a solid, a superficies, and a line, and the line as little
reproduces the plenitude of being as the coast-line of a map the
beetling cliffs and thundering seas.
But the subject-matter of the sciences is not even the universe
treated as a material whole, but the universe cut up into abstract
’ologies and ’onomies, each of which insidiously tends to swell
into a full-seeming sphere of Truth, as when Political Economy,
having proved that Free Trade produces the cheapest article,
tends to assume that humanity is therefore bound to buy
in the cheapest market; so that even the Tariff Reformer,
under the same hypnosis, seeks to deny this economic law,
instead of admitting and overriding it by considerations
from supplementary spheres of Truth. Similar fallacies spring
from pathology, psychology, physiology, criminology, and other
methods of vivisecting our noble selves. We are parcelled out
among the professors, each of them magnifying his office.
“Hark, hark, the lark at Heaven’s gate sings!”
says the beautiful song in Cymbeline. The sciences pounce
upon that lark like hawks, and tear it to pieces between them.
But the truth about the lark—is it in the unreal abstractions of
the sciences, or is it in the poet’s perception of the lark in all
the fulness, colour, and richness of actual existence?
The little Gradgrinds, says Dickens, had cabinets in various
departments of science. “They had a little chronological
cabinet, and a little metallurgical cabinet, and a little mineralogical
cabinet, and the specimens were all arranged and labelled,
and the bits of stones and ore looked as though they might
have been broken off from the parent substances by those
tremendously hard instruments, their own names.”
But it is only in the falsificatory museums of science that
things exist in little cabinets, or that the butterfly is impaled on
a pin and ranged in a glass case with other Lepidoptera. In the
real universe it flutters alone amid the flowers. It is full of its
own vivid life; it does not know it has been classified. This
classification exists only in some student’s mind; the truth is in
the fluttering butterfly. And Truth really flutters like a butterfly,
free and joyous, winged with iridescent splendours and subtle
shades. Truth is not a dead formula, but an airy aliveness.
When I was a youth studying mathematics and the ’ologies,
I became infected with the sense of superiority to the crowd
which these pursuits bring: such cold, logical reasoning, such
rare reaches of thought! To think that men eminent in these
branches should remain unrewarded by popular fame, while every
petty scribbler with a gift of invention commanded the applause
of the mob! To be a novelist seemed a paltry affair; yet later
on I came to recognise that the crowd is right, and that those
who decry the predominance of the novel are wrong. All these
sciences and speculations deal with human life, not in its living
fulness, but with an abstractness which makes it dead, unreal,
false. The world’s instinctive distrust of pedants and students
and mathematicians is justified. They isolate one aspect of life,
one thread of the tangled skein, one motif in the eternal
symphony, and sometimes drawing from reality the merest shred
of tune, execute upon it an enormous fantasia—as in the higher
mathematics—which plays itself out inaudibly in vacuo. The
cold perfection of mathematics is due to our having eliminated
in advance all the accidents of reality, and even the supposed
infallibility of the proposition that two and two are four shatters
itself upon the futility of adding two elephants to two speeches
on the Irish question. And yet in those callow days it was to
Number that I, like Pythagoras, was fain to look for the key of
the riddle. But that was under the glittering spell of the late
Monsieur Taine, who well-nigh persuaded me that a Science was
only truly Scientific when it passed from the qualitative to the
quantitative stage. If you could only express everything by
mathematical formulæ, then at last you would catch that shy
bird, Truth, by the tail. Strip away Truth’s feathers, then the
flesh, then even the bones, till you get a meaningless world of
imaginary atoms, and that, forsooth, is the ultimate Truth.
“The universe,” said Taine triumphantly, “will one day be
expressed in mathematical formulæ.” In other words, strip
away all there is to know, get rid of all that interests you, the
colour and the form and the glow of life, and then you will
really know the thing. The only way to know a thing is
elaborately to prevent yourself from knowing it.
That invaluable institution the Post Office annually provides
us with statistics. So many billion letters are sent a year, so
many postcards, so many packages, and of these so many are
left open, and so many unaddressed or unstamped, and so many
go astray. These figures have as much to do with the realities
implied in this correspondence as the figures of the quantitative
sciences with the realities they are drawn from. Even could it
be proved that the ratio of unaddressed letters to addressed is
constant over a given area, or that the percentage of postcards
varies inversely with the status of the senders, how much nearer
are we to the hot passions and wild despairs, the commercial
greeds and the loving humours which are the actuality of the
phenomena under calculation?
Even the lines and angles of geometry, which have more body
than statistics, are a poor substitute for the full, rich world,
with its forests and skies. Mathematics may be indispensable
to navigation, but on the sea of life we sail very well without
it. Some of the most charming women I know count on their
fingers. When
“A Rosalind-face at the lattice shows,
           *       *       *
 And Sir Romeo sticks in his ear a rose,”
it is indifferent to the situation that the rose is compact of
chemical atoms dancing in complex figures, setting to partners,
visiting and retreating.
Biron in “Love’s Labour Lost,” professing to derive his
learning from women’s eyes, which are
          “the ground, the books, the academes,
From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire,”
was, though the sentiment may be unpopular in this educational
age, wiser than Faust in his study soliloquising on the
curse of useless learning. Many of the statements of science
are true for the abstract logical faculty; they are not actually
conceivable. We laugh at the mediæval controversies as to
how many angels could dance on the point of a needle, but
surely our modern theory of the atomic constitution of the
needle-point justifies the question. One angel per atom would
exhaust the angelic hosts. Perhaps the sparks emitted for
years by one drop of bromide of radium on the point of a
needle are really a dance of demons. Or take the undulatory
theory of light—that to produce the varying colours of the
spectrum the luminiferous ether must vibrate from 458 to 727
million of million times per second. It might as well have
been a thousand billions or ten trillions for all the difference to
our understanding. To give us such figures is like offering a
million-pound note to an omnibus conductor and expecting
change. The best scientists admit that these conceptions are but
working hypotheses. Nay, I find a worthy German actually
calling them “useful fictions.” Indeed, they cannot endure
cross-examination, and if you want to see a scientific man as
angry as a theologian of the Inquisition era, you will treat his
mystic conceptions as Tom Paine treated the mysteries of
religion. The world went very well ere we knew the fairy-tales
of science and learned to dread death in every breath we took,
every crumb we ate, every drop of non-alcoholic drink we
drank. As if it were not tragic enough to read the newspapers,
we are harassed with the life-histories of insects invisible to the
naked eye, thirty generations or so of which live and die every
day in a drop of ditch-water. At the same time such surface
questions as why a man lives six times as long as a dog and a
tortoise six times as long as a man are left in absolute darkness.
Men of science are to be admired for their patient and
fearless groping after knowledge, the only reward of which is
the applause of that splendid international brotherhood of
learning. But this knowledge of theirs is never more than raw
material for the philosopher at the centre to weave into his
synopsis. No doubt there are men of science who preserve
their perspective, who do not view the universe as heaven-sent
material for a series of text-books, but this part of their thinking
is done, not as scientists, but as poets or philosophers.
Classification is all that Science Proper can do, and when the
pigeon-holing is complete to the last Z, the universe will
remain as mysterious as before. When the astronomers have
determined the size, weight, orbit, speed, and spectrum lines of
all the four hundred millions of visible stars, we shall still look
up and say,
“Twinkle, twinkle, little star,
 How I wonder what you are!”
But this pigeon-holing of the universe by Science is conspicuously
incomplete. For by a paradoxical modesty the man of
science too often forgets to include himself in the inventory.
In this way Herbert Spencer explained everything—except
Herbert Spencer. Possibly the forgetfulness is wilful, because
the existence of the man of science upsets so many of his
explanations. “I find in the Universe no trace of Will or
Reason,” protested one of them to me. “I see only the blind
movement of forces, mechanical as billiard-balls.” “Naturally,”
I retorted, “if you omit to look in the one direction where
Reason and Will assuredly exist—in your own self.”
On the physical plane we get movement without will, on the
animal plane the will to live, on the human plane the will to
live divinely. These three strata cannot be reduced to a lowest
common denominator of blind force. And if they could, the
miracle of their differentiation would still remain. That blind
forces should rise to consciousness and write books about
themselves is even more wonderful than an eternity of spirit.
Reduce all the seventy odd elements to one, as Chemistry hopes,
and instead of an explanation you will only get the new puzzle
of how the one could contain the seeds of the many. Even the
popular Evolution theory is but a juggling with time. You
do not get rid of Creation by shifting the beginning back to a
billion years last Tuesday.
And with all my admiration for the fine qualities of the man
of science I cannot away with his cocksureness, so curiously
proof against the fact that scientific conceptions are always
changing—witness the revolution wrought by radium. Even
such a simple analysis as the composition of air has taken in
many new and important constituents—argon, xenon, helium,
krypton, neon, &c.—since the days when as a schoolboy I got
full marks for stating them inaccurately. And yet to this day
the scientist recounting the constituents of air forgets to wind
up, “With power to add to their number.”
As for those sciences which do not depend on intellectual
conceptions and practical experiments, but on antiquarian research,
those learned and dry-as-dust studies which academies
delight to honour, they owe all their importance simply to
antiquity’s lack of self-consciousness and its failure to provide
for the curiosity of posterity. Had the first man who evolved
from the ape drawn up a note upon his ancestor, or, better still,
made a picture of his ancestral tree, what controversies we
should have been spared! Had the builders of the Pyramids or
the delvers of the Roman catacombs put up little tablets to
explain their ideas, what scholarship would have been nipped in
the bud! The reputation of the Egyptologists depends on the
fact that the writers of hieroglyphics apparently left no dictionary.
If one were to turn up, the reputation of these savants
would be gone. At present they are able to translate the same
text by “The King went a-hunting” or “My grandmother is
dead” without ceasing to be taken seriously.
But it is in the realm of Italian art-connoisseurship that the
greatest havoc would be wrought did an official catalogue come
to light, say in one of the recesses of the Vatican or in that
wilderness of the Venetian archives. For the lordly neglect of
the Old Masters to put their names to their pictures has flooded
us with a tedious pedantry of rival attributions, and the thing
of beauty, instead of being a joy for ever, is an eternal source of
dulness.
“Ass who attributes it to Mantegna,” I saw scribbled on a
fresco, at Padua, of St. Antony admonishing Ezzelino, and
connoisseurship is merely politer. As long ago as 1527 a quiz or
a braggart of an artist, Zacchia da Vezzano, painted underneath
a sacred picture of his, now in Lucca:
“His operis visis hujus cognoscere quis sit
 Auctorem dempto nomine quisque potest.”
As who should say, “Take away the name and anybody can
tell the artist.” But experience proves the contrary.
I do not say that the virtuosi would all be exposed, as by the
pedigree of a Da Vinci bust, could we light on a source of
certainty like the contemporary slatings in the Renaissance
Review. Some of these sleuth-hounds might even be vindicated;
and I opine that to you, amico mio, who of thirty-three Titians
in a London exhibition pronounced no less than thirty-two to
be hung on false evidence, the discovery of a set of Accademia
catalogues would not be unwelcome. But your career as a
connoisseur would close. Dead too would be the school of
Morelli, collapsed the drapery students and ear-measurers,
whose mathematics had, indeed, as little relation to Art as it
has to life.
The Sherlock Holmeses of Science and Art dig up old cities,
reconstruct forgotten civilisations, redistribute famous pictures,
and amend corrupt texts or corrupt them more hopelessly. It
is but rarely that they have imaginative and historic insight.
“Learning is but an adjunct to ourselves,” says Biron. Scholars
are too often but an adjunct to learning. For men with real
insight there are enough dead civilisations and forgotten customs
still flourishing all about us. The taboo, the fetish, the totem,
the oracle, and the myth are the very atmosphere of our being.
Our generation will leave newspapers and museums—nay,
gramophone records and the films of bioscopes; the ghosts of our
shapes and voices will haunt our posterity, and the only chance
for scholars will be to condense the too, too ample materials—there
are four miles of novels already in the British Museum—or
perhaps a few beneficent fires will give scholarship a new
lease of life. At their best and richest antiquarian studies only
help to make the past present again, but how does that help us
in essential insight? The past of to-morrow is here to-day and
we are no wiser. In the hundredth century the excavator may
exhume London, but we see London even more clearly to-day,
and how does that help us in the real problems?
No; the only help for us lies in those elements of Truth
which we draw from ourselves, not receive from without—in
those emotional and volitional contacts with the essence of
things which accompany all intellectual perception; in these
motor aspects of reality which drive us along, these flashes of
faith and spiritual intuition which, although they may vary from
age to age under the spell of individual poets and prophets, and
under the evolution of knowledge and civilisation,
“Are yet a master-light of all our seeing.”
They may have been intertwined with incorrect intellectual
elements, but because one antenna of the apparatus of consciousness
functions falsely we are not therefore justified in wholly
rejecting the joint report. When we think of the vast number
of contradictory truths by which men in all ages and countries
have lived and died, we shall find consolation in the thought
that the emotional and volitional elements of Truth are more
important than its intellectual skeleton.
But what a curious confusion that these emotional and
volitional elements should themselves come to be treated as
intellectual, and desiccated into dogmas! This is the result of
their seeking expression in words, that unsuitable, impossible
and fading medium. It is through their felicitous escape from
words that verbally inarticulate artists and musicians paint and
compose truer things than philosophers say, things that survive
vicissitudes of thought and are as true to-morrow as yesterday.
With the music of the Roman Catholic Church we all agree,
and who shall contradict the Venus of Milo?
Yes, a statue or a symphony is safe from syllogisms, at least
until it gets into the hands of the art critic and the programme-concocter.
But the truth airily embodied in words is at the
mercy of system-builders and deduction-squeezers. Taken with
the hard definiteness of coins—as if, indeed, even coins did not
vary from day to day in purchasing power and according to the
country of circulation,—the words are added together to yield a
specific sum of truth. Flying prophetic phrases and wingèd
mystical raptures are shot down and stuffed for Church
Catechisms and Athanasian Creeds. As if the emotional and
volitional fringe of living words permitted them to be thus
sterilised into scientific propositions! For just as facts are the
skeletons of truths, so words are single bones, and the dictionary
is a vast ossuary. Talk of the dead languages—all languages
are dead unless spoken, and spoken with real feeling. A parrot
always speaks a dead language. It is the folly of a universal
language that it assumes the same vocabulary could be used
over a vast area of varying conditions, its words never expanding
nor contracting in meaning, nor ever changing in pronunciation
or colour. As if Latin was not once universal in those countries
which have gradually transformed it into French, Spanish, Portuguese,
Italian, Provençal, Roumanian, and Rumonsch! Idiomatic
expressions cannot be torn from the soil they grow in. Mañana
has not the same meaning outside Spain nor Kismet outside
Islam. Language lays such traps for fools; the fools have
always spoiled and fossilised what the men of genius have felt
and thought. They have made logic out of poetry and have
deadened worship and wonder into theology. “What do you
read?” says Hamlet. “Words, words, words.”
A truth, then, may be formulated, but it is not true till it is
felt and acted on, and ceases to be true when it ceases to be felt
and acted on. Nor does this canon apply only to inner truths.
Without an element of feeling and volition, however shadowy,
even the simple realities of the outer world have never been
perceived, and the omission of these elements invalidates the
total reality. If so many readers skip scenery in novels, ’tis
because the scene is described as though it existed in
itself. The dead chunk of landscape bores and depresses.
The reader subconsciously feels that so impersonal a vision is
untrue to the actualities of perception. Nobody has ever
seen a landscape without some emotion, if only the traveller’s
desire to be at the other end of it. A dozen persons—even
omitting the colour-blind—would see it in as many different
ways, each with different accompaniments of feeling, thought,
and volition, potential or actual, just as every person in
The Ring and the Book sees Pompilia differently. Let the
novelist describe the scene, not for itself, but for its relation to
the emotions and purposes of his personages, and it leaps into
life. Similar is the case of Science, whose facts in divesting
themselves of all emotion and individual error divest themselves
likewise of reality. The dry scientific coldness with which the
universe must be envisaged is an artificial method of vision.
True, the scientist himself may be impelled by the most tingling
curiosity. But the passion and thrill of his chase for truth does
not appear in the quarry: that is a mere carcase. His report
on his speciality is always carefully divested of emotion. But
our emotional and volitional relations to the spectacle of
existence are as much a part of the total truth of things as
colour is of the visible world. The world is not complete
without
“The light that never was on sea or land,
 The consecration and the poet’s dream.”
When Lear cries to the heavens that they too are old, or
Lamartine calls on the lake to remember his happiness, Ruskin
would tell us that this suffusion of Nature with our own
emotions is the pathetic fallacy. On the contrary, its absence
is the scientific fallacy. Science registers the world as the
phonograph registers sound or the camera space—without
any emotion of its own. As the former with equal phlegm
records a song or a curse, or the latter a wedding or a funeral,
so does Science register its impassive observations. For once
admit such a shifting subjective factor as emotion, and what
becomes of the glorious objectivity of Science? Away, therefore,
with all but the frigid intellectual view of things! Since
the other elements of Truth elude our grasp, let us boldly declare
them irrelevant. The bankruptcy of Science, you see, comes
not at the end of its operations. Science starts bankrupt. It
has not sufficient capital to begin trading. Its methods and
apparatus are entirely inadequate for the attainment of truth.
A cat may look at a king—but its observation will not be very
profound. And Science is as little equipped for observing the
universe as the cat for observing the king. All it can perceive
or establish is chains of causation, or rather recurring sequences
of phenomena, in an unconscious continuum. It is a post-mortem
investigation to ascertain, not the cause of death, but
the cause of life.
But the universe is not a quaint collection of dead things in
a vacuum, not a museum of stuffed birds or transfixed butterflies,
but a breathing, flying, singing, striving, and suffering
process—an unfinished infinitude. This kinetic process cannot
be expressed in terms of statics. “What is Truth?” says the
jesting cosmos, and does not stay for an answer. But by an
artificial abstraction parts of it can be expressed for the
intellect in static ’ologies and ’onomies, on the understanding
that the intellect never forgets to put back its results into the
palpitating flux to which they belong and in which alone they
have true significance. This understanding the intellect too
frequently violates or forgets, and therefore for Truth we must
go, not to the man of science, but to the poet, who registers his
universe synthetically with soul as well as with brain. Tragedy,
comedy, heroic drama, sombre suffering, majestic mystery, all
these are in the flux—more surely than ether waves and dancing
atoms—and the poet in painting the fulness of life with the
fulness of his own emotion is giving us a fuller truth than any
that Science can attain to. “We cannot really know the truth
unless we love the truth,” said Fénelon. “They who love well
will know well.” This is not mysticism but common sense, and
Goethe repeated it when he said that “No one can write about
anything unless he writes about it with love.” “To see things
in their beauty,” said Matthew Arnold, “is to see them
in their truth.” It may be that the knowledge of things
through pure intellect is pure delusion, that to pigeon-hole the
universe is to make it into a cemetery. Instead of that “love
is blind,” the truth may be that only love sees. There is a
sense in which every mother’s babe is the most beautiful in the
world.
Knowledge, then, as a mere function of the intellect, is only
the dead knowledge that appears in school-books. But who
shall say that knowledge was meant to be only a function of
the intellect, that we do not know with our heart and soul as
well as with our brains? Nay, as if to mock at mere intellect,
the universe absolutely refuses to yield up its secret to the
intellect. Hence the antinomies of Kant or Mansel or Plato’s
“Parmenides.” Follow up mere thought, however apparently
clear, and it lands us in nonsense. Perhaps wisdom does not
lie that way at all. Perhaps the fear of the Lord is really the
beginning of wisdom.
For if Science is Truth in one dimension and Art Truth in
two dimensions, it is only when we complete emotional vision
by volition that we arrive at Truth’s full-orbed reality. Even
love cannot bring wisdom unless the love translates itself into
action. In short, the meaning of Truth must be changed from
a dead fact of the intellect into a live fact of the whole being.
The Truth is also the Way and the Life.
Aristotle in his “Metaphysics” tells us that Cratylus carried
the scepticism of Heraclitus to such a degree that he at last was
of opinion one ought to speak of nothing, but merely moved his
finger. Aristotle does not see that in this moving of his finger
Cratylus was asserting at least the volitional element of Truth
and perhaps its most important. For the universe is not a
museum, placarded “Look, but please do not touch.” It says,
“Touch, and then you will really see. Live, work, love,
fight, and then you will really know what the nature of your
universe is.”
The world of the physical sciences is only the stage-setting
for the spiritual drama. Though there is a truth of dead things
called Science, the real truth is of live things—a triple truth in
which intellect, will, and emotion are one. Our sense of this
truth—obtained as it is during emotional volition—is individual,
irreducible to the simpler planes of Science and Art, and
thus incommunicable. And the measure of our attainment of it
will be the measure of our sympathetic insight and of the depth to
which we have penetrated by action into the heart of the phenomena.
Then what seemed a mass of dull facts may break into
music like a Beethoven score under the baton of a master.
The scientist who should say that a Beethoven symphony
consisted of the atoms of the paper and ink which constitute
the score, or even who expressed it mathematically as a sequence
of complex air-vibrations made by strings and holes, would be
talking truth; but as incomplete and irrelevant truth as the
ignoramus who should say it was curious black strokes and dots
on ruled paper, or the statistician who should count the semi-breves
or fortissimo passages. The true truth of the symphony
comes into being only when it is interpreted by the finest performers
to souls whose life it enlarges.
And so with the universe, which is not a dead, complete thing
outside of us, but a palpitating spiritual potentiality, for the
fullest truth about which the co-operation of our own souls is
needed, our souls that create a part of the truth they perceive
or aspire to. The universe, in short, is a magic storehouse
from which we may draw—or into which put—what we will
to the extent of our faith, our emotion, our sense of beauty
our righteousness. “Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you.”
When I betake me to a zoological garden, equipped with a
pennyworth of popcorn, a food strangely popular even among
the carnivora, I am touched by a prescience of all the pleasure
and dumb gratitude to be evoked by those humble grains. And
in truth how many eager caged creatures are destined to have a
joyous thrill of sniffing suspense, followed by the due titillation
of the palate! My proffering fingers shall meet the gentle nose
of the deer, the sensitive arching trunk of the elephant, the
kindly peck of parrots, the mischievous hands of monkeys, the
soft snouts of strange beasts. Not otherwise is it when, faring
forth to Italy, I provision myself with a bag of coin. Into
what innumerable itching tentacles these gilded or cuprous
grains are to drop: white-cuffed hands of waiters, horny digits
of vetturini and facchini, gnarled fins of gondoliers and hookers,
grimy paws of beggars, shrivelled stumps of cripples, dexterous
toes of armless ancients, spluttering mouths of divers, rosy
fingers of flower-throwing children, persuasive plates of serenading
musicians, deceptive ticket-holes of dishonest railway
clerks, plethoric pockets of hotel-keepers, greedy tills of
bargaining shopkeepers, pious palms of monks and sacristans,
charity-boxes of cathedrals, long-handled fishing-nets of little
churches, musty laps of squatting, mumbling crones, greasy caps
of guides, official pyxes of curators and janitors, clutching claws
of unbidden cicerones. All these—and how many more!—photographers
and painters and copyists and forgers, modellers and
restorers and lecturers on ruins, landlords and cooks and critics—live
by Italy’s ancient art. Great Cæsar dead—and turned to Show.
The beauty of Italy is elemental fodder for the autochthones;
yet how strange the existence of the Neapolitan swimmer
whose métier is to dive for coppers when the steamer sails for
the witching cliffs of Sorrento, and to cry in enticing gurgles,
“Money in the water!” the spluttering syllables flowing
into one another as in the soft patois of Venice! Precisely
when the Bay of Naples is a violet dancing flame, and Vesuvius,
majestically couchant, sends her white incense to the blue, and
you are tranced with beauty and sunshine, comes this monetary
merman to drag you down to the depths.
“Nutritive chains” the biologists name the inter-related
organisms whose existence depends on one another, and another
link of this chain you shall count the boatmen waiting to show
you the blue grotto of Capri. Their skiffs dart upon you like
creatures whose prey comes only at a fixed hour; like creatures,
moreover, shaped in the struggle for existence to the only
function by which they can survive, for they are fittest to pass
under the low arch of the cerulean grotto (the occupant consenting
to crouch like an antenna drawn in). That ardent
water in the Capri cave—that lovely flame of light blue in a
bluer burning spirit—sustains likewise the naked diver who
stands poised on a rock, ready to show its chromatic effects upon
flesh; the culminating moment of whose day—the feeding-time,
as it were—comes when the tourists glide in.
Apt symbol indeed of the tourist, that shallow skiff skimming
over beauty with which the native is in deep elemental contact,
from which, indeed, he wrests his living.
Since Goethe with his gospel of culture spent those famous
Wanderjahre in Italy, a swollen stream of pious art-pilgrims
has been pouring over the land. And coming into Florence
from Lucca and a sheaf of quiet cities on an afternoon of this
spring, I had a horrid impression of modern bustling streets and
motors and trams and a great press of people, and ten thousand
parasites battening on the art and beauty of the city, and it
was not till I had won my way to my beloved Ponte Vecchio,
with its mediæval stalls, that the city of the lily seemed to
possess her soul again. Then as I saw her compose herself
under her deep blue sky into a noble harmony, with her heights
and her palaces and her river and her arches and arcades, and
group herself round a tower, and brood in Venetian glamour
over her water with her ancient rusty houses, and rise behind
into a fantasy of quaint roofs and brick domes and steeples
and belfries, all floating in a golden glory; and as I reflected
on all she was and held within her narrow compass, how the
names of great men and great days were written on every stone,
and how every sort of art had been poured over her as
prodigally as every sort of earth-beauty; and as I thought of
the enchanting villages around and above her, where the
cypress and the olive, the ilex and the pine slumbered in the
sunshine, amid great rocks that shadowed cool glooming pools,
and white roads went winding odorous with may and sweet with
the song of thrush and blackbird, framing and arabesquing
the faery city below in magic tangles of leafy boughs; and as I
remembered that here to-day in this same city was not only
spring, but Botticelli’s Spring—then it seemed to me that
her flowers and her palaces, her frescoes and the curves of her
hills were pushed up from the same deep elemental core of
beauty, and that she lay like some great princess of Brobdingnag
on whose body a colony of all the culture-snobs of the
world had dumped its masses of raw building, run up its
hundreds of hotels and pensions, piled its pyramids of handbooks,
biographies, Dantes, histories, essays, landed its hordes of guides
and interpreters, encamped its army of lecturers and art critics,
installed its cohort of copyists, dragged up its heavy battery of
professional photographers, supplemented by an amateur corps
of Kodak snapshooters; but that, breathing lightly beneath
all this mountainous cumber, unasphyxiated even by the works
on the Renaissance, she could still rise radiant in her immortal
strength and beauty, shaking off the Lilliputian creatures and
their spawn of print, ungalled by that ceaseless fire of snapshots,
imperturbable amid the lecturing, unimpaired even by all that
immemorial admiration.
The pioneers of this culture-colony blundered sometimes, as
pioneers will, and even Goethe, one notes with malicious glee,
spent himself upon the wrong pictures, gloating over Guercino,
wrestling with Caracci, Guido and Domenichino, and passing
Botticelli by, nay taking all Florence as an afternoon excursion.
And Pater himself, the pontifical Pater, though he has the
merit of a Botticelli pioneer, yet thought it necessary to
apologise for criticising “a second-rate painter”: which is as
though one should apologise for discussing Keats.
Nor were Byron and Shelley more felicitous in their admirations.
The Kunstforscher, that Being usually made in Germany,
has been busy since their day. Amid the great movement of life,
while men have been sowing and reaping, writing and painting,
voyaging and making love, this spectacled creature has been
peering at pictures and statues, scientifically analysing away
their authenticity and often their charm. There is the Venus de’
Medici, which generations have raved over, which innumerable
processions of tourists have journeyed to admire and found admirable.
The connoisseurs have now pronounced her “spurious and
meretricious,” and to-day nobody who respects himself would allow
himself a thrill at the sight of her. Yet Childe Harold cried:
“We gaze and turn away, and know not where,
 Dazzled and drunk with beauty, till the heart
 Reels with its fulness.”
I must admit that after the Venus of Milo the beauty of the
Medici Venus does appear a trivial prettiness. But even the
Venus of Milo—though we are still permitted to admire her—is
“late and eclectic.”
The unhappy Byron also wrote to somebody: “The Venus
is more for admiration than for love. What struck me most
was the mistress of the Raphael portrait.” Alas! nobody believes
now that the picture has anything to do with La Fornarina.
As for Shelley, when in 1819 he saw at Florence the Medusa
attributed to Leonardo da Vinci, he broke into lyric raptures,
“Its horror and its beauty are divine,
 Upon its lips and eyelids seems to lie
 Loveliness like a shadow, &c. &c.
           *       *       *
“’Tis the tempestuous loveliness of terror;
 For from the serpents gleams a brazen glare,
 Kindled by that inextricable error! . . .”
Kindled indeed by that inextricable error! For the Medusa
is now given up by every connoisseur. It is a mere inartistic
futility and to-day every lover of the arts must grow stony at
the sight of it. That immortal line “the tempestuous loveliness
of terror” is the only thing to its credit, though some might
count, too, the passage in which Pater gloats over its beauty of
conception.
Then there is that little matter of Leonardo’s St. John in
the Louvre. Michelet saw the whole Renaissance in it, and
Pater alludes to it as “one of the few naked figures Leonardo
painted,” and builds upon it a complex theory of Leonardo’s
symbolic suggestive method, and is not surprised at the saint’s
“strange likeness to the Bacchus which hangs near it, which set
Théophile Gautier thinking of Heine’s notion of decayed gods,
who, to maintain themselves after the fall of Paganism, took
employment in the new religion.” And now the St. John
turns out to have been a pupil’s or an imitator’s, and probably
not even a St. John.
The culture-pilgrims of to-day, armed with sacred text-books,
verbally infallible, and canonical lists of authentic attributions,
enjoy a suspicious superiority in æsthetic judgment over the
greatest creative artists. For Goethe and Byron and Shelley
did at least create, and Pater’s interpretation of Mona Lisa is
finer than the picture itself; whereas the pursuit of culture in
the average pilgrim is a confession of sterility either in himself
or in his own nation, which is not sufficiently vitalised to absorb
his interests. “If the Romans had had to learn Latin,” said
Heine, “they would never have conquered the world.” And
were England free in thought and nobly artistic, there would be
no need of this fervour for the preservation of Greek. Even
Goethe, it is amazing to discover from his “Italiänische Reise,”
never saw the sea till he went to Italy. And his first glimpse
of it was, of all places in the world, at the Lido in Venice!
He with the German Ocean to draw from him, as it drew from
Heine, the cry of “Thalassa!”; he who might have seen how
“Die weissen Meerkinder
 Hoch aufspringen und jauchzen
 Uebermut-berauscht,”
must fare forth to another land and behold a lazy, almost
tideless lagoon lapping in shallow muddiness on the tamest and
dullest shore in the world. Surely we have here an ironic image
of the culture-pilgrim who sets out to see Art abroad before he
has seen Nature at home.
When the Goths besieged Rome, Belisarius hurled down upon
them the statues of the Mausoleum of St. Angelo, and the tomb
was turned to a citadel. But against the siege of Rome by the
Goethes there is no known defence. A rain of statues would
merely aggravate their zeal, and the more hopelessly the statues
smashed, the more would their admiration solidify. So
to-day the Goethes and the Huns alike are invited up to see
the statues—for a fee—and every citadel of reality is turned to
a mausoleum-museum. St. Angelo, that has stood the storms
of eighteen centuries, is the perquisite of a facetious warder who
gabbles automatically of Beatrice Cenci, “la più bella ragazza
d’ Italia,” as he points out her pitiful, if dubious, dungeon. In
the stone cell of the Florentine monastery, on whose cold flags
Savonarola wore his knees in fasting and prayer, a guide holds up
a reflector to concentrate the light on the frescoes with which Fra
Angelico glorified the rude walls. Where St. Catherine walked—in
the footsteps of the Bridegroom—leaving the marks of her
miraculous feet, a buxom native of Siena expects her obolus.
Outside the pyramid-shadowed cemetery where Keats lies under
his heart-broken epitaph, a Roman urchin turns supplicatory
somersaults. Italia Bella, a paper published at Milan, adjured
Arona to wake up and celebrate the tercentenary of the canonisation
of its Saint Carlo, “if only because it pays.” History,
with its blood and tears, becomes æsthetics for the tourist and
economics for the native. Of a truth quaint links concatenate
Cæsar and the showman, the saint with the apple-woman who
finds a profitable pitch for her stall at his church-corner. While
we are fuming and strutting we are but providing popcorn
for posterity. Buskined heroes of history, who walk the earth
in tragic splendour, perchance your truest service to humanity
has been done in affording occupation for the poor devil who
expatiates upon the traces of your passing. This, at least, ye
may be sure is good service; the rest of your work, who shall sever
the good and evil strands of it? So much pother of prophets
and politicians—and, lo! how poor a planet we still wander in.
The culture-pilgrim, too, apart from this scattering of popcorn,
is a futile being. Culture as a mere excursion from a solid
home-reality may be vitalising, but whoso thinks to batten on
alien arts and letters is filling his belly with the sirocco. There
is no reality in the travel-world, be it the world of Art or the
world of Nature, for we have no true volitional relations with it.
’Twas Schopenhauer who discovered this for Art—though his
World has only the two dimensions of Will and Idea. But he
did not, if I remember, point out that everything seen with
aloofness from action partakes of this art-quality. The landscape
from the observation-car is a mere picture to us, however real to
the peasants working in the fields.
The only “real” traveller is the commercial. We others,
wandering through streets that our ancestors did not build, or
sitting in alien apartments and gazing upon unhomely hills, are
still spectators, not actors. We are not rooted in this soil, nor
feel the deep intimacies that are the truest truth about it. I
may partake in the annual festa of an Italian mountain village,
hear the Mass, bear banner and taper in the procession, salute
the saintly image, dance upon the plateau-piazza with a snooded
peasant-girl, but how shall I feel the holiness and joy of this
day of days?—I whose infant breath was not drawn amid these
precipitous fastnesses, who have not lived in these human caves
cut in the rock, who have not played in these steep stone streets,
who know nothing of the dear narrowness, the vivid intensity
that is born of cramped consciousness! There is in the very
attitude of spectator something that stands between one and the
object in its truth. This it is that makes the appreciations of
cities by the school of Pater such hollow phantasy, such bastards
of an accident by a temperament. This it was that begot
Pierre Loti’s monumental misreading of Japan as a Lilliput
of the pretty-pretty. To lose the artistic Ego in the inner life
of the phenomenon—how rare the critic who is capable of that!
Listening to these parasites upon alien autocosms,
“Moving about in worlds not realised,”
one would imagine that a civilisation or a city existed, that
its remote founders had fevered and its burghers toiled and its
architects built, to the mere end that centuries after they were
dust some exquisite vibrations should be registered on a sensitive
soul.
Only less arrogant is it to place one’s soul in patronising
“appreciation” before some great historic structure—a cathedral,
a mosque, a palace, a library. These works of man so
immensely transcend any man’s works that he fits into them
almost as ludicrously as a mouse. A cathedral that represents
the genius and labours and sacrifices of generations towers so
immensely out of proportion to any individual that he can only
recover a reasonable relation to it by fusing himself into the
life and stature of the race. To be solely concerned with its
impingement upon his own soul is an impertinence, to pass his life
in contriving such impingements is to live by robbery, and to
enjoy these secular products of human solidarity on the Paterian
pretext that the only reality is the fleeting and isolated Ego, is
peculiarly paradoxical.
Pater himself would even go so far as to study men, e.g.
Pico di Mirandola, for their æsthetic flavours. This is, indeed,
to live resolutely Im Schönen if not Im Ganzen, and it is, therefore,
the more curious, that in citing Goethe’s maxim in his “Winckelmann”
Pater should, like Carlyle, have unconsciously substituted
Im Wahren for Im Schönen. The æsthetic appreciation of
Pico—as of most things—is a mere by-product. I do not deny
that by-products are sometimes delightful. But let us not
mistake them for central verities. And these churches, these
pictures, these statues, these palaces, these monasteries which
we see to-day in two dimensions, had once their third dimension
of reality, nay often have it still to those who know them in
their truth. How quaint that juxtaposition of Bibles and
Baedekers in Italian churches! The image which, seen through
tears, is soothing a worshipper’s pain, is at the same moment
finding exact appreciation at the eyes of a connoisseur. Who
can read without emotion of how in thirteenth-century Florence
Cimabue’s Madonna, “the first Madonna the people could love,”
was borne in triumph from the painter’s studio to its church by
the whole population of the quarter, which henceforwards took
the name of the Allegro Borgo! To-day the art-critic analyses
its types and its composition, and it takes its place coldly in the
history of painting as the link between the Byzantine and the
Tuscan. But the citizens of the Joyous Quarter had the true
flavour of the thing.
Despite the doctrine of Art for Art’s sake it remains questionable
if any maker of Art has ever escaped a desire to act—massively
or diffusively—upon the life of his age. In vain he hides
himself in the past, or flies to No-man’s-land, he vibrates throughout
to the present, touches living interests with their myriad
indirect relations to action, to the third dimension. Every art-product
holds, however subtly, something of that topical quality
which makes the portrait of a contemporary celebrity, wet from
the painter’s brush, very different from the peaceful remoteness
of an Old Master.
No half-deciphered face of dim sweetness, charming us from
the magic casement of some fading fresco by some forgotten
artist, as with the very image of Art aloof and absolute, but was
once wrought for a specific market and born into a specific
atmosphere. The forlorn stumps and torsos that litter the
moss-grown courts of museums were hailed, as they fell from
the craftsman’s hand, by a definite clientèle, rejoicing in
their beauty, stimulated by their freshness. Nothing, alas!
is so old, so corroded with time, but it was once brand
new, the pleasant novelty of the day to beings looking
back upon an immemorial antiquity, and now long since
mouldered to dust. Every blurred inscription, every crumbling
pillar and shattered fragment had once its life, its meaning,
its public.
The hand of time in eliminating the topical element and
reducing a picture to pure Art—the inactive beauty that is its
own end—removes from our perception the full reality of the
art phenomenon as it fell from the artist’s hand into time and
space.
Some parts of this original plenitude were indeed better forgotten,
for the Old Masters who were young once, young and
impecunious, turned Renaissance art into a fancy dress ball of
their patrons, the Magnificent Ones figuring as saints and
patriarchs, Bethlehem shepherds and Magian kings, whom
oblivious time has done well to mellow into a quasi-anonymity.
But if the loss of such intellectual elements is a gain, I am less
certain as to the evaporation of the emotional auras of works of
art.
Andrea Orcagna worked ten years at the marble Gothic
Tabernacle that stands in the fuscous Or San Michele of
Florence, and men of other races and faiths gaze perfunctorily
upon its decorative jewelled marvels, its pictorial reliefs, wrought
after the plague of 1348 from the pious legacies of the dead or
the thank-offerings of the survivors. The marble gleams in the
immortal inactive beauty that is its own end—but where are
the hope and the faith, the mourning and the anguish that
made the atmosphere in which its beauty had birth? Ebbed
to the eternal silence, like that great wave of popular rejoicing
on which Cimabue’s Madonna was carried to S. Maria Novella,
or a picture of Duccio’s to its due church in Siena. Can it be
that Art, launched thus upon a sea of emotion, is only its true
self when stranded high and dry upon the beach?
Is perhaps its most precious aspect precisely that by which
it is related to life? And its least precious part that which
remains over for the connoisseur of beauty? Oh but this is
heresy, almost the philistinism of a Tolstoy or a Savonarola.
But believe me, my dear Virtuosi, that flavour which the
citizens of the Joyous Quarter tasted, that wild-strawberry
flavour of living, that dog-rose aroma of reality which you miss
by your wilful avoidance of volitional relations, by your gospel
of Art for Art’s sake, is as exquisite as any of your hot-house
flowers and fruitage. Are you rushing in pursuit of the new
pleasure? Nay, it can only be captured by those who do not
pursue it, who are even unaware that it exists. Mill’s eudæmonistic
paradox again, you see.
Has any professional hunter of the æsthetic ever, I wonder,
had so exquisite a sense of the starry heaven as Garibaldi when
he embarked from Quarto to redeem his country? “O night of
the fifth of May, lit up with the fire of a thousand lamps with
which the Omnipotent has adorned the Infinite! Beautiful,
tranquil, solemn with that solemnity which swells the hearts
of generous men when they go forth to free the slave!”
“He never tampered with his sense of reality.” These words
came to me as the epitaph of an old Jewish pedlar when I heard
of his passing away in far-off Jerusalem. He too knew this joy
of the Allegro Borgo (though in his autocosm the Madonna was
an idol) and gleams of it sustained him through long years of
poverty and pain, and through the shadows of his closing hour.
Pictures, songs, histories—all had no existence for him outside
his religion. All were but ministers of faith, to feed its sacred
flame. There was not in his whole life a moment of divorce
between reality and consciousness. In such simplicity, what a
unity, what a giant strength! Pitiful ye seem in comparison,
ye unshelled æsthetes, wandering in search of an
autocosm or yearning to inhabit every one in turn. Imagine it,
to live the years of the Patriarch in our complex tortured era,
and never to have had an art-emotion, never—save perhaps in
childhood—to have known make-believe, never to have sundered
vision and idea from actuality! Think of it, ye who have played
such tricks with your souls as would make the angels weep,
whose pious emotion has as much relation to religion as the
enjoyment of a painted ocean to a struggle in the blind waters.
You, Monsieur Loti of the Académie Française, with your vain
literary vigil at the Holy Sepulchre, will you not envy this high
seriousness which found an exaltation in forty fasts a year, without
bite or sup, and drew a salty vitalisation from the tear of
penitence? And you, sophisters of religion, who cling to your
creed because it is good for the poor, or a beautiful tradition,
or a branch of respectability; and above all, you, amateurs of
“la volupté dans la dévotion,” after the recipe of Barrès; you, neo-Catholics
who mistake masturbation for adoration, bow your
heads before one who worshipped God as naïvely as a dog adores
his master, who did not even know that he believed, who was belief;
who went to Jerusalem not because he was a Zionist but because
it was Zion, whose tears at the Wailing Wall were tinctured
with never a thought of the wonder and picturesqueness of
weeping over a Zion lost eighteen hundred years before he was
born! Poor Parsifal! Poor pure fool! Gone is thy restful
simplicity. Persiflage is now our wisdom.
But because I have been privileged to see this sancta
simplicitas of the old Jewish pedlar, I feel I know my Middle
Ages better than the Protestant connoisseur whose learning
flattens me out, or the pseudo-Catholic in search of sensations.
I understand the Allegro Borgo, I say, and I am not appalled
by the terrible list of Christian forgeries and legends, the
apocryphal Gospels, the pseudo-Epistles, the hagiologies, for
I know that ’tis the dry light of literary history that is false—like
every other science—and that in life all these figments may
have been the harmless nutriment of saintly souls. In this old
Jew’s autocosm, too, there were no physical impossibilities, no
incredible miracles, no monsters or leviathans so strange but
their names in Hebrew letters were a certificate of pedigree;
the centuries were fused for him as by a cosmic cinematograph,
the patriarchs and saints hovering over him in immortal
synchrony. So am I not taken aback to see the Bambino still
in his mother’s lap by the time the Visconti present the Certosa
to the Madonna, nor does it disconcert me to behold all the
abbots and bishops of Christendom in attendance at the Crucifixion
with consoling models of their churches. And as for the
Madonna being an Italian grande dame dressed in Venetian
silks or Florentine brocades, how else, pray, are we to preserve
religion? True local colour and true Jerusalem costuming
would have brought relativity into the absoluteness of belief,
would have been a reminder that the Madonna was a foreigner.
The truer truth is that she is Our Lady.
Art, you see, had in its palmy days to be a full-orbed reality,
carrying conviction as well as beauty to the guileless beholder.
To us too ’tis only the masterpiece attuned to our own macrocosm
that can give us this plenary satisfaction. Even “Paradise Lost”
is for us merely a magnificent banquet of words, the virgin
bloom of Paradise truly lost with our faith in the groundwork
of the epic. Tolstoy’s attack on Art fails to differentiate
between the Art of alien autocosms, the Culture Art which
divides our soul against itself, and the real vitalising Art of our
own epoch. For though we say, “Blessed are the simple, who
live in the Absolute,” ’tis no necessary converse to cry damnation
on the complex. Art, we know, is in a sense a playing with
life, an outcome, as Schiller said, of the play-impulse, the
exuberance of energies not exhausted in the struggle for
existence. This is what Carlyle felt when he denounced
mere rhymesters and canvas-colourers; it was the secret of his
“imperfect sympathies” (in Elia’s phrase) with Shakespeare
himself. ’Tis Hebraism versus Hellenism—the earnestness of
the writers of the Bible, whose Art is an unconscious enhancement,
a by-product struck off at white heat, versus the self-conscious
manipulation of themes by Æschylus or Sophocles.
A sense of futility and superfluity, if not of positive pravity,
lies behind the eternal distrust of the Puritan for the
make-believe of Art, his suspicion of the theatre and the
nudities of Pagan sculpture. A prick of atavistic Calvinism
caused the writer with the profoundest instinct for make-believe
our generation has seen—Robert Louis Stevenson—suddenly
to declare that the artist was no better than a fille de
joie. But this was because the bulk of Stevenson’s fiction—unlike
his essays and his poetry—is Art in its anecdotage, without
serious relation to the spirit. And there are moods in
which a jejune elegance or an empty exhilaration is as unsatisfying
as a lady’s boudoir; and the artist, as a maker of beautiful
toys, must sink into the same place as the contriver of perfumes
and cushions. In Japan, where every workman is an artist, Art
is in its proper place, and there is neither cant nor confusion.
But besides the little Art of decorative line and melodious tinkle
and romantic falsification of life there is the greater Art which
has in it the unrest of the ocean and the silence of the starry
night. Art, if in some instances it has sprung direct from the
play-impulse, has largely come to us by way of religion, and
where it is merely play for play’s sake—as in rococo Art—it is
doomed to sterility.
Although Art represents, yet, as photography came to prove,
representation is not the aim of Art. The aim of Art is creation—creation
that stimulates the soul. The artist has not to
reproduce his model, but to create something new, living, and
stimulating by help of it. He adds new creations to Nature.
He marries her facts to his passion and pain, and the offspring is
Art—Nature crossed by Man. The great odes of Keats and
Wordsworth, the symphonies of Beethoven, the pictures of
Bellini, the statues of Michelangelo, transmit to us the artists’
spiritual exaltations, their ideals of beauty and energy. It boots
not to point out that the artist is often selfish and licentious,
irritable and vain. It is the greatnesses of his soul, not its
pettinesses, which he puts into his art; his emotions and ideals
into its content, his sincerity into its craftsmanship. And by
greatnesses I do not mean only moral greatnesses, for life is
larger than morality. It is his own temperament with which
the artist crosses Nature. And that is why schools of Art can
never yield more than craft: new creations can only be got by
new crossings.
I would grant the Puritan, to whom all Art is of Satan, as
I would grant his strange ally, Plato, that æsthetics may be
abused, especially when divorced from life. There are young
ladies who consume a novel a day, Sundays not omitted, by
which process half their waking life is passed in a species of
opium-eating. There are amateurs of music whose life is a surfeit
of sweet sounds, and picture-lovers whose day is an orgy of
line and colour. But when Tolstoy, perceiving what a sensual
sty of Fine Art we may wallow in, ranged himself with the old
Puritan iconoclasts, and launched his famous Platonic encyclical
against music divorced from public psalmody, song sundered
from harvest-festivity, or poetry that was not a marching song
to the Millennium, he overlooked that even a healthy soul may
have a surplusage of play-energy—nay, that this is the very
child-soul—and that even from a Puritan point of view Fine
Art may purify for fine Action, though it lack the direct nexus
with Action. Tolstoy’s tracts on religion may even be less
vitalising for our age than “Anna Karenina” operating by way
of the Aristotelian katharsis.
And the relation of so-called fiction to truth may be even
closer than its nexus with Action. For it follows from our
analysis of Science that novels and plays have the great initial
veracity of reproducing the fulness of life as compared with the
segregative sciences with their one-sided abstractions, which are
to actuality as the conjugations in a Greek grammar are to a
conversation with Helen of Troy. While the artificial selection
of Science breaks a whole into parts, the artificial selection of
Art can make a part truly represent the whole. And the greater
the artist-soul the less will it play with its moods by the artificial
and conscious refraction of Art for Art’s sake. None
should know better than Tolstoy that the highest Art is only
Truth seen as Beauty. The great artist’s registration and
reflection of the universe in tone or colour, line or word, is,
indeed, the highest form of Science at our command, fact and
flower in one. “Beauty is Truth, Truth Beauty.” Sophocles,
Shakespeare, Dante, Michelangelo, Beethoven, Milton, Browning,
were not playing with life. The world of Art may not be the
world of Science, but it is the world we live in, the human world
furnished with faith and emotion, no less “real” than the naked
universe of physical law.
To accept Art for Art’s sake, to divorce it from life, would
be to pigeon-hole our souls, as most people put their religion
into Sundays. The deepest analysis seems to conduct us back
to a recognition that Art and Reality, though they have no
necessary relation, do actually tend to approach each other in
the greatest Art. The greatest writers—a Shakespeare or a
Tourgénieff—in that selection from life which constitutes Art,
select so as to give a sense of the whole, avoiding the one-sided
selection which gives us on the one hand the disproportionate
sexualities of the Palais-Royal farce or of the elegant bawdy-book,
on the other the disproportionate sentimentalisms of
goody-goody fiction. In painting, too, the Art which seizes
the essence of places and people is the greatest, and I believe
the greatest music seizes the essence of moods. Moreover, it
is only by their relations to human realities that imaginative
creations like Goethe’s Mephistopheles or Swift’s Lilliputians,
the Prometheus of Æschylus, the Caliban of Shakespeare or
the Jungle-Beasts of Kipling, have power to hold us. It may
give us a useful distinction between Imagination and Fancy to
connect the one with invention along the lines of life and born
of insight into its essence—as in the creation of Hamlet; the
other with artificial invention—as in the creation of Alice’s
Wonderland. Whether Hamlet existed or not, or that Prince
Hal did exist, is irrelevant to Art. The transient reality has
been replaced by the permanent creation. Per contra, what was
meant as Truth may survive only as Art, like the mythological
parts of the “Iliad,” “Macbeth,” “Paradise Lost,” or the
“Divina Commedia.” Yet, as I have just pointed out, even
these great artistic creations lose their hold in proportion as
they cease to seem in correspondence with external realities. And
if the supreme test of plastic and literary Art is its communication
of a sense of life, is it not Truth we are really worshipping,
Truth under another name? For lifelikeness, if it does
not necessarily mean likeness to particular individuals, does
necessarily mean likeness to universals. And Selection, though
it omits portions of the truth, does not omit the whole truth—nay,
sometimes reveals the whole truth by cutting away the
obscuring details. Reality is the inexhaustible fons et origo of
all great Art; apart from which there is no life in Art, but
a rootless, sapless, soulless simulacrum. So that with the supreme
artist, the Puritan antithesis of Truth and Art, Reality and
Make-believe, Hebraism and Hellenism, disappears. A Sophocles
is as earnest as a Socrates, a Michelangelo as a Savonarola,
a Shakespeare as a Luther, a Beethoven as a Darwin.
As earnest, but not as limited. The biggest souls have never
been able to express their sense of the multiform flowingness of
things in neat packets of propositions; they have expressed it
through the infinitude of Art. And Art, having once in human
history been the medium of the spirit, must never sink back
into a soulless toy. The Art of the future must vivify Science
and take it up into Life; it must touch Truth with emotion and
exalt it into Religion.
“Ludibria rerum humanarum cunctis in negotiis.”
Tacitus.
So eccomi back in Assisi, after heaven knows how many years,
and here is the same bland Franciscan—or his brother—to
show me the same tiny monastery garden with the same rusty
rose-bushes and tell me the same story of how its native thorns
and briars turned into thornless roses with blood-specked leaves
after St. Francis had rolled in them to subdue the flesh, and the
same anecdote of the neophyte who refused to plant cabbages
with their roots upward and was rejected by the saint as
insufficiently simple and obedient, and I ask the same question
as to the botanic results of planting cabbages topsy-turvy and
receive the same beaming reassurance that they waxed to prize
dimensions, while a blight fell on those whose roots had, with
worldly-wise presumption, been planted in earth. And I am
shown the same little hut which the saint occupied, with the
same unnatural ecclesiastic vaulting and the same unnatural
oratory above it, and I go again into the same Lilliputian church
(twenty-two feet by thirteen) beloved of St. Francis, with its
rude plaster and its wooden benches and its plain brass lamps,
and receive the same shock at the thought of its asphyxiation
beneath the giant grandeur of S. Maria of the Angels, that
spreads over it like a golden eagle brooding a street sparrow.
And from the door of this dear little Portiuncula I glean the
same glad tidings that Pope Gregory XIII at the instance of
the most illustrious Cardinal Sforza has conceded to every
faithful Christian who will say (or pay for) a mass at its altar,
the grace of liberating a soul from Purgatory. And I am given
the same illuminated leaflet about St. Francis, with the same
specimen of ensanguined rose-leaf—precisely like that which
grows in my own garden—and I pay the same lira on the same
spot where St. Francis, who called coins “flies,” had some of
these pests, innocently offered by a worshipper, thrown out
upon asses’ dung. The only change since my last visit is
that a fig-tree has been planted “by request” in remembrance
of the old tree in which Sister Grasshopper sang with the saint
for eighty days.
And this “by request” is a vivid reminder that the Franciscan
legend is flourishing more and more, like the topsy-turvy cabbage,
and that shoals of pleasure-pilgrims, richly clad, come
by carriage or motor to maunder over “the little poor man of
Assisi,” to gloat upon the cord of his tunic, stored up in a
cupboard, and to gain an appetite for lunch by rhapsodising
over the cell in which he fasted. Yes, the lover of poverty and
of the brute creation has brought a good deal of money to the
little hill-town, and no small sum of labour and lashings to its
horses, and it is not surprising that the region round the poor
little abandoned church of S. Maria in Portiuncula has grown
up in the last quarter of a century into a big suburb, with
eating- and lodging-houses, or that the successors of the saint
who in his horror of property tried to tear down the chapter-house
built for him, and who left even his cell because somebody
referred to it as St. Francis’s, have within the last ten
years been able to enrich their vast basilica with three elaborate
carven doors and an iron railing, not to mention the horrible
modern fresco with six angels like ballet-girls hovering without
the chapel where St. Francis died.
As I leave this musty S. Maria of the Angels and mount on
this divine spring day towards the sunny hill-top where Assisi
proper sits rock-hewn, with its towers, domes, and castles, and
see beneath me the wonderful rolling Apennines, and the windings
of white roads and silver streams, and around me the
grey-green of olives and the bridal white of cherry-trees, and
above me the cloud-galleons sailing in the great spaces of sky, a
remark of the bland brother comes back to me with added
significance. “We do not know where St. Francis’s heart is,”
he said, grudgingly conceding that the rival church on high
possessed his body. The fancy takes me, as I toil up to this
tomb, that St. Francis’s heart refused to be buried in a church,
is here out of doors, at one with the spring and the sunshine.
And even more symbolic sounds to me the bland brother’s
boast that the colossal church built over the poor little
Portiuncula is on the model of St. Peter’s. Canonisation is
a process that normally lasts centuries; our King Alfred’s is
not yet complete. But twenty months after his death Francesco
Bernardone was hustled into formal saintship. The Pope
crushed him by a loving embrace, and over his beloved doll’s
house of a church was erected a copy of St. Peter’s! And far
above, on the rival ridge of Assisi, as if to give a culminating
irony to the symbolism, and as if one great church built over
his body did not suffice to keep him down, a second church of
S. Francesco has been built on the top of the first, and beneath
these two churches, each supplied with its frescoed falsifications
by the school of Giotto, the little brother of the poor who
demanded only to lie among the criminals on the “Infernal
Hill” was safely buried.
And yet not so safely but that his spirit has begun to
penetrate through all the layers of stone and legend. Perhaps
it has escaped through that portal of the upper church which,
incautiously thrown open to illumine the painted miracles,
tempers the austere gloom and the drone of ceaseless psalm-saying
from below with a revealed greensward and a piping of
birds. But one cannot imagine that his spirit has gone to
occupy that large red throne between two yellow armchairs
which the fresco depicts as the vision of his appointed seat in
heaven, or that fiery chariot with which to bedazzle the
brethren left behind. These twenty-eight wall frescoes, like
the four triangular allegories on the ceiling below, hold little
of the true St. Francis (notwithstanding that they are all
drawn from Franciscan literature), and the least spiritual and
the most mythical portions of the legend, the demons flying
over Arezzo, or St. Francis hovering in the air while praying,
figure on equal terms with his real activities, while the picture
of his offering the Soldan the ordeal of fire is an imaginative
amplification even of the literature. Setting aside all the
fatuous monastic miracles, and the more tedious anecdotes of
the Franciscan legend—and it must be remembered that the
earliest dated manuscript of the Fioretti comes a hundred and
sixty-four years after the death of St. Francis—we are yet
able to extricate from it a kernel of personality sufficient to
account for its genesis and growth, and it is this St. Francis
who has at length burst through the three churches devoted to
keeping him down and made his appeal to the modern mind.
Yet the modern mind might easily misread itself into the
mediæval mystic.
Despite his marriage to Lady Poverty, St. Francis was far
from a conscious rebel against the glories of the Vatican. He
was too humble-minded to be anything but a meek acceptant
of the established Church and the ruling ritual. But there was
in his literal translation into life of the Sermon on the Mount,
the germ of a dangerous schism—a germ which duly developed
into a sect of “Spirituals” for whom the Gospel of Assisi was
the Eternal Evangel destined to supersede the Christianity
of the Vatican—and it is not an accident that his followers,
despite their popularisation of the idea of Papal infallibility,
gravitated more to the Ghibelline cause than to the Guelph, and
were, later on, formally condemned as heretics by John XXII.
This unstatesmanlike Pope was not only ignorant that persecution
is the seed of the sect, but he undermined the doctrine of
his own Papal infallibility by thus reversing the bull of
Nicholas III confirming their order. He alleged that Nicholas
had framed it without his Cardinals, but the more logical
Minorite Brothers contended that the contradiction of his
predecessors proved him no true Pope, but a usurper. John
and his successors retorted with the Holy Inquisition, and the
Franciscans were burnt in stacks or tortured to death in
dungeons; “martyrs,” says Döllinger, “to the doctrine of
Papal infallibility and the rule of poverty.” And such is the
comedy of Catholicism.
One wonders sometimes what St. Francis would have made of
himself, had Christianity never come his way. His own genius
would never have created the melancholy dogmas of the mediæval
Church. There is neither Christ nor Atonement in his Canticle
to the Sun—his most characteristic utterance. The Christianity
he absorbed from his environment makes but a hybrid composite
with his essential personality. There is thus no real unity in
his spiritual being, no real reconciliation between his theory of
utter abnegation and unworthiness, and his cheerful mystic
oneness with the material universe and all its creatures. That
everything God has created is laudable except one’s self, and
that all matter is sacramental except one’s own body, is scarcely
a congruous creed. And he followed his Christianity for the most
part with a prosaic literality that showed that here he was but a
passive receiver, as in his pharisaic prohibition against the
brethren’s practice of soaking pulse the evening before it was
eaten, on the ground that this meant taking thought for the
morrow. Not to soak it, is precisely taking thought, since it
is concentrating attention on a triviality. But in his tender
mystic universalism on the other hand he was a master, a
creator. “Our Brother the Sun,” “Our Sister the Moon,” “Our
Sister, Water,” “Our little Brothers and Sisters, the Birds,”
“Our Sister, the Death of the Body”—these are the mintings
of an original genius, not that tame subservience to texts which
limited his wardrobe because of certain words in St. Matthew.
And the originality of this genius consists, curiously enough,
in the spontaneous reproduction of Hindu optimism and universality
in a Western. How Hindu this thought is appears
vividly from the story in the “Speculum Perfections,” that when
St. Francis’s drawers caught fire about the knee, he would not
put it out nor harm his brother Fire. From this point of view
Hell would only be brother Fire enjoying himself. Yet we
find St. Francis engaged all his life in thwarting the fraternal
appetite. St. Francis would have been a greater man, had he
been less of a Christian.
His distinctively Christian sayings are indeed comparatively
poor. One scans the record almost in vain for any flash of the
irony or sublimity of Jesus. The profoundest remark of the
Fioretti—“everything, good or bad, that a man does, he does
to himself”—belongs to brother Giles who, one is not surprised
to find, left a book of Verba Aurea. Occasionally a superb
transcendence of ritual as in St. Francis’s remark that so far
from not eating meat when Christ’s nativity fell on a Friday,
“the very walls should eat flesh on such a day, or if they
cannot should at any rate be greased outside,” recalls the
flouter of Pharisaism, and we catch the voice of an authentic
master in his exposition of a passage of Ezekiel to a peace-loving
doctor of divinity perturbed about the text: “If thou
proclaim not to the wicked man his wickedness, I will require
his soul at thy hand.” It was by the brightness of his own life
and the perfume of his fame, said St. Francis, that the servant
of God proclaimed their wickedness to the wicked. That was
not precisely the method of Jesus, and herein St. Francis is
more Christian than Christ. Nevertheless, if one had not his
Hindu utterances to supplement his Christian, there would be
little to distinguish the skinny black-eyed little strolling
preacher from the numberless narrow-browed ascetics of the
Church except his childishly dramatic delivery, his success
in founding an Order and his redeeming weakness for talking
bad French. It is that strange animism of his which gives
him his hold upon us, which, not content with reading a
soul into the bird, the fish, the grasshopper and the wolf,
extends with half-savage, half-childish personalisation to fire
and water, and even to wood and stone, nay to the very letters
of the alphabet, so that he will not erase a letter even when
he has set it down in error. Behind this divination of life in
all things must have lain an exquisite sensibility, and it was
thus his unfortunate fate to be supremely alive to beauty—even
in woman—yet to be driven by his creed to the worship
of sorrow, abnegation and self-inflicted pain, though even from
these his subtle nervous system could snatch a rare moment of
ecstasy, for so delicately was he strung that the mere words
“the love of God” set up a sweet vibration like a plectrum
striking a lute. How indeed should the gay knight, whom his
comrades elected “King of the fools,” change his sensitive skin,
merely because he turned to be “God’s fool?” If he now
found his joy in the ecstasy of mystic communion and absolute
abnegation, the joy was still at his core, and however he might
afflict his body, with a sub-conscious sense of setting a model to
his weaker brethren, it was impossible for him to subdue his
sun-worship, or not to delight in the ripple of water, and the
grace of birds and flowers and women. And herein he differs
from the Buddha with whose life-story and tenderness for all
creation he has so much in common, but to whom this world is
merely a mistake to be endured till the nullity of Nirvana is
attained. Even the pseudo-Christian theory of this vale of
tears is not so pessimistic as Buddhism, for the lachrymose vale
is merely the prelude to a mountain of bliss, and Schopenhauer’s
attempt to pair Christianity with Buddhism overlooked that
the Buddhist saint lives to die and the Christian dies to live.
Kuenen showed much deeper insight when he pointed out that
Buddha does not value purity and renunciation as virtue—he is
“beyond good and evil”—but as the best means of escape
from life. But for St. Francis the world is not a vale of tears.
Indeed the conception of a world of sorrow is contradicted by
the sorrowful lives of the saints. For abnegation is pointless
if there is no happiness to be surrendered. The pathos of the
life of St. Francis lies precisely in his exquisite capacity for
terrestrial happiness, and in his daily crucifixion of every
natural desire at the bidding of a vicious theory of virtue, to
which a natural want means something created by God in order
to be thwarted, and which makes a vice of every necessity.
Fortunately he had from his Hindu side the saving grace of
joyousness, and could rebuke the saturnine visage of professional
sanctity and even—towards the end—his own barbarity to that
brotherly ass, his body.
His disciples, whose affinities with him were so imperfect that
his most devoted biographer is the author of the “Dies Iræ,”
attempt indeed to harmonise the two halves of his personality
by the mediation of texts. If he loves even the humble worm,
it is because “he had read that word concerning the Saviour:
‘I am a worm and no man,’ ” and if he treads reverently on the
stone, it is not from some mystic sense of a stone-life or some
sacramental sense of a divine immanence, but “for love of
Him who is called the Rock.” That his delight in water should
be traced to its baptismal uses, and his prohibition against
cutting down the whole of a tree to a reverence for the material
of the cross, was, of course, inevitable. Nor is it impossible
that St. Francis occasionally glossed himself over to himself,
and it is quite probable that his special tenderness for the
hooded lark was due to its quasi-monkish cowl, and that his
comparative coldness to the ant reposed upon its providing for
the morrow. For it was his tragedy to be torn between a
blithe personal revelation of the divine and a stereotyped
tradition of sorrow, to constrict his spiritual genius to a cut-and-dried
scheme of salvation, and to be crucified on a second-hand
cross. The stigmata which are the best proof of his
hyperæsthesia are likewise the best evidence of his spiritual
plagiarism and his comparative failure. For to be crucified is
not to be Christ. Jesus did not set out to be crucified,
but to do his and his Father’s work. Crucifixion came
in the day’s work, but was its interruption, not its fulfilment.
The true imitation of Christ is to do one’s work though
men crucify one. But deliberately to seek crucifixion—even
crucifixion of one’s natural desires—is to imitate the accident,
not the essence. A still greater perversion is it to brood upon
the crude insignia of the Passion till auto-hypnotism works
miracles in the flesh.
The followers of St. Francis pushed the plagiarism so far as
to adumbrate a parallel legend, with a descent into Purgatory
and a John of the Chapel who fell away and hanged himself, and
by the latter end of the fourteenth century the parallel was made
precise and perfect in the Liber Conformitatum of Bartolommeo of
Pisa. But the copy is only superficially true to the original.
There is nothing in the story of the great Galilæan to justify
the perpetual self-torture of St. Francis in his morbid quest of
perfect humility and sinlessness. On the contrary, Jesus speaks
with so god-like an assurance of righteousness that it has
become one of the chief arguments for his divinity, as it is
the chief stumbling-block to the efficacy of his example. For
if God was made not man but superman, we can no more
emulate this superman’s goodness than his power of creating
loaves and fishes in a crisis. Only if Jesus were not God is his
example valuable. But man or superman, he did not sap his
energies by brooding on his own vileness. Buddhism, with all
the apathy that its pessimism engenders, is healthier here, since
(according to the Mahâviyûhassutta) the Muni, the Master of
renunciation, never blames himself.
I sympathise cordially with the perplexities of Brother
Masseo, who, according to the “Analecta Franciscana,” lost his
naturally cheerful countenance under the difficulty of believing
himself viler than the vicious loafer; and who, when this peak
of humility was by grace attained, found himself in fresh
despondency before the new Alp that rose on the horizon. “I
am sad because I cannot get to the point of feeling that if any
one cut off my hands or feet or plucked my eyes out, though I
had served him to the best of my power, still I could love him
as much as I did before, and be equally pleased to hear him
well spoken of.” Poor Masseo! Why should this worthy
brother, a man, according to the Fioretti, of great eloquence
and belonging to the inner circle of St. Francis, waste his time
and spoil his valuable cheerfulness over such hypothetic
absurdities? The humour of the last clause is worthy of
Gilbert.
It is in face of such a heautontimorumenos as poor Brother
Masseo that I revolt against all this strained ethics, this
gymnast virtue demanding years of training to force the soul
into some unnatural posture which it can only sustain at best
for a few seconds. I could weep over all this wasted goodness
when I think of the wrongs crying out for justice, the voice of
lamentation that rises daily from the wan places of the world.
How much there is for Hercules to labour at without standing on
his head and balancing the seven deadly virtues on his toes! The
beauty of holiness is often put on the same level as the holiness
of beauty, as a self-sufficient ideal. But even as false ideals of
beauty may impose themselves, so may false ideals of holiness.
The static sanctity of a Stylites has long been relegated to those
false ideals, and even a St. Francis cannot be accepted as a
model for to-day, though a few satiated souls may yearn after
abnegation as the last luxury of the spirit. There is much
barren æsthetic admiration wasted upon religious maxims
which it is admitted would overturn society if acted upon; and
it is questionable, therefore, whether there is any real beauty in
these, any more than in jewelled watches that will not go.
Even when a rare saint acts upon them, they seem to produce
spiritual sickliness rather than spiritual health. There is,
perhaps, a finer beauty of holiness in the life of a wise and good
man of the world with a sense of humour, than in the life of an
ecstatic and underfed saint, whose very notion of the Fatherhood
of God lacks the reality and fulness that come from paternity.
There are few things in literature more touchingly simple
than those adventures in search of holiness, that picaresque
novel of the spirit, known as “The Little Flowers of St. Francis.”
These gentle souls, who wander without food or knapsack, under
the tutelage of the seraphic saint, through the enchanting
valleys and hills of unspoiled thirteenth-century Italy, and
adventuring in even more glamorous regions hold strange
parleyings with the Soldan of Babylon, have upon them a
morning light of innocence and that perfume of holiness which
can never fail to justify the Master’s exposition of Ezekiel. If
anything could add to the sweetness of the idyll, it is the
spiritual loves of St. Francis and St. Clara. And yet our
adoration of St. Francis must not blind us to the questionable
aspects of the chronicle. “I may yet have sons and daughters,”
he replied deprecatingly to one who proclaimed him blessed and
holy. What a caricature of true ethics! Even the poverty for
which he was “so greedy” is impossible if everybody is greedy
for it, and the abnegation he practised he could not have
preached. Otherwise when he tossed his own tunic to a
shivering beggar, he should have inspired the beggar to toss
it back to his now shivering self, and so ad infinitum. That
game of tunic-tennis with nothing ever scored but “love”
would have been true Franciscanism, but also its reductio ad
absurdum. I do not wonder that Goethe smiled at the
“Heiliger” of Assisi, for neglecting to visit whose shrine he
was nearly arrested as a smuggler.
Yes, the bland brother does well to babble of the cabbage
planted with its leaves in the ground. For he has blundered
into the very essence of the Master’s teaching: this topsy-turvydom,
these roots in the air, are the secret of St.
Francis’s success. There is a tendency to blame our paradoxists,
to deride their inversions as mechanical. But St.
Francis is an inversion incarnate, a paradox in flesh and
blood. While with other men Property is a sacred concept,
a fetish guarded by a mesh of laws, he refuses to own anything
and even disposes with blasphemous levity of other people’s
property. Theft he daringly defines as not to give something
to anybody who has greater need of it than oneself. He hated
Property, not as the Socialist hates it who covets its communalisation,
but as something in itself evil. These practical inversions
of his have the same excuse as those of the literary
paradoxist. Nothing less than this violent antithesis will suffice
to shake men’s notions from the rigor mortis that overtakes
even true ideas, or to offset the exaggeration which gradually
falsifies them. One false extreme must be met by another, if
the happy mean is to be struck.
Pray do not imagine I would endorse Aristotle’s doctrine of
the mean, or the popular platitude that truth always lies midway
between two extreme views. On the contrary, truth is often
the most violent and extreme of all possible propositions and
right action the most violent and extreme of all possible forms
of conduct. But the system of St. Francis needed as much
contradiction from the world of common sense as the world of
common sense needed from it. In so far as it was Christian, it
was an imitation of early Christianity, minus the time-limit
which justified its model. But the right course of action when
the world is about to come to an end will not necessarily be the
right course if the world is indefinitely to be continued in our
next. In such a world the system of St. Francis is an impossibility,
if only because it would bring the world to an
end by lack of population. And if it really succeeded, it
would bring itself to an end even before the world, for
in the absence of owners there would be none to receive
alms from, none to bake that bread which St. Francis
naïvely regarded as coming by grace as simply as water.
This absolute avoidance of money resembles, indeed, nothing
so much as banking, which is possible only if the bulk of
the investors do not ask for their money at the same time.
It is on the certainty of his failure that the success of a saint
reposes. His disciples will never be more than a miserable
minority and so he will seem recuperative and not destructive
to society. The exaggeration of his holiness will mitigate the
materialism of the average man. Dives will not give up his
dinner but he will drop a crumb for Lazarus and another for
the saint, and perhaps eat only salmon and trout on Fridays.
It is this reflection that he incarnates for the race an ideal of
perfection, imperfect though it be in its impossibility, that
reconciles me to the saint, as the reflection that the Church
Fathers were engaged in fashioning that ideal reconciles me
to their meticulous morality, in a world so given over to
slaughter, sensuality and every abomination of injustice that
their fine shades and their notion of an impassable infinity
between right and the smallest wrong appear ludicrously disproportionate
and academic.
The saint on this theory is a scapegoat, a victim on the altar
of human selfishness; he does, suffers, or gives up, too much
because most other persons do, suffer, or give up, too little. He
is sacrificed to the balance of things, or as St. Paul put it, he is
the leaven to the lump. Yet things would overbalance were he
too successful, and too much leaven would spoil the lump.
If there is within St. Francis an unresolved discord between
Hinduism and Christianity, still more jarring is the outer
discord between Nature and Christianity which he tried so
heroically to harmonise. Don Quixote tilting at windmills is
a practical figure beside St. Francis trying to Christianise bird
and beast. The consciously grotesque pathos of Cervantes is
surpassed by the unconsciously grotesque pathos of the
chronicles of St. Francis. The struggle for existence in
Nature—the angler’s hook and the birdcatcher’s snare—can
hardly be glossed over by sermons to the birds and the fishes.
Doubtless St. Francis had—as some sinners have to-day—a
strange power of fascination over the lower creatures, but the
butcher was not eliminated because St. Francis occasionally
bought off a lamb or a turtle-dove. We know too little of the
psychology of wild beasts to deny that he tamed the Wolf of
Agobio—though it is permissible to doubt the civil contract
with Brother Wolf which in Sassetta’s fanciful picture is even
drawn up by a notary; nor is the stone record of the miracle
you may read to-day on the façade of that little church in
Gubbio which was set up three centuries later, nor even the
skull of Brother Wolf himself, found—according to a lady
writer on Gubbio—“precisely on the spot pointed out by tradition
as the burial-place of the beast,” and “now in the possession
of a gentleman at Scheggia,” as convincing a testimony as she
imagines “to the indubitable truth of the tradition, and to the
superhuman power of love towards every living creature.” Love
has no such power to turn lions and wolves into civil contractors
or vegetarians. There is a battle of beneficent and sinister forces
in the universe, which Persian speculation has always recognised
frankly, but which Hebraic and Hindu systems, by their higher
synthesis of Love or Good, unconsciously whittle away into a
sham fight, or at best a tournament; a play of God with His
own forces. ’Tis Docetism writ larger. But whether the fight
be sham or real, the universe is not run on a Franciscan system,
and it is this which makes the pathos and the grotesquerie of
the saint’s attempts to equate the macrocosm with his autocosm.
Yes, St. Francis is as nobly mad as Don Quixote. Nay, towards
the end, where the cavalier of Christ, broken by disease in the
prime of his years—disease of the spleen, disease of the liver,
disease of the stomach, disease of the eyes—macerated by senseless
privations, a mere substratum for poultices and fomentations
and cauterisations, scarcely even washing himself for fear of
ostentating the stigmata, still sings songs of praise so blithely
as to scandalise his companions’ sense of death-bed decency, we
touch a more Quixotic pathos than anything in Cervantes.
And these legends of his pious influence over the cicala and
the swallow and the wolf, this tench that plays around his
boat, this pheasant that haunts his cell, this falcon that wakes
him for matins during his fast in the mountain, these birds that
fly off in four companies like a cross after devoutly digesting his
sermon, all make for the comity of creation, especially in Italy,
where animals have no souls, only bodies that may be ill-used:
indeed, St. Francis—with his disciple St. Antony of Padua—contributes
to Christianity that missing note of respect for the
animal creation which Hinduism expresses “in the great word
Tat-twam-asi (This is thyself!).” And here at least modern
thought is with St. Francis and his Hindu universalism. The
evolution theory is usually considered a depressing doctrine, yet
it has its stimulating aspects. For though we may doubt if
St. Francis converted the wolf, we cannot doubt that Nature
Christianised it, or at least some creature as low and savage.
For from some gibbering ferocious brute there did, in the
process of the suns, emerge a seraphic, selfless being with love
for all creation. The wolf, in fact, became St. Francis; a more
notable conversion than any in the missionary books.
But what did St. Francis become? Here the record is not so
stimulating; here begins degeneration, devolution. Before he
died he was an idol and the nominal centre of vast organisations,
lay as well as monastic, female as well as male, and in
this success lay his defeat. Lachrymæ rerum inhere even more
in success than in failure. The portrait of St. Francis by Ribera
which may be seen at Florence—a melancholy monk with his
eyes turned up, holding a skull—was no sadder caricature of the
blithe little man who swept out dirty churches with a broom
than these gigantic and infinitely quarrelsome organisations
were of his teaching.
A great man may either influence humanity by his solitary
work or he may found an institution. The institution (if
adequately financed) will live, but with himself squeezed out
of it—for worship at a safe height. The squeezing out of
St. Francis from Franciscanism began even before his death—the
Papacy pressing from without and his own vicars from
within. That very sensible fear of Brother William of
Nottingham—evidently a practical Briton—that superfluities
would grow up in the Order as insensibly as hairs in the
beard, was more than verified. The dangerous rule of Absolute
Poverty was relaxed, scholastic learning was reinstalled in
its armchair, a network of rules replaced the rule of the spirit,
and the little brotherhood that had lain on straw and tattered
mattresses in the Portiuncula swelled and split into Conventualists
and Observants, the majority established in magnificent
monasteries. St. Francis lamented the degeneration of the
brethren, though he characteristically refused to punish it. And
when he was quite squeezed to death there began a fight for his
body—holy body-snatching was a feature of the Middle Ages—and
that vile enemy of the soul which he had battled against all
his life took his place as the centre of the cult. Perugia,
holding by force the body of St. Giles, removed from Assisi the
only possible rival of his relics. His very poultice is still
preserved as an object of edification.
Erasmus dreamed once—so he writes to Charles Utenhove—that
St. Francis came to thank him for chastising the
Franciscans. The Founder had not the scrupulous stage-costume
of his degenerate followers: his brown frock was of
undyed wool; the hood was not peaked, but merely hung behind
to cover the head in bad weather; the cord was a piece of rope
from a farmyard; the feet were bare. Of the five wounds of
the stigmata there was as little trace in St. Francis as of the
six virtues in the Franciscans. Obedience, poverty, chastity,
humility, simplicity, charity—where had flown these “six
wings of the seraph”?
Eheu fugaces! ’Tis the story of all founders, of all orders.
St. Francis at his supreme moment of renunciation had not even
the brown frock of Erasmus’s dream. In the market-place of
Assisi he stood in his shirt. And he desired to die even more
naked, as Thomas of Celano and the “Legenda Trium Sociorum”
testify. The first Franciscans were simple souls kindled by his love
and ecstasy, “the minstrels of the dear Lord.” They bore revilement
and scourging; dragged along by their hoods, they never
ceased to proclaim Peace. They lay a-cold in caves, with hearts
careless of the morrow; they served in lepers’ houses. And
above all they worked; begging was only to be a last resort, and
never was money to be asked for. “Beware of money,” says
the “Regula.”
Brother Elias of Cortona, the immediate successor of St.
Francis, is said to have lived like a prince, with valets and
horses, and he readily got the Pope to sanction a device by
which he obtained all the money he wanted per interpositas
personas. Nor did the Master’s teaching fare better at the
hands of the more faithful faction—the Observants whom the
Conventualists persecuted—for the rule of Absolute Poverty
was applied without the genial concessions and exceptions he
knew how to make; and under the guidance of the caustic and
canonical Antony of Padua the ancient gaudentes in Domino
hardened into slaves of the letter, while the more mystic
degenerated into anchorites who retired to the mountains to
save their own souls.
Nothing can point the tragedy of St. Francis’s success more
vividly than his own homely words in his “Testamentum.” “And
they who came to take up this life gave up whatever they might
have to the poor and were content with a single tunic, patched
inside and out (if they wished), together with a girdle and
drawers: and we would have no more. We clerks said the
office like other clerks; the lay-brothers said the Lord’s Prayer.
We gladly abode in poor and forsaken churches, and were
simple folk and subject to all. And I used to work with my
hands, and I desire to work, and my earnest wish is that all the
brethren should work at some decent employment.”
Only a century later Dante’s eulogy of the Founder (“Paradiso,”
Canto XI) is qualified by the remark that so few of his followers
cleave to his teachings that “a little stuff may furnish out
their cloaks.” And three centuries later the spectacle which
these Fratri Minori represented to Erasmus was that of arrogant
mendicants, often of loose morals, begging with forged testimonials,
haunting the palaces of the rich, forcing themselves
into families, selling the Franciscan habit to wealthy dying
sinners as a funeral cloak to cover many sins. His little
sisters, the swallows and the doves, fluttered over St. Francis’s
tomb, but from it issued the hawks and the vultures. An old,
old moral, though humanity will never learn it.
Saint Francis was Francis Saint. The Lady Poverty “who
for eleven hundred years had remained without a single suitor”
found in him a spouse faithful unto death. His soul went out
in fraternity to all the wonderful creation, in joyous surrender
to pain and tribulation: even Death was his sister. To found
an Order of St. Francis is to count upon a succession of St.
Francises. As well found an Order of Shakespeare, a phalanstery
of Da Vincis.
In religion no less than in literature or art the Master is
ever a new individual—“Natura lo fece e ruppe il tipo”—but
followers ever think to fix the free-blowing spirit. Alas! saints
may be summarised in a system, but the system will not produce
saints. Academies, churches, orders can never replace men;
they too often serve to asphyxiate or assassinate such as appear.
St. Dominic, the sterner founder of the other mendicant order,
was not more fortunate in creating an apostolic succession of
Poverty than his friend and contemporary; and as for his
precursor, St. Bruno, contrast his marble image in the Certosa,
gazing agonisedly at a crucifix, with the mosaics of agate, lapis-lazuli,
amethyst, and cornelian worked over the altars by eight
generations of the Sacchi family, or with the Lucullian feasts
which the Carthusians could furnish forth at the bidding of the
Magnificent Lodovico. St. Bruno retreated to the desert to fast
and pray, and the result was Chartreuse. If he now follows the
copious litigation he may well apprehend that his order has
modified its motto and that for “Stat crux dum volvitur orbis”
you should read “Stat spiritus.”
Benedictine, too, is a curious by-product of the first of all the
Western orders, and the one by which England was converted
to Christianity. How pleased the founder of Monte Cassino
must be to see a British bishop sipping Benedictine!
Religion has not, indeed, lacked saints aware of the tendency
of followers to substitute the forms for the realities and the
leader for the spirit. There was Antoinette Bourignon, with her
love for the free flowing of the Holy Ghost and her hatred of
the Atonement theory, but in the absence of forms her sect had
not sufficient material framework to maintain itself by. If the
Quakers still survive, it is because they have erected something
into a system, if only colour-blindness. But the twaddle which
is talked at Quaker meetings when an old bore is played upon
by the spirit, turns one’s thoughts longingly to a stately liturgy,
independent on the passing generation. Humanity is indeed
between the devil and the deep sea. Institutions strangle the
spirit, and their absence dissipates it.
“Nec tecum possum vivere, nec sine te.”
Even if by miracle a Church remains true to the spirit of its
founder, this is a fresh source of unspirituality, for his spirit
may be outgrown. An excellent definition of what a Church
should be was given some years ago by a writer in the Church
Quarterly: “A National Church, elastic enough to provide
channels for fresh manifestations of spiritual life, yet anchored to
the past.” But where is such a Church to be found? “Anchored
to the past”—yes, that condition is more than fulfilled. But
spiritual elasticity? The Church Quarterly reviewer has the
face to pass off his definition as that of the Church of England,
and to say that such a National Church “might have saved the
United States from many of those grotesque, and worse than
grotesque, features which have at various times disfigured their
spiritual life.” But the Church of England has notoriously
failed in elasticity—even the Archbishop of Canterbury is
unable to make it express his view of the Athanasian Creed.
And, far from its anchoring the spiritual life of the English
people, they have violently torn themselves away from it in
secessions of Baptists, Methodists, Quakers, &c. &c. As to its
preserving them from grotesque religious features, the aberrations
of English sectarianism fully equal those of America, when
the difference of geographic area is considered and the absence
of supervision over great spaces. Sandemanians, Walworth
Jumpers, Joanna Southcottians, Seventh Day Baptists, Plymouth
Brethren, Christadelphians, Peculiar People—such are a few of
the British aberrations, some of which have counted distinguished
followers. The bequests to foster even the Southcott
mania were treated as sacred by the Court of Chancery. Jump-to-Glory-Jane
is an English type put into poetry by an English
poet. The sect to which Silas Marner belonged, with its naïve
belief in drawing lots—the practical equivalent of the sortilege
of the Pagan soothsayer—was not made in America. It was
England which Voltaire ridiculed for its one sauce and its endless
sects. The great scale of America magnifies the aberrations.
But even Mormonism, Dowieism, and Christian Science have
solid achievements to their credit. Salt Lake City is a paradise
built over a desert reclaimed by Mormon labourers, Zion City
is a handsome town without drinking-palaces, and Christian
Science has made more advances in the last generation than
Christianity made in its first two centuries, numbering as it
does its temples and its teachers by the thousand. There is at
least life behind these grotesqueries, while in the Established
Churches there is asphyxiation by endowments.
Endowments—there is the secret of stagnation. It is an
unhappy truth that man tends to become a parasite on his own
institutions. Humanity is a Frankenstein that is ridden by its
own creations. Its Churches, with their cast-iron creeds and
their golden treasure-heaps, are the prisons of the soul of the
future. The legal decision in the great Free Church fight serves
as what Bacon calls an “ostensive instance” of this elemental
truth, bringing out as it does that the legal interpretation of
a Church involves, not the elasticity so glibly vaunted by the
Church Quarterly reviewer, but absolute inelasticity. A tiny
minority of ministers is able, for a time at least, to hold millions
of money and hundreds of buildings, because the vast majority
has elected, in a spirit of brotherly love, to join another body
from which it is separated by a microscopic point. There can,
at this rate, never be development in a Church. The faintest
divergence from old tradition may justify the hard-shell orthodox
in claiming all the funds and regarding the innovators as deserters
of their posts and properties. All Church funds are indissolubly
connected with the doctrines to which they were first tacked on,
and changes in doctrine involve forfeiture of the belongings in
favour of those who have had the fidelity or the shrewdness to
cling to the original dogma. How much change is necessary to
alter a creed is a delicate problem, known in logic as of the Soros
order. For every day brings it subtle increments or decrements,
and a dogma of imperishable adamant has not yet appeared in
human history. Every dogma has its day. The life of a
normally constituted truth is, according to Ibsen, twenty years
at the outside, and aged truths are apt to be shockingly thin.
Thus the danger which threatens all Churches—the danger of
having to buy their ministers—is raised to infinity if the money
is thus to be tied up by the dead hand of the past. A premium
is placed upon infidelity and mustiness. There is no Church or
religious body in the world which is not weighted with pecuniary
substance, from Rome to the Order we have been considering,
founded for the preachment of Absolute Poverty. The continuity
of policy which the Church Quarterly applauds becomes a mere
continuity of property, if progress is to be thus penalised. Nor
are the Dissenting bodies immune from this pecuniary peril. A
Calvinist chapel in Doncaster that was gravitating to the New
Theology has found itself closed pro tem. under its trust deed of
1802.
The remedy for this clogging of spiritual life is clear. It
was always obvious, but when Property is in danger one begins
to consider things seriously.
Every Church and sect must be wound up after three generations.
The time-limit needs elucidation.
The first generation of a Church or a heresy—the terms are
synonymous, for every Church starts as a heresy—is full to the
brim of vitality, fire, revolt, sincerity, spirituality, self-sacrifice.
It is a generation in love, a generation exalted and enkindled
by the new truth, a generation that will count life and lucre
equally base beside the spreading of the new fire. The second
generation has witnessed this fervour of its fathers, it has been
nourished in the warmth of the doctrine, its education is imprinted
with the true fiery stamp. It is still near the Holy
Ghost. In the third generation the waves radiated from the
primal fire have cooled in their passage through time; the
original momentum tends to be exhausted. Now is the period
of the smug Pharisees profiting by the martyrdoms of their
ancestors, babbling rhetorically—between two pleasures—of
their fidelity to the faith of their fathers. If the third generation
of a Church can get through with fair spiritual success, it
is often only because of a revival of persecution. But the third
generation is absolutely the limit of the spiritual stirring. In
the fourth generation you shall ever find the young people sly
sceptics or sullen rebels, and the Vicar of Bray coming in for
high preferment. Here, then, is the limitation dictated by
human nature. The life of a Church should be wound up by
the State. The birth of a heresy must be free to all, and should
be registered like the birth of a child. It would expose its
adherents to no disadvantages, either religious or political.
But after three generations it must be wound up.
Of course, it should be perfectly open for the Church to
reconstitute itself immediately, but it should do this under a
new name. If it started again afresh, the compulsory winding-up
would have acted as a species of persecution and thoroughly
revitalised the content of the particular credo. The third
generation would have strained every sinew to realise their faith
and bring it home to the young and fourth generation. The
latter, ere re-establishing the Church, would have rediscovered
its truth, and thereby given it fresh momentum to carry it
through another three generations. This simple system would
allow children to continue the faith of their fathers from conviction
instead of compulsion, and, by terminating the right
to property, would save posterity from the asphyxiation of
benefactions.
The life of a generation is computed by biological statisticians
at thirty-three years. Three generations would thus make
ninety-nine years. A century brings such changes in thought
and things that the excerpts from the Times of a hundred
years ago read like the journalism of another planet.
The bequests by which eleven old gentlewomen of a certain
parish, that has been swept away, receive groats of an abolished
currency, on a day that has disappeared from the calendar, to
perpetuate the memory of a benevolent megalomaniac, would,
on a similar principle, be limited to the natural run of a century.
It is enough to be allowed a dead finger in the pie of proximate
posterity; “a century not out” must never be written over any
human will or institution.
If this time-limit seems a trifle harsh, apply it, dear reader,
not to your own creed, but to something esoteric, like the
doctrine of the Dalai Lamas of Tibet, which has for so many
centuries paralysed a priest-ridden Asiatic population. Do you
think this theory of reincarnation deserved a longer run than
three generations?
“Dieses Prunkschiff ist ein rechtes Inventariënstück,
woran man sehen kann, was die Venetianer waren,
und sich zu sein dünkten.”
Goethe: Italiänische Reise.
But if Absolute Poverty is less worshipful than St. Francis
imagined, Magnificence as an ideal will, I fear, always be found
to connote defective moral sympathies, as of the Pharaohs
building their treasure-cities on the labour of lashed slaves.
For how in our world of sorrow and mystery can magnanimity
and magnificence meet? What great soul could find expression
in gilt, or even in gold? ’Tis a reflection on the character of
the Doges of Venice that everywhere in their palace is a sense
of over-gilded ceilings. Even when the Masters have made a
firmament of frescoes, the massive flamboyant framing weighs like
a torrid haze on a weary land. Art is overlaid and obliterated
by gold. What wonder Religion too is soon asphyxiated in
these flaming halls of Council—the Doge ceases to kneel to the
Madonna, he stands before Venice Enthroned between Mars and
Neptune. It is Juno who from a ceiling-fresco pours gold on
Venice, and in the heavy gilded picture of Zelotti, the Magnificent
Ten could behold Venice Seated on the World. What
sly satirist was it who—over the choir of St. Mark’s—crucified
Christ on a cross of gold?
In “The Merchant of Venice,” ’tis the Duke of Morocco who
chooses the golden casket; I feel sure ’twas Bassanio, the
Venetian. Not that I do not hate the leaden casket more.
Portia should have gone with a field of buttercups in June.
Of all expressions of human greatness, metallic sheen is the
most banal. I have never recovered from the shock of learning
that the Greeks gilded their temples, and though I can now with
even a spice of zest imagine them shining afar from their headlands
in a golden glory, I would have preferred to keep my
vision of austere columns and noble pediments; and I am grateful
to Time, that truer artist, for having refined away that assertive
aureola.
On the water, indeed—which is beneath one’s feet, and not
sagging on one’s head—metallic sheen may exhilarate, subtilising
and softening itself, as it does, in its own wavering reflections,
and I find the Doge’s gilded galley more endurable than his
lacunar aureum. It may be because Shakespeare (or rather
Plutarch) has reconciled me to Cleopatra’s barge by those
magnificent burnished lines. The Lord Mayor of London, too,
had anciently his gilded barge, and if you will look at an
eighteenth-century picture in the Guildhall by a pair of forgotten
painters, representing the Lord of Cockaigne sailing in state on
the Thames on the ninth of November, on the way to be sworn
at Westminster, you will see how easily London, with her old
boatmen and barges, and water-gates and water-parties, singing
as in Pepys, might have paralleled the water-pomp of Venice,
and how completely we have now thrown away the gorgeous
possibilities of our proud water-way, lining it with warehouses
in lieu of stately mansions, and cutting out of our lives all that
shimmering vitality of ever-moving water. Man does not live
by bread alone, and “Give us this day our daily water” were no
unfitting prayer in our arid city. The Henley Week is our one
approach to the colour of a Venetian festa. Yet what a Grand
Canal the Thames might have been! I vow that at a distance
I should take that old Guildhall picture, with its gay old
costumes, its pageant of gilded galleys, each flying a brave array
of rich-dyed flags and manned with rowers in white, its spires
and turrets, and the noble dome of St. Paul’s swelling into sunny
spaces of air and cloud, all suffused in a golden mellowness, to
represent the Doge of Venice going to a “solemn rite” at the
Salute. Alas! the Lord Mayor has now only a gilded coach,
and the Doge of Venice has vanished away, and only fragments of
galleys in the Arsenal and a model of the last of the Bucentaurs
remain to tell the tale of his marine glories, and his marriage to
the Adriatic on Ascension Day.
One mast of the Bucentoro—the very mast that upbore the
flag of the winged lion and the proud inscription, In hoc signo
vinces—survives in tragic recumbency, while a morsel of frieze
shows in gold, on a basis of dark wood, delicious angels playing
trumpet and harp at the prow. The relics of other galleys,
pranked with figures about half life-size, enable us to gather
what exuberance of fancy and grotesquerie went to grace
the Bucentoro which Napoleon burnt, while the fact that
he extracted the gold of 80,000 Napoleons from its ashes
shows with what prodigality the Republic blazoned its sense
of itself.
But the marvellous model reconstructed by Ferdinand of
Austria in 1837 at a cost of 152,000 francs, reveals, if it be exact,
that seamy side which is always the obverse of Magnificence. At
first the eye is taken up with its opulence of decoration, as
it seems to take the water with its proud keel, and its great
all-topping flag of the lion and the cross. For its upper deck is
of mosaic, over-hinged by a huge lid, red velvet without and
gold relief within, and from the water-line rise winged figures,
and over the arch through which pass the many-flashing oars of
red and gold is a frieze of flying horses, the rape of Europa,
Centaurs, and what not; and above this are winged figures flying
towards a gold sky, and gold figures on a balcony, which is
supported at the prow by winged lions and a pair of mermen,
and at the bowsprit couches the winged lion with two little angels
playing behind him; and on the hull is a naiad pouring out her
urn, and a merman blowing his trumpet, and the protrusive heads
of alligators; and lest you should think Venice meant nothing
but gold and fantasy and the pride of life, behold dominant over
these Justice with her sword and her scales, and Peace with her
dove and her olive-branch.
But below, hidden away behind and beneath the gilding, at
the unseen end of the red and gold oars
“Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke,”
sat one hundred and seventy-eight galley-slaves, chained four to
an oar; and here in this fuscous interior the benches are no
longer of plush, but of rough deal; here is no play of Fancy—here
in the hard seats we touch Reality. But not herein lies
the supreme sordidness of the Bucentoro—the crowning touch
is given by the oars, which, at the very point where they disappear
over the rowlocks under the gay arches, turn from their red and
gold into a plain dirty white, like shirt-cuffs that give on soiled
sleeves. ’Tis the very magnificence of meanness! The horny-handed
wretches, to the rhythm of whose tired muscles this
golden vessel moved along in its music and sunshine, to whose
caged gloom no glimpse came of the flags and the purple, the
angels and the naiads, could not even be conceded the coloured
end of an oar. But could there be an apter symbol of civilisation,
ancient, mediæval, or modern, than this gilded oar, whose
gaudiness fades as it passes from the bravery of the outer
spectacle to the grimness of the inner labour? Upon such
sweating slaves rested all the glitter and pageantry of the
ancient world—not only Babylon and Carthage, but even
the spiritual and artistic greatness of Greece. In hoc signo
vinces—in the sign of slavery; in the sign of the lion and the
cross—the lion for yourself and the cross for the people. And
in every land of to-day the same State-Galley glides along in
bannered pomp, parading its decorative images of Peace and
Justice, and the radiant creations of its Art, while below are
the hard bare benches and the labouring, groaning serfs. The
serfs are below, even in another sense, for it is their unsightly
hands that have built up every square inch of this splendour.
Beatrice d’Este went to see a galley a-building, her velvet cap and
her embroidered vest stuck full of jewels; complacently recording
the ejaculations of admiration for her diamonds and rubies,
while the Venetian women, and even children, were toiling at
making the sails and the ropes. Yes, the social order too must
be gazetted bankrupt. It has, indeed, never been solvent. It
has never paid its real creditors, the slaves of the uncoloured
oar.
Nor does our civilisation hold much hope of a change for the
fairer. Despite prophets and poets, despite Socialists, dry-as-dust
or dithyrambic, despite philanthropists and preachers, the revel
on the top-deck amid the velvet and the mosaics grows ever
wilder, the flutes ever more Dionysiac, the fantasies on prow
and poop ever more grotesquely golden. America, shorn of
monarchy and feudalism and rank, and all that the friends of
man screamed against, divides with Russia the hegemony of
hotels and outdoes the worst extravagances and debaucheries
of the Renaissance. Where in the Cinquecento a few despots
and “humanists” wallowed in lust and luxury, we have now ten
thousand private tyrants and loose-livers, restrained hardly by
the penal law. The deeds of the Cenci or the Baglioni must be
done in a glass-house in the fierce light that beats upon local
greatness. The ruffians of the Renaissance had no such free
field for vagaries and vices as the vagrom son of a millionaire
enjoys in this modern world, where property in growing fluid
has become dissolved from duty; where in every pleasure-city
palaces invite and women allure and slaves grovel; where every
port swarms with white-winged yachts to bear his indolent
irresponsibility to glamorous shores; where in a million halls of
light his world-strewn flunkeys proffer unseasonable food cooked
by unsurpassable artists, and rare champagnes, oscillated for
months in a strange daily ritual by troops of underground
elves.
They tell us that this New Year’s Eve in New York alone some
three million pounds were spent in suppers in the flaring restaurants,
where between eleven and twelve o’clock only champagne
could be served. Such is the New Era ushered in by the New
World—the Era of Champagne. For this the Red Indian was
uprooted and the wilderness tamed. For this Washington lived
and Lincoln died. By the flood of champagne all standards of life
and letters are swept away, save the one standard of financial
success, save the ability to dine in that wonderful culinary
cathedral where in a dim irreligious light as of a submarine
world of faery, to a melting liturgical music, a fashionable
congregation follows with absorbing zeal the lengthy order of
service. What an Agapemone!
And this epidemic of vulgarity, spreading to our own country,
has made the England of 1802, which Wordsworth denounced
for “glittering like a brook,” the England where “plain living
and high thinking” were no more, appear like an island of
pristine simplicity. Even the old families surrender to the new
standard and—in the plaint of Dante—“non heroico more, sed
plebeo sequuntur superbiam.”
What is to be done? What is to be done about it all? We
writing men, to whom the highest British manhood is still
Wordsworth in that country cottage where visitors must pay for
anything beyond bread and cheese, we to whom the greatest
American personality is still Walt Whitman in his Camden
shanty, must at least preserve our divine gift of laughter, our
one poor power of laughing at these vulgarians, whom even the
occasional smuggling of an Old Master out of Italy cannot
redeem from barbarism.
The purple pomp of kings, blatant though it be in comparison
with true grandeur, is at least the expression of a public dignity:
it is an official costume like the judge’s wig and gown. But
because greatness must accept office at the hands of its otherwise
helpless inferiors, and office must be suitably apparelled, a certain
confusion has been established between splendour and greatness,
as though because greatness means splendour, splendour must
mean greatness. Of this confusion those are promptest to take
advantage to whom the high road to consideration is closed.
Private pomp is a confession of personal pettiness. The little
soul must needs inflate itself by a great house-shell, and protract
itself by a long retinue of servants. ’Tis almost too pathetic a
meekness, this humility of the Magnificent Ones.
Cannot I breathe into you—O Magnificent Ones—a little
proper pride? Ye buy the Past, watching one another in
jealous competition; will no one buy the Future? Why not buy
with your millions an earth renewed and regenerated, a solvent
social order? Why not build a true civilisation on this malarious
marsh, that shall rise like the spires and domes of Venice from
her swamps? Surely that were a dream worthy of Magnificence!
Come, let us build together a State-Galley where the oars shall
be red and gold from blade to handle, and every man shall take
his turn at them, and the fantasies of Art shall adorn the hull of
Righteousness, and Justice and Peace shall no longer be ironic
images carved for the complacency of the top-deck. So shall
there dawn an Ascension Day on which the Doge shall go out
with banners and music, not to marry the sea with a ring, but
to celebrate the nuptials of Earth with Heaven.
Private pomp is surely a questionable thing. Mediæval life
centred round the Cathedral, the Castle, the Palace. And the
masses touched the life at each and all. The Cathedral gave
them their religion, their laws came from the Palace, their protection
from the Castle. Dominating a feudal population, the
towers of law and war uplifted and unified the people. The
lowliest were of this greatness. To-day palaces flaunt themselves,
divorced from moral meaning, magnificence without
significance. The world, as I said, is full of private autocrats,
without duties or dangers: an unhappy consequence of the fall
of feudalism, ere a system as human was ready to replace it.
And to-day the Cathedral is our one feudal relic, reconciling
magnificence with morality: the light streaming through the
rose-window haloes the grey head of the market-woman, and her
prayer equals that of the Magnificent One himself. It is significant
that no villa—whoever the architect—can attain the poetic
quality of the simplest village church. The palace of Moses is
nowhere mentioned, but we read many minute instructions concerning
the Tabernacle and the Temple. In truth, art treasures
are essentially public: the furniture of cathedrals, libraries, law-courts,
market-places, and parks. The owners of collections do
indeed often allow the public to visit them at inconvenient
times, but that anybody should have exclusive rights is an
absurdity. If Art were a form of property like any other, the
owner could destroy it, and the righteous indignation of the
world at the destruction of a Botticelli or a Velasquez would
mark the boundaries of private property. Land comes under
the same canon. Nothing, perhaps, should be owned which
might not be destroyed at will.
In literature and music—which are more spirits than bodies,
and which can be multiplied without loss—monopolies are
unnecessary. If I write a book against Socialism, the world will
applaud, and communistically possess itself thereof after a brief
term. And this legal limitation of copyright which forcibly
wrests epics, operas, and novels from the heirs might be extended
to pictures and statues.
But if the galley of old Venice stimulates my Socialism, the
cinematograph of modern Venice torpifies it again. For be it
known that in Venice there are scores of halls and theatres
devoted to delectable visions at prices to suit the poorest, and
open to ragazzi for a couple of soldi. And in every city of Italy
the fever rages; one performance follows on the heels of another,
and the wretched manipulator of the magic lantern must subsist
on sandwiches while the theatre is clearing and re-filling. Every
unlet dancing-hall or decayed rink or bankrupt building has
blossomed out into a hall of enchantment where even the words
of the play are sometimes given by the cunning juxtaposition of
gramophones. In this way I heard Amletto, or the Prince of
Denmark, its too, too solid flesh melted into a meat extract.
But the most wonderful spectacle of all was soundless, save for
the flowing music. For twenty centesimi the Teatro S. Marco
passed before my eyes an exquisite vision of Le Ore—the hours
in ten “Quadri animati,” from the shiver of light that precedes
the dawn to the last falling of night. In the Sala d’Aurora of
the Castle of Ferrara, Dosso Dossi has depicted Tramonto, Notte,
L’Aurora and Mezzogiorno, but not more poetically than the
modern stage-manager who arranged these living pictures. As
I watched these allegorical groupings of nymphs and fauns by
their stream in the glade, I felt that the old pagan religion still
lingered in the souls that could conceive and enjoy this nature-poetry.
And as I sat here, amid Venetian washerwomen and street
boys, it was further borne in upon me that no State Bureau would
ever have begotten this marvel for the joy and uplifting of the
people, and that in the present imperfection of human nature
individual initiative under the spur of gold or hunger could
alone work these miracles of Socialism. “La propriété c’est
la vol,” said Proudhon, but “vol” in his sense implies a bullish
acceptance of the very conception he is combating. Let us translate
it by “flight.” Property is the impulse of the aeroplane.
Therefore pray do not count my aspiration for a solvent social
order as an adhesion to any cut and dried theory of the State
owning and administering all social resources. For that sort of
Socialism is—like science—bankrupt, even before it begins. It
fails, not merely because it would substitute an external arrangement
for a change of heart—and Socialism will either be a religion
or will not be—but because no external arrangement is possible.
The collective ownership of land and capital is feasible in Juan
Fernandez so long as Robinson Crusoe and Friday continue
exiled from civilisation, but impossible in our world of international
finance, where private ownership extends to countries
which the property holder will never even visit. Unless, therefore,
every country in the world simultaneously adopted Socialism,
there would be an inextricable tangle of Socialism and
Individualism. Not to mention that capital—as every shareholder
knows—means men as much as money. But even in
Juan Fernandez, as soon as it became thickly populated,
Socialism would be unmanageable, because the stock of concentrable
human consciousness is insufficient to arrange a social
order from a central bureau. Omniscience alone would be equal to
the task, not to mention All Goodness and All Wisdom. Despite
the vast loss by friction and absence of organisation, despite
the vast suffering, the struggle for existence is the only agency
capable of fitting the pegs into the holes. Shall the State, for
example, select which man shall write poetry? And still more
vital, which poetry the State Press shall print? We have
already had experience of the State as a selector of Laureates
and a censor of drama, and Milton knew it as a censor of literature.
Our most brilliant Socialists, an they had their way,
would be reduced to pasting pasquinades on the pedestals of
our street statues.
But in a looser connotation, “we are all Socialists now,” if
indeed we ever were anything else. From the day of the first
human grouping for co-operation and common defence, Socialism
has been the rule of life, and the question of how the common
work and the common products are to be apportioned is a mere
question of organised distribution. That we have hitherto left
this cumbrous and infinitely complex problem of distribution to
solve itself by natural selection does not make society less socialistic.
Nor would the discovery of a more excellent way of dividing
up the labour and its results make society more socialistic. For
compared with the assets of civilisation in which we share equally—the
museums, picture galleries, libraries, parks, roads, schools,
life-boat and fire-engine services, armies, navies, light-houses,
weather-bureaus, asylums, hospitals, observatories—the assets in
which we share unequally are relatively unimportant, and without
sacrificing to a machine the zest and stimulus of liberty, and the
fine flavour of individuality, it is a comparatively simple matter to
minimise the waste and suffering produced by the struggle for
existence, and to arrange that talent shall rise to the top, not for
its sake but our own. It is no evil that one man should live in a
palace and another in a cottage; these differences even add to the
colour and joy of life. The evil is solely that any man willing
to work should lack a cottage, or that the cottage should be a
malarious hovel. Levelling up is the only reform necessary, as
it is the only reform possible. For if the gradual consolidation of
railways, land, mines, and a few leading industries in the hands
of the State is not beyond practical politics, this would still be
very far from “Socialism,” and it is vastly amusing to witness
the agony of apprehension with which respectable society looks
forward to the advent of a social order which cannot possibly
materialise, and which menaces us less than the flaming tail of a
comet. Only less amusing is the awe with which society regards
Property as something sacrosanct in quality and immutable in
quantity. Why, even the King’s shilling is as nimble and elusive
as mercury, will buy you mutton to-day and only tripe to-morrow,
and scarcely run to dog-sausage in a siege. Property
is a Proteus, a shadow, a transient and generally embarrassed
phantom. Property merely means a potential call upon human
service—past or future—and if human service is unwilling or
absent, Property shrinks or collapses, like the bag of pearls found
by the thirsting Arab in the desert. Finance—like all other
branches of science—has been treated as though its subject-matter
had absolute existence. But the assets of the world’s
bankers incalculably outrun the world’s power of service, and
Property is merely a promissory note which can only be
redeemed if there is not too great a run upon the labour bank
at which it is presented. Still more elastic is the service that
produces this right to call upon the service of others. A
hundred thousand readers buy this book—instead of borrowing
it—and I am a Crœsus; a hundred, and I am free of income
tax. Motor cars are invented, and my house in Ascot falls to
half its former value because the smart set need no longer stay
overnight during the Ascot week. My unknown aunt remembers
me in her will and I am a thousand pounds the richer. The
Seine rises and my Paris flat is a ruin. I die and my land
dwindles to six feet. Where in this foolish flux is room for
holiness? And why may not society—the only source of values—mould
Property as it will for society’s ends? Why—among
the many vicissitudes with which Property must reckon—should
not social reform count equally with bad harvests, wars of
conquest and Stock Exchange manœuvres?
To say that Property is sacred is to confuse the means with
the end, like the miser who hoards his gold and forgets its uses.
Society is sacred, not Property, and whatever sanctitude or
stability has been attached to Property has been attached
entirely for socialistic purposes; not that the individual may
be enriched, but that he may not lose the spur that drives him
to enrich society. Individual property is merely a by-product
of labour for society. He who demands overmuch for his labour
is under-moralised. The true citizen is anxious to be taxed for
the general good, provided his taxes are used for social service.
He is anxious that some form of distribution of the common
products shall be organised to supplement natural selection and
correct its over-harshness. Experience might prove that interference
with natural selection saps the stamina and initiative
of society more than it benefits the “submerged tenth,” in
which case we should reluctantly return to the present form of
Socialism.
As for land, it is the one thing that I can conceive nationalised
even under our present form of Socialism, nay, which is already
nationalised to the extent that the private owners of British
land may not sell it to Germany or Japan, as they may sell
anything else of theirs. Every new State should doubtless
begin by trying to nationalise its land. I say “trying,” because
it is by no means certain that it would succeed, since so far from
the increment in land values being unearned, it is the very
possibility of earning it that induces the pioneer to suffer peril,
privation and isolation. Were Canada, for example, not to
give away its land, the many adventurers who have flowed in
from the United States would probably have remained at home,
and all this Canadian territory have been still empty. And
once you have made land quasi-private property, it cannot
justly be subjected to any peculiar tax, since colossal as is the
rise of land values in growing towns, the value of land is controlled
by the same factors of luck and judgment as rule all other
property values, and may be depreciated as well as enhanced by
the operation of social forces beyond the owner’s control or
prevision. Wherefore all increments in value—in stocks and
shares, copyrights, patents, &c. &c.—should be treated as potential
matter for taxation equally with the so-called “unearned
increment” on land.
One would imagine from the war cries in our latest political
campaign that Socialism was already upon us, and that the only
refuge from it lay in Tariff Reform. But it is precisely Tariff
Reform which is Socialism; a taxation of the entire community
in the interests of this or that industry. Nor should the entire
community be averse from taxation for any provably good
object; a moralised community would even be always looking
round for fresh methods of self-taxation. Budget Day would be
a national festival, a day of solemn joy, tense with the hope
that new ways would be found of making England the Kingdom
of God. Alas! it is a day of sick anxiety, with a sequel of
farcical unfailingness, in which every section taxed sends a
deputation to show that it is the one section that should have
been left unburdened, while from the bloated gluttons and
swillers at the great hotels arises the cry of “Red ruin and the
breaking-up of laws.” And the poor philanthropist we have
always with us—he who threatens to stop his charity contributions.
As if the abolition of charity was not the very object of
social reform! Every benevolent activity means a sore in the
social system, and charity covers indeed a multitude of our sins.
Strange that these sordid questions of money should so fever
this mighty England of Shakespeare and Milton. Ship-money
cost Charles the First his head, and a petty land tax changes
the House of Peers. Poor humanity, so deluded as to the essential
values of life, so peculiarly demented in all that concerns
Property! But I bid you cast away your fears. I repeat to
you my good tidings of great joy. Socialism is impossible. A
perfect and just distribution of the goods and labours of life—“to
each according to his needs, from each according to his powers”—is
Utopian. Moreover envy, hatred and all uncharitableness
prevent it: stupidity, sloth, selfishness, treachery and tyranny
preclude it. Rejoice, therefore, and let us cry Hosanna!
Nor are these evil qualities confined to the capitalist, they
are found in even uglier forms in the working man, who is
merely a capitalist without means, and through his Trade
Unions talks equally of rights and even less of duties and ideals.
But if Socialism is impossible, and Socialist parties consequently
deficient in constructive potency, they yet perform in
every country a critical and regulative function of the first
importance. Our own Labour members are the only gentlemen
in British politics. To all questions, national or international,
they bring a broad spirit and a quixotic ideal, and while our
Howards and our Percys cower in craven terror of Germany, or
make prudent alliance with Holy Russia, or handle with correlative
despotism India, Ireland or the woman question, our men
from the pits and the factories sit free and fearless, the sole
guardians of England’s ancient glory.
Arrestive was it in an aisle of Santa Croce—the Florentine
Church of the Holy Cross—to come upon a monument to Niccolò
Machiavelli, anathema alike for Catholicism and Protestantism,
the “Old Nick” of the Hudibras rhyme. ’Twas as if Mephisto
had managed not only to slip into the Cathedral, but to
achieve canonisation. But even a devil is not given his due
at the hands of his own countrymen: it was reserved for an
English earl, more than two and a half centuries after
Mephisto’s passing, to provide his works with a splendid setting
and his remains with a massive monument. And so, in the
dim religious light, I pondered over the stately inscription:
“Tanto Nomini nullum par Elogium.”
How, indeed, equate eulogy to so great a name? Machiavelli
was our first modern—the first to exhibit the reign of law in
human affairs, to read history as the play of human forces and
not as the caprice of a cloudy Providence, modified by the stars.
What an epic sweep in the opening sentences of his “History
of Florence”—Gibbon in a nutshell, the whole “Decline and
Fall,” summarised as the economic emigration southward of the
surplus population of the Goths into an Italy weakened by the
removal of the seat of Empire to Constantinople. Vagarious
chance, indeed, he admits, as a complication (to be minimised
by prudence), but Providence is mentioned in “The Prince,”
only to be dropped, and astrology is not even mentioned.
Machiavelli would have agreed that “the fault’s in ourselves, not
in our stars, that we are underlings,” and for those who wished
to prince it, he was prepared to point the conditions of success.
And this indifference to the stars—to quadrangles and hexagons,
sigils, conjunctions, and configurations—is not his least amazing
merit.
Pico della Mirandola had, indeed, refuted astrology before
him, but it was in the interests of that conventional theory of
Providence and free-will which leaves the chaos of history
irreducible to order. Machiavelli not only ignores astrology,
but substitutes causation for the chaos.
’Tis true Comte suggested that astrology was, likewise, an
attempt to reduce to law the chaos of human phenomena, but
the remark is over-ingenious. Where there is no rational
connection between causes and effects there is no science. The
planetary conjuncture one was born under might, indeed, not
impossibly affect temperament or internal destiny, just as the
climate one was born under, but the notion that it could shape
external destiny belongs to the mediæval megalomania.
Galileo’s discovery of new stars must have shaken it, falsifying
as it did all previous horoscopes—indeed, Sir Henry Wotton,
our ambassador to Venice, was more impressed by Galileo’s injuriousness
to astrology than to theology. “For the virtue of
these new planets must needs vary the judicial part, and why
may there not yet be more?” But Machiavelli belongs to the
pre-telescope period; he wrote a whole century before Galileo,
and thirty years ere Copernicus unsettled the ancient heavens
by his Nuremberg treatise. True, even in the twelfth century,
Maimonides had denounced astrology as “a disease, not a
science,” and the great Jew’s letter “to the Men of Marseilles”
had evoked papal applause. But not even Popes could arrest
the disease. A century before Machiavelli was born Petrarch
poured scorn on the astrologers. But the mockeries of this
pioneer of humanism did not save a prince of the Renaissance
like Lodovico from employing an astrologer advisory, under
whose calculations he went from disaster to disaster. There
were even Professors of Astrology at the Universities. Bodin,
the next great political philosopher after Machiavelli, though
half a century later, still dallies with astrology, still coquets
with the theory of a connection between the planetary motions
and the world’s history, while Copernicus he regards as a
fantast unworthy of serious refutation.
Earlier in the sixteenth century Luther had denounced
astrology as “framed by the devil,” and in his Table Talk had
challenged the astrologers to answer him why Esau and Jacob,
who were “born together of one father and one mother, at one
time and under equal planets” were yet “wholly of contrary
natures, kinds and morals.” Nevertheless in the next century,
Milton in “Paradise Regained” makes Satan predict truly to
Jesus on the strength of
                      “What the stars,
Voluminous or single characters,
In their conjunction met,”
give him to spell, and throughout the whole seventeenth
century, as “Guy Mannering” reminds us, nativities continued
to be cast. The child’s horoscope in some parts of Europe
hung side by side with his baptismal certificate. Even to-day
such phrases as “Thank your lucky stars,” conserve a shadow
of the ancient belief, and the sidereal influence survives even
more subtly in the word “consider.” Through such banks of
fog pierces the searchlight of the great Florentine, it turns
its powerful beam even upon Church history. The Princes of
ecclesiastical principalities, he remarks drily, are the only ones
who can possess States and subjects without governing and
defending them, but it would be presumptuous in him to
discuss these matters, as they are under the superintendence
and direction of an Almighty Being, whose dispensations are
beyond our weak understandings. But the Church has likewise
attained temporal power, and here Mephisto may intrude without
blasphemy. Secular triumphs demand secular explanations.
One is reminded of the dialogue on Julius II attributed to
Erasmus. Our Mephisto notes grimly that no prophet has
ever succeeded unless backed by an armed force. Hence the
collapse of “brother Jerome Savonarola when the multitude
ceased to have faith in him.” In short, in the making of
history Might and Right are partners.
Not in the exposition of this commonplace lay Machiavelli’s
offensiveness for his contemporaries. Had he remained the
passionless observer of the pitiful human breed, the explicator
of the tangled threads of history, he would have been acclaimed
as a moralist, unveiling with ruthless hand the hypocrisies of
princes. What changed angel to devil was that instead of
fulminating against the partnership of Might and Right, he found
that only by this firm could history be made. He wrote not
science but art—the ars usurpandi. Not only had the Princes
of the past combined Might with Right, guile with goodness,
but whoso wished now to be a Prince must needs go and do
likewise. The ethics springing from the social relations of
citizen to citizen no longer holds in the relation of ruler to
subjects.
It is true “The Prince” might also be regarded as an elaborate
Swiftian irony—a negative Pulcinellian advice to those about to
usurp—an exposition of Princedom as the service of the devil.
“A New Prince cannot with impunity exercise all the virtues,
because his own self-preservation will often compel him to
violate the laws of charity, religion and humanity.” But this
Swiftian supposition does not tally with the dedication to
Lorenzo de’ Medici and his overt encouragement to the Most
Magnificent to seize the reins. Machiavelli plainly believes in
the sense he alleges hidden by the ancients in the myth of
Chiron the Centaur, who was the educator of rulers because he
had the double qualification of the brute and the man. In high
politics crimes are only crimes when they are blunders. Unsuccessful
cruelty is unpardonable. Wickedness should be pursued
with an economy of means to end: like the causes in Occam’s
canon, crimes should not be multiplied præter necessitatem.
Politics is a sort of bee-keeping, and the master of the hive will
use the instincts and ethics of the little creatures for his own
purposes, his kindness will be as cold-blooded as his cruelty.
Thus, some three and a half centuries before Nietzsche, was
expounded the doctrine of the Superman, the splendid blonde
beast who had passed Jenseits von Gut und Böse. “The
despised virtues of patience and humility have abased the spirits
of men, which Pagan principles exalted.” It is in such precisely
Nietzschean terms that Sir Thomas Browne sums up, albeit
unapplausively, “the judgment of Machiavel.” But as a
treatise on apiculture, “The Prince” is not rigidly scientific.
The Superman, alone upon his dizzy height, Diabolists and
neo-Dionysians as yet unborn to cheer him, has his moments of
human weakness. Before the crimes of Agathocles he falters,
and remarks with delicious gravity, “Still it must not be called
virtue to murder one’s fellow-citizens or to sacrifice one’s friends,
or be insensible to the voice of faith, pity or religion.
These qualities may lead to sovereignty but not to glory.”
And there is a more general apologia in the concession that the
times are out of joint—in the grim Tacitean explanation that
“he who deviates from the common course of practice, and
endeavours to act as duty dictates, necessarily ensures his own
destruction.” Super-morality lapses here into morality.
Moreover, Machiavelli did not himself play the Superman.
He wrote the part—or founded it on Cæsar Borgia—but he did
not act it. The Rubicon ’twixt thought and action he never
crossed. His own morals appear to have been conventionally
excellent. Like Helvetius, who traced virtue to the lowest
roots of self-interest, he was of a rare magnanimity. As a
scientific observer he advises the Tyrant, if he cannot live in the
Republic he has conquered, to destroy it root and branch, but as
a man he bore torture and imprisonment for the cause of liberty.
Indeed, in his later years something of the sæva indignatio of
Swift seems to have possessed his breast. It was Napoleon who
was destined to incarnate the maxims of Machiavelli, though on
a far grander stage than even Cæsar Borgia ever dreamed of: it
was Napoleon who gave the greatest performance of “The
Prince.” And by a hitherto unnoted coincidence Napoleon was
born exactly three centuries after Machiavelli. Exactly three
hundred years (1469-1769) divided the nativities of the Superman
of Letters and the Superman of Action—’tis almost enough
to revive faith in the potency of planetary conjunctures. True,
Nietzsche regards Napoleon as but “half-Superman,” the other
half being beast, but we have seen that the bestial portion is a
necessary factor of the Machiavellian Superman, who is nothing
if not super-dominant. What Nietzsche’s Superman was to be,
Nietzsche did not precisely know, though we may well suspect
that the direction in which he strained his vision for him was
not the horizon but the looking glass. Nietzsche has not even
the credit of inventing the Superman, for when Nietzsche was
six years old, Tennyson published “In Memoriam,” with its
prophetic peroration:
                “A closer link
Between us and the crowning race. . . .
 
No longer half akin to brute,
For all we thought and loved and did,
And hoped, and suffered, is but seed
Of what in them is flower and fruit.”
Tennyson pressed home this idea of the further evolution of
our race in his very last volume, in a poem called “The
Making of Man.”
“Man as yet is being made, and ere the crowning Age of ages,
Shall not æon after æon pass and touch him into shape?”
And again in “The Dawn.”
                    “Ah, what will our children be,
The men of a hundred thousand, a million summers away?”
More self-conscious a disciple of Machiavelli than Napoleon
was our own Thomas Cromwell, who carried “The Prince” as
his political enchiridion, and who within three years of its
publication chopped off Sir Thomas More’s head as coolly as a
knight captures a bishop on a chess-board. If you have to
choose between love and fear, said the Master, then fear is the
stronger weapon. With fear, Thomas the pupil hewed his way
to the great ends he had set himself. Thomas Cromwell’s
application of the system was, however, vitiated by one radical
mistake. By a paradox, worthy of Machiavelli himself—and
repeated in our own day by Bismarck—“the Prince” he worked
for was not himself but his sovereign. Howsoever Thomas Crommay
have appeared the true gerent, the final profit was to
the suzerain, and the axe of despotism which he had forged for
Henry VIII was turned against his own neck. Of his canon
that traitors should be condemned unheard, he was the sole
victim. Possibly he might have triumphed even over the flaw
in his practice, had Anne of Cleves been more personable. It was
essential to his game to queen this pawn, and queen her he did.
But at what a cost! It has been said that if Cleopatra’s nose
had been longer, the world’s history would have been other. Of
the German princess’s nose it may be said that had it been
prettier—or perchance had Holbein flattered it less before it
was seen by the matrimonial agent—Thomas Cromwell would
have continued to rule England, and Europe might have been
spared the Thirty Years’ War. But even Supermen cannot
change the shape of ladies’ noses, and in this surd of a world,
where the best laid plans may “gang agley” over the tilt of a
nostril, what avail your Supermen more than Supermice? The
toasted cheese is but temporary, the end of Napoleon is the
mouse-trap.
The phenomena of history are indeed too multifarious for
consciousness, and the Machiavellian method of treating persons
as things—in defiance of the moral maxim—shatters itself upon
the impossibility of foreseeing all the permutations of the
things. A bad prince is no more secure against assassination
than a good prince. A religious reformer may arise and upset
the snuggest peace. A failure of crops may precipitate rebellion.
A child’s arm may plug up a dam. In brief, lacking the
necessary omniscience, the shrewdest of Supermen is driving in
the dark. The upshot of Napoleon’s career was to make
Germany and mutilate France.
It is through lack of omniscience, too, that we cannot obey
the frequent modern suggestion to breed the Superman—the
Superman, that is, not as the cold-blooded manipulator of man,
but as his moral superior and successor, Tennyson’s Superman,
not Nietzsche’s. We are too abysmally ignorant for evolutionary
eugenics. We breed horses and roses for higher types, but
then we immeasurably transcend horses and roses. Who transcends
us so immeasurably that he should breed us? In breeding
we have a clear vision of our aim—to produce a thornless rose
or a Derby winner. What clear vision has any one of the
Superman? It is impossible to read even Nietzsche without
seeing a spectral swarm of shifting types. Moreover we breed
only for physical qualities. What experience have we of
breeding for moral qualities? And what were all our breedings
compared with Nature’s inexhaustible experimentation, her
thousand million men and women of all shades and psychoses,
her endless blendings and crossings that yield now Nietzsches,
now Isaiahs; yesterday Platos, to-day Darwins and Wagners.
The Superman will come of himself: already man rises as
imperceptibly into him as he fades into the orang-outang.
“This was no man,” said Napoleon, reading the Sermon on the
Mount—an involuntary admission by the Machiavellian of a
finer species of Superman than his own.
And this brings us to the paradox that the defect in Machiavelli’s
system was not in his morals but in his intellect. In the
hive he examined were creatures greater than he, obeying
motives beyond his ken. To him Princes ruled primarily for
their own glory, for the pomp and pride of power. Of the
small but infinitely important class of rulers who assume
mastership only because they have the greatest power to serve,
he has no adequate conception. That there has sometimes
been a Pope who felt himself literally servus servorum Dei
passed his comprehension. This falsifies his treatment of
history, this makes his vision imperfect, this throws his conclusions
out of gear. The verse in St. Matthew, “he that is
greatest among you shall be servant of all the rest,” represents
a more scientific generalisation. As Chapman’s Don Byron
(Act 3, Scene 1) reminds us, in his denunciation of “the schools
first founded in ingenious Italy,” the true
        “Kings are not made by art
But right of nature, nor by treachery propt
But simple virtue.”
But Machiavelli, that crude biologist, treats Moses and Cyrus
as creatures of the same species, would run together the Attilas
and the Buddhas. Hence the hard metallic sheen of his style
as of an old Latin prose-writer; of spiritual iridescence, of
Jewish tenderness, of Christian yearning, of even the Nietzschean
ecstasy there is no trace. It is not astonishing that he should
have turned a scornful ear to Savonarola’s message, dismissed
him as a compound of fraud and cunning. How dramatic is
the picture of Mephisto listening to the preacher of San Marco
that week of the Carnival of 1497! (What a pity “Romola”
does not exploit that episode instead of using Machiavelli as a
mere caustic conversationalist). But though Machiavelli’s flair
for crouching Cæsars was not utterly at fault, though the
Dominican did indeed aspire to be “The Prince” of the Church,
and even the power behind the thrones of the Princes of
Christendom, yet ’twas all ad majorem Dei gloriam and for the
greater confusion of the infidel, and George Eliot has understood
this impersonal egotist infinitely better than his cynical contemporary
understood him. And this intellectual limitation—this
absence of the highest notes from his psychological gamut—must
always keep Machiavelli out of the first rank of writers.
He cannot rise above the notion that power is an end in itself
and that those who can satisfy it “deserve praise rather than
censure.” If the King of France—he tells us—was powerful
enough to invade the kingdom of Naples, then he ought to have
done it. Though Machiavelli could see that the individual’s
crimes “may lead to sovereignty but not to glory,” yet he did
not question the right of a State to absorb or shatter another.
He saw that the world went on
                  “The simple plan
That they should take who have the power,
And they should keep who can,”
and he admitted that the rule was indispensable—if you went
into politics. This was his crime—High Treason against
Idealism. Humanity prefers to be guided by rules which it
disavows. The splendid blonde beasts who practised the maxims
of Machiavelli shuddered at the scribe who merely stated them.
Nowhere probably was disgust with the Florentine writer more
vehement than in Venice, which employed assassins as a principle
of polity. Could that Turkish “Prince” who decreed that
each new monarch of his house must safeguard the dynasty by
massacring his swarm of brothers, or that Persian “Prince”
who invented the principle of blinding them, have seen the
printed “Prince” of Machiavelli, they with their correct Islamic
or Zoroastrian principles would have shared in the universal
opprobrium.
That the world shudders still is shown by the apologetic
attitude of his commentators and even of his panegyrists. Not
one but repudiates his system, charitably traces it to the unhappy
circumstances of his day, to the welter of force and fraud
amid which his lot was cast. Yet are these circumstances
essentially changed? The small urban republics have vanished,
but in their stead are the Great Powers. Cæsar Borgia and
Ezzelino are gone, but we have the Congo Ruler and the Trust
Magnate. “Every country hath its Machiavel,” says Sir
Thomas Browne, and there is no spot on earth where the maxims
of “The Prince” are not in daily operation. The voice may
be the voice of Savonarola, but the hands are the hands of
Machiavelli.
Nay, it is often the voice of Machiavelli even when it sounds
like the voice of Savonarola. For, as Lord Acton subtly
pointed out, Machiavellism lurks in many a seemingly innocent
and even pious proposition. It is perhaps straining his point
to find it in Jeremy Bentham’s “greatest happiness principle,”
but who shall doubt but that it is involved in the popular idea
that “Time tries all,” and that everything happens for the best
in the long run, and that history is, after all, the Will of God?
What are all these nebulous notions but the acceptance of
success—of the brute fact—as the moral standard? Less
obvious than the proposition that “God is on the side of the
biggest battalions,” they are substantially identical with it.
They simply mean that God was on the side of the biggest
battalions. They imply that whichever party triumphed, God
was with that party. So that many even of those who reject
Machiavelli with loathing are found to be unconsciously
Machiavellian.
Hallam in his “Introduction to the Literature of Europe”
palliates the darker features of the Machiavellian teaching by
the nature of the times, yet in his own “Europe during the
Middle Ages,” writing of the rapid decay of Charlemagne’s
Empire under his son Louis, “called by the Italians the Pious,
and by the French the Debonair or Good-natured,” he says
“the fault lay entirely in his heart; and this fault was nothing
but a temper too soft and a conscience too strict. It is not
wonderful that the Empire should have been speedily dissolved.”
And Charlemagne, its peerless founder, is described as having
divorced nine wives, beheaded four thousand Saxons in a single
day, and executed all who ate flesh during Lent!
It is when I hear the words of Church or Press, Parliaments
or Royal Proclamations, that I fall into a rage against language,
and even as Sancho Panza blessed the man who invented sleep,
I curse the man who invented speech. In the beautiful dumb
days the strong rent the weak in sacred simplicity. Now the
strong make pious speeches to show that the eupepsia of the
universe is their appetite’s aim, and the weak must listen to
proofs that they are being eaten for their own good. Happily
the serpent no longer talks, else were his slow slimy deglutition
of the living rabbit accompanied by a sermon. The State has
not only killed Christ but stolen his words. At the Hague the
lion and the lamb lie down together, and the concordial words
flow on like music, till the lamb suggests that the lion should
pare his claws. And the lamb himself—is he anything but a
wolf in sheep’s clothing? Is he not at heart envious of claws,
always feeling his paws for talons of his own?
“And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee,
thou shalt smite them and utterly destroy them: thou shalt
make no covenant with them, nor show mercy unto them.”
Where outside Machiavelli shall you find a clean strong sentence
like this of Moses? The Destroying Angel’s sword shall be
sharp and antiseptic as a surgeon’s knife; he shall leave no
writhing torsoes, no half-sawn limbs and festering wounds littering
the purlieus of life. But this utterance is too strong for
Christian stomachs, it belongs to the fee-fo-fum eye-for-eye period
of the Old Testament: with the New entered the reign of ethereal
mildness, lilies showering from full hands, festal fountains
spouting the milk of human kindness. Well might Wordsworth
cry out:
              “Earth is sick,
And Heaven is weary, of the hollow words
Which States and Kingdoms utter when they talk
    Of truth and justice.”
But even the Old Testament is comparatively sophisticated.
This extinction of the native tribes of Palestine is enjoined, not
on political grounds but on religious. It is not that Palestine,
which offers the most convenient territory for the refugees from
Egypt, happens unfortunately to be densely populated. No,
virtue must be vindicated, not brute force. But one cannot too
much admire that the Biblical historian chose the less nauseous
of the two morals open to him. “Not for thy righteousness, or
for the uprightness of thine heart, dost thou go to possess their
land; but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord thy God
doth drive them out from before thee.” By a remarkable exception
in epics, Israel is the villain, not the hero, of his own story.
But all the same, the story has to be coloured in the interests of
righteousness. His successors in invasion have not been content
to blacken the autochthones, they have brightened themselves.
It is for their own uprightness that the Lord casts out the tribes
before them or sets them to rule over the heathen. The Lord
calls them to spread His word in countries closed to their commerce.
He ordains they should bear the White Man’s burden—the
Black Man’s ivory and gold are indeed no light weight.
Pah! let us talk of politics like Machiavelli or forever hold our
peace.
And yet something can be said for the world’s hypocrisy. It
is the homage which the Relative pays to the Absolute, part of
that yearning of mankind for indefectible ideals, for Luther’s
“pearl of certainty.” Its Right must be Right in all circumstances
under the stars, nay, before the stars were born. Ethics
shall not be a child of conditions; what holds between man and
man, must obtain equally between ruler and ruled, even between
State and State. But what is to be done when ethics demands
one thing and necessity the opposite? Necessity wins of course,
but on condition of not blazoning its victory. The Church, forbidden
to shed blood, exacts an expiation from its indispensable
warriors, or gravely invents the bloodless stake for its heretics,
or with an even more humorous preference of the letter to the
spirit forbids its priests to practise surgery. The negro, enfranchised
by the Quixotic theory of the American constitution, is
disestablished by the Sancho Panzas who miscount his votes.
The Jew, commanded to rid himself of leaven during Passover,
sells his stock of groceries to an accommodating Christian till the
Festival be over. The Christian, to whom money-lending is a sin
against nature, hands over the necessary function to the accursèd
Jew with the sanction of St. Thomas Aquinas, or founds the
Monte di Pietà which Leo X permits to exact a fee on its loans
to cover the cost of its officials. Ethics, like the old astronomy,
complicates itself with the cycles and epicycles of practice, but
the theory of the perfect circle of planetary motion remains
immutable. In Lombardy, in Florence, under the very eye of
the Pope, the industrial system of modern Europe founds itself
on money-lending, but no Encyclical removes the prohibition or
condones the sacrilege, or grants Christian burial to the impenitent
financier. The irresistible force of facts comes into collision
with the immovable body of principles, but the crash is soundless,
and by a delicate instinct Society looks the other way.
The immortal principle is buried silently—not a drum is heard,
not a funeral note. For later generations its deadness is a matter
of course.
Even so mankind founds its social systems upon beautiful
ideals and averts its eyes from the rotten places of the fabric.
It will concede almost anything to practice, if practice will only
remain under the rose. This Social Conspiracy is sub-conscious.
In war or in religion, in sex or even the smaller animal functions,
it works towards a harmony of seeming, an artistic selection of
the beautiful or the perfect with rejection of the ugly or the
jarring. Is not this indeed our highest art, this art of civilisation,
which, out of the raw stuff we are, fashions us into the
figures of an heroic and poetic masque? Costumed in the skins
of our fellow beasts or in the spoils of our vegetable contemporaries,
our dames pranked in the web of a worm, we ruffle it in
drawing-rooms as gods and spirits, no terrestrial weakness
bewrayed. Our true superiority to the brutes is that we are
artists, and they are naturals. Man will not be a creature of
Nature, as Coleridge noted. All the world’s a stage and all the
men and women players, or—to say it in Greek—hypocrites. It
is for bad manners that Machiavelli has been boycotted.
It was with a thrill that I came upon a holograph of Lucrezia
Borgia in the library of the University of Ferrara. I had
already seen in a little glass case at Milan, in the Ambrosian
library, a lock of her notorious yellow hair, and this wishy-washy
tress, so below the flamboyance of its fame, should have
prepared me for the Ferrara relic. For the document was—of
all things in the world—a washing list! The lurid lady—the
heroine of Donizetti’s opera, the Medea of Victor Hugo’s
drama—checked, perhaps mended, her household linen! It has
been sufficiently washed in public since her day. But this list
alone should serve to cleanse her character. Indeed Pope
Alexander’s daughter does not lack modern whitewashers—what
ancient disrepute is safe from them? Roscoe, Gilbert and
Gregorovius defend her, and even in her lifetime she had her
circle of court laureates that included Ariosto himself. Her
platonic friendship with Cardinal Bembo is rather in her
favour. The copiously grey-bearded ecclesiast in cap and robe,
whose portrait may be seen at Florence in the corridor between
the Pitti and the Uffizi, does not look like a man who would
consort with the legendary Lucrezia. Yet even a man of
letters of Bembo’s status is liable to colour-blindness when the
Scarlet Woman is a reigning duchess. Bembo, we know, was
afraid to read the Epistles of St. Paul, for fear of contaminating
his Latin; we are less certain that any fear of contaminating
his character would keep him from reading the epistles of
Lucrezia. But it seems fairest to accept the view that once
freed by her third marriage from the vicious influences of the
Vatican and the company of the Pope’s concubines, she became
rangée, steadying herself into an admirable if pleasure-loving
consort of the ruler of Ferrara! Nevertheless even in Ferrara
rumour connected her with the murder of the poet Ercole
Strozzi, and the guides used to count among their perquisites the
blood-flecked wall of the Palace in which, by way of revenge for
her extrusion from a respectable Venetian ball-room, she poisoned
off at a supper-party eighteen noble Venetian youths, including
a natural son of her own whom she poignarded in the frenzy of
the discovery.
And Addington Symonds, even after the huge monograph of
Gregorovius in her favour, can only exchange the idea of “a
potent and malignant witch” for “a feeble woman soiled with
sensual foulness from the cradle,” a woman who could look on
complaisantly at orgies devised for her amusement, applauding
even when Cesare chivied prisoners to death with arrows.
But it was reserved for the latest biographer of the Borgias
(Frederick Baron Corvo) to write of her: “She was now the
wife of royalty, with a near prospect of a throne, worshipped by
the poor for her boundless and sympathetic charity, by the
learned for her intelligence, by her kin for her loving loyalty, by
her husband for her perfect wifehood and motherhood, by all
for her transcendent beauty and her spotless name. Why it
has pleased modern writers and painters to depict this pearl
among women as a ‘poison-bearing mænad,’ a ‘veneficous
Bacchante’ stained with revolting and unnatural turpitude, is
one of those riddles to which there is no key.” As for there
being no key to it, that is nonsense, for naturally Lucrezia
Borgia would share in the opprobrium due to the pravity of
Cesare Borgia and Pope Alexander VI, and Corvo himself
claims that Gregorovius proves that these calumnious inventions
came from the poisoned pens of her father’s enemies. This judgment
of a reckless writer may however be discounted, for Corvo
throughout defends that papal Antichrist, Lucrezia’s father,
in a spirit which Machiavelli, to whom “virtù” and “magnanimità”
meant efficiency whether for good or evil, could not
possibly better. And he gaily announces in his preface that he
does not write to whitewash the House of Borgia, “his present
opinion being that all men are too vile for words to tell.” In
such a darkness, in which all cats are grey, Lucrezia Borgia
might well seem as white as a blue-eyed Persian. But the
paradox remains that Corvo may not impossibly be right. As,
but for superhuman strainings, Dreyfus might have gone down
to history as a traitor to France, so may the Borgian Lucrezia
have been as blameless as the Tarquinian to whom indeed
Ariosto boldly compares her. The woman who protected the
Jews during a famine, provided poor girls with dowries, passed
evenings over her embroidery frame and held the esteem of the
greatest poet and the greatest stylist of her day, may really have
lived up to that washing list. Chose jugée is never absolutely
true in history, and there is no trial but is liable to revision.
Even the saints are not safe; the devil’s advocate may always
appeal. Sir Philip Sidney himself has been sadly toned down
in his latest biography, and per contra it may well be that
Lucrezia Borgia has innocently shared in the blackness of the
Borgias. But how shall we ever know? How is it possible—especially
considering the public and private conspiracy of
falsification and suppression—to uncover the truth even about
our contemporaries? Our very housemates elude us. The
simplest village happening is recounted by the onlookers in a
dozen different ways; an historic episode varies according to the
politics of the recording newspaper. Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John recount their great story, each after his own fashion,
so that even “gospel truth” is no synonym for objective veracity.
Letters are taken as invaluable evidence in past history, yet
every letter involves a personal relation between the writer and
the receiver, is written in what the logicians in a narrower sense
call “the universe of discourse,” so that words written to one
man differ from the same words written to another man, and
still more from the same words written to a woman. Facetiousness,
exaggeration, under-statement, pet-words, words in special
meanings, are the note of intimate intercourse. ’Tis a cipher to
which nobody else has the key, and which can never be read by
the chronicler. “Our virtuous and popular Gloster” might
mean “our vicious and universally odious Gloster.” How shall
the peering student of musty records behold the wink in the
long-vanished eye of the writer, the smile on the skull of the
reader? A frigid note may veil a burning love; a tropic outburst
disguise a dying passion. Who has the clue to these
things? And in the literature of an age the things that
are understood are exactly the things that are not written
down, and thus the things that are written down are the
things that are not understood. What would we not give
for a little realistic description of houses, clothes and furniture
in the Bible! But such information only drifts into the text
indirectly and by accident. Official documents are the bed-rock
of history, yet even such formal things as birth-certificates are
unreliable, for did not the wife of my dearest friend momentarily
forget where her own baby was born? Suppose Peggy grows
up a celebrity, an Academician or even a Prime Minister, what
is to prevent her birth-plaque being affixed to the wrong
house?
Once, and once only, did I strive to penetrate to the sources
of history—it was the life of Spinoza—and I found to my amaze
that the traditional detail of his doings and habits rested on
little more solid than the mistranslated scribblings of a
Lutheran pastor who had occupied his lodging a generation
after his death. And once in my life did I examine State
papers. It was in the Archives of Venice; and as I wandered
through the two hundred and ninety-eight rooms of the
Recording Angel—though I did not verify the statement that
there are fourteen million documents—I saw enough chronicles
and certificates, enough Orators’ letters in cypher from every
court in Europe (with inter-bound Italian translations) to keep
in life-long occupation a staff of Methuselahs. And this for
only one town, or, if you will, for one empire! Who is it that
has the patience to sift this mammoth dust-heap, or who, having
the patience, is likely to have the insight to interpret, or the
genius to embody its essence? How shall we know which
ambassador lied abroad for his country’s good, and which for his
own? How shall we abstract the personal equation from their
reports? How allow for their individual prejudices, jealousies,
stupidities, rancours, mal-observations and dishonesties?
As the wise Faust pointed out, History is a subjective
illusion.
“Mein Freund, die Zeiten der Vergangenheit
 Sind uns ein Buch mit sieben Siegeln;
 Was ihr den Geist der Zeiten heisst,
 Das ist im Grund der Herren eigner Geist
 In dem die Zeiten sich bespiegeln.”
Or as honest Burckhardt puts it more prosaically in his preface
to his “Renaissance in Italy”: “In the wide ocean upon which
we venture, the possible ways and directions are many; and the
same studies which have served for this work might easily, in
other hands, not only receive a wholly different treatment and
application, but lead also to essentially different conclusions.”
This would be the case even were our information on the past
complete. The reduction of this wilderness of material to
ordered statement and judgment would permit innumerable
ways of seeing and summarising. But consisting as our knowledge
does for the most part of mere ruins and shadows, or
worse, of substantial falsities, such infinite perspectives of misreading
are opened up that the bulk of written history can be
only an artistic manipulation of hypotheses. What wonder if
the original research and original insight of successive historians
is constantly changing the colours and perspectives? Read
Pope Gregory’s letter to the German princes describing the
humiliation of Henry IV, and judge for yourself whether the
famous story of the three days’ penance can really be built up
out of “utpote discalciatus et laneis indutus,” &c. or whether it
should be blotted out from the history-books as some modern
writers demand. Is there, indeed, any episode to which we can
pin a final faith? Has history bequeathed us anything on
which the duty to truth is not so large as almost to swallow
up the legacy? Popular wisdom in insisting that “Queen
Anne is dead” selects the only sort of historic affirmation which