# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2013
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    James Slough Zerbe, Motors
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/42369/42369-h/42369-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

    Every Boy's Mechanical Library
By J. S. ZERBE, M.E.
Price, per volume, 60 cents, Net. Postage extra.
AUTOMOBILES
This is a subject in which every boy is interested. While few
mechanics have the opportunity to actually build an automobile,
it is the knowledge which he must acquire about every particular
device used, that enables him to repair and put such machines in
order. The aim of this book is to make the boy acquainted with
each element, so that he may understand why it is made in that
special way, and what the advantages and disadvantages are of
the different types. To that end each structure is shown in
detail as much as possible, and the parts separated so as to
give a clear insight of the different functions, all of which are
explained by original drawings specially prepared to aid the reader.
MOTORS
To the boy who wants to know the theory and the practical
working of the different kinds of motors, told in language which
he can understand, and illustrated with clear and explicit drawings,
this volume will be appreciated. It sets forth the groundwork
on which power is based, and includes steam generators, and
engines, as well as wind and water motors, and thoroughly describes
the Internal Combustion Engine. It has special chapters
on Carbureters, Ignition, and Electrical systems used, and particularly
points out the parts and fittings required with all devices
needed in enginery. It explains the value of compounding,
condensing, pre-heating and expansion, together with the methods
used to calculate and transmit power. Numerous original illustrations.
AEROPLANES
This work is not intended to set forth the exploits of aviators
nor to give a history of the Art. It is a book of instructions intended
to point out the theories of flying, as given by the pioneers,
the practical application of power to the various flying structures;
how they are built; the different methods of controlling them;
the advantages and disadvantages of the types now in use; and
suggestions as to the directions in which improvements are required.
It distinctly points out wherein mechanical flight differs
from bird flight, and what are the relations of shape, form, size
and weight. It treats of kites, gliders and model aeroplanes,
and has an interesting chapter on the aeroplane and its uses in
the great war. All the illustrations have been specially prepared
for the work.

CUPPLES & LEON CO., Publishers, NEW YORK
Every Boy's Mechanical Library
MOTORS

BY
J. S. ZERBE, M.E.

Author of
Aeroplanes—Automobiles

ILLUSTRATED

NEW YORK
CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY
Copyright, 1915, by
CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY
CONTENTS
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
[1]
INTRODUCTORY
The motor is the great dominating factor in the
world of industry. Every wheel and spindle;
every shaft and loom, and every piece of mechanism
which has motion, derives it from some sort
of motor.
The term motor has a wider significance than
any other word. A steam engine is a motor, and
so, also, is a dynamo, a water wheel or a wind
mill.
It would be just as descriptive to call a wind
mill a wind motor, or a steam engine a steam
motor, as to adhere to the old terms; and, on the
other hand, since it would be out of place to call a
dynamo or a wind mill an engine, the word motor
seems best adapted to express the meaning of
every type of mechanism which transforms energy
into motion.
In considering the subject I shall proceed on
the theory that the boy knows nothing whatsoever
of the subject, nor the terms used to designate the
various phases, subjects and elements. It must
be elementary in its character, and wholly devoid
of technical terms or sentences.
[2]
While it is necessary to give information in a
book of this character, on the methods for figuring
out power, it must be done without resorting to
the formulas usually employed in engineering
works, as they are of such a nature that the boy
must have some knowledge of the higher mathematics
to follow out the calculations employed.
Indeed, every phase should be brought within
the mental view of the boy, and to do this may
occasionally necessitate what might appear to be
long drawn out explanations, all of which, it is
hoped, will be the means of more clearly presenting
the subject.
The opening chapters, which treat of the fundamentals,
will be as nearly complete as possible,
and thus lay a foundation for the work we shall be
called upon to perform, when we treat of the structures
of the different parts and devices in the various
types of motors.
The object is to explain power in its various
phases, how derived, and the manner in which advantage
is taken of the elements, and substances
with which we are brought into contact. The
reasons for each step are plainly set forth with
the view of teaching the boy what power means,
rather than to instruct him how to make some
particular part of the machinery.
The Inquisitive Trait.—My experience has impressed
[Pg 3]
me with the universality of one trait in
boys, namely, that of inquisitiveness. Put a machine
before a boy and allow him to dissect it, and
his curiosity will prompt him to question the motive
for the particular construction of each part
of its make-up.
The Reasons for Doing Things.—He is interested
in knowing the reason why. Every boy has
the spirit of the true investigator,—that quality
which seeks to go behind or delve down deeply.
This is a natural instinct.
The Mystery of Mechanism.—If this taste is
gratified, and he thereby learns the mystery of
the machine, what a wonderful world is opened
to him! The value of the lesson will depend, in
a large measure, on the things which he has found
out for himself. It is that which counts, because
he never forgets that which he has dug out and
discovered.
Curiosity Which Prompts Investigation.—I recall
a farmer's boy whose curiosity led him to investigate
the binding mechanism of a reaper. It
was a marvel to him, as it has been to many
others. He studied it day after day, and finally,
unaided mastered the art. That was something
which could not be taken away from him.
It was a pleasure to hear him explain its operation
to a group of boys, and men, too, in which he
[4]
used the knot itself to explain how the various
fingers and levers coöperated to perform their
functions. It was an open book to him, but there
was not one in the group of listeners who could
repeat the explanation.
The Sum of Knowledge.—It is the self-taught
boy who becomes the expert. The great inventors
did not depend on explanations. A book of this
character has a field of usefulness if it merely sets
forth, as far as possible, the sum of useful knowledge
which has been gained by others, so as to
enable the boy to go forward from that point, and
thus gain immensely in time.
There is so much that has been developed in the
past, with reference to the properties of matter,
or concerning the utility of movements, and facts
in the realm of weights, measures, and values of
elements which he must deal with, that, as he
studies the mechanical problems, the book becomes
a sort of cyclopedia, more than a work designed
to guide him in the building of special engines or
motors.

The Author.
[5]
MOTORS
CHAPTER I
MOTORS AND MOTIVE POWER
What makes the wheels turn round? This simple
question is asked over and over again. To
reply means pages of answers and volumes of explanations.
The Water Fall.—Go with me to the little
stream I have in mind, and stand on the crest of
the hill where we can see the water pouring down
over the falls, and watch it whirling away over
the rocks below.
The world was very, very old, before man
thought of using the water of the falls, or the
rushing stream below, to grind his corn or to render
him other service.
Water Moves in One Direction Only.—What
the original man saw was a body of water moving
in one direction only. When he wanted to grind
corn he put it in the hollow of a rock, and then
beat it with a stone, which he raised by hand at
[6]
each stroke. In doing so two motions were required
in opposite directions, and it took thousands
of years for him to learn that the water
rushing along in one direction, could be made to
move the stone, or the pestle of his primitive
grinding mill, in two directions.
It took him thousands of years more to learn
another thing, namely, that the water could be
made to turn the stone round, or rotate it, and thus
cause one stone, when turning on another, to
crush and grind the grain between them.
Now, as we go along with the unfolding of the
great question of motors, we must learn something
of the terms which are employed, to designate the
different things we shall deal with, and we ought
to have some understanding of the sources of
power.
What Is Energy?—The running, as well as the
falling water represent energy. This is something
which is in the thing, the element, or the
substance itself. It does not come from without.
It is not imparted to it by anything.
Stored or Potential Energy.—At the top of
the falls, look at that immense rock. It has been
there for centuries. It, also, has energy. There
is stored within it a tremendous power. You
smile! Yes, the power has been there for ages,
and now by a slight push it is sent crashing down
[7]
the precipice. The power developed by that fall
was thousands of times greater than the push
which dislodged it.
But, you say, the push against the stone represented
an external force, and such being the
case, why do you say that power is within the
thing itself? The answer is, that not one iota
of the power required to push the stone off its
seat was added to the power of the stone when it
fell. Furthermore, the power required to dislodge
the stone came from within me, and not from
any outside source.
Here we have two different forms of energy,
but both represent a moving force. The power
derived from them is the same.
Kinetic Energy.—The energy of the falling
water or stone is called Kinetic energy. In both
cases the power developed came from within
themselves and not from any exterior source.
The difference between Potential and Kinetic
Energy is therefore that Potential Energy represents
the capacity to do work, while Kinetic
Energy is the actual performance of work.
Friction.—In every form of energy there is always
something to detract from it or take away a
portion of its full force, called friction. When a
shaft turns, it rubs against the bearings, and more
or less power is absorbed.
[8]
When a wheel travels over the ground friction
is ever present. The dislodging of the stone required
ten pounds of energy, but a thousand
pounds was developed by the fall. The water
rushing along its rocky bed has friction all along
its path.
Resistance.—This friction is a resistance to the
movement of a body, and is ever present. It is
necessary to go back and examine the reason for
this. As long as the stone was poised at the top
of the precipice it had latent or potential energy,
which might be termed power at rest. When it
fell it had power in motion. In both cases gravity
acted upon the stone, and in like manner on
the water pouring over the falls.
Inertia.—Inertia or momentum is inherent in
all things and represents the resistance of any
body or matter, to change its condition of rest or
standing still into motion, and is then called
Inertia of Rest, or the resistance it offers to increase
or decrease its speed when moving, and is
then called Inertia of Motion.
Inertia or momentum is composed by the weight
of the body and its speed and is measured by multiplying
its weight by its speed.
The law is, that when a body is at rest it will
remain at rest eternally, and when in motion it
will continue in motion forever, unless acted on
[9]
by some external force or resistance. An object
lying on the ground has the frictional resistance
of the earth to prevent its moving. When the
object is flying through space it meets the air and
has also the downward pull of gravity, which
seek to bring it to rest.
These resisting forces are less in water, and
still less in gases, and there is, therefore, a state
of mobility in them which is not found in solids.
Internal and External Resistance.—All
bodies are subject to internal, as well as external
resistance. The stone on the cliff resisted the
movement to push it over. Weight was the resisting
internal force, but when the stone was
moving through the air, the friction with the air
created external resistance.
Energy Indestructible.—There is another
thing which should be understood, and that is the
absolute indestructibility of energy. Matter may
be changed in form, or in the direction of its motion,
by the change of kinetic into potential energy,
or vice versa, but the sum total of the energy
in the world is unalterable or constant.
The tremendous power developed by the stone
when it plunged through space and struck the
rocks below, developed a heat at its impact. Thus
the moving force which was a motion in one direction
was converted into another form of energy,
[10]
heat. The expansion of the material exposed to
the heat also represented energy.
When powder explodes and absolutely changes
the form of the substance, its volume of expansion,
if it should be retained within a vessel, would perform
a certain amount of work, and the energy
is thus transferred from one form to another
without ceasing.
Wind Power.—Primitive man also saw and felt
the winds. He noted its tremendous power, but
he could not see how a force moving in one direction
only could be utilized by him.
Rectilinear Motion.—This movement of the
wind in one direction, like the water flowing along
the bed of the river, is called rectilinear motion.
It required invention to convert rectilinear into
circular motion.
Oscillating Motion.—When he threshed his
grain and winnowed it by shaking it to and fro, to
rid it of the chaff, the idea of using the wind to
produce an oscillating motion did not occur to
him. After circular motion was produced, the
crank was formed and thus the oscillating movement
was brought about.
Movements in Nature.—All movements in nature
are simple ones, of which the following are
illustrations:
[11]
1. Rectilinear, which, as stated, means in a
straight line.
2. Circular, like the motion of the earth on its
axis, once every twenty-four hours.
3. Oscillatory, like a to and fro movement,
the swaying branches of trees, or the swinging of
a pendulum.
How Man Utilizes the Various Movements.—What
man has done is to utilize the great natural
forces in nature in such a way as to produce these
movements at will, in either direction, with
greater or less speed, at regular or irregular intervals,
and at such amplitudes as are required
to perform the necessary work.
Kinds of Potential Energy.—Now, materials
have within themselves potential energy of various
kinds. Thus, powder, if ignited, will burn,
and in burning will expand, or explode, as we term
it. This is true also of oils and gases. The expansion
pressure produced from such substances
depends on the speed at which they will burn, and
in so confining the burning substances that a
great pressure is produced.
The Power in Heat.—The pressure of all such
substances against the confining medium depends
on heat. Any gas which has 523 degrees of heat
imparted to it will expand double its volume. If
[12]
one cubic inch of water is converted into steam the
latter will occupy one cubic foot of space under
atmospheric pressure,—that is, it will expand over
1700 times.
Energy in Steam.—If the steam thus generated
is now subjected to 523 degrees of heat additional,
it will occupy over 3400 cubic inches of
space. It will thus be seen why steam, gas, and
gasoline engines are called heat engines, or heat
motors.
Energy From the Sun.—Many attempts have
been made to utilize the heat of the sun, to turn
machinery, but the difficulty has been to secure
sufficient heat, on the one hand, and on the other
to properly cool down the heated gases, so that the
various liquid and solid fuels are required to
make the heat transformations.
Power From Water.—In the use of water two
forms are available, one where the water is moving
along or falling in a constant open stream;
and the other where the flowing water is confined
and where its flow can be regulated and controlled.
The latter is more available for two
reasons:
First: Economy in the use of water.
Second: Ability to control the speed or movement
of the motor.
With running or falling streams a large surface
[13]
is required, and the wheels turn slowly. Two well-recognized
forms of wheels have been employed,
one called the undershot, or breast wheel, shown
in Fig. 1, and the other the overshot, illustrated in
Fig. 2.
In both types it is difficult to so arrange them
as to shut off the power or water pressure when
required, or to regulate the speed.
The Turbine.—Wheels which depend on the
controllable pressure of the water are of the turbine
type. The word is derived from the Latin
word turbo, meaning to whirl, like a top. This is a
[14]
type of wheel mounted on the lower end of a vertical
or horizontal shaft, within, or at the bottom,
of a penstock. The perimeter of the wheel has
blades, and the whole is enclosed within a drum,
so that water from the penstock will rush through
the tangentially-formed conduit into the drum,
and strike the blades of the wheel.
A column of water one inch square and twenty-eight
inches high weighs one pound,—or, to express
it in another way, the pressure at the bottom
[15]
of such a column is one pound, and it is a
pound for each additional 28 inches.
If there should be a head or height of water
column of seven feet, the pressure on each square
inch of water at the bottom of the penstock would
be three pounds to the square inch. Assuming
the opening or duct leading to the wheel blades
should be 12 × 12 inches, and also the blades be
12 × 12 inches, the area would be equal to 144
square inches, and this multiplied by three pounds
would equal 432 pounds pressure against the
blades.
Calculating Power of a Turbine Wheel.—The
power of such a wheel depends principally on two
things. First, the arrangement of the blades with
reference to the inflowing water; and, second, the
discharge port, or ability of the water to free itself
from the wheel casing.
Let us assume that the diameter of the wheel at
the center of the blades is two feet, which would,
roughly estimating, give a circumference of six
feet, or a travel of each particular blade that distance
at each turn of the wheel.
If the wheel turns one hundred times a minute,
and this is multiplied by the circumference of the
wheel (six feet), the result is 600 feet. This,
again, multiplied by 432 pounds (which represents
the pressure of the water on the entire discharge
[16]
opening), and we have a product of 259,200, which
represents foot pounds.
This means the same work as if 259,200 pounds
would have been lifted through a space of one
foot in one minute of time. To ascertain how
much power has been developed we must know
how many foot pounds there are in a horse power.
Horse Power.—It is determined in this way:
any force which is capable of raising 550 pounds
one foot in one second of time, is developing one
horse power. A man might have sufficient
strength to raise such a weight once, twice, or a
dozen times in succession, but if he should try
to do it sixty times a minute he would find it a
trying, if not impossible task.
Foot Pounds.—If he should be able to lift 550
pounds sixty times within a minute, he would have
lifted 33,000 pounds one foot in one minute of
time (550 × 60), and thus have developed one
horse power.
As the water wheel, in our calculations above,
raised 259,200 pounds in that period of time, this
figure divided by 33,000 shows that a little more
than 73/4 horse power was developed, assuming,
of course, that we have not taken into account any
waste, or loss by friction, or otherwise.
This method of determining one horse power
should be carefully studied. Always keep in mind
[17]
the main factor, 33,000 pounds, and this multiplied
by one foot, the result will be 33,000 foot
pounds,—that is, one horse power.
It would be just the same, however, if it were
possible to raise one pound 550 times in one second,
or one pound 33,000 times within a minute.
Power and Time.—You are thus brought face
to face with another thing which is just as important,
namely, that, in considering power, time, as
well as energy, must be considered. If a man,
by superior strength, could be able to raise 550
pounds once within a second, then skip a few seconds,
take another hold, and again raise it that
distance, he would not be developing one horse
power for a minute, but only for one second while
he lifted the weight. For the whole minute he
would only develop a certain number of foot
pounds, and less than 33,000 foot pounds.
If, within a minute, he succeeded in raising it
one foot for six times, this would be six times 550,
equal to 3,300 foot pounds, or just one-tenth of
one horse power for one minute; so time is just as
important as the amount lifted at each effort.
Gravitation.—Now, let us examine power from
another standpoint. Every attempt which man
makes to produce motion is an effort to overcome
some resistance. In many cases this is "weight
or gravity." While humanity unceasingly antagonizes
[18]
the force of gravity it is constantly utilizing
the laws of gravitation.
Utilizing the Pull of Gravity.—The boy laboriously
drags his sled to the top of the hill
against gravity, and then depends on that force
to carry him down. We have learned to set up
one force in nature against the other. The running
stream; the moving winds; the tides; the expansive
force of all materials under heat, are
brought into play to counteract the great prevailing
agency which seeks to hold everything
down to mother earth.
Utilizing Forces.—The Bible says: Blessed is
he who maketh two blades of grass grow where
one grew before. To do that means the utilization
of forces. Improved machinery is enabling
man to make many blades grow where one grew
before. New methods to force the plow through
the soil; to dig it deeper; to fertilize it; and to
harvest it; all require power.
Pitting Forces Against Each Other.—Man
has discovered how to pit the forces of nature
against each other, and the laws which regulate
them.
Centripetal and Centrifugal Forces.—Gravity,
that action which seeks to draw all matter
toward the center of the earth, is termed centripetal
[19]
force. But as the earth rotates on its axis
another force is exerted which tends to throw substances
outwardly, like dirt flying from the rim
of a wheel. This is called centrifugal force.
Man utilizes this force in many ways, one of
which is illustrated in the engine governor, where
the revolving balls raise the arms on which they
swing, and by that means the engine valve is regulated.
Power Not Created.—In taking up the study
of this subject start with a correct understanding
of the source of all power. It is inherent in all
things. All we can do is to liberate it, or to put
the various materials in such condition, that they
will exert their forces for our uses. (See Page
nine, "Energy Indestructible.")
A ton of coal, when burned, produces a certain
amount of heat, which, if allowed to escape, will
not turn a wheel. But if confined, it expands the
air, or it may convert water into steam which will
turn ponderous machinery. Niagara Falls has
sent its great volume into the chasm for untold
centuries, but it has never been utilized until
within the last twenty years. The energy has
been there, nevertheless; and so it is with every
substance of which we have knowledge.
The successive steps, wherein the experimenter
[20]
and the inventor have greatly improved on the
original inventions, will be detailed as we go along
through the different types of motors.
Developing the Power of Motors.—This development
in the art is a most fascinating study.
It is like the explorer, forcing his way through a
primeval forest. He knows not what is beyond.
Often, like the traveler, he has met serious obstructions,
and has had to deviate from his course,
only to learn that he took the wrong direction and
had to retrace his steps.
The study of motors and motive power is one
which calls for the highest engineering qualities.
In this, as in every other of the mechanical arts,
theory, while it has an important function, occupies
second place.
Experimenting.—The great improvements have
been made by building and testing; the advance
has been step by step. Sometimes a most important
invention will loom up as a striking example
to show how a valuable feature lies hidden and
undeveloped.
An illustration of this may be cited with respect
to the valve of the steam engine. For four hundred
years there was no striking improvement in
the valve. The various types of sliding and rocking
valves were modified and refined until it was
assumed that they typified perfection. At one
[21]
stroke the Corliss valve made such an immense
improvement that the marvel was as much in its
simplicity as in its performance.
The reasons and the explanations will be set
forth in the section which analyzes valve motion.
In this, as in other matters, it shall be our aim to
explain why the different improvements were regarded
as epochs in the production of motors.
[22]
CHAPTER II
THE STEAM GENERATOR
The most widely known and utilized source of
power is the steam engine. Before its discovery
wind and water were the only available means, except
the muscular power of man, horses and other
animals, which was used with the crudest sort of
contrivances.
In primitive days men did not value their time,
so they laboriously performed the work which machinery
now does for us.
The steam engine, like everything else which
man has devised, was a growth, and, singular as
it may seem, the boiler, that vital part of the organism,
was, really, the last to receive due consideration
and improvement.
As the boiler is depended upon to produce the
steam pressure, and since the pressure depends
on the rapid and economical evaporation of water,
the importance of the subject will be understood
in treating of the steam engine.
Water as an Absorbent of Heat.—Water has
the capacity to absorb a greater amount of heat
[23]
than any other substance. A pewter pot, which
melts at 500 degrees, will resist 2000 degrees of
heat if it is filled with water, since the latter
absorbs the heat so rapidly that the temperature
of the metal is kept near the boiling point of
water, which is 212 degrees.
Notwithstanding the great heat-absorbing qualities
of water, a large portion of the heat of the
fuel passes through the flues and escapes from the
stack. This fact has caused inventors to devise
various forms of boilers, the object being to present
as large an area of water as possible to the
heat of the burning fuel. How that was accomplished
we shall try to make plain.
Classification of Boilers.—Numerous types of
boilers have been devised, the object being, in all
cases to evaporate the largest amount of water
with the minimum quantity of fuel. All boilers
may be put under two general heads, namely, those
which contain a large quantity of water, and those
which are intended to carry only a small
charge.
In the first division the boilers are designed to
carry a comparatively small pressure, and in the
latter high pressures are available.
Mode of Applying Heat.—The most important
thing to fully understand is the manner in which
heat is applied to the boiler, and the different
[24]
types which have been adapted to meet this requirement.
The Cylindrical Boiler.—The most primitive
type of boiler is a plain cylindrical shell A, shown
in Fig. 3, in which the furnace B is placed below,
so that the surface of the water in contact with
the fire area is exceedingly limited.
In such a type of boiler it would be impossible
for water to extract more than quarter the heat
of the fuel. Usually it was much less. The next
step was to make what is called a return tubular
type in which the heat of the burning gases is
conveyed to the rear end of the boiler, and then
returned to the front end through tubes.
Fig. 4 shows this construction. The head
of the shell holds the ends of a plurality of tubes,
and the products of combustion pass through the
[25]
conduit, below the boiler to the rear end, and are
conducted upwardly to the tubes. As all the tubes
are surrounded by water, it will absorb a large
amount of the heat as the gases move through,
and before passing out of the stack.
The Cornish Boiler.—One of the most important
inventions in the generation of steam was the
Cornish boiler, which for many years was the recognized
type for marine purposes. It had the
advantage that a large amount of water could be
carried and be subjected to heat at all times.
[26]
Aside from that it sought to avoid the great loss
due to radiation.
It will be seen from an examination of Fig. 5
that the shell is made very large, and its length
does not exceed its diametrical measurement.
Two, and sometimes three, fire tubes are placed
within the shell, these tubes being secured to the
heads. Surrounding these fire tubes, are numerous
small tubes, through which the products of
combustion pass after leaving the rear ends of the
fire tubes.
In these boilers the tubes are the combustion
chambers, and are provided with a grating for
receiving the coal, and the rear ends of the tubes
are provided with bridge walls, to arrest, in a
measure, the free exit of the heated gases.
These boilers would be very efficient, if they
could be made of sufficient length to permit the
water to absorb the heat of the fuel, but it will
be seen that it would be difficult to make them of
very great length. If made too small diametrically
the diameter of the fire boxes would be reduced
to such an extent that there would not be
sufficient grate surface.
It is obvious, however, that this form of boiler
adds greatly to the area of the water surface
contact, and in that particular is a great improvement.
[27]
The Water Tube Boiler.—In the early days of
the development of boilers, the universal practice
was to have the products of combustion pass
through the flues or the tubes. But quick generation
of steam, and high pressures, necessitated a
new type. This was accomplished by connecting
an upper, or steam drum, with a lower, or water
drum, by a plurality of small tubes, and causing
the burning fuel to surround these tubes, so that
the water, in passing upwardly, would thus be
subjected to the action of the fuel.
[28]
This form of boiler had two distinct advantages.
First, an immense surface of water could be provided
for; and, second, the water and steam drums
could be made very small, diametrically, and thus
permit of very high pressures.
In Fig. 6, which is designed to show a well
known type of this structure, A A, represent the
water drums and B, the steam drum. The water
drums are separated from each other, so as
to provide for the grate bars C, and each water
drum is connected with the steam drum by a plurality
of tubes D.
It will thus be seen that a fire box, or combustion
chamber, is formed between the two sets of
tubes D, and to retain the heat, or confine it as
closely as possible to the tubes, a jacket E is
placed around the entire structure.
The ends of the water and steam drums are
connected by means of tubes F, shown in side
view, Fig. 7, for the return or downward flow of
the water. The diagrams are made as simple as
possible, to show the principal features only. The
structure illustrated has been modified in many
ways, principally in simplifying the construction,
and in providing means whereby the products of
combustion may be brought into more intimate
contact with the water during its passage through
the structure.
[29]
As heretofore stated, this type of boiler is designed
to carry only a small quantity of water,
so that it is necessary to have practically a constant
inflow of feed water, and to economize in
this respect the exhaust of the steam engine is
used to initially heat up the water, and thus, in
a measure, start the water well on its way to the
evaporation point before it reaches the boiler.
Various Boiler Types.—The different uses have
brought forth many kinds of boilers, in order to
[30]
adapt them for some particular need. It would
be needless to illustrate them, but to show the diversity
of structures, we may refer to some of
them by their characteristics.
Compound Steam-Boiler.—This is a battery of
boilers having their steam and water spaces connected,
and acting together to supply steam to a
heating apparatus or a steam engine. These are
also made by combining two or more boilers and
using them as a feed water heater or a superheater,
for facilitating the production of steam,
or to be used for superheating steam.
The terms feed water heater and super heater
are explained in chapter III.
Locomotive Steam-Boiler.—This is a tubular
boiler which has a contained furnace and ash pit,
and in which the gases of combustion pass from
the furnace directly into the horizontal interior
tubes, and after passing through the tubes are
conveyed directly into the smoke box at the opposite
ends of the tubes. The name is derived from
the use of such boilers on locomotive engines, but
it is typical in its application to all boilers having
the construction described, and used for generating
steam.
Vertical Steam-Boiler.—This is a form of construction
in which the shell, or both the shell and
the tubes, are vertical, and the tubes themselves
[31]
may be used to convey the products of combustion,
or serve as the means for conveying water
through them, as in the well known water tube
type.
This form of boiler is frequently used to good
advantage where it is desired to utilize ground
space, and where there is sufficient head room.
Properly constructed, it is economical as a steam
generator.
From the foregoing it will be seen that the
structural features of all boilers are so arranged
as to provide for the exposure of the largest possible
area of water to a heated surface so that the
greatest amount of heat from the fuel may be absorbed.
[32]
CHAPTER III
STEAM ENGINES
The first steam engine was an exceedingly simple
affair. It had neither eccentric, cylinder,
crank, nor valves, and it did not depend upon the
pressure of the steam acting against a piston to
drive it back and forth, because it had no piston.
It is one of the remarkable things in the history
and development of mechanism, that in this day
of perfected steam engines, the inventors of our
time should go back and utilize the principles employed
in the first recorded steam engine, namely,
the turbine. Instead of pressure exerting a force
against a piston, as in the reciprocating engine,
the steam acted by impacting against a moving
surface, and by obtaining more or less reaction
from air-resistance against a freely discharging
steam jet or jets.
The original engine, so far as we have any
knowledge, had but one moving part, namely, a
vertical tubular stem, to which was attached a
cross or a horizontal tube.
The Original Engine.—Figure 8 is a side view
[33]
of the original engine. The vertical stem A is
pivoted to a frame B, and has a bore C which
leads up to a cross tube D. The ends of the
tube D are bent in opposite directions, as shown
in the horizontal section, Fig. 9.
Steam enters the vertical stem by means of a
pipe, and as it rushes up and out through the lateral
tubes D, it strikes the angles E at the discharge
ends, so that an impulse is given which
drives the ends of the tube in opposite directions.
[34]
As the fluid emerges from the ends of the tubes, it
expands, and on contacting with the air, the latter,
to a certain extent, resists the expansion, and this
reacts on the tube. Thus, both forces, namely,
impact and reaction, serve to give a turning motion
to the turbine.
The Reciprocating Engine.—The invention of
this type of engine is wrapped in mystery. It has
been attributed to several. The English maintain
that it was the invention of the Marquis of Worcester,
who published an account of such an engine
about 1650. The French claim is that Papin
discovered and applied the principle before the
year 1680.
In fact, the first actual working steam engine
was invented and constructed by an Englishman,
Captain Savery, who obtained a patent for it in
1698. This engine was so constructed as to raise
water by the expansion and condensation of
steam, and most engines of early times were devoted
solely to the task of raising water, or were
employed in mines.
Atmospheric Engines.—When we examine them
it is difficult to see how we can designate them as
steam engines. The steam did not do the actual
work, but a vacuum was depended on for the energy
developed by the atmospheric pressure.
A diagram is given, Fig. 10, showing how engines
[35]
of this character were made and operated.
A working beam A was mounted on a standard
B, and one end had a chain C on which was
placed heavy weights D. Near this end was
also attached the upper end of a rod E, which
extended down to a pump.
The other end of the working beam had a chain
F, which supported a piston G working within
a vertically-disposed cylinder H. This cylinder
was located directly above a boiler I, and a pipe
J, with a valve therein, was designed to supply
steam to the lower end of the cylinder.
A water tank K was also mounted at a point
[36]
above the cylinder, and this was supplied with
water from the pump through a pipe L. Another
pipe M from the tank conducted water
from the tank to the bottom of the cylinder.
The operation of the mechanism was as follows:
The steam cock N, in the short pipe J,
was opened to admit steam to the cylinder, below
the piston. The stem of the steam cock also
turned the cock in the water pipe M, so that during
the time the steam was admitted the water
was shut off.
When the steam was admitted so that it filled
the space below the piston, the cock N was
turned to shut off the steam, and in shutting off
the steam, water was also admitted. The injection
of water at once condensed the steam within
the cylinder so a partial vacuum was formed.
It will be remembered that as steam expanded
1700 times, the condensation back into water made
a very rarified area within the cylinder, and the
result was that the piston was drawn down, thus
raising both the weight D and also the pump rod
E. This operation was repeated over and over,
so long as the cock N was turned.
The turning of the stem of this cock was performed
manually,—that is, it had to be done by
hand, and boys were usually employed for doing
this. When, later on, some bright genius discovered
[37]
that the valve could be turned by the machinery
itself, it was regarded as a most wonderful
advance.
The discovery of this useful function has been
attributed to Watt. Of this there is no conclusive
proof. The great addition and improvements
made by Watt, and which so greatly simplified and
perfected the engine, were through the addition
of a separate condenser and air pump, and on
these improvements his fame rests.
From the foregoing it will be seen that the
weight D caused the piston to travel upwardly,
and not the force of the steam, and the suction
produced by the vacuum within the cylinder did
the work of actuating the pump piston, so that it
drew up the water.
The Piston.—From this crude attempt to use
steam came the next step, in which the steam was
actually used to move the piston back and forth
and thus actually do the work. In doing so the
ponderous walking beam was dispensed with, and
while, for a long period the pistons were vertically-placed,
in time a single cylinder was used,
and a crank employed to convert the reciprocating
into a circular motion.
Fig. 11 shows a simple diagram of a steam engine,
so arranged that the operation of the valves
may be readily understood. The cylinder A has
[38]
a steam chest B, which contains therein a slide valve
C to cover the ports at the ends of the
cylinder. This figure shows the crank turning to
the right, and the eccentric D on the engine shaft
is so placed, that while the crank E is turning
past the dead center, from 1 to 2, the slide valve
C is moved to the position shown in Fig. 12,
thereby covering port F and opening port G.
It will be seen that the slide valve is hollowed
within, as at H, and that the exhaust port I leads
from this hollowed portion while the live steam
[39]
from the boiler enters through pipe J and fills
the space K of the chest.
In Fig. 11 live steam has been entering port
F, thus driving the piston to the right. At the
same time the exhaust steam at the right side of
the piston is discharging through the port G and
entering the hollow space within the slide valve.
In Fig. 12 the conditions are reversed, and now
live steam enters port G, and the exhaust passes
out through port F.
When the engine crank reaches the point 3,
which is directly opposite 1, the reverse action
takes place with the slide valve, and it is again
moved to its original position, shown in Fig. 12.
Importance of the Valve.—Every improvement
which has been made in the engine has been
directed to the valve. The importance of this
should be fully understood. As the eccentric is
constantly turning it is a difficult matter to so arrange
the valve as to open or close it at the correct
time, absolutely, and many devices have been
resorted to to accomplish this.
Expanding the Steam.—As all improvements
were in the direction of economizing the use of
steam, it was early appreciated that it would be
a waste to permit the steam to enter the cylinder
during the entire period that the engine traveled
from end to end, so that the valve had to be constructed
[40]
in such a way that while it would cut off
the admission of steam at half or three-quarters
stroke, the exhaust would remain on until the entire
stroke was completed.
Some engines do this with a fair degree of accuracy,
but many of them were too complicated
for general use. In the form of slide valve shown
the pressure of the steam on the upper side, which
is constant at all times, produces a great wearing
action on its seat. This necessitated the designing
of a type of valve which would have a firm
bearing and be steam tight without grinding.
Balanced Valve.—One of the inventions for
this purpose is a valve so balanced by the steam
pressure that but little wear results. This has
been the subject of many patents. Another type
also largely used in engines is known as the oscillating
valve, which is cylindrical or conical in its
structure, and which revolves through less than a
complete revolution in opening and closing the
ports.
Rotary Valve.—The rotary valve, which constantly
turns, is employed where low pressures
are used, but it is not effectual with high pressures.
This is also cylindrical in its structure,
and has one or more ports through it, which coincide
with the ports through the walls of the engine,
as it turns, and thus opens the port for admitting
[41]
live steam and closing the discharge port
at the same time or at a later period in its rotation.
Engine Accessories.—While the steam engine
is merely a device for utilizing the expansive
force of steam, and thus push a cylinder back and
forth, its successful operation, from the standpoint
of economy, depends on a number of things,
which are rarely ever heard of except by users
and engineers.
Many of these devices are understood only by
those who have given the matter thorough study
and application. To the layman, or the ordinary
user, they are, apparently, worth but little consideration.
They are the things, however, which
have more than doubled the value of the steam
engine as a motor.
Efficiency of Engines.—When it is understood
that with all the refinements referred to the
actual efficiency of a steam engine is less than
30 per cent. some idea may be gained of the value
which the various improvements have added to
the motor.
Efficiency refers to the relative amount of power
which is obtained from the burning fuel. For
instance, in burning petroleum about 14,000 heat
units are developed from each pound. If this is
used to evaporate water, and the steam therefrom
[42]
drives an engine, less than 4200 heat units are
actually utilized, the remaining 9800 heat units
being lost in the transformation from the fuel to
power.
The value of considering and providing for
condensation, compression, superheating, re-heating,
compounding, and radiation, and to properly
arrange the clearance spaces, the steam jackets,
the valve adjustments, the sizes of the ports and
passages, and the governor, all form parts of the
knowledge which must be gained and utilized.
How Steam Acts in a Cylinder.—Reference
has been made to the practice of cutting off steam
before the piston has made a full stroke, and permitting
the expansive power of the steam to drive
the piston the rest of the way, needs some explanation.
As stated in a preceding chapter the work done
[43]
is estimated in foot pounds. For the purpose of
more easily comprehending the manner in which
the steam acts, and the value obtained by expansion,
let us take a cylinder, such as is shown in
Fig. 13, and assume that it has a stroke of four
feet. Let the cylinder have a diameter of a little
less than one foot, so that by using steam at fifty
pounds pressure on every square inch of surface,
we shall have a pressure of about 5000 pounds
on the piston with live steam from the boiler.
In the diagram the piston moves forwardly to
the right from 0 to 1, which represents a distance
of one foot, so that the full pressure of the steam
of the boiler, representing 5000 pounds, is exerted
on the piston. At 1 the steam is cut off,
and the piston is now permitted to continue the
stroke through the remaining three feet by the
action of the steam within the cylinder, the expansive
force alone being depended on.
As the pressure of the steam within the cylinder
is now much less and decreases as the piston
moves along, we have taken a theoretical indication
of the combined pressure at each six inch of
the travel of the piston. The result is that we
have the following figures, namely, 4000, 2700,
1750, 1000, 450 and 100. The sum of these figures
is 10,000 pounds.
The piston, in moving from 0 to 1, moved one
[44]
foot, we will say, in one second of time, hence the
work done by the direct boiler pressure was 5000
foot pounds; and since the piston was moved
three feet more by the expansion of the steam
only, after the steam pressure was shut off, the
work done in the three seconds required to move
the piston, was an additional 5000 foot pounds,
making a total of 10,000 foot pounds for four seconds,
150,000 foot pounds per minute, or about 45
horse power.
This movement of the piston to the right, represented
only a half revolution of the crank, and
the same thing occurs when the piston moves
back, to complete the entire revolution.
Indicating the Engine.—We now come to the
important part of engine testing, namely, to ascertain
how much power we have obtained from
the engine. To do this an indicator card must be
[45]
furnished. A card to indicate the pressure, as
we have shown it in the foregoing diagram would
look like Fig. 14.
The essential thing, however, is to learn how
to take a card from a steam engine cylinder, and
we shall attempt to make this plain, by a diagram
of the mechanism so simplified as to be readily understood.
In Fig. 15 we have shown a cylinder A, having
within a piston B, and a steam inlet pipe
C. Above the cylinder is a drum D, mounted on
a vertical axis, and so geared up with the engine
shaft that it makes one complete turn with each
shaft revolution. A sheet of paper E, ruled with
cross lines, is fixed around the drum.
The cylinder A has a small vertical cylinder
[46]
F connected therewith by a pipe A, and in this
cylinder is a piston H, the stem I of which extends
up alongside of the drum, and has a pointed
or pencil J which presses against the paper E.
Now, when the engine is set in motion the drum
turns in unison with the engine shaft, and the
pressure of the steam in the cylinder A, as it
pushes piston B along, also pushes the piston
H upwardly, so that the pencil point J traces a
line on the ruled paper.
It will be understood that a spring is arranged
on the stem I in such a manner that it will always
force the piston H downwardly against the
pressure of the steam.
Mean Efficiency.—We must now use a term
which expresses the thing that is at the bottom
of all calculations in determining how much power
is developed. You will note that the pressure on
the piston during the first foot of its movement
was 10,000 pounds, but that from the point 1, Fig.
13, to the end of the cylinder, the pressure constantly
decreased, so that the pressure was not a
uniform one, but varied.
Suppose we divide the cylinder into six inch
spaces, as shown in Fig. 13, then the pressure of
the steam at the end of each six inches will be the
figures given at bottom of diagram, the sum total
[47]
of which is 30,000, and the figures at the lower side
show that there are eight factors.
The figure 10,000 represents, of course, two six
inch spaces in the first foot of travel.
The result is, that, if we divide the sum total
of the pressures at the eight points by 8, we will
get 3750, as the mean pressure of the steam on
the piston during the full stroke of the piston.
In referring to the foot pounds in a previous
paragraph, it was assumed that the piston moved
along each foot in one second of time. That was
done to simplify the statement concerning the use
of foot pounds, and not to indicate the time that
the piston actually travels.
Calculating Horse Power.—We now have the
first and most important factor in the problem,—that
is, how much pressure is exerted against the
piston at every half revolution of the crank shaft.
The next factor to be determined is the distance
that the piston travels in one minute of time.
This must be calculated in feet. Let us assume
that the engine turns the crank shaft at a speed
of 50 revolutions a minute. As the piston travels
8 feet at each revolution, the total distance
traveled is 400 feet.
If, now, we have a constant pressure of 3750
pounds on the piston, and it moves along at the
[48]
rate of 400 feet per minute, it is obvious that by
multiplying these two together, we will get the
figure which will indicate how many pounds the
steam has lifted in that time.
This figure is found to be 1,500,000, which
means foot pounds, as we have by this means
measured pressure by feet, or pounds lifted at
each foot of the movement of the piston.
As heretofore stated, we must now use the
value of a horse power, so that we may measure
the foot pounds by it. If we had a lot of wheat
in bulk, and we wanted to determine how much
we had, a bushel measure would be used. So with
power. The measure, as we have explained, is
33,000, and 1,500,000 foot pounds should give as
a result a little over 45 horse power.
Condensation.—We now come to the refinements
in engine construction,—that which adds
so greatly to the economy of operation. The first
of these is condensation. The first reciprocating
engine depended on this to do the actual work.
In this age it is depended upon simply as an aid.
The first thing however that the engineer tries
to do is to prevent condensation. This is done
by jacketing the outside of the cylinder with some
material which will prevent radiation of heat, or
protect the steam within from being turned back
[49]
into water by the cool air striking the outside of
the cylinder.
Atmospheric Pressure.—On the other hand,
there is a time when condensation can be made
available. The pressure of air on every square
inch of surface is 143/4 pounds. When a piston
moves along and steam is being exhausted from
the cylinder, it must act against a pressure of
143/4 pounds on every square inch of its surface.
The problem now is to get rid of that back pressure,
and the old type engines give a hint how
it may be done. Why not condense the steam discharged
from the engine cylinder? In doing so a
vacuum is produced on the exhaust side of the
piston, at the same time a pressure is exerted on
its other side.
The Condenser.—Thus the condenser is
brought into existence, as an aid. By jacketing
condensation is prevented; it is fought as an
enemy. It is also utilized as a friend. It is so
with many of the forces of nature, where man
for years vainly fought some principle, only to
find, later on, that a friend is more valuable than
a foe, and to utilize a material agency in nature
is more economical than to fight it.
Pre-heating.—The condenser does two things,
both of which are of great value to the economical
[50]
operation of the engine. For the purpose of rapidly
converting the steam back into water as it
issues from the engine cylinder, water is used.
The steam from the cylinder has a temperature
of 212 degrees and upwards, dependent on its
pressure.
Water, ordinarily, has a temperature of 70 degrees,
or less, so that when the steam strikes a
surface which is cooled down by the water, it is
converted back into liquid form, but at a temperature
less than boiling water. The water thus converted
back from the steam gives up part of its
heat to the water which cools the condenser, and
the water from the condenser, as well as the water
used to cool the condenser, are thus made available
to be fed into the boiler, and thus assist in
again converting it into a steam.
The economy thus lies in helping the coal, or
other fuel, do its work, or, to put it more specifically,
it conserves the heat previously put out by
the coal, and thus saves by using part of the heat
over again.
Superheaters.—Another refinement, and one
which goes to the very essence of a heat motor,
is the method of superheating the steam. This
is a device located between the boiler and the engine,
so that the steam, in its transit from the
boiler to the engine, will be heated up to a high
[51]
degree, and in the doing of which the pressure
may be doubled, or wonderfully increased.
This may be done in an economical manner in
various ways, but the usual practice is to take
advantage of the exhaust gases of the boiler, in
the doing of which none of the heat is taken from
the water in the boiler.
The products of combustion escaping from the
stacks of boilers vary. Sometimes the temperature
will be 800 degrees and over, so that if pipes
are placed within the path of the heated gases,
and the supply steam from the boiler permitted to
pass through them a large amount of heat is imparted
to the steam from a source which is of no
further use to the water being generated in the
boiler.
Compounding.—When reference was made to
the condensation of steam as it issued from the
boiler, no allusion was made to the pressure at
which it emerged. If the cylinder was well jacketed,
so that the amount of condensation in the
cylinder was small, then the pressure would still
be considerable at the exhaust. Or, the steam
might be cut off before the piston had traveled
very far at each stroke, in which case the exhaust
would be very weak.
In practice it has been found to be most
economical to provide a high boiler pressure, and
[52]
also to superheat the steam, but where it is not
superheated, and a comparatively high boiler
pressure is provided, compounding is resorted
to.
To compound steam means to use the exhaust
to drive a piston. In such a case two cylinders
are placed side by side, one, called the high pressure
cylinder, being smaller than the low pressure
cylinder, which takes the exhaust from the high
pressure.
The exhaust from the second, or low pressure
cylinder may then be supplied to a condenser, and
in that case the mechanism would be termed a
compound condensing engine. If a condenser is
not used, then it is simply a compound engine.
Triple and Quadruple Expansion Engines.—Instead
of using two cylinders, three, or four, are
employed, each succeeding cylinder being larger
than the last. As steam expands it loses its pressure,
or, stated in another way, whenever it loses
pressure it increases in volume. For that reason
when steam enters the first cylinder at a pressure
of say 250 pounds, it may exhaust therefrom
into the next cylinder at a pressure of 175
pounds, with a corresponding increase in volume.
To receive this increased volume, without causing
a sensible back pressure on the first cylinder,
the second cylinder must be larger in area than
[53]
the first; in like manner when it issues from the
exhaust of the second cylinder at 125 pounds pressure,
there is again an increase in volume, and so
on.
Examine Fig. 16, which shows a pair of cylinders,
A being the high, and B the low pressure
cylinders, the exhausts of the high pressure being
connected up with the inlets of the low pressure,
as indicated by the pipes, C D.
The diagram does not show the valve operations
in detail, it being sufficient to explain that
when the valve E in the pipe C is closed, the valve
F, at the other end of the cylinders, in the pipe
D, is closed. The same principle is employed in
the triple and quadruple expansion engines,
whereby the force of the steam at each exhaust is
put to work immediately in the next cylinder, until
[54]
it reaches such a low pressure that condensation
is more effective than its pressure.
The diagram, as given, is merely theoretical,
and it shows the following factors:
First: The diameter of each piston.
Second: The area of each piston in square
inches.
Third: The steam pressure in each cylinder.
Fourth: The piston pressure of each cylinder.
It will be seen that an engine so arranged is
able to get substantially the same pressure in
each of the second, third and fourth cylinders,
as in the first (see Fig. 16a), and by condensing
the discharge from the fourth cylinder a most
economical use of steam is provided for.
[55]
The Steam Turbine.—We must now consider
an entirely new use of steam as a motive power.
Heretofore we have been considering steam as a
matter of pressure only, in the development of
power. It has been observed that when the pressure
of steam decreases at the same temperature
it is because it has a greater volume, or a greater
volume results.
When steam issues from the end of a pipe its
velocity depends on its pressure. The higher the
pressure the greater its velocity. The elastic
character of steam is shown by its action when
ejected from the end of a pipe, by the gradually
enlarging area of the discharging column.
In a reciprocating engine the power is derived
from the pressure of the steam; in a turbine the
power results from the impact force of the steam
jet. Such being the case velocity in the movement
of the steam is of first importance.
Pressure and Velocity.—To show the effectiveness
of velocity, as compared with pressure, examine
Fig. 17. A is a pipe discharging steam at
a pressure of 100 pounds. To hold the steam in
[56]
the pipe would require a pressure of 100 pounds
against the disk B, when held at 1, the first position.
Suppose, now, the disk is moved away from the
end of the pipe to position 2. The steam, in issuing
forth, strikes the disk over a larger area, and
in escaping it expands, with the result that its
velocity from 1 to 2 is greater than the movement
of the steam within the pipe that same distance.
The disk is now moved successively to positions
3, 4, 5, and so on. If we had a measuring
device to determine the push against the disk at
the various positions, it would be found that there
is a point at some distance from the end of the
pipe, at which the steam has the greatest striking
force, which might be called the focal point.
A blow pipe exhibits this same phase; the hottest
point is not at the end of the pipe, but at an
area some distance away, called the focal point
of heat.
[57]
The first feature of value, therefore, is to understand
that pressure can be converted into
velocity, and that to get a great impact force,
the steam must be made to strike the hardest and
most effective blow.
When a jet of steam strikes a surface it
is diverted or it glances in a direction opposite
the angle at which it strikes the object. In
directing a jet against the blades of a turbine it
is impossible to make it strike squarely against
the surface.
Let us assume that a wheel A, Fig. 20, has a set
of blades B, and a steam jet is directed against
it by the pipe C. It will be seen that after the
first impact the steam is forced across the blades,
and no further force is transferred to them.
Form of Blades.—The blades are therefore so
curved, that the steam after the first impact cannot
freely pass along the blade, as it does on a
straight blade, but imparts on every element of
the curved-back blade, thereby giving up continually
part of its speed to the blade.
[58]
This is clearly shown in Fig. 21, where the
pipe D ejects the stream of steam against the
concaved blades E. Many modifications have
been made in the shapes of these blades, all designed
to take advantage of this action.
Compounding the Jet.—We may extend the advantages
gained by this form of blades, and diverting
the course of the jet, so that it will be
directed through a series of wheels, each of which
will get the benefit of the moving mass from the
pipes.
Such a structure is shown in Fig. 22, in which
three bladed wheels A, B, C, are caused to rotate,
a set of stationary blades D, E, being placed between
the three moving wheels, but the stationary
[59]
blades are disposed in reverse directions. When
the steam from pipes F, F, impinges against the
blades of the first wheel A, it is directed by the
stationary blade D to the next wheel B, and from
the stationary blade E to the blades of the next
wheel C, thus, in a manner somewhat similar to
the compounding effect of the steam engine,
utilizes the pressure which is not used at the first
impulse.
[60]
CHAPTER IV
FUELS AND COMBUSTION
All fuels must be put into a gaseous state before
they will burn. This is true of coal as well
as of hydro-carbon oils.
Neither coal nor petroleum will burn in its native
state, without the addition of oxygen. This
is absolutely necessary to support combustion.
Burning is caused by the chemical union of oxygen
with such substances as will burn.
This burning process may be slow, and extend
over a period of years, or it may be instantaneous,
in which latter case the expansion of the heated
gases is so great as to cause an explosion. When
a sufficient amount of oxygen has been mixed with
a fuel to permit it to burn, a high temperature is
necessary to cause the immediate burning of the
entire mass.
If such a temperature is not present the course
of combustion is not arrested, but it will, on its
own account, start to oxydize, and eventually be
reduced to the same condition that would take
place if exploded by means of a flame.
[61]
Solid Fuels.—The great fuels in nature are
carbon and hydrogen, carbon being the substance
most widely known and depended upon. Hard
coal, for instance, is composed almost wholly of
carbon; whereas soft coal has a considerable quantity
of hydrogen.
As coal was formed by wood, which, through
long process of time became carbonized, it contains
considerable foreign matter which will not
burn, forming ash.
Liquid Fuels.—The volatile oils, however, have
very little non-combustible matter. Ordinary
petroleum contains about 80 per cent, of carbon,
and from 12 to 15 per cent. of hydrogen, the
residue being foreign matter, all more or less
susceptible of being consumed at high temperatures.
Combustion.—The term combustion, in its general
sense, means the act of burning; but in a
larger and more correct application it refers to
that change which takes place in matter when
oxygen unites with it.
Oxygen is a wonderful element, and will unite
with all known substances, unlike all other elements
in this respect. It may take years for it
to form a complete unity. Thus, wood, in time,
will crumble, or rot, as it is called. This is a
slow process of combustion, brought about without
[62]
applying heat to it, the change taking place
in a gradual way, because oxygen unites with only
a small portion of the wood.
Oxidation.—Iron will rust. This is another instance
of combustion, called oxidation. When
oxygen unites with a substance it may produce an
acid, or an alkali, or a neutral compound. When
wood is burned it produces an ash, and this ash
contains a large amount of potash, or lye, which
is an alkali, or a salt. So when other substances
are burnt the result may be an acid, like sulphur,
or it may be unlike either acid or the alkali.
The unity of oxygen with the food in the body
is another instance of oxidation, which produces
and maintains the heat necessary for existence.
Carbon or hydrogen, as a fuel, are inert without
oxygen, so that in considering the evolution
of a force which is dependent on heat, we should
know something of its nature, thereby enabling
us to utilize it to the best advantage.
The Hydro-carbon Gases.—If petroleum, or
gasoline, should be put into the form of a gas,
and as such be confined in a receiver, without adding
any oxygen, it would be impossible to ignite it.
The character of the material is such that it
would instantaneously extinguish any flame.
Now, to make a burning mixture, at least three
[63]
parts of oxygen must be mixed with one of the
hydro-carbon, before it is combustible.
Oxygen and Atmosphere.—The atmosphere is
not oxygen. Only one-fifth of common air is
oxygen, the residue being, principally, nitrogen,
which is not a fuel. To produce the proper aëration,
therefore, at least fifteen parts of air must
be mixed with one part of hydro-carbon gas.
The term hydro-carbon is applied to petroleum,
and its products, because the elements carbon and
hydrogen make up the largest part of the oil,
whereas this is not the case with most of the other
oils.
We are now dealing with a fuel such as is
needed in Internal Combustion Engines, and it is
well to know some of the problems involved in
the use of the fuel, as this will give a better understanding
of the structure of the devices which
handle and evolve the gases, and properly burn
them within the engine.
Vaporizing Fuel.—As the pure liquid will not
burn in that state the first essential is to put it
into a gaseous form, or to generate a vapor from
it. The vapor thus made is not a gas, in the true
sense of that term, but it is composed of minute
globules of finely-divided particles of oil.
Nearly all liquids will vaporize if permitted to
[64]
come into contact with air. The greater the
surface exposed to air the more rapidly will it
turn into a vapor.
By forcibly ejecting the liquid from a pipe or
spraying device, and mingling air with it, evaporation
is facilitated, and at the same time the proper
admixture of air is provided to make a combustible
substance the moment sufficient heat is
brought into contact with it.
This is what actually takes place in a gasoline
engine, and all the mechanism is built with this
end in view.
It has been the universal practice to make an explosive
mixture of this character, and then ignite
it by means of an electric spark, but it is now
known that such a fuel can be exploded by pressure,
and this needs some explanation.
Explosion by Compression.—The study of the
compressibility of gases is an interesting one.
As we have previously stated, the atoms, comprising
the gases, are constantly moving among themselves
with great rapidity, so that they bombard
the sides of the receiver in which they are confined,
and also contact with each other in their
restless movements.
When compression takes place the speed of
the movements of the atoms is greatly accelerated,
[65]
the friction of their movements is increased, and
heat is evolved. As the pressure becomes
greater the heat increases until it is of such intensity
that the gas ignites, and an explosion follows.
How Compression Heats.—The theory of the
compressibility of gases may be stated as follows:
Let us assume that the temperature of the air is
70 degrees Fahrenheit, and we have a receiver
which holds two cubic feet of this air.
If the contained air is now compressed to a
volume of one cubic foot, the temperature of two
cubic feet is compressed into one cubic foot, and
there is now 140 degrees of heat within the
receiver.
If this cubic foot of air is again compressed to
half its volume, the temperature is correspondingly
increased. While this it not absolutely true
in practice, owing to the immense loss caused by
radiation, still, it will enable the mind to grasp
the significance of compression, when the subject
of heat is concerned.
Elasticity of Gases.—The great elasticity of
gases, and the perfected mechanical devices for
compressing the same, afford means whereby ten
or twenty atmospheres can be forced into a receiver,
and thereby produce pressures of several
[66]
hundred pounds, which would mean sufficiently
high temperatures to ignite oils having the higher
flash point.
Advantages of Compression.—The compression
system permits of the introduction of a larger
quantity of fuel than is usually drawn into the cylinder,
and thereby a greater and more efficient action
is produced on the piston of the engine on account
of quicker combustion and therefore higher
gas pressures.
The compression, however, rarely if ever exceeds
six atmospheres or about 90 pounds per
square inch.
The Necessity of Compression.—There are two
reasons why compression is necessary before igniting
it. First, because it is essential to put sufficient
gas in the cylinder to make the engine efficient.
To illustrate: Suppose we have a cylinder capable
of drawing in 150 cubic inches of gas, and
this is compressed down to 25 cubic inches, the
space then occupied by the gas would represent
what is called the clearance space at the head of
the cylinder. To compress it to a greater degree
the clearance space might be made smaller, which
could be done in several ways, but whether the
gas thus drawn in should be compressed to 30,
or 25, or even 10 cubic inches, it is obvious that
[67]
there would be no more fuel in the cylinder in one
case than in the other. As however the mean effective
pressure, which determines the efficiency
of the motor, increases with the compression pressure,
the latter should be as high as possible, but
not so high that premature explosion takes place
owing to the heat created by compression.
Second: The more perfect the mixture of the
vaporized product with the air, the more vigorous
will be the explosion. The downward movement
of the piston draws in the charge of air and
sprayed jet of gasoline, and the only time for mixing
it is during the period that it travels from the
carbureter through the pipes and manifold to the
cylinder.
Having in mind the statement formerly made
that compression causes a more rapid movement
of the molecules of a gas, it is obvious that the
upward movement of the piston, in the act of
compressing the gas has a more positive action
in causing an intimate mixture of the hydro-carbon
gases than took place when the gases were
traveling through the pipes on their way to the
cylinder.
[68]
CHAPTER V
THE INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE
It will be observed that in a steam engine the
heat is developed outside of the cylinders and
the latter used solely for the purpose of taking the
steam and utilizing it, by causing its expansion to
push a piston to and fro.
We shall now consider that type of motor which
creates the heat within the cylinder itself and
causes an expansion which is at once used and
discharged at the reciprocating motion of the piston.
The original method of utilizing what is called
Internal combustion Motors, was to employ a fixed
gas. A fixed gas is one which will remain permanently
in that condition, unlike a vapor made
from gasoline. The difference may be explained
as follows:
Fixed Gases.—If the vapor of gasoline, or
petroleum, is subjected to a high heat, upwards of
1500 degrees, it is so changed chemically, that it
will not again return to a liquid state. This is
called fixing it. Gas is made in that way from the
[69]
vapor of coal, and fixed, producing what is called
illuminating gas.
Although the temperature of fixing it is fully
three times greater than is required to explode
it, the fact that it is heated in closed retorts,
and oxygen is prevented from mixing with it, prevents
it from burning, or exploding.
Gas Engines.—Such a gas has been used for
many years in engines which were usually of the
horizontal type, and were made exceedingly heavy
and cumbrous, and provided with enormous fly
wheels. Gases thus made are not as rich as those
generated direct from the hydro-carbon fuels, because,
being usually made from coal they did not
have a large percentage of hydrogen.
Energy of Carbon and Hydrogen.—When a
pound of carbon is burned, it develops 14,500
heat units, and a pound of hydrogen over 52,000
heat units. Assuming that 85 per cent. of a pound
of petroleum is carbon, and 15 per cent. is hydrogen,
the heat units of the carbon would be 12,225,
and the heat units of the 15 per cent. of hydrogen
would be 12,800. The combined value is, therefore,
25,025, which is almost double that of coal
gas.
This fact makes the gasoline engine so much
more efficient, and for the same horse power the
[70]
cylinders can be made smaller, and the whole
structure much lighter in every way.
Gasoline motors are of two types, one in which
an explosion takes place at every revolution of
the crank, called the two-cycle, and the other the
four-cycle, in which the explosion occurs at every
other turn of the crank.
The terms two-cycle is derived from the movement
of the piston, as that moves downwardly
during the period when the crank is making a half
turn, and returns in its upward stroke when the
crank completes the turn, or that two half turns
of the crankshaft complete the cycle. Four-cycle
engines have two such complete movements at
each impulse, or require four half turns of the
crankshaft to complete the cycle.
The Two-Cycle Type.—In order to clearly distinguish
between this and the four-cycle, it would
be well to examine the diagram, Fig. 23. For a
clearer understanding the drawing is explained
in detail.
The cylinder A, within which the piston works,
has a removable cap B, and at its lower end a removable
crank case C. The case is designed to
entirely close the lower end of the cylinder so that
it is air tight, for reasons which will be explained.
The outer jacket, or casing D, at the upper end
of the cylinder, is designed to provide a space E,
[71]
for the circulation of water, to cool the cylinder
during its working period. The crankshaft F
passes through the crank case, the latter having
suitable bearings G for taking care of the wear.
The piston H is connected up with the rod I,
the latter being hinged at a point within the piston,
as shown. The crank case has an inlet port,
provided with a valve which opens inwardly, so
[72]
that when the piston moves upwardly the valve
will open and air will be drawn into the crank
case and space below the piston.
At one side is a vertical duct K, which extends
from a point directly above the crank case, to such
a position that when the piston is at its lowest
point gas can be discharged into the space above
the piston.
On the opposite side of the cylinder, and a little
above the inlet port of the duct K, is a discharge
port M. The inlet port and the discharge port,
thus described, are both above the lower end of
the piston when it is at its highest point.
The spark plug is shown at N. On the upper
end of the piston, and close to the side wall
through which the inlet port K is formed, is an
upwardly-projecting deflecting plate O, the uses
of which will be explained in the description of its
operation.
Fig. 23 shows the piston at its highest point,
and we will now assume that ignition takes place,
thus driving the piston downwardly until the
upper end of the piston has fully uncovered the
discharge port M, as shown in Fig. 24. This permits
the exhaust to commence, and as the piston
proceeds down still further, so as to uncover the
inlet port K, the gas, which at the down stroke
has been compressed in the space below the piston,
[73]
rushes in, and as it strikes the deflecting plate
O, is caused to flow upwardly, and thus helps to
drive out the burnt gases remaining at the upper
end of the cylinder.
This action is called scavenging the cylinder,
and the efficiency of this type of engine is largely
due to the manner in which this is done. It is
obvious that more or less of the unburnt gases
[74]
will remain, or that some of the unburnt carbureted
air will pass out at each discharge, and
thus, in either case, detract from the power of
the subsequent explosion.
As the piston now moves upwardly to complete
the cycle, the piston closes both of the ports, thus
confining the gas which was previously partly
compressed, and as the piston proceeds the gas
is still further compressed until the piston again
reaches the upward limit of its motion.
Advantages of the Two-Cycle Engine.—This
kind of engine has several distinct advantages.
It has less weight than the four-cycle; it gives
double the number of impulses for a given number
of revolutions of the crankshaft; and it dispenses
with valves, springs, cam-shafts, stems
and push rods.
More or less danger, however, attends the
operation of a two-cycle engine, principally from
the fact that an explosive mixture in a partially
compressed condition is forced into the
space which the instant before was occupied by a
flame, and it is only because the expansion of the
burst gases at the previous charge has its temperature
decreased so far below the explosion
point, that the fresh gas is not ignited, although
there have been occasions when explosions have
taken place during the upstroke.
[75]
The Four-Cycle Engine.—The most approved
type is that which is known as the four-cycle.
This will also be fully diagrammed so as to enable
us to point out the distinctive difference.
Figs. 26 and 27 show sections of a typical four-cycle
engine, in which the inlet and the exhaust
valves are mechanically operated. The cylinder
A is either cast with or separate from the crank
case B, and has a removable head C. The upper
end of the cylinder has a water space formed by
the jacket D.
The inlet port E and the discharge port F are
both at the upper end of the cylinder. The crank
shaft G passes horizontally through the crank
[76]
case, and it is not necessary, as in the case of the
two-cycle-engine, to have the case closed tight.
The piston H is attached to the connecting rod
I, which is coupled to the crank, as shown. The
crank shaft has a small gear J, which meshes
with two gears of double size on opposite sides of
the crank shaft, one of the gears K, being designed
to carry the cam L for actuating the stem L´, which
opens the valve M in the port that admits the carbureted
air.
The other large gear N is mounted on a shaft
which carries a cam O that engages the lower end
of a push rod P, to open the valve Q in the discharge
port F. It should be observed that the
stems L´, P, are made in two parts, with interposing
[77]
springs R, so the valves may be firmly seated
when the stems drop from the cams.
The spark plug S is located in the head, close
to the inlet port. The character of the igniting
system is immaterial, as the object of the present
diagrams is to show the cycle and method of
operating the engine at each explosion, and to
fully illustrate the manner in which it is distinguished
from the two-cycle type.
A fly wheel is necessary in this as in the other
type, and in practice the two gear wheels, K, N,
are placed outside of the case B, and only the
small gear, and the cam shafts, on which the cams
are mounted, are within the case.
The operation is as follows: In Fig. 26 the
piston is shown in a position about to commence
its downward movement, and we will assume that
the ignition has just taken place. Both valves
M, Q, are closed, as it will be noticed that the cams
L, O, are not in contact with the lower ends of
the push rods.
The explosion drives the piston down to the
position shown in Fig. 27, when the cam O begins
to raise the stem P, and thus opens the discharge
valve Q, permitting the burnt gases to
escape as the piston travels upwardly to the
position shown in Fig. 28.
At this position the valve Q closes, and the cam
[78]
L opens the inlet valve M, so that as the piston
descends the second revolution, the carbureted air
is drawn in until the crank has just turned at its
lowest limit of movement, as shown in Fig. 29.
The upward stroke of the piston now performs
the work of compressing the carbureted air in
the cylinder, and it is ready for the ignition the
moment it again reaches the position shown in
Fig. 26.
The Four Cycles.—The four distinct operations
thus performed are as follows: First, the
explosion, and downward movement of the piston.
Second, the upward movement of the piston,
and the discharge of the burnt gases. Third,
the down stroke of the piston, and the indrawing
of a fresh charge of carbureted air. Fourth, the
upward movement of the piston, and the compression
of the charge of carbureted air.
The order of the engine performance may be
designated as follows: 1. Impulse. 2. Exhaust.
3. Admission. 4. Compression.
Ignition Point.—While the point of ignition,
shown in the foregoing diagrams, represents them
as taking place after the crank has passed the
dead center, the firing, in practice, is so adjusted
that the spark flashes before the crank turns past
the dead center.
The reason for this will be apparent on a little
[79]
reflection. As the crank turns very rapidly the
spark should be advanced, as it is called, because
it takes an interval of time for the spark to take
effect and start the explosion. If the sparking
did not take place until the crank had actually
passed the dead center, the full effect of the compression
and subsequent explosion pressure would
not be had.
Advantage of the Four-Cycle Type.—The
most marked advantage in the four-cycle type is
its efficiency. As it has one full stroke within
which to exhaust the burnt gases, the cylinder is in
a proper condition to receive a full value of the
incoming charge, and there is no liability of any
of the unburnt gases escaping during the exhaust
from the previous explosion.
The next important advantage of this type is
in the fact that it can be operated at a higher
speed than the two-cycle type, and this is a great
advantage, notwithstanding the less number of
impulses in the four-cycle type.
The Loss in Power.—The great disadvantage
in all engines of this class is the great loss resulting
from their action. The explosion which
takes place raises the temperature to fully 2000
degrees of heat, and unless some provision is
made to keep the cylinder down to a much lower
temperature the engine would soon be useless.
[80]
High temperatures of this character absolutely
prevent lubrication, a thing which is necessary to
insure proper working. For this reason a water
jacket is provided, although there are engines
which are cooled by the action of air.
In any event, the heat imparted to the cylinder
is carried away and cannot be used effectively,
so that fully one-half of the power is dissipated
in this direction alone.
The next most serious loss is in the escape of
heat through the burnt gases, which amounts to
seventeen per cent. If the expansive force of the
burnt gases at the time of ignition is 250 pounds
per square inch, and at the time of the discharge
it is fifty pounds, only four-fifths of its power
is effectively used.
As, however, the discharge is against the air
pressure of nearly fifteen pounds per square inch,
it is obvious that thirty-five pounds per inch is
driven away and lost.
The third loss is by conduction and radiation,
which amounts to fifteen per cent. or more, so that
the total loss from all sources is about eighty-four
per cent., leaving not more than sixteen per
cent. of the value of the fuel which is converted
into power.
Engine Construction.—In the construction of
engines the utmost care should be exercised in
[81]
making the various parts. The particular features
which require special care are the valves,
which should be ground to fit tightly, the proper
fitting of the piston rings, crank shaft and connecting
rod bearings as well as the accurate relining
of these bearings.
Valve Grinding.—Fig. 30 shows a valve and
valve seat. The valve has usually a cross groove
so that a screw driver in a drill stock may be
used to turn it and to exert the proper pressure.
The finest emery powder and a first class quality
of oil should be used. The valve is seated and
[82]
after the oil and emery powder are applied the
drill stock is used to turn the valve.
After twenty or thirty turns, wipe off the parts
and examine the contact edges, to see whether
the entire surfaces are bright, which will indicate
that the valve fits true on its seat. Never overgrind.
This is entirely unnecessary. It is better
also to rock the crank of the drill stock back and
forth, instead of turning it in one direction only.
The Crank Shaft.—The crank shaft is the
most difficult part of the engine to build. It is
usually made of a single forging of special steel
and the cranks and bearings are turned out of
this, requiring the utmost care. Formerly these
were subject to breakage, but improved methods
have eliminated all danger in this direction.
The Cams.—Notwithstanding the ends of the
push rods are provided with rollers to make the
contact with the cams, the latter will wear, and
in doing so they will open the valves too late.
The slightest wear will make considerable difference
in the inlet valve, and it requires care and
attention for this reason, in properly designing
the cams, so that wear will be brought to a
minimum.
[83]
CHAPTER VI
CARBURETERS
A carbureter is a device which receives and
mixes gasoline and air in proper proportions, and
in which a vapor is formed for gasoline engines.
The product of the carbureter is a mixture of
gasoline vapor and air, not a gas. A gas, as explained,
is of such a character that it remains
fixed and will not stratify or condense.
Functions of a Carbureter.—The function of
a carbureter is to supply air and gasoline by
means of its adjustable features so as to make
the best mixture. The proportions of air and
gasoline will vary, but generally the average is
fifteen parts of air to one of gasoline vapor.
If there is too much gasoline, proportionately,
a waste of fuel results, as a great amount of soot
is formed under those conditions. If there is an
excess of air the mixture, when ignited, will not
have such a high temperature, hence the expansive
force is less, and the result is a decrease of
power.
While it is possible to get a rapid evaporation
[84]
from gasoline by heating it, experience has shown
that it is more economical to keep the gasoline
cool, or at ordinary temperatures, provided the
carbureter is properly constructed, because the
vapor, if heated, when drawn into the engine,
will be unduly expanded, and less fuel in that
case is drawn in at each charge, and less power
results.
Rich Mixtures.—There are conditions under
which rich mixtures are advantageous. This is a
mixture in which there is a larger percentage of
gasoline than is necessary for instantaneous combustion.
For ordinary uses such a mixture would
not be economical.
At low speeds, however, or when carrying heavy
loads, it is desirable, for the reasons that at a
slow speed the combustion is slower.
Rich mixtures are objectionable at high speeds
because, as the combustion is slow, incomplete
combustion within the power stroke results, the
temperature of the gas at the end of the stroke is
very high, and this will seriously affect the exhaust
valves. Furthermore, there is likelihood of
the gas continuing to burn after it is discharged
from the cylinder.
Lean Mixtures.—Such a mixture is one which
has a less amount of gasoline than is necessary
to make a perfectly explosive compound. For
[85]
high speeds a lean mixture is desirable, principally
because it burns more rapidly than a rich
mixture.
Types of Carbureters.—There are two distinct
types of carbureters, one which sprays the gasoline
into a conduit through which air is passing,
and the other in which a large surface of gasoline
is placed in the path of the moving air column,
which was originally used, but has been absolutely
replaced by the jet carbureters on account of their
better control features.
It will be remembered that reference was made
to the manner in which vaporization takes place,
this term being used to designate that tendency of
all liquids to change into a gaseous state. All carbureters
are designed with the object of mechanically
presenting the largest possible area of oil
to the air, so that the latter will become impregnated
with the vapor.
The Sprayer.—The best known type depends
on dividing up the gasoline into fine globules, by
ejecting it from a small pipe or jet. The spray
thus formed is caught by the air column produced
by the suction of the engine pistons, and during
its passage through the throttle and the manifold,
is in condition where a fair mixture of air and
vapor is formed, which will readily ignite.
The Surface Type.—This form of carbureter
[86]
provides a pool of gasoline with a large surface,
within the shell, so arranged that as the air is
drawn past the pool it must come into contact
with the oil, and thus take up the necessary quantity
of evaporated gasoline for charging the air.
The surface type has not been used to a large
extent, but the sprayer is universally used, and
of this kind there are many examples of construction,
each having some particular merit.
Governing a Carbureter.—It is a curious thing
that one carbureter will work admirably with one
engine, and be entirely useless in another. This
is due to several factors, both in the engine design
and in the carbureter itself. The quality of mixture
that an engine will take depends on its speed.
The suction of the pistons depends on the speed
of the engine.
If, at ordinary speed the carbureter gives a
proper mixture, the throats and passages through
the pipes and manifold, as well as the valve which
discharges the gasoline, may be in a prime condition
to do good work; but when the pistons work
at double speed the inrush of air may not carry
with it the proper amount of fuel; or, under those
conditions, the air may receive too great an
amount of gasoline, proportionally.
The latter is usually the case, hence provision
must be made for such a contingency, and we
[87]
shall therefore take up the various features essential
in the construction of the carbureter, so as
to show what steps have been taken to meet the
problems arising from varying speeds, differences
in the character of the fuel, regulating the
inflow and mixture of gasoline and air, and adjustments.
So many different types of carbureters have
been devised, that it is difficult to select one which
typifies all the best elements of construction.
[88]
In Fig. 31 we have shown a well known construction,
and which will illustrate the features
of the sprayer type to good advantage. The body
of the device, represented by A, has a flange by
means of which it is secured to the pipe which
carries the carbureted air to the engine. The
lower end of this tubular body is contracted, as
shown at B, so as to form what is called a venturi
tube.
Exteriorly this contracted tube is threaded, as
shown at C, so as to receive thereon a threaded
body D, the lower end of the body having an enlarged
disk-head E, integral therewith, and an
upwardly-projecting annular flange F is formed
around this disk to receive and hold a cylinder G,
which constitutes the float and fuel chamber.
The upper end of this cylinder rests against
a seat cast with the body A, and packing rings
are placed at the ends of the cylinder to prevent
the oil from leaking out. Within the tubular
body D is a vertical tube H, integral with the disk
head E, and oil is supplied to this tube through
ducts I, which communicate with the chamber
within the reservoir G.
A drain cock is at the lower end of this tube,
and an adjustable cap K screws on the tubular
stem of the drain tube, around which air is admitted,
the air passing upwardly through vertical
[89]
ducts L, as shown, and thus mixes with air at the
contracted part of the venturi tube.
A ring-like float N is placed within the glass
chamber, and this is adapted to engage with the
inner end of a lever N´, this lever being pivoted
at O, within a side extension P of the carbureter
shell. The inner end of this lever has a link
hinged thereto, the lower end of which serves as
a needle valve to close the ejecting orifice of the
tube L.
The outer end of the lever N´ engages a shoulder
on a vertically-disposed needle valve Q, which
has its point in the inlet opening of the pipe R,
through which gasoline is supplied to the glass
chamber. A spring T serves to keep the valve
stem normally on its seat.
Directly opposite this chambered extension P
is another extension U, also cast with the shell,
through which is a vertical stem V. This stem
carries a downwardly-opening valve W, that seats
against a plug, and a spring X below the valve,
serves to keep it against its seat, unless there
should be an extraordinarily heavy pull or suction.
This is the auxiliary air inlet, and the lower
spring is actuated only when the engine is running
at moderate speeds, but when running at
high speed and an additional quantity of air is
[90]
required the upper spring Y is compressed, and
thus a much greater quantity of air is allowed to
pass in and mingle with the spray at the throttle
valve Z.
The throttle valve is mounted in the discharge
opening, and is controlled by a lever on the outside
of the carbureter.
The device operates as follows: Primary air
enters the opening between the cup K and the
disk-head E, passing up into the space around the
oil tube H. As the spring T, around the needle
valve Q, draws up the valve from its seat, oil is
permitted to flow in through the duct R and fill
the chamber, until the float engages with the inner
end of the lever N, and raises it, thus uncovering
the ejecting end of the tube H, and at the same
time closing the inlet tube R.
The suction from the engine then draws air
through the primary duct, as stated, and also an
additional quantity through the secondary source,
by way of the valve W, this valve being so regulated
as to supply the requisite quantity.
The auxiliary air source serves the purpose that
means should be provided to supply more than
the ordinary amount of air, when running at high
speeds.
From the foregoing it will be observed that a
carbureter must be so constructed that it will
[91]
perform a variety of work. These are: First,
Automatic means for filling the float chamber
when the gasoline goes below a certain level.
Second, Cutting off the supply of gasoline.
Third, Providing a primary supply of gasoline
for spraying purposes. Fourth, Furnishing an
auxiliary air supply. Fifth, Throttling means in
the discharge opening.
It is thus a most wonderful contrivance, and
considering that all the elements necessary to
make it work satisfactorily are provided with
adjustable devices, it may be seen that to make it
perform correctly requires a perfect understanding
of its various features.
Requirements in a Carbureter.—In view of
the foregoing it might be well to know how to
select a carbureter that is ideal in its operation.
First. The adjustment of the auxiliary valve
should be of such a character that at the slowest
speed the valve should not be lifted from its
seat.
Second. It must be so arranged that it is not
difficult to change the relative amount of air and
gasoline.
Third. The floating chamber should be so arranged
that the float will act on the lever which
lifts the valve of the injecting pipe, even though
the carbureter body should be tilted at an angle.
[92]
This is particularly important when the carbureter
is used in automobiles.
Fourth. The valves should be in such position
that they are readily accessible for cleaning or for
examination.
Fifth. The float should be so arranged that it
is adjustable with reference to the lever that it
contacts with.
Sixth. A gauze strainer should be placed at
the gasoline inlet, and it is also advisable to have
a similar strainer above the mixing chamber, beyond
the throttle.
Seventh. There should be no pockets at any
point in the body to hold the gasoline which might
condense.
Eighth. The body of the carbureter should be
so constructed that every part is easily accessible,
and draining means provided so that every particle
of gasoline can be withdrawn.
Ninth. Means for heating it, in case of cold
weather.
Size of the Carbureter.—The proper size of a
carbureter for an engine has been the subject of
considerable discussion and experimenting. If
its passages are too large, difficulty will be experienced
in starting the engine, because the pulling
draft through the primary will not be sufficient to
make a spray that will unite with the air.
[93]
A carbureter too large will only waste fuel, even
after the engine has been cranked up so it will
start.
If the carbureter is too small the engine will
not develop its required output of power. While
it might work satisfactorily at low speeds it would
be entirely inefficient at high speeds.
Rule for Size of Carbureter.—In all cases the
valve opening and cylinder capacity in the engine
should determine this. The size of the opening
of the carbureter outlet should be the same as that
of the engine valve, which is also the case where
the carbureter supplies a multi-cylinder, as there
is only one valve open at the same time.
It was formerly the custom to use a carbureter
for each cylinder but the practice has been abandoned,
because it is obvious that a single carbureter
will, owing to the continuous suction, supply
a mixture of more nearly uniform character
than two or more, even though they should supply
the mixture to a common manifold.
The Throttle.—Much of the economy in running
an engine depends on the manipulation of
the throttle. As an example, with a certain motor
and carbureter it will be found that for maximum
speed the throttle should be open about one-eighth
of the way. The proper way, in starting the engine,
is to open the throttle fully half way, and
[94]
to retard the spark. As soon as the engine begins
to run properly, the spark is advanced and the
throttle closed down to the required point.
The engine speed may always be maintained by
the throttle under a constant varying load, by
adjusting the throttle valve. A rich mixture may
be obtained by throttling the primary air supply.
The throttle may also be a most effective means
of economizing fuel when the engine has a first
class sparking device, as in that case the throttle
can be closed down to provide a very small opening.
Flooding.—One of the most prevalent troubles
in carbureters is the liability to flood. This is
usually caused by foreign matter getting under
or in the float valve, so that it will not properly
seat. Sometimes the mere moving of the float
will dislodge the particle.
Another cause of flooding is due, frequently, to
an improperly-arranged float, which, when the
engine is inclined, will prevent improper seating
of the valve, and flooding follows.
The greatest care should be exercised in seeing
that the gasoline supply is free from all impurities
when it is poured into the tank. To strain
it is the best precaution, and it pays to be particular
in this respect. It is surprising to see the
[95]
smallest speck, either stop the flow entirely, or
produce an overflow, either of which will cause
a world of trouble.
Water is another element which has no place
in a carbureter. An indication of this is the irregular
movement of the engine. The only
remedy is to stop and drain the carbureter. A
few drops may cause all the trouble.
Types of Carbureters.—In Fig. 32 we show another
type of carbureter, which is simple in construction,
and has many desirable features. The
cylindrical body of the carbureter, A, has a downwardly-projecting
[96]
globular extension B, at one
side of which is a flange C to secure it to the
pipe, and through this is the discharge opening D.
This globular extension serves as the mixing
chamber.
Within the cylindrical shell is an upwardly-projecting
circularly-formed extension E, and the top
or cap F of the cylindrical body A has a downwardly-projecting
cylindrical rim G which overlaps
the lower circular extension E, and it is so
constructed that a very thin annular slit H is
thus formed between the two parts, through which
fuel oil flows from the float chamber I into the
space around the central tube J which passes
down through the two circular extensions E, G.
This central tube J is designed for the auxiliary
air supply. It extends down to the globular base
B, and has a valve K seated against its end. The
stem L of the valve is vertically-movable within an
adjustable stem M, and a helical spring N, capable
of having its tension adjusted by the stem
M, bears upwardly against the valve so as to keep
it normally against the lower end of the tube J.
The auxiliary air, therefore, passes down centrally
through the tube J, while the primary air
supply passes through openings O, surrounding
the tube J, downwardly past the slitted opening
H, and thence to the discharge port D.
[97]
Surrounding the tubular projections E, G, and
within the float chamber I, is the float P. This is
designed to strike the bifurcated ends of a lever
Q, which is hinged near its outer end, as at R, and
has its short projecting end resting beneath the
collar of a vertical needle valve S.
This needle valve is vertically placed within a
chambered extension T at the side of the shell A,
and its lower end rests within the opening of the
inlet U which supplies the gasoline to the chamber
I. The upper end of the valve stem passes
through a plug V, through which is a vent
hole W.
A spring X is used between the plug and the
collar on the lower end of the needle valve, so
that the valve is kept on its seat thereby, unless
the gasoline in the chamber should fall so low as
to cause the float to rest on the inner end of the
lever Q, when the needle valve would be unseated
thereby.
All the parts of this device seem to be accessible,
and it is presented as an example of construction
that seems to meet pretty nearly all of the ideal
requirements of a device for furnishing a perfect
admixture.
Surface Carbureter.—This type of carbureter
also requires a float but does not have secondary
air inlet mechanism. It has one striking advantage
[98]
over the sprayer system, in the particular
that the suction of the engine is not depended
upon to draw the gasoline from the float chamber.
It is much more sensitive to adjustment in the
float level and needle valve than the other type.
The diagram, Fig. 33, shows a body A, somewhat
bowl-shaped, with a chambered extension,
B, at one side, at the lower side of which is the
fuel inlet duct C. Directly above this duct the
upper wall of the extension has a plug D, the lower
end of which carries therein the upper end of a
vertically-movable needle valve, E, the lower end
of the valve resting within the duct C.
A float F within the bowl-shaped body is secured
[99]
at one side to a lever G, which is hinged at
a point near the needle valve E, and the short end
of this lever connects with this needle valve in
such a manner that as the float moves upwardly
the valve is seated, and when the level of the fuel
oil falls below a certain point the needle is lifted
from its seat, and oil is permitted to flow into
the float chamber.
The cap H of the float chamber has cast therewith
a U-shaped tube, the inlet end I being horizontally-disposed,
while the discharge end J is
vertical. Directly above the lowest part of the
bend in this tube, the vertical dimension of the
tube is contracted by a downwardly-projecting
wall K, so as to form a narrow throat L.
Below this contracted point, the U-shaped tube
has integral therewith a downwardly-projecting
stem M, the lower end of which passes through
an opening in the float chamber, and is threaded,
so as to receive a nut, by means of which the cap
H may be firmly fixed to the float chamber.
This stem M has a vertical duct N, which communicates
with the float chamber, and is provided
with a drain plug O. Alongside of this duct is a
tube P which extends up into the U-shaped tube
and is open at its lower end so that the level of
the gasoline within the bent tube cannot extend
above the end of this drain tube P.
[100]
An adjustable valve stem Q passes through one
side of the bent tube, the lower end being pointed
and adapted to regulate the inflow of gasoline
through the duct N, and into the U-shaped tube.
A throttle valve R is placed in the discharge
end of the U-shaped tube, which is susceptible of
regulation by means of a lever S. The diagram
shows the gasoline within the U-shaped tube, so
that it is on a level with the gasoline in the float
chamber.
In operation a sufficient amount of gasoline is
permitted to enter the float chamber so that a
pool is formed in the bottom of the U-shaped tube.
When suction takes place the air rushes through
the tube, at I, down beneath the wall K, and in doing
so it sweeps past the surface of the pool at
that point, absorbing a greater or less amount of
the vapor.
In order to adjust the device so that a smaller
amount of the liquid fuel will be exposed, the carbureter
is adjusted so it will close the needle
valve before the level of the liquid is so high, and
thereby a less surface of oil is formed within the
U-shaped tube.
It is obvious that this type of carbureter, owing
to the absence of the secondary air-supply
mechanism, can be readily regulated and all adjustments
[101]
made while running, while for automobile
uses the lever S, which controls the
throttle, can be connected up with a dash-board
control.
[102]
CHAPTER VII
IGNITION. LOW TENSION SYSTEM
Electricity, that subtle force, which manifests
itself in so many ways, is nevertheless beyond the
power of man to see. The only way in which we
know of its presence is by the results produced by
its movements, because it can make itself known
to our senses only by some form of motion.
The authorities regard light, heat and electricity
as merely different forms of motion. The
most that can be done with such a force is to learn
the laws governing it.
Magnetism.—This is a form of electricity. In
fact, it is one of the most universal manifestations,
for without it electricity would be useless.
When the first permanent magnet was found at
Magnesia, it was not considered electricity. The
sciences had not arrived at that point where they
were able to classify it as belonging to lightning
and other manifestations of that kind which we
now know to be electricity.
The Armature.—But magnetism can no more
be seen than electricity flowing through a wire.
[103]
If a piece of metal has magnetism it will attract
a piece of iron or steel placed in close proximity,
and thus we are permitted to see the action.
The lightning in the upper atmosphere burns
the gases in its path. This enables us to see, not
the current, but its action,—the result produced
by its power.
The electric current has many peculiar manifestations,
the causes of some of them being
known and utilized. In the use of this medium for
igniting the fuel gas, many of the phases of electrical
phenomena are brought into play, and
it is necessary, therefore, to know something of
the fundamentals of the science to enable us to
apply it.
Characteristics of Electricity.—When a current
passes along a wire, it does not describe a
straight path, but it moves around the conductor
in the form of circles. The current is not confined
wholly to the wire itself, but it extends out
a certain distance from it at all points.
Magnetic Field.—Every part of a wire which
is carrying a current of electricity has, surrounding
it, a magnetic field, of the same character, and
to all intents and purposes, of the same nature as
the magnetic field at the ends of a magnet.
Elasticity.—This current has also something
akin to elasticity. That is, it surges to and fro,
[104]
particularly when a current is interrupted in the
circuit. At the instant of breaking a current in
an electric light circuit there is a momentary flash
which is much brighter than the normal light,
which is due to the regular flow of the current.
This is due to the surging movement, or the
elastic tension, in the current. Advantage is
taken of this characteristic, in making a spark.
This spark is produced at the instant that the
ends of the wires are separated.
The Make and Break System.—No spark is
caused by putting the two ends together, or by
making the connection, but only by breaking it,
hence it is termed the make and break method of
ignition.
When the connection is broken the current tries
to leap across the gap, and in doing so develops
such an intense heat that the spark follows. As a
result of the high temperature it is necessary to
use such a material where the gap is formed that
it will not be burned. For this purpose platinum,
and other metals are now employed.
Voltage.—This plays an important part in ignition.
Voltage is that quality which gives pressure
or intensity to a current. It is the driving
force, just as a head of water gives pressure to a
stream of water.
High and Low Voltage.—A high tension current,—that
[105]
is, one having a high voltage, will leap
across a gap, whereas a low voltage must have an
easy path. When the ends of a wire in a circuit
are separated, air acts as a perfect insulator between
them, and the slightest separation will prevent
a low current from jumping across.
This is not the case with a high tension current,
where it will leap across and produce the
flash known as the jump spark.
Low Tension System.—Two distinct types of
ignition have grown out of the voltage referred
to, in which the make and break system uses the
low tension, because of its simplicity in the electrical
equipment.
Disadvantages of the Make and Break.—There
is one serious drawback to the extended
use of this system, and that is the necessity of
using a moving part within the cylinder, to make
and break the contact in the conductor, as it is
obvious that this part of the mechanism must be
placed within the compressed mixture in order to
ignite it.
Amperes.—A current is also measured by amperes,—that
is, the quantity flowing. A large conductor
will take a greater quantity of current
than a small one, just as in the case of water a
large pipe will convey a greater amount of the
liquid.
[106]
Resistance.—All conductors offer resistance to
the flow of a current, and this is measured in
Ohms. The best conductor is silver and the next
best is copper, this latter material being used
universally, owing to its comparative cheapness.
Iron is a relatively poor conductor. Resistance
can be overcome to a certain extent, however, if
a large conductor is used, but it is more economical
to use a small conductor which has small resistance,
like copper, than a heavy conductor, as
iron, even though pound for pound the latter may
be cheaper.
Direct Current.—There are two kinds of current,
one which flows in one direction only, called
the Direct. It is produced in a dynamo which has
a pair of commutator brushes so arranged that
as the armature turns and its wires move through
the magnetic fields of a magnet, and have direction
of the current alternate, these brushes will
change the alternations so the current will travel
over the working conductors in one direction only.
Primary and secondary batteries produce a
direct current. These will be described in their
appropriate places.
Alternating Current.—This is a natural current.
All dynamos originally make this kind of
current, but the commutator and brushes in the
direct current machine change the output method
[107]
only. The movement of this current is likened to
a rapid to and fro motion, first flowing, for an
instant, to one pole, and then back again, from
which the term alternating is derived.
While the sudden breaking in a circuit will
produce a spark with either the direct or the
alternating currents, the direct is usually employed
for the make and break system, since batteries
are used as the electrical source.
On the other hand the jump spark method employs
the alternating current, because the high
tension can be most effectively produced through
the use of induction coils, which will be explained
in connection with the jump spark method of ignition.
Generating Electricity.—There are two ways
to produce a current for operating an ignition system,
one by a primary battery, and the other by
means of a magneto, a special type of dynamo,
which will be fully explained in its proper place.
Primary Battery.—As we are now concerned
with the make and break system, the battery type
of generation, and method of wiring up the same,
should first be explained.
Thus, in Fig. 34, a primary battery is shown,
in which the zinc cell A has an upwardly-projecting
wing B at one side, to which the conductor is
attached; and within, centrally, is a carbon bar
[108]
C. An electrolyte, which may be either acid or
alkali, must be placed within the cell.
Making a Dry Cell.—The zinc is the negative,
and the carbon the positive electrode. The best
material for the electrolyte is crushed coke, which
is carbon, and dioxide of manganese is used
for this purpose, and the interstices are filled
with a solution of sal-ammoniac.
The top of the cell is covered with asphaltum,
so as to retain the moistened material and the
liquid within the cell, and thus constituted, it is
called a dry cell.
Energy in a Cell.—A battery is made up of a
number of these cells. Each cell has a certain
[109]
electric energy, usually from one and a half to one
and three-quarter volts, and from twenty-five to
forty amperes.
The amperage of a cell depends on its size, or
rather by the area of the electrodes; but the voltage
is a constant one, and is not increased by the
change, formation, or size of the electrodes.
For this reason the cells are used in groups,
forming, as stated, a battery, and to get efficient
results, various methods of connecting them up
are employed.
Wiring Methods.—As at least six cells are required
to operate a coil, the following diagrams
will show that number to illustrate the different
types of connections.
Series Connection.—The six cells, Fig. 35,
show the carbon electrodes A, of one cell, connected
by means of a wire B with the zinc electrode
wing C of the next cell, and so on, the cell
at one end having a terminal wire D connected
with the zinc, and the cell at the other end a wire
E connected with the carbon electrode.
[110]
The current, therefore, flows directly through
the six cells, and the pressure between the
terminal wires D, E, is equal to the combined
pressure of the six cells, namely, 11/2 × 6, which is
equal to 9 volts. The amperage, however, is that
of one cell, which, in these diagrams, will be assumed
to be 25.
Parallel Connection.—Now examine Fig. 36.
In this case the carbon electrodes A are all connected
up in series, that is, one following the
other in a direct line, by wires B, and the zinc
electrodes C, are, in like manner, connected up in
series with each other by wires D. The difference
in potential at these terminals B, D, is the
same as that of a single cell, namely, one and a
half volt.
The amperage, on the other hand, is that of the
six cells combined, or 150. This method of connecting
the cells is also called parallel, since the
two wires forming the connections are parallel
with each other, and remembering this it may be
better to so term it.
[111]
Multiple Connections.—This is also designated
as series multiple since the two sets of cells
each have the connections made like the series
method, Fig. 35. The particular difference being,
that the zinc terminals of the two sets of cells
are connected up with one terminal wire A, and
the carbon terminals of the two sets are joined to
a terminal B.
The result of this form of connection is to increase
the voltage equal to that of one cell multiplied
by the number of cells in one set, and the
amperage is determined by that of one cell multiplied
by the two sets.
Each set of cells in this arrangement is called
a battery, and we will designate them as No. 1,
and No. 2. Each battery, therefore, being connected
in series, has a voltage equal to 41/2 volts,
and the amperage 50, since there are two batteries.
Now the different arrangement of volts and
amperes does not mean that the current strength
[112]
is changed in the batteries or in the cells. If the
pressure is increased the flow is lessened. If the
current flow, or the quantity sent over the wires
is increased, the voltage is comparatively less.
Watts.—This brings in another element that
should be understood. If the current is multiplied
by the amperes a factor is obtained, called
Watts. Thus, as each cell has 11/2 volts and 25
amperes, their product is 371/2 watts.
To show that the same energy is present in each
form of connection let us compare the watts derived
from each:
Series connection: 9 volts × 25 amperes, equal
225 watts.
Parallel connection: 11/2 volts × 150 amperes,
equal 225 watts.
Series Multiple connection: 41/2 volts × 50
amperes, equal 225 watts.
From the foregoing, it will be seen that the
changes in the wiring did not affect the output,
but it enables the user of the current to effect such
changes that he may, for instance, in case a battery
should be weak, or have but little voltage,
so change connections as to temporarily increase
it, although in doing so it is at the expense of
the amperage, which is correspondingly decreased.
It would be well to study the foregoing comparative
[113]
analysis of the three forms of connections,
so far as the energy is concerned, because
there is an impression that increasing the voltage,
is adding to the power of a current. It does
nothing but increase the pressure. There is not
one particle of increase in the energy by so doing.
Testing a Cell.—The cells should be frequently
tested, to show what loss there is in the amperage.
This is done by putting an ammeter in the circuit.
If a meter of this kind is not handy, a good plan
is to take off one of the wire connections, and snap
the wire on the terminal, and the character of the
spark will show what energy there is in the cell.
Testing With Instruments.—The method of
testing with voltmeter and ammeter, is shown in
Fig. 38. The voltmeter is placed in a short circuit
between the two terminal wires, whereas the
ammeter is placed in circuit with one of the wires.
The reason for this is that the voltmeter registers
[114]
the pressure, the power, or the difference of potential
between the two sides of the cell, and the
ammeter shows the quantity of current flowing
over the wire.
In practice batteries are not used continuously
for igniting. They are temporarily employed,
principally for starting, because their continued
use would quickly deplete them.
Simple Battery Make and Break System.—In
order to show this method in its simplest form,
examine Fig. 39, which diagrams the various parts
belonging to the system.
We have illustrated it with two cylinders, portions
of the heads being shown by the outlines A,
A. B, B represent terminals which project into
the cylinders, and are insulated from the engine
[115]
heads. Through the sides of the engine heads are
rock shafts C, the ends within the cylinder having
fingers D which are adapted to engage with the
inner ends of terminals B, B.
On the ends of the rock shafts outside of the
cylinders, they are provided with levers E, E, one
end of each being attached to a spring F, so that
the tension of the spring will normally keep the
upper end of the finger D in contact with the
terminal B. The cut shows one finger engaging
with B, and the other not in contact.
The other end of the lever E rests beneath a collar
or shoulder G on a vertical rod H. The lower
end of this rod engages with a cam I on a shaft J,
and when the cam rotates the rod drops off the
elevated part of the cam, and in doing so the
shoulder G strikes the end of the lever E and
causes the finger to rapidly break away from the
terminal B, where the spark is produced.
To Advance the Spark.—For the purpose of
advancing or retarding the spark, this rod has,
near its lower end, a horizontally-movable bar K,
which may be moved to and fro a limited distance
by a lever L, this lever being the substitute in
this sketch of the lever on the steering wheel of
an automobile.
The spark is advanced or retarded by causing
the lower end of the rod H to be moved to the left
[116]
or to the right, so that it will drop off of the raised
portion of the cam earlier or later.
The wiring up is a very simple matter. The
battery M has one end connected up with one
terminal of a switch N, while the other terminal
of the switch has a wire connection with the
terminal plugs B, B, in the cylinder heads.
The other end of the battery is connected with
the metal of the engine, which may be indicated
by the dotted line O which runs to the rock shaft
C, and thus forms a complete circuit.
The operation is as follows: When the key P
of the switch is moved over so that it contacts
with the terminal N, the battery is thrown into
the circuit, and the current then passes to the
plug B of the first cylinder, as the finger D in
that cylinder is in contact with that terminal, and
it passes along the finger D, and rock-shaft C, to
the metal of the engine, and passes thence to the
battery, this course being indicated by the dotted
line O.
At the same time, while cylinder No. 2 is also
connected up with the battery, the shoulder of the
rod H has drawn the finger D from its contact
with the plug B, hence the current cannot pass in
that direction.
As the cam I, of cylinder No. 1, turns in
the direction of the arrow, the rod drops down
[117]
and suddenly makes a break in the terminal of
this cylinder, causing the ignition, to be followed
by a like action in No. 2.
The Magneto in the Circuit.—To insure the
life of the battery, so that it may be in service
only during that period at the starting, when the
magneto is not active, the latter is so placed in the
circuit, that, at the starting, when, for instance,
the automobile is being cranked, it is cut out by
the switch on the dash board.
In Fig. 40, a simple two-pole switch is used.
With the magneto it is necessary to have a three-point
switch, R, and a plain coil S is placed between
the switch and battery.
One side of the magneto T is connected by wire
U with one of the points of the switch R, and the
[118]
other side of the magneto is connected with the
metal of the engine, which is indicated by the
dotted line V.
In all other respects the mechanism is the same.
The starting operation has been explained with
reference to the preceding figure, and when the
engine has picked up, and is properly started, the
switch bar is thrown over so it contacts with the
point connected up with the wire U leading to the
magneto.
This, of course, cuts out the battery, and the
engine is now running on the magneto alone.
The object of the coil S is to oppose a rapid change
of the current at the moment of the interruption.
The coil induces a counter current the moment
the break is made, and as the current continues
to flow for a very short period after the break a
spark of greater intensity is produced than if the
circuit should be permitted to go from the battery
to the sparker directly, as in the previous illustration.
The best spark is produced by quickly making
the break between the points B, D, so that particular
attention has been given to mechanism
which will do this effectively.
Magneto Spark Plug.—One of the devices to
obviate the difficulty of providing moving mechanism
outside of the engine cylinder, is shown in
[119]
Fig. 41. In this the coil A is connected with a
terminal B at the head of the device and the
other is connected to the plug C which screws into
the cylinder head.
Within the core is a pivotally-mounted lever D,
the upper end E of which is attracted by the
tubular metallic core F, and the lower end having
a contact point G, which is adapted to engage
with a stationary point H.
[120]
The pivot I, on which the lever D is mounted,
provides a means whereby the lever swings, and
a spring J is so arranged that when the lower end
of the lever is disengaged from the contact, the
spring will return it to its normal position.
In its operation when a contact is formed by
the timing device of the magneto, so as to give a
spark, the circuit passes to the terminal B, coil
A, and plug C, thus forming a complete circuit.
This energizes the core A, pulling the upper end
of the lever, and at the same time causes the lower
end to disengage the two contacts G, H, which
breaks the circuit and produces a spark.
The breaking of the circuit deënergizes the core,
and the spring again draws the lever back to its
normal position, ready for the next completion of
the circuit by the timing device.
Such an arrangement is as simple as the spark
plug usually employed in the use of the high tension
system, although it is more expensive than
the plug.
[121]
CHAPTER VIII
IGNITION. HIGH TENSION
This system is used to the largest extent, so
that we ought to have a full explanation of the
devices which are required to do the work. While
magnetos are used with the low tension system,
for the reasons stated, they are especially necessary
with the Jump Spark method.
Magnetos.—The most important element in this
system is the magneto, so we shall try and make
the subject as explicit as possible. As stated, a
magneto is a special type of dynamo which will
now be explained. For this purpose it will be
necessary to show the elementary operation of an
alternating current dynamo.
Alternating Current.—In Fig. 42 A is a bar
of soft iron, around which is a coil of wire B,
the wire being insulated, so that it will not touch
the bar. There is no magnetism in this bar, and
this simple form of structure is shown, merely to
represent what is called the field of a dynamo.
The object of the coil of wire is to make a magnet
of the bar, for the moment a current is sent
[122]
over the wire, a magnet is formed, and the magnetism
leaves the bar the moment the current
ceases to flow. If this bar should be of hard steel
it would retain the magnetism.
Now, the primary difference between the magneto
and the dynamo, is that this field bar is a
permanent magnet in the magneto, whereas the
field is only a temporary magnet in the dynamo.
This should always be kept in mind.
The end of a magnet, whether it is a temporary
one, or permanent, has a magnetic field of
force at the ends as well as at all parts of it, exterior
to the surface of the bar. Such a field is
[123]
indicated, and in the dynamo, no such field exists
unless a current is passing over the wire B, which
is called the field winding.
The U-shaped piece of metal C represents the
armature. It is shown hinged to the top of two
posts, for clearness in understanding, and is
adapted to turn to the right, and in turning the
loop passes the end of the field bar B, and passes
through the magnetic field which is indicated by
the dotted lines D.
Now, if the loop is simply permitted to remain
in the position shown in Fig. 42, a current would
flow through the loop, this transference of the current
being called induction, and this characteristic
of the flow of electricity will be explained and
its utility explained.
Cutting Lines of Force.—The loop will now be
turned to the right so that it passes the magnetic
field and goes beyond it in its revolution. This
motion of passing the armature through the magnetic
field is called cutting the lines of force.
[124]
While the loop was lying within the magnetic field,
and also when it was moving through the field, the
current set up in the loop flowed in the direction
of the darts F, or to the right, through the pivots
D.
In Fig. 43 the loop is shown as having made a
quarter turn, and it is now vertical, or at right
angles to its former position. The loop in thus
passing away loses its force, until it reaches the
position shown in Fig. 44, when there is a surging
back of the current to the opposite direction, as
indicated by the arrows.
When the loop reaches the lowest position,
shown in Fig. 45, it again begins to get the influence
of the magnetic field, and a reversal back to
its former direction takes place, this surging
movement back and forth being due to the reversal
of the polarity in the coil brought about by
the position in which it is placed relative to the
magnetic field.
It is now an easy matter to connect the ends of
[125]
the loop with wire conductors. This is shown in
Fig. 46, where a small metal wheel G is placed on
each end of the spindle, and in having a strip of
metal bearing H on the wheel. These are not
commutator brushes, but are merely wiping
brushes to take the current from the turning
parts. Wires I connect with these wiping bars,
and through them the current is transmitted to
perform the work.
Plurality of Loops.—The dynamo may have a
plurality of loops, which are called coils, and
there may be a single magnet or any number of
magnets. Instead of driving these coils past the
face of the magnet, or magnets, the latter may
be driven past the coils. In fact with most of
the alternating current machines the fields are
the rotating parts and the armatures, or the coils,
are fixed.
The voltage is increased if the coils have a
large number of turns on the armature, and also
if the armature, or the turning part, is speeded
[126]
up. Voltage will also be higher if larger or more
powerful magnets are used in the magnetos.
The Electro-Magnet.—The permanent magnet,
such as is used in the magneto, is distinguished
by the fact that it contains a permanent
charge of magnetism, but this is not an electro-magnet.
This is a magnet made of soft iron, so
it will be readily demagnetized. While not
shown in the diagrams, an iron core may be
placed within the loop or coil, and this is done in
all dynamos, because the iron core acts as a carrier
of the magnetism, concentrating it at the center,
because it is a much better conductor than air.
The Dynamo Form.—Consult the diagram,
Fig. 47. The iron heads A represent the bar in the
[127]
previous diagrams, and B the wire around the
bar. C is the armature, which in this case represents
a number of loops, or coils, and D is the
commutator, which is used in the direct current
machine to correct the alternations referred to in
the previous diagrams, so as to send the current
in one direction only, the commutator brushes E
being used to carry off the current for use.
The Magneto Form.—The metal loop F, in
Fig. 48, being a permanent magnet, the armature, G,
formed of a plurality of loops, has no field wires
to connect with it, as in the case of the dynamo.
Advantage of the Magneto.—The magneto has
a pronounced advantage over the dynamo, as a
source of power for ignition purposes, in the particular
that the strength of the magnetic field is
constant. In a dynamo this varies with the output,
because when used on an automobile where
the speed is irregular, the voltage will vary. The
voltage of the magneto is a constant one, and is
thus better adapted to meet the needs of ignition.
Induction Coil.—The induction coil is a device
which is designed to produce a very high voltage
from a low tension, so that a current from it will
leap across a gap and make a hot spark.
We stated in a previous section that a current
leaps across from one conductor to another, so
that electricity can be transferred from a wire
[128]
to another not touching it, by means of induction.
Look at Fig. 49, which represents two wires side
by side. The current is flowing over one wire A,
and by bringing wire B close to A, but not touching
it, a current will be induced to leap across the
gap and the wire B will be charged. If the ends
of the wire B are brought together, so as to form a
circuit, and a current detector is placed in the
circuit it will be found that a current is actually
flowing through it, but it is now moving in a direction
opposite to the current flowing through A.
Changing the Current.—But we have still another
thing to learn. If the two wires are not of
the same thickness it would not prevent the current
from leaping across, but another astonishing
thing would result.
First, we shall use a wire B double the thickness
of wire A. If now, we had an instrument to
test the voltage and the amperage, it would be
found that the voltage in B is less than that in A,
and also that the amperage is greater.
Second, if the conditions are reversed, and the
wire A is thicker than B, the latter will have an
[129]
increase of voltage, but a lower ampere flow than
in A.
Now this latter condition is just what is necessary
to give a high tension. Voltage is necessary
to make a current leap across a gap. By
this simple illustration we have made an induction
coil which may be used for making a high
tension jump spark.
Construction of a Coil.—Two wires side by
side do not have the appearance of a coil, and
even though such an arrangement might make a
high tension current, it would be difficult to apply.
To put the device in such a shape that it
can be utilized, a spool is made, as shown in
Fig. 50.
This spool A has a number of layers of thick,
insulated wire B first wound around it, the layers
being well insulated from each other, and the opposite
[130]
ends brought out at one end or at the opposite
ends, as shown at C, D. On this is a layer of
finer wire, also insulated, this wire E having its
terminals also brought out at the ends of the spool,
and after the whole is thus wound, the outside of
the coil is covered with a moisture proof material.
The Primary Coil.—The winding of thick wire
is called the primary coil. The current from the
battery or the electric generator is led to this
inner coil.
The Secondary Coil.—The fine wire wrapping
represents the secondary coil, which is raised
to a high voltage, and this actuates the sparking
mechanism.
In the art it is customary to illustrate the various
contrivances by certain conventional forms.
Fig. 51 shows the manner of designating an induction
coil in a diagram, in which the heavy zig-zag
line indicates the primary, and the lighter
zig-zag lines the secondary coil.
[131]
Contact Maker.—A simple little device used in
the primary circuit of an induction coil, is known
as a contact maker. This, as shown in Fig. 52,
is merely a case A, through which is a shaft B
that carries within the shell a cam C. A spring
finger D has its free end normally bearing against
the cam, and when the nose on the cam moves out
the spring finger, the latter is moved outwardly
so it contacts with a plug E in the side wall of the
case, although it is insulated therefrom. This
contact establishes a current through the plug,
spring finger and case.
The diagram, Fig. 53, illustrates the principles
of construction and arrangement of a high tension
jump spark ignition, in which the electrical
source is a battery actuating an induction coil.
High Tension With Battery and Coil.—The
battery A has one side connected up by wire B
with one terminal of the primary C in the induction
coil, and the other side of the battery has a
[132]
wire D leading to the contact maker. A switch E
is placed in the line of this wire.
The other terminal of the primary has a wire
F leading to the insulated contact plug G of the
contact maker. This completes the generating
circuit. The cam H is on a shaft I, which travels
one half the speed of the engine shaft.
One side of the secondary coil J has a wire K
leading to the spark plug, while the other terminal
of the secondary has a wire L which is grounded
on the engine M.
When the nose of the cam pushes over the
[133]
spring finger and closes the cam, the circuit
through the finger flows through the primary
coil and excites the secondary. When the cam
again immediately breaks the circuit a high tension
current is momentarily induced in the secondary,
so that the current leaps the gap in the
spark plug and makes the spark.
Metallic Core for Induction Coil.—In the
previous description of the induction coil it was
stated that the spool might be made of wood.
These coils are also provided with metal cores,
which can be used to make what is called a vibratory
coil.
The Condenser.—A necessary addition to the
circuiting provided by an induction coil, is a condenser.
This is used in the primary circuit to absorb
the self-induced current of the primary and
thus cause it to oppose the rapid fall of the primary
current.
The condenser is constructed of a number of
tinfoil sheets, of suitable size, each sheet having
[134]
a wing at one end, and these sheets are laid on
top of each other, with the wings of the alternate
sheets at opposite ends. Very thin sheets of
waxed paper are placed between the tin foil
sheets so that they are thus insulated from each
other.
The wings at the ends are used to make connections
for the conducting wires. The device
is not designed to conduct electricity, but to act
as a sort of absorbent, if it might so be termed.
The large surface affords a means where more or
less of the current moves from the conductor at
one end to the conductor at the other end, and
as it is designed to absorb a portion of the current
in the line it is merely bridged across from one
side of the circuit to the other.
The diagram, Fig. 55, represents the conventional
form of illustrating it in sketching electrical
devices.
Operation of a Vibrator Coil.—The illustration,
Fig. 56, shows the manner in which a vibrator
coil is constructed and operated. The coil
comprises a metal core A, the primary winding
[135]
B being connected at one terminal, by a wire C,
with a post D, and the other terminal by a wire
E with one side of a battery F. A switch G is
in the line of this conductor.
The post D holds the end of a vibrating spring
H, which has a hammer H´ on its free end, which
is adapted to contact with the end of the metal
core A, but is normally held out of contact, so
that it rests against the end of an adjusting screw
I which passes through a post J.
The post J is connected up with the battery by
a wire K, and a wire L also runs from the wire K
to the conductor C, through a condenser M.
[136]
The secondary coil N, has the outlet wires O,
P, which run to the spark plug Q on the engine.
The operation is as follows: When the switch
G closes the circuit, the battery thus thrown
in the primary coil magnetizes the core A, and the
hammer H´ is attracted to the end of the core,
thus breaking the circuit at the contact screw I.
The result is that the core is immediately demagnetized,
and the spring H draws the hammer
back to be again attracted by the core which is
again magnetized, so that the hammer on the vibrator
arm H goes back and forth with great
rapidity.
From the foregoing explanations it will be understood
how the primary induces a high tension
current in the secondary, and in order that the
spark may occur at the right time, a timer for
closing and opening the primary circuit must be
provided. By this means an induced high tension
current is caused to flow at the time the spark
is needed in the cycle of the engine operation.
The Distributer.—The distributer is a timing
device which controls both the primary and the
secondary currents, and it also has reference to
the revolving switch on the shaft of a magneto
whereby the current is distributed to the various
cylinders in regular order.
Fig. 57 shows a form of distributer which
[137]
will illustrate the construction. A is the shaft
which is driven at one half the engine speed. It
is usually run by suitable gearing direct from the
shaft of the magneto.
Its outer end rests in a bearing plate B, of insulating
material, which plate serves as the disk
to hold the contact plates, 1, 2, 3, 4, to correspond
with the four cylinders to which the current is
to be distributed.
Wires 5, 6, 7, and 8, run to the respective spark
plugs C from these contact plates. The projecting
end of the shaft A carries thereon a contact
finger D, which is designed to contact with the
respective plates, and an insulating ring E is interposed
[138]
between the shaft and finger so as to prevent
short circuiting of the high tension current.
On the side of the finger is a hub F, integral
therewith, and a wiper attached to a post bears
against the hub so as to form continuous contact.
A wire leads from the post to one terminal of the
secondary coil.
Circuiting With Distributer.—The diagram
Fig. 58 shows the complete connections of a system
[139]
which comprises a magneto, induction coil,
condenser, and a distributer. The magneto A has
on its armature shaft B two revolving disks C, D,
one of which must be insulated from the shaft,
and one end of the coil E of the armature is connected
with one of these disks, and the other end
of the coil is attached to the other disk.
Alongside of these disks is another disk F which
has projecting points G to engage with and make
temporary contact with a spring finger which actuates
the interrupter I, this being a contact
breaker which breaks the primary current at the
time a spark is required.
One terminal of this interrupter is connected by
a wire J with one end of the primary winding K,
of the induction coil, and the other end of the primary
has a wire L which runs to the disk C.
The other terminal of the interrupter has a wire
M leading to a condenser N, and from the other
side of the condenser is a wire O leading to the
wire J before described. The wiper of the other
disk D has a wire connection with the wire M.
The distributer shaft P is so mounted that it
may receive its motion from the shaft of the magneto,
and for this purpose the latter shaft has a
gear Q one half the diameter of the gear R on
the distributer shaft.
The distributer S has been described with sufficient
[140]
clearness in a preceding diagram, to show
how the wires T lead therefrom and connect up
with the spark plugs U. One terminal of the
secondary coil V is connected by a wire W with
the wiper X which contacts with the hub of the
distributer finger X´, and the other terminal of
the primary is grounded at Y, which represents
the metal of the engine.
[141]
CHAPTER IX
MECHANICAL DEVICES UTILIZED IN POWER
One of the most important things in enginery
is the capacity to determine the power developed.
Although the method of ascertaining this appears
to be somewhat complicated, it is really simple,
and will be comprehended the more readily if it
is constantly borne in mind that a certain weight
must be lifted a definite distance within a particular
time.
The Unit of Time.—The unit of time is either
the second, or the minute, usually the latter, because
it would be exceedingly difficult to make the
calculations, or rather to note the periods as short
as a second, and a very simple piece of mechanism
to ascertain this, is to mount a horizontal shaft
A, Fig. 59, in bearings B, B, and affix a crank C
at one end.
It will be assumed that the shaft is in anti-friction
bearings so that for the present we shall
not take into account any loss by way of friction.
A cord, with one end attached to the shaft and
the other fixed to a weight D, the latter weighing,
[142]
say 550 pounds, is adapted to be wound on the
shaft as it is turned by the crank.
Knowing the length of the cord and the time
required to wind it up, it will be an easy matter to
figure out the power exerted to lift the weight,
which means, the power developed in doing it.
Suppose the cord is 100 feet long, and it requires
one and a half minutes to raise the weight
the full limit of the cord. It is thus raising 550
pounds 100 feet in 45 seconds.
One horse power means that we must raise
550 pounds one foot in one second of time, hence
we have developed only 1/45th of one horse
power.
Instead of using the crank, this shaft may be
attached to the engine shaft so it will turn slowly.
Then add sufficient weight so that the engine will
just lift it, and wind the cord on the shaft.
[143]
You can then note the time, for, say, one minute,
and when the weight is lifted, make the following
calculation: Weight lifted one hundred feet in
one minute of time was 825 pounds. Multiply 100
by 825, which equals 82,500. This represents
foot pounds.
As there are 33,000 foot pounds in a horse
power, 82,500 divided by this figure will show that
21/2 horse power were developed.
The Proney Brake.—Such a device is difficult
to handle, but it is illustrated merely to show the
simplicity of the calculation. As a substitute for
this mechanism, a device, called the Proney brake
has been devised, which can be used without rewinding
of a cord. This is accomplished by
frictional means to indicate the power, and by the
use of weights to determine the lift.
The following is a brief description of its construction:
The engine shaft A, Fig. 60, which is
giving out its power, and which we want to test,
[144]
has thereon a pulley B, which turns in the direction
of the arrow. Resting on the upper side of
the pulley is a block C, which is attached to a
horizontal lever D by means of bolts E, these
bolts passing through the block C and lever D,
and having their lower ends attached to the terminals
of a short sprocket chain F.
Block segments G are placed between the chain
and pulley B, and when the bolts E are tightened
the pulley is held by frictional contact between
the block C and the segments G.
The free end of the lever has a limited vertical
movement between the stops H, and a swinging
receptacle I, on this end of the lever, is designed
to receive weights J.
The first thing to do is to get the dimensions of
the pulley, its speed, and length of the lever. By
measurement, the diameter of the pulley is six
inches. To get the circumference multiply this by
3.1416. The distance around, therefore, is a little
over 18.84 inches. The speed of the pulley
being 225 times per minute, this figure, multiplied
by 18.84, gives the perimeter of the pulley 4239
inches.
As we must have the figures in feet, dividing
4239 by 12, we have 353.25 feet.
The length of the lever from the center of the
pulley to the suspension point of the receptacle,
[145]
is 4 feet, and this divided by the radius of the
pulley (which is 6 inches), gives the leverage.
One half of six inches, is three inches, or 1/4 of
one foot, and 4 divided by this number, is 1' 4",
or 11/3 feet, which is the leverage.
Now, let us suppose the weight J is 1200 pounds.
This must be multiplied by the leverage, 11/3 feet,
which equals 1800, and this must be multiplied by
the feet of travel in the pulley, namely, 353.25,
which is equal to 635,850. This represents foot
pounds.
Now, following out the rule, as there are 33,000
foot pounds in a horse power, the foregoing figure,
635,850, divided by 33,000, equals 19 horse power
within a fraction.
Reversing Mechanism.—A thorough knowledge
of the principles underlying the various mechanical
devices, and their construction, is a part
of the education belonging to motors. One of the
important structures, although it is very simple,
when understood, requires some study to fully
master.
This has reference to reversing mechanism,
which is, in substance a controllable valve motion,
whereby the direction of the valve is regulated at
will.
All motions of this character throw the valve
to a neutral point which is intermediate the two
[146]
extremes, and the approach to the neutral means
a gradual decrease in the travel of the valve
until the reciprocating motion ceases entirely at
the neutral position.
Double Eccentric Reversing Gear.—A well
known form of gear is shown in Fig. 61, in which
the engine shaft A has two eccentrics B, C, the
upper eccentric B being connected with the upper
end of a slotted segment D by means of a stem
E, and the other eccentric C is connected with the
lower end of the segment by the stem F. The eccentrics
[147]
B, C, are mounted on the shaft so they
project in opposite directions.
The slotted segment carries therewith the pin
G of a valve rod H, and the upper end of the
segment has an eye I, to which eye is a rod J
operated by a lever.
By this arrangement the link may be raised or
lowered, and as the valve rod pin has no vertical
movement, either the connecting link E or F may
be brought into direct line with the valve rod H.
Fig. 61 shows the first position, in which
the valve rod H is in direct line with the upper
[148]
connecting rod E, actuated by the cam B.
Fig. 62 shows the neutral position. Here
the pin G serves as a fulcrum for the rocking
movement of the segment; whereas in Fig. 63 the
valve rod H is in line with the lower connecting
rod F, so that the valve is pushed to and fro by
the eccentric C.
It is more desirable, in many cases, to use a
single eccentric on the engine shaft, which can be
done by pivoting the segment L, Fig. 64, to a
stationary support M, and connecting one end of
the segment by a link N with the single eccentric
O.
In this construction the valve rod P is shifted
vertically by a rod Q, operated from the reversing
lever, thus providing a changeable motion through
one eccentric.
Balanced Slide Valves.—In the chapter pertaining
[149]
to the steam engine, a simple form of
slide valve was shown, and it was stated therein
that the pressure of the steam bearing on the
valve would quickly grind it down. To prevent
this various types of balanced valves have been
made, a sample of which is shown in Fig. 64.
The valve chest A has in its bottom two ports
C, D, leading to the opposite ends of the cylinder,
and within is the sliding valve E, which moves
beneath an adjustable plate F connected with the
top or cover G of the valve chest.
This is also modified, as shown in Fig. 66, in
which case the slide valve H bears against the
cover I at two points, so that as there is steam on
the upper surface to a slightly greater area than
on the lower side, there is sufficient downward
pressure to hold it firmly on its seat, and at the
same time not cause any undue grinding. This
valve also has double exhaust ports J, J.
[150]
Balanced Throttle Valve.—Fig. 67 will give a
fair idea of the construction of throttle valves,
the illustration showing its connection with a simple
type of governor.
Engine Governors.—Probably the oldest and
best known governor for regulating the inlet of
steam to an engine, is what is known as the Watt
design. This is shown in Fig. 68.
The pedestal A which supports the mechanism,
has an upwardly-projecting stem B, to the upper
end of which is a collar C, to which the oppositely-projecting
[151]
pendent arms D are hinged. These
arms carry balls E at their free ends.
The lower part of the stem has thereon a sliding
collar F, and links G, with their lower ends
hinged to the collar, have their upper ends attached
to the swinging arms D. The collar has
an annular groove at its lower end, to receive
therein the forked end of one limb of a bell-crank
lever H, the other limb of this lever being connected
up with the engine throttle, by means of a
link L.
[152]
Centrifugal motion serves to throw out the
balls, as indicated by the dotted lines J, and this
action raises the bell-crank lever, and opens the
throttle valve.
Numerous types of governors have been constructed,
some of which operate by gravity, in
connection with centrifugal action. Some are
made with the balls adapted to swing downwardly,
and thrown back by the action of springs. Others
have the balls sliding on horizontally-disposed
arms, and thrown back by the action of springs;
and gyroscopic governors are also made which
are very effective.
Fly wheel governors are not uncommon, which
are placed directly on the engine shaft, or placed
within the fly wheel itself, the latter being a
well known form for engines which move slowly.
Injectors.—The Injector is one of the anomalies
in mechanism. It actually forces water into a
boiler by the action of the steam itself, against its
[153]
own pressure. It is through the agency of condensation
that it is enabled to do this.
The illustration, Fig. 69, which represents the
original type of the device, comprises a shell A,
within which is a pair of conically formed tubes,
B, C, in line with each other, the small ends of the
tubes being pointed towards each other, and
slightly separated. The large end of the conical
tube C, which points toward the pipe D, which
leads to the water space of the boiler, has therein
a check valve E.
The steam inlet pipe F, has a contracted nozzle
G, to eject steam into the large end of the conical
tube B, and surrounding the nozzle F is a chamber
which has a pipe H leading out at one side,
through which cold water is drawn into the injector.
Surrounding the conical pipes B, C, is a chamber
I, which has a discharge pipe J. The action
of the device is very simple. When steam is permitted
to flow into the conical tube B, from the
nozzle G, it passes out through the drain port J,
and this produces a partial vacuum to form in the
space surrounding the nozzle G.
As a result water is drawn up through the pipe
H, and meeting with the steam condenses the latter,
thereby causing a still greater vacuum, and
this vacuum finally becomes so great that, with
[154]
the inrushing steam, and the rapid movement
through the conical tubes, past their separated
ends, a full discharge through the drain J is prevented.
As it now has no other place to go the check
valve E is unseated, and the cold water is forced
into the boiler through the pipe D, and this action
will continue as long as condensation takes
place at the nozzle G.
Many improvements have been made on the
original form, mostly in the direction of adjusting
the steam nozzle, and to provide the proper
proportion of flow between the steam and water,
as this must be adjusted to a nicety to be most
effective.
An example of a movable tube which closes the
[155]
outlet to the overflow, is shown in Fig. 70. The
steam inlet tube A is at one end of the shell, and
the outlet tube B to the boiler, at the other end,
and intermediate the two is a tube C, with its open
flaring end adapted to receive the steam from the
tube A. This tube is longitudinally-movable, so
that the controlling lever D may move it to and
fro.
A chamber E surrounds the nozzle A, and has
a water inlet pipe F, while the space G between
the ends of the pipes B, C, has an outlet H, a
single check valve I being interposed. In operation
the tube C may be adjusted the proper distance
from the end of the pipe B, and when the
current is once established through the injector,
the pipe C may be brought into contact with B,
and thus entirely cut out the movement of the
water to the overflow.
Feed Water Heater.—An apparatus of this
kind is designed to take the exhaust steam from
the engine and condense it, and from the condenser
it is again returned to the boiler. The
water thus used over again goes into the boiler at
a temperature of over 180 degrees, and thus
utilizes the heat that would otherwise be required
to raise the temperature of the water from the
natural heat, say 70, up to that point.
In Fig. 71 the illustration shows a typical
[156]
heater, which comprises an outer shell A, each
end having a double head, the inner head B being
designed to receive the ends of a plurality of
horizontally disposed pipes, and the outer heads
C, separated from the inner head so as to provide
chambers, one end having one, and the other head
being provided with two horizontal partitions D,
so the water may be diverted back and forth
through the three sets of pipes within the shell.
The three sets of pipes, E, F, and G, are so
arranged that they carry the water back and forth
from one head to the other, and for this purpose
the water for cooling the steam enters the port
H at one end, passes through the upper set of
pipes E to the other end, then back through the
same set of pipes on the other side of a partition,
not shown, and back and forth through the two
lower sets of pipes F, G.
[157]
The steam enters at the port I at the top of
the shell, and passes down, as it is condensed, being
discharged at the outlet J.
[158]
CHAPTER X
VALVES AND VALVE FITTINGS
In the use of steam, compressed gas, or any
medium which must have a controllable flow,
valves are a necessary element; and the important
point is to know what is best adapted for the use
which is required in each case.
For this reason one of the best guides is to fully
understand the construction of each. The following
illustrations and descriptions will give a good
idea of the various types in use.
Check Valve.—Fig. 72 shows a longitudinal
section of a check valve, which is designed to prevent
[159]
the water from returning or backing up from
the pressure side. The cylindrical body A is
threaded at each end, and has an inclined partition
B therein which has a circular aperture.
The upper side of the shell has an opening,
adapted to be closed by a cap C, large enough to
insert the valve D, which is hinged to the upper
side of the partition. Water or gas is forced in
through the valve in the direction of the arrow,
and the hinged valve is always in position to close
the opening in the partition.
[160]
In case the valve should leak it may be readily
ground by taking the small plug E from the opening,
and with a screw driver, turning the valve,
and thereby fit it snugly on its seat.
Gate Valve.—The cylindrical shell A has its
ends internally threaded, and is provided, midway
between its ends, with a partition wall B, having
a central aperture. The upper side of the shell
has an opening to receive the bonnet C, through
which the valve stem D passes. This stem carries
at its lower end a gate E which rests against the
partition B.
[161]
The stem D is threaded to screw into the
threaded bore of the gate. A packing gland F
surrounds the stem D. It will thus be seen that
the turning of the stem D draws the gate up
or down, and thus effects an opening, which provides
a direct passage for the water through the
valve body.
Globe Valve.—A globe valve has the advantage
that the valve is forced against its seat by
the pressure of the wheel, differing from the gate
valve, that depends on the pressure of the fluid to
keep it tight.
The valve body A has therein a Z-shaped partition
B, the intermediate, horizontally-disposed
limb of the partition being directly below the opening
through the body, which is designed to receive
the bonnet C.
The bonnet has a central vertical bore, the lower
end of which is threaded to receive the wheel spindle.
The lower end of the spindle carries the circular
valve, which is seated in the opening of the
Z-shaped partition.
The Corliss Valve.—The valve itself is of the
rotary type, as shown in Fig. 75, in which the port
A goes to the cylinder, and B is the passage for
the steam from the boiler. The cylindrical valve
body C has within the aperture B a gate D, one
edge of which rests against the abutment through
[162]
which the port A is formed, and this gate has
within it the bar E which is connected with the
crank outside of the casing.
The Corliss Valve-Operating Mechanism.—As
the operation of the valves in the Corliss type
of engine is so radically different from the ordinary
reciprocation engine, a side view of the
valve grouping and its connecting mechanism are
shown in Fig. 76.
The cylinder has an inlet valve A at each end,
and an outlet valve B at each end for the discharge
of the steam. C is a valve rod from the eccentric
which operates the valves, and D a wrist plate,
having an oscillatory or rocking motion around its
center E. The attachments F F, of the steam
rods, open the inlet ports A A, and G G, are the
attachments of exhaust rods which open and close
the exhaust valves B B. H H are catches which
can be unhooked from the stems of the valves A
by the governor rods J J.
[163]
The vertical links K, K are connected at their
lower ends with the pistons of dash pots, and
have their upper ends attached to the valve spindles,
and act to close the valves A A when the
catches H are released by the governor rods J
by means of the weights of the pistons in the dash
pots.
The dash pots L L act in such a manner as to
cushion the descent of the links K and thus prevent
undue shock. M is a wrist plate pin by which
the valve rod C can be released from the wrist
plate.
The whole purpose of the mechanism is to provide
a means for closing the valves which are at
[164]
the steam inlet ports, by a sudden action. The
exhaust valves, on the other hand, are not so
tripped but are connected directly with the wrist
plate which drives all four of the valves.
The wrist plate or spider has a rocking motion,
being driven by an eccentric rod from the engine-shaft.
The mechanism thus described gives a
variable admission as the load varies, but a constant
release of the exhaust and a constant compression
to act as a cushion.
It gives a high initial pressure in the cylinder,
and a sharp cut off, hence it is found to be very
efficient.
Angle Valve.—One of the most useful is the
angle valve, which is designed to take the place of
an angle bend or knee in the line of the piping.
The mechanism is the same as in the well known
[165]
globe valve construction, the bonnet A being on
a line with one of the right-angled limbs of the
body.
The pressure of the fluid should always be on
the lower side of the valve C, coming from the
direction of the arrow B, for the reason that
should the steam pressure be constant on the other
side, it would be difficult to repack the gland D
without cutting off the steam from the pipe line.
Referring back to the illustration of the globe
valve, it will be noticed that the same thing, so
far as it pertains to the direction of the steam,
applies in that construction, and a common mistake
is to permit the pressure of the steam to be
exerted so that it is constantly acting against the
packing of the spindle.
Rotary Valves.—Two forms of rotary valves
are shown, one as illustrated in Fig. 78, where the
[166]
rotating part, or plug, A has one straight-way
opening B, which coincides with two oppositely-projecting
ports C, D.
The other form, Fig. 79, has an L-shaped opening
E through the rotating plug F, and the casing,
in which the plug is mounted has three ports, one,
G, being the inlet, and the other two H, I, at right
angles for the discharge of the fluid.
Rotable Engine Valves.—So many different
forms of the rotable valve have been made, that
it is impossible to give more than a type of each.
For engine purposes the plugs are usually rotated
in unison with the engine shaft, and a single
delivery valve of this kind is shown in Fig. 80.
This has three ports in the casing, namely the
inlet port A, and two outlet ports C, D. The plug
has a curved cut out channel E, and this extends
around the plug a distance equal to nearly one-half
[167]
of the circumference, so that the steam will
be diverted into, say, B, for a period equal to one-quarter
turn of the plug, and then into port C, for
the same length of time.
Fig. 81 shows a valve which has a double action.
The plug G has two oppositely-disposed curved
channels, H, I, and the casing has a single inlet
port J, and two oppositely-disposed outlet ports
K, L.
When the plug turns the port L serves to convey
the live steam to the engine, while the other
port K at the same time acts as the exhaust, and
this condition is alternately reversed so that L
acts as the discharge port.
Throttle Valves.—The throttle valves here
illustrated are those used in connection with
gasoline engines. The best known is the Butterfly
valve, shown in Fig. 82, and this is also used as a
[168]
damper, for regulating the draft in furnaces and
stoves.
This type is made in two forms, one in which the
two wings of the valve are made to swing up or
down in unison, and the other, as illustrated,
where the disk A is in one piece, and turns with the
spindle B to which it is fixed.
In Fig. 83 the wing C is curved, so that by swinging
it around the circle, the opening of the discharge
pipe D is opened or closed.
Another design of throttle is represented in
Fig. 84. One side of the pipe A has a lateral extension
B, which is double, so as to receive therein
a sliding plate C, which is easily controllable from
the outside.
Fig. 85 shows a form of double sliding plate,
where the double lateral extensions project out in
opposite directions, as at D, D, and within these
extensions are sliding plates which are secured
together in such a way that as one is pushed in
[169]
the other also moves in, and thus acts in unison
to close or to open the space between them. It is
the most perfect form of throttle valve, as it
causes the gases to open directly into the center
of the outgoing pipe.
Blow-off Valves.—The illustration shows a
type of valve which is used on steamboats and very
largely on farm boilers throughout the country.
The pipe A from the boiler has cast therewith, or
otherwise attached, a collar B, which has a standard
C projecting upwardly at one side, to the
upper end of which is hinged a horizontal lever D,
which has a weight at its other end.
The upper end of the pipe has a conically-ground
seat, to receive a conical valve E, the stem
of which is hinged, as at F, to the level. The
weight may be adjusted to the pressure desired
before blowing out and the only feature in this
type of valve is the character of the valve seat,
[170]
which is liable, through rust, and other causes, to
leak.
Pop, or Safety Valve.—As it has been found
more desirable and practical to use a form of
valve which is not liable to deterioration, and also
to so arrange it that it may be manually opened,
the Safety Pop valve was devised.
This is shown in Fig. 87, in which the valve
seat base A, which is attached to the top of the
boiler, has a cup-shaped outlet B, that is screwed
to it, and this carries a lever C, by means of
which the valve may be manually opened.
[171]
A vertical shell D is attached to the cup-shaped
portion, and this has a removable cap E. The
valve F is seated within a socket in the base, and
has a disk head, to receive the lower end of a
coiled spring G.
The spring is supported in position by a stem
H which extends down from the head, and an adjusting
nut I serves to regulate the pressure desired
before the steam in the boiler can act.
[172]
CHAPTER XI
CAMS AND ECCENTRICS
More or less confusion arises from the terms
cams and eccentrics. A cam is a wheel which
may be either regular in shape, like a heart-wheel,
or irregular, like a wiper-wheel.
The object in all forms of cams is to change
motion from a regular into an irregular, or reversely,
and the motion may be accelerated or retarded
at certain points, or inverted into an intermittent
or reciprocating movement, dependent
on the shape of the cam.
A cam may be in the shape of a slotted or
grooved plate, like the needle bar of a sewing machine,
where a crank pin works in the slot, and
this transmits an irregular vertical movement to
the needle.
A cam may have its edge provided with teeth,
which engage with the teeth of the engaging
wheel, and thus impart, not only an irregular motion
but also a turning movement, such forms being
largely used to give a quickly rising or falling
motion.
[173]
What are called wiper-wheels are designed to
give an abrupt motion and such types are used in
trip hammers, and to operate stamp mills. In
harvesters, printing presses, sewing machines,
and mechanism of that type, the cam is used in
a variety of forms, some of them very ingenious
and complicated.
Cams are also used for cutting machines, or in
tracing apparatus where it would be impossible to
use ordinary mechanism. All such forms are special,
requiring care and study to make their movements
co-relate with the other parts of the mechanism
that they are connected up with.
Simple Cams.—Fig. 88 shows a form of the
most simple character, used, with some modifications,
to a larger extent than any other. It is
called the heart-shaped cam, and is the regular
type.
[174]
Fig. 89 is an elliptical cam, which is also
regular. What is meant by regular is a form that
is the same in each half portion of its rotation.
Fig. 90 is a double elliptic, which gives a
regular movement double the number of times of
that produced by the preceding figure, and the
differences between the measurements across the
major and minor axes may vary, relatively, to any
extent.
Wiper Wheels.—Wiper wheels are cams which
give a quick motion to mechanism, the most common
form being the single wiper, as shown in
Fig. 91.
The double wiper cam, Fig. 92, has, in some
mechanism, a pronounced difference between the
lengths of the two fingers which form the wipers.
The form of cam shown in Fig. 93 is one much
used in iron works for setting in motion the tilt
hammer. Only three fingers are shown, and by
enlarging the cam at least a dozen of these projecting
points may be employed.
Cam Sectors.—Fig. 94 shows a type of cam
[175]
which is designed for rock shafts. The object
of this form of cam is to impart a gradually increasing
motion to a shaft. Assuming that A is
the driving shaft, and B the driven shaft, the
cam C, with its short end D, in contact with the
long end E of the sector F, causes the shaft B to
travel at a more accelerated speed as the other
edges G, H, approach each other.
Cylinder Cam.—Fig. 95 shows one form of
cylinder A with a groove B in it, which serves
[176]
as a means for moving a bar C back and forth.
The bar has a projecting pin D, which travels in
the groove.
This form of movement may be modified in
many ways, as for instance in Fig. 96, where the
drum E has a sinuous groove F to reciprocate a
bar G to and fro, the groove being either regular,
so as to give a continuous back and forth movement
of the bar; or adapted to give an irregular
motion to the bar.
Double Cam Motion.—Cams may also be so
arranged that a single one will produce motions
in different directions successively, as illustrated
in Fig. 97. The horizontal bar A, hinged at B
to the upper end of a link C, has its free end resting
on the cam D.
The arm A has also a right-angled arm E extending
downwardly, and is kept in contact with
[177]
the cam by means of a spring F. Connecting
rods G, H, may be hinged to the arm E and bar
A, respectively, so as to give motion to them in
opposite directions as the cam revolves.
Eccentrics.—An eccentric is one in which the
cam or wheel itself is circular in form, but is
mounted on a shaft out of its true center. An eccentric
may be a cam, but a cam is not always eccentric
in its shape. The term is one in direct
contrast with the word eccentric.
Fig. 98 shows the wheel, or the cam, which is
regular in outline, that is circular in form, but
is mounted on the shaft out of its true center. In
this case it is properly called an eccentric cam but
in enginery parlance it is known as the eccentric,
as represented in Fig. 99.
Triangularly-Formed Eccentric.—Fig. 100
illustrates a form of cam which has been used on
engines. The yoke A being integral with the bar
B, gives a reciprocating motion to the latter, and
[178]
the triangular form of the cam C, which is
mounted on the shaft D, makes a stop motion at
each half-revolution, then produces a quick motion,
and a slight stop only, at the half turn, and
the return is then as sudden as the motion in the
other direction.
[179]
CHAPTER XII
GEARS AND GEARING
For the purpose of showing how motion may
be converted from a straight line or from a circular
movement into any other form or direction,
and how such change may be varied in speed, or
made regular or irregular, the following examples
are given, which may be an aid in determining
other mechanical devices which can be specially
arranged to do particular work.
While cams and eccentrics may be relied on to
a certain extent, there are numerous places where
the motion must be made positive and continued.
This can be done only by using gearing in some
form, or such devices as require teeth to transmit
the motion from one element to the other.
The following illustrations do not by any means
show all the forms which have been constructed
and used in different machines, but they have been
selected as types merely, in order to give the suggestions
for other forms.
Racks and Pinions.—The rack and pinion is the
most universal piece of mechanism for changing
[180]
motion. Fig. 101 illustrates it in its most simple
form. When constructed in the manner
shown in this figure it is necessary that the shaft
which carries the pinion shall have a rocking motion,
or the rack itself must reciprocate in order
to impart a rocking motion to the shaft.
This is the case also in the device shown in Fig.
102, where two rack bars are employed. A
study of the cams and eccentrics will show that
the transference of motion is limited, the distances
being generally very small; so that the
rack and pinions add considerably to the scope
of the movement.
The Mangle Rack.—The device called the mangle
rack is resorted to where a back and forth, or
[181]
a reciprocating movement is to be imparted to an
element by a continuous rotary motion.
The plain mangle racks are shown in Figs. 103
and 104, the former of which has teeth on the inside
of the opposite parallel limbs, and the latter,
Fig. 104, having teeth not only on the parallel
sides, but also around the circular parts at the
ends.
This form of rack may be modified so that an
alternate circular motion will be produced during
[182]
the movement of the rack in either direction.
Fig. 105 is such an instance. A pinion within
such a rack will turn first in one direction, and
then in the next in the other direction, and so on.
If the rack is drawn back and forth the motion
imparted to the pinion will be such as to give a
continuous rocking motion to the pinion.
Controlling the Pinion.—Many devices have
been resorted to for the purpose of keeping the
pinion in engagement with the teeth of the mangle
rack. One such method is shown in Fig. 106.
The rack A has at one side a plate B, within
which is a groove C, to receive the end of the shaft
D, which carries the pinion E. As the mangle rack
moves to such a position that it reaches the end
of the teeth F on one limb, the groove C diverts
the pinion over to the other set of teeth G.
All these mangle forms are substitutes for
cranks, with the advantage that the mangle gives
a uniform motion to a bar, whereas the to and fro
[183]
motion of the crank is not the same at all points of
its travel.
Examine the diagram, Fig. 107, and note the
movement of the pin A which moves along the
path B. The crank C in its turning movement
around the circle D, moves the pin A into the different
positions 1, 2, 3, etc., which correspond
with the positions on the circle D.
The Dead Centers.—There is also another advantage
which the rack possesses. Where reciprocating
motion is converted into circular motion,
as in the case of the ordinary steam engine,
there are two points in the travel of a crank where
the thrust of the piston is not effective, and that
is at what is called the dead centers.
In the diagram, Fig. 108, the ineffectiveness of
the thrust is shown at those points.
Let A represent the piston pushing in the direction
of the arrow B against the crank C. When
in this position the thrust is the most effective,
and through the arc running from D to E, and
[184]
from H to G, the cylinder does fully four-fifths of
the work of the engine.
While the crank is turning from G to D, or
from I to J, and from K to L, no work is done
which is of any value as power.
If, therefore, a mangle bar should be used instead
of the crank it would add greatly to the effectiveness
of the steam used in the cylinder.
Crank Motion Substitute.—In Fig. 109 the
pinion A is mounted so that its shaft is in a vertical
[185]
slot B in a frame C. The mangle rack D, in
this case, has teeth on its outer edge, and is made
in an elongated form. The pinion shaft moves up
and down the slot and thus guides the pinion
around the ends of the rack.
Mangle Wheels.—The form which is the most
universal in its application is what is called the
mangle wheel. In Fig. 110 is shown a type
wherein the motion in both directions is uniform.
Mangle wheels take their names from the ironing
machines called mangles. In apparatus of
this kind the movement back and forth is a slow
one, and the particular form of wheels was made
in order to facilitate the operation of such machines.
In some mangles the work between the
rollers is uniform back and forth. In others the
[186]
work is done in one direction only, requiring a
quick return.
In still other machines arrangements are made
to provide for short strokes, and for different
speeds in the opposite directions, under certain
conditions, so that this requirement has called
forth the production of many forms of wheels,
some of them very ingenious.
The figure referred to has a wheel A, on one
side of which is a peculiarly-formed continuous
slot B, somewhat heart-shaped in general outline,
one portion of the slot being concentric with
the shaft C.
Within the convolutions of the groove is a set
of teeth D, concentric with the shaft C. The
pinion E, which meshes with the teeth D, has the
end of its shaft F resting in the groove B, and it
is also guided within a vertical slotted bar G.
[187]
The pinion E, therefore, travels over the same
teeth in both directions, and gives a regular to and
fro motion.
Quick Return Motion.—In contradistinction
to this is a wheel A, Fig. 111, which has a pair
of curved parallel slots, with teeth surrounding
the slots. When the wheel turns nearly the entire
revolution, with the pinion in contact with
the outer set of teeth, the movement transmitted
to the mangle wheel is a slow one.
When the pinion arrives at the turn in the
groove and is carried around so the inner teeth
are in engagement with the pinion, a quick return
is imparted to the wheel.
Accelerated Motion.—Aside from the rack and
mangle type of movement, are those which are
[188]
strictly gears, one of them being a volute form,
shown in Fig. 112. This gear is a face plate A,
which has teeth B on one face, which are spirally-formed
around the plate. These mesh with a
pinion C, carried on a horizontal shaft D. This
shaft is feathered, as shown at E, so that it will
carry the gear along from end to end.
The gear has cheek-pieces F to guide it along
the track of teeth. As the teeth approach the
center of the wheel A, the latter impart a motion
to the gear which is more than twice the speed that
it receives at the starting point, the speed being
a gradually increasing one.
Quick Return Gearing.—Another much more
simple type of gearing, which gives a slow forward
[189]
speed and a quick return action, is illustrated
in Fig. 113. A is a gear with internal teeth
through one half of its circumference, and its hub
B has teeth on its half which is opposite the teeth
of the rim.
A pinion C on a shaft D is so journaled that
during one half of the rotation of the wheel A,
it engages with the rim teeth, and during the
other half with the hub teeth. As the hub B
and gear C are the same diameter, one half turn
of the pinion C will give a half turn to the wheel
A.
As the rim teeth of the wheel A are three times
the diameter of the pinion C, the latter must turn
once and a half around to make a half revolution
of the wheel A.
Scroll Gearing.—This is a type of gearing
[190]
whereby at the close of each revolution the speed
may be greater or less than at the beginning. It
comprises two similarly-constructed gears A, B,
each with its perimeter scroll-shaped, as shown.
The diagram shows their positions at the beginning
of the rotation, the short radial limb of one
gear being in line with the long limb of the other
gear, hence, when the gears rotate, their speeds
relative to each other change, being constantly
accelerated in one or decreased in the other.
[191]
CHAPTER XIII
SPECIAL TYPES OF ENGINES
In describing various special types of motors,
attention is first directed to that class which depend
on the development of heat in various gases,
and this also necessitates some explanation of ice-making
machinery, and the principles underlying
refrigeration.
It is not an anomaly to say that to make ice
requires heat. Ice and boiling water represent
merely the opposites of a certain scale in the condition
of matter, just as we speak of light and
darkness, up and down, and like expressions.
We are apt to think zero weather is very cold.
Freezing weather is a temperature of 32 degrees.
At the poles 70 degrees below have been recorded.
In interstellar space,—that is, the region between
the planets, it is assumed that the temperature is
about 513 degrees Fahrenheit, below zero, called
absolute zero.
The highest heat which we are able to produce
artificially, is about 10,000 degrees by means of
the electric arc. We thus have a range of over
[192]
10,500 degrees of heat, but it is well known that
heat extends over a much higher range.
Assuming, however, that the figures given represent
the limit, it will be seen that the difference
between ice and boiling water, namely, 180 degrees,
is a very small range compared with the
temperatures referred to.
In order to effect this change power is necessary,
and power requires a motor of some kind.
Hence it is, that to make a lower temperature, a
higher degree of heat is necessary, and in the
transit between a high and a low temperature,
there is considerable loss in this respect, as in
every other phase of power mechanism, as has
been pointed out in a previous chapter.
In order that we may clearly understand
the phenomena of heat and cold, let us take a receiver
which holds a cubic foot of gas or liquid,
and exhaust all the air from it so the vacuum will
be equivalent to the atmospheric pressure, namely,
14.7 pounds per square inch.
Alongside is a small vessel containing one cubic
inch of water, which is heated so that it is converted
into steam, and is permitted to exhaust
into the receiver. When all the water is converted
into steam and fills the receiver we shall
have the same pressure inside the receiver as on
the outside.
[193]
It will be assumed, of course, that there has
been no loss by condensation, and that the cubic
inch of water has been expanded 1700 times by
its conversion into steam.
In a short time the steam will condense into
water, and we now have, again, a partial vacuum
in the receiver, due, of course, to the change in
bulk from steam to water. Each time the liquid
is heated it produces a pressure, and the pressure
indicates the presence of heat; and whenever
it cools a loss of pressure is indicated, and
that represents cold, or the opposite of heat.
Now, putting these two things together, we get
the starting point necessary in the development of
power. Let us carry the experiment a step further.
Liquids are not compressible. Gases are.
The first step then is to take a gas and compress
it, which gives it an increase of heat temperature,
dependent on the pressure.
If the same receiver is used, and say, two atmospheres
are compressed within it, so that it has
two temperatures, and the exterior air cools it
down to the same temperature of the surrounding
atmosphere, we are ready to use the air within
to continue the experiment.
Let us convey this compressed gas through
pipes, and thus permit it to expand; in doing so
the area within the pipes, which is very much
[194]
greater than that of the receiver, grows colder,
due to the rarefied gases within. Now bearing in
mind the previous statement, that loss of pressure
indicates a lowering of temperature, we can
see that first expanding the gas, or air, by heat,
and then allowing it to cool, or to produce the
heat by compressing it, and afterwards permitting
it to exhaust into a space which rarefies it,
will make a lower temperature.
It is this principle which is used in all refrigerating
machines, whereby the cool pipes extract
the heat from the surrounding atmosphere,
or when making ice, from the water itself, and
this temperature may be lowered to any extent desired,
dependent on the degree of rarefaction produced.
Let us now see how this applies to the generation
of power in which we are more particularly
interested.
All liquids do not evaporate at the same temperature
as water. Some require a great deal
more than 212 degrees; others, like, for instance,
dioxide-of-carbon, will evaporate at 110 degrees,
or about one half the heat necessary to turn
water into steam.
On the other hand, all gases act alike so far as
their heat absorption is concerned, so that by
using a material with a low evaporative unit, less
[195]
fuel will be required to get the same expansion,
which means the same power.
To illustrate this, let us assume that we have
equal quantities of water, and of dioxide-of-carbon,
and that is to be converted into a gas. It will
take just double the amount of fuel to convert the
water into a gaseous state. As both are now in
the same condition, the law of heat absorption is
the same from this time on.
The dioxide-of-carbon engine is one, therefore,
which uses the vapor of this material, which, after
passing through the engine, is condensed and
pumped back to the boiler to be used over and
over.
In like manner, also, ether, which has a low
point of vaporization, is used in some engines,
the principle being the same as the foregoing
type.
Rotary Engines.—Many attempts have been
made to produce a rotary type of steam engine,
and also to adapt it for use as an internal combustion
motor.
The problem is a complicated one for the following
reasons: First, it is difficult to provide
for cut-off and expansion. A rotating type, to
be efficient, must turn at a high rate of speed,
and this makes the task a more trying one. Second,
the apparent impossibility of properly packing
[196]
the pistons. The result is a waste of steam,
or the gas used to furnish the power. Third, the
difficulty in providing a suitable abutment so as
to confine the steam or gas, and make it operative
against the piston.
In Fig. 115 is shown a type of rotary which
is a fair sample of the characteristics of all motors
of this form. It comprises an outer cylindrical
shell, or casing, A, having a bore through
the ends, which is above the true center of the
shell, to receive a shaft B.
This shaft carries a revolving drum C of such
[197]
dimensions that it is in contact with the shell at
its upper side only, as shown at D, leaving a channel
E around the other portions of the drum.
The steam inlet is at F, which is one-eighth of
the distance around the cylinder, and the exhaust
is at G, the same distance from the point D, on
the other side. The inlet and the outlet pipes
are, therefore, at the contracted parts of the
channel.
The drum has a pair of radially-movable blades
H H´, which may move independently of each
other, but usually they are connected together,
thus dispensing with the use of any springs to
keep their ends in contact with the shell.
When steam enters the inlet F the pressure
against the blade H drives the drum to the right,
and the drum and shell, by contacting at D, form
an abutment. Each charge of steam drives the
drum a little over a half revolution.
A great deal of ingenuity has been exercised to
arrange this abutment so that the blades may pass
and provide a steam space for a new supply of
steam. In certain types a revolving abutment is
formed, as shown, for instance, in Fig. 116.
The shell A, in this case, has two oppositely-disposed
inlet and outlet ports, B, C, respectively,
and between each set of ports is a revolving gate,
formed of four wings D, mounted on a shaft E,
[198]
in a housing outside of the circular path F, between
the drum G and shell A.
The drum G is mounted on a shaft H which is
centrally within the shell, and it has two oppositely-projecting
rigid blades I. When steam
enters either of the supply ports B, the drum is
rotated, and when the blades reach the revolving
gates, the latter are turned by the blades, or, they
may be actuated by mechanism connected up
with the driving shaft.
Caloric Engine.—This is an engine which is
dependent on its action upon the elastic force of
[199]
air which is expanded by heat. The cylinder of
such a motor has means for heating it, and thus
expanding the air, and a compressor is usually
employed which is operated by the engine itself,
to force compressed air into the cylinder.
It is not an economical engine to work, but it
is frequently used in mines, in which case the
compressor is located at the surface, and the
engine operated within the mine, thus serving a
double purpose, that of supplying power, and also
furnishing the interior with fresh air.
All engines of this character must run at a slow
speed, for the reason that air does not absorb
heat rapidly, and sufficient time must be given
to heat up and expand the air, so as to make it
effective.
Adhesion Engine.—A curious exhibition of the
action of a gas against a solid, is shown in what
is called an Adhesion Engine. Fig. 117 shows its
construction. A plurality of disks A are mounted
on a shaft B, these disks being slightly separated
from each other.
The steam discharge pipe C is flattened at its
emission end, as shown at D, so the steam will
contact with all the disks. The steam merely contacts
with the sides of the disks, the movement of
the steam being substantially on the plane of the
disks themselves, and the action sets up a rapid
[200]
rotation, and develops a wonderful amount of
power.
It will be understood that the disks are enclosed
by a suitable casing, so that the steam is
carried around and discharged at a point about
three quarters of the distance in the circumference.
This motor is given to illustrate a phase of the
subject in the application of a motor fluid, like
steam, or heated gases, that shows great possibilities.
It also points out a third direction in which
an expansive fluid may be used.
Thus the two well-known methods, namely,
pressure, and impact forces, may be supplemented
by the principle of adhesion, in which the expansive
[201]
force of a gas, passing alongside of and in
contact with a plain surface, may drag along the
surface in its train.
Such an exhibition of force has an analogy in
nature by what is known as capillary attraction,
which shows adhesion. For instance, sap flowing
up the pores of trees, or water moving along the
fibers of blotting paper, illustrates movement of
liquids when brought into contact with solids.
[202]
CHAPTER XIV
ENGINERY IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE HUMAN RACE
The energy of a nation may be expressed by
its horse power. It is not numbers, or intellect,
or character, or beliefs that indicate the progress
of a people in a material sense.
It is curious how closely related enginery is with
the advancement of a people. Nothing can be
more striking to illustrate this than railroads as
a feature of development in any country.
Power in Transportation.—Without the construction
and maintenance of mechanical power,
railroads would be impossible. To be able to
quickly and cheaply move from place to place, is
the most important factor in human life. The
ability of people to interchange commodities, and
to associate with others who are not in their own
intimate community, are the greatest civilizing
agencies in the world.
Power vs. Education and the Arts.—Education,
the cultivation of the fine arts, and the desire
for luxuries, without the capacity for quickly interchanging
commodities and to intermingle with
[203]
each other, are ineffectual to advance the interests
of any nation, or to maintain its prosperity.
Lack of Power in the Ancient World.—The
Greeks and the Romans had a civilization which
is a wonder even to the people of our day. They
had the arts and architecture which are now regarded
as superb and incomparable. They had
schools of philosophy and academies of learning;
their sculpture excites the admiration of the
world; and they laid the foundation theories of
government from which we have obtained the
basis of our laws.
The Early Days of the Republic.—When our
forefathers established the Republic there were
many misgivings as to the wisdom of including
within its scope such a large area as the entire
Atlantic seacoast. From Maine to Florida the
distance is 1250 miles; and from New York to the
Mississippi 900 miles, comprising an area of
1,200,000 square miles.
How could such an immense country ever hold
itself together? It was an area nearly as large as
that controlled by Rome when at the height of
her power. If it was impossible for the force
of Roman arms to hold such a region within its
control, how much more difficult it would be for
the Colonies to expect cohesion among their scattered
peoples.
[204]
Lack of Cohesiveness in a Country Without
Power.—Those arguments were based on the
knowledge that every country in ancient times
broke apart because there was no unity of interest
established, and because the different parts of
the same empire did not become acquainted or
associated with each other.
The Railroad as a Factor in Civilization.—The
introduction of railroads, by virtue of motive
power, changed the whole philosophy of history
in this respect. Even in our own country
an example of the value of railroads was shown
in the binding effect which they produced between
the East and the West prior to the Civil War.
All railroads, before that period, ran east and
west. Few extended north and south. It is popularly
assumed that the antagonism between the
North and the South grew out of the question of
slavery. This is, no doubt, largely so, as an immediate
cause, but it was the direct cause which
prevented the building of railroads between the
two sections.
It simply reënforces the argument that the motor,
the great power of enginery, was not brought
into play to unite people who were antagonistic,
and who could not, due to imperfect communication,
understand each other.
To-day the United States contains an area
[205]
nearly as great as the whole of Europe, including
Russia, with their twenty, or more, different governments.
Here we have a united country, with
similar laws, habits, customs and religions
throughout. In many of those foreign countries
the people of adjoining provinces are totally unlike
in their characteristics.
It has been shown that wherever this is the case
it is due to lack of quick and cheap intercommunication.
The Wonderful Effects of Power.—This
remarkable similarity in the conditions of the
people throughout the United States is due to the
railroads, that great personification of power, notwithstanding
the diverse customs and habits of
the people which daily come to our shores and
spread out over our vast country.
It has unified the people. It has made San
Francisco nearer to New York than Berlin was
to Paris in the time of Napoleon. The people
in Maine and Texas are neighbors. The results
have been so far reaching that it has given stability
to the government greater than any other
force.
But there is another lesson just as wonderful
to contemplate. England has an area of only
about 58,000 square miles, about the same size as
either Florida, Illinois, or Wisconsin.
[206]
England as a User of Power.—The enginery
within her borders is greater than the combined
energy of all the people on the globe. Through
the wonderful force thus set in motion by her
remarkable industries she has become the great
manufacturing empire of the world, and has called
into existence a carrying fleet of vessels, also controlled
by motors, so stupendous as to be beyond
belief.
We may well contemplate the great changes
which have been brought about by the fact that
man has developed and is using power in every
line of work which engages his activities.
The Automobile.—He does not, in progressive
countries, depend on the muscle of the man, or on
the sinews of animals. These are too weak and
too slow for his needs. Look at the changes
brought about by the automobile industry within
the past ten years. What will the next century
bring forth?
Artificial power, if we may so term it, is a late
development. It is very young when compared
with the history of man.
High Character of Motor Study.—The study
of motors requires intellect of a high order. It
is a theme which is not only interesting and attractive
to the boy, but the mastery of the subject
[207]
in only one of its many details, opens up a
field of profit and emoluments.
The Unlimited Field of Power.—It is a field
which is ever broadening. The student need not
fear that competition will be too great, or the opportunities
too limited, and if these pages will
succeed, in only a small measure, in teaching the
fundamental ideas, we shall be repaid for the
efforts in bringing together the facts presented.
[208]
CHAPTER XV
THE ENERGY OF THE SUN, AND HOW
HEAT IS MEASURED
In the first chapter we tried to give a clear view
of the prime factors necessary to develop motion.
The boy must thoroughly understand the principles
involved, before his mind can fully grasp the
ideas essential in the undertaking.
While the steam engine has been the prime
motor for moving machinery, it is far from being
efficient, owing to the loss of two-thirds of the
energy of the fuel in the various steps from the
coal pile to the turning machinery.
First, the fuel is imperfectly consumed, the
amount of air admitted to the burning mass being
inadequate to produce perfect combustion.
Second, the mechanical device, known as the
boiler, is not so constructed that the water is able
to completely absorb the heat of the fuel.
Third, the engine is not able to continuously
utilize the expansive force of the steam at every
point in the revolution of the crankshaft.
Fourth, radiation, the dissipation of heat, and
condensation, are always at work, and thus detract
from the efficiency of the engine.
[209]
The gasoline motor, the next prime motor of
importance, is still less efficient in point of fuel
economy, since less than one-third of the fuel is
actually represented in the mechanism which it
turns.
The production of energy, in both cases, involves
the construction of a multiplicity of devices
and accessories, many of them difficult to make
and hard to understand.
To produce power for commercial purposes, at
least two things are absolutely essential. First,
there must be uniformity in the character of the
power produced; and, second, it must be available
everywhere.
Water is the cheapest prime power, but its use
is limited to streams or moving bodies of water.
If derived from the air currents no dependence
can be placed on the regularity of the energy.
Heat is the only universal power on the globe.
The sun is the great source of energy. Each year
it expends in heat a sufficient force to consume
over sixty lumps of coal, each equal to the weight
of the earth.
Of that vast amount the earth receives only a
small part, but the portion which does come to
it is equal to about one horse power acting continuously
over every thirty square feet of the surface
of our globe.
[210]
The great problem, in the minds of engineers,
from the time the steam engine became a factor,
was to find some means whereby that energy
might be utilized, instead of getting it by way of
burning a fuel.
One of the first methods proposed was to use
a lens or a series of mirrors, by means of which
the rays might be focused on some object, or
materials, and thus produce the heat necessary
for expansion, without the use of fuel.
Wonderful results have been produced by this
method; but here, again, man meets with a great
obstacle. The heat of the sun does not reach us
uniformly in its intensity; clouds intervene and cut
off the rays; the seasons modify the temperature;
and the rotation of the globe constantly changes
the direction of the beams which fall upon the lens.
The second method consists in using boxes covered
with glass, the interior being blackened to
absorb the heat, and by that means transmit the
energy to water, or other substances adapted to
produce the expansive force.
Devices of this character are so effective that
temperatures much above the boiling point of
water have been obtained. The system is, however,
subject to the same drawbacks that are urged
against the lens, namely, that the heat is irregular,
and open to great variations.
[211]
These defects, in time, may be overcome, in
conserving the force, by using storage batteries,
but to do so means the change from one form of
energy to another, and every change means loss
in power.
The great problem of the day is this one of the
conversion of heat into work. It is being done
daily, but the boy should understand that the
direct conversion is what is required. For instance,
to convert the energy, which is in coal,
into the light of an electric lamp, requires at least
five transformations in the form of power, which
may be designated as follows:
1. The burning of the coal.
2. The conversion of the heat thus produced
into steam.
3. The pressure of the steam into a continuous
circular motion in the steam engine.
4. The circular motion of the steam engine into
an electric current by means of a dynamo.
5. The change from the current form of energy
to the production of an incandescent light in the
lamp itself, by the resistance which the carbon
film offers to the passage of the current. Should
an inventor succeed in eliminating only one of
the foregoing steps, he would be hailed as a genius,
and millions would not be sufficient to compensate
the fortunate one who should be able
[212]
to dispense with three of the steps set forth.
The Measurement of Heat.—To measure heat
means something more than simply to take the
temperature. As heat is work, or energy, there
must be a means whereby that energy can be expressed.
It has been said that the basis of all true science
consists in correct definitions. The terms used,
therefore, must be uniform, and should be used
to express certain definite things. When those
are understood then it is an easy matter for the
student to grope his way along, as he meets the
different obstacles, for he will know how to
recognize them.
Before specifically explaining the measurement
it might be well to understand some of the terms
used in connection with heat. The original theory
of heat was, that it was composed of certain
material, although that matter was supposed to
be subtle, imponderable and pervading everything.
This imponderable substance was called Caloric.
It was supposed that these particles mutually
attracted and repelled each other, and were also
attracted and repelled by other bodies, so that
they contracted and expanded.
The phenomenon of heat was thus accounted
for by the explanation that the expansion and
[213]
contraction made the heat. This was known as
the Material Theory of Heat.
But that phase of the explanation has now been
abandoned, in favor of what is known as the
dynamical, or mechanical theory, which is regarded
merely as a mode of motion, or a sort
of vibration, wherein the particles move among
each other, with greater or less rapidity or in
some particular manner.
Thus, the movements of the atoms may be accelerated,
or caused to act in a certain way, by
friction, by percussion, by compression, or by
combustion. Heat is the universal result of either
of those physical movements.
Notwithstanding that the material theory of
heat is now abandoned, scientists have retained,
as the basis of all heat measurements, the name
which was given to the imponderable substance,
namely, Caloric.
It is generally written Calorie, in the text books.
A calorie has reference to the quantity of heat
which will raise the temperature of one kilogram
of water, one degree Centigrade.
As one kilogram is equal to about two pounds,
three and a quarter ounces, and one degree Centigrade
is the same as one and two-thirds degrees
Fahrenheit, it would be more clearly expressed by
stating that a caloric is the quantity of heat required
[214]
to raise the temperature of one and one-fifth
pound of water one degree Fahrenheit.
This is known as the scientific unit of the
thermal or heat value of a caloric. But the engineering
unit is what is called the British Thermal
Unit, and designated in all books as B. T. U.
This is calculated by the amount of heat which
is necessary to raise a kilogram of water one
degree Fahrenheit. According to Berthelot, the
relative value of calorics and B. T. U. are as
follows:
HEATS OF COMBUSTION
When it is understood that heat is transmitted
in three different ways, the value of a measuring
instrument, or a unit, will become apparent.
Thus, heat may be transmitted either by conduction,
convection, or radiation.
[215]
Conduction is the method whereby heat is transmitted
from one particle to another particle, or
from one end of a rod, or other material to the
other end. Some materials will conduct the heat
much quicker than others, but if we have a standard,
such as the calorie, then the amount of heat
transmitted and also the amount lost on the way
may be measured.
Convection applies to the transmission of heat
through liquids and gases. If heat is applied
to the top or surface of a liquid, the lower part
will not be affected by it. If the heat is applied
below, then a movement of the gas or liquid begins
to take place, the heated part moving to the
top, and the cooler portions going down and thus
setting up what are called convection currents.
Radiation has reference to the transference
of heat from one body to another, either through
a vacuum, the air, or even through a solid.
By means of the foregoing table, which gives
the heats developed by the principal fuels, it is
a comparatively easy matter to determine the
calorific value of fuels, which is ascertained by
making an analysis of the fuel.
The elements are then taken together, and the
table used to calculate the value. Suppose, for
instance, that the analysis shows that the fuel has
seventy-five per cent. of carbon and twenty-five
[216]
per cent. of hydrogen. It is obvious that if we
take seventy-five per cent. of 8,137 (which is the
index for carbon), and twenty-five per cent. of
43,500 (the index of hydrogen), and adding the
two together, the result, 14,727, would represent
the calorific value of the fuel.
[217]
GLOSSARY OF WORDS
USED IN TEXT OF THIS VOLUME
[234]
[235]
The Motor Boys Series
(Trade Mark, Reg. U. S. Pat. Of.)
By CLARENCE YOUNG
12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.
The Motor Boys
or Chums Through Thick and Thin

The Motor Boys Overland
or A Lone Trip for Fun and Fortune

The Motor Boys in Mexico.
or The Secret of The Buried City

The Motor Boys Across the Plains
or The Hermit of Lost Lake
The Motor Boys Afloat
or The Stirring Cruise of the Dartaway

The Motor Boys on the Atlantic
or The Mystery of the Lighthouse

The Motor Boys in Strange Waters
or Lost in a Floating Forest

The Motor Boys on the Pacific
or The Young Derelict Hunters
The Motor Boys in the Clouds
or A Trip for Fame and Fortune

The Motor Boys Over the Rockies
or A Mystery of the Air

The Motor Boys Over the Ocean
or A Marvellous Rescue in Mid-Air

The Motor Boys on the Wing
or Seeking the Airship Treasure
The Motor Boys After a Fortune
or The Hut on Snake Island

The Motor Boys on the Border
or Sixty Nuggets of Gold

The Motor Boys Under the Sea
or From Airship to Submarine

The Motor Boys on Road and River
(new)    or Racing to Save a Life
[236]
Up-to-date Baseball Stories
Baseball Joe Series
By LESTER CHADWICK
Author of "The College Sports Series"
12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.
Ever since the success of Mr. Chadwick's
"College Sports Series" we have been urged
to get him to write a series dealing exclusively
with baseball, a subject in which he is
unexcelled by any living American author
or coach.
Baseball Joe of the Silver Stars
or The Rivals of Riverside
In this volume, the first of the series, Joe
is introduced as an everyday country boy
who loves to play baseball and is particularly
anxious to make his mark as a pitcher. He finds it almost
impossible to get on the local nine, but, after a struggle, he
succeeds. A splendid picture of the great national game in
the smaller towns of our country.
Baseball Joe on the School Nine
or Pitching for the Blue Banner
Joe's great ambition was to go to boarding school and play
on the school team. He got to boarding school but found it
harder making the team there than it was getting on the nine
at home. He fought his way along, and at last saw his chance
and took it, and made good.
Baseball Joe at Yale
or Pitching for the College Championship
From a preparatory school Baseball Joe goes to Yale University.
He makes the freshman nine and in his second year
becomes a varsity pitcher and pitches in several big games.
Baseball Joe in the Central League
or Making Good as a Professional Pitcher
In this volume the scene of action is shifted from Yale College
to a baseball league of our central states. Baseball Joe's
work in the box for Old Eli had been noted by one of the
managers and Joe gets an offer he cannot resist. Joe accepts
the offer and makes good.
Baseball Joe in the Big League
or A Young Pitcher's Hardest Struggle
From the Central League Joe is drafted into the St. Louis
Nationals. At first he has little to do in the pitcher's box, but
gradually he wins favor. A corking baseball story that fans,
both young and old, will enjoy.
[237]
The Racer Boys Series
by CLARENCE YOUNG
Author of "The Motor Boys Series", "Jack Ranger Series", etc. etc.
Fine cloth binding. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60c postpaid.
The announcement of a new series of stories by
Mr. Clarence Young is always hailed with delight
by boys and girls throughout the country, and we
predict an even greater success for these new books,
than that now enjoyed by the "Motor Boys Series."
The Racer Boys
or The Mystery of the Wreck

This, the first volume of the series, tells who
the Racer Boys were and how they chanced to be
out on the ocean in a great storm. Adventures
follow in rapid succession in a manner that only Mr. Young can describe.
The Racer Boys At Boarding School
or Striving for the Championship

When the Racer Boys arrived at the school everything was at a standstill,
and the students lacked ambition and leadership. The Racers
took hold with a will, got their father to aid the head of the school
financially, and then reorganized the football team.
The Racer Boys To The Rescue
or Stirring Days in a Winter Camp

Here is a story filled with the spirit of good times in winter—skating,
ice-boating and hunting.
The Racer Boys on The Prairies
or The Treasure of Golden Peak

From their boarding school the Racer Boys accept an invitation to
visit a ranch in the West.
The Racer Boys on Guard
or The Rebellion of Riverview Hall

Once more the boys are back at boarding school, where they have
many frolics, and enter more than one athletic contest.
The Racer Boys Forging Ahead
or The Rivals of the School League

Once more the Racer Boys go back to Riverview Hall, to meet their
many chums as well as several enemies. Athletics play an important
part in this volume, and the rivalry is keen from start to finish. The
Racer Boys show what they can do under the most trying circumstances.
[238]
The Dorothy Dale Series
By MARGARET PENROSE
Author of "The Motor Girls Series"
12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.

Dorothy Dale: A Girl of To-Day

Dorothy is the daughter of an old Civil
War veteran who is running a weekly newspaper
in a small Eastern town. When her
father falls sick, the girl shows what she
can do to support the family.

Dorothy Dale at Glenwood School

More prosperous times have come to the
Dale family, and Major Dale resolves to send
Dorothy to a boarding school.

Dorothy Dale's Great Secret

A splendid story of one girl's devotion to another. How
Dorothy kept the secret makes an absorbing story.

Dorothy Dale and Her Chums

A story of school life, and of strange adventures among the
gypsies.

Dorothy Dale's Queer Holidays

Relates the details of a mystery that surrounded Tanglewood
Park.

Dorothy Dale's Camping Days

Many things happen, from the time Dorothy and her chums
are met coming down the hillside on a treacherous load of hay.

Dorothy Dale's School Rivals

Dorothy and her chum, Tavia, return to Glenwood School.
A new student becomes Dorothy's rival and troubles at home
add to her difficulties.

Dorothy Dale in the City

Dorothy is invited to New York City by her aunt. This
tale presents a clever picture of life in New York as it appears
to one who has never before visited the Metropolis.

Dorothy Dale's Promise

Strange indeed was the promise and given under strange
circumstances. Only a girl as strong of purpose as was Dorothy
Dale would have undertaken the task she set for herself.

Dorothy Dale in the West

Dorothy's father and her aunt inherited a valuable tract
of land in the West. The aunt, Dorothy and Tavia, made a
long journey to visit the place, where they had many adventures.
[239]
The Motor Girls Series
By MARGARET PENROSE
Author of the highly successful "Dorothy Dale Series"
12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.

The Motor Girls
or A Mystery of the Road

When Cora Kimball got her touring car she
did not imagine so many adventures were in
store for her. A tale all wide awake girls
will appreciate.

The Motor Girls on a Tour
or Keeping a Strange Promise

A great many things happen in this volume.
A precious heirloom is missing, and how it was traced
up is told with absorbing interest.

The Motor Girls at Lookout Beach
or In Quest of the Runaways

There was a great excitement when the Motor Girls decided
to go to Lookout Beach for the summer.

The Motor Girls Through New England
or Held by the Gypsies

A strong story and one which will make this series more
popular than ever. The girls go on a motoring trip through
New England.

The Motor Girls on Cedar Lake
or The Hermit of Fern Island

How Cora and her chums went camping on the lake shore
and how they took trips in their motor boat, are told in a way
all girls will enjoy.

The Motor Girls on the Coast
or The Waif from the Sea

The scene is shifted to the sea coast where the girls pay
a visit. They have their motor boat with them and go out
for many good times.

The Motor Girls on Crystal Bay
or The Secret of the Red Oar

More jolly times, on the water and at a cute little bungalow
on the shore of the bay. A tale that will interest all girls.

The Motor Girls on Waters Blue
or The Strange Cruise of the Tartar

Before the girls started on a long cruise down to the
West Indies, they fell in with a foreign girl and she informed
them that her father was being held a political prisoner on
one of the islands. A story that is full of fun as well as mystery.
[240]
Ruth Fielding Series
By ALICE B. EMERSON
12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 40 cents, postpaid.

Ruth Fielding of The Red Mill
or Jaspar Parloe's Secret

Telling how Ruth, an orphan girl, came
to live with her miserly uncle, and how
the girl's sunny disposition melted the old
miller's heart.

Ruth Fielding at Briarwood Hall
or Solving the Campus Mystery

Ruth was sent by her uncle to boarding
school. She made many friends, also one
enemy, who made much trouble for her.

Ruth Fielding at Snow Camp
or Lost in the Backwoods

A thrilling tale of adventures in the backwoods in winter,
is told in a manner to interest every girl.

Ruth Fielding at Lighthouse Point
or Nita, the Girl Castaway

From boarding school the scene is shifted to the Atlantic
Coast, where Ruth goes for a summer vacation with some chums.

Ruth Fielding at Silver Ranch
or Schoolgirls Among the Cowboys

A story with a western flavor. How the girls came to the
rescue of Bashful Ike, the cowboy, is told in a way that is most
absorbing.

Ruth Fielding on Cliff Island
or The Old Hunter's Treasure Box

Ruth and her friends go to Cliff Island, and there have
many good times during the winter season.

Ruth Fielding at Sunrise Farm
or What Became of the Raby Orphans

Jolly good times at a farmhouse in the country, where Ruth
rescues two orphan children who ran away.

Ruth Fielding and the Gypsies
or The Missing Pearl Necklace

This volume tells of stirring adventures at a Gypsy encampment,
of a missing heirloom, and how Ruth has it restored to
its owner.
[241]
The Dave Dashaway Series
By ROY ROCKWOOD
Author of the "Speedwell Boys Series" and the "Great Marvel Series."
12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 40 cents, postpaid.
Never was there a more clever young aviator than Dave
Dashaway. All up-to-date lads will surely wish to read
about him.

Dave Dashaway the Young Aviator
or In the Clouds for Fame and Fortune

This initial volume tells how the hero ran
away from his miserly guardian, fell in with
a successful airman, and became a young
aviator of note.

Dave Dashaway and His Hydroplane
or Daring Adventures Over the Great Lakes

Showing how Dave continued his career as a birdman and
had many adventures over the Great Lakes, and how he
foiled the plans of some Canadian smugglers.

Dave Dashaway and His Giant Airship
or A Marvellous Trip Across the Atlantic

How the giant airship was constructed and how the daring
young aviator and his friends made the hazardous journey
through the clouds from the new world to the old, is told in a
way to hold the reader spellbound.

Dave Dashaway Around the World
or A Young Yankee Aviator Among Many Nations

An absorbing tale of a great air flight around the world,
of adventures in Alaska, Siberia and elsewhere. A true to
life picture of what may be accomplished in the near future.

Dave Dashaway: Air Champion
or Wizard Work in the Clouds

Dave makes several daring trips, and then enters a contest
for a big prize. An aviation tale thrilling in the extreme.
[242]
The Speedwell Boys Series
By ROY ROCKWOOD
Author of "The Dave Dashaway Series," "Great Marvel Series," etc.
12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 40 cents, postpaid.
All boys who love to be on the go will welcome the Speedwell
boys. They are clean cut and loyal lads.

The Speedwell Boys on Motor Cycles
or The Mystery of a Great Conflagration

The lads were poor, but they did a rich
man a great service and he presented them
with their motor cycles. What a great fire
led to is exceedingly well told.

The Speedwell Boys and Their Racing Auto
or A Run for the Golden Cup

A tale of automobiling and of intense rivalry on the road.
There was an endurance run and the boys entered the contest.
On the run they rounded up some men who were wanted by
the law.

The Speedwell Boys and Their Power Launch
or To the Rescue of the Castaways

Here is an unusual story. There was a wreck, and the lads,
in their power launch, set out to the rescue. A vivid picture
of a great storm adds to the interest of the tale.

The Speedwell Boys in a Submarine
or The Lost Treasure of Rocky Cove

An old sailor knows of a treasure lost under water because
of a cliff falling into the sea. The boys get a chance to go
out in a submarine and they make a hunt for the treasure.

The Speedwell Boys and Their Ice Racer
or The Perils of a Great Blizzard

The boys had an idea for a new sort of iceboat, to be run
by combined wind and motor power. How they built the craft,
and what fine times they had on board of it, is well related.
