# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2014
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	H. J. Mozans, Up the Orinoco and down the Magdalena
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/45848/45848-h/45848-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

From Miami we went by steamer to Key West, which will soon be
accessible by rail from St. Augustine. The sea was as placid as an
inland lakelet and the voyage to Havana was in every way ideal. We
skirted along the Florida Keys—those countless coral islets that
are to serve as piers for the railroad under construction, which
[19]is to form so important a link between Cuba and
the United States. When completed the time consumed in going to the
Pearl of the Antilles will not only be greatly lessened, but the former
discomforts and terrors of the journey will be entirely eliminated. No
longer will the traveler be obliged to encounter the hurricanes of the
Bahamas or the heavy seas off Cape Hatteras. He will be able to take
his seat in a Pullman car in New York and go, without change, through
to Key West and thence to Havana and Santiago de Cuba.
How different was it when the small Spanish craft of four centuries
ago navigated these waters on their way from Panama and Vera Cruz to
the mother country! Then, as the reader will observe, by reference to
the old maps of Florida, the keys or coral reefs along the coast were
known as Los Mártires—the
Martyrs—so named by Ponce de Leon on account of the number of
shipwrecks that occurred here, and because of the number of lives that
were lost on these treacherous shoals and also, as Herrera informs us,
because of certain rock-formations in the vicinity that have the
appearance of men in distress.
If we may credit the legends and traditions that have obtained in
those parts, many a Spanish treasure-ship has been lost in threading
its way through the uncharted shoals and islands of Los
Mártires and the Bahamas, and many futile attempts have been
made to recover at least a part of the treasure lost, but it was
“Lost in a way that made search vain.”
And of the adventurous divers, who braved the dangers
of current and wave, one can safely say in the words of Bret Harte
“Never a sign,
East or West, or under the line,
They saw of the missing galleon;
Never a sail or plank or chip,
They found of the long-lost treasure-ship,
Or enough to build a tale upon.”
[20]
unexpected, was the welcome accorded us by a number of the leading
citizens of the town. They had been advised by telegraph of our coming,
and had prepared most comfortable quarters for our reception and
entertainment. Escorting us to our temporary home—which was not
only well furnished but a model of neatness—we were told, with
true Castilian politeness, accompanied by an air of simplicity and
sincerity that made us feel at home from the first moment,
“Aquí están Uds. en su casa. Estamos
todos á sus órdenes.” “Here you are in your own
home and we are all at your disposition.” The keys of the house
were then handed us, and with them we were accorded the freedom and
hospitality of generous, never-to-be forgotten Orocué.
[165]
1 Juan
de Castellanos, Varones Ilustres de Indias, Primera Parte,
Elegia, XI, Canto II. ↑
2
Castellanos was for a while a soldier and afterwards an ecclesiastic,
enjoying a benefice in the town of Tunja, New Granada. Like Pope, he
had an extraordinary faculty for versification, and, like him,
“He spoke in numbers for the numbers came.” This does not,
however, detract from his authority as a historian. Having taken an
active part in many of the campaigns, which he describes, and, knowing
intimately many of the earlier conquerors of that vast territory now
known as the Republic of Colombia, few writers were better qualified
than he to record the events so graphically depicted in his
Elegias, or to portray the characters of those conquistadores
who figure so prominently among his Varones Ilustres de
Indias. The first part of his work was published in 1589. The
second and third parts were published in 1850 by Rivadeneyra in the
Biblioteca de Autores Españoles. The fourth
part, discovered only a few years ago, was issued by D. Antonio Paz y
Melia in 1887 under the title of Historia del Nuevo Reino
de Granada. In his introduction to this work, Sr. Melia gives an
able résumé of all that is known or conjectured regarding
Castellanos. For a critical estimate of the author of Las
Elegias de Varones Ilustres, consult Jimenez de la Espada, in his
study, Juan de Castellanos y su Historia del Nuevo Reino
de Granada, in the Rivista Contemporanea, Madrid,
1889. ↑
3 Padre
Caulin, Historia Coro-Grafica, Natural y Evangelica, Lib. I,
Cap. X, p. 79, 1779. ↑
4
Maluco, a word frequently used in Venezuela for malo,
bad. ↑
5 “A
sambo,” writes Depons, “is the offspring of a negress with
an Indian, or of a negro with an Indian woman. In color he nearly
resembles the child of a mulatto by a negress. The sambo is well
formed, muscular, and capable of supporting great fatigue; but
unfortunately, his mind has a strong bias to vice of every kind. The
word sambo signifies, in the language of the country, everything
despicable and worthless, a knave, a drone, a drunkard, a cheat, a
robber, and even an assassin. Of ten crimes committed in this district,
eight are chargeable on this villainous and accursed
race.”—Travels in South America, p. 127, London,
1806. ↑
6 Op.
cit., Vol. I, p. 43. ↑
7 Compare
Cassani, J., Historia de la provincia de la
compañia des Jesus del Nuevo Reino de Granada en la America,
descripción y relación exacta de sus gloriosas missiones
en el reino, llano, meta, y rio Orinoco, etc. Con 1 mapa. Folio.
Madrid, 1741. ↑
8 P. 14.
How like the labors and cares of the bishops of the early Church were
those of the missionaries among the children of the forest! Both were
continually called upon to act as causarum
examinatores—arbitrators—and to settle difficulties
that were ever arising among the flocks entrusted to their care. St.
Augustine, the great bishop of Hippo, refers frequently to “the
burdensome character of this kind of work, and the distraction from
higher activities which it involved”—“Quantum attinet ad meum commodum,” he writes in his
De Opere Monachorum, XXIX, 37, “multo mallem per singulos dies certis horis, quantum in bene
moderatis monasteriis constitutum est, aliquid manibus operari, et
ceteras horas habere ad legendum et orandum, aut aliquid de divinis
litteris agendum liberas, quam tumultuosissimas perplexitates caussarum
alienarum pati de negotiis secularibus vel judicando dirimendis vel
interveniendo præcidendis.” ↑
9 Every
reader is familiar with the story that has long been in circulation
regarding monkey bridges, and, in his youth, was, no doubt, entertained
by pictures of such imaginary bridges. It is quite safe to say that no
one ever saw such bridges in any part of South America or elsewhere.
And yet the tale regarding their existence has had currency since the
time of Acosta, who visited the New World in 1570. “Going from
Nombre de Dios to Panamá,” he writes, “I did see in
Capira one of these monkies leape from one tree to an other, which was
on the other side of a river, making me much to wonder. They leape
where they list, winding their tailes about a braunch to shake it; and
when they will leape further than they can at once, they use a pretty
devise, tying themselves by the tailes one of another, and by this
means make as it were a chaine of many; then doe they launch themselves
foorth, and the first holpen by the force of the rest takes holde where
hee list, and so hangs to a bough and helps all the rest, till they be
gotten up.” Historia Natural y Moral de las
Indias, Bk. IV, Chap. 39, Grimston’s Translation, London,
1604.
The fable about the monkey bridge belongs to the
same class as those that obtain in certain parts of South America
regarding the “great devil,” or “man of the
woods,” a near relative of Waterton’s
“Nondescript.”
Kingsley, in the following passage from Westward
Ho!, referring to some of the things seen and heard by Amyas Leigh
and his companions during their voyage up the Meta, paints a picture
that is doubtless before the mind’s eye of most people when they
think of the forest-fringed banks of this river, but which is about as
far from the reality as could well be imagined. “The long
processions of monkeys,” he writes, “who kept pace with
them along the tree tops and proclaimed their wonder in every
imaginable whistle, and grunt and howl, had ceased to move their
laughter, as much as the roar of the jaguar and the rustle of the boa
had ceased to move their fear.” Chap. XXIII. ↑
10 Op.
cit., p. 347. ↑
11
Historia de Abiponibus, Vol. II, p. 231 et seq.,
Vienna, 1784. “Attention has recently been called to a group of
peasant superstitions that have made their appearance in Germany, which
are closely analogous in principle to the couvade, though relating not
to the actual parents of the child but to the god-parents. It is
believed that the habits and proceedings of the god-father and
god-mother affect the child’s life and character. Particularly,
the god-father at the christening must not think of disease or madness
lest this come upon the child; he must not look round on the way to the
church lest the child should grow up an idle stare-about; nor must he
carry a knife about him for fear of making the child a suicide; the
god-mother must put on a clean shift to go to the baptism or the baby
will grow up untidy,” etc., etc. See E. B. Tylor’s
Researches into the Early History of Mankind and the Development of
Civilization, p. 304, Boston, 1878.
For further information on La Couvade, the
reader is referred to Brett’s Indian Tribes of Guiana, p.
355; Max Muller’s Chips from a German Workshop, Vol. II,
p. 281; Spix and Martius’s Travels in Brazil, Vol. II, p.
247; Du Tertre’s Histoire Générale des
Antilles habitées par les Francais, Vol. II, p. 371;
Gilli’s Saggio di Storia Americana, Vol. II, p.
133; Tschudi’s Peru, Vol. II, p. 235; Tylor’s
Researches into the Early History of Mankind and the Development of
Civilization, p. 293, et seq; and Lafitau’s Moeurs des Sauvages Americains, Vol. I, p. 259. ↑
12 One of
the peculiarities of some savages is the decided objection they
manifest to having their photographs or portraits taken. They imagine
that they lose somewhat of their own life by having their likeness
transferred to paper or other material. And the more perfect their
likeness the greater, they fancy, is the loss which they personally
sustain. Having had some experience with the Indians of North America
regarding this matter, I was not surprised to find that there are in
South America certain Indians who entertain similar notions regarding
the danger of having their pictures taken. Some, to avoid having their
photographs taken, will at once avert their faces; others will run away
to escape the impending danger. Cf. On the Origin of Civilization
and the Primitive Condition of Man, by Lord Avebury, London, 1902,
and The Indians of North America, Letter 15, by George Catlin,
Edinburgh, 1903. ↑
13 For the
benefit of those who are familiar with Spanish I give this touching
quotation in the original. It is quite impossible to reproduce in a
translation the verse and rhythm of the sonorous Castilian of the
poet.
“Así de la Mision todos los
niños
Corren en torno de la cruz que arranca
Enhiesta al aire y cercan al anciano,
Que entre tantas cabezas infantiles
Descuella allí con su cabeza blanca.
Oh! ni Platon, ni Socrates, famosos
En los anales del saber, supieron
Tras largos años de velar continuo
Lo que estos pobres niños, candorosos,
De los tremulos labios del anciano,
Al pié del leño rústico
aprendieron.”
—From his ode Los Colonos.
 ↑
14 Known
in the West Indies as the god-tree and greatly venerated by the native
negroes. The ceiba is one of the few tropical trees that ever shed
their foliage. The erythrina, when it exchanges its leaves for flowers,
is another. ↑
15 G.
Hartwig, The Tropical World, p. 137,
London, 1892. ↑
16 Op.
cit., Vol. II, pp. 47 et seq.
As early as 1640 the Dutch writer Laet refers to a
milk tree which was evidently the same as the one that so impressed
Humboldt. He says: “Inter arbores quae sponte hic
passim nascuntur, memorantur a scriptoribus Hispanis quaedam quae
lacteum quemdam liquorem fundunt, qui durus admodum evadit instar
gummi, et suavem odorem de se fundit; aliae quae liquorem quemdam
edunt, instar lactis coagulati, qui in cibis ab ipsis usurpatur sine
noxa.”—Descriptio Indiarum
Occidentalium, Lib. XVIII. ↑
17 In
Venezuela and Colombia the word parasita—parasite—is
usually employed to designate all orchids, no matter what may be the
species or genus. This is a mistake. Orchids are not parasites which,
like the dodder or mistletoe, obtain their nourishment from the plant
or tree on which they grow. They are epiphytes, that get their
nourishment from the surrounding atmosphere, and use the branches and
trunks of trees merely as supports or resting-places. The Old World
genus Aërides is especially remarkable in this respect. One
of the species, Aërides odoratum, “has this wonderful
property, that, when brought from the woods, where it grows, into a
house, and suspended in the air, it will grow, flourish and flower for
many years without any nourishment, either from the earth or from
water.” For this reason the orchid is appropriately called
Flos aëris, or Air Flower. ↑
18
Orchids: Their Culture and Management, p. 20, by W. Watson and
H. J. Chapman, London, 1903.
Peter Martyr must have had some of these orchids in
mind when he wrote the following sentence as translated by Michael
Lok:—“Smooth and pleasinge words might be spoken of the
sweete odors and perfumes of these countries, which we purposely omit
because they make rather for the effeminatinge of mens minds than for
the maintanance of good behavior.” Dec. IV, Cap. 4, p. 161.
For colored figures and descriptions of the rare
and beautiful orchidaceous plants found in Venezuela and Colombia, the
reader is referred to The Orchid Album, 12 vols., conducted by
Messrs. Warner, Williams, Moore and Fitch, London. ↑
“Aqui la selva secular, ornada
De festones de variada enredadera
De bellos y vivísimos colores,
Y la extensa pradera
De fraganciosas flores alfombrada,
Forman el templo augusto que levanta
La creacion a Dios, á quien ofrece
Deliciosos perfumes por incienso,
Y por ofrenda el fruto delicado
Que el estival calor ha sazonado.”
“Here the forest secular, decked with festoons
of divers climbers, of beautiful and brilliant colors, and the broad
meads carpeted with fragrant flowers, form an august temple, which
creation raises to God, to whom it offers delicious perfumes for
incense, and, as an oblation, brings the delicate fruit matured by the
summer’s sun.”
In these words of the Bolivian poet, D. Manuel José
Cortés, might aptly be described the extensive forests and
plains of which Orocué is the centre. Everywhere is that same
exuberance of vegetation and profusion of vari-colored bloom that are
so characteristic of the basin of the Meta. While lost in silent
admiration of the countless floral beauties that on every side met our
delightful gaze, we could but compare the scene to a ruined Eden,
“Where the first sinful pair
For consolation might have weeping trod,
When banished from the garden of their God.”
In the garden adjoining our house were citrus trees
[166]laden with golden fruit, bananas of many
varieties and a large mango tree, whose branches were bending under the
weight of its richly tinted, luscious drupes. Near by was a noble old
ceiba, while but a short distance away was a tall
Jacaranda—of the trumpet-flower family—literally
enveloped in a reddish-violet mantle of papilionaceous flowers, and
filling the air round about with perfume not unlike that of the orange
blossom or the jasmine. Everywhere we went some new floral display was
awaiting us. All along our path we found an unending variety of laurels
and myrtles; trees and shrubs and herbs of the Rubiaciæ
family. There were splendid representatives of the genera Cassia
and Mimosa, and clumps of the ever-present moriche, together
with other species of palm equally attractive and majestic. Frequently
these were joined by delicate festoons of liana, many of which were
weighted down with orchids and epiphytes of the rarest beauty and
fragrance.
Orocué is the capital of the district of that name in the
National Territory of the Meta, and the seat of a prefecture. It is
located on the left bank of the Meta, on an eminence about thirty feet
above the surface of the river, and sufficiently high to guarantee it
against inundations during the rainy season. Being less than five
degrees from the equator, the climate is warm but, during our stay, it
was never uncomfortable, and at no time did the thermometer ever rise
above 82° F. The population is about six hundred. The place is
healthful, and malignant fevers are rare. The streets are wide, and
some of the houses are well-built and comfortable. Most of them are
constructed of bamboo plastered over with clay. The roof is thatched
with the broad leaves of the moriche palm or preferably with those of
the palma de cobija, also known as the palma de sombrero—hat palm. This is what scientists call
Copernicia1 tectorum, and is preferred to any other
leaf because it is not readily inflammable. Such a roof lasts ten or
twelve years, and is impervious to water. [167]During our sojourn in
Orocué it rained regularly for several hours every day and,
although the downpour at times was very heavy, never once did we
observe a single drop of water to pass through the roof. Everything in
our rooms remained as dry as if the roofs had been made of tile or
slate.
Many of these bamboo-palm houses are constructed without the use of
a single nail. Studs and cross beams, laths and rafters, are tied
together and held firmly in place by bejucos, those wonderful natural
cords and cables which are found in such profusion in every tropical
forest, and which, in the hands of the natives, serves such an endless
variety of purposes.
Some years ago the town possessed what the inhabitants considered a
large and beautiful church. It was constructed of the same materials as
the other buildings of the town and occupied a conspicuous position on
the plaza. In consequence of recent revolutions and other disturbances,
it had been greatly neglected, and, at the time of our visit, was
rapidly falling into ruins. The people had not had a pastor for some
years, but were hoping to have one soon. They, however, received every
few months the ministrations of a priest from a neighboring mission,
and longed for the time when they could have a resident pastor and see
their church restored to its pristine condition.
There was a small school for boys, attended by about twenty young
mestizos, but none for girls. There was a movement on foot to secure
the services of some nuns to teach the girls, and the mothers of the
children awaited their arrival with the greatest impatience. The
monjas—nuns—have a wonderful influence over the
children, and young and old are thoroughly devoted to them.
Orocué has an aduana, or customhouse, and is the
centre of a flourishing grazing district, in which there are numerous
hatos and fundaciones,2 containing
from two to twenty [168]thousand head of cattle. Cattle, hides and
rubber, together with the coffee, which is brought from the foothills
of the Andes, constitute the principal articles of export.3
The neighboring Indians manufacture large and beautiful hammocks
from the leaves of the Cumare and other palms and bring them
here and exchange them for anything that may strike their fancy.
Although I had brought a German hammock with me, I procured one of
these Indian chinchorros, and found it during the remainder of
my journey in South America the best investment I could have made.
Nothing contributed more to my comfort when I desired a siesta, and
when I wished to escape the filth and insect pests to which, in my
wanderings, I was so frequently exposed.
Of the many objects brought to Orocué for barter by the
Indians few had greater interest for us than the weapons employed by
them in the chase and in war. Among these the chief ones were their
poisoned arrows and blowguns. A friend made us a present of some of
them, but owing to the inconvenience of transporting them, we were
unable, much to our regret, to take them with us.
For a long time the mystery connected with the virulent poison,
known as curare, urari woorali, etc., with which the Indians poison
their arrows, remained unsolved, notwithstanding [169]the
efforts of men of science to determine its source and composition.
Early travelers gave the most fantastic accounts of its composition and
manufacture. According to them it was a concoction more uncanny than
that prepared from
“Eye of newt and toe of frog,
Wool of bat and tongue of dog.
Adder’s fork and blind worm’s sting,
Lizard’s leg and owlet’s wing.”
Indeed, so carefully did the Indians engaged in its
manufacture guard the secret of its preparation that it was not until a
few decades ago that the true character of this deadly compound was
first understood. Boussingault suspected but did not prove the
existence of strychnine in curare.4 Humboldt was probably the
first to suspect its true nature.5 It is now known that
neither snake’s teeth nor stinging ants form its active
principle, as was formerly supposed, but that its venomous properties
are due to the presence of curarine, a bitter crystalline alkaloid
obtained from the plant Strychnos toxifera, or other plants of
this genus, found throughout equatorial America. Its virulence is
manifested only when it is administered through the skin. It then
paralyzes the motor nerves, and, if the poison be sufficiently strong,
it produces death by suffocation.
The Indians in Orocué, as everywhere else along the Meta and
Orinoco, were a subject of never-ending study for us. Most of the
inhabitants of Orocué are Indians or mestizos, and it would be
difficult to find anywhere a gentler or more peaceful people. The town
was founded by the Salivas Indians, whose nasal language the early
missionaries found so difficult to master, but whose gentle nature and
amiable disposition were ever the subject of the highest eulogies.
Remnants of this tribe are still found in this [170]territory, as are also representatives of the
Piapocas, Tunebos, Yaruros, Cuivas, and the once powerful yet friendly
Achaguas.
The tribe, however, that counts the greatest numbers, is the
Guahibos, whom certain imaginative travelers would have us believe are
as fierce as pumas or jaguars. The truth is, however, that, although
some of them are more or less nomadic in their habits, and decline to
live with the racionales—whites—they are, as a rule,
peaceful and industrious. Sr. Jorge Brisson, an engineer for the
Colombian government, who a few years ago thoroughly explored this
country—the Casanare—speaks of them as being muy agricultores y muy trabajadores—hard-working tillers
of the soil.
That they are peaceful and harmless is evidenced by the fact that
the owners of the scattered conucos along the Meta are rarely,
if ever, disturbed by these much maligned Indians. In many of the
isolated habitations, which we visited on our way up the river, we
found only women and children. The men were occupied elsewhere, and
were sometimes absent for weeks at a time. This, certainly, would not
be the case if the Guahibos were the cruel, relentless savages they are
so often represented to be. Not once in our journeyings up the Meta and
its affluents did we hear of any atrocities committed by these Indians,
or even of any complaints against them, although we took particular
pains to inform ourselves about the matter. All the reports about their
robberies and murders were confined to those we had heard a thousand
miles down the river and from people who probably never saw a Guahibo
in their lives, and who would not recognize one if they were to see
one.
It is true that now and then a cow or a calf may disappear from some
of the Conucos and fundaciones and that their
disappearance is always credited to the Indians. Even if this suspicion
were verified, an occasional theft of this kind—all the
circumstances considered—should not [171]be so surprising. We
do not need to go beyond the boundaries of our own country to find
cases of cattle stealing. And the poor Indian, often cheated and
wronged, may, without being a casuist, easily persuade himself that he
is justified in seeking occult compensation. This is often his only
safe method of making reprisals for damage done him in person and
property, and he would be more than human, if he did not occasionally
resort to it if he thought he could do so with impunity.
“The fact is,” says Brisson, “the poor creatures
have heretofore been very badly treated by those who claim to be
civilized, and flee in terror when they see a white man. The question
now is not to civilize them but to win their confidence. The problem
would easily be solved if this delicate task were confided to the
missionary priests. They would bring it to a successful issue much
sooner than could government officialdom.”6
Contrary to what is often imagined, the Indians who visit the
settlements along the Meta and the Orinoco are always decently if but
scantily clad. In their forest homes, however, their raiment usually
consists of a simple lap-cloth. On occasions of feasting or public
rejoicing they make an addition to their toilet. This consists in
painting their bodies with various dyes, but chiefly with the
yellowish-red annatto, which is obtained from the pulp of the fruit of
the arnotto tree, Bixa Orellana. They frequently cover their
persons with the most fantastic designs. Indeed, it is only when thus
decorated that the true children of the forest consider themselves
properly dressed. They would be ashamed to appear before strangers
otherwise.7 [172]
“Tigers and serpents,” observes Mr. Brisson, “are
bug-bears of the same family as Indios
bravos”—savages. It is certain that the
tiger—jaguar—is fond of heifers and calves. But herdsmen
will tell you, that in order to get rid of one, it is at times
necessary to follow him for a fortnight before being able to find and
kill him. This is sufficient to prove that the tiger is never the first
to attack a man in the llanos of Casanare, where it has food in
abundance. “Serpents are met with only casually.”8
I was glad to find one writer, who is so familiar with the country
as is Sr. Brisson, to speak thus of the wild beasts most dreaded and of
the still more dreaded Indios bravos, for it harmonized
perfectly with my own experience.
We were one day talking with our host in Orocué about the
stories told by travelers and writers regarding the jaguars of the
South American forests. He smiled, and said, “I have lived in
this country thirty-five years. I have several hatos in various
parts of the country, which I visit frequently. In doing this I am
obliged to travel much through the forests and plains. I have often
journeyed up and down the Orinoco, and the Meta from Trinidad to
Bogotá, and, believe me, during all these years, I have never
seen but one jaguar and that was in passing.” How different his
experience from that of those who, after a short excursion into the
interior of South America, where they rarely leave the beaten track
used for centuries, have, nevertheless, such wonderful adventures to
relate; such miraculous escapes from savage beasts and more savage
Indians!
Our host was a Venezuelan of Spanish descent, and a splendid type of
the old Spanish school. He had spent [173]a part of his youth
in Germany, and was a man of education and refinement. He was untiring
in his delicate attentions to us during our sojourn in Orocué,
and made us quite forget that we were so far from home and what we so
often fancy are the indispensable necessities of civilization. He had
been eminently successful in business. Besides owning the largest
business house in Orocué—which is a distributing point for
the great Casanare territory—he is the proprietor of several of
the largest hatos in the country and counted his cattle by tens
of thousands. In addition to all this, he has various other interests
that yield him a handsome income. He enjoys the reputation of being a
millionaire, and the reputation is apparently justified.
How he could content himself to live in this isolated quarter of the
world—“six months from everywhere,” as one of his
clerks expressed it—when he could enjoy all that money could
command in the capitals of the Old or the New World, was a mystery to
us, and yet he seemed to be perfectly happy here, and to have no desire
to live elsewhere. Was it the ever dominant feeling that “There
is no place like home,” that made him prefer Orocué to
Paris or London? Quien sabe?
The only Europeans living here were three Germans. Two of them had
arrived but a few months before our visit, while the third had been
here for nearly twenty years. This latter was also as much attached to
Orocué as was our host. The year before he had visited his
family and friends in Hamburg and Berlin. “But,” he said,
“I had heimweh—got homesick—for
Orocué, and came back much sooner than I intended. The noise and
bustle and hurry and high-pressure of Europe were quite unendurable,
and I was more than delighted when I got back to dear old
Orocué.” He, too, had realized that there is no place like
home. And he, also, like our host, was educated and cultured; was
interested in science and literature and passionately fond of music. He
had several musical instruments [174]in his house—among
others a piano—on all of which he was a skillful performer.
“What wonderful men these Germans are!” I said to
myself, when I saw these three men in the prime of life burying
themselves away off here in the wilderness, so far away from friends
and country. But this is not an unique instance of young Germans going
to distant lands to engage in business and to contribute thereby
towards that wonderful development of trade and influence for which the
Vaterland is becoming so famous. In every part of
Venezuela which we visited, we found it the same. The greatest and most
successful business houses are in the hands of Germans.
In all parts of South America you will find Germans, and find them,
too, successful in their enterprises, and often getting more than their
share of the trade of this vast continent. But they deserve success,
for they have earned it, and know how to make sacrifices when they are
necessary to attain it, or to reach the goal for which they are
striving—to become the dominating commercial power of South
America. If the United States would display but a tithe of the energy
and enterprise exhibited by Germany, it would not now occupy in the
southern continent the humiliating position it does among the great
mercantile nations of the world, and among our friends of the great
Latin American republics. It is not too late to retrieve our loss, but,
to do so, we must change our policy and our methods of doing business,
and conduct them along the lines recommended by such alert and
far-seeing statesmen as Blaine, Root and Roosevelt.
After a delightful week spent in Orocué we were ready to
start for Barrigon or Puerto Nuevo on the Rio Humea, an affluent of the
Meta. To go there by a bongo9 during [175]the
rapidly rising water, would require from fifteen to twenty days. It
would be necessary to pole it—or pull it along by ropes in
certain places—the entire distance. Besides this, owing to its
limited quarters, such a boat would be extremely uncomfortable.
Fortunately for us, and thanks to the kind offices of our host, we were
able to have the use of a fine and commodious petroleum launch, which
would convey us to our destination in a week.
It was with genuine regret that we said Adios to the good
people of Orocué and to the kind friends who had made our
sojourn there so pleasant and profitable. They were all at the landing
to see us off, and speed the parting guests with the touching words,
Vayan Uds. Con Dios—May you go with God. To these fervent
words of farewell came from our little crew the cordial response, Y
con la Virgen, and with the Virgin Mother.
Our captain was a bright and courteous and most obliging young
Colombian from Bogotá. The pilot was a Venezuelan half-breed
from the town of Barcelona. This “son of Barcelona,” as he
described himself, had fled from his native country, on account of the
continued revolutions, to seek peace in Orocué. The cook was
also a mestizo, while his assistant was a strong, broad-shouldered
Guahibo, who, [176]far from being an unfeeling savage, was one of
the kindest and most thoughtful persons one could meet. He was ever
ready to serve us and was never more happy than when he observed that
his delicate attentions were fully appreciated.
The launch’s commissariat consisted of a liberal supply of
tasajo—salt, dried beef—cassava bread, coffee,
panela10 and various kinds of fruit. Anticipating our
needs at this part of our journey we had, before leaving the
Port-of-Spain, laid in a supply of claret and canned goods of various
kinds. Aside from the butter and condensed cream and some of the fruit
preserves, the canned goods were a disappointment. Although they were
guaranteed to be fresh from the factory, they were unfit for use. What
we really enjoyed more than anything else, and always found fresh and
wholesome, was our supply of coffee, sugar and crackers. For our
café in the morning nothing more was desired.
Coffee was always served on the launch, when we were ready to start
on the day’s journey, which was usually at sunrise. Desayuno—breakfast—we took at about ten
o’clock. For this we always landed, as it was more convenient and
more agreeable to do our cooking on shore than aboard. It was, indeed,
quite romantic to have one’s breakfast served under a
broad-spreading ceiba, or in the midst of a clump of stately palms, or
in the shade of a group of graceful bamboos. And not the least
picturesque feature about it was Antonio—our ever-active and
obliging Guahibo.
“La Niñita,”
Our Launch, on the Upper Meta.
Whenever possible, we stopped for desayuno and
comida—dinner—at a hut or cottage on the
river’s bank. We ordinarily passed several of them in the course
of the day, for the banks of the upper Meta count many more inhabitants
than does the lower part of the river. Usually there was only a single
cottage, but occasionally we passed [177]a caserio consisting of five or six cottages. But whatever the
number they were always of the simplest construction possible.
Sometimes the house was nothing more than a palm-thatched shed,
composed solely of a roof, with eaves extending almost to the ground,
resting on short supports. Sometimes the owners of these humble
habitations were Indians, sometimes mestizos. But whether Indians or
mestizos, we were cordially received and invited to make ourselves
comfortable in the best hammock in their possession. With them the
hamaca is the one indispensable article of furniture
in every dwelling, even the poorest. It takes the place of our
rocking-chair, sofa and bed. According to the Colombian poet, Madrid,
the hammock was invented by the Indians—
“Gente
Dulce, benigna y mansa,”
—a race suave, gentle and benign—and even
when all else fails them they have their hammock to comfort them in
misfortune, banishing their trouble in its oblivious embrace. The poet,
like many others, evidently shares the Indian’s fondness for the
hammock, as the best verses he ever wrote was his poem La
Hamaca.11 [178]
There were several reasons for stopping at one of these native huts
when we could conveniently do so. We were thus enabled to get fresh
fruit, eggs and chickens, and have them cooked as well. We had no
complaint to make of our own cooks, but we soon discovered that the
Indian and mestizo women were far better. I shall never forget our
surprise and pleasure at the manner in which a young Indian woman
prepared for us roast chicken, and that, too, in a remarkably short
time. I never tasted a more tender or better flavored fowl in the best
restaurants of New York or Paris. And she had no stove or oven in which
to roast it. Her sole utensil was a wooden spit over a few coals
surrounded by three stones about seven or eight inches in diameter. And
all was as clean as it was enjoyable.
All the furniture of the house is as primitive as the fireplace on
which the meals are cooked. Often the only utensils of metal are a pot,
or kettle, and a machete, which takes the place of a knife in cutting.
When the hammock is not used one sits on the ground or on a log that
serves as a bench. Occasionally we were offered the carapace of a large
turtle in lieu of a chair. When the hammock is not used, an ox hide, or
a rush mat, or a large palm leaf serves as a bed. Often the poor people
sleep on the bare ground.
Aside from the single metal kettle above mentioned, all other
culinary utensils are made from the fruit of the [179]calabash tree. It is the species known to
botanists as Crescentia Cujete and is called by the natives
totumo. The fruit is used at various stages of its growth
according as it is employed for making small or large utensils. The
younger and smaller fruits are fashioned into spoons, those of medium
size serve for drinking vessels, while the largest full-grown
fruits—often eight inches in diameter—are used for dishes
and platters.12 They also furnish a kind of musical
instrument resembling the castanet. But marvelous to relate, they are
also employed for lanterns of a most original kind. After the shell is
pierced with a large number of small holes it is filled with those
wonderful Cocuios—fireflies—that are found in such
numbers in the tropics. Such a lantern seen at a distance is not unlike
the familiar Chinese lantern, and, considering the nature of the
illuminant, gives a surprising amount of light.
A house, such as the one just described, is the lodging place of the
dogs, and poultry, and not infrequently of the pigs also. The poultry
roost upon the crosspieces immediately under the roof. The other
animals occupy their own corner, and no one seems to be molested by
their presence. Benzoni, in speaking of the habits of the Indians he
saw, remarks in his quaint fashion: “They all sleep together like
fowls, some on the ground and some suspended in the
air.”13
Every house is surrounded by a number of fruit trees. Among these
the platano and the banana are the most conspicuous, and are
never wanting, for they supply a large part of the food of the
inhabitants of the tropics. Equally important are maize and
yuca.14 The latter is used for [180]making bread. In certain parts of the tropics no
other kind of bread is obtainable. To me it has a very insipid taste,
somewhat like that of bran or cellulose. Schomburgk considered that it
had a deleterious effect on the stomach, but there are few, I think,
that share his view. Certain it is, that its use as food is universal
in the tropics, and it is one of the three plants—yuca, maize and
the platano—that one is always sure to find in every
conuco—even that of the poorest Indian. These three articles are
his staff of life. The natives also eat fish and flesh of various
kinds, it is true, but as the three plant products named are quite
sufficient to sustain life, and as they require little care after they
are once planted, many people make little or no effort to secure other
kinds of food. They are content with little and seem to enjoy the
living of the simple life fully as much as some of our friends in the
North enjoy talking and writing about it.
Often, too, where one would least expect it, one will find beautiful
flower gardens around the most unpretentious habitations. Of the
flowers that we in the North are most familiar with—not to
mention countless peculiarly tropical species—those we most
frequently observed were roses, jasmines, dahlias, pinks, violets,
dracenas, gladioli and gardenias. The large rose bushes, or rather rose
trees—they are so huge—one sometimes sees in the hot, dry
climate of the tropics are truly remarkable. They sometimes attain a
height of twenty feet, and one may count on a single bush as many as a
thousand buds. From such a bush one may pluck a hundred beautiful roses
every day in the year without any apparent diminution in the number on
the parent stem.
While journeying up the Orinoco and Meta, we several times tried our
luck at fishing, but our efforts were always attended with the most
ignominious failures. Outside of a few minnows we caught absolutely
nothing. One of our [181]crew once caught a fish about two feet long
resembling a pickerel and this was the only time that we ever tasted
fresh fish all the time we were on the river.
No sooner had the hook sunk into the water than the bait was taken.
There was a momentary nibble, and presto! the bait had disappeared. On
investigation we found that we had to deal with the terrible
Caribe—that voracious little fish about which so many
extraordinary stories are related. In crossing rivers the natives dread
the attacks of this serrasalmonine marauder more than they do the
gymnotus, the stingray or the cayman. They have very sharp, trenchant
teeth, usually swim in schools, and, when attracted by blood, will
attack men and the larger animals without hesitation. And so fierce and
rapid is their combined action that their attack usually means death to
the victim.
We had often heard and read of their snapping fishhooks in twain but
had classed this statement among the stories of the monkey-bridge
class—stories that entertained us during our early school days,
and which, I doubt not, still perform the same function for the rising
generation in certain parts of the world.
But, while pondering our ill success with rod and line, we
discovered one evening, after vainly trying for an hour to get at least
one specimen of the finny tribe—and exhausting all our bait in
the attempt—that our hook—a good-sized one, too—was
snapped in two as neatly as if it had been cut by a pair of pliers. We
examined the part of the hook that remained attached to the line and we
found that it was actually cut, not broken on account of defective
material.
On further inquiry, I found that several men of science who had
visited these parts, and had, presumably, investigated the matter, had
positively stated that the Caribe was capable of severing fishhooks
with the greatest ease. Thus Mr. H. M. Myers does not hesitate to
affirm that the Caribe is “able to sever ordinary hooks as if
they were [182]but slender threads,”15 and Dr.
Carl Sachs declares that “even thick steel fishhooks do not
withstand their teeth.”16
Both in the Orinoco and in the Meta we saw quite a number of
porpoises—toninas, the Spaniards call them—quite as
large and as playful as any we ever saw in the ocean. The natives say
they are the friends of man, and defend him from caymans when he
happens to be in the river.17 One thing is certain and that
is that caymans and crocodiles both quickly make their escape when the
porpoise appears. It is probably, because the sluggish and indolent
caymans, ferocious as they are by nature, have an instinctive dread of
the noisy and impetuous evolutions of these delphinine cetaceans,
especially when they move in schools.
We were often surprised by the large flocks of ducks, of many
different species, which we saw along the Meta. They seemed to be most
numerous near sunset when, occasionally, they flew across the river by
thousands. So great, indeed, was their number at times that we could
compare them only with the immense flocks of pigeons that, during our
boyhood days, used to darken the sky during their season of migration.
Many of these ducks, as articles of food, compare favorably with our
mallard and canvasback. Truth to tell, the only time we regretted not
having a shotgun with us was when we saw these clouds of edible birds
passing over our heads within easy reach. This was particularly the
case when our food supply was running short, or when we desired a
change of diet, or [183]something different from carne
frita—fried beef that has been salted and dried—and
sancocho.18
Among the singing birds peculiar to the tropics are two that deserve
special mention. There are the campanero or bellbird, and the flautero
or flute bird.
Of the bellbird, Waterson writes as follows: “He is about the
size of a jay. His plumage is white as snow. On his forehead rises a
spiral tube nearly three inches long. It is jet black, dotted all over
with small white feathers. It has a communication with the palate, and
when filled with air, looks like a spire; when empty it becomes
pendulous. His note is loud and clear, like the sound of a bell.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
“With many of the feathered race, he pays the common tribute
of a morning and an evening song; and even when the meridian sun has
shut in silence the mouths of the whole of animated nature, the
campanero still cheers the forest. You hear his toll, and then a pause
for a minute, then another toll, and then a pause again, and then a
toll, and again a pause. Then he is silent for six or eight minutes and
then another toll, and so on. Acteon would stop in mid-chase, Maria
would defer her evening song and Orpheus himself would drop his lute
and listen to him; so sweet, so novel, and romantic is the toll of the
pretty snow-white campanero.”19 [184]
So closely indeed does the note of the campanero resemble the sound
of a bell that the traveler can easily fancy that there is a chapel in
the depths of the forest, and that the faithful are being called to
prayer. The bellbird has a near relative in the herrero, or blacksmith
bird, whose note is like that produced when an anvil is struck by a
hammer.
The flautero, or flute bird, is quite small and of a grayish color.
Its notes are surprisingly sweet and mellow, and closely resemble those
of a sweet-toned flute, whence its name. One who hears this feathered
songster for the first time would easily believe that he is listening
to a skillful flute player, and not to the song of a tiny bird. The
refrain of its song is fairly well expressed in the following
notes:
Unfortunately for us, we were often obliged to listen to sounds that
were not so agreeable as those of the flautero or campanero. These were
the raucous, discordant, never-ending noises produced by frogs and
toads. In Orocué they always began their cacophonous serenade at
nightfall, and kept it up uninterruptedly until the following morning.
I could then realize that Padre Rivero had good cause for regarding
them as among the greatest nuisances with which he had to contend.
Their confused, strident notes—base, tenor, contralto,
soprano—kept up the entire night were, he assures us, enough to
split one’s head. Some of these amphibians we heard at
Orocué were on the opposite side of the river from us, more than
half a mile distant. They [185]were in very truth what Lowell has
so well characterized as
“Old croakers, deacons of the mire,
That led the deep batrachian choir.”
The wonderful depth and fertility of the dark, loamy
soil in the valley of the Meta was ever a source of wonder to us. Along
the river banks it usually formed a layer of four or five feet, and not
infrequently seven or eight feet. And the vegetation was everywhere an
evidence of this fertility. At Platanales, a conuco at which we
spent a night, we saw a grove of several acres of the largest and most
prolific bananas and plantains we had ever encountered anywhere. At
another conuco, farther up the river, where we stopped for
breakfast, we saw several acres of corn that was rapidly maturing. And
what corn! Never did I in Kansas or Nebraska see such ample stalks or
so large ears and grains. It was a revelation to us, and exhibited in a
most striking manner the wonderful, future possibilities of this
marvelously fertile, yet unknown land.
Near every dwelling, however humble, along the Meta, we observed a
large cross made of tastefully and often artistically plaited palm
leaves. The material was yet quite fresh and the crosses had evidently
been erected only a few days before we passed by. In design and
workmanship they reminded us of those seen in parts of Italy on Palm
Sunday. On inquiry, we found that they had been erected on the third of
May, the feast of the Invention of the Holy Cross.
“Why is this cross placed here?” I asked of an Indian
woman, while she was preparing our desayuno. “Para que no nos pegue el chubasco,”—in order that
the chubasco—wind squall—may not strike us, she
replied without hesitation. I asked many others at divers places the
same question and invariably received a similar reply.
These poor people were not able to erect the beautiful shrines one
so frequently sees in the Catholic countries of [186]Europe, and so their simple faith found
expression in these palm-leaf crosses, on which they had evidently put
their best and most careful work, of which they often seemed justly
proud.
On passing by a particularly large and beautiful cross of this kind
my mind reverted to a shrine near the lighthouse of Savona, an ancient
town near Genoa. Here there is a statue of the Madonna, twelve feet
high, under which are inscribed two Sapphic verses, expressing in
rhythmic numbers the same idea that was uppermost in the mind of the
good Indian woman when she braided and placed in position this symbol
of redemption. The verses were composed by Gabriello Chiabrera,
“the prince of Italian lyric poets,” who was a native of
Savona. They are remarkable in that they are both “good Latin and
choice Italian,” and have the same meaning in both languages.
They read as follows:
“In mare irato, in subita procella,
Invoco te, nostra benigna stella.”20
The only place of any importance between Orocué
and Barrigón is Cabuyaro, a small town of about two hundred
inhabitants. It cherishes the hope of becoming the eastern terminus of
the long-projected railroad from Bogotá to the Meta. This would
no doubt be a good terminal point, as the town is favorably located,
and the river is sufficiently deep to permit the passage of good-sized
vessels. As at the other towns we passed, the steamer may moor within a
few feet of the river’s bank.
Cabuyaro, however, is not the only place ambitious to become the
terminus of the Bogotá Eastern railroad. It has several rivals,
some of which are little more at present than rude huts in the
wilderness. Among these is Barrigón, which also rejoices in
the high-sounding name of Puerto Nuevo. It has, certainly, an advantage
over [187]Cabuyaro in that it is much nearer the capital.
When this railway, which has been in contemplation for many years,
shall have been completed, it will be possible to go from Bogotá
to the Meta in ten hours. At present it takes six days to make the
trip, and a very trying and tiresome one it is.
While our cooks were preparing comida—dinner—we
visited the town. As we were passing a neat-looking house on the plaza,
next to the church, a woman standing at the door, surrounded by her
family, observing that we were strangers, insisted on our partaking of
the hospitality of her home. She gave orders at once to have dinner
prepared for us, and was deeply disappointed when she learned that our
captain had made arrangements for us to dine elsewhere. She then said:
“You must do us the honor of taking at least a cup of coffee in
our humble home. We cannot let you depart without something.”
Before she had finished speaking, one of her daughters, a bright,
modest girl of about sixteen, had started to boil the water, and in a
short time we were served with as good coffee as we had ever tasted
anywhere during our journey.
The kindness and simplicity of these good people were admirable.
They were much interested in our journey, and could not understand what
could induce us to undertake such a long trip. They were most eager to
hear about our own country, and showed an intelligent interest in
persons and things that quite surprised us. Soon a number of their
neighbors called and each one was duly presented to the
viajeros—travelers—and served also with a cup of the
aromatic beverage which our hostess knew so well how to prepare.
Although we had become accustomed to the generous hospitality of the
good people we had everywhere met along the Meta, the cordial reception
given us by the people of Cabuyaro during our short stay among them
impressed us in a special manner, and made us feel that it is
particularly among primitive peoples, among those in the depth of the
forest, or in the solitude of the [188]desert, that hospitality is
not only regarded as a duty but is also esteemed a pleasure.
How often, when partaking of the simple fare of our kindly hosts in
tropical America, were we forced to compare their never-failing
hospitality with that of the Greeks of Homeric times! Then nothing was
too good for the honored guest, for he might be a god in disguise, or,
if not a god, he was at least a friend of the gods. Like the early
Christians, who treated their guests as if they might be angels who had
come upon them unawares, our Meta hosts always gave us the best at
their disposition, and expressed their regret that they were unable to
do more. Their home was ours as long as we chose to remain, and their
every act showed that they were pleased to be honored—as they
expressed it—by the strangers’ visit.21
Before leaving Orocué, we had telegraphed to Villavicencio to
have saddle and pack mules ready for us on our arrival in
Barrigón, which, as planned, was to be the morning after our
arrival at Cabuyaro. As, however, we had been delayed a day by trouble
with the engine, and loss of our anchor, we could not hope to reach our
destination without traveling all night. Fortunately, there was a full
moon and a cloudless night. And our crew, the captain notably, were
ready and willing, regardless of their own comfort, to do anything in
their power to enable us to reach Barrigón at the appointed
time. [189]
Never shall I forget our last night on the Meta. C. and I were
sitting on the prow of our launch, which was moving merrily along the
broad river—as broad as ever, apparently—which, under the
bright rays of the moon, shone like molten silver. There was no murky
vapor to obscure the fair face of the queen of night, or dim her
glowing form. Surrounded by the myriad stars of heaven, she reigned
supreme. Then, more truly than ever before in our lives, could we say
with Saint Augustine, that we saw “the moon and stars solace the
night.”22
The air was balmy and impregnated with sweetest perfumes and rarest
balsamic odors, wafted from the dark, impervious forest walls that rose
in silent majesty on either shore. The sleeping mimosas that had folded
their leaves for the night, the ethereal jambos, figs, and laurels, the
dark crowns of the jaca and the manga, the slender shafts of bamboo
tufts, the dim crests of the palm, trellised vines and liana festoons,
defiled before us in rapid succession, and, in the shades of night,
assumed the most fantastic shapes and magic combinations.
As we glided along the glassy stretches of the river there was
nothing to mar the perfect stillness that pervaded the scene, except
the muffled pulsations of our engine, too feeble to wake an echo from
the neighboring banks. The time, the place, the freshness of earth and
the splendor of heaven lent themselves to reverie, and stirred the
fancy to unwonted activity. Frequently on the Orinoco we had amused
ourselves by watching the odd and whimsical shapes assumed by the
clouds, especially before or after a
chubasco, or at the time the sun was dropping below the horizon.
Then the imagination, quickened to action, would discover, in the
rapidly changing clouds, animal forms varying from the bear and the
eagle to the griffin and the dragon. [190]
And so it was now. At one time we could see, in a curiously arranged
clump of trees and vines, the ruins of a Rhenish castle, at another the
shattered towers and merloned walls of an enchanted palace. Now it was
a rustic chapel by the wayside, and a moment later, as we peered into
the darkness of the inner wold, and noted the huge dark tree trunks, it
was the massive pillars of a Hindoo shrine. Here it was a Druid
trysting-place, there a mermaid’s grot and there again a
dryad’s bower or the home of a fairy queen. That Titania was not
far distant was evidenced by the swarms of fairies—matter-of-fact
scientific men would doubtless call them
Pyropheri—fireflies—that, like a thousand stars,
flitted through the bloom and the foliage, illuming with their soft
radiance the favorite haunt of fairyland.
How we enjoyed the mystery of these vast solitudes! How exquisite
the ever-changing chiaroscuro; the wondrous play of light and shade;
the warmth, depth and softness of the noble pictures that, at every
turn, ravished our delighted gaze! How it all elevated the soul and
enjoined recollection of spirit! The impression was in an eminent
degree like that experienced beneath the sombre arches of a Gothic
cathedral. And why not? Were we not beneath the starry vault of heaven,
in the depth of the dark, majestic tropical forest, in the most
inspiring temple of the Most High?
When in Orocué, we were told that, on a bright, clear day,
the Andes were visible from that place. But owing to the clouds and the
mists and the forests that had constantly obstructed our view, we had
not yet gotten even a glimpse of this world-famed chain of mountains.
Of course, we had seen one of its spurs in the coast range of
Venezuela. But this range was not the Cordillera of our boyhood dreams.
We longed to see that massive chain that extends in unbroken continuity
from Panama to Patagonia. And day by day, as we moved westward, our
wistful eyes were ever peering through broken forest or over
[191]grass-covered glade, to catch the first view of
La Cordillera de los Andes.
While silently sitting on the prow of our launch admiring the
countless, ever-changing beauties of that marvelous moonlight
night—our last on the Meta,—giving free rein to our fancy,
and shifting our course as the meandering river demanded, behold!
Suddenly like a vision, the Andes stood before us in all their majesty
and glory, looming up to the very heavens. So instant was the
apparition that, for a while, we were quite speechless from admiration
and awe. “The Andes!” one of us ejaculated, and we were
then completely under their magic spell. So agreeable was our surprise
and so great our emotion that for a time it was impossible to find
words to express our feelings of delight and wonder. We realized, as
probably never before, what a feeble instrument language is for
conveying one’s innermost thoughts, and how inadequate to express
what deeply stirs the soul.
Our adjectives and exclamations were little more than the
Indian’s grunt, and less devotional than the Moslem’s
phrase, “Allah is great!” Coming from the cold and tame
nature of the North to that of the glorious and marvelous equator, we
were like Plato’s men, bred in cavern twilight, and then suddenly
exposed to the bright effulgence of the noonday sun. We saw things
wonderful and unspeakable, but all our superlatives were inarticulate
and feeble, matched with the scene before us.
“But what are those lights on the mountain summit, a little to
the left?” inquired C., finally breaking the long-sustained
silence. On the very crest of the Cordilleras and extending for a
considerable distance, was a large number of brilliant lights, like so
many electric arcs. It was as if the long rows of arc lamps that
illumine the Bay of Naples, as one sees them from an incoming steamer,
were raised skyward far above the cone of Vesuvius; or as if the
resplendent “White Way” of New York were lifted into
cloudland. [192]
At first we thought it was a forest fire, but it was so different
from the unsteady, yellowish-red flame of burning trees and vegetation.
We had seen such fires along the Orinoco and Meta—as well as
elsewhere—and were quite familiar with their appearance. It could
not be due to volcanic action, for there were no volcanoes in that
direction, unless of extremely recent origin. Besides, the lights
before us were quite different from the fitful reflections that molten
lava produces from swirling masses of vapor. Might they not actually be
the electric lights of Bogotá or of some other city of the
Sierras? No, for Bogotá was on the west slope of the mountain
range, and there was no town of any size on the eastern declivity.
Still less could the lights be due to reflection from the sun, for it
had set hours before.
What then was this “midnight gloom still blossoming into
fire”? Our curiosity was excited to a high degree, but the
apparition seemed to defy all attempts at explanation. We thought of
the gleaming light seen by Robert Bruce from the turrets of Brodick
Castle, in the isle of Arran, before his landing in Carrick.
We recalled a similar phenomenon, observed by Humboldt on the Cerro
del Cuchivano in Venezuela, in which he thought the luminous display
observed might be due to the burning of hydrogen and other inflammable
gases.23
The Indians who live among or near the mountains, relate many
wonderful stories about strange lights that are occasionally seen on or
in the vicinity of the loftier peaks. “It is a curious
thing,” writes Im Thurn, regarding a phenomenon of this kind,
seen in the mountains of British Guiana, “that, as I have seen,
there actually is an appearance, as of fire, to be seen sometimes up in
these mountains, nor was I ever able to form any theory as to its
cause.”24
Sir Martin Conway records a more remarkable case of [193]this
character. “Long after the sun had set and darkness had come on,
Illampu glowed red like fire, and all the people in town saw it. Such a
sight none had ever beheld. In great terror they ran to the church and
the bells were rung. They thought the end of the world had
come.”25
My own conclusion regarding the luminous phenomena, that occupied
our attention for at least an hour, during the night to which I refer,
is that they were of electric origin. The mountain in front of us
seemed to be a vast condenser from which the electricity was escaping
by a silent glow or brush-discharge on an immense scale. The color and
the steadiness of the lights, as well as their durability, were
evidence of this. They were probably of the same nature as the
corposant of St. Elmo’s fire, sometimes seen on the spars or
yards of a ship.26
We slept little that last night on the Meta. Earth and sky were so
beautiful, and there was so much to engage our attention that it was a
late hour before we sought repose.
Early in the morning we left the Meta and entered the Humea, passing
the Rio Negro on our left. In Europe or America these two affluents of
the Meta would be considered good-sized rivers. Both of them are
navigable for some distance, but like hundreds of other rivers in South
America, are practically unknown, except to those who live in their
immediate vicinity.
About nine o’clock our pilot blew a loud, prolonged blast on
his conch which served him for a horn or call-instrument, and, looking
ahead of us, we saw gathered on the banks the entire population of
Barrigón—a negro woman, [194]her three daughters
and a young man, likewise a negro. We expected, of course, to see also
our mules and our arrieros—muleteers—but they were nowhere
visible. They evidently had not arrived. To describe our disappointment
and dismay would be impossible. We felt as if we were about to be
marooned, or left in a penal colony. What did it all mean? [195]
1 Named
after the astronomer Copernicus. ↑
2 In
eastern Colombia, if a cattle farm contains more than a thousand head
of cattle it is called a hato; if it counts less than this
number it is known as fundacion. A plantation in the hilly
country is called a hacienda, in the plains a conuco, and
if it have a sugar-mill, it is named a trapiche. ↑
3 The
steamer on which we had come to Orocué, took, on her return to
Ciudad Bolivar, among other articles of freight, nearly three tons of
orchids, of many species, collected from divers parts of Colombia. They
were intended for certain New York florists, and were shipped directly
to their greenhouses in New Jersey. They were gathered by one of the
many orchid collectors that are constantly engaged in tropical America
in making collections for florists in the United States and Europe.
Sometimes they come across new species of rarest
beauty. This means a treasure-trove for the lucky finder. Not long
before our visit to Colombia a truly magnificent specimen had been
discovered by one of these collectors. It was sold in London for a
thousand pounds sterling. And we heard of others that fetched prices
quite as extravagant as any that were ever paid for tulip-bulbs during
the period of the tulipomania in Holland in the early part of the
seventeenth century. ↑
4
Viajes Cientificos á los Andes Ecuatoriales, p. 29,
Paris, 1849. ↑
5
Personal Narrative, up. sup., Vol. II, p. 438 et
seq. ↑
6
Casanare, p. 11, Bogotá, 1896. ↑
7 Writing
of the juice of the arnotto berries, “that die a most perfect
crimson and carnation,” Sir Walter Raleigh declares, “And
for painting, al France, Italy or the east Indies yield none such. For
the more the skyn is washed, the fayer the cullour appeareth, and with
which euen those brown and tawnie women spot themselues and cullour
their cheekes.” Op. cit., p. 113.
Peter Martyr, referring to certain painted Indian
warriors, encountered by the Spaniards in the West Indies, declares,
“A man wold thinke them to bee deuylles incarnate newly broke
owte of hell, they are soo lyke vnto hell-houndes.” Op. cit., p.
91. ↑
8
Ibid. ↑
9
Bongo, falca, and curiara are names given in
Colombia and Venezuela to the dugouts or canoes fashioned from a single
tree-trunk. They are sometimes large enough to hold from twenty to
twenty five persons. Usually, however, their capacity is limited to
five or six persons. The curiara is smaller than the bongo or falca.
The bongo is generally provided with a covering in the centre called a
toldo or carroza. This is made of lattice-work with palm
leaves to shelter the traveler from the sun and rain. It is steered and
urged backwards and forwards by a man standing at the stern, who uses a
kind of oar—canalete—very much as a Venetian
gondolier handles his oar for steering and propelling his gondola. When
the current does not permit the use of oars those standing near the
prow urge the boat forward by poles called palancas. The boatmen
are called bogas and the ropes with which they sometimes pull
their canoes forward are called sogas. The bongo, especially
when the river is high, is a very slow means of locomotion. And owing
to the very limited space of the toldo, even in the largest canoes,
traveling in a bongo is, at best, very confining and uncomfortable. A
journey any distance in one of these long, narrow, crank
dug-outs—more unstable than a shell—is a trying experience,
and one that all travelers in equatorial America avoid whenever
possible. The treacherous craft is liable to capsize when one least
expects it. Even a skilled Oxford or Harvard sculler would at times
have great difficulty in keeping his balance in one of
them. ↑
10 Also
called papelon—cane-syrup boiled down, without being
clarified, and cast into molds. The only kind of sugar obtainable
here. ↑
11 A
stanza from this poem will show what value the author placed on the
hammock. It expresses, at the same time, the opinion of it entertained
by all travelers in tropical countries.
“Mi hamaca ea un tesoro,
Es mi mejor alhaja;
Á la ciudad, al campo,
Siempre ella me acompaña.
Oh prodigio de industria!
Cuando no encuentro casa,
La cuelgo de los troncos,
Y allí esta mi posada.
‘Salud, salud doe veces
Al que invento la hamaca!’”
Mention is made of hammocks by Vespucci and Alonso
de Ojeda as early as 1498. They are made on hand-looms from the fibres
of various species of palm and bromelia or from cotton thread. In their
manufacture the Indian women often display considerable skill and
taste. This is particularly true of the hammocks made in the regions of
the upper Rio Negro, which are beautifully decorated with the feathers
of parrots, toucans and other birds of brilliant plumage.
“The hammock,” as Schomburgk well
observes, “is the most indispensable article in the
Indian’s house, or for an Indian’s journey. On his travels
it is carried folded up and slung round his neck; the greatest
precaution is used to prevent its getting wet. Where a halt is made, be
it of ever so short a duration, the first object sought for is a
convenient tree from which he can suspend it. It is a compliment paid
to the stranger, if the host takes the hammock from him on entering the
house and slings it for his guest, and it is the duty of the wife to do
this service for her husband. The common hammocks of the Indians are
generally open, that is, not closely woven, and colored red with roucou
or arnotto.” Op. cit., p. 66. ↑
12 Peter
Martyr, writing of the West Indies, informs us that “In all these
Ilandes is a certeyne kynde of trees as bygge as elmes, whiche beare
gourdes in the steade of fruites. These they vse only for drinkynge
pottes, and to fetch water in, but not for meate, for the inner
substance of them is sowrer then gaule, and the barke as harde as any
shelle.” Eden, op. cit., p. 76. ↑
13
“Tutti dormono insieme come i polli, chi in
terra, chi in aria sospeso.”—Historia del Mondo
Novo, In Venetia, 1565. ↑
14 Often
misspelled yucca, which is the name of a genus of plants belonging to
the lily family. The Spanish bayonet—Yucca
albifolia—is a familiar example. ↑
15 Life
and Nature in the Tropics, p. 98, by H. M. and P. V. M. Myers, New
York, 1871. ↑
16
Aus den Llanos, p. 147, Leipzig, 1840. ↑
17 Of the
tonina, as of the dolphin that befriended Arion, one could say in the
words of an ancient writer: “Of man, he is nothing afraid,
neither avoideth from him as a stranger; but of himselfe meeteth their
ships, plaieth and disporteth himselfe, and fetcheth a thousand
friskes, and gambols before them. He will swimme along by the mariners,
as it were for a wager, who should make way most speedily, and alwaies
outgoeth them, saile they with never so good a
forewind.” ↑
18 The
national dish of Venezuela, also much esteemed in Colombia. It is a
kind of ragout composed of meat and vegetables, or fish and vegetables,
highly seasoned with aji, or red pepper. ↑
19
Wanderings in South America, Second Journey.
Referring to Waterton’s account of the
bellbird and the distance at which it can be heard, Sydney Smith
expresses his scepticism in the following fashion:—
“The description of the birds is very
animated and interesting; but how far does the gentle reader imagine
the campanero may be heard, whose size is that of a jay? Perhaps 300
yards. Poor innocent, ignorant reader! unconscious of what Nature has
done in the forests of Cayenne, and measuring the force of tropical
intonation by the sounds of a Scotch duck! The campanero may be heard
three miles!—this single little bird being more powerful than the
belfry of a cathedral, ringing for a new dean—just appointed on
account of shabby politics, small understanding, and good family!
“It is impossible to contradict a gentleman
who has been in the forests of Cayenne; but we are determined, as soon
as a campanero is brought to England, to make him toll in a public
place, and have the distance measured.” ↑
20
Who can tell? What we do know is that he has reproduced in the
exquisite creations of his transcendent genius just such cloud-effects
as rejoiced our vision on that memorable day when we bade adieu to the
Eastern Cordilleras. Never before had mountain scenery occasioned us
keener delight. Only once before had it been my privilege to
contemplate a vista at all approaching the one that unfolded itself
before us in the picturesque valley of the Magdalena. That was long
years ago, as I stood on the summit of Mt. Parnassus. It was a balmy
morning in summer. “Rosy-fingered dawn” was just making her
appearance beyond the plain where Troy once stood, and was hastening to
gladden by her smile the islands of the Ægean and the one-time
famous land of Hellas. Then I beheld, spread out before me, the greater
part of Greece, together with the countless islands that engirdle it.
It was a panorama which I then thought was unequaled in the wide world.
But beautiful, sublime, glorious as it undoubtedly was, it has since
yielded the palm to the unrivaled vista that greeted us from the summit
of El Sargento.
“How Turner and Ruskin,” we exclaimed, “would have
reveled in such scenic splendor! How it would have delighted the heart
of Claude Lorrain, the painter of idyllic scenes and the master of
aerial perspective! What ecstatic joy would not Gaspard and Nicholas
Poussin, Ruysdael and Corot, have experienced in the presence of such
exuberant vegetation, such sparkling streams and fleece-like clouds,
such grandiose mountains with their spotless mantles of eternal
snow!” [343]
And how such a spot as El Sargento would have appealed to the
esthetic soul of St. Benedict or to such lovers of wild nature as St.
Bruno, or St. Francis, the poverello of Assisi! Had they found
such a place, it would undoubtedly have been chosen as a site for a
temple, like our Lady of the Angels, or a monastic retreat like that of
Monte Casino or the Grande Chartreuse.22
We were still under the spell of the matchless pictures engraved on
our memories long after we had started on our way down the mountain.
Before we had realized it, we had passed from the tierra
templada to the tierra caliente. We were again in the dense
and luxuriant forests of the lowlands—in a region of perpetual
summer, like unto that which we had left behind us in the valleys of
the Meta and the Orinoco. We had left the habitat of the coffee plant
and the oak and were now in the territory of the cacao and the tolu
tree, the vanilla vine and the moriche palm. Far above and behind us,
on lofty mountain peaks where sunbeams “glide apace with shadows
in their train,” were the favorite haunts of the fleet and
sporting Oreades. Our path was now through a dense, gloomy forest where
Silence and Twilight,
“Twin sisters keep
Their noonday watch, and sail among the shades,
Like vaporous shapes half seen.”23
It was in such a sombre forest as this, we fancied,
where, under the influence of a fertile soil, perpetual warmth and
humidity, the teeming earth, in later geologic time, fed the countless
monsters that depended on her bounty. It was amid such surroundings
that they were wont to hold high [344]carnival, or engage in that
struggle for existence which resulted in the survival of the fittest,
until finally all were swept away by some fatal agency of which we know
so little. Had we seen a megatherium or a mylodon or a megalonyx
crossing our path, or observed a mastodon pushing his bulky form
through the dense underbrush; had we seen a screaming pterodactyl
passing over our heads, or beheld a giant iguanodon floundering in the
morass by the wayside, or browsing on the succulent crowns of the
Mauritia flexuosa, we should have regarded it all as in perfect
keeping with our environment.
Our reveries were suddenly disturbed by the soft, dulcet notes of
the tiple. Only a short distance ahead of us, reclining against
a mango tree, was an amorous young mestizo, who was fondly gazing on
his dusky querida, while thrumming his instrument. She, during
the serenade24 of her ardent suitor, sat on the door-sill
of a bamboo dwelling with a palm-thatched roof, having seemingly no
thought beyond satisfying the cravings of two little nude, paunchy,
bananniverous urchins, apparently her brother and sister—Pablo
and Julia by name—who, like ebony statuettes, were standing at
her knee and clamoring for another banana from a bunch suspended from a
rafter above the cabin door.
Farther on was another cabin, from which issued coarser notes of
shouts and laughter. It was a chicheria, and the chicha there
served was evidently the cause of the good nature and general merriment
that prevailed. We then discovered that we were on the outskirts of a
small pueblo, [345]just across the river from the goal of our
day’s journey. Our long, yet delightful ride across the oriental
Andes was at an end. Crossing a steel suspension bridge, the noblest
structure of the kind in the republic—which here spans
Colombia’s great waterway—we were in Honda, the head of
navigation for the lower Magdalena. [346]
1 Since
writing the above the connection has been made. ↑
2
Vergara y Velasco, Nueva Geografia de Colombia, p.
253. ↑
3
Castellanos, in his Historia del Nuevo Reino de
Granada, Tom. II, pp. 61, 62, in referring to the delicacies Don
Alonso Luis de Lugo and his half-famished companions found on their
reaching the Sabana de Bogotá, after their dreadful journey
through the “pluvious, swampy, impassable, dismal” sierras
of the Opon, makes mention, among other things, of well-cured hams and
capons that were provided for their entertainment.
“Cuantidad de jamones bien curados,
Porque tenian ya buenas manadas
De puercos desque vino Benalcazar
Que trajo los primeros de la tierra.
Hubo tambien capones y gallinas,
Que se multiplicaron desque vino
Nicolao Fedriman de Venezuela,
Que al Nuevo reino trajo las primeras.”
 ↑
4 Fray
Bernardo Lugo, in his Gramatica de la lengua Mosca,
published in 1619, and Padre Simon, in his Noticias
Historiales, written shortly after, were the first to state that
the language spoken was the Chibcha. Muisca is a Chibcha word
signifying person. ↑
5 The
Chibchas, like many people living on the Andean plateaus to-day,
derived their chief sustenance from potatoes and maize, both of which
are indigenous to South America. Oviedo speaks of the potato as their
principal aliment, as it was always served with whatever else they ate.
According to Castellanos, it was a favorite article of diet with the
conquistadores, as well as with the Indians.
Maize afforded them meat and drink, for out of it
they made bread and their highly-prized beverage, chicha, which
is still so popular among their descendants. Of the paramount
importance of this article of food among the aborigines of the New
World, John Fiske, in his valuable work, The Discovery of
America, writes as follows:—
“Maize or Indian corn has played a most
important part in the history of the New World, as regards both the red
men and the white men. It could be planted without clearing or
ploughing the soil. It was only necessary to girdle the trees with a
stone hatchet, so as to destroy their leaves, and let in the sunshine.
A few scratches and digs were made in the ground with a stone digger,
and the seed once dropped in took care of itself. The ears could hang
for weeks after ripening, and could be picked off without meddling with
the stalk; there was no need of threshing or winnowing. None of the Old
World cereals can be cultivated without much more industry and
intelligence.” Vol. 1, pp. 27, 28. M. Alphonse de Candolle, in
his learned work, Origin of Cultivated Plants, seems to regard
Colombia as the original home of maize, while he inclines to the
opinion that Chile was the point of departure of the
potato—Solanum tuberosum. ↑
6
Prehistoric America, p. 460, London, 1885. ↑
7 It is
saying more than the facts will warrant to assert, as does Ameghino,
that “En Nueva Granada las inscripciones geroglificas se
encuentran a cada paso”—that hieroglyphic inscriptions are
found everywhere. Cf. his La Antiguedad del Hombre, Vol. I, p.
92. ↑
8 Los Chibchas antes de la Conquista Española, p. 176,
Bogotá, 1895. Cf. also El Dorado, Estudio
Historico, Etnografico y arqueologico de los Chibchas, Habitantes de la
Antigua Cundinamarca y de Algunas Otras Tribus, por el Doctor
Liborio Zerda, Bogotá, 1883, and Nouvelle
Géographic Universelle, par Elisée
Reclus, Tom. XVIII, pp. 292 et seq., Paris, 1893. ↑
9 Chap. I,
New York, 1877. ↑
10 Compare
Fiske, op. cit., Vol. I, Chap. I. ↑
11
Crossing a mountain range like the Oriental Cordilleras, is not, as is
so frequently imagined, a gradual and uninterrupted ascent to the
summit, and then a similar continuous descent to its base. Far from it.
It is literally an ever-recurring journey “up the hill and down
the dale,” from the foothills on one side of the range to the
foothills on the other. The accompanying diagram from Karsten’s
Géologie de l’Ancienne Colombie
Bolivarienne, gives a good idea of the eastern range of the Andes
along our route from the Meta to the Magdalena. ↑
12
Commonly called “chaps.” ↑
13
Notwithstanding the statements, frequently made by travelers, about
their mules climbing roads inclined at angles varying from 30° to
45°, it can safely be affirmed that the maximum angle is but
little, if any more than 20°, as actual measurement will show. When
the inclination becomes greater than this the mule will always take a
zigzag course, so as to reduce the grade as much as
possible. ↑
14
“Heavy, tortuous and dark.”—Ovid. ↑
15 I do
not pretend to deny that drunkenness exists in Colombia. Even Colombian
writers would be the last to do this, for they are fully aware of the
extent of the ravages of the drink evil. They will tell you frankly
that the inhabitants of certain parts of the country are addicted to
intoxication, or, as one of them expresses it, that they are
“muy amigos de embriagarse”—fond of
getting drunk. And no one, I think, will deny that the prevalence of
the drink habit is one of the country’s greatest curses. A good
old padre, learned and patriotic, wrote a book some decades ago, in
which he contended that Colombia, by reason of its favored geographical
position and its wonderful natural resources, should rank among the
richest and most prosperous countries of the New World. And it would
be, he insisted, were it not for three drawbacks. These, in his
estimation, were borracheria, holgozaneria and politiqueria, to-wit,
drunkenness, indolence, and the habit, so universally prevalent, of its
people dabbling in questionable politics. We have no equivalent in
English for the expressive word, politiqueria,
although we should have frequent use for it if it existed. It means,
literally, the methods and occupation of a politicaster—an
individual who is as much of a drawback to the best interests of our
own country as is the politicastro to Colombia.
To the great amount of chicha sold in these
estancos, usually kept by women, is undoubtedly traceable the origin of
the saying, Toda chichera muere rica—Every
chicha vender dies rich. ↑
16
According to Franz Keller and other travelers in South America, the
Indian women in certain parts of the continent prepare chicha by
masticating the maize, just as some of the Polynesians prepare kava and
certain other of their favorite beverages by mastication. They claim
that when thus prepared it has a far more agreeable flavor than when
prepared artificialmente, that is, by the method above
described. See The Amazon and Madeira Rivers, p. 164 et seq.,
London, 1874.
Spix and Martius’ Travels in
Brazil, Vol. II, p. 232, London, 1824, say, “It is remarkable
that this mode of preparing a fermented liquor out of maize, mandioca
flour or bananas, is found among the various Indian tribes of America,
and seems peculiar to this race.”
Sir Robert Schomburgk, referring to the
intoxicating drink, paiwori, made from cassava bread, writes as
follows:—
“The women, who prepare the beverage,
assemble around a large jar or other earthen vessel, and having
moistened their mouths with fresh water, they commence chewing the
bread, collecting in the vessel the moisture which accumulates in the
mouth. This is afterwards put into a trough, called canaua, or in large
jars, in which a quantity of the charred bread has been broken up, over
which boiling water is poured; and it is then kneaded, and portions
which are not of an even consistency are again carried to the mouth,
ground with the teeth, and returned into the earthen pot. The process
is repeated several times, from the idea that it conduces to the
strength of the beverage. The second day fermentation begins, and on
the third the liquor is considered fit for use. We have seen a whole
village, young and old, men and women, occupied in this disgusting
process when it was contemplated to celebrate our unexpected arrival
among them; otherwise, for common use, the females alone employ
themselves ex officio with the preparation. Their teeth suffer
so much from this occupation that a female has seldom a good tooth
after she is thirty years old.... The taste of the paiwori is very
refreshing after great fatigue, and not unpleasant to the taste; if
offered as the cup of welcome by the Indian, it would be a great
offense to refuse it.”—The Discovery of Guiana, ut
sup., pp. 64, 65. ↑
17
Reisen in den Columbianischen Anden, Leipzig,
1888. ↑
18 The
usual name given the humming bird by the people of Venezuela and
Colombia is colibri. It is also known as the
pajarito-mosca—little bird fly—or
pica-flor—flower-nibbler. But the most beautiful and most
picturesque names are those in use by the Indians, who seem to have a
particular faculty for inventing appropriate epithets for whatever
specially strikes their fancy. By them humming birds are called
“The rays of the sun,” “The tresses of the
day-star” and “Living sunbeams.” The poet Bailey has
incorporated the last of these names in the couplet,
“Bright Humming-bird of gem-like plumeletage,
By western Indians Living Sunbeam named,”
Audubon was but imitating the children of the
forest when he called humming birds “Glittering fragments of the
rainbow.” ↑
19 Even
the Colombian writer, Vergara y Velasco, who, like South Americans
generally, is slow to grow enthusiastic over natural scenery, refers to
the view from El Sargento as a “Sitio pintoresco si los
hay”—a picturesque place if there be any. ↑
20 Act
III, Scene VI. ↑
21
According to Karl Fauehaber, the explorer of the Quindio Cordillera,
Tolima has an altitude of 20,995 feet. ↑
22
“With Francis of Assisi and his Hymn to the Sun,” we
are informed by a recent writer, “the love of wild nature became
more articulate.” As an illustration of the effect of Nature-love
on sensitive souls, we are told that the poet Gay, after visiting the
Grande Chartreuse, declared that if he had lived in St. Bruno’s
day, he would have been one of his disciples. “It was,” he
said, “one of the most solemn, the most romantic and the most
astonishing scenes I ever beheld.” ↑
23
Shelley’s Alastor, or The Spirit of
Solitude. ↑
24 The
negroes of Colombia are often of a highly poetical nature, and, like
those of our Southern states, are passionately fond of music, singing
and dancing. Their voices are often marvelously elastic, expansive and
harmonious. Their favorite air and dance is the bambuco, of
African origin, to which Jorge Isaacs refers in his charming Caucan
novel, Maria, and of which Vergara y Vergara in his valuable
Historia de la Literatura en Nueva Granada (Parte primera, p.
513, Bogotá, 1867) gives us so glowing an account. It is the
latter writer that assures us that if a negro were to play a
marimba in the forests of the South Coast, he could be certain
that wild beasts and serpents would listen to him in silent
ecstasy. ↑
“Salud, Salud, majestuoso rio!...
Al contemplar tu frente coronada
De los hijos mas viejos de la tierra,
Lleno solo de ti, siento mi alma
Arrastrada en la espuma de tus olas,
Que entre profundos remolinos braman,
De aquel gran ser que el infinito
abraza.”1
—Manuel M.
Madiedo.
While in Guaduas we met a Scotch engineer, who was
superintendent of a gold mine in the mountains west of Honda. Desiring
to know the truth about the excessive temperature of this place, about
which we had heard so many reports, we asked him if it was really true
that the heat in Honda was as intense as represented.
“You will,” he said, “find it the hottest place
you have ever visited. It is certainly the most torrid place I know,
and I have been something of a globe-trotter in my time. Hades, if I
have caught the meaning of the word, as used in the Revised Version, is
quite temperate in comparison with it. Business frequently calls me to
Bogotá, and, on my way thither, I must necessarily pass through
Honda, but I never stop there longer than is absolutely necessary, and
I always try to avoid being there in the daytime. If I must stop there
for a few hours, I time my journey so as to arrive there at night, and
make it a point to leave before morning. Hot? I think it is the hottest
and most suffocating [347]spot on earth. It has always been a mystery
to me how people can live there at all. I know of nothing to compare it
with except one of the burning pits of Dante’s
Inferno.”
Had we not learned by long experience how to discount such
statements, the prospect of spending some days in a town with such a
reputation for grilling the stranger within its gates, would have been
anything but inviting. But we had heard similar reports about the
llanos and the valley of the Orinoco, and had found, on arriving in
these regions, that the temperature said to prevail there had been
greatly exaggerated. The same we found to be true of Honda. During our
sojourn there, our thermometer never registered more than 86° F. in
the shade. Of course, around midday it was uncomfortable in the sun,
but I have been in many places in the United States where I suffered
more from the heat than I did in Honda.
The town is about seven hundred feet above sea level and counts
nearly four thousand inhabitants. It is separated into two parts by the
river Guali, which here enters the Magdalena. Being the centre of
traffic for Bogotá, the upper Magdalena, and the mining district
round about Mariquita, it is a place of considerable importance. As
soon, however, as the Colombian National Railway, now nearing
completion, shall have connected Girardot with Bogotá, Honda
will lose the commercial supremacy it has maintained for nearly three
centuries. There will then be little reason for a town in this place,
and it will lapse into a straggling village similar to many others
along the river.
And the Muisca Trail, over which we had so delightful a ride, will
be no longer needed, and will soon disappear in the dense and rank
vegetation through which it passes. Then, too, will disappear those
long and picturesque mule-trains, that so often crowded us to the
roadside on our way from Bogotá, and which have been almost the
sole means employed for the transportation of freight and passengers
since the capital was founded by Quesada nearly four centuries
[348]ago. We shall always congratulate ourselves that
we were able to make the trip on mule-back rather than by a railway
train. We can thus feel that we have, to a great extent, seen the
country as it was in colonial times—before its character was
modified by the innovations of modern progress and the introduction of
modern inventions.
In 1805 Honda was visited by a terrific earthquake, from the effects
of which it has never recovered. Everywhere are evidences of the
frightful cataclysm. Some of the largest and most important structures
are still in ruins. Nor has any attempt ever been made to restore
certain quarters of the town to their prior condition.
After a few days’ halt at Honda, we were ready to continue our
journey towards the Caribbean. The rapids of the Magdalena make it
impracticable for steamers to ascend the river as far as the town. For
this reason, it is necessary to go by rail to La Dorada, eighteen miles
northwards. But, although the distance is so short, it takes two hours
for the train to make the run. The road, however, passes through a
picturesque country and time passes pleasantly and quickly. Before one
realizes it, one is at La Dorada, where the transfer is made to the
steamer bound for Barranquilla.
There are several lines of steamboats plying between La Dorada and
Barranquilla and intermediate points. But all the boats, which are
stern-wheelers, are quite small. The largest of them will not carry
more than four hundred tons. Usually the tonnage is much less—not
more than one or two hundred tons.2 Our boat, which was
recommended as the best and the most comfortable on the river, was one
of the largest and newest, but, if it was the best, it is difficult to
conceive what the others must have been. [349]
A glance was sufficient to convince us that the craft on the
Magdalena are in every way inferior to those on the Orinoco and its
affluents. The Venezuelan boats are larger, and with incomparably
better equipment and appointments. They are clean, well kept, and the
service is good. Their cabins are commodious and well ventilated. They
are, besides, provided with all necessary furniture and the berths are
as comfortable as could be desired.
But how different is it on the Magdalena boats! In the cabins, in
place of berths with neat bedding, there is a bare cot, usually of
questionable cleanliness. Each passenger is supposed to supply his own
bedding. As to lavatories and bathrooms, those that we saw were filthy
beyond description. Our stewards were half-dressed, barefooted,
slovenly, unwashed negro boys, who seemed to have been picked up on the
streets at random, just before the boat left its moorings. The cuisine
and service were in keeping with everything else, and left very much
room for improvement. The natives, having nothing better, seemed to be
satisfied with the conditions that obtained. The foreigners, however,
and there were representatives of several nationalities aboard, could
never become reconciled to the lack of so many things essential to
comfortable traveling, and were always glad when their river
experiences were at an end.
For ourselves, who had been roughing it so long, the trip down the
river was not so trying as it was for many others. We were, besides,
better prepared for such a journey than the other passengers. We had
our camping outfits with us, together with clean bedding, which had
received the attention of the laundress before we left Bogotá.
We had, besides, good cumare hammocks, and mosquito nets, so that we
had nothing to apprehend from filth, vermin or insects. Thus equipped,
we really enjoyed our voyage on the Magdalena, but we were probably the
only ones who did.
After we had gotten fairly started down stream, and [350]could contemplate at our leisure the rich
tropical vegetation that fringed both banks, our minds reverted to the
first trip made down this river by Europeans. The travelers were the
celebrated conquistadores, of whom mention has already been made, viz.,
Quesada, Belalcazar and Federmann. They embarked with a number of
soldiers at Guataqui, a short distance above Honda. But they had
scarcely started on their downward course, before they encountered the
rapids at the mouth of the Guali. They were then obliged to unload
their two brigantines and canoes and transport their contents to the
lower part of the cataract, whence, after reloading, they were able to
proceed again on their long journey to Cartagena.
It was while passing this point that Quesada learned from his Indian
boatmen of the existence of gold in the valley of the Guali. In
consequence of this information, the town of Marquita was founded
without delay, and has ever since been a mining centre of considerable
importance. It was in this place that Quesada died after his return
from Spain. From here his remains were transferred to the Cathedral of
Bogotá, where they still repose.
According to Padre Simon, Quesada and his companions were
frequently, during their journey down the river, attacked by Indians,
“who came out to salute them and speed their way with a shower of
poisoned arrows.” “With the help of God,” he
continues, “joined to eternal vigilance, their own valor and a
liberal supply of powder and firearms with which the soldiers of
Belalcazar were provided, they were able finally to arrive at
Cartagena, and give the first information regarding the great campaign
in which Quesada and his followers had achieved such signal
success.”3
The Magdalena, like many other water courses in South America, was
at first known as the Rio Grande—the great river. It was
subsequently given the name it now bears [351]in honor of St. Mary
Magdalene.4 At times it is comparatively narrow and deep. Then
navigation is easy and without danger. At other times,
“Shallow, disreputable, vast
It spreads across the western plains.”
Then progress is difficult, and the boat may run into
a sand bar at any moment. And if the river should then be falling, it
may be impossible to get the craft free until the water rises. Only a
short time before our trip one of the steamers had been held in a sand
bank for forty days. As it was not near any place where provisions
could be obtained, the passengers suffered greatly from hunger, not to
speak of the suspense and enforced detention on an uncomfortable
boat.
Owing to the shallowness of the river, the boat was, during the
first part of the voyage, always tied up for the night at the first
tree or stump that might be found on the bank at sunset. The following
morning we were supposed to resume our journey at daybreak, but, as the
firemen did not begin to get up steam before that time, it was usually
an hour after sunrise before we were under way. We stopped at every
village and warehouse along the river, sometimes to deliver the mail,
often consisting of only a single letter or package, or to take on a
passenger. Two or three times a day, also, we halted to take on wood to
supply the furnace with fuel, for here, as on the Meta, coal is not
used. Fortunately, we were never obliged, as on the Meta, to delay
until the wood could be cut. Large wood piles are found every few miles
all along the river. They usually belong to a negro, who has a hut or
shed near by, together with a small garden and a few domestic animals
which supply him and his family with food in their sequestered
home.
We stopped at several large warehouses, many of them [352]constructed of corrugated iron from the United
States. This seems strange in a land where timber is so abundant. But
there are no sawmills in the Magdalena valley. South of
Barranquilla—where but little lumber is produced—imported
lumber would be more expensive and less durable than iron. At these
places the chief articles of merchandise are coffee, cacao, hides and
vegetable ivory. This last product, also called ivory nuts, is the
fruit of a species of palm known as Phytelephas
macrocarpa,5 and constitutes, in this part of Colombia, an
important article of commerce. For many things it is a good substitute
for elephant ivory, which it rivals in whiteness, beauty and solidity,
and collecting it for shipment gives occupation to quite a number of
the poor inhabitants of the Magdalena valley.
We usually went ashore at the different landing places to see the
people and familiarize ourselves with their mode of life. It was
generally as simple and primitive as possible—almost as
primitive, in some instances, as we conceive it to have been in the
Quaternary period or in the days of the Troglodytes. Often their
dwellings were little more than palm-thatched sheds—barely
sufficient to shield their occupants from sun and rain. A tulpa,
consisting of three stones, served them in lieu of a stove, and on this
they broiled the fish caught in the river, or prepared their
arepas—corn cakes—or their sancocho, a kind
of ragout, as popular in some parts of Colombia as it is in
Venezuela.
We were surprised to see in the houses and shops along the Magdalena
valley—what we had often observed in various parts of Colombia
and Venezuela—the large number of illustrated circulars of
Spanish, English and French proprietary medicines. The insides of
certain houses were sometimes quite plastered over with them. But what
was more surprising was the number of lithographs we saw of
[353]the German Emperor. Sometimes he was represented
alone, at others he was depicted as surrounded by the members of his
family. In several places we saw pictures not only of the emperor and
his family, but also those of his father and grandfather and Bismarck.
And the remarkable thing about it was that, in some cases, there were
no Germans living within hundreds of miles of where we came across
these pictures. Had some enthusiastic Teuton tried to start a
propaganda in favor of the Vaterland by distributing broadcast these
engravings of the imperial family? I know not, but, judging solely from
the number of their pictures we came across in Venezuela and Colombia,
one would be led to suppose that the Hohenzollern rulers are the most
popular of potentates, at least in this part of South America.
While stopping to take on some rubber at a certain small village, we
had a remarkable illustration of the rapidity with which the bed of the
river is sometimes changed, even when the water is comparatively low.
We had scarcely reached the landing place when there was a terrific
crash, occasioned by the falling in of a large section of the bank on
which the village was built. Soon afterwards another section gave way,
and then a third and a fourth. The whole bank seemed to be undermined
by the river, and, although the warehouse was fully fifty feet away
from the water when we arrived, so much of the bank had been carried
away in less than half an hour, that not only the contents of the
building, but also the building itself had to be hurriedly removed in
order that it and the merchandise stored within might not be borne away
by the resistless current. As the structure was of light bamboo, and
put together with a view to such an emergency, the transfer was not a
difficult task. When we started to continue our course, it looked as if
the eroding action of the river would necessitate the changing of the
site of the entire village before nightfall.
Such changes in the course of the river are not uncommon.
[354]They are going on all the time in some part or
other of the valley. One may frequently see immense masses of earth
suddenly detached, which are a serious menace to the champans6—large covered flat-boats—and other
small craft that happen to pass by at the time. Sometimes the giants of
the forest are thus wrested from their footholds, and may be seen
drifting down stream together with masses of vegetation attached to
them. At times, too, masses of earth, like floating islets, are
visible, and may travel a long distance down stream before their course
is arrested by an island or a sand bar.
Ordinarily the changes in the river bed are gradual and occasion
little danger to life or property. Sometimes, however, during the rainy
season, and when the flood is unusually high, widespread devastation is
the result. Whole villages are swept away by the deluge; and towns,
that were before important commercial centres, are suddenly isolated
and left far from the navigable part of the river. Places that before
were favorably situated are, after the flood, found to be in the midst
of pestiferous morasses. Such has been the fate of many places along
the waterways of Colombia, but more notably in the great island of
Mompos, near the confluence of the Cauca and the Magdalena. Here
several places that were at one [355]time centres of industrial
and agricultural activity, have long since either ceased to exist or
lost entirely their pristine importance.
Champan Going Up the Magdalena.
The town of Mompos is probably the most remarkable example of this
kind. Founded in 1539 by Alonso de Heredia, it is one of the oldest
towns in the republic, and was for generations the most important
commercial centre between Cartagena and Honda. But owing to a
displacement of the main channel of the river, and the filling in of
the branch of the river on which the town was built, it is now
practically deprived of its former means of communication with the rest
of the country, and is rapidly verging towards extinction.
The Magdalena, as a commercial highway, has been much neglected. As
a consequence, no one can calculate when leaving Honda, how long it
will take him to reach Barranquilla. It may require five or six days,
or it may demand twice that much time. All depends on the shifting bed
of the river, or the blocking of the channel by sand bars and
accumulations of floating timber. By reason of these obstructions and
the ever-varying depth of the main channel, navigation is usually
impossible at night, except below the island of Mompos, where the
volume of water is swelled by the tribute of the mighty Cauca.
If the Magdalena were under the supervision of a corps of competent
engineers, having at their disposal the necessary dredges and other
appliances for keeping the main channel in prime condition, a properly
constructed boat would easily make the trip from Honda to the mouth of
the river in two days, and traverse the same course up stream in three
days at most. It is really a pity to see such a splendid water course
so neglected. If cared for as it should be, it could easily be rendered
an artery for inland commerce of the first importance. As it is,
transportation, as now carried on, is always slow and uncertain, and
never free from danger and disaster. [356]
As a serviceable means of communication with the outside world we
were constantly contrasting the Magdalena with the Meta. From our
observations, we should consider the Meta, from its junction with the
Orinoco to Cabuyaro or even to the mouth of the Humea, as a safer
waterway than the Magdalena. Only twice did our boat graze a sand bank
in the Meta, but it continued its course without a moment’s
stoppage. In the Magdalena, however, we frequently ran into sand bars,
or shallow water, and, on several occasions, had difficulty in
extricating and floating our craft. Once we were delayed for some time,
and began to fear that, owing to the falling water, we should be
stranded for weeks, as other boats had been not long before.
When peace shall have been firmly established in Colombia, and its
finances shall have been placed on a satisfactory basis, the patriotic
and far-seeing statesmen of the republic, will, I am convinced, see the
necessity of carrying out the plan of the former Archbishop and Viceroy
of New Granada—Don Antonio Caballero y Gongora—and
connecting Bogotá with Europe by means of the Meta and the
Orinoco. It will not be a difficult feat of engineering to build a
railroad from the capital to a suitable point on the Meta, and the
length of such a road need not exceed one hundred and fifty miles at
most. This will bring Bogatá within eight or ten hours of the
head waters of navigation, and develop the most valuable and most
productive grazing section of the country.
The highest point the road need reach in crossing the Eastern
Cordilleras will be less than that of several passes in Colorado, where
the Rocky Mountains are scaled by the iron-horse with a long train of
cargo behind him. The pass of Chipaque, by which we entered the
altiplanicies of Bogotá, is several thousand feet lower
than the heights crossed by the railways leading from the waters of the
Pacific to Lake Titicaca, and to Argentina by way of Cumbre Pass, and
is nearly a mile lower than the point [357]where the Galera
tunnel pierces the Cordillera on the way from Lima to Oroya.7
What Colombia really needs is the betterment of both its great
waterways—the Meta for the eastern and the Magdalena for the
western part of the republic. Until they shall both have been put in
such condition as to be navigable during the entire year, it will be
impossible fully to develop the marvelous resources of this extensive
country. River traffic will always remain cheaper than traffic by rail,
and, on account of many physical difficulties, it is highly improbable
that certain valuable sections of territory will ever be tapped by
railroads. When, however, these two main arteries of commerce shall
have received the attention they deserve and shall have been put in
communication with the rich grazing, mining and agricultural regions by
the various lines of railway that are contemplated or in course of
construction, Colombia will at once take a position among the richest
and most flourishing republics of South America. Only those who have
traveled through it can fully realize its wonderful natural riches, or
form an adequate conception of its vast extent. Sufficient to state
that its area is more than ten times as great as the state of New York,
or as great as that of France, Germany and the British Isles
combined.
As to the great Pan-American line which has been projected to
connect New York with Buenos Ayres, that is talked of in Colombia as
well as in the United States. But when one contemplates the enormous
engineering difficulties to be encountered in the construction of the
section extending from Costa Rica to the frontier of Ecuador, one is
compelled to regard the project as a much more arduous undertaking than
some of its enthusiastic promoters would have us believe. Railway
communication will soon be complete [358]from Buenos Ayres to
Central Peru, and, judging by work now being accomplished in Ecuador,
steel rails will soon span the country from the northern to the
southern boundaries of this republic. But with all this work completed,
the most difficult part of the colossal enterprise will still remain
untouched. Even should the road eventually be completed, as is
possible, it is still doubtful whether long stretches of it would ever
pay even a nominal interest on the investment.
The part of the Magdalena valley between Honda and the island of
Mompos is but sparsely inhabited. Most of the inhabitants are Indians,
mestizos, or negroes, the descendants of former slaves.8
On account of the heat and malaria that always prevail in the lowlands,
but few white men are found here, and their sojourn, as a rule, is only
temporary. But near the confluence of the Cauca and the Magdalena, and
thence to the Caribbean, there are rich and extensive
esteros—grazing lands—covered with succulent Para
and Guinea grasses, several feet high. In these broad plains, there are
no fewer than half a million cattle, not to speak of large numbers of
horses, mules and other domestic animals. Some of the cattle we saw
reminded us of the fat, sleek animals we had seen on the llanos watered
by the Rio Negro and the Humea. Under more favorable conditions the
number could greatly be increased.
The scenery along the Magdalena is much like that along the Meta and
the Orinoco, except that along the western river one sees more of the
mountains, especially in the southern part. The vegetation is similar
in character and quite as varied and exuberant. On both sides of the
river trees and bushes are so massed together as to [359]form
an impenetrable wall. Everywhere there is a veritable maze of creeping
plants, of bromelias, bignonias, passifloras. And everywhere, too, are
lianas—aptly named monkey-ladders—which bind tree to tree
and branch to branch. Usually they are single, like ropes—whence
their name bush ropes—but often they are twined together like
strands in a cable. Frequently they are seen descending from the
topmost part of a tree to the ground, where they forthwith strike root
and present the appearance of the stays and shrouds of a ship’s
main mast. And where there is air and sunshine, these lianas, which
often form bights like ropes, are loaded with epiphytes of all kinds,
and decorated with the rarest and most beautiful orchids. Indeed, the
regions on both sides of the Magdalena have long been favorite resorts
for the orchid hunters in the employ of the florists and merchant
princes of the United States and Europe. From here these bizarre
vegetable forms are shipped by thousands. One enthusiastic English
collector tells us how he secured, as the result of two months’
work about ten thousand plants of the highly prized
Odontoglossum. But to obtain these orchids he was obliged to
fell some four thousand trees.
“The most magnificent sight,” he writes, “for even
the most stoical observer, is the immense clumps of Cattleya
Mendelii, each new bulb bearing four or five of its gorgeous
rose-colored flowers, many of them growing in the full sun, or with
very little shade, and possessing a glowing color which is very
difficult to get in the stuffy hothouses where the plants are
cultivated. Some of these plants, considering their size and the
slowness of growth, must have taken many years to develop, for I have
taken plants from the trees with five hundred bulbs, and as many as one
hundred spikes of flowers, which, to a lover of orchids, is a sight
worth traveling from Europe to see.”9
It is when contemplating the marvelous variety and [360]luxuriance of intertropical flora—of which
one in our northern climes can have no adequate conception—that
one is tempted to exclaim with Wordsworth:—
“It is my faith, that every flower
Enjoys the air it breathes.”10
And if the extraordinary claims which Professors
Wagner, France and G. H. Darwin make for plants be true, viz., that
they have minds and are conscious of their existence, that they feel
pain and have memories, then, indeed, should we be disposed to regard
the exuberant and wondrously developed plants of the equatorial world
as occupying the highest plane in the evolutionary process of vegetable
life.
Passing the embouchure of the Opon, on the right bank of the
Magdalena, evoked, in a special manner, memories of Quesada and his
valiant band. It was here they left the Magdalena during that memorable
expedition that made them the undisputed masters of the country now
known as Colombia. More than eight months had passed since they had
started from Santa Marta on their career of discovery and conquest. The
difficulties they had to encounter and the sufferings they had to
endure were extreme. Mosquitoes, wasps, ants and other insects;
reptiles and jaguars gave them no rest, day or night. Certain kinds of
worms, the old chroniclers tell us, buried themselves in the flesh of
the exhausted and half-famished men and caused them untold agony.
Indians everywhere laid ambush for them, and assailed them with
poisoned arrows from every point of vantage. Even the elements seemed
to conspire against them. There was a continual downpour of rain, so
that it was impossible to light a fire for any purpose. Their arms were
almost destroyed by rust, and they were left without [361]a
single dry charge of powder. Their provisions became exhausted and
starvation stared them in the face. To preserve life they devoured
their sword scabbards and every article of leather they had with them.
There was incessant thunder, unchanging gloom, eternal horror, and
other features of the pit infernal. Their course was through dense
underbrush and pestiferous swamps and up precipitous acclivities,
whither they had to drag their weakened horses by long lianas that
served the purpose of ropes.11
Finally, after the most heroic efforts, they came to a place where
they found provisions—a veritable land of promise for the
suffering but intrepid Spaniards. They had left behind them the
inhospitable sierras of the Opon, and were on the verge of the fertile
plateau of Cundinamarca, that constituted the home of the Muiscas. Here
they found maize, potatoes,12 yucas, beans, tomatoes and, as
Padre Simon phrases it, “a thousand other
chucherias—titbits—of the aborigines.” Well
could they, in the language of Castellanos, exclaim, with
thanksgiving:
“A good land! A good land! A land which puts an end to our
suffering, a land of gold, a land of plenty. A land for a home, a land
of benediction, bright and serene.”
It was then that the enthusiastic soldiers, whose courage would
often have faltered, had it not been for the determination and
perseverance of their invincible leader, gathered around Quesada to
congratulate him on the successful issue [362]of his great
undertaking, and to assure him of their undying loyalty in any future
enterprise in which he might require their services.
And well they might render the noble licentiate the meed of praise
he so well deserved, for had it not been for him, the expedition would
have been a failure, and they would undoubtedly have perished before
they could have returned to Santa Marta, as had so many of their
companions, who had turned back before the ascent of the Cordillera was
begun. To some of his officers who, in view of the unheard-of
difficulties they had to encounter, recommended that the expedition be
abandoned, he replied that he would regard as a personal enemy any one
who, in future, would make such a pusillanimous proposal and one so
foreign to Spanish valor.
All in all, he was one of the bravest and most humane of the
conquistadores, and successfully performed a task before which a less
valorous commander would have given up in despair. His achievements
obscure by their brilliancy and daring those of Amadis and Roldan and
are in no wise inferior to those of any of the conquistadores. They may
truthfully, in the words of Bacon, written anent a performance of Sir
Richard Grenville, be styled as “memorable beyond credit, and to
the height of some heroical fable.”
Quesada has taken his place in Valhalla among the greatest of the
world’s heroes, and his memory will endure as long as splendid
deeds of prowess shall stir the souls of men. Of him and his gallant
companions one can say what Peter Martyr wrote of their countrymen in
general:—
“Wherefore, the Spanyardes in these owre dayes and theyr noble
enterpryses, doo not gyue place eyther to the factes of Saturnus, or
Hercules, or any other of the ancient princes of famous memorie, which
were canonized amonge the goddes cauled Heroes
for theyr searchinge of newe landes, and regions, and bringinge the
same to better culture and ciuilitie.”13
[363]
Lower down the Magdalena, on the left bank of the river, we
approached the scene of the exploits of another of the distinguished
conquistadores—Pedro de Heredia, the founder of Cartagena. After
he had reduced to submission the Indians who had been victorious over
Ojeda, he started towards the Magdalena, where he collected such
immense treasures of gold that when it was divided, each soldier
received no less than 6,000 ducats. This was the equivalent of $48,000
in gold at the present valuation of this metal, and was the largest
apportionment of spoil, at least, so far as private soldiers were
concerned, made during the conquest.14 He
afterwards made a similar expedition to the territories drained by the
San Jorge and the Nechi, affluents of the Cauca, in search of the rich
veins whence the Indians extracted their gold. He did not find the
objects of his quest, but came across several rich cemeteries, in which
the dead had been interred with their jewels, and a sanctuary with
idols adorned with plates of gold. From these he secured treasures to
the amount of more than $3,000,000 of our money.15
Strange as it may seem, the method Heredia resorted to of securing
gold, the rifling of the huacas—burial places—of the
aborigines, has been continued until the present day. There are still
men in Colombia, notably in Antioquia—huaqueros, they are
called—who gain a livelihood by searching for huacas and
extracting from them the gold and emeralds they frequently contain.
The year before our trip there appeared in an English magazine, the
following paragraph in an article purporting to give a picture of the
Magdalena valley and its life:—
“Anchored in the forest at midnight, the traveler hears
[364]the deep growl of the jaguar, the sharp squeal
of the wild cat, the howl of the howler monkey, the long moan of the
sloth, and the last scream of the wild pig, pierced by the claws of
some patient but ferocious animal ambushed during the past hour, with
many other sounds of life, terror and conflict that fall strangely on
the European ear, and, if he waits and watches until the dawn, he may
see the alligator dragging his ugly bulk out of the water, crowds of
turtles trailing on the sands, the deer and the tapir coming down to
drink, thousands of white cranes on the branches nearest to their prey,
thousands of gray ones already wading leg-deep, and many more thousands
of other birds clouding the dim horizon, all waiting for the light ere
they begin their work of life and slaughter.... With the alligators in
shoals at the bottom of the river, and the millions of birds above its
surface, one wonders how any fish are left, yet the river is always
literally teeming with fish, as though conscious of the demands it has
to meet.”
Although we were always on the alert, so as to miss nothing of
interest, especially anything that concerned the animal life of the
tropics, we must confess that in all our experience we never heard
growls, squeals, howls, moans, screams, or other sounds of terror and
conflict, either along the Magdalena or anywhere else in South America.
And we spent nearly a year in the country, and often traveled weeks at
a time in the wild virgin forest, far away from human habitations of
every kind. Nor did we ever perceive any of the animals that certain
tourists would lead one to believe can be seen in such numbers
everywhere, even from the deck of a passing steamer. Nowhere along the
Orinoco, the Meta, the Magdalena, or elsewhere, did we ever catch even
a glimpse of a jaguar or a puma, a manati or a sloth, a wild cat or a
wild pig. More than this, not once, during our entire trip through
Venezuela and Colombia, through forests and plains, did we ever see a
single monkey, except two or three that were kept as pets [365]by
the natives. This may seem an incredible statement. I would have
believed such an experience as ours to be absolutely impossible,
especially in view of what writers and travelers in South America have
told us regarding the immense number of wild animals of all kinds
everywhere visible in equatorial wilds. But I am stating a fact that I
am quite unable to reconcile with the contrary experiences of others
who, according to their own admission, have seen but little, compared
with what we saw, of the lands through which we passed. I have seen
more large game on the plains of New Mexico and Wyoming, from the
window of a Pullman car, in a single trip to and from the Pacific
coast, than I ever saw in the wilds of South America during nearly a
twelvemonth.
Nor did we ever see along the Magdalena, or anywhere else, the
“thousands of white cranes on branches,” nor the
“thousands of gray ones wading leg-deep,” nor the
“many more thousands clouding the dim horizon,” of which
the writer of the above-mentioned article professes to have been the
fortunate spectator. We rarely saw more than a few dozen cranes at a
time—never a hundred, and I have reason to believe we enjoyed
very favorable opportunities, at least during a portion of our long
journey, for seeing what was to be seen. At no time did we ever observe
as many birds in the air at one time as I have frequently seen in the
United States. I feel safe in asserting positively that the number of
wild pigeons I have frequently noted in a single flock in the United
States, would more than equal that of all the birds combined that we
saw while in the tropics.
Mr. F. Lorraine Petre evidently had an experience somewhat similar
to ours. In his recent work on Colombia, he tells us frankly that one
sees little of animal life on the Magdalena, that “of the
mammalia one sees and hears little.... Of the jaguars, the pumas, the
sloths, the peccaries, the deer, the tapirs, and other animals,
dangerous or harmless, we saw or heard as little as we did of the bears
which inhabit the hills beyond. It is surprising [366]that, tied up, as we often were, right against
the forest, we should not have heard the night call of the carnivora,
or the sharp bark of the frightened deer, but truth compels us to admit
that we did not, and, moreover, that the cry of even the howling monkey
did not salute us.”16
The number of birds observed along the Magdalena was not greater
than I have frequently seen in the valleys of the Missouri or the
Columbia. Most of these were parrots and macaws. Always noisy and
restless, always flying and climbing about, except when eating fruit or
cracking nuts, one is at times tempted to describe them as feathered
relatives of the monkey. The parrots are sometimes seen in flocks, and
their piercing cries are at times almost deafening. They are a sociable
bird and are usually seen in considerable numbers. The macaws are
remarkable for always flying in pairs, and for their brilliant colors.
Their body is flaming scarlet, their wings are tinged with various
shades of red, yellow, green and blue, while their tail is bright blue
and scarlet. They, too, like parrots, are very vociferous, and,
although they may occasionally be found in large numbers, they always
fly two and two.
The large animals most frequently seen along the Magdalena, as along
other tropical rivers, are those horrid monsters, “ambiguous
between sea and land,” the cayman and “the scaly
crocodile.” But even they are not so numerous as certain
travelers would have us believe. The largest number we ever saw at one
time was fifteen. They were sunning themselves on a
playa—sand bank—below the island of Mompos. On the
Orinoco and the Meta we never beheld more than eight at any one
time—unless we [367]were to count a number of little ones, just
hatched, which Luisito, our colored boy, caught one day while we were
taking on wood on the lower Meta.17
The early Spaniards called all these saurians by the general name of
lagartos—lizards. The English afterwards spoke of a single
animal as a lagarto, whence the present name alligator. Modern writers
speak of them indiscriminately as alligators or crocodiles. As a matter
of fact, several species of both alligators and crocodiles are found in
the equatorial regions. But, notwithstanding all that has hitherto been
written about them, their distinction and definition, their
classification still remains a matter of difficulty. Some specimens
have been found whose classification is so perplexing that naturalists
are still undecided whether to regard them as crocodiles or alligators.
In this respect they are much like Shakespeare’s two lovers,
“Two distincts, division none.”
The name cayman is employed in Venezuela and Colombia to designate
any of these saurians. Following the classification adopted in the
British Museum the cayman is distinct from both alligator and
crocodile. More than this. According to the British system of
classification, there are no alligators at all in South America, while,
in the waters of Colombia and Venezuela, there are two species of
crocodile and three species of cayman.
Probably more fabulous accounts have obtained about crocodiles than
about any other animal. In spite of the old saying to the contrary,
they never shed tears. And notwithstanding the fact that the ancient
Egyptians gave the crocodile divine honors, because, being tongueless,
it was [368]made in hieroglyphical writing, a symbol of the
Divinity, it is now known that the tongue of this erstwhile god is
quite large, except at the tip. Similarly, all the stories that have so
long been current about the impenetrability of the animal’s hide,
are quite without foundation. How often have we not been told that it
is impossible to kill a crocodile, with even the best Winchester,
unless the ball enter the eye or strike under the soft, fleshy parts of
the front legs? Their plated skin is easily pierced by an ordinary
rifle or revolver, and a mortal wound ensues whenever a vital part is
penetrated.
Not less erroneous are the ideas that so widely prevail regarding
the ferocity of the crocodile and the cayman. On the contrary, they
are, in their native state, very timid animals, and rarely exhibit
hostility towards man, except when cornered. Then, like most other
animals, they will fight with great fierceness. They make for the water
as soon as they see one approach them, and it is often far from easy to
get near them. We often saw the natives enter rivers frequented by
crocodiles and caymans, something they surely would not have done if
the danger were as great as ordinarily imagined. In Venezuela the
Indian or mestizo has a much greater dread of the ray or carib fish
than of the cayman.18
Some attempts have been made, both on the Orinoco and the Magdalena,
to secure the hides of crocodiles and caymans for commercial purposes,
but the expense of preparing them for the market proved to be so great
that the work had to be abandoned.19 [369]
The early explorers of the New World had many stories to tell about
the cayman and the crocodile, and many of them have apparently survived
among the natives until the present day. But there were many other
animals that made even a greater impression on them. It will suffice to
reproduce Peter Martyr’s quaint account of two of these
representatives of the American fauna. The first is the tapir, of which
he writes as follows:—
“But there is especially one beast engendered here, in which
nature hath endeuoured to shew her cunnyng. This beaste is as bygge as
an oxe, armed with a longe snoute lyke an elephant, and yet no
elephant. Of the colour of an oxe and yet noo oxe. With the houfe of a
horse, and yet noo horse. With eares also much lyke vnto an elephant,
but not soo open nor soo much hangying downe: yet much wyder then the
eares of any other beaste.”20
The other animal that excited the wonder of Martyr and his
contemporaries was the sloth, of which he says:— “Emonge
these trees is fownde that monstrous beaste with a snowte lyke a foxe,
a tayle lyke a marmasette, eares lyke a batte, handes lyke a man, and
feete lyke an ape, bearing her whelpes abowte with her in an owtwarde
bellye much lyke vnto a greate bagge or purse. The dead carkas of this
beaste, you sawe with me, and turned it ouer and ouer with yowre owne
handes, marueylynge at that newe belly and wonderful prouision of
nature. They say it is knownen by experience, that shee neuer letteth
her whelpes goo owte of that purse, except it be eyther to play, or to
sucke, vntyl suche tyme that they bee able to gette theyr lyuing by
them selues.”21
The part of the valley below the confluence of the Cauca and the
Magdalena was quite different from that above. The country contained
more inhabitants, and the dense [370]forests that had hitherto
bordered the river gave place to broad savannas, on which grazed
thousands of cattle, so buried in the Para and Guinea grasses, that
frequently we could discern only their horns. Along the river banks
were the estates of well-to-do haciendados—some of them
foreigners—and the villages, that before were extremely rare,
became more numerous. The aspect of the country was less wild than that
through which we had just passed, and betokened a certain measure of
prosperity, at least so far as the grazing interests were
concerned.
We could now travel day and night, for the river was so deep that
sand bars were no longer to be apprehended. And then we had the most
delightful moonlight nights. The air was balmy and laden with an
exquisite fragrance,
“Mild as when Zephyrus on Flora
breathes,”
a constant invitation to repose and dolce far
niente. The surpassing loveliness of the scene, the magic stillness
of the vast solitude through which we were so peacefully gliding, the
broad expanse of one of the world’s great rivers, the weird
silhouettes cast by the passing palms on the moonlit waters—all
these things contributed towards rendering our last night on the river
a fitting finale to the others—all of which were in the highest
degree enjoyable. Seated on the forward deck of our steamer, we could
exclaim in the words of the choric song of Tennyson’s
Lotos-Eaters:—
“How sweet it were, hearing the downward
stream,
With half-shut eyes ever to seem
Falling asleep in a half-dream!
Resting weary limbs at last on beds of
asphodel.”
The following morning—our last day on the
Magdalena—found us at Calamar. Here some of our fellow-passengers
disembarked to take the train to Cartagena, sixty-five miles to the
westward. From Calamar to Barranquilla, [371]the chief northern
terminus of river navigation, is sixty-six miles. This distance we
expected to make in a few hours, but for reasons presently to be given,
we were unexpectedly delayed within sight of Barranquilla, the goal
that marked the completion of another important stage in our
journey.
Our last day on the Magdalena was a bright balmy one in June. We
spent the entire time on the forward part of the upper deck, fanned by
the delightful breezes that were wafted from the Caribbean. The river
here has about the same width as has the Mississippi at New Orleans,
but the scenery is far more attractive. It flows through a broad,
level, grass-covered savanna, which extends beyond the limits of
vision, and which is dotted here and there with small villages and
flourishing haciendas. Some of the houses near the river banks have a
most cozy appearance. They are almost embowered in a mass of flowers of
every hue, and surrounded by lofty palms whose lovely emerald coronals
were each a picture of rarest beauty.
“These princes of the vegetable world” always had a
peculiar fascination for us, no matter where we saw them. And during
our long journey from the delta of the Orinoco they were never absent
from view even for a single hour. When one species disappeared it was
replaced by another, and thus they followed us from the Atlantic wave
to the lofty crest of Suma Paz. The ocean-loving cocoa gave place to
the moriche, and this was in turn succeeded by the corneto of the
llanos and the wax palm of the Sierras.22
It is quite impossible for the inhabitants of our northern climes to
have anything approaching an adequate conception of the grace and
beauty and surpassing loveliness of the omnipresent palms of the
equatorial world. Away [372]from heat and sunshine, they are
quite devoid of the luxuriance and stateliness that characterize them
in the tropics. In Europe, for instance, there is but a single palm
that is indigenous—the Chamærops humilis. The date
palm was introduced from the East. In the tropics, however, about
eleven hundred species of palms are known, and there is reason to
believe that, when this part of the world shall have been thoroughly
explored, many new species shall be discovered.
The habits as well as the habitats of palms were a source of
unfailing interest to us. Some are solitary and are rarely found
forming groups with other trees of their species. Others, like the date
palm, are quite gregarious and often form extensive clumps. Others
still are said to be “social,” because they occupy
extensive tracts almost to the entire exclusion of other kinds of
trees. Various species of Mauritia, Attalea, Cocoa
and Copernicia are social palms, and the
palmares—palm groves—formed by them constitute the
most attractive features of tropical landscapes.
We once saw near the river’s bank a grove of this kind
composed of palms of unusual height and beauty. It had been selected as
the last resting place of the denizens of a neighboring village, and
was, to our mind, the most beautiful cemetery in the world. Could we
have our choice, we should prefer, by far, to repose under one of those
noble frond-bearing shafts to being shelved away in the costliest
marble vault of Père Lachaise.
A Palm Forest in the
Tropics.
Certain palms affect the open savanna, others seek the solitudes of
the forest, while still others are most frequently found midway between
these two—that is, on the belt of land that separates forest from
plain. Some palms, like the cocoa, seem to require an atmosphere that
is slightly saline, and thrive best near the ocean’s shore.
Others apparently attain their greatest development in marshes and
lowlands, while others again demand the arid plain or the lofty
mountain plateau. [373]
In spite of their noble appearance and their aspect of perennial
youth, palms, as a rule, are short-lived. None of them ever attain the
age of the venerable patriarchs of our northern forests. According to
Martius, the span of a palm’s life never exceeds that of a few
generations of men. The areca catechu runs its course in forty or fifty
years, the cocoa attains an age of one hundred or one hundred and
twenty years at most, while the date palm, which probably lives the
longest, usually rounds out its existence within the period of two
centuries.
Some palms, like the Metroxylon, for instance, never survive
fructification. It fruits but once, and then, as Martius so graphically
expresses it, “nobilis arbor mox riget, perit et
cadit”—the noble tree presently withers, perishes and
falls. But, continues the same writer, “there is pleasure and
solace in the thought that palms never die without yielding fruit,
thereby insuring the continuance of the species.” And then, as is
his wont when opportunity offers, he takes occasion from this
circumstance to moralize as follows: “To labor, to flourish, to
fructify is granted not only to the palm but to man
also.”23
In the foregoing pages I have mentioned some of the countless uses
made of palms, especially by the inhabitants of the tropics. It would,
however, require a large volume to enumerate all the purposes for which
they are employed. It can, however, safely be asserted that no family
in the great vegetable kingdom more completely meets the necessities of
millions of people than does that of the noble and ever-beautiful
Palmaceæ.
Like Martius, we always found in the contemplation of the palm a
source of special joy and peace. To him the palm was what literature
was to Cicero, a consolation in trial and affliction, and the delight
and inspiration of maturer years. In the palm we always found something
to elevate the mind, something that fascinated us and stirred our
emotions in a manner that often surprised us. For us, [374]as
for myriads of others who have lived and struggled and attained the
goal of the heart’s desire, the palm was the emblem of victory,
of a higher and better life beyond the tomb, of a happy, glorious
immortality.
As we gazed in silent delight at the broad expanse of the
green-carpeted savanna, adorned with the graceful, columnar shafts and
feathery fronds of the ever-beautiful, ever-majestic palm, we could
easily fancy ourselves in the valley of the Euphrates or in the plains
of Babylon, as described by Herodotus and Xenophon. And, without any
effort of the imagination, we could descry, in a palm-shaded village in
the vista before us, Jericho, as Moses saw it, when the Land of Promise
was a land of palms, as well as a land of milk and honey, and when
Judea was so prolific in palms that one of its representatives was
chosen as the symbol of the country.24 We dreamed
of Zenobia’s fair capital, Palmyra—the city of
Palms—of the land of the Nile, where Isis and Osiris carried
palms as the symbol of their fecund power. We recalled the enthusiastic
words of the ancient poets—Hebrew and Greek—in praise of
the gracefulness and magnificence of the palm, and the plaintive elegy
of Abdul Rhaman, first calif of Cordoba, who, exiled from Damascus, his
home, thus addresses the date palm, that reminds him of the land of his
birth: “Thou, also, beautiful palm, art here a stranger. The
sweet zephyr of Algaraba descends and caresses thy beauty. Thou growest
in this fertile soil and raisest thy crown to the skies. What bitter
tears thou would’st shed, if, like me, thou hadst
feeling!”25
While thus musing on the glories of the past and contemplating the
splendors of the present, which were passing in rapid succession before
our enchanted vision, we instinctively repeated the words of the
reverent poet-naturalist, [375]Martius, who, contemplating the
marvels of the tropical palm-world, expressed the depth of his emotion
by the two words, Sursum corda—hearts heavenward!
Just then our reveries were suddenly and unexpectedly
interrupted.
We had, early in the day, been congratulating ourselves on making
our voyage down the river without delay and without accident. We were
now within sight of Barranquilla and expected to land in less than an
hour. We were in the full enjoyment of one of those delightful
day-dreams that we always loved to indulge in, whenever Flora displayed
before us, as she did then, her choicest treasures, when suddenly,
without premonition of any kind, there was a violent lurch of the boat,
a creaking and a crushing noise abaft, a quick stoppage of the engine,
all of which indicated that something unusual, if not serious, had
befallen our ill-fated craft. A hasty examination showed that the
steamer had collided with a sunken tree, and that several of the
float-boards of the stern-wheel had been loosened, or partially
wrenched from their places. After considerable delay the boatmen were
able so to repair the damage that we were able to continue on our
journey, although at a reduced speed.
Very shortly afterwards there was a second and a much severer crash.
We had encountered another hidden tree. This time several of the
float-boards were carried away from the wheel entirely, and the wheel
itself was so racked that repair, while on the river, was quite
impossible. Fortunately, as we were going down stream, we were able to
float to the entrance of the canal that leads to the docks of
Barranquilla. Here a crowd of stevedores from the town soon
congregated. These men, mostly negroes, agreed, after some parleying,
to haul the boat to the landing place. They, accordingly, took hold of
a long rope, which was thrown ashore, and soon the disabled steamer was
being conveyed to her moorings in the same fashion as a canal boat is
drawn along by mules in tandem. We [376]reached the wharf the fifth
day26 after leaving Honda, just as the sun was setting,
and when the customs officers were about to close their office for the
night. They, however, kindly allowed us to disembark and we were soon
on our way to a hotel.
“How fortunate,” C. exclaimed, “that this accident
did not occur midway up the river!” Such a mishap would have
entailed much suffering and might have delayed our arrival at
Barranquilla, for days, if not for weeks. And considering our happy
escape from the detentions and disasters from which so many others had
suffered, and the peculiar episode that characterized our last hours on
the Magdalena, we were forcibly reminded of the words of
Dante:—
“Let not the people be too swift to judge.
For I have seen
A bark, that all her way across the sea
Ran straight and speedy, perish at the last
E’en in the haven’s mouth.”27
[377]
1
“Hail, hail, majestic river!... Contemplating thee, adorned by
the eldest of Earth’s sons; full only of thee, I feel my soul
carried on by the foam of thy waves, which in deep whirlpools roar,
absorbed in the giant works of that Being which embraces the
infinite.” ↑
2 The
reader will be surprised to learn that the aggregate capacity of all
the boats—champans included—at present plying on the
Magdalena—proudly named by the people the Danube of
Colombia—is not more than eleven thousand tons, about half the
tonnage of one of our great transatlantic steamers. ↑
3 Op.
cit., 3a Noticia, Cap. IX. ↑
4 The
first mention, apparently, of the Magdalena, as distinguished from the
Rio Grande, occurs in Benzoni’s work, already
cited. ↑
5 Called
by the natives Cabeza de
Negro—Negro-head—from the globular form of the spathe
enclosing the nuts. ↑
6 The
introduction of the steamboat on the Magdalena will soon suppress the
rude yet picturesque craft known as the champan. With it will disappear
that interesting type of negro known as the boga. The boga is
tall and robust, with the habits of a savage. He spends the greater
part of his time in the champan, and his life as a punter is a
strenuous one and full of danger. He speaks a barbarous
jargon—currulao—composed of Spanish and of certain
African and Indian dialects. His ideas of honor and honesty are not
unlike those of similar people in other parts of the world. One can
safely trust him with money and clothing, but, if the traveler have
liquor of any kind with him, the boga will be sure to purloin it at the
first opportunity. He is simple, frank, and brave. He sings during good
weather, even while struggling against the current or fighting caymans,
but he swears like a trooper during rain and thunder storms, especially
when the lightning strikes near him. For him death is a very simple
matter. A dead man to him is like a champan damaged beyond
repair—something to be carried away by the all-devouring
river. ↑
7 The
exact altitudes of the points named are as follows:—Cumbre Pass,
between Chile and Argentina, 12,505 feet; Crucero Alto, between
Arequipa and Lake Titicaca, 14,666 feet; Galera Tunnel, 15,665 feet. At
Urbina, on the recently-completed railroad between Guayaquil and Quito,
the height above sea level is 11,841 feet. ↑
8 In
Colombia, the white race, composed of the descendants of the
conquistadores, most of whom have intermarried with the indigenous
tribes, constitutes fifty per cent of the population. The negroes
compose thirty-five and the Indians fifteen per cent. In Venezuela the
descendants of Europeans are in the minority, while in Ecuador, Peru
and Bolivia the indigenes make up nearly two-thirds of the inhabitants.
La Republique de Colombie, p. 44, par Ricardo
Nuñez et Henry Jalahay, Bruxelles, 1898. ↑
9 Albert
Millican, Travels and Adventures of an Orchid Hunter, p. 118,
London, 1891. ↑
10 The
noted English botanist, Spruce, expresses a similar idea when he
writes, “I like to look on plants as sentient beings, which live
and enjoy their lives—which beautify the earth during life, and
after death may adorn my herbarium.”—Notes of a
Botanist, and the Amazon and Andes, Chap. XXXIX, by Richard Spruce,
London, 1908. ↑
11 The
route followed by Quesada from the Magdalena to the plateau of
Bogotá has remained impassable for horses since the time of the
conquest. To one familiar with the difficulties of the way, it seems
impossible that so small a body of soldiers should ever have been able
to take sixty horses with them and bring them all, with a single
exception, in safety to the plains above. It may be safely doubted if
such a feat could be accomplished now. But “there were giants in
those days.” ↑
12 The
fact that the Spaniards found potatoes here on their arrival, and the
further fact that there was never any communication, so far as known,
between New Granada and Chile before the conquest, would seem to
indicate that the Solanum tuberosum may have been, contrary to
the opinion of Humboldt and De Candolle, indigenous to
Colombia. ↑
13 Op.
cit., Dec. I, Book X. ↑
14
Quesada’s infantry received as their share of the spoil, which
had been secured, the equivalent of about $1,000. The cavalry received
twice this amount. ↑
15 In the
province of Sinu the amount of treasure in gold and jewels secured in
one day amounted to $300,000. Not without reason, then, was this part
of the New World designated by the early geographers, Castilla del
Oro—Golden Castile. ↑
16 The
Republic of Colombia, p. 59, London, 1906.
Nothing is farther from my mind than to call in
question the veracity of distinguished naturalists and travelers
regarding any statements they may have made concerning the vast numbers
of animals and birds seen by them in the equinoctial regions of South
America. But my experience proves at least one thing and that is that
one may travel a long time in the very heart of the tropics, and see
very little of its fauna, even in those parts in which it is generally
supposed that there are always representatives of many kinds and that,
too, in great numbers. ↑
17 The
following sentence affords an interesting commentary on the occasional
rarity of certain animals which are usually supposed to be always
visible in large numbers, especially in the Magdalena.
“I have read much of the number of alligators
on the Magdalena, but have not seen one.”—The Journal of
an Expedition Across Venezuela and Colombia, p. 264, 1906–7,
by Hiram Bingham, New Haven. 1909.
Raleigh says he saw in Guiana thousands of these
“vglie serpants” called Lagartos. ↑
18 Mr. R.
L. Ditmars, Curator of Reptiles in the New York Zoological Park, in his
interesting work, The Reptile Book, writes as follows of the
crocodile: “The sight of a child will send a twelve-foot specimen
rushing from its basking place for the water, and a man may even bathe
in safety in rivers frequented by the species. The dangerous
‘man-eating’ crocodiles inhabit India and Africa.” P.
91. Compare Schomburgk, in Raleigh’s Discovery of Guiana,
p. 57. ↑
19 If the
slaughter of the alligator in the Gulf States continues for a few years
longer, at the rate which has prevailed during the past few decades,
the reptile will be exterminated. According to the Bulletin of the
U. S. Fish Commission, XI, 1891, p. 343, it is estimated that
2,500,000 were killed in Florida between 1880 and 1894. ↑
20 Dec.
II, Book 9. ↑
21 Dec. I,
Book 9. ↑
22 The
Ceroxylon andicola and the Kunthia montana grow at
altitudes of from 6,000 to 9,000 feet, and, according to Humboldt,
palms are found in the Paramo de Guanucos, 13,000 feet above sea
level. ↑
23
Historia Naturalis Palmarum, Tom. I, p. 156, Lipsiæ.
1850. ↑
24 The
countries here mentioned, especially Palestine, are now comparatively
bare of palms. ↑
25
According to a legend, this was the first date-palm seen in Spain, and
was planted by the calif himself, in front of his palace, as a souvenir
of his early home. ↑
26 Quesada
and his companions made their celebrated voyage from Guatiqui to the
mouth of the river, a distance of nearly seven hundred miles, in twelve
days. Considering that they had only rudely-constructed brigantines and
dugouts, their trip, compared with ours made in a steamboat under the
most favorable conditions in but little less than half the time, was
truly remarkable. ↑
27
Paradiso, Canto XIII, 130 et 136–138. ↑
“O’er the glad waters of the dark
blue sea,
Our thoughts are boundless and our souls as free,
Far as the breeze can bear, the billows foam,
Survey our empire and behold our home!
These are our realms, no limits to their sway,
Our flag the sceptre all who meet obey.
Ours the wild life in tumult still to range
From toil to rest, and joy in every change.”
—Byron, The
Corsair.
Barranquilla, a city of about sixty-five thousand
inhabitants, is notable for being the chief port of entry of Colombia.
It is estimated that two-thirds of the commerce of the republic
converges at this point. To us, coming from the interior of the
country, where comparatively little business is transacted, the place
seemed to be a marvel of activity and business enterprise. It counts a
large number of important business houses, the chief of which are
controlled by foreigners. It is provided with tram-ways, electric
lights, telephones, a good water supply and, in many respects, reminds
one of our progressive cities on the Gulf Coast. Many of the private
residences, especially in the more elevated quarters of the city, are
models of comfort and good taste. The average annual temperature is
80° F., but the refreshing breezes from the Caribbean make it seem
less. At no time during our sojourn of more than a week in the city,
had we reason to complain of the excessive heat of which so much has
been said and written. [378]
Although Barranquilla was founded in 1629, it is only within the
last third of a century that it has come to the front as the leading
entrepot of the republic. Before this time, Cartagena and Santa Marta
were Colombia’s principal ports and busiest marts. This change in
the relative importance of these three ports was effected by the
construction of a great pier at Savanilla and connecting it with
Barranquilla by rail. After this both Cartagena and Santa Marta rapidly
dwindled in importance as distributing centres, while the growth of
Barranquilla was correspondingly rapid. Were it not for the banana
industry, controlled by the United Fruit Company, an American
corporation, Santa Marta’s trade would now be little more than
nominal.
But why, it will be asked, do not ocean vessels dock at Barranquilla
instead of unloading so far away from the city? The usual answer given,
and in a way the correct one, is that the Magdalena is not deep enough
to permit the passage of so large vessels. We saw one venturesome ocean
liner stranded near the mouth of the river on a sand bar, where it had
been washed and pounded for nearly two years. Many attempts had been
made to float her but without success, and it seemed as if she was
destined to remain a captive of the treacherous shoal that had so long
held her in its unyielding grasp. The real reason, however, for not
having the landing place where it should be—in the city
itself—is the lack of the capital that would be required to
dredge the river, and enlarge the canal, and keep them both in a
condition that would insure the safe passage of vessels of heavy draft.
Given an engineer like James B. Eades, of Mississippi jetties fame, and
the necessary capital, the improvement would soon be effected.
Before leaving Bogotá we had planned to reach Barranquilla in
time to take an English steamer from Savanilla—Puerto
Colombia—to Colon. We then flattered ourselves that, after
reaching the mouth of the Magdalena, we should have no difficulty in
making connection for any [379]part of the world, and that delay
in continuing our journey was the last thing to be apprehended.
But alas and alack! Where we least expected it, we were doomed to
disappointment. We had crossed the continent without a single failure
to connect, as we had anticipated, except at Barrigón, where we
were detained a day, and had not experienced a single disagreeable
delay, and now, when we had reached the world lines of travel, we were
informed that the steamer we had intended to take had been laid up for
repairs, and that we should be obliged to wait a week before another
would arrive.
There was nothing to do but resign ourselves to the inevitable.
Barranquilla is not a place where a traveler would care to remain long
as a matter of choice, but we managed to make ourselves comfortable.
The time passed more quickly and pleasantly than we anticipated, but,
just as we began to make preparations for our departure, we found
ourselves the victims of a new disappointment. The steamer that we were
to take was forbidden to land at Savanilla, in consequence of having
stopped at Trinidad, which was then reported to be infected by the
bubonic plague.
“Truly,” we said, “we are getting into the region
of mañana—delay and disappointment—just at
the moment when we thought we were leaving it.”
We had been so fortunate thus far, and that too in lands where, we
had been assured, everything would be against us and where the
best-laid plans would be frustrated, that we were ill prepared for
delay where it was least expected. Happily for us, however, a steamer,
having a clean bill of health, but belonging to another line, was due
in a few days, and this we determined to take, for we did not know when
we should be able to get another one. When once the plague appears in
the West Indies, or on the mainland bordering the Caribbean, quarantine
regulations are strictly enforced, and the luckless traveler may find
himself a prisoner for weeks, and even months, [380]in a
place that is practically destitute of the commonest comforts and
conveniences of life. Then, indeed, his lot—especially if he is
not familiar with the language of the country—is far from
enviable. I have met with many people who, under such untoward
conditions, had to endure the greatest privations and sufferings.
By the greatest good fortune, it seemed to us, we finally got aboard
a good, comfortable vessel. It was not, however, bound for our
objective point—Colon—but for Puerto Limon, in Costa Rica.
This, although we did not know it at the time, was a blessing in
disguise. Had we gone directly to Colon, we should have been obliged to
spend some time in quarantine. By going to Costa Rica, we escaped this
and were able, during a week, to combine utile
dulci—study with pleasure—under the most favorable and
delightful circumstances.
From Puerto Colombia we went directly to Cartagena—a city
that, in some respects, possessed a greater interest for us than any we
had hitherto visited in South America. We entered this famous harbor,
large enough to hold all the navies of the world, early in the morning,
just as the sun was beginning to impart a subdued roseate glow to the
tiled roofs of the loftier buildings of the once flourishing metropolis
of New Granada.
The picture of Cartagena, as it first presented itself to our view,
was one of rarest loveliness. As we then saw it, it was not unlike
Venice as seen from Il Lido or from the deck of a steamer arriving from
Trieste. From another point as we advanced into the placid bay, we
discerned in it a resemblance to Alexandria, as viewed from the
Mediterranean. As Venice has been called the Queen of the Adriatic, so
also, and justly, did the beauteous city of Pedro de Heredia long bear
the proud title of Reina de las Indias y Reina de los
Mares, Queen of the Indies and Queen of the Seas.
One of the first cities built on Tierra Firme, it was also, for a
long period, one of the most important places in [381]the
New World. Its fortifications and the massive walls that girdle it have
long been celebrated. Even now these are the features that have the
greatest attraction for the visitor. Stupendous is the only word that
adequately characterizes them. Their immensity impresses one like the
pyramids of Ghizeh, and this impression is fully confirmed when one
learns their cost and the number of men engaged in their construction.
It is said that from thirty to one hundred thousand men were employed
on this titanic undertaking, and that it cost no less than fifty-nine
million dollars—a fabulous sum for that period. This reminds one
of what historians relate regarding the building of the pyramid of
Cheops, the greatest and most enduring of human monuments, as the walls
of Cartagena are the grandest and most imposing evidence of Spanish
power in the western hemisphere. So great was the draft made on the
royal exchequer by the construction of these massive walls that Philip
II, so the story runs, one day seized a field glass and looking in the
direction of Cartagena, murmured with disenchanted irony: “Can
one see those walls? They must be very high, for the price
paid?”
No wonder that Charles V was always in need of money, and that, to
secure it, he was forced to mortgage a large tract of land in Venezuela
to the Welsers, the German bankers of Augsburg. No wonder that Philip
II, despite the stream of gold and silver that flowed into his coffers
from his vast possessions beyond the sea, was, during the second half
of his reign, forced to see his royal signature dishonored by bankers
who refused him further credit!
Cartagena in Colombia was named after Cartagena in Spain, as the
Spanish city, founded by Hasdrubal as an outpost to serve in future
Punic campaigns, was named from the celebrated Tyrian emporium that was
so long the rival of Rome. And when the sons of the Caribbean Carthage
sailed up the Cauca to establish new colonies and extend the sphere of
Spanish influence and enterprise, they commemorated their triumph, and
exhibited their [382]loyalty to the land of their birth, by
founding still another Carthage—the Cartago of the Upper
Cauca.
And what an eventful story is that of the Caribbean Cartagena! What
changes has she not witnessed! What fortunes of war has she not
experienced! What disasters has she not suffered! Like her African
prototype, whose very strength caused her rival on the Tiber to decree
her downfall, Cartagena seemed to be singled out for attack by all the
enemies of Spain for long generations. Her cyclopean walls, that seemed
to render her impregnable, did not save her. Time and again she was
assaulted by pirates and buccaneers, who levied heavy tributes and
carried off booty of inestimable value. Drake, Morgan, Pointis1
and Vernon attacked and ravaged her in turn, but unlike the Carthage of
the hapless Dido, she still survives. And notwithstanding the four long
sieges she sustained and the vicissitudes through which she passed
during the protracted War of Independence, when she was hailed as La
Ciudad Heroica—The heroic city—her walls, after three
and a half centuries, are still in a marvelous state of preservation
and evoke the admiration of all who behold them.
Everywhere within the city, which during colonial times enjoyed the
monopoly of commerce with Spain, are evidences of departed grandeur.
Churches, and palaces and monastic institutions, beautiful and
grandiose, still retain much of the glamour of days long past. In the
charming plazas, shaded by graceful palms and adorned with richest
tropical verdure and bloom; along the narrow streets flanked by
spacious edifices and ornamented with multi-colored balconies and
curiously grated windows, one feels always under the spell of a proud
and romantic past, of an age of chivalry of which only the memory
remains. The architecture of many of the buildings, erstwhile homes
[383]of wealth and culture and refinement, is Moorish
in character and carried us back to many happy days spent in fair
Andalusia in its once noble capitals, Granada and Seville.
Strolling along the grass-grown pavements of Cartagena, we note in
the former flourishing metropolis what Wordsworth observed in
Bruge’s town,
“Many a street
Whence busy life has fled.”
But we also discern unmistakable signs of an awakening
to a new life, and of the dawn of a new era of prosperity and
mercantile greatness. Notwithstanding the venerable years in which she
is at present arrayed, we can, without being horoscopists, safely
presage that the benignant stars are sure to bring
“What fate denies to man,—a second
spring.”
To enjoy the best view of Cartagena, one must ascend
an eminence to the east of the city called La Popa, from its fancied
resemblance to the lofty stern of a fifteenth century ship. There,
seated under an umbrageous cocoa palm, fully five hundred feet above
the beautiful iris-blue bay that washes the walls that encircle the
city, one has before him one of the most charming panoramas in the
world; one which during more than three centuries, was the witness of
some of the most stirring events in history. In the broad, steep
harbor, protected on all sides by frowning fortresses, the Spanish
plate-fleets long found refuge from corsairs and sea rovers. It was
here, when pirates and buccaneers made it unsafe to transport treasure
by the Pacific, that gold and silver were brought from Bolivia to Peru,
Ecuador and New Granada by way of the Andean plateau and the Cauca and
Magdalena rivers.
One is stupefied when one considers what an expenditure of energy
this implied. Think of transporting gold and silver ingots a distance
of more than two thousand miles, over the arid deserts of Bolivia and
Peru, and across the [384]chilly punas and paramos of the lofty
Cordilleras; of securing it against loss in passing along dizzy
ravines, across furious torrents, through the almost impenetrable
forests of New Granada, often infested by hostile Indians. And
remember, that, for a part of this long distance, these heavy burdens
had to be carried by human beings, for no other means of transportation
were available.
And when one considers the amount of the treasure thus transported
from points as distant as the flanks of Potosi and the auriferous
deposits of the distant Pilcomayo, the wonder grows apace. According to
the estimates of reliable historians, the amount of gold and silver
imported into Spain from her American possessions from 1502 to 1775 was
no less than the colossal sum of ten billion dollars.2 Nearly
two billions of this treasure were taken from the famous silver mines
of Potosi alone. The greater part of the bullion from Peru was shipped
by the South Sea to Panama and Nombre de Dios and thence carried to
Spain in carefully guarded plate-fleets. But after the pirates and
buccaneers became active along the western coast of South America, the
ingots of the precious metals, yielded by the mines between Chile and
the Caribbean were transported overland and deposited in carefully
guarded galleons awaiting them in the harbor of the Queen of the
Indies.
But even then the treasure was not safe. It was, indeed, much more
exposed on the way from Cartagena to Palos and Cadiz than it had been
from the time it had been dispatched from the smelter until its arrival
at the great stronghold on the Caribbean. For then, suddenly and
without warning, like a flock of vultures that had scented carrion from
afar, there gathered from all points of the compass English buccaneers,
French filibusters, and Dutch freebooters and harassed the galleons
until they succumbed. So successful did these daring sea robbers
eventually become [385]that no galleon dared to venture alone on
the waters of the Indian seas, and only strongly guarded plate-fleets
could hope to escape capture by their alert and venturesome enemies,
who swarmed over the Caribbean from the Lesser Antilles to Yucatan, and
terrorized the coast of the Spanish Main from one end to the other.
One loves to conjecture what might have been if Charles V or Philip
II had been endowed with the genius of a Napoleon or a Cæsar.
Masters of the greater part of Europe, and undisputed sovereigns of the
major portion of the Western Hemisphere, with untold wealth continually
pouring into their treasury, then was the time—the only time,
probably, in the history of the modern world—to realize
Dante’s fond dream of a universal monarchy. But neither Charles
nor Philip had the genius required, and the one opportunity, that ever
presented itself, of making Spanish possessions coextensive with the
world’s surface, was lost and lost forever.
The sun was rapidly approaching the western horizon when we took our
departure from the beautiful and picturesque harbor of the Queen of the
Seas. In a short time the coast of what was once known as Castilla del
Oro—Golden Castile—had disappeared from our view and the
prow of our vessel was directed towards the historic land of Costa
Rica—the Rich Coast—discovered by Columbus during his
fourth voyage.
The night following our visit to Cartagena was an ideal one, a night
for wakeful dreams and the sweet delights of reverie. There was
scarcely a ripple on the waters, and the stars of the firmament seemed
to shine with an unwonted effulgence. All was peace and tranquillity,
and everything seemed to proclaim the joy of living.
How different was old Benzoni’s experience in these same
waters and during the same season of the year! “In consequence of
contrary winds,” he tells us, “we remained there
seventy-two days, and in all this time we did not see four hours of
sunshine. Almost constantly and especially [386]at
night, there was so much heavy rain, and thunder and lightning, that it
seemed as if both heaven and earth would be destroyed.”3
The experience of Columbus was even more terrifying. In a letter to
Ferdinand and Isabella, giving an account of his fourth voyage, the
great navigator informs them that, so great was the force of wind and
current, he was able to advance only seventy leagues in sixty days.
During this time, there was no “cessation of the tempest, which
was one continuation of rain, thunder and lightning; indeed, it seemed
as if it were the end of the world.... Eighty-eight days did this
fearful tempest continue, during which I was at sea, and saw neither
sun nor stars.”4 The name Cape Gracias á Dios—Thanks be to God—which he
gave to the easternmost point of Nicaragua and Honduras, still remains
to attest his gratitude for his miraculous escape from what for many
long weeks seemed certain destruction.
It was our good fortune, during all our cruising in the Caribbean,
to enjoy the most delightful weather, but we never appreciated it so
much as we did during our voyage from Cartagena to Puerto Limon, and
more especially during the first night after our departure from the
Colombian coast. We were then sailing in waters that had been rendered
famous by the achievements of some of the most remarkable men named in
the annals of early American discovery and conquest, where every green
island and silent bay, every barren rock and sandy key, has its legend,
and where, at every turn, one breathes an atmosphere of romance and
wonderland.
At one time we were following in the wake of the illustrious Admiral
of the Ocean; at another we were in the track of Amerigo Vespucci and
Juan de la Cosa, that brave [387]Biscayan pilot who was regarded by
his companions as an oracle of the sea. Rodrigo de Bastidas, Alonso de
Ojeda and Diego de Nicuesa passed this way, as did Vasco Nuñez
de Balboa, the discoverer of the Great South Sea, who, his countrymen
declared, never knew when he was beaten, and who, according to Fiske,
was “by far the most attractive figure among the Spanish
adventurers of that time.”5 The Pizarros and Almagro
sailed these waters, before embarking at Panama on that marvelous
expedition which resulted in the conquest of Peru. And so did Orellana,
the discoverer of the Amazon, and Belalcazar, the noted conquistador
and rival of Quesada and Federmann. And then, too, there was Gonzalez
Davila, the explorer of Nicaragua, and Hernando Cortes, the
conqueror of Mexico.
And last, but the best and noblest of them all, was the gentle and
indefatigable Las Casas, the protector of the aborigines and the
Apostle of the Indies, whose memory is still held in benediction in all
Latin America. His voluminous writings, making more than ten thousand
pages octavo, much of which is devoted to the defense of the Indians,
constitute a monument which will endure as long as men shall love truth
and justice. But his greatest monument—one that is absolutely
unique in the history of civilization—is his former diocese of
Chiapa, which is just northwest of the land towards which we are
sailing. When he went to take possession of it, it was occupied by
savage warriors who had successfully resisted all attempts made by the
Spaniards to subdue them. It was considered tantamount to certain death
to enter their jealously-guarded territory. But Las Casas, armed only
with the image of the Crucified and the gospel of peace, soon had these
wild children of the forest prostrate at his feet, begging him to
remain with them as their father and friend. So successful was his work
among them that the land which, before his arrival, had been known as
La Provincia de Guerra—The Province of War—was
thereafter [388]called La Provincia de Vera
Paz—The Province of True Peace—a name it bears to the
present day. And more remarkable still, this particular part of
Guatemala is said to have a denser Indian population, in proportion to
its area, than any other part of Latin America. Truly, this is a
monument worthy of the name, and one that would have appealed most
strongly to the loving heart of the courageous protector of the
Indians.6
But discoverers and explorers, conquistadores and apostles, were not
the only men who have rendered this part of the world forever
memorable. There were others, but many of them were of a vastly
different type. I refer to the pirates and Buccaneers, who so long
spread terror in these parts and ultimately destroyed the commercial
supremacy of Spain in the New World, and contributed so materially to
the final extinction of her sovereign power. Many of them have written
their names large on the scroll of history and often in characters of
blood. Many of them were pirates of the worst type, who flew at every
flag they saw, who recognized no right but might, and whose sole object
was indiscriminate robbery on both sea and land. These outlaws,
however, have no interest for us now.
Besides these unscrupulous and sanguinary pirates, there was another
class of men whom their friends and countrymen insist on grouping in a
class by themselves. The majority of these were Englishmen, of whom the
most distinguished representatives, along the Spanish Main, were
Raleigh, Hawkins and Drake. When these men did not act [389]under secret commissions from their government,
they relied on its tacit connivance in all the depredations for which
they are so notorious. In the light of international law, as we now
understand it, they were as much pirates as those who attacked the
ships of all nations, and as such they have always been regarded by
Spanish writers. All three of the men just mentioned made their raids
on Spanish possessions while England was at peace with Spain. Thus the
two nations were at peace when Drake sacked Panama in 1586, as they
were at peace when Raleigh attacked Trinidad in 1595. These sea rovers
lived up to the old forecastle phrase, “No peace beyond the
line”7 and recognized, at least in the Spanish territory
in the New World, no law of nations except that
“They should take who have the power,
And they should keep who can.”
“The case,” as old Fuller quaintly puts it
in his Holy and Profane State, “was clear in sea-divinity;
and few are such infidels as not to believe doctrines which make for
their own profit.”
So far as England acquiesced in, or connived at what the Spaniards
always denounced as downright piracy, it was doubtless ever with the
view of weakening the menacing power of the dominant Spanish empire.
She was also actuated by “an aggressive determination to break
down the barriers with which Spanish policy sought to enclose the New
World and to shut out the way to the Indies.” In this
determination England had the sympathy of France and often its active
coöperation. For a similar reason Dutch sea rovers swarmed over
the Caribbean Sea. All were aware of the magnitude of the struggle in
which they were engaged, and realized that their existence as nations
depended on their crippling their common enemy by striking [390]at
the sources of his power in the Western Hemisphere.
Much might be said of the reckless audacity, brilliant achievements
and skillful seamanship of these privateers or pirates—whatever
one chooses to call them—that read more like fable or romance
than sober chronicles of authentic fact, but space does not permit.
Besides, we are more interested in another class of sea rovers of a
later date, whose names and exploits are inseparably connected with the
West Indies and the great South Sea. I refer to the Buccaneers, or, as
they called themselves, the Brethren of the Coast.
Our knowledge of these extraordinary adventurers is derived mainly
from themselves. Of English Buccaneers the most interesting narratives
have been left us by Sharp, Cowley, Ringrose and Dampier. The
Frenchman, Ravenau de Lussan, has also left us a record of value. The
most popular work, however, and the one that gives us the truest
insight into the manners and customs of the Brethren of the Coast, and
recounts with the greatest detail their deeds of daring and cruelty, is
that given to the world by the Dutchman Esquemeling. It was entitled
De Americaensche Zee Rovers and was, on its
appearance, immediately translated into the principal languages of
Europe. The fact that Esquemeling was with the Buccaneers for five
years, and was with them, too, on many of their most important
expeditions, gave him unusual opportunities for collecting facts at
first hand and studying the methods of procedure of his reckless and
often brutal associates.
By the Spaniards, the Brethren of the Coast have always been
regarded as pirates—for the same reason as Raleigh, Drake and
Hawkins and their associates were regarded as pirates—because
they conducted their lawless operations when England and Spain were at
peace. But there was the same difference between Buccaneers and
ordinary pirates as there was between the corsairs just mentioned and
ordinary pirates. The latter attacked vessels of every nation, while
the Buccaneers, like Drake and his compatriots, [391]confined themselves to preying on Spanish
shipping and sacking Spanish towns and strongholds.
Some became Buccaneers because they had a grievance, real or
imaginary, against the Spaniards, others because they chafed under the
monopolizing policy of the Spanish government, and wished to secure a
part of the ever-increasing trade with the New World, while others
still joined the ranks of the Brethren because they relished the life
of excitement and adventure it held forth, or because they found it the
easiest means of gaining a livelihood.
Esquemeling was among the last of these classes. After being twice
sold as a slave, he finally obtained his liberty when, to use his own
words, “Though like Adam when he was first created, that is,
naked and destitute of all human necessaries, not knowing how to get my
living, I determined to enter into the Order of the Pyrates or Robbers
at Sea.”8
The cradle of the extraordinary “Order of Pyrates,” of
which Esquemeling was to be the most distinguished chronicler, was
Tortuga, a small, rocky island off the northwest corner of Haiti. It
was visited by Columbus during his first voyage, and, from the number
of turtles found there, was called Tortuga—the Spanish for
turtle—the name it still retains. But small as it was, it was
destined to become “the common refuge of all sorts of wickedness,
[392]and the seminary, as it were of pyrates and
thieves.”9
The name Buccaneer is derived from “bucan,” a Carib word
signifying a wooden gridiron on which meat is smoked. Originally, the
term Buccaneer was applied to the French settlers of Española,
whose chief occupation was to hunt wild cattle and hogs, which roamed
over the island in large numbers, and cure their flesh by bucaning it,
that is smoking it on a bucan.10 When they were driven from
their business of bucaning by the Spaniards, they took refuge in
Tortuga, where they were soon joined by many English adventurers. Here
they combined to make war on Spain in her American colonies, and for
more than a half century they carried terror and destruction to every
part of the Caribbean archipelago.
But, notwithstanding their change of occupation, their old name of
Buccaneer clung to them, and, as such, they are still known in history.
Like the bold Vikings of the [393]North, who were so long the
scourge of western and southern Europe, the Buccaneers were the scourge
of Spanish America from Tortuga to Panama and from California to
Patagonia. They warred against but one enemy—the one that had
harassed and driven them from their peaceful avocation of bucaning, or
had persecuted and oppressed their brethren in the peaceful pursuit of
commerce, when the lands of their birth, or the countries to which they
owed allegiance, were unable or unwilling to protect them.
Like the archpirate Drake, as the Spaniards called him, “They
swept the sea of every passing victualler, and added the captured
cargoes to the stores of game and fish it was their delight to catch.
At intervals along the coast and amongst the wilderness of islands,
magazines were hidden, and into these were poured the stores that had
been destined for the great plate-fleets. The shark-like pinnaces would
suddenly appear in the midst of the trade-route no one knew whence, and
laden with food, as suddenly disappear no one knew whither.”
Compared with the Spaniards, they were usually in a small minority.
But in their case, as in so many similar ones, it was not numbers, but
their skill and courage, that gave them possession of rich galleons and
placed the well-guarded plate-fleets at their mercy. At times the
Buccaneers had only simple canoes—mere dugouts—but these,
according to Esquemeling, were so fleet that they might well be called
“Neptune’s post-horses.” In these they went out to
sea for a distance of eighty leagues and attacked heavily-armed men of
war, and, before the Spanish crew had time to realize what the daring
sea rovers were after, their vessel was in the possession of their
irresistible foe.11
They were strangers to fear, and no undertaking was too [394]arduous, if the booty promised was sufficiently
great. Danger and difficulty seemed only to whet their appetite for
gold and fan their passions to a blaze. Their endurance of hunger and
thirst and fatigue was as remarkable as their hardihood was phenomenal.
They were loyal to one another and divided the spoils they secured in
strict accordance with the agreement they had entered into beforehand.
“Locks and bolts were prohibited, as such things were regarded as
impeaching the honor of their vocation.”
They were religious after their own fashion. Thus it was forbidden
to hunt or cure meat on Sunday. Before going on a cruise, they went to
church to ask a blessing on their undertaking, and, after a successful
raid, they returned to the house of God to sing a hymn of thanksgiving.
We are told of a French captain who shot a filibuster for irreverence
in church during divine service, and we also read of Captain Hawkins
once throwing dice overboard when he found them being used on the
Lord’s day.12
How all this reminds one of the conduct of that pitiless old slaver,
John Hawkins, who frequently enjoined on his crew to “serve God
daily,” and who, after escaping a heavy gale on his way from
Africa to the West Indies, whither he was bound with a shipload of
kidnapped negroes, sanctimoniously writes, “The Almighty God, who
never suffereth His elect to perish, sent us the ordinary
breeze.”
Although the Buccaneers frequently came into possession of immense
sums of money, they would forthwith [395]proceed to squander
it in all kinds of dissipation and debauchery. “Such of these
pyrates,” writes Esquemeling, “will spend two or three
thousand pieces of eight in a night, not leaving themselves a good
shirt to wear in the morning.”
At first, the Buccaneers confined themselves to depredations on sea,
but their unexpected successes on water soon emboldened them to attack
the largest and richest towns on the Spanish Main. When these were once
in their power, they exacted from their inhabitants a heavy tribute,
and if it was not paid without delay, the hapless people, regardless of
age or sex, were subjected to the most cruel and unheard-of tortures.
Puerto Principe, Maracaibo, Porto Bello, Panama and other places were
captured in turn, and some of them, when sufficient ransom was not
obtained, were burned to the ground. And so great and so hideous were
the atrocities committed in some of these places that even Esquemeling
has not the heart to do more than allude to them. They equaled, if they
did not surpass, anything recorded of the pirates of Barbary or
Malabar, and showed what fiends incarnate men can become when carried
away by insatiate greed or the spirit of rapine and carnage.
The two Buccaneer leaders who most distinguished themselves for
their diabolical ferocity and viciousness were L’Olonnois and
Morgan. “L’Olonnois,” says Burney, “was
possessed with an ambition to make himself renowned for being terrible.
At one time, it is said, he put the whole crew of a Spanish ship,
ninety men, to death, performing himself the office of executioner, by
beheading them. He caused the crews of four others vessels to be thrown
into the sea; and more than once, in his frenzies, he tore out the
hearts of his victims and devoured them.”13
This “infernal wretch,” as Esquemeling calls him,
“full of horrid, execrable and enormous deeds, and debtor to so
much innocent blood, died by cruel and butcherly hands,”
[396]for the Indians of Darien, having taken him
prisoner, “tore him in pieces alive, throwing his body, limb by
limb, into the fire, and his ashes into the air, that no trace or
memory might remain of such an infamous, inhuman
creature.”14
Of Henry Morgan, who sacked Maracaibo and pillaged and burnt Panama,
the same authority declares he “may deservedly be called the
second L’Olonnois, not being unlike or inferior to him, either in
achievements against the Spaniards or robberies of many innocent
people.”15
He did not, however, share the fate of L’Olonnois. Having
found favor with King Charles II, he was knighted and made deputy
governor of Jamaica, when he turned against his former associates, many
of whom he hanged, while he delivered others up to their enemies, the
Spaniards.
From the time the Buccaneers made Tortuga a base of operations until
the Peace of Ryswick, in 1697, when they were finally suppressed, was
more than half a century. From this little island they spread over the
entire Caribbean sea and had places of rendezvous in Jamaica, Santa
Catalina, the sequestered coves of the Gulf of Darien and in many
secret places along the Spanish Main. Their distinctive mark during all
this time, from which they never deviated, as it had been the
distinctive mark of pirates and privateers of England, France and
Holland during nearly a century and a half before, was their incessant
and relentless war against Spain; their determination to break her
power and destroy that trade monopoly which she was so determined to
retain.
So numerous and powerful did they eventually become that some of
their leaders, notably Mansvelt and Morgan, dreamed of establishing an
independent state. They had selected the small island of Santa
Catalina—now known as Old Providence—just a short distance
north of the course along which we are now sailing—as a starting
point and, [397]had they undertaken this project while the
French and English Buccaneers were still united, they might have been
successful.16
To us of the twentieth century, with our ideas of law and order, it
seems strange that the pirates and Buccaneers of the West India islands
and the Main should have been able to continue their nefarious
operations for so long a period, and that they were so numerous. But,
when we remember how they were countenanced and abetted by their
respective governments, how they were provided with letters of marque
and reprisal, how they were openly assisted by the English17 and French governors of the West Indies, how they
were assisted even by their own sovereigns,18 the wonder
ceases. Considering the love of adventure that distinguished this
period of the world’s history, and the princely fortunes that
rewarded the successful raids of [398]the daring sea rovers, it is
surprising that the number was not greater. If the same conditions now
obtained, it is safe to say that the seas would swarm with similar
adventurers. It is interesting to surmise what would now be the
condition of the Western Hemisphere if the Buccaneers, instead of
confining themselves to capturing treasure ships and sacking towns,
had, like the bold Vikings, their antitypes, set out to conquer and
colonize.
Whatever else may be said of the Buccaneers, there can be no doubt
that it is to them that England owes her proud title of Mistress of the
Seas. They gave birth to her great navy, and developed that great
merchant marine whose flags are to-day seen in every port of the world.
They distinguished themselves in the destruction of the Spanish Armada,
and closely followed Magellan in circumnavigating the globe. They had a
hand in the formation of the East India Company and were
“Britain’s sword and shield for the defence of her nascent
colonies.”
Of the occupation of the Buccaneers one can assert what James
Jeffrey Roche writes of that of the filibusters of the middle of the
last century—that it “is no longer open to private
individuals. The great powers have monopolized the business, conducting
it as such and stripping it of its last poor remnant of romance,
without investing it with a scrap of improved morality.”19
And one can also say of them, what Byron writes of his
Corsair, that they left a
“Name to other climes
Linked with one virtue and a thousand
crimes.”
[399]
1 The
amount of loot and tribute obtained by de Pointis was, according to
some estimates, no less than forty million livres—an enormous sum
for that period. ↑
2 W.
Robertson, The History of America, Vol. II, p. 514,
Philadelphia, 1812. ↑
3
History of the New World, pp. 124, 125, printed for the Hakluyt
Society, London, 1857. ↑
4
Writings of Christopher Columbus, p. 202, edited by P. L. Ford,
New York, 1892. ↑
5 The
Discovery of America, Vol. II, p. 370. ↑
6 John
Boyd Thacher declares that Las Casas was “the grandest figure,
next to Columbus, appearing in the Drama of the New World. Against the
purity of his life, no voice among all his enemies ever whispered a
suggestion. If the Apostle Peter was a much better man, the story is
told elsewhere than in his acts. If the Apostle Paul was braver, more
zealous, more consecrated to the cause of humanity, which alone can ask
for Apostleship, Las Casas was a consistent imitator. The Church has
never passed a saint through the degree of canonization more worthy of
this signal and everlasting honor than Bartolomé de las Casas,
the Apostle of the Indies.”—Christopher Columbus, His
Life, His Work, His Remains, Vol. I, pp. 158 and 159, New York,
1903. ↑
7 The line
here referred to is not the equator, but the tropical line. The phrase
practically signified that European treaties did not bind within the
tropics; that, although Spain might be at peace in the Old World, there
could be no peace for her in the New. ↑
8 The
History of the Buccaneers of America, Vol. I, p. 22, fourth
edition, London, 1741.
Esquemeling, as the reader will observe, does not
apply to his associates the euphemious term Buccaneers, but calls them
“the Pyrates of America, which sort of men are not authorized by
any sovereign prince. For the Kings of Spain having on several
occasions sent their ambassadors to the Kings of England and France to
complain of the molestations and troubles those pyrates often caused on
the coasts of America, even in the calm of peace, it hath always been
answered that such men did not commit those acts of hostility and
pyracy as subjects to their Majesties, and therefore his Catholick
Majesty might proceed against them as he should think fit. The King of
France added that he had no fortress nor castle upon Hispaniola,
neither did he receive a farthing of tribute from thence. And the King
of England adjoined that he had never given any commission to those of
Jamaica to commit hostilities against the subjects of his Catholick
Majesty.” Op. cit., p. 58, Vol. I. ↑
9 Here,
says Sir Frederick Treves, in his charming work. The Cradle of the
Deep, “In defiance of the ban of Spain, a strange company
began to collect.... They came across the seas in obedience to no call;
in ones and twos they came. Frenchmen, British, and Dutch, and, led by
some herding instinct, they foregathered at this wild trysting-place.
Some were mere dare-devil adventurers, others were wily seekers after
fortune; the few were in flight from the grip of justice, the many had
roamed away from the old sober world in search of freedom.
“There was a common tie that banded them
together, the call of the wild and the hate of Spain. They formed no
colony, nor settlement, but simply joined themselves together in a kind
of jungle brotherhood. They found a leader as a pack of wolves finds
theirs, not by choosing one to lead but by following the one who
led.” P. 250, London, 1908. ↑
10 For
awhile the term Buccaneer was applied to the English, who had nothing
to do with the bucan, as well as to the French adventurers.
Subsequently the French sea-rovers became known as flibustiers, the
French sailors’ pronunciation of the word freebooter, while the
English corsairs appropriated the name Buccaneers. As their occupations
were the same—making war on the Spaniard—the two terms came
eventually to be regarded as synonymous. All the freebooters, whether
English, French, or Dutch, as an indication of their being banded
against a common enemy, the Spaniards, assumed the name Brethren of the
Coast. The members of this brotherhood must not be confounded with such
cutthroats as Kidd, Bonnet, Avery and Thatch, who was known as
Blackbeard and, for a while, terrorized the Atlantic Coast from the
West Indies to New England. ↑
11 Thus,
the French Flibustier, Pierre le Grand, with only a small boat and a
crew of but twenty-eight men, surprised and captured the ship of the
vice-admiral of the Spanish galleons as she was homeward bound with a
rich cargo. ↑
12 When
John Watling, the successor of the deposed Captain Edmund Cook, began
his captaincy, he ordered all his crew to keep holy the Sabbath day.
“With Edmund Cook down on the ballust in irons,” writes
Masefield, and William Cook talking of salvation in the galley, and old
John Watling expounding the Gospel in the cabin, the galleon,
‘The most Holy Trinity,’ must have seemed a foretaste of
the New Jerusalem. The fiddler ceased such prophane strophes as
‘Abel Brown,’ ‘The Red-haired Man’s
Wife,’ and ‘Valentinian.’ He tuned his devout strings
to songs of Zion. Nay, the very boatswain could not pipe the cutter up
but to a phrase of the Psalms.” (On the Spanish Main, p.
263, London, 1906.) ↑
13
History of the Buccaneers of America, Chap. V. ↑
14 Op.
cit., Vol. I, p. 115. ↑
15 Ibid.,
p. 117. ↑
16
Referring to this matter, George W. Thornsburg writes:—
“Anomalous beings, hunters by land and sea,
scaring whole fleets with a few canoes, sacking cities with a few
grenadiers, devastating every coast from California to Cape Horn, they
needed only a common principle of union to have founded an aggressive
republic as wealthy as Venice and as warlike as Carthage. One great
mind and the New World had been their own.”—The Monarchs
of the Main, or Adventures of the Buccaneers, preface, p. 10,
London, 1855. ↑
17 Thus
Esquemeling tells us that Morgan’s fleet, before his raid on
Maracaibo, was, by order of the governor of Jamaica, strengthened by
the addition of an English vessel of thirty-six guns. This was done to
give the ruthless Buccaneer “greater courage to attempt mighty
things.” Op. cit., p. 147. ↑
18 The
Spaniards accused Queen Elizabeth of aiding Drake, and it is known that
she lent John Hawkins one of her ships. “The great Queen,”
as Mowbray Morris observes, “had a most convenient way of
publically deprecating the riotous acts of her subjects, when she found
it expedient to do so, and roundly encouraging them in private. She was
fond of money, too, and ... had found a share in these ventures
uncommonly remunerative. Unqueenly tricks, as they seem to us, and apt
to confuse the law of nations, they were, as things went then,
extremely useful to England.”—Tales of the Spanish
Main, p. 131, London, 1901.
Père Labat cleverly hits off the policy of
France and England towards the Buccaneers in a single sentence,
“On laissoit faire des Avanturiers, qu on pouvoit toujours
desavouer, mais dont les succes pouvoient être
utiles”—they connived at the actions of the Adventurers,
which could always be disavowed, but whose successes might be of
service. ↑
19
By-Ways of War, The Story of the Filibusters, p. 251, Boston,
1901. ↑
“But oh! the free and wild magnificence
Of Nature in her lavish hours doth steal,
In admiration silent and intense,
The soul of him who hath a soul to feel.
“The river moving on its ceaseless way,
The verdant reach of meadows fair and
green,
And the blue hills that bound the sylvan
scene,—
These speak of grandeur, that defies decay,—
Proclaim the eternal architect on high,
Who stamps on all his works his own
eternity.”
—Longfellow.
The afternoon preceding our arrival at Puerto Limon,
the captain of our steamer called our attention to a wonderful mirage
due south of us. High above the water—apparently midway between
the sea and the sky—was suspended one of the islands of the
Caribbean that stand off from the Panama coast. So far away was it from
our course that, had it not been for the peculiar atmospheric
conditions then prevailing, it would have been quite invisible, even
with the aid of the most powerful glass. A beautiful, fantastic shape
it exhibited as, seen through the trembling and shimmering air, it
seemed to float in the hazy atmosphere. At first it was of a
pearly-gray tint, then of a fustian-brown, and finally, as it became
more distinct in outline, it shaded into a dark olive green. The
apparition lasted for nearly an hour, when it gradually
disappeared.
“The Vanishing Island of St. Brendan,” exclaimed a young
Celt who had been admiring the scene. And then [400]he
read for us what John Sparke, a companion of Hawkins in the voyage of
1564, writes:
“Certaine flitting ilands, which haue beene oftentimes seene,
and when men approched neere them they vanished, ... and therefore it
should seeme hee is not yet borne to whom God hath appoynted the
finding of them.”1
The flitting islands that Sparke refers to were, it is true,
supposed by him to be in the neighborhood of the Azores. But their
location was uncertain, at least the one named after the seafaring
Irish monk, for divers positions have been assigned it by cosmographers
and mediæval writers. Among other peculiarities possessed by this
island was that it had an apparent motion towards the west—a
motion that was quite sufficient to have carried it at the beginning of
the twentieth century to the westernmost part of the Caribbean.
“In this motion westward,” said C.—as our
representative of classical lore—“the Island of St. Brendan
would have but followed the example set by the Elysian Fields and the
Isles of the Blessed. Pindar and Hesiod placed them in the Western
Ocean, but much farther west than Homer had located his Elysium. As the
years rolled by, the Fortunate Islands and the Gardens of the
Hesperides, for these were but synonyms of the Isles of the Blessed,
were also found, like St. Brendan’s, to have moved towards the
region of the setting sun. Subsequently, birth was given to legends
respecting a Transatlantic Eden and a Mexican Elysium somewhere in the
Gulf of Mexico or among the beauteous isles of the Caribbean
Archipelago.”
“Very true, very true,” said one of our party, a
good-natured German privat-docent, who was perched hard by on what
seemed to be the first reclining chair ever devised. It was a
cumbersome structure about four feet high, apparently modeled after one
of those lofty bedsteads once the vogue in certain parts of the
Vaterland, and vastly different from the modern reclining chair so
popular with [401]ocean travelers, and so rickety that it
threatened every moment to collapse and deposit its portly
occupant—for he was a man of weight, physically as well as
intellectually—on the hard floor of the hurricane deck.
“You are quite right, Sr. C. The Isles of the Blessed, like the
Island of St. Brendan, are quite as ubiquitous and elusory as is the
Terrestrial Paradise described in Genesis. For learned men who have
written about it have located it, at one time or another, in almost
every part of the earth’s surface. Some maintain it was somewhere
in the valley of Mesopotamia, others that it was east of the Ganges, or
near the head waters of the Nile. Columbus imagined it was nigh the
source of the Orinoco, while an American author—a Bostonian, I
believe—some decades ago published a work in which he endeavoured
to prove that the seat of Paradise was the North Pole. As for myself, I
have never ventured to formulate a theory on any of these interesting
subjects. They are out of my line. Davus sum non
Œdipus.”
Just then there was a crash. Like the “wonderful one-hoss
shay,” the tottering old chair had collapsed and the docent lay
sprawling under the ruins.
“Caramba, donnerwetter!” These two exclamations,
so dear to the Spaniard and the German, when they wish to express
surprise and disgust, were emitted with an explosive violence that left
no one present in doubt as to what thoughts were uppermost in the mind
of our friend as he was endeavoring to extricate himself from the
entangling frame. With the aid of some of the bystanders he finally
regained his feet, but he manifested no desire to continue the
conversation so suddenly interrupted.
“Carajo, donnerblitz!”—two expressions even
more vigorous than the preceding—constituted the finale to the
performance that afforded amusement to all except the leading
character, who disliked exceedingly the undignified position in which
he had momentarily been placed. Fortunately, the last call for dinner
had been given just a few moments previously, and we accordingly
adjourned to the [402]dining saloon, where other matters absorbed
the attention of the unlucky docent as well as the spectators of his
ungainly tumble.
The morning following the little episode just referred to, we were
in sight of Costa Rica2—that rich
coast—discovered by Columbus during his eventful fourth voyage.
The wooded lowlands, bordering the sea, are clothed in a mantle of rich
tropical verdure. A short distance behind them arise the escarpments of
the Central American Cordillera, that is the scene of the activity of
such noted volcanoes as Poas, Irazu and Turialba. Owing to the
proximity of the Sierra to the sea, it appears much higher than it
really is, and, when the weather is clear, it presents a picture of
rare magnificence. This is particularly the case when it is seen at
sunrise, the time it first met our view. Then we had before us the
violet expanse of the summer sea canopied by the splendid azure vault
of heaven, while before us stood up in all its majesty the gentian blue
peak of the Cordillera that gradually melted into crimson and then into
gold.
Owing to the reports that had been received at Limon regarding the
plague at Trinidad, and the fear that it might already have reached the
Spanish Main, none of the passengers were allowed to land until they
had passed, on the part of the health officers, an examination of more
than usual strictness. Fortunately, we had provided ourselves with a
health certificate before leaving Barranquilla and were permitted to
land after but little delay. Those, however, [403]who
could not exhibit such a document were at once ordered off to
quarantine. Everyone, however, had to be vaccinated, unless one could
produce evidence that he had been vaccinated only a short time before.
As very few could present such evidence, the great majority had to
submit—many of them much against their will—to being
inoculated with the virus that is supposed to render one immune against
smallpox.
While these operations were going on, we had an opportunity of
getting a good view of the coast in front of us. It had a special
interest for us, for it was the favored land along which Columbus
sailed in his last voyage in 1502. Here, before us, there is reason to
believe, was the land of Cariari, and, just a stone’s throw from
our steamer was the charming island of Quiribri, which, on account of
its beauty and the lovely trees with which it was adorned—palms
and bananas and platanos—the Admiral called El Huerto—the
orchard. To-day it is known as the island of Uvita, and is used for
quarantine. As we gazed on this exquisite spot, provided with cozy
cottages nestling among clumps of stately palms, and decked with
beauteous flowers of every hue, we almost regretted that we could not
spend a few days there. Had we been sent there with the others we
should certainly not have complained.
So fascinating was this place that Columbus anchored here between
the island and the mainland to give his crew an opportunity to refresh
themselves after their arduous voyage. And so fragrant were the groves
on the mainland that their perfumes were wafted out to the ships. This,
we have noted, was also the experience of the early explorers of
Florida.
While here, Columbus held frequent converse with the Indians, whom
he found intelligent and well disposed. They brought him gifts of
cotton, cloth and gold and evidently were inclined to enter into
friendly relations with their strange visitors. In his letter to
Ferdinand and Isabella, referring to this land, he writes: “There
I saw [404]a tomb in the mountain side as large as a house,
and sculptured.3 This is remarkable as being the only passage
in all the Admiral’s writings which could warrant us in
concluding that he ever set foot on the mainland of the New World.
Until the middle of the last century Port Limon was but a small
rancheria—it did not deserve the name of village—of
poor fishermen. Now it is the chief port of the republic and a
flourishing town of 6,000 inhabitants. Its present importance and
prosperity are due to the completion of the railroad from this point to
the capital, San José, and to the fact that it is the principal
centre of the rapidly-increasing banana industry controlled by the
United Fruit Company.
The place is quite modern in appearance, and were it not for its
exuberant tropical vegetation, might easily pass for one of our
enterprising Gulf Coast towns. It boasts of all modern improvements,
has good sanitation, broad streets, comfortable homes and a delightful
park that, for wealth and variety of tree and shrub and flower, looks
like a well-kept botanic garden. While the white race is well
represented, the majority of the population is made up of West Indian
negroes.
During our travels among the Antilles and on the Spanish Main, we
frequently had occasion to note the importance of the banana and the
platano as articles of food, but it was not until our arrival in Limon
that we had an opportunity of observing the extent to which the
cultivation and shipment of these fruits have been carried. Here are
two long iron piers at which one will occasionally find as many as six
or eight large steamers being freighted at the same time with the
golden fruit of Costa Rica, preparatory to distribution among the
leading ports along the Gulf and Atlantic coasts.
The culture of the banana in Costa Rica on an extensive [405]scale is of recent date. In 1880 but three
hundred and sixty bunches were sent to the United States. Now the
amount shipped from Limon alone averages more than a million bunches a
month. During the year 1908 the number of bunches that left Port Limon
aggregated more than thirteen million, and the amount shipped is
rapidly increasing. In addition to the daily shipments made to the
United States weekly cargoes are forwarded to France and England.
But great as are the proportions which the banana trade has already
assumed, it is safe to say that it is as yet but in its infancy. What
in most parts of our country and Europe has hitherto been practically
unknown, or been regarded as a luxury beyond the reach of the poor, is
now rapidly finding its way among all classes and at such prices that
even those of the most limited means can have it on their tables.
That which first impresses the visitor from the North is the large
number of species of the Musa and the extraordinary number of
uses made of them. Already fully forty species have been described and
nearly a hundred varieties. Most of these bear fruit which is as
agreeable as it is nutritious, and which is often of a flavor of the
utmost delicacy.
Reference has already been made in a previous chapter to the
extensive and varied use made of bananas and platanos by the peoples of
tropical climes, but even they have still much to learn regarding the
food value of their great staple. Recent investigations have revealed
the fact that the fruit of the Musa is henceforth to be regarded
not only as one of the most wholesome and nutritious of foods, but also
as one of the most important means of subsistence for the world’s
rapidly increasing population. Even now it is felt that the supply of
flesh meat and cereals is rapidly becoming less than the demand, and
too expensive for the poor, and thoughtful men have already set to work
to devise ways and means to meet the emergency. [406]And
one of the means suggested is a more extensive cultivation of platanos
and bananas, as well as a more general use of their manifold
products.
Humboldt long ago pointed out the great economic value of the banana
and the platano as sources of food supply.4 But he did
not have the data we now possess for arriving at just conclusions. As
the result of numerous experiments it is now known that bananas afford
per acre one and a third times as much food as maize produces, two and
a third times as much as oats, three times as much as buckwheat,
potatoes and wheat; and four times as much as rye. Then the labor
involved in the cultivation of the banana is far less than that
demanded for our northern crops. No skill is required, and unlike many
of our northern fruit-bearing trees, the banana and the platano are
entirely exempt from insect pests and diseases.
Chemical analysis discloses the curious fact that bananas and
potatoes are practically identical in composition. As compared with the
principal vegetables and fruits consumed in the United States and
Europe, the food value of the banana and the platano stands in the
ratio of five to four in favor of the latter. Comparing banana flour, a
new product of this remarkable fruit, with the flour made from sago,
wheat and maize, it is found that the nutritive value of all four is
about equal—the banana product being slightly in the lead.
As a consequence of recent researches the commercial products
obtained from the banana and platano have been greatly increased, while
some of them are vastly different from anything that people who have
been living on them [407]for thousands of years have ever dreamed.
Among these are meal in the starchy state for making superior kinds of
bread and porridge, flakes and meal in a dextrinous condition for the
preparation of nourishing soups and puddings, sauces and
fritters.5 In dried slices it is used in the manufacture of
beer and alcohol. Bananas are also employed in making marmalades, for
the manufacture of glucose and syrups for confectionery, and, dried
entire without the peel, they are put up in boxes like figs. Dried and
roasted they afford a nutritious beverage that is said to be a valuable
substitute for coffee and chocolate. Even the stems and leaves of the
banana are put to use, for from them are manufactured paper and
cordage.
These facts open up a splendid vista as to the future food
possibilities of the tropics. They demonstrate also the wisdom of
giving more thought to this neglected part of the world, for it is to
tropical America that the teeming millions of coming generations will
be obliged to look for much of their sustenance. Our northern climes
will be unable to meet the demands that will eventually be made on
them.
Before we boarded the train at Limon for San José, the
capital of the little republic, a young German, who had visited the
lowlands through which the railway passes, said that we would there see
the most remarkable exhibition of vegetable growth in the world.
“It is,” he declared, “the
Urwelt”—the primeval forest—“in all its
luxuriance and glory.”
As he had never seen any tropical scenery outside of Costa Rica, and
very little of that, we, who had just come from the exuberant forest
regions of the Magdalena and [408]the Orinoco, were disposed to give
little heed to his statement. Compared with Germany, the floral display
of Costa Rica was doubtless something really marvelous in the
estimation of our untraveled Teutonic friend, but it could not compare,
we said to ourselves, with the wonders of plant life on which we had
been feasting our eyes during our journey among the Antilles and
through the Northern part of South America.
Our conclusion, however, as we very soon discovered, was quite
unwarranted. The vegetation of the lowlands and of the foothills of the
Costa Rican Cordillera, as we noted on our way to San José, was
really something wonderful. It was the Urwelt in very truth, and
exhibited a wealth of plant and tree, foliage and bloom such as must
have characterized the foreworld during its richest period. For miles
upon miles along this picturesque railway, we reveled in the glories of
the virgin forest at its best—a dense, complicated mass of
verdure, a tousled, world-old jungle, surmounted by giants of the
forest, loaded down with festoons of countless creepers and bound
together by innumerable cable-like lianas, each of the richest hues. At
one time we were passing through valleys of enchantment, valleys
pervaded by a languorous haze of lilac and indigo, like the smoke of
incense, valleys rendered musical by scores of hidden streams and
tumultuous torrents bridged over by an entanglement of green fathoms in
depth. At another we were winding around rugged crags and inaccessible
peaks, not bald and barren, as in our temperate climes, but covered to
their very summits with a tapestry of leaf and flower of the most vivid
tropical tints, that at times resembled a cascade of palpitating color,
of emerald foliage and glowing bloom. Here it was the crimson
bouganvilla, there lovely aroides with spathes of delicate purple or
immaculate white, while hard by, fanned into motion by the trickery of
the shifting breeze, were the slender tufts of the bamboo or the
tenuous fronds of the ever-graceful fern tree. On all sides was a
parade [409]of foliage and blossom, a bravery of color to be
found only in the tropics and then only in its most favored
regions.
The astonishing variety and richness of the flora of Costa Rica is
due to the fact that it is the connecting link between the floras of
the two great continents of the North and the South. Besides exhibiting
species peculiar to itself, it presents an infinitude of others found
in North and South America. Those, however, of South America
predominate, the reason being that Costa Rica was connected with the
southern continent long before it was united with that to the
north.
It is a hundred and three miles from Limon to San José by
rail. The road, a narrow-gauge one, was constructed by an American, Mr.
Minor C. Keith, and compares favorably with our narrow-gauge roads in
the Rocky Mountains. Many difficulties were encountered in laying the
track, some of which, especially those caused by landslides and the
overflowing rivers, seemed at times insuperable. The most serious
impediments, however, were due to the steaming, sweltering, putrid,
fever-laden swamps between the coast and the foothills of the
Cordillera. So great was the mortality among the workmen on account of
pernicious fevers that it is stated that this section of the line cost
a human life for every tie that was laid. Like the valley of the lower
Magdalena, this part of Costa Rica is habitable only by negroes. The
white men who are called there by business make their sojourn as brief
as possible.
It is along this route that are found the best and most extensive
platanales—banana plantations—of the country and, as
a consequence, there are many settlements and villages all along the
railroad. And what banana plants are seen here! In height they resemble
trees rather than plants. We saw some that were thirty-five feet high,
bending under golden clusters of fruit weighing at times nearly a
hundred pounds. While sailing along the Orinoco and the Meta we thought
that the platanales we saw on their banks were [410]unrivaled for magnitude of plants and wealth of
fruitage, but they were fully equaled if not surpassed by those of
Costa Rica.
Most of the labor connected with the cultivation and shipment of
bananas is performed by negroes from Jamaica and other West Indian
islands. One sees their little frame houses, or shacks, scattered all
along the road in the banana region, and their occupants have the same
jovial, happy-go-lucky disposition that characterizes the negro the
world over. Crowds of them, old and young, are always assembled at the
station on the arrival of every train—attracted thither by
apparently the same reason that causes their brethren of the North in
the cotton belt to flock to the depot when they hear the whistle of the
locomotive—childlike curiosity and a desire to get the latest
news at the earliest possible moment.
Quite a number of the female portion had sliced
piñas—pineapples—for sale, but they asked as
much for a single slice as a whole piña would cost in our
markets, while for an entire pineapple they expected four or five times
the price of this fruit in New York, and that in the land of the
piña. They demanded extravagant prices because, I suppose, they
took it for granted that those who were able to travel in a Pullman
car, as our party did, would not, if the fruit was really wanted,
begrudge paying the amount asked, however exorbitant. But high as the
price was, the fruit was worth it and far more. It was the most
luscious and fragrant fruit we had ever tasted, and incomparably
excelled the best that ever reaches our markets. It was so soft and
juicy that it could be eaten with a spoon, and contained all the fabled
virtues of nectar and ambrosia combined.
Incredible as it may seem, where there were train loads of bananas
at every siding, we were unable to get even a sample of edible fruit
anywhere between Limon and San José, although we asked for it at
every stopping place. All that was destined for shipment was unripe,
and, while [411]there were several other kinds of fruits for
sale, there was not a single ripe banana.
The negroes we saw along the railroad, as well as those observed in
Limon, were a constant study for us, especially when congregated in
large numbers in halls or churches. Like the negroes of Martinique they
are, in the words of Lafcadio Hearn, “A population fantastic,
astonishing—a population of the Arabian
Nights.”6 They exhibit the whole gamut of
skin tints from the milk-white of the albino to the coal-black of the
Nubian.
Some of the women are remarkable for beauty of form and delicacy of
features. Lissome, statuesque, and of graceful bearing, they are
Juliets in ebony, who exhibit the classic proportions of
“ox-eyed” Juno or of the Venus of Milo. As simple as
children, they, like their sisters in the Antilles, are as talkative as
parrots and their laugh is as hearty as it is spontaneous.
But it is the dress of the Costa Rican negress that arrests
attention, especially when she is seen in public gatherings of any
kind. Then the design and color of her attire is bizarre in the
extreme. She selects by preference the most flaunting and garish
colors, and, when she appears in her Sunday costume, one would declare
that she had tried to combine the hues of tropical birds, and to mimic
the gorgeousness of the blue-red-yellow macaw.
The description given by Sir F. Treves of the dress of the negress
of Martinique, sums up in a few words the salient features of the
Sunday costume of her sister in Costa Rica. “The
headdress,” he writes, “is very picturesque. It consists of
a ‘madras,’ an ample handkerchief wound about the head
turban fashion, and finished by a projecting end, which stands up like
the eagle’s feather in an Indian’s hair. The color of the
madras will be usually a canary yellow striped with black. The hues of
the dress are bewildering. Here are a skirt of roses and a foulard of
sky-blue, a gown of scarlet and yellow with [412]a
terra-cotta scarf across the breast, a dress of white striped with
orange below a foulard of green, a frock of primrose spotted with red
and completed by a scarf of mazarine blue. Add to this the necklace of
gold beads, the heavy bracelets, the great earrings, and the
‘trembling pins’ that fix the madras, and then realize over
all, the white light of a tropical moon.”7
The two places along our route in which we were specially interested
were the village of Matina, in the fertile valley watered by the river
of that name, and Cartago, which was founded by the Spaniards in 1563,
and was, during colonial times, the capital of the country.
In the latter part of the eighteenth century Matina was a port of
some importance and the centre of the largest and best
cacaotales—cacao haciendas—in Costa Rica, but owing
to the frequent incursions of pirates and Mosquito Indians, this
fertile territory had to be evacuated. There was also another reason
for abandoning it and that was the hot, enervating, pernicious
atmosphere, and the torrential rains, which were the causes of malaria
and malignant fevers from which the district was never exempt. So bad
was the reputation of the Matina valley in this respect that people, as
the Costa Rican writer, Don Ricardo F. Guardia, informs us in his
Cuentos Ticos, “used to confess and make their wills when
they went to Matina, to the famous Matina which inspires fear in men
and madness in mules,8 as they used to say in those
days when men were braver and mules better.”—
Cartago—how often this Carthaginian name recurs in this part
of the world!—is a delightful place nearly a mile above sea
level, with a population of about seven thousand souls. It was founded
in 1562 by Juan Vazquez de Coronado, the real conqueror of Costa Rica.
It has a [413]very salubrious climate with a mean annual
temperature of 66° F. In 1841 it was almost entirely destroyed by
an earthquake caused by a violent eruption of the volcano of Irazu, at
the foot of which the town is situated. It is noted as the seat of the
Central American Court of Justice, which was inaugurated here as one of
the results of the Peace Congress held in Washington in 1907. In
consequence of the establishment of this tribunal here, the town has
been called the “Hague of the New World.” Mr. Andrew
Carnegie has contributed $100,000 for the erection of a suitable
edifice in which to hold the sessions of the court. The site selected
for it is the most beautiful in the city, and the structure, on which
work was begun without delay, promises to be the most attractive
feature of Cartago.
Costa Rica is justly celebrated for its coffee. In the London market
it has long been a favorite brand and always commands a high price. It
has a delicious aroma scarcely inferior to that of the best Java or
Mocha berries. We preferred it to any we had found elsewhere in our
tropical wanderings. The haciendas devoted to the cultivation of
coffee—especially those in the vicinity of Cartago and San
José—are kept in splendid condition, and the trees are of
exceptional vigor and productiveness.
Next to bananas, coffee constitutes the most important export of the
republic. It was introduced from Havana about a century ago, and one
may yet see in Cartago the centenarian trees that supplied the seeds
for the plantations of Costa Rica and other parts of Central America.
The value of the coffee and bananas annually exported from the republic
is much greater than that of all the other commodities combined.
Indeed, these two staples are to the commerce of Costa Rica what
tobacco and sugar are to Cuba. Columbus and his followers searched
these countries for gold and spices, but they found but little of
either. If they could return now to these favored lands they would
discover that their real treasures, more precious [414]far
than gold mines and groves of spice trees, lay in the indigenous banana
and tobacco plants, and in the two exotic growths, coffee and sugar
cane.
The schedule time of the train from Limon to San José,
although only one hundred and three miles, is about seven hours. This
is due to the numerous stops made and to the heavy grades up the flanks
of the Cordillera.
Our arrival at the capital was signalized by a genuine tropical
downpour, such as we had not seen elsewhere during our journey. For a
while it seemed to justify the Spanish expression—llover á cántaros—to rain bucketfuls. But
the aguacero—the name given these short, heavy
rainfalls—was of short duration. It was but one of those daily
afternoon showers that characterize the plateau during the winter
season—invierno, our summer—which extends
from the month of May until the end of November. The dry or summer
season—verano—lasts from December until
May and is distinguished by absence of rain. The verano is the season
of the northeast trade winds, which lose their humidity in crossing the
Atlantic Cordillera. The monsoon, which comes from the southwest during
the winter, does not encounter on the Pacific side mountains of
sufficient height to condense the vapor with which it is charged. Thus
it still contains, on its arrival at the central plateau, enough
moisture to produce the heavy precipitation just noted.9
But notwithstanding these daily aguaceros, one can
always count on sunshiny mornings, except during October, which is the
wettest month of the year. It scarcely ever rains before two
o’clock P. M., and rarely after five o’clock in the
evening.
Method of Transporting Freight
Between Honda and Bogotá.
We were quite charmed with San José and its hospitable and
cultured people. In many respects we thought it the most delightful
city we had seen in Latin America—especially [415]for
a protracted sojourn. Situated in the smiling valley of the Abra, it is
reputed to be the most beautiful city in Central America, while it is
the second in extent and the third in population, having about thirty
thousand souls. Its altitude is nearly four thousand and seven hundred
feet above the level of the sea, and it has a mean annual temperature
of 70° F. Foreign residents declare that the climate during the dry
season is ideal.
The city counts a number of beautiful churches and public buildings,
but the greatest surprise for us was its superb Teatro
Nacional. In some of its leading features it is modeled after the
Grand Opera House in Paris, and is really a gem of architecture. It
cost nearly $1,000,000 in gold, and was paid for by an extra tax on
coffee. We have nothing in the United States to compare with it in
beauty and artistic finish, especially in the decoration of its
sumptuous foyer. In the New World it is surpassed only by the Teatro Municipal of Rio de Janeiro and the Teatro
Colon of Buenos Aires.
There are many attractive parks adorned with tastefully arranged
flowers and trees and monuments that would be a credit to any capital.
The monument that appealed most strongly to us was located in the
Parque Nacional, and commemorates the campaign of 1856 against
the Filibusters led by that daring adventurer from the United States,
William Walker. It is also dedicated to the fraternity of the five
Central American republics made one in defense of their independence.
Let us hope that this is a symbol of the birth in the near future of a
new federation of the Central American republics, similar to the one
that was established shortly after they had achieved their independence
under the name of the Republic of Central America. Such a republic
would have fifty per cent more territory than the whole of Great
Britain, and, considering all the natural resources it possesses, it
would, under a stable and progressive government, [416]soon
take an honorable place among the nations of the world.
We visited a number of coffee plantations, as well as orchards and
gardens, in the vicinity of San José, and were surprised at the
variety and luxuriance of every species of vegetable growth.
But it is to the city market that one must go—especially on
Sundays and dies de fiesta—holidays—if one would
have an adequate conception of the floral and pomonic riches of this
favored land.
Here we could easily imagine that we had before us every blossom
that blows. Exposed for sale at a nominal price are the most gorgeous
of flowers still fresh with the morning dew; roses of every size and
color; orchids of the most fantastic forms and of dazzling beauty, to
possess which a New York belle, would, if necessary, pawn a favorite
jewel.
And here one beholds in lavish abundance citrous fruits of every
species, bananas of untold varieties, and scores of other fruits
equally common here but scarcely known except by name in our northern
latitudes. At every turn we see booths filled with guavas, mameys and
mangoes; zapotes, avocados and chirimoyas; papayas, pomegranates and
sapodillas; anonas, bread-fruit, mangosteens, and others too numerous
to mention, that are prized by the natives for the preparation of
dulces—sweets—and preserves.
The avocado, also called avocado pear, on account of its shape, is
the fruit of the beautiful tree called by botanists Persea
gratissima, after Perseus, the son of Jupiter and Danæ. The
English in the Caribbean Islands name this delicious fruit alligator
pear, or midshipman’s butter. It, indeed, somewhat resembles
butter in appearance, and, to a certain extent, replaces butter on the
table in the tropics, where real butter is difficult to procure and
more difficult to keep. Of late years it has been introduced into the
North as a salad, and promises, as soon as it becomes generally
[417]known, to be one of the most popular of tropical
fruits.
Speaking for myself, I prefer it to any other, except possibly the
piña—pineapple. But one must taste the fresh, ripe
pineapple of the tropics to know its full lusciousness. It is
incomparably more juicy and fragrant than anything our Northern markets
offer. Old Benzoni says of it, “It smells well and tastes
better,” and declares it to be “one of the most relishing
fruits in the world.” Sir Walter Raleigh was right when he called
it “the prince of fruits.” King James thought so highly of
it that he remarked that “it was a fruit too delicious for a
subject to taste of.” The poet Thomson doubtless entertained a
similar view when he penned the following lines:
“Witness, thou best Anana! thou the pride
Of vegetable life, beyond whate’er
The poets imagined in the golden age:
Quick let me strip thee of thy tufty coat,
Spread thy ambrosial stores and feast with
Jove.”
But delicious as is the pineapple it is, in the
estimation of many, surpassed by the chirimoya. This fruit is likened
by Paez to “lumps of flavored cream ready to be frozen, suspended
from the branches of some fairy tree amidst the most overpowering
perfume of its flowers.” Clements R. Markham was so enthusiastic
about it that he declared that “He who has not tasted the
chirimoya fruit has yet to learn what fruit is.” “The
pineapple, the mangosteen, and the chirimoya,” Dr. Seeman writes,
“are considered the finest fruits in the world. I have tasted
them in those localities in which they are supposed to attain their
highest perfection—the pineapple in Guayaquil, the mangosteen in
the Indian Archipelago, and the chirimoya on the slope of the Andes,
and if I were called upon to act the part of Paris, I would, without
hesitation, assign the apple to the chirimoya. Its taste, indeed,
surpasses that of every [418]other fruit, and Haenke was quite
right when he called it the masterpiece of nature.”
A fruit that always appealed to us was the papaya, or pawpaw. It
grows in clusters on a tree about twenty feet high. In taste and
appearance it closely resembles a good-sized muskmelon. It is
surprising to see such large fruits growing on so small a tree. It
flowers and fruits at the same time.
The fruits, however, that are the mainstay for the greatest number
of people in the tropics, are, as has already been stated, the banana
and the plantain. The former is known to botanists as Musa
sapientum, because sages have reposed beneath its shade
and eaten its fruit. The latter is called Musa paradisiaca, on
account of a certain tradition that it was the forbidden fruit in
Paradise.10 Both the banana and the plantain number almost as
many varieties as the apple. The bananas are smaller than the
plantains. The former range from one to six inches in length, while
some varieties of the latter attain a length of fifteen inches. They
are eaten raw, boiled and roasted and as preserves. A few trees will
supply a whole family with the means of subsistence during the entire
year.
The banana and plantain are just the kinds of plants that specially
appeal to the natives of the equatorial regions, for they give at all
seasons a never-failing abundance of nutritious food, and that, too,
without any more labor and care than are entailed by clearing the
[419]ground and placing them in the ever-productive
soil.11 Sir Charles Dilke, however, regards these food
producers in quite a different light. In his estimation, the banana is
the curse of the tropics. Their very abundance, and the little care
they require, constitute, according to him, a bar to progress and to
civilization of the highest kind in the tropics, for the reason that
all true civilization necessarily presupposes labor and effort. It is
for this reason that the highest faculties of man are most conspicuous
in the temperate zone, where there is a constant
struggle for existence.
Before leaving Barranquilla we met a gentleman who had just
completed a tour of all Latin America and he declared that San
José was the most beautiful city he had seen in all his
travels.
At the time we gave little credence to what seemed a very
exaggerated impression, but after we were able to judge for ourselves,
we were forced to admit that Costa Rica’s fair capital is,
indeed, a most delightful place.
In a charming, secluded vale near the city, where stood the country
seat of a wealthy merchant of the capital, was a particularly romantic
spot. The only places I could recall that could fairly compare with it
were certain upland valleys [420]in the larger islands of the
equatorial Pacific. Hidden away in the luxuriant tropical forest,
alongside a broad mountain torrent, where fruit and flower and foliage
vied with one another in delicacy of fragrance and richness of hue, it
required but little strain of fancy to imagine that we were gazing upon
the wonders of the enchanted isle of Armida and Rinaldo; for here,
“Mild was the air, the skies were clear as
glass,
The trees no whirlwind felt nor tempest’s
smart,
But ere the fruit drop off, the blossom comes;
This springs that falls, that ripeneth and thus
blooms.”12
Whilst gazing in silent rapture at the incomparable
beauty of the scene before us, and carried away by the matchless
exhibitions of Flora and Pomona, we were suddenly transported on the
wings of memory back to the beautiful plaza of Ciudad Bolivar, where,
some months before, we had heard a happy, enthusiastic fiancée
declare that she considered the lower Orinoco, aboard a yacht or a
steamer, an ideal place to spend one’s honeymoon. With no claim
to the power of mind-reading, or to the spirit of prophecy, we assert,
without fear of erring, that if she had the opportunity of choosing
between the Orinoco valley and this beauty spot near San José,
as a place to spend her honeymoon—her luna de miel, as the
Spaniards phrase it—it would not be to the Orinoco that Don
Esteban would take his bride, but to this Edenic spot on the charming
Costa Rican plateau.
Costa Rica, despite what has often been said to the contrary, has,
for the past half century, been practically free from those fratricidal
revolutions that have so characterized the other Central American
republics. There have, it is true, been occasional
pronunciamientos and periods of excitement about the time of
some of the presidential elections, but none of those devastating
insurrections that have so long been the curse of her less-fortunate
neighbors. [421]
Costa Rica points with pride, and well she may, to the fact that she
has more school teachers than soldiers. Everywhere one finds schools
for both sexes, admirably appointed and conducted, and constant efforts
are being made to have them compare favorably with similar institutions
in other parts of the world.
The original Spanish inhabitants of the central plateau were of
sturdy Galician stock, and their descendants still exhibit the thrift,
industry and enterprise of their ancestors. One meets many families of
pure Spanish blood, but the majority are evidently mestizos—the
result of the intermarriage of Spaniards with the aborigines. The
number of pure-blooded Indians is comparatively small—only about
three thousand out of a total population of a third of a million. There
are few negroes seen outside of the low coast lands, where they
constitute the majority of the inhabitants. We were, indeed, greatly
impressed to note the sudden transition from the black to the white
race as we ascended the Cordillera. In San José the number of
negroes is astonishingly small, while the complexions of the whites,
compared with that of the majority of the people living in the Andean
lands we had recently visited, is unusually clear and ruddy.
“How fair and delicate are the features of the
Josefinas!”13 exclaimed C., as we took our first promenade
in the broad and well-kept streets of San José. And with the eye
of a connoisseur, he continued, “How tastefully dressed they
are!”
He was right. The number of beautiful, Madonna-like types one meets
with is surprising. This impression is probably enhanced in some degree
by the beautifully embroidered pañolones—large
Chinese silk shawls—which they know so well how to display to the
best advantage. [422]When to the tasteful costume and delicate
features one adds the culture and refinement that often distinguish the
Josefina, one can easily realize that she but continues the best
traditions for beauty and grace of mind and heart that have so long
distinguished her sisters in the land of Isabella of Castile.
After a delightful week spent in San José we prepared to
return to Limon. We then experienced, probably more than at any other
place in our long journey,—what all travelers more or less dread
in their peregrinations—the pang of leaving places that have
especially appealed to one and of saying farewell to newly-formed
friends almost as soon as one has learned to know their goodness of
heart and nobility of character. To me, I confess, this has always been
the greatest drawback of traveling and is something I have never been
able to outgrow.
Armed with a certificate from our consul stating that we had spent
in San José the time required of passengers coming from
quarantined ports, by the health regulations of Panama, we took our
place in a comfortable parlor car, and were soon on our way towards the
Caribbean coast, but not before we had taken “a last, long,
lingering look,” at beautiful, hospitable, fascinating San
José.
As the train slowly moved eastwards towards Cartago, our attention
was directed for the hundredth time to the rich
cafetales—coffee plantations—that covered the
fertile acres on both sides of the road. Here and there we noted one of
those cumbersome ox-carts with solid wooden wheels drawn by a yoke of
oxen in charge of an odd-looking boyero. These are rapidly
giving way to more modern means of transportation, but the lover of the
bizarre and the picturesque will regret their disappearance.
“Observe,” said a Josefino, having some pretensions to
physiognomy, “the peculiar features of that boyero on his
way to the market. I will wager anything that that man is a firm
believer in ceguas and cadejos and lloronas; that
he dreams of botijas, even in the daytime, and that he
[423]has greater fear of hermanos than any of
your countrymen have of ghosts.” He then proceeded to explain the
meaning of these terms.
“A cegua,” he continued, “is a monster somewhat
like the sirens of old, that assumes the form of a beautiful woman and
leads men astray. A cadejos is a fantastic animal, black and hairy,
resembling an enormous dog which has resounding hoofs instead of paws.
A llorona is a frightful phantom that is sometimes heard moaning in the
mountains in such wise as to strike terror into the passer-by.14 Botija—the Spanish for a large earthen
jar—is the name given in Costa Rica to a buried treasure. The
country people believe that, if one having buried money dies in debt,
his ghost—hermano—will haunt the place in great distress
until the treasure is found and the debt is paid.”
“I wish I could have the assistance of a few such
hermanos,” interposed C. laughingly. “If I had, I should
have several thousand dollars more to my credit than I have now.
Unfortunately, in my country we have not such aids in bringing our
debtors to book.”
On our way down the Cordillera, while crossing one of the numerous
iron bridges that span the Reventazon and other mountain rivers and
torrents, our Josefino friend pointed to a pier of masonry standing
alone about forty feet to one side of the bridge. “That
pier,” he said, “was formerly under the bridge, but in
consequence of a peculiar landslide or earthquake, it was transported,
together with a part of the bed of the stream, to the spot where it now
stands.”
And then he told us of the opposition of the boyeros to the
construction of the railroad. They, like ill-advised people in other
parts of the world, feared that it would ruin their occupation and
reduce them and their families to starvation. The government and
railway company [424]cleverly overcame this opposition by
employing the boyeros to haul the material used in the construction of
the road.
Then, too, there were wiseacres in Costa Rica, as there were in our
Rocky Mountain region when there was question of undertaking some of
the remarkable engineering feats that characterize several of our
transcontinental railroads, who declared that the projectors of the
road from Limon to San José were essaying the impossible.
“General Guardia”—the dictator under whose rule the
road was begun—they declared “is trying to build a railroad
to Port Limon, where the birds themselves can scarcely go with
wings.”
And yet, aside from the landslides which occur in all mountainous
countries, and the miasmatic climate, there were but few great
difficulties encountered. From an engineering standpoint the
construction of the road offered far less difficult problems than many
of the railroads in Colorado, Peru and Ecuador. The curves are not so
sharp and the grades are less, while the altitude attained is less than
half of that reached by several Rocky Mountain roads and less than
one-third of the height of the celebrated Andean railway which connects
Oroya with Lima.
Our first care on arriving at Limon was to have the health officer
of that place countersign the certificate we had received from our
consul in San José. We then boarded our steamer and were ready
to start for Panama.
The weather was again in our favor, and we had a most delightful
sail to Colon, and needless to say, we enjoyed every moment of it. We
enjoyed it particularly on account of its interesting historical
associations, and the romantic legends that have been woven about every
isle and inlet and headland along the coast.
That, however, which appealed most strongly to us was the land of
Veragua, near the dividing line between Costa Rica and Panama. It was
here that Columbus imagined he had found the Golden Chersonese, the
land whence came the gold used in the construction of Solomon’s
temple. [425]In the letter to his sovereigns, dispatched from
Jamaica, he contends “that these mines of the Aurea are identical
with those of Veragua.”15
It was here, too, near the mouth of the river Belen, that the first
settlement on the continent of the New World was located. Although it
had soon to be abandoned, it was begun with a view of permanent
occupancy, and as such is deserving of special notice. A suitable
memorial should indicate this spot, as one should also mark the site of
Isabella, the first settlement in the New World.
It was while on the coast of Veragua that Columbus heard of the
great ocean now known as the Pacific.16 He was not,
however, permitted to add its discovery to the long list of his
marvelous achievements. That honor was reserved for Vasco Nuñez
de Balboa.
About nine o’clock the morning following our departure from
Limon we dropped anchor in the harbor of Colon. The sea was so tranquil
that there was scarcely a ripple on its placid waters. It was certainly
in marked contrast with the condition in which Columbus once found it
in these parts; for he assures us, in the oft-quoted letter to
Ferdinand and Isabella, that “never was sea so high, so terrific,
and so covered with foam.” It seemed [426]like
a “sea of blood, seething like a cauldron on a mighty
fire.” So continual, indeed, were the shifting winds, and so
terrific were the storms, that the coast from Veragua to Colon which we
had found washed by so calm a sea was by Columbus and his companions
named La Costa de los Contrastes.
Immediately on our arrival our vessel was boarded by the health
officers of the port. Those who could not produce a satisfactory health
certificate—and many could not—were sent to quarantine.
Many of our party, however, did not require any, as they did not
purpose landing at Colon. Some of them were bound for Jamaica and for
points more distant. Among them was C., my brave and resolute companion
across the Andes, the loyal and generous young cavalier who, if he had
not been of superior mold, would more than once have lost his heart
during the course of our long journey. I would fain have enjoyed his
companionship longer while following the conquistadores in lands
farther south; but it was not to be. To him, and to other friends, I
had regretfully to pronounce the words of parting that had so
frequently been addressed to us by the kindly and hospitable people we
had met all along our route—Que Uds. vayan bien, y
con la Virgen!—A happy journey and with the Virgin
Mother!
As I left our good ship and the friends it bore to divers
destinations and stepped ashore alone, a stranger in a strange land, I
felt, I must confess, not unlike Dante when he suddenly found himself
deprived of the companionship of Virgil, who had been his friend and
guide during his arduous journey down through the fearsome pits of Hell
and up the precipitous ledges of the mountain of Purgatory. But this
impression, strong though it was, could not long remain dominant. What
had in the beginning of my journey been but “a consummation
devoutly to be wished,” had during our wanderings in tropical
lands crystallized into a determination to make the desire a reality.
The happy termination of our voyage up the [427]Orinoco and down the Magdalena was conclusive
evidence that travel, even through the least frequented parts of South
America, was far from being as difficult as it has long been depicted.
The moment, then, that I stepped from the gang plank that connected our
steamer with Panaman soil, the Rubicon was crossed, and I had resolved,
coûte que coûte,—alone, if
necessary,—to realize the long-cherished dream of my
youth,—to visit the famed lands of the Incas and explore the
fertile valleys under the equator. If my experience in the llanos and
among the Cordilleras had not made me “fit to mount up to the
stars,” as Dante was when he left the Terrestrial Paradise, it
had at least renewed me “even as new trees with new
foliage,” and I was ready to undertake a longer and more
difficult journey than the one just completed and eager to follow the
conquistadores along the Andes and down the Amazon. [429]
1
Hakluyt’s Early Voyages, Vol. III, p. 594, London,
1810. ↑
2 The
origin of the name Costa Rica is uncertain. It appears for the first
time in an account of an expedition made by Martin Estete to the river
San Juan in 1529, twenty-seven years after the discovery of the country
by Columbus. It occurs subsequently in a document signed by the King of
Spain, dated May 14, 1541. It is probable that the name was given in
consequence of the rich mines that had been discovered near the town of
Estrella, in Talamanca—from which it was inferred that all the
interior of the country was equally rich in the precious
metals—and not on account of the luxuriant vegetation that
abounds, as is sometimes supposed. Cf. Diccionario
Geografico de Costa Rica, p. 47, por Felix F. Noriega, San
José, Costa Rica, 1904. ↑
3
“Alli vide una sepultura en el monte, grande como una casa y
labrada.”—Relaciones y Cartas de Colon, p. 375,
Madrid, 1892. ↑
4 In his
Political Essay on the Kingdom of New Spain, Book IV, Chap. IX,
he asserts that for a given area of land “The produce of bananas
is to that of wheat as 133:1, and to that of potatoes as 44:1.”
These proportions, however, refer to the weights and not to the
nutritive values of the products compared. The ratio of the nutritive
value of bananas and wheat is, according to Humboldt, twenty-five to
one in favor of bananas. Hence, he writes, “a European, newly
arrived in the torrid zone is struck with nothing so much as the
extreme smallness of the spots under cultivation round a cabin which
contains a numerous family of Indians.” ↑
5 Stanley,
in In Darkest Africa, writes: “If only the virtues of
banana flour were publicly known, it is not to be doubted but it would
be largely consumed in Europe. For infants, persons of delicate
digestion, dyspeptics, and those suffering from temporary derangement
of the stomach, the flour properly prepared would be of universal
demand. During my two attacks of gastritis a light gruel of this, mixed
with milk, was the only matter that could be digested.” Vol. II,
pp. 261, 262, New York, 1890. ↑
6 Two
Years in the French West Indies, p. 38, New York,
1890. ↑
7 Op.
cit., pp. 140, 141. ↑
8
“Al famoso Matina
que a los hombres acoquina,
Y a las mulas desatina.”
 ↑
9
According to observations made with the pluviometer, the amount of
precipitation sometimes reaches nearly two and a half inches an
hour. ↑
10
“La Banane,” says Père Labat,
“que les Espagnols appelent Plantain ... renferme
une substance jaunatre de la consistence d’un fromage bien gras,
sans aucune graines, mais seulment quelques fibres assez grosses qui
semblent representer une espece de crucifix mal formé quand le
fruit est coupé par son transvers. Les Espagnols du moins ceux a
qui j’ai parlé, pretendent que c’est la le fruit
defendu et que le premier homme vit en le mangeant le mystère de
sa réparation par la croix. Il n’y a rien
d’impossible la dedans; Adam pouvoit avoir meilleure vue que
nous, ou la croix de ces bananes etoit mieux formée:
quoiqu’il en soit il est certain que ce fruit ne se trouve
seulement dans l’Amérique, mais encore dans
l’Afrique, dans l’Asie, et sur tout aux environs de
l’Eufrate ou on did qu’etoit le Paradis
terrestre.” Op. cit., Tom. I, Part II, p.
219. ↑
11 Andres
Bello, the Venezuelan poet, beautifully expresses these facts in the
following verses:—
“Y para ti el banano,
Desmaya el peso de su dulce carga.
El banano, primero
De cuantos concedio bellos presentes
Providencia a las gentes
Del Ecuador feliz con mano larga;
No ya de humanas artes obligado
El premio rinde opimo;
No es á la podera, no al arado,
Deudor de su racemo.
Escasa industria bastale cual puede
Robar á sus fatigas mano esclara;
Crece veloz, y cuando exhausta acaba,
Adulta prole en torno le sucede.
Silva a la Agricultura en la Zona
Torrida.”
 ↑
12
Jerusalem Delivered, Canto XVI. ↑
13
Josefinos—feminine Josefinas—is the name
given the denizens of San José. In Central America, Costaricans
generally are known as Ticos, while the people of Nicaragua are
called Nicos or Pinolios, and those of Guatemala and
Honduras Chopines and Guanacos
respectively. ↑
14 Compare
this with the peculiar belief of the South American Indians, alluded to
in Chap. IX, regarding the cry of a lost soul. ↑
15 Veragua
has a special interest for Americans, as “the only thread of
glory still held in the hands of the family of Columbus” leads
back to this narrow strip of territory on the western shores of the
Caribbean. The present representative of this name in Spain is Don
Cristobal Colon, Duke of Veragua. His full title is Duke of Veragua and
Vega, Marquis of Jamaica, Admiral and High Steward of the Indies. The
grandson of the discoverer of America, Don Luis Colon, was the third
Admiral and Viceroy of the Indies, the last of which titles he
relinquished for that of first Duke of Veragua and Vega. ↑
16
“Whatever he may have thought, or said he thought, when he was at
Cuba, on the second voyage; whatever he thought, or said he thought,
when in a half-crazed condition in the island of Jamaica, he now knew
he really had discovered continental land, and that it was separated
from Catigara, or the land of the east, by a goodly stretch of another
sea.”
“And it is pleasant to think that such a view
is consistent with the nautical, geographical and astronomical
knowledge of the great Discoverer.”—Thatcher,
Christopher Columbus, Vol. II. pp. 593 and 621. ↑
Acosta, Padre José de.
Historia natural y moral de las Indias, translated into English in 1604
by Grimston. Sevilla, 1590.
André, Eugène. A Naturalist in
the Guianas. New York, 1904.
Anglerius, Petrus Martyr. De
nouo orbe, or the historie of the West Indies, contayning the actes and
aduentures of the Spanyardes, which haue conquered and peopled those
countries, inriched with varitie of pleasant relation of the manners,
ceremonies, lawes, gouernments, and warres of the Indians. Comprised in
8 decades. Written by Peter Martyr a Millanoise of Angleria, cheife
secretary. Whereof three, haue beene formerly translated into English,
by R. Eden, whereunto the other fiue, are newly added by the industrie,
and painefull trauaile of M. Lok. Gent. London, 1612.
Appun, C. F. Unter den Tropen.
Jena, 1871.
Benzoni Girolamo. La Historia del
Mondo Nuovo. Venezia 1555.
Boussingault, J. B. Viages
cientifices á los Andes Ecuatoriales. Paris, 1849.
Bürger, Otto. Reisen eines
Natürforschers im Tropischen America. Leipzig, 1900.
Burney, James. History of the Buccaneers of
America. 1816.
Cassani, Padre, J. Historia de la
provincia de la compañía de Jesus del Nuevo Reino de
Granada en la America. Descripción y relación exacta de
sus gloriosas misiones en el reino, llanos, Meta, y rio Orinoco.
Madrid, 1741.
Castellanos, Juan de. Elegias de Varones
Ilustres de Indias, in the Biblioteca de Autores Españoles, Tom.
IV, Collection Rivadeneyra. Madrid, 1850.
Castellanos, Juan de. Historia del
Nuevo Reino de Granada. Madrid, 1887. [430]
Caulin, Padre, A. Historia
coro-grafica, natural y evangelica de la Nueva Andalucia. Madrid,
1779.
Cieza de Leon, Pedro de. Travels in the
First Part of the Chronicle of Peru, translated from the Spanish and
published for the Hakluyt Society. London, 1864.
Codazzi, Agostino. Geografia
Stadistica de Venezuela. Firenze, 1864.
Colon, Cristobal. Relaciones y
Cartas de Cristobal Colón in the Biblioteca Clasica, Tom. CLXIV.
Madrid, 1892.
Colon, Don Fernando. Historia del
Almirante de las Indias, Don Cristobal Colón. Madrid, 1892.
Creveaux, Jules. Voyages dans
l’Amérique du Sud. Paris, 1883.
Darwin, Charles. Journal of Researches into
the Natural History and Geology of the Countries Visited during the
Voyage of H. M. S. “Beagle” round the World.
Dobrizhoffer, Padre M. Historia de
Abiponibus. Vienna, 1784.
Ducoudray-Holstein, H. Memoirs of Simon
Bolivar. London, 1830.
Erbach, Erberhard, Graf zu.
Wandertage eines Deutschen Touristen im Strom und Küstengebiet des
Orinoko. Leipzig, 1892.
Esquemeling. The History of the Buccaneers
of America. London, 1741.
Fabie, Antonio Maria. Vida y
Escritos de Don Fray Bartolomé de las Casas, Obispo de Chipa.
Madrid, 1879.
Fernandez de Navarrete, Martin.
Colección de los Viajes y Descubrimientos que hicieron por mar
los Españoles desde fines del siglo XV. Madrid,
1825–37.
Fernandez de Oviedo Y Valdes,
Gonzalo. Historia General y Natural de las Indias. Madrid,
1851.
Fernandez Piedrahita, Lucas.
Historia General de las Conquistas del Nuevo Reino de Granada.
Bogotá, 1881.
Figueroa, Padre F. de. Relaciones
de las Misiones de la Compañia de Jesús en el Pais de los
Maynas. Madrid, 1904.
Fiske, John. The Discovery of America.
Boston, 1892.
Ford, P. L. Writings of Columbus. New York,
1892.
Fresle, J. R. Conquista i
descubrimiento del nuevo reino de Granada de las Indias occidentales
del mar oceano i fundación de la ciudad de Sante Fé de
Bogotá. Bogotá, 1859. [431]
Gaffarel, Paul. Étude sur
les y Rapports de l’Amérique et de L’ancien
Continent Avant Christophe Colomb. Paris, 1869.
Garcilaso, de la Vega, El Inca. La
Florida, Historia del Adelantado Hernando de Soto. Madrid, 1723.
Gerstächer, Friedrich. Neue
Reisen. Berlin.
Gilli, Abate P. S. Saggio di
Storia Americana. Rome, 1780.
Goering, Anton. Vom Tropischen
Tieflande zum Ewigen Schnee. Leipzig.
Gomara, Lopez de. Historia General
de las Indias, Tom. XXII de Autores Españoles. Madrid, 1877.
Gumilla, Padre José. El
Orinoco Ilustrado, Historia Natural Civil y Geografica de las naciones
situadas en las Riberas del Rio Orinoco. Barcelona, 1882.
Gutierres, Carlos. Fray
Bartolomé de las Casas, Sus Tiempos y su Apostolado. Madrid,
1878.
Hakluyt’s Early Voyages. London,
1810.
Harrisse, H. Christophe Colomb. Paris,
1884.
Helps, Sir Arthur. The Spanish Conquest in
America. New York, 1900.
Herrera, Antonio de. Historia
General de los hechos de los Castellanos en las Islas y Tierra Firme
del Mar Oceano. Madrid, 1726.
Hettner, Alfred. Reisen in den
Columbianischen Anden. Leipzig, 1888.
Humbert, J. L’Occupation
Allemande de Vénézuela au XVI Siècle,
Période dite des Welser, 1528–1556. Bordeaux, 1905.
Humboldt, Alexander von. Cosmos.
————. Examen Critique del histoire
de la géographic de Nouveau Continent. Paris, 1836–39.
————. Personal Narrative of Travel to the
Equinoctial Regions, Bohn edition.
————. Vues des Cordillères
et Monuments des Peuples Indigènes de l’Amérique.
Paris, 1810.
Klunzinger, E. Antheil der
Deutschen an der Andeckung von Süd-Amerika. Stuttgart, 1857.
Labat, Père Jean Baptiste.
Nouveau Voyage aux Isles de l’Amérique. Paris, 1743.
[432]
Laet, Joannes de. Novus Orbis seu
Descriptio Indiæ Occidentalis. Leyden, 1633.
Las Casas, Fray Bartolome de.
Historia de las Indias. Madrid, 1875.
MacNutt, F. A. Bartholomew de las Casas, His
Life, His Apostolate and His Writings. New York, 1909.
Martius, C. F. Historia Naturalis
Palmarum. Lipsiæ, 1850.
Martyr, Peter. The first three books on
America, translation of Richard Eden, edited by Edward Arber.
Westminster, 1895.
Michelena y Rojas, F. Exploracion
Oficial. Bruselas, 1867.
Nadaillac, Marquis de. Prehistoric America.
London, 1885.
Oviedo y Baños, José
de. Historia de la Conquista y poblacion de la Provincia de
Venezuela. Madrid, 1885.
Paez, Ramon. Travels and Adventures in South
and Central America. New York, 1864.
Raleigh, Sir Walter. The Discovery of the
Large, Rich and Beautiful Empire of Guiana, edited by Sir Robert
Schomburgh,—printed for the Hakluyt Society. London, 1848.
Ramusio, G. B. Delle Navigazioni e
Viaggi. Venetia, 1550.
Reclus, Eliseé. Nouvelle
Géographic Universelle. Paris, 1893.
Remesal, Antonio de. Historia de
la Provincia de San Vicente de Chyapa. Madrid, 1620.
Restrepo, Vicente. Los Chibehas
antes de la Conquista Española. Bogotá, 1895.
Rivero, Padre Juan. Historia de
las Misiones de los Llanos de Casanare y los Rios Orinoco y Meta.
Bogotá, 1883.
Sachs, Carl. Aus den Llanos.
Leipzig, 1879.
Schomburgk, Richard. Reisen in
Britisch Guiana. Leipzig, 1840–44.
Simon, Fr. Pedro. Noticias historiales de
las Conquistas de Tierra Firme. Bogotá, 1892.
Spix, J. B. and Martius, C. F. Travels in
Brazil. London, 1824.
Spruce, Richard. Notes of a Botanist and the
Amazon and Andes. London, 1908. [433]
Ternaux-Compans, H. Voyages
Rélations et Memoires Originaux pour servir à Histoire de
la découverte de l’Amérique. Paris,
1837–1841.
Thatcher, J. B. Christopher Columbus, His
Life, His Works, His Remains. New York, 1904.
Thornsburg, Geo. W. The Monarchs of the
Main, or Adventures of the Buccaneers. London, 1855.
Thurn, Everard T. Im. Among the Indians of
Guiana. London, 1883.
Triana, Perez. Down the Orinoco in a Canoe.
London, 1902.
Varnhagan, F. A. de. Le Premier
Voyage de Amerigo Vespucci. Vienne, 1869.
Vedia, Enrique de. Historias
Primitivas de Indias. Madrid, 1877.
Vergara y Vergara, José
Maria. Historia de la Literature en Nueva Granada desde la
Conquista hasta la Independencia, 1538–1820. Bogotá,
1867.
Vergara y Velasco, F. J. Nueva
Geografia de Colombia. Bogotá, 1901.
Waterton, Charles. Wanderings in South
America.
Zerda, Liborio. El Dorado, Estudio
Historico, Etaografico y Arqueologico de los Chibehas Habitantes de la
Antigua Cundinamarca y de Algunas otras Tribus. Bogotá,
1883.
Antologia de poetas Hispano-Americanos, publicada por la
Real Academia Española. Madrid, 1894.
Colección de libros raros y curiosos que tratan de
America. Madrid, 1892–1902.
Colección de documentos inéditos relativos
al descubrimiento, conquista y colonizacion de las posesiones
Españolas en America. Madrid, 1864–1899. [435]
Anaconda, Waterton’s description of, 75
Animals, domestic, in South America, 259;
introduced by the Spaniards, 258,
259;
extinct, 259, 260
Ant-hills, 246
Ants in the tropics, depredations of, 247
Aruac Indians, 95
Augustine, St., Fla., 5
Bamboo, many uses of, 339
Bananas, varieties and uses of, 179;
industry in, extent of, 405 et
seq.;
as a food, value of, 406, 407;
legends concerning, 418
Barranquilla, importance of, 377, 378
Barrigón, description of, 195 et seq.
Beauvois, E., on traditions regarding Fountain of Youth and River
Jordan, 15 et seq.
Belalcazar, Sebastian de, meets Quesada and Federmann on plain of
Bogotá, 294–298,
332
Bell-bird, Waterton and Sydney Smith on, 183
Birds, migratory, in the tropics, 249–252
Boats on the Orinoco, 87,
88;
on the Magdalena, 349
Bogotá, foundation of, 285;
location of, 286;
description and population of, 286
et seq.;
schools and scholars of, 300 et
seq.
Bolivar, Simon, liberator of South America, 303 et seq.;
estimates of, by Tejera and Larazabel, 304, 305;
opinions of Hippisley and General Holstein concerning, 305–308;
ante-mortem statements of, 311
Brendan, St., in the New World, 13;
vanishing island of, 399, 400
Buccaneers, origin of, 390–392;
skill and courage of, 393,
394;
religion of, 394;
depredations and ferocity of, 395,
396;
secretly encouraged by various governments, 397
Buena Vista, Colombia, view from, 235, 236
Butterflies, tropical, 337,
338
Cabuyaro, village on the Meta, 186
Calabash tree, utility of, 179
Callao, Venezuela, mines of, 90,
91
Canoes used by the Indians, 174, 175
Caqueza, experience in, 254;
climate of, 256, 257
Caracas, 41, 42;
compared with Taormina, 42
Carib Indians, 95, 98;
misrepresentations of, 97, 98;
language of, 99–101
[436]
Carib fish, remarkable teeth of, 181
Cariben, Raudal de, scenery about, 144
Cartagena, location and past history of, 380–385
Cassiquiare river, first explorer of, 142, 143
Castellanos, Juan de, on the Fountain of Youth, 11, 12;
his work as poet and historian, 139, 299, 318
Castle, Morro, in Havana, 20;
in Santiago, 28
Cayman, numbers of, 366–369
Chibchas. See Muiscas
Chicha, how made and general use of, 333–335
Chinchona trees in Colombia, 231, 232
Churches, large and beautiful, in South America, 260
Ciudad Bolivar, 102;
foundation and description of, 102–107
Colombians of the eastern Cordilleras, characteristics of, 240–244;
of Bogotá, 313
Columbus, Christopher, regards Cuba as Cathay and Española as
Japan, 21;
on scenery of Cuba, 23;
notions of, about Española, 29, 30;
remains of, in Cathedral of Santo Domingo, 35–37;
Humboldt’s estimate of, 37;
monument for, 37;
view of, regarding the shape of the earth, 67;
view of, regarding the location of the Garden of Paradise, 68;
experience of, with storms, 386;
visits Costa Rica, 402–404;
at Veragua, 425
Cordillera, eastern, temperature on summit of, 275;
hardships endured by Bolivar’s army while crossing, 276, 277
Costa Rica, origin of name, 402;
scenery in, 408, 409;
railways of, 409, 423, 424;
fruits of, 410, 416–419;
negroes of, 411, 412;
coffee of, 413;
curious beliefs in, 422, 433
Couvade, the, among the Indians of South America, 152 et seq.
Crocodile. See Cayman
Cross, Southern, 101, 102
Cross section of oriental Andes, 326
Crosses, before houses along the Meta, 185, 186
Cuba, regarded as Cathay by Columbus, 21
Curaçao, island of, 38
Curare poison, composition and manufacture of, 169
Currency, Colombian, depreciation of, 314–316
Darwin, Charles, on tropical scenery, 83–86;
on extinct mammals in South America, 259
Dobrizhoffer, Padre, on the Couvade among the Indians of South
America, 153
Domingo, Santo, city of, 34–37;
cathedral of, 35
Egret hunting in South America, 107
Española, introduction of slavery into, 31–34
Esquemeling, historian of the Buccaneers, 391
Federmann, Nicholas, expedition of, 238, 239;
place where he crossed the Cordillera, 280;
meets Quesada [437]and Belalcazar on plain of Bogotá,
294–298
Fireflies, brilliancy of, 179,
190
Florida, as described by early explorers, 5, 6;
origin of name, 6, 7;
when discovered, and by whom, 7,
8, 9
Flowers, beauty and abundance of, in the tropics, 180
Flute bird, musical notes of, 184
Fountain of Youth and Juan Ponce de Leon, 9 et seq.;
Gomara, Fontenada and Juan de Castellanos on, 10–12;
Sir John Mandeville regarding, 14
Germans in South America, enterprise of, 173, 174, 353;
early attempt of, at colonization, 239
Guaduas, beautiful location of, 339
Guahibos Indians, greatly misrepresented, 170
Guayra, La, port of, 39,
40
Gumilla, Padre, on Indians of Orinoco delta, 78;
account of the moriche palm by, 78,
79
Haiti, 29 et
seq.
Hammock, general use of, in the tropics, 177
Havana, 20 et seq.
Hohermuth, George—Jorge de Spira—expedition of, 237, 238
Home-builders, in the eastern Cordilleras of Colombia, 244–246
Honda, description of, 346–348
Hospitality of the people in the equatorial regions, 187, 188, 220
Humming-birds, 338
Hütten, Philip von, wanderings of, 238
Indians, of Cumana, gentleness of, 47;
former missions among, along the Meta and in Casanare, 155, 156;
simplicity of homes of, 178,
179, 246;
legends and superstitions of, 264–267
José, San, capital of Costa Rica, attractions
of, 414–416;
people of, 421, 422
Keys, Florida, 18,
19
Labat, Père, on introduction and use of
tobacco, 25;
on language of Caribs, 99–101
Las Casas, Bishop, on cruelty to Indians, 28, 29;
projected commonwealth of, 47,
48;
words from will of, 49;
Fiske’s eulogy on, 49;
diocese of, 387;
Thacher’s eulogy on, 388
Leon, Juan Ponce de, 9 et
seq.;
remains of, in Puerto Rico, 38
Lights, mysterious, on the Andes, 191 et seq.
Llanos of Colombia, 202 et
seq.;
herds on, 204, 205;
value of pastures of, 205;
accessibility of, 205;
as a region for investment and exploitation, 207;
inhabitants of, 210 et
seq.;
poets of, 211, 212;
trails in, 214, 215
Llanos of Venezuela, 126–129;
inhabitants of, 129, 131;
remarkable capture of Spanish gun-boats by Llaneros under Paez,
131
Loneliness in the mountains, 263 [438]
Magdalena river, description of, 350, 351;
navigation on, 351, 352;
frequent changes in bed of,353, 355;
as commercial highway, 355,
356, 357;
inhabitants in valley of, 358;
scenery along, 358, 359;
fauna in the valley of, 364 et
seq.
Main, Spanish, meaning of, 39
Mandeville, Sir John, on Fountain of Youth, 14
Margarita, island of, and its pearl fisheries, 49–53
Martyr, Peter, father of American history, 7;
about Indian dwellings on tree tops, 77
Meta river, size of, 146;
traveling on, 159;
inhabitants along, 160;
beauty of scenery along, 190,
191;
navigability of, 206;
should be open to all vessels, 230
Milk tree, 157
Missions, Indian, 86
Monkey bridges, stories about, 151
Montaña, traveling in, 201, 221
Muiscas, 319 et
seq.;
an agricultural people, 320;
commerce of, 321;
civilization and culture of, 322–324;
trails of, 332
Mule, Andean, idiosyncrasies of, 239, 240, 336–337
Ocoa river, difficulty in crossing, 222–225
Orchids, beauty and number of species of, in the tropics, 161–163, 359
Ordaz, Diego de, an officer under Cortez, explores the Orinoco,
140–142
Orinoco, delta of, described by Sir Walter Raleigh, 70, 71;
exuberant vegetation of, 75;
stories about Indians having houses on tops of trees in, 76, 78;
exploration of, by A. E. Level, 80,
81;
inhabitants of, 81
Orinoco river, first view of, 72;
magnitude of, 82;
scenery along, 83;
fauna in valley of, 85, 86;
steamers on, 87;
travelers on, 88, 89;
erroneous notions about, 114–119;
insects along, 114;
temperature in valley of, 116,
117;
temperature and turbidity of water of, 133
Orocué, capital of a prefecture, described, 166
Palms, number of species and uses of, 78, 79,
203, 204, 371–374
Paradise, Terrestrial, 68,
69, 400, 401
Paramo, defined, 272; flora of,
273;
dangers in, 274
Paria, gulf of, 64 et
seq.
Pearl Coast, 46 et
seq.
Pirates, 388, 389
Pitch Lake, 62
Platanos, as food in the tropics, 179, 198
Poncho, description and use of, 213, 214
Porpoises, fresh water, 182
Port-of-Spain, botanical garden of, 58–60
Puerto Cabello, 45
Puerto Limon, importance of, 404, 405
Puerto Rico, 38
Quesada, Gonzalo, Jimenez de, 285, 294;
buried in cathedral of Bogotá,[439] 299;
first man of letters of Bogotá, 299, 332;
voyage of, down the Magdalena, 340;
expedition of, to Cundinamarca, difficulty of, 360–362
Railways, Colombian, 316, 317, 357, 358
Raleigh, Sir Walter, on the delta of the Orinoco, 71;
account by, of the treasures of Guiana, 93, 94;
remarks of, on winter and summer in the tropics, 120
Rivero, Padre, work of, among the Indians along the Meta, 148 et seq.;
on the couvade among the Indians along the Meta, 152
Rubber plantations in Colombia, 231
Sabana de Bogotá, 290, 317–319
Saddle used in Cordilleras, 325
Santiago de Cuba, 28
Sargento, El, magnificent view from summit of, 340–343
Scenery along trail over the eastern Cordilleras, 247–249
Serpent’s Mouth, strait of, described by Columbus, 65
Silla, La, mountain of, 39
Slavery, negro, first introduction of, into America, 31–34
Soto, Hernando de, in Florida, 12
Suma Paz, range of, 278,
279
Telegraph, in the tropics, 261
Tequendama, Falls of, 290,
293, 294
Tierra fria, tierra templada, tierra caliente, characteristics of,
270–274
Tobacco, discovery of, 24;
use of, by aborigines of America, 24, 25;
Benzoni, Père Labat, and King James on, 24–26;
value of, as source of revenue to Spain, 27
Trapiche, described, 332
Treasures found by the conquistadores, 363
Trees, remarkable, in the tropics, 156, 157
Trinidad, island of, 54 et
seq.;
scenery of, 61, 62;
smugglers in, 63
Turtles, immense numbers of, on the sand banks of the Orinoco,
132
Valencia, 45
Varnhagen, M., on the discoveries of Americus Vespucius, 8, 9
Venezuela, reflections on, 134–138;
advantages and natural resources of, 134;
area of, 135;
revolutions in, 135;
future of, 136–139
Vespucius, Americus, discoverer of Florida, 8
Villavicencio, town of, visit to, 225 et seq.
Waraus Indians, 94, 95
Welser colony in Venezuela, 239
Wild, call of the, 261,
262
Winds, trade, at summit of the Cordilleras, 269
Women, market, in the Cordilleras, 258
Yuca, as source of food, 180 [441]
AN AMERICAN ADMIRAL.
Forty-five Years Under the Flag.
By Winfield Scott Schley, Rear-Admiral, U.
S. N. Illustrated. 8vo. Cloth, uncut edges, and gilt top, $3.00
net.
About one-third of Admiral Schley’s volume is devoted to the
Spanish War, in which he became so great a figure. He tells his own
story in simple and effective words. His recollections are constantly
reinforced by references to dispatches and other documents.
Readers will be surprised at the extent of Admiral Schley’s
experiences. He left the Naval Academy just before the outbreak of the
Civil War and saw service with Farragut in the Gulf. Three chapters are
devoted to Civil War events. His next important service was rendered
during the opening of Corea to the commerce of the world, and the
chapter in which he describes the storming of the forts is one of
thrilling interest. Another important expedition in his life was the
rescue of Greely, to which three chapters are devoted. Two other
chapters pertain to the Revolution in Chili, and the troubles growing
out of the attack upon some of Admiral Schley’s men in the
streets of Valparaiso.
Altogether the book contains thirty-eight chapters. It has been
illustrated from material furnished by Admiral Schley and through his
suggestions, and makes an octavo volume of large size. It will appeal
to every true-hearted American.
The author says in his preface: “In times of
danger and duty the writer endeavored to do the work set before him
without fear of consequences. With this thought in mind, he has felt
moved, as a duty to his wife, his children, and his name, to leave a
record of his long professional life, which has not been without some
prestige, at least for the flag he has loved and under which he has
served the best years of his life.”
“Rear-Admiral W. S. Schley’s ‘Forty-five Years
Under the Flag’ is the most valuable contribution to the history
of the American Navy that has been written in many a
year.”—New York Times.
“The author’s career is well worthy of a book, and he
has every reason for pride in telling of his forty-five active years in
all parts of the world.” —Edwin L. Shuman in the Chicago
Record-Herald.
“It is a stirring story, told with the simple directness of a
sailor. Its reading carries the conviction of its truthfulness. The
Admiral could not have hoped to accomplish
more.”—Chicago Evening Post.
“He has told his own story in his own way, from his own
viewpoint, and goes after his detractors, open and above board, with
his big guns.”—Washington Post.
“It is a work that will interest every one, from the
sixteen-year-old school-boy who is studying history and loves tales of
stirring adventure to the grandsire whose blood still pulses hotly with
patriotic pride at the recounting of valiant deeds of arms under our
starry flag.”—Boston American.
“The Admiral tells the story well. His is a manly and
straightforward style. He leaves nothing to doubt, nothing open to
controversy.”—Baltimore Sun.
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. [442]
BIOGRAPHY AND HISTORY.
The Journal of Latrobe.
Being the Notes and Sketches of an Architect, Naturalist, and
Traveller in the United States from 1796 to 1820 By Benjamin Henry Latrobe, Architect of the Capitol at
Washington. Copiously illustrated with reproductions from the original
drawings by the author. 8vo. Ornamental cloth, $3.50 net.
These are the memoirs of a personal friend of the first President of
the United States. He was a man of refinement and great intellectual
attainments, a soldier, civil engineer, philosopher, artist, humorist,
poet, and naturalist. The book is bright with story and anecdote,
criticism and comment.
“Benjamin Latrobe was a man of the world and a
clever commentator on what he saw going on around him. One of the best
pen pictures of Washington is Latrobe’s account of a visit to the
Father of his Country at Mt. Vernon in 1796.”—Review of
Reviews.
“Mr. Latrobe was a keen observer, and his notes of travel in
the South are valuable in an attempt to picture the life of a century
ago.—Chicago Tribune.
“Benjamin Latrobe visited Washington at Mt. Vernon and
recorded what he saw very fully. Then, late in life, he went to New
Orleans by sea and wrote full notes of his voyage and his impressions.
Both diaries are full of interest. Between them are placed in this
volume papers relating to the building of the Capitol. Prefixed to the
volume is a biographical introduction written by his son thirty years
ago. The illustrations are curious and interesting.”—New
York Sun.
“With what has been said of the volume it should be evident
that it is curious, interesting, and instructive to an unusual degree.
To speak of ‘The Journal of Latrobe’ without mention of its
illustrations would be an unpardonable oversight.”—San
Francisco Chronicle.
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. [443]
VIVID, MOVING, SYMPATHETIC, HUMOROUS.
A Diary from Dixie.
By Mary Boykin Chesnut. Being her Diary from
November, 1861, to August, 1865. Edited by Isabella D. Martin and Myrta
Lockett Avary. Illustrated 8vo. Ornamental Cloth, $2.50 net; postage
additional.
Mrs. Chesnut was the most brilliant woman that the South has ever
produced, and the charm of her writing is such as to make all
Southerners proud and all Northerners envious. She was the wife of
James Chesnut, Jr., who was United States Senator from South Carolina
from 1859 to 1861, and acted as an aid to President Jefferson Davis,
and was subsequently a Brigadier-General in the Confederate Army. Thus
it was that she was intimately acquainted with all the foremost men in
the Southern cause.
“In this diary is preserved the most moving and
vivid record of the Southern Confederacy of which we have any
knowledge. It is a piece of social history of inestimable value. It
interprets to posterity the spirit in which the Southerners entered
upon and struggled through the war that ruined them. It paints
poignantly but with simplicity the wreck of that old world which had so
much about it that was beautiful and noble as well as evil. Students of
American life have often smiled, and with reason, at the stilted and
extravagant fashion in which the Southern woman had been described
south of Mason and Dixon’s line—the unconscious
self-revelations of Mary Chesnut explain, if they do not justify, such
extravagance. For here, we cannot but believe, is a creature of a fine
type, a ‘very woman,’ a very Beatrice, frank, impetuous,
loving, full of sympathy, full of humor. Like her prototype, she had
prejudices, and she knew little of the Northern people she criticised
so severely; but there is less bitterness in these pages than we might
have expected. Perhaps the editors have seen to that. However this may
be they have done nothing to injure the writer’s own nervous,
unconventional style—a style breathing character and temperament
as the flower breathes fragrance.—New York Tribune.
“It is written straight from the heart, and with a natural
grace of style that no amount of polishing could have
imparted.”—Chicago Record-Herald.
“The editors are to be congratulated; it is not every day that
one comes on such material as this long-hidden
diary.”—Louisville Evening Post.
“It is a book that would have delighted Charles
Lamb.”—Houston Chronicle.
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. [444]
ALL ABOUT EARTHQUAKES.
Earthquakes.
By Prof. William Herbert Hobbs, Ph.D.,
formerly of the University of Wisconsin and now head of the Department
of Geology in the University of Michigan. Illustrated. 12mo. Ornamental
cloth, $1.50 net; postage additional.
Any book on earthquakes prepared by a great authority and adapted
for popular reading would be interesting. Professor Hobbs has been for
years a special student of the noted geological tract in southwestern
New England, which is the focus of much controversy and in which he
prepared himself for the especial study of earthquakes, faults, dikes,
and associated phenomena. From his experience in America, in Spain, and
in Italy, he has been fortunately enabled to discover what promises to
be a new law of earthquake faults, which law is so simple and
appropriate that it was at once adopted by the world’s greatest
authority on earthquakes, the Count de Montessus de Ballore.
While the book contains allusions to the new theory of earthquake
faults, it also fairly presents the whole subject of earthquakes in its
proper proportion and perspective, giving complete lists of all the
great seismological disturbances and detailed descriptions of all the
more important and typical earthquakes. The book is written from the
standpoint of a great scientist, but in language which an ordinary
reader can easily understand.
“Mr. Hobbs’ study of the subject is
exhaustive and very clear, sensible and of practical
benefit.”—Seattle Post-Intelligencer.
“Professor Hobbs furnishes valuable observations made of
recent earthquakes. The book is scholarly and well written; a good book
that even the casual reader can peruse with
pleasure.”—New York World.
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. [445]
BOOKS BY PROFESSOR GROOS.
The Play of Man.
By Karl Groos, Professor of Philosophy in
the University of Basel. Translated, with the author’s
coöperation, by Elizabeth L. Baldwin, and edited, with a Preface
and Appendix, by Prof. J. Mark Baldwin, of Princeton University, 12mo.
Cloth, $1.50 net; postage, 12 cents additional.
“A book for parents to read and ponder over with
care and mental diligence.”—Chicago Tribune.
“Not alone does the work make an appeal to the strictly
scientific. The general reader will find in it absorbingly interesting
facts, presented in a way which may prove of practical
use.”—Boston Advertiser.
“A very valuable book. The results of Professor Groos’s
original and acute investigations will be especially appreciated by
those who are interested in psychology and sociology, and they are of
great importance to educators.”—Brooklyn Standard
Union.
The Play of Animals.
By Karl Groos. Translated, with the
author’s coöperation, by Elizabeth L. Baldwin, and edited,
with a Preface and Appendix, by Prof. J. Mark Baldwin, of Princeton
University, 12mo. Cloth, $1.75.
“A work of exceptional interest to the
student”—San Francisco Argonaut.
“His work is intensely interesting. Both nature and books have
been ransacked for materials, and the selection shows a trained
intelligence of the highest order in observation and
acumen.”—The Independent.
“A treasure-house of the most amusing and interesting stories
about the entire brute creation, from elephants to ants, all adduced as
illustrating some mental process. We feel that we are brought into
closer contact with, and a better understanding of, those faithful
friends from whom we learn so much.”—Boston
Beacon.
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, NEW YORK. [446]
TWENTIETH CENTURY TEXT-BOOKS.
TEXT-BOOKS OF ZOOLOGY.
By David Starr Jordan, President of Leland
Stanford Jr. University; Vernon Lyman Kellogg,
Professor of Entomology; Harold Heath,
Assistant Professor of Invertebrate Zoology.
Evolution and Animal Life.
This is a popular discussion of the facts, processes, laws, and
theories relating to the life and evolution of animals. The reader of
it will have a very clear idea of the all-important theory of evolution
as it has been developed and as it is held to-day by scientists. 8vo.
Cloth, with about 300 illustrations, $2.50 net; postage 20 cents
additional.
Animal Studies.
A compact but complete treatment of elementary zoology, especially
prepared for institutions of learning that prefer to find in a single
book an ecological as well as morphological survey of the animal world.
12mo. Cloth, $1.25 net.
Animal Life.
An elementary account of animal ecology—that is, of the
relations of animals to their surroundings. It treats of animals from
the standpoint of the observer, and shows why the present conditions
and habits of animal life are as we find them. 12mo. Cloth, $1.20
net.
Animal Forms.
This book deals in an elementary way with animal morphology. It
describes the structure and life processes of animals, from the lowest
creations to the highest and most complex, 12mo. Cloth, $1.10 net.
Animals.
This consists of “Animal Life” and “Animal
Forms” bound in one volume. 12mo. Cloth, $1.80.
Animal Structures.
A laboratory guide in the teaching of elementary zoology, 12mo.
Cloth, 50 cents net.
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,
NEW YORK. BOSTON. CHICAGO. LONDON.
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no
cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give
it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at www.gutenberg.org.
This eBook is produced by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at www.pgdp.net.
Scans are available from the Internet Archive (copy 1, 2,
3).
Related Library of Congress catalog page: 10013159.
Related Open Library catalog page (for source): OL7019372M.
Related Open Library catalog page (for work): OL6668084W.
Related WorldCat catalog page: 1709644.

This Project Gutenberg eBook contains external references. These
links may not work for you.
The following corrections have been applied to the text:

UP THE ORINOCO AND
DOWN THE MAGDALENA

A Cavalcade in the
Andes.
Copyright, 1910,
by
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
Published May, 1910
TO
MY GENIAL
COMPAGNON DE VOYAGE
BRAVE LOYAL
C.
Res ardua vetustis novitatem dare; novis
auctoritatem; absoletis, nitorem; obscuris, lucem; fastiditis, gratiam;
dubiis, fidem; omnibus vero naturam, et naturae sua omnia. Itaque etiam
non assecutis, voluisse abunde pulchrum atque magnificum est. That
is to say: It is a dyfficulte thynge to gyue newenes to owlde thynges,
autoritie to newe thynges, bewtie to thynges owt of vse, fame to the
obscure, fauoure to the hatefull, credite to the doubtefull, nature to
all and all to nature. To such neuerthelesse as can not atayne to all
these, it is greately commendable and magnificall to haue attempted the
fame.
From the preface, addressed to the Emperor Vespasian, of
Pliny’s Natural History. [ix]
The following pages contain the record of a journey
made to islands and lands that border the Caribbean and to the less
frequented parts of Venezuela and Colombia. Thanks to our trade
relations with the Antilles, and the number of meritorious books that
have been written about them during the last few decades, our knowledge
of the West Indies is fairly complete and satisfactory. The same,
however, cannot be said of the two extensive republics just south of
us. Outside of their capitals and a few of their coast towns, they are
rarely visited, and as a consequence, the most erroneous ideas prevail
regarding them. Vast regions in both republics are now less known than
they were three centuries ago, while there are certain sections about
which our knowledge is as limited as it is regarding the least explored
portions of darkest Africa.
This is not the place to account for the prevailing ignorance
regarding the parts of the New Hemisphere that first claimed the
attention of discoverers and explorers. Suffice it to state that,
paradoxical as it may seem, it is, nevertheless, a fact.
When we recollect that the lands in question were not only the first
discovered but that they were also witnesses of the marvelous
achievements of some of the most renowned of the conquistadores, our
surprise becomes doubly great that our information respecting them is
so meager and confined almost exclusively to those who make a special
study of things South American.
Never, perhaps, in the history of our race was the spirit of
adventure so generally diffused as it was at the dawn of the sixteenth
century—just after the epoch-making discoveries of Columbus and
his hardy followers. It was like the spirit that animated the Crusaders
when they started on their long march to recover the Holy Sepulchre
from the possession of the Moslem. It was, indeed, in many of its
aspects, a revival of the age of chivalry. The Sea of Darkness had at
last been successfully crossed. That ocean of legend and mystery with
its enchanted islands inhabited by witches and gnomes and griffins had
been explored. And that strange [x]island of Satanaxio,
“the island of the hand of Satan,” where the Evil One was
“supposed once a day to thrust forth a gigantic hand from the
ocean to grasp a number of the inhabitants” was consigned to the
limbo of mediæval superstitions. A new world was revealed to the
astonished Spaniards. Every animal, tree, plant seemed new to them and
often entirely different from anything the Old World could show. There
was, too, a new race of men, with strange manners and customs—men
who told them of a Fountain of Youth, of regions of pearls and precious
stones, of cities and palaces of gold in the lofty plateau and in the
heart of the wilderness.
Those who first came to the New World acted as if they were in a
land of enchantment and were prepared to believe any tale, however
preposterous, that appealed to their lust of gold or love of adventure.
No enterprise was too difficult for them, no hardship too great.
Neither trackless forests, nor miasmatic climates, nor ruthless savages
could deter them from their quest of treasure, or quench their thirst
for glory and emolument. Hence those extraordinary expeditions in
search of El Dorado,—that El Dorado which Quesada hoped to find
in Cundinamarca, his brother in Casanare, Orsua among the Omaguas on
the Amazon, Philipp von Hutten in the regions of the Meta and the
Guaviare, and Cesar and Belalcazar in the territories drained by the
Cauca and the Magdalena,—in which were combined the extravagant
performances of a Don Quixote with the feats of prowess of a Rodrigo
Diaz. The spirit of knight-errantry seemed to revive and to bring with
it an age of romance that for hardihood of enterprise and variety of
incident surpassed any period that had preceded it. The feats of
individual prowess were as brilliant as the success of Spanish arms was
pronounced and far-reaching. It was an age of epics, of poetry in
action.
Lord Macaulay, in his essay on Lord Clive, writes, “We have
always thought it strange that, while the history of the Spanish empire
in America is familiarly known to all the nations of Europe, the great
actions of our countrymen in the East should, even among ourselves,
excite little interest.”
One reason for the difference noted was the absence, in the English
conquest of India, of those romantic and picturesque elements that so
distinguished the achievements of the conquistadores in the New World,
and which so fascinated Leo X, that he sat up all night [xi]to read the Decades of Peter Martyr.
“The picturesque descriptions,” declares Theodore Irving,
in his Conquest of Florida, “of steel-clad cavaliers with
lance and helmet and prancing steed, glittering through the
wildernesses of Florida, Georgia, Alabama and the prairies of the Far
West, would seem to us fictions of romance, did they not come to us
recorded in matter-of-fact narratives of contemporaries, and
corroborated by minute and daily memoranda of eye-witnesses.”
The same can be said with even more truth of the conquistadores of
the Spanish Main and of the daring adventurers who first penetrated the
trackless forests and scaled the lofty mountains of Venezuela and New
Granada. “Their minds,” as Fiske well observes, “were
in a state like that of the heroes of the Arabian Nights who, if they
only wander far enough through the dark forest or across the burning
desert, are sure at length to come upon some enchanted palace whereof
they may fairly hope, with the aid of some gracious Jinni, to become
masters.” Thus it was that Cortes, unaided, however, by a
gracious Jinni, became the master of the capital of the Aztecs, as
Quesada and Pizarro became the masters of the lands and the treasures
of the Muiscas and the Incas.
It is impossible for the student of early American history to cruise
along the Spanish Main, or sail on the broad waters of the Orinoco, the
Meta and the Magdalena, without harking back at every turn to the
achievements of some of the early discoverers or conquistadores. Every
island, every promontory, every river has been visited by them and, if
endowed with speech, they could tell thrilling stories of daring
adventure and brilliant exploit unsurpassed in the annals of chivalry
and crusading valor. Every place he goes, he will find that he has been
preceded by the Spaniard by three or four centuries, for everywhere he
will find traces or traditions of his passage.
It matters not that the Spaniards were lured on by such
ever-receding chimeras as Manoa, El Dorado and Lake Parime, that many
other objects of their quest were as mythical as that of the Argonauts
or as unattainable as the golden apples of the Hesperides. Their
expeditions were not for these reasons wholly fruitless. Every one of
them, whether for the purpose of exploration or conquest or
colonization, contributed to our knowledge of the lands visited and of
the tribes inhabiting them, many of whom have long since disappeared.
And everywhere one finds towns founded by [xii]them, or
places, mountains and rivers that still bear the names that were given
them at the time of their discovery.
It was always our pleasure, during our wanderings in the tropics, to
recall what the first explorers thought of the new lands visited by
them while they were still under the spell of the novel and marvelous
things that were ever claiming their rapt attention whithersoever they
went. We loved to look upon the countries we visited as their first
explorers had looked upon them. This we were able to do, for thanks to
the old chroniclers, the wonderment of the discovery of the New World
has been preserved, as in amber, in all its freshness, and that, too,
for all time to come.
Comparatively few people realize how extensive is the literature,
especially in Spanish, that relates to the period of the conquest and
that immediately following it. And still fewer are aware of its intense
interest and importance. In addition to the well-known classic works of
Peter Martyr, Las Casas, Herrera, Oviedo, Garcilaso de la Vega, Cieza
de Leon, Gomara, Acosta, and others scarcely less valuable, there are
scores of similar annals that have for centuries lain in the archives
of Spain and of the various countries of Latin-America which have but
recently been published. Many of these—beyond price for the
historian—were absolutely unknown until a few years ago, and are
still awaiting the artistic pen of a Prescott or an Irving to transmute
their contents in masterpieces of literature. It is safe to say that
nowhere else will the man of letters find a more fertile and a less
cultivated field to engage his talent.
Then there are the works, equally precious, of the early
missionaries. Many of them are veritable mines of information
respecting the manners and customs of the native inhabitants of the
tropics, while not a few of them are the only sources extant of
knowledge respecting many interesting Indian tribes that have long
since become extinct. Among these deserving of special notice are the
works of Simon, Gilli, Caulin, Rivero, Cassani, Gumilla and
Piedrahita—not to mention others of lesser note—that treat
specially of Venezuela and New Granada, and afford us the truest
picture of the condition of these countries during their existence
under Spanish domination. Humboldt frequently quotes them in his
instructive Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions
of America, and usually with the generous approval and commendation
which they so well deserve. To the humble and intelligent and often
erudite missionaries of the tropics the illustrious German [xiii]savant was indebted for much of the success
that attended his explorations in the basin of the Orinoco and along
the plateau of the Cordilleras.
Worthy of mention, too, in traversing countries where the traveler
has not the benefit of a Murray or a Baedeker, are the numerous works
of those explorers—German, English, French, American—who
have followed in the footsteps of Humboldt and his compagnon de voyage, Bonpland, and who have cast a flood of
light upon the fauna and flora of the countries visited, and
supplemented the works of the early historians and missionaries by
describing the condition of their inhabitants as it obtains to-day.
In the following pages the author has endeavored to give not only
his own impressions of the lands he has visited but also, when the
narrative permitted or required it, the impressions of
others—conquistadores, missionaries and men of science—who