# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Emile Zola, Doctor Pascal
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/10720/10720-h/10720-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Then he opened a drawer of his table and threw the key into it, as he used
 to do formerly.
 

 From this time on he gained strength, and his convalescence progressed
 more rapidly. Relapses were still possible, for he was still very weak.
 But he was able to write, and this made the days less heavy. The sun, too,
 shone more brightly, the study being so warm at times that it became
 necessary to half close the shutters. He refused to see visitors, barely
 tolerated Martine, and had his mother told that he was sleeping, when she
 came at long intervals to inquire for him. He was happy only in this
 delightful solitude, nursed by the rebel, the enemy of yesterday, the
 docile pupil of to-day. They would often sit together in silence for a
 long time, without feeling any constraint. They meditated, or lost
 themselves in infinitely sweet reveries.
 

 One day, however, Pascal seemed very grave. He was now convinced that his
 illness had resulted from purely accidental causes, and that heredity had
 had no part in it. But this filled him none the less with humility.
 

 “My God!” he murmured, “how insignificant we are! I who thought myself so
 strong, who was so proud of my sane reason! And here have I barely escaped
 being made insane by a little trouble and overwork!”
 

 He was silent, and sank again into thought. After a time his eyes
 brightened, he had conquered himself. And in a moment of reason and
 courage, he came to a resolution.
 

 “If I am getting better,” he said, “it is especially for your sake that I
 am glad.”
 

 Clotilde, not understanding, looked up and said:
 

 “How is that?”
 

 “Yes, on account of your marriage. Now you will be able to fix the day.”
 

 She still seemed surprised.
 

 “Ah, true—my marriage!”
 

 “Shall we decide at once upon the second week in June?”
 

 “Yes, the second week in June; that will do very well.”
 

 They spoke no more; she fixed her eyes again on the piece of sewing on
 which she was engaged, while he, motionless, and with a grave face, sat
 looking into space.
 

 
 
 

 On this day, on arriving at La Souleiade, old Mme. Rougon perceived
 Martine in the kitchen garden, engaged in planting leeks; and, as she
 sometimes did, she went over to the servant to have a chat with her, and
 find out from her how things were going on, before entering the house.
 

 For some time past she had been in despair about what she called
 Clotilde’s desertion. She felt truly that she would now never obtain the
 documents through her. The girl was behaving disgracefully, she was siding
 with Pascal, after all she had done for her; and she was becoming
 perverted to such a degree that for a month past she had not been seen in
 Church. Thus she returned to her first idea, to get Clotilde away and win
 her son over when, left alone, he should be weakened by solitude. Since
 she had not been able to persuade the girl to go live with her brother,
 she eagerly desired the marriage. She would like to throw her into Dr.
 Ramond’s arms to-morrow, in her impatience at so many delays. And she had
 come this afternoon with a feverish desire to hurry on matters.
 

 “Good-day, Martine. How is every one here?”
 

 The servant, kneeling down, her hands full of clay, lifted up her pale
 face, protected against the sun by a handkerchief tied over her cap.
 

 “As usual, madame, pretty well.”
 

 They went on talking, Felicite treating her as a confidante, as a devoted
 daughter, one of the family, to whom she could tell everything. She began
 by questioning her; she wished to know if Dr. Ramond had come that
 morning. He had come, but they had talked only about indifferent matters.
 This put her in despair, for she had seen the doctor on the previous day,
 and he had unbosomed himself to her, chagrined at not having yet received
 a decisive answer, and eager now to obtain at least Clotilde’s promise.
 Things could not go on in this way, the young girl must be compelled to
 engage herself to him.
 

 “He has too much delicacy,” she cried. “I have told him so. I knew very
 well that this morning, even, he would not venture to demand a positive
 answer. And I have come to interfere in the matter. We shall see if I
 cannot oblige her to come to a decision.”
 

 Then, more calmly:
 

 “My son is on his feet now; he does not need her.”
 

 Martine, who was again stooping over the bed, planting her leeks,
 straightened herself quickly.
 

 “Ah, that for sure!”
 

 And a flush passed over her face, worn by thirty years of service. For a
 wound bled within her; for some time past the master scarcely tolerated
 her about him. During the whole time of his illness he had kept her at a
 distance, accepting her services less and less every day, and finally
 closing altogether to her the door of his room and of the workroom. She
 had a vague consciousness of what was taking place, an instinctive
 jealousy tortured her, in her adoration of the master, whose chattel she
 had been satisfied to be for so many years.
 

 “For sure, we have no need of mademoiselle. I am quite able to take care
 of monsieur.”
 

 Then she, who was so discreet, spoke of her labors in the garden, saying
 that she made time to cultivate the vegetables, so as to save a few days’ 
 wages of a man. True, the house was large, but when one was not afraid of
 work, one could manage to do all there was to be done. And then, when
 mademoiselle should have left them, that would be always one less to wait
 upon. And her eyes brightened unconsciously at the thought of the great
 solitude, of the happy peace in which they should live after this
 departure.
 

 “It would give me pain,” she said, lowering her voice, “for it would
 certainly give monsieur a great deal. I would never have believed that I
 could be brought to wish for such a separation. Only, madame, I agree with
 you that it is necessary, for I am greatly afraid that mademoiselle will
 end by going to ruin here, and that there will be another soul lost to the
 good God. Ah, it is very sad; my heart is so heavy about it sometimes that
 it is ready to burst.”
 

 “They are both upstairs, are they not?” said Felicite. “I will go up and
 see them, and I will undertake to oblige them to end the matter.”
 

 An hour later, when she came down again, she found Martine still on her
 knees on the soft earth, finishing her planting. Upstairs, from her first
 words, when she said that she had been talking with Dr. Ramond, and that
 he had shown himself anxious to know his fate quickly, she saw that Dr.
 Pascal approved—he looked grave, he nodded his head as if to say
 that this wish seemed to him very natural. Clotilde, herself, ceasing to
 smile, seemed to listen to him with deference. But she manifested some
 surprise. Why did they press her? Master had fixed the marriage for the
 second week in June; she had, then, two full months before her. Very soon
 she would speak about it with Ramond. Marriage was so serious a matter
 that they might very well give her time to reflect, and let her wait until
 the last moment to engage herself. And she said all this with her air of
 good sense, like a person resolved on coming to a decision. And Felicite
 was obliged to content herself with the evident desire that both had that
 matters should have the most reasonable conclusion.
 

 “Indeed I believe that it is settled,” ended Felicite. “He seems to place
 no obstacle in the way, and she seems only to wish not to act hastily,
 like a girl who desires to examine her heart closely, before engaging
 herself for life. I will give her a week more for reflection.”
 

 Martine, sitting on her heels, was looking fixedly on the ground with a
 clouded face.
 

 “Yes, yes,” she murmured, in a low voice, “mademoiselle has been
 reflecting a great deal of late. I am always meeting her in some corner.
 You speak to her, and she does not answer you. That is the way people are
 when they are breeding a disease, or when they have a secret on their
 mind. There is something going on; she is no longer the same, no longer
 the same.”
 

 And she took the dibble again and planted a leek, in her rage for work;
 while old Mme. Rougon went away, somewhat tranquillized; certain, she
 said, that the marriage would take place.
 

 Pascal, in effect, seemed to accept Clotilde’s marriage as a thing
 settled, inevitable. He had not spoken with her about it again, the rare
 allusions which they made to it between themselves, in their hourly
 conversations, left them undisturbed; and it was simply as if the two
 months which they still had to live together were to be without end, an
 eternity stretching beyond their view.
 

 She, especially, would look at him smiling, putting off to a future day
 troubles and decisions with a pretty vague gesture, as if to leave
 everything to beneficent life. He, now well and gaining strength daily,
 grew melancholy only when he returned to the solitude of his chamber at
 night, after she had retired. He shuddered and turned cold at the thought
 that a time would come when he would be always alone. Was it the beginning
 of old age that made him shiver in this way? He seemed to see it
 stretching before him, like a shadowy region in which he already began to
 feel all his energy melting away. And then the regret of having neither
 wife nor child filled him with rebelliousness, and wrung his heart with
 intolerable anguish.
 

 Ah, why had he not lived! There were times when he cursed science,
 accusing it of having taken from him the best part of his manhood. He had
 let himself be devoured by work; work had consumed his brain, consumed his
 heart, consumed his flesh. All this solitary, passionate labor had
 produced only books, blackened paper, that would be scattered to the
 winds, whose cold leaves chilled his hands as he turned them over. And no
 living woman’s breast to lean upon, no child’s warm locks to kiss! He had
 lived the cold, solitary life of a selfish scientist, and he would die in
 cold solitude. Was he indeed going to die thus? Would he never taste the
 happiness enjoyed by even the common porters, by the carters who cracked
 their whips, passing by under his windows? But he must hasten, if he
 would; soon, no doubt, it would be too late. All his unemployed youth, all
 his pent-up desires, surged tumultuously through his veins. He swore that
 he would yet love, that he would live a new life, that he would drain the
 cup of every passion that he had not yet tasted, before he should be an
 old man. He would knock at the doors, he would stop the passers-by, he
 would scour the fields and town.
 

 On the following day, when he had taken his shower bath and left his room,
 all his fever was calmed, the burning pictures had faded away, and he fell
 back into his natural timidity. Then, on the next night, the fear of
 solitude drove sleep away as before, his blood kindled again, and the same
 despair, the same rebelliousness, the same longing not to die without
 having known family joys returned. He suffered a great deal in this
 crisis.
 

 During these feverish nights, with eyes wide open in the darkness, he
 dreamed always, over and over again the same dream. A girl would come
 along the road, a girl of twenty, marvelously beautiful; and she would
 enter and kneel down before him in an attitude of submissive adoration,
 and he would marry her. She was one of those pilgrims of love such as we
 find in ancient story, who have followed a star to come and restore health
 and strength to some aged king, powerful and covered with glory. He was
 the aged king, and she adored him, she wrought the miracle, with her
 twenty years, of bestowing on him a part of her youth. In her love he
 recovered his courage and his faith in life.
 

 Ah, youth! he hungered fiercely for it. In his declining days this
 passionate longing for youth was like a revolt against approaching age, a
 desperate desire to turn back, to be young again, to begin life over
 again. And in this longing to begin life over again, there was not only
 regret for the vanished joys of youth, the inestimable treasure of dead
 hours, to which memory lent its charm; there was also the determined will
 to enjoy, now, his health and strength, to lose nothing of the joy of
 loving! Ah, youth! how eagerly he would taste of its every pleasure, how
 eagerly he would drain every cup, before his teeth should fall out, before
 his limbs should grow feeble, before the blood should be chilled in his
 veins. A pang pierced his heart when he remembered himself, a slender
 youth of twenty, running and leaping agilely, vigorous and hardy as a
 young oak, his teeth glistening, his hair black and luxuriant. How he
 would cherish them, these gifts scorned before, if a miracle could restore
 them to him!
 

 And youthful womanhood, a young girl who might chance to pass by,
 disturbed him, causing him profound emotion. This was often even
 altogether apart from the individual: the image, merely, of youth, the
 perfume and the dazzling freshness which emanated from it, bright eyes,
 healthy lips, blooming cheeks, a delicate neck, above all, rounded and
 satin-smooth, shaded on the back with down; and youthful womanhood always
 presented itself to him tall and slight, divinely slender in its chaste
 nudeness. His eyes, gazing into vacancy, followed the vision, his heart
 was steeped in infinite longing. There was nothing good or desirable but
 youth; it was the flower of the world, the only beauty, the only joy, the
 only true good, with health, which nature could bestow on man. Ah, to
 begin life over again, to be young again, to clasp in his embrace youthful
 womanhood!
 

 Pascal and Clotilde, now that the fine April days had come, covering the
 fruit trees with blossoms, resumed their morning walks in La Souleiade. It
 was the first time that he had gone out since his illness, and she led him
 to the threshing yard, along the paths in the pine wood, and back again to
 the terrace crossed by the two bars of shadows thrown by the secular
 cypresses. The sun had already warmed the old flagstones there, and the
 wide horizon stretched out under a dazzling sky.
 

 One morning when Clotilde had been running, she returned to the house in
 such exuberant spirits and so full of pleasant excitement that she went up
 to the workroom without taking off either her garden hat or the lace scarf
 which she had tied around her neck.
 

 “Oh,” she said, “I am so warm! And how stupid I am, not to have taken off
 my things downstairs. I will go down again at once.”
 

 She had thrown the scarf on a chair on entering.
 

 But her feverish fingers became impatient when she tried to untie the
 strings of her large straw hat.
 

 “There, now! I have fastened the knot. I cannot undo it, and you must come
 to my assistance.”
 

 Pascal, happy and excited too by the pleasure of the walk, rejoiced to see
 her so beautiful and so merry. He went over and stood in front of her.
 

 “Wait; hold up your chin. Oh, if you keep moving like that, how do you
 suppose I can do it?”
 

 She laughed aloud. He could see the laughter swelling her throat, like a
 wave of sound. His fingers became entangled under her chin, that delicious
 part of the throat whose warm satin he involuntarily touched. She had on a
 gown cut sloping in the neck, and through the opening he inhaled all the
 living perfume of the woman, the pure fragrance of her youth, warmed by
 the sunshine. All at once a vertigo seized him and he thought he was going
 to faint.
 

 “No, no! I cannot do it,” he said, “unless you keep still!”
 

 The blood throbbed in his temples, and his fingers trembled, while she
 leaned further back, unconsciously offering the temptation of her fresh
 girlish beauty. It was the vision of royal youth, the bright eyes, the
 healthy lips, the blooming cheeks, above all, the delicate neck,
 satin-smooth and round, shaded on the back by down. And she seemed to him
 so delicately graceful, with her slender throat, in her divine bloom!
 

 “There, it is done!” she cried.
 

 Without knowing how, he had untied the strings. The room whirled round,
 and then he saw her again, bareheaded now, with her starlike face, shaking
 back her golden curls laughingly. Then he was seized with a fear that he
 would catch her in his arms and press mad kisses on her bare neck, and
 arms, and throat. And he fled from the room, taking with him the hat,
 which he had kept in his hand, saying:
 

 “I will hang it in the hall. Wait for me; I want to speak to Martine.”
 

 Once downstairs, he hurried to the abandoned room and locked himself into
 it, trembling lest she should become uneasy and come down here to seek
 him. He looked wild and haggard, as if he had just committed a crime. He
 spoke aloud, and he trembled as he gave utterance for the first time to
 the cry that he had always loved her madly, passionately. Yes, ever since
 she had grown into womanhood he had adored her. And he saw her clearly
 before him, as if a curtain had been suddenly torn aside, as she was when,
 from an awkward girl, she became a charming and lovely creature, with her
 long tapering limbs, her strong slender body, with its round throat, round
 neck, and round and supple arms. And it was monstrous, but it was true—he
 hungered for all this with a devouring hunger, for this youth, this fresh,
 blooming, fragrant flesh.
 

 Then Pascal, dropping into a rickety chair, hid his face in his hands, as
 if to shut out the light of day, and burst into great sobs. Good God! what
 was to become of him? A girl whom his brother had confided to him, whom he
 had brought up like a good father, and who was now—this temptress of
 twenty-five—a woman in her supreme omnipotence! He felt himself more
 defenseless, weaker than a child.
 

 And above this physical desire, he loved her also with an immense
 tenderness, enamored of her moral and intellectual being, of her
 right-mindedness, of her fine intelligence, so fearless and so clear. Even
 their discord, the disquietude about spiritual things by which she was
 tortured, made her only all the more precious to him, as if she were a
 being different from himself, in whom he found a little of the infinity of
 things. She pleased him in her rebellions, when she held her ground
 against him,—she was his companion and pupil; he saw her such as he
 had made her, with her great heart, her passionate frankness, her
 triumphant reason. And she was always present with him; he did not believe
 that he could exist where she was not; he had need of her breath; of the
 flutter of her skirts near him; of her thoughtfulness and affection, by
 which he felt himself constantly surrounded; of her looks; of her smile;
 of her whole daily woman’s life, which she had given him, which she would
 not have the cruelty to take back from him again. At the thought that she
 was going away, that she would not be always here, it seemed to him as if
 the heavens were about to fall and crush him; as if the end of all things
 had come; as if he were about to be plunged in icy darkness. She alone
 existed in the world, she alone was lofty and virtuous, intelligent and
 beautiful, with a miraculous beauty. Why, then, since he adored her and
 since he was her master, did he not go upstairs and take her in his arms
 and kiss her like an idol? They were both free, she was ignorant of
 nothing, she was a woman in age. This would be happiness.
 

 Pascal, who had ceased to weep, rose, and would have walked to the door.
 But suddenly he dropped again into his chair, bursting into a fresh
 passion of sobs. No, no, it was abominable, it could not be! He felt on
 his head the frost of his white hair; and he had a horror of his age, of
 his fifty-nine years, when he thought of her twenty-five years. His former
 chill fear again took possession of him, the certainty that she had
 subjugated him, that he would be powerless against the daily temptation.
 And he saw her giving him the strings of her hat to untie; compelling him
 to lean over her to make some correction in her work; and he saw himself,
 too, blind, mad, devouring her neck with ardent kisses. His indignation
 against himself at this was so great that he arose, now courageously, and
 had the strength to go upstairs to the workroom, determined to conquer
 himself.
 

 Upstairs Clotilde had tranquilly resumed her drawing. She did not even
 look around at his entrance, but contented herself with saying:
 

 “How long you have been! I was beginning to think that Martine must have
 made a mistake of at least ten sous in her accounts.”
 

 This customary jest about the servant’s miserliness made him laugh. And he
 went and sat down quietly at his table. They did not speak again until
 breakfast time. A great sweetness bathed him and calmed him, now that he
 was near her. He ventured to look at her, and he was touched by her
 delicate profile, by her serious, womanly air of application. Had he been
 the prey of a nightmare, downstairs, then? Would he be able to conquer
 himself so easily?
 

 “Ah!” he cried, when Martine called them, “how hungry I am! You shall see
 how I am going to make new muscle!”
 

 She went over to him, and took him by the arm, saying:
 

 “That’s right, master; you must be gay and strong!”
 

 But that night, when he was in his own room, the agony began again. At the
 thought of losing her he was obliged to bury his face in the pillow to
 stifle his cries. He pictured her to himself in the arms of another, and
 all the tortures of jealousy racked his soul. Never could he find the
 courage to consent to such a sacrifice. All sorts of plans clasped
 together in his seething brain; he would turn her from the marriage, and
 keep her with him, without ever allowing her to suspect his passion; he
 would take her away, and they would go from city to city, occupying their
 minds with endless studies, in order to keep up their companionship as
 master and pupil; or even, if it should be necessary, he would send her to
 her brother to nurse him, he would lose her forever rather than give her
 to a husband. And at each of these resolutions he felt his heart, torn
 asunder, cry out with anguish in the imperious need of possessing her
 entirely. He was no longer satisfied with her presence, he wished to keep
 her for himself, with himself, as she appeared to him in her radiant
 beauty, in the darkness of his chamber, with her unbound hair falling
 around her.
 

 His arms clasped the empty air, and he sprang out of bed, staggering like
 a drunken man; and it was only in the darkness and silence of the workroom
 that he awoke from this sudden fit of madness. Where, then, was he going,
 great God? To knock at the door of this sleeping child? to break it in,
 perhaps, with a blow of his shoulder? The soft, pure respiration, which he
 fancied he heard like a sacred wind in the midst of the profound silence,
 struck him on the face and turned him back. And he returned to his room
 and threw himself on his bed, in a passion of shame and wild despair.
 

 On the following day when he arose, Pascal, worn out by want of sleep, had
 come to a decision. He took his daily shower bath, and he felt himself
 stronger and saner. The resolution to which he had come was to compel
 Clotilde to give her word. When she should have formally promised to marry
 Ramond, it seemed to him that this final solution would calm him, would
 forbid his indulging in any false hopes. This would be a barrier the more,
 an insurmountable barrier between her and him. He would be from that
 moment armed against his desire, and if he still suffered, it would be
 suffering only, without the horrible fear of becoming a dishonorable man.
 

 On this morning, when he told the young girl that she ought to delay no
 longer, that she owed a decisive answer to the worthy fellow who had been
 awaiting it so long, she seemed at first astonished. She looked straight
 into his eyes, but he had sufficient command over himself not to show
 confusion; he insisted merely, with a slightly grieved air, as if it
 distressed him to have to say these things to her. Finally, she smiled
 faintly and turned her head aside, saying:
 

 “Then, master, you wish me to leave you?”
 

 “My dear,” he answered evasively, “I assure you that this is becoming
 ridiculous. Ramond will have the right to be angry.”
 

 She went over to her desk, to arrange some papers which were on it. Then,
 after a moment’s silence, she said:
 

 “It is odd; now you are siding with grandmother and Martine. They, too,
 are persecuting me to end this matter. I thought I had a few days more.
 But, in truth, if you all three urge me—”
 

 She did not finish, and he did not press her to explain herself more
 clearly.
 

 “When do you wish me to tell Ramond to come, then?”
 

 “Why, he may come whenever he wishes; it does not displease me to see him.
 But don’t trouble yourself. I will let him know that we will expect him
 one of these afternoons.”
 

 On the following day the same scene began over again. Clotilde had taken
 no step yet, and Pascal was now angry. He suffered martyrdom; he had
 crises of anguish and rebelliousness when she was not present to calm him
 by her smiling freshness. And he insisted, in emphatic language, that she
 should behave seriously and not trifle any longer with an honorable man
 who loved her.
 

 “The devil! Since the thing is decided, let us be done with it. I warn you
 that I will send word to Ramond, and that he will be here to-morrow at
 three o’clock.”
 

 She listened in silence, her eyes fixed on the ground. Neither seemed to
 wish to touch upon the question as to whether the marriage had really been
 decided on or not, and they took the standpoint that there had been a
 previous decision, which was irrevocable. When she looked up again he
 trembled, for he felt a breath pass by; he thought she was on the point of
 saying that she had questioned herself, and that she refused this
 marriage. What would he have done, what would have become of him, good
 God! Already he was filled with an immense joy and a wild terror. But she
 looked at him with the discreet and affectionate smile which never now
 left her lips, and she answered with a submissive air:
 

 “As you please, master. Send him word to be here to-morrow at three
 o’clock.”
 

 Pascal spent so dreadful a night that he rose late, saying, as an excuse,
 that he had one of his old headaches. He found relief only under the icy
 deluge of the shower bath. At ten o’clock he left the house, saying he
 would go himself to see Ramond; but he had another object in going out—he
 had seen at a show in Plassans a corsage of old point d’Alencon; a marvel
 of beauty which lay there awaiting some lover’s generous folly, and the
 thought had come to him in the midst of the tortures of the night, to make
 a present of it to Clotilde, to adorn her wedding gown. This bitter idea
 of himself adorning her, of making her beautiful and fair for the gift of
 herself, touched his heart, exhausted by sacrifice. She knew the corsage,
 she had admired it with him one day wonderingly, wishing for it only to
 place it on the shoulders of the Virgin at St. Saturnin, an antique Virgin
 adored by the faithful. The shopkeeper gave it to him in a little box
 which he could conceal, and which he hid, on his return to the house, in
 the bottom of his writing-desk.
 

 At three o’clock Dr. Ramond presented himself, and he found Pascal and
 Clotilde in the parlor, where they had been awaiting him with secret
 excitement and a somewhat forced gaiety, avoiding any further allusion to
 his visit. They received him smilingly with exaggerated cordiality.
 

 “Why, you are perfectly well again, master!” said the young man. “You
 never looked so strong.”
 

 Pascal shook his head.
 

 “Oh, oh, strong, perhaps! only the heart is no longer here.”
 

 This involuntary avowal made Clotilde start, and she looked from one to
 the other, as if, by the force of circumstances, she compared them with
 each other—Ramond, with his smiling and superb face—the face
 of the handsome physician adored by the women—his luxuriant black
 hair and beard, in all the splendor of his young manhood; and Pascal, with
 his white hair and his white beard. This fleece of snow, still so
 abundant, retained the tragic beauty of the six months of torture that he
 had just passed through. His sorrowful face had aged a little, only his
 eyes remained still youthful; brown eyes, brilliant and limpid. But at
 this moment all his features expressed so much gentleness, such exalted
 goodness, that Clotilde ended by letting her gaze rest upon him with
 profound tenderness. There was silence for a moment and each heart
 thrilled.
 

 “Well, my children,” resumed Pascal heroically, “I think you have
 something to say to each other. I have something to do, too, downstairs. I
 will come up again presently.”
 

 And he left the room, smiling back at them.
 

 And soon as they were alone, Clotilde went frankly straight over to
 Ramond, with both hands outstretched. Taking his hands in hers, she held
 them as she spoke.
 

 “Listen, my dear friend; I am going to give you a great grief. You must
 not be too angry with me, for I assure you that I have a very profound
 friendship for you.”
 

 He understood at once, and he turned very pale.
 

 “Clotilde give me no answer now, I beg of you; take more time, if you wish
 to reflect further.”
 

 “It is useless, my dear friend, my decision is made.”
 

 She looked at him with her fine, loyal look. She had not released his
 hands, in order that he might know that she was not excited, and that she
 was his friend. And it was he who resumed, in a low voice:
 

 “Then you say no?”
 

 “I say no, and I assure you that it pains me greatly to say it. Ask me
 nothing; you will no doubt know later on.”
 

 He sat down, crushed by the emotion which he repressed like a strong and
 self-contained man, whose mental balance the greatest sufferings cannot
 disturb. Never before had any grief agitated him like this. He remained
 mute, while she, standing, continued:
 

 “And above all, my friend, do not believe that I have played the coquette
 with you. If I have allowed you to hope, if I have made you wait so long
 for my answer, it was because I did not in very truth see clearly myself.
 You cannot imagine through what a crisis I have just passed—a
 veritable tempest of emotions, surrounded by darkness from out of which I
 have but just found my way.”
 

 He spoke at last.
 

 “Since it is your wish, I will ask you nothing. Besides, it is sufficient
 for you to answer one question. You do not love me, Clotilde?”
 

 She did not hesitate, but said gravely, with an emotion which softened the
 frankness of her answer:
 

 “It is true, I do not love you; I have only a very sincere affection for
 you.”
 

 He rose, and stopped by a gesture the kind words which she would have
 added.
 

 “It is ended; let us never speak of it again. I wished you to be happy. Do
 not grieve for me. At this moment I feel as if the house had just fallen
 about me in ruins. But I must only extricate myself as best I can.”
 

 A wave of color passed over his pale face, he gasped for air, he crossed
 over to the window, then he walked back with a heavy step, seeking to
 recover his self-possession. He drew a long breath. In the painful silence
 which had fallen they heard Pascal coming upstairs noisily, to announce
 his return.
 

 “I entreat you,” murmured Clotilde hurriedly, “to say nothing to master.
 He does not know my decision, and I wish to break it to him myself, for he
 was bent upon this marriage.”
 

 Pascal stood still in the doorway. He was trembling and breathless, as if
 he had come upstairs too quickly. He still found strength to smile at
 them, saying:
 

 “Well, children, have you come to an understanding?”
 

 “Yes, undoubtedly,” responded Ramond, as agitated as himself.
 

 “Then it is all settled?”
 

 “Quite,” said Clotilde, who had been seized by a faintness.
 

 Pascal walked over to his work-table, supporting himself by the furniture,
 and dropped into the chair beside it.
 

 “Ah, ah! you see the legs are not so strong after all. It is this old
 carcass of a body. But the heart is strong. And I am very happy, my
 children, your happiness will make me well again.”
 

 But when Ramond, after a few minutes’ further conversation, had gone away,
 he seemed troubled at finding himself alone with the young girl, and he
 again asked her:
 

 “It is settled, quite settled; you swear it to me?”
 

 “Entirely settled.”
 

 After this he did not speak again. He nodded his head, as if to repeat
 that he was delighted; that nothing could be better; that at last they
 were all going to live in peace. He closed his eyes, feigning to drop
 asleep, as he sometimes did in the afternoon. But his heart beat
 violently, and his closely shut eyelids held back the tears.
 

 That evening, at about ten o’clock, when Clotilde went downstairs for a
 moment to give an order to Martine before she should have gone to bed,
 Pascal profited by the opportunity of being left alone, to go and lay the
 little box containing the lace corsage on the young girl’s bed. She came
 upstairs again, wished him the accustomed good-night, and he had been for
 at least twenty minutes in his own room, and was already in his shirt
 sleeves, when a burst of gaiety sounded outside his door. A little hand
 tapped, and a fresh voice cried, laughing:
 

 “Come, come and look!”
 

 He opened the door, unable to resist this appeal of youth, conquered by
 his joy.
 

 “Oh, come, come and see what a beautiful little bird has put on my bed!”
 

 And she drew him to her room, taking no refusal. She had lighted the two
 candles in it, and the antique, pleasant chamber, with its hangings of
 faded rose color, seemed transformed into a chapel; and on the bed, like a
 sacred cloth offered to the adoration of the faithful, she had spread the
 corsage of old point d’Alencon.
 

 “You would not believe it! Imagine, I did not see the box at first. I set
 things in order a little, as I do every evening. I undressed, and it was
 only when I was getting into bed that I noticed your present. Ah, what a
 surprise! I was overwhelmed by it! I felt that I could never wait for the
 morning, and I put on a skirt and ran to look for you.”
 

 It was not until then that he perceived that she was only half dressed, as
 on the night of the storm, when he had surprised her stealing his papers.
 And she seemed divine, with her tall, girlish form, her tapering limbs,
 her supple arms, her slender body, with its small, firm throat.
 

 She took his hands and pressed them caressingly in her little ones.
 

 “How good you are; how I thank you! Such a marvel of beauty, so lovely a
 present for me, who am nobody! And you remember that I had admired it,
 this antique relic of art. I said to you that only the Virgin of St.
 Saturnin was worthy of wearing it on her shoulders. I am so happy! oh, so
 happy! For it is true, I love beautiful things; I love them so
 passionately that at times I wish for impossibilities, gowns woven of
 sunbeams, impalpable veils made of the blue of heaven. How beautiful I am
 going to look! how beautiful I am going to look!”
 

 Radiant in her ecstatic gratitude, she drew close to him, still looking at
 the corsage, and compelling him to admire it with her. Then a sudden
 curiosity seized her.
 

 “But why did you make me this royal present?”
 

 Ever since she had come to seek him in her joyful excitement, Pascal had
 been walking in a dream. He was moved to tears by this affectionate
 gratitude; he stood there, not feeling the terror which he had dreaded,
 but seeming, on the contrary, to be filled with joy, as at the approach of
 a great and miraculous happiness. This chamber, which he never entered,
 had the religious sweetness of holy places that satisfy all longings for
 the unattainable.
 

 His countenance, however, expressed surprise. And he answered:
 

 “Why, this present, my dear, is for your wedding gown.”
 

 She, in her turn, looked for a moment surprised as if she had not
 understood him. Then, with the sweet and singular smile which she had worn
 of late she said gayly:
 

 “Ah, true, my marriage!”
 

 Then she grew serious again, and said:
 

 “Then you want to get rid of me? It was in order to have me here no longer
 that you were so bent upon marrying me. Do you still think me your enemy,
 then?”
 

 He felt his tortures return, and he looked away from her, wishing to
 retain his courage.
 

 “My enemy, yes. Are you not so? We have suffered so much through each
 other these last days. It is better in truth that we should separate. And
 then I do not know what your thoughts are; you have never given me the
 answer I have been waiting for.”
 

 She tried in vain to catch his glance, which he still kept turned away.
 She began to talk of the terrible night on which they had gone together
 through the papers. It was true, in the shock which her whole being had
 suffered, she had not yet told him whether she was with him or against
 him. He had a right to demand an answer.
 

 She again took his hands in hers, and forced him to look at her.
 

 “And it is because I am your enemy that you are sending me away? I am not
 your enemy. I am your servant, your chattel, your property. Do you hear? I
 am with you and for you, for you alone!”
 

 His face grew radiant; an intense joy shone within his eyes.
 

 “Yes, I will wear this lace. It is for my wedding day, for I wish to be
 beautiful, very beautiful for you. But do you not understand me, then? You
 are my master; it is you I love.”
 

 “No, no! be silent; you will make me mad! You are betrothed to another.
 You have given your word. All this madness is happily impossible.”
 

 “The other! I have compared him with you, and I have chosen you. I have
 dismissed him. He has gone away, and he will never return. There are only
 we two now, and it is you I love, and you love me. I know it, and I give
 myself to you.”
 

 He trembled violently. He had ceased to struggle, vanquished by the
 longing of eternal love.
 

 The spacious chamber, with its antique furniture, warmed by youth, was as
 if filled with light. There was no longer either fear or suffering; they
 were free. She gave herself to him knowingly, willingly, and he accepted
 the supreme gift like a priceless treasure which the strength of his love
 had won. Suddenly she murmured in his ear, in a caressing voice, lingering
 tenderly on the words:
 

 “Master, oh, master, master!”
 

 And this word, which she used formerly as a matter of habit, at this hour
 acquired a profound significance, lengthening out and prolonging itself,
 as if it expressed the gift of her whole being. She uttered it with
 grateful fervor, like a woman who accepts, and who surrenders herself. Was
 not the mystic vanquished, the real acknowledged, life glorified with love
 at last confessed and shared.
 

 “Master, master, this comes from far back. I must tell you; I must make my
 confession. It is true that I went to church in order to be happy. But I
 could not believe. I wished to understand too much; my reason rebelled
 against their dogmas; their paradise appeared to me an incredible
 puerility. But I believed that the world does not stop at sensation; that
 there is a whole unknown world, which must be taken into account; and
 this, master, I believe still. It is the idea of the Beyond, which not
 even happiness, found at last upon your neck, will efface. But this
 longing for happiness, this longing to be happy at once, to have some
 certainty—how I have suffered from it. If I went to church, it was
 because I missed something, and I went there to seek it. My anguish
 consisted in this irresistible need to satisfy my longing. You remember
 what you used to call my eternal thirst for illusion and falsehood. One
 night, in the threshing yard, under the great starry sky, do you remember?
 I burst out against your science, I was indignant because of the ruins
 with which it strews the earth, I turned my eyes away from the dreadful
 wounds which it exposes. And I wished, master, to take you to a solitude
 where we might both live in God, far from the world, forgotten by it. Ah,
 what torture, to long, to struggle, and not to be satisfied!”
 

 Softly, without speaking, he kissed her on both eyes.
 

 “Then, master, do you remember again, there was the great moral shock on
 the night of the storm, when you gave me that terrible lesson of life,
 emptying out your envelopes before me. You had said to me already: ‘Know
 life, love it, live it as it ought to be lived.’ But what a vast, what a
 frightful flood, rolling ever onward toward a human sea, swelling it
 unceasingly for the unknown future! And, master, the silent work within me
 began then. There was born, in my heart and in my flesh, the bitter
 strength of the real. At first I was as if crushed, the blow was so rude.
 I could not recover myself. I kept silent, because I did not know clearly
 what to say. Then, gradually, the evolution was effected. I still had
 struggles, I still rebelled against confessing my defeat. But every day
 after this the truth grew clearer within me, I knew well that you were my
 master, and that there was no happiness for me outside of you, of your
 science and your goodness. You were life itself, broad and tolerant life;
 saying all, accepting all, solely through the love of energy and effort,
 believing in the work of the world, placing the meaning of destiny in the
 labor which we all accomplish with love, in our desperate eagerness to
 live, to love, to live anew, to live always, in spite of all the
 abominations and miseries of life. Oh, to live, to live! This is the great
 task, the work that always goes on, and that will doubtless one day be
 completed!”
 

 Silent still, he smiled radiantly, and kissed her on the mouth.
 

 “And, master, though I have always loved you, even from my earliest youth,
 it was, I believe, on that terrible night that you marked me for, and made
 me your own. You remember how you crushed me in your grasp. It left a
 bruise, and a few drops of blood on my shoulder. Then your being entered,
 as it were into mine. We struggled; you were the stronger, and from that
 time I have felt the need of a support. At first I thought myself
 humiliated; then I saw that it was but an infinitely sweet submission. I
 always felt your power within me. A gesture of your hand in the distance
 thrilled me as though it had touched me. I would have wished that you had
 seized me again in your grasp, that you had crushed me in it, until my
 being had mingled with yours forever. And I was not blind; I knew well
 that your wish was the same as mine, that the violence which had made me
 yours had made you mine; that you struggled with yourself not to seize me
 and hold me as I passed by you. To nurse you when you were ill was some
 slight satisfaction. From that time, light began to break upon me, and I
 at last understood. I went no more to church, I began to be happy near
 you, you had become certainty and happiness. Do you remember that I cried
 to you, in the threshing yard, that something was wanting in our
 affection. There was a void in it which I longed to fill. What could be
 wanting to us unless it were God? And it was God—love, and life.”
 

 
 
 

 Then came a period of idyllic happiness. Clotilde was the spring, the
 tardy rejuvenation that came to Pascal in his declining years. She came,
 bringing to him, with her love, sunshine and flowers. Their rapture lifted
 them above the earth; and all this youth she bestowed on him after his
 thirty years of toil, when he was already weary and worn probing the
 frightful wounds of humanity. He revived in the light of her great shining
 eyes, in the fragrance of her pure breath. He had faith again in life, in
 health, in strength, in the eternal renewal of nature.
 

 On the morning after her avowal it was ten o’clock before Clotilde left
 her room. In the middle of the workroom she suddenly came upon Martine
 and, in her radiant happiness, with a burst of joy that carried everything
 before it, she rushed toward her, crying:
 

 “Martine, I am not going away! Master and I—we love each other.”
 

 The old servant staggered under the blow. Her poor worn face, nunlike
 under its white cap and with its look of renunciation, grew white in the
 keenness of her anguish. Without a word, she turned and fled for refuge to
 her kitchen, where, leaning her elbows on her chopping-table, and burying
 her face in her clasped hands, she burst into a passion of sobs.
 

 Clotilde, grieved and uneasy, followed her. And she tried to comprehend
 and to console her.
 

 “Come, come, how foolish you are! What possesses you? Master and I will
 love you all the same; we will always keep you with us. You are not going
 to be unhappy because we love each other. On the contrary, the house is
 going to be gay now from morning till night.”
 

 But Martine only sobbed all the more desperately.
 

 “Answer me, at least. Tell me why you are angry and why you cry. Does it
 not please you then to know that master is so happy, so happy! See, I will
 call master and he will make you answer.”
 

 At this threat the old servant suddenly rose and rushed into her own room,
 which opened out of the kitchen, slamming the door behind her. In vain the
 young girl called and knocked until she was tired; she could obtain no
 answer. At last Pascal, attracted by the noise, came downstairs, saying:
 

 “Why, what is the matter?”
 

 “Oh, it is that obstinate Martine! Only fancy, she began to cry when she
 knew that we loved each other. And she has barricaded herself in there,
 and she will not stir.”
 

 She did not stir, in fact. Pascal, in his turn, called and knocked. He
 scolded; he entreated. Then, one after the other, they began all over
 again. Still there was no answer. A deathlike silence reigned in the
 little room. And he pictured it to himself, this little room, religiously
 clean, with its walnut bureau, and its monastic bed furnished with white
 hangings. No doubt the servant had thrown herself across this bed, in
 which she had slept alone all her woman’s life, and was burying her face
 in the bolster to stifle her sobs.
 

 “Ah, so much the worse for her?” said Clotilde at last, in the egotism of
 her joy, “let her sulk!”
 

 Then throwing her arms around Pascal, and raising to his her charming
 face, still glowing with the ardor of self-surrender, she said:
 

 “Master, I will be your servant to-day.”
 

 He kissed her on the eyes with grateful emotion; and she at once set about
 preparing the breakfast, turning the kitchen upside down. She had put on
 an enormous white apron, and she looked charming, with her sleeves rolled
 up, showing her delicate arms, as if for some great undertaking. There
 chanced to be some cutlets in the kitchen which she cooked to a turn. She
 added some scrambled eggs, and she even succeeded in frying some potatoes.
 And they had a delicious breakfast, twenty times interrupted by her
 getting up in her eager zeal, to run for the bread, the water, a forgotten
 fork. If he had allowed her, she would have waited upon him on her knees.
 Ah! to be alone, to be only they two in this large friendly house, and to
 be free to laugh and to love each other in peace.
 

 They spent the whole afternoon in sweeping and putting things in order. He
 insisted upon helping her. It was a play; they amused themselves like two
 merry children. From time to time, however, they went back to knock at
 Martine’s door to remonstrate with her. Come, this was foolish, she was
 not going to let herself starve! Was there ever seen such a mule, when no
 one had said or done anything to her! But only the echo of their knocks
 came back mournfully from the silent room. Not the slightest sound, not a
 breath responded. Night fell, and they were obliged to make the dinner
 also, which they ate, sitting beside each other, from the same plate.
 Before going to bed, they made a last attempt, threatening to break open
 the door, but their ears, glued to the wood, could not catch the slightest
 sound. And on the following day, when they went downstairs and found the
 door still hermetically closed, they began to be seriously uneasy. For
 twenty-four hours the servant had given no sign of life.
 

 Then, on returning to the kitchen after a moment’s absence, Clotilde and
 Pascal were stupefied to see Martine sitting at her table, picking some
 sorrel for the breakfast. She had silently resumed her place as servant.
 

 “But what was the matter with you?” cried Clotilde. “Will you speak now?”
 

 She lifted up her sad face, stained by tears. It was very calm, however,
 and it expressed now only the resigned melancholy of old age. She looked
 at the young girl with an air of infinite reproach; then she bent her head
 again without speaking.
 

 “Are you angry with us, then?”
 

 And as she still remained silent, Pascal interposed:
 

 “Are you angry with us, my good Martine?”
 

 Then the old servant looked up at him with her former look of adoration,
 as if she loved him sufficiently to endure all and to remain in spite of
 all. At last she spoke.
 

 “No, I am angry with no one. The master is free. It is all right, if he is
 satisfied.”
 

 A new life began from this time. Clotilde, who in spite of her twenty-five
 years had still remained childlike, now, under the influence of love,
 suddenly bloomed into exquisite womanhood. Since her heart had awakened,
 the serious and intelligent boy that she had looked like, with her round
 head covered with its short curls, had given place to an adorable woman,
 altogether womanly, submissive and tender, loving to be loved. Her great
 charm, notwithstanding her learning picked up at random from her reading
 and her work, was her virginal naivete, as if her unconscious
 awaiting of love had made her reserve the gift of her whole being to be
 utterly absorbed in the man whom she should love. No doubt she had given
 her love as much through gratitude and admiration as through tenderness;
 happy to make him happy; experiencing a profound joy in being no longer
 only a little girl to be petted, but something of his very own which he
 adored, a precious possession, a thing of grace and joy, which he
 worshiped on bended knees. She still had the religious submissiveness of
 the former devotee, in the hands of a master mature and strong, from whom
 she derived consolation and support, retaining, above and beyond
 affection, the sacred awe of the believer in the spiritual which she still
 was. But more than all, this woman, so intoxicated with love, was a
 delightful personification of health and gaiety; eating with a hearty
 appetite; having something of the valor of her grandfather the soldier;
 filling the house with her swift and graceful movements, with the bloom of
 her satin skin, the slender grace of her neck, of all her young form,
 divinely fresh.
 

 And Pascal, too, had grown handsome again under the influence of love,
 with the serene beauty of a man who had retained his vigor,
 notwithstanding his white hairs. His countenance had no longer the
 sorrowful expression which it had worn during the months of grief and
 suffering through which he had lately passed; his eyes, youthful still,
 had recovered their brightness, his features their smiling grace; while
 his white hair and beard grew thicker, in a leonine abundance which lent
 him a youthful air. He had kept himself, in his solitary life as a
 passionate worker, so free from vice and dissipation that he found now
 within him a reserve of life and vigor eager to expend itself at last.
 There awoke within him new energy, a youthful impetuosity that broke forth
 in gestures and exclamations, in a continual need of expansion, of living.
 Everything wore a new and enchanting aspect to him; the smallest glimpse
 of sky moved him to wonder; the perfume of a simple flower threw him into
 an ecstasy; an everyday expression of affection, worn by use, touched him
 to tears, as if it had sprung fresh from the heart and had not been
 hackneyed by millions of lips. Clotilde’s “I love you,” was an infinite
 caress, whose celestial sweetness no human being had ever before known.
 And with health and beauty he recovered also his gaiety, that tranquil
 gaiety which had formerly been inspired by his love of life, and which now
 threw sunshine over his love, over everything that made life worth living.
 

 They two, blooming youth and vigorous maturity, so healthy, so gay, so
 happy, made a radiant couple. For a whole month they remained in
 seclusion, not once leaving La Souleiade. The place where both now liked
 to be was the spacious workroom, so intimately associated with their
 habits and their past affection. They would spend whole days there,
 scarcely working at all, however. The large carved oak press remained with
 closed doors; so, too, did the bookcases. Books and papers lay undisturbed
 upon the tables. Like a young married couple they were absorbed in their
 one passion, oblivious of their former occupations, oblivious of life. The
 hours seemed all too short to enjoy the charm of being together, often
 seated in the same large antique easy-chair, happy in the depths of this
 solitude in which they secluded themselves, in the tranquillity of this
 lofty room, in this domain which was altogether theirs, without luxury and
 without order, full of familiar objects, brightened from morning till
 night by the returning gaiety of the April sunshine. When, seized with
 remorse, he would talk about working, she would link her supple arms
 through his and laughingly hold him prisoner, so that he should not make
 himself ill again with overwork. And downstairs, they loved, too, the
 dining-room, so gay with its light panels relieved by blue bands, its
 antique mahogany furniture, its large flower pastels, its brass hanging
 lamp, always shining. They ate in it with a hearty appetite and they left
 it, after each meal, only to go upstairs again to their dear solitude.
 

 Then when the house seemed too small, they had the garden, all La
 Souleiade. Spring advanced with the advancing sun, and at the end of April
 the roses were beginning to bloom. And what a joy was this domain, walled
 around, where nothing from the outside world could trouble them! Hours
 flew by unnoted, as they sat on the terrace facing the vast horizon and
 the shady banks of the Viorne, and the slopes of Sainte-Marthe, from the
 rocky bars of the Seille to the valley of Plassans in the dusty distance.
 There was no shade on the terrace but that of the two secular cypresses
 planted at its two extremities, like two enormous green tapers, which
 could be seen three leagues away. At times they descended the slope for
 the pleasure of ascending the giant steps, and climbing the low walls of
 uncemented stones which supported the plantations, to see if the stunted
 olive trees and the puny almonds were budding. More often there were
 delightful walks under the delicate needles of the pine wood, steeped in
 sunshine and exhaling a strong odor of resin; endless walks along the wall
 of inclosure, from behind which the only sound they could hear was, at
 rare intervals, the grating noise of some cart jolting along the narrow
 road to Les Fenouilleres; and they spent delightful hours in the old
 threshing yard, where they could see the whole horizon, and where they
 loved to stretch themselves, tenderly remembering their former tears,
 when, loving each other unconsciously to themselves, they had quarreled
 under the stars. But their favorite retreat, where they always ended by
 losing themselves, was the quincunx of tall plane trees, whose branches,
 now of a tender green, looked like lacework. Below, the enormous box
 trees, the old borders of the French garden, of which now scarcely a trace
 remained, formed a sort of labyrinth of which they could never find the
 end. And the slender stream of the fountain, with its eternal crystalline
 murmur, seemed to sing within their hearts. They would sit hand in hand
 beside the mossy basin, while the twilight fell around them, their forms
 gradually fading into the shadow of the trees, while the water which they
 could no longer see, sang its flutelike song.
 

 Up to the middle of May Pascal and Clotilde secluded themselves in this
 way, without even crossing the threshold of their retreat. One morning he
 disappeared and returned an hour later, bringing her a pair of diamond
 earrings which he had hurried out to buy, remembering this was her
 birthday. She adored jewels, and the gift astonished and delighted her.
 From this time not a week passed in which he did not go out once or twice
 in this way to bring her back some present. The slightest excuse was
 sufficient for him—a fete, a wish, a simple pleasure. He
 brought her rings, bracelets, a necklace, a slender diadem. He would take
 out the other jewels and please himself by putting them all upon her in
 the midst of their laughter. She was like an idol, seated on her chair,
 covered with gold,—a band of gold on her hair, gold on her bare arms
 and on her bare throat, all shining with gold and precious stones. Her
 woman’s vanity was delightfully gratified by this. She allowed herself to
 be adored thus, to be adored on bended knees, like a divinity, knowing
 well that this was only an exalted form of love. She began at last to
 scold a little, however; to make prudent remonstrances; for, in truth, it
 was an absurdity to bring her all these gifts which she must afterward
 shut up in a drawer, without ever wearing them, as she went nowhere.
 

 They were forgotten after the hour of joy and gratitude which they gave
 her in their novelty was over. But he would not listen to her, carried
 away by a veritable mania for giving; unable, from the moment the idea of
 giving her an article took possession of him, to resist the desire of
 buying it. It was a munificence of the heart; an imperious desire to prove
 to her that he thought of her always; a pride in seeing her the most
 magnificent, the happiest, the most envied of women; a generosity more
 profound even, which impelled him to despoil himself of everything, of his
 money, of his life. And then, what a delight, when he saw he had given her
 a real pleasure, and she threw herself on his neck, blushing, thanking him
 with kisses. After the jewels, it was gowns, articles of dress, toilet
 articles. Her room was littered, the drawers were filled to overflowing.
 

 One morning she could not help getting angry. He had brought her another
 ring.
 

 “Why, I never wear them! And if I did, my fingers would be covered to the
 tips. Be reasonable, I beg of you.”
 

 “Then I have not given you pleasure?” he said with confusion.
 

 She threw her arms about his neck, and assured him with tears in her eyes
 that she was very happy. He was so good to her! He was so unwearied in his
 devotion to her! And when, later in the morning, he ventured to speak of
 making some changes in her room, of covering the walls with tapestry, of
 putting down a carpet, she again remonstrated.
 

 “Oh! no, no! I beg of you. Do not touch my old room, so full of memories,
 where I have grown up, where I told you I loved you. I should no longer
 feel myself at home in it.”
 

 Downstairs, Martine’s obstinate silence condemned still more strongly
 these excessive and useless expenses. She had adopted a less familiar
 attitude, as if, in the new situation, she had fallen from her role of
 housekeeper and friend to her former station of servant. Toward Clotilde,
 especially, she changed, treating her like a young lady, like a mistress
 to whom she was less affectionate but more obedient than formerly. Two or
 three times, however, she had appeared in the morning with her face
 discolored and her eyes sunken with weeping, answering evasively when
 questioned, saying that nothing was the matter, that she had taken cold.
 And she never made any remark about the gifts with which the drawers were
 filled. She did not even seem to see them, arranging them without a word
 either of praise or dispraise. But her whole nature rebelled against this
 extravagant generosity, of which she could never have conceived the
 possibility. She protested in her own fashion; exaggerating her economy
 and reducing still further the expenses of the housekeeping, which she now
 conducted on so narrow a scale that she retrenched even in the smallest
 expenses. For instance, she took only two-thirds of the milk which she had
 been in the habit of taking, and she served sweet dishes only on Sundays.
 Pascal and Clotilde, without venturing to complain, laughed between
 themselves at this parsimony, repeating the jests which had amused them
 for ten years past, saying that after dressing the vegetables she strained
 them in the colander, in order to save the butter for future use.
 

 But this quarter she insisted upon rendering an account. She was in the
 habit of going every three months to Master Grandguillot, the notary, to
 receive the fifteen hundred francs income, of which she disposed afterward
 according to her judgment, entering the expenses in a book which the
 doctor had years ago ceased to verify. She brought it to him now and
 insisted upon his looking over it. He excused himself, saying that it was
 all right.
 

 “The thing is, monsieur,” she said, “that this time I have been able to
 put some money aside. Yes, three hundred francs. Here they are.”
 

 He looked at her in amazement. Generally she just made both ends meet. By
 what miracle of stinginess had she been able to save such a sum?
 

 “Ah! my poor Martine,” he said at last, laughing, “that is the reason,
 then, that we have been eating so many potatoes of late. You are a pearl
 of economy, but indeed you must treat us a little better in the future.”
 

 This discreet reproach wounded her so profoundly that she allowed herself
 at last to say:
 

 “Well, monsieur, when there is so much extravagance on the one hand, it is
 well to be prudent on the other.”
 

 He understood the allusion, but instead of being angry, he was amused by
 the lesson.
 

 “Ah, ah! it is you who are examining my accounts! But you know very well,
 Martine, that I, too, have my savings laid by.”
 

 He alluded to the money which he still received occasionally from his
 patients, and which he threw into a drawer of his writing-desk. For more
 than sixteen years past he had put into this drawer every year about four
 thousand francs, which would have amounted to a little fortune if he had
 not taken from it, from day to day, without counting them, considerable
 sums for his experiments and his whims. All the money for the presents
 came out of this drawer, which he now opened continually. He thought that
 it would never be empty; he had been so accustomed to take from it
 whatever he required that it had never occurred to him to fear that he
 would ever come to the bottom of it.
 

 “One may very well have a little enjoyment out of one’s savings,” he said
 gayly. “Since it is you who go to the notary’s, Martine, you are not
 ignorant that I have my income apart.”
 

 Then she said, with the colorless voice of the miser who is haunted by the
 dread of an impending disaster:
 

 “And what would you do if you hadn’t it?”
 

 Pascal looked at her in astonishment, and contented himself with answering
 with a shrug, for the possibility of such a misfortune had never even
 entered his mind. He fancied that avarice was turning her brain, and he
 laughed over the incident that evening with Clotilde.
 

 In Plassans, too, the presents were the cause of endless gossip. The rumor
 of what was going on at La Souleiade, this strange and sudden passion, had
 spread, no one could tell how, by that force of expansion which sustains
 curiosity, always on the alert in small towns. The servant certainly had
 not spoken, but her air was perhaps sufficient; words perhaps had dropped
 from her involuntarily; the lovers might have been watched over the walls.
 And then came the buying of the presents, confirming the reports and
 exaggerating them. When the doctor, in the early morning, scoured the
 streets and visited the jeweler’s and the dressmaker’s, eyes spied him
 from the windows, his smallest purchases were watched, all the town knew
 in the evening that he had given her a silk bonnet, a bracelet set with
 sapphires. And all this was turned into a scandal. This uncle in love with
 his niece, committing a young man’s follies for her, adorning her like a
 holy Virgin. The most extraordinary stories began to circulate, and people
 pointed to La Souleiade as they passed by.
 

 But old Mme. Rougon was, of all persons, the most bitterly indignant. She
 had ceased going to her son’s house when she learned that Clotilde’s
 marriage with Dr. Ramond had been broken off. They had made sport of her.
 They did nothing to please her, and she wished to show how deep her
 displeasure was. Then a full month after the rupture, during which she had
 understood nothing of the pitying looks, the discreet condolences, the
 vague smiles which met her everywhere, she learned everything with a
 suddenness that stunned her. She, who, at the time of Pascal’s illness, in
 her mortification at the idea of again becoming the talk of the town
 through that ugly story, had raised such a storm! It was far worse this
 time; the height of scandal, a love affair for people to regale themselves
 with. The Rougon legend was again in peril; her unhappy son was decidedly
 doing his best to find some way to destroy the family glory won with so
 much difficulty. So that in her anger she, who had made herself the
 guardian of this glory, resolving to purify the legend by every means in
 her power, put on her hat one morning and hurried to La Souleiade with the
 youthful vivacity of her eighty years.
 

 Pascal, whom the rupture with his mother enchanted, was fortunately not at
 home, having gone out an hour before to look for a silver buckle which he
 had thought of for a belt. And Felicite fell upon Clotilde as the latter
 was finishing her toilet, her arms bare, her hair loose, looking as fresh
 and smiling as a rose.
 

 The first shock was rude. The old lady unburdened her mind, grew
 indignant, spoke of the scandal they were giving. Suddenly her anger
 vanished. She looked at the young girl, and she thought her adorable. In
 her heart she was not surprised at what was going on. She laughed at it,
 all she desired was that it should end in a correct fashion, so as to
 silence evil tongues. And she cried with a conciliating air:
 

 “Get married then! Why do you not get married?”
 

 Clotilde remained silent for a moment, surprised. She had not thought of
 marriage. Then she smiled again.
 

 “No doubt we will get married, grandmother. But later on, there is no
 hurry.”
 

 Old Mme. Rougon went away, obliged to be satisfied with this vague
 promise.
 

 It was at this time that Pascal and Clotilde ceased to seclude themselves.
 Not through any spirit of bravado, not because they wished to answer ugly
 rumors by making a display of their happiness, but as a natural
 amplification of their joy; their love had slowly acquired the need of
 expansion and of space, at first beyond the house, then beyond the garden,
 into the town, as far as the whole vast horizon. It filled everything; it
 took in the whole world.
 

 The doctor then tranquilly resumed his visits, and he took the young girl
 with him. They walked together along the promenades, along the streets,
 she on his arm, in a light gown, with flowers in her hat, he buttoned up
 in his coat with his broad-brimmed hat. He was all white; she all blond.
 They walked with their heads high, erect and smiling, radiating such
 happiness that they seemed to walk in a halo. At first the excitement was
 extraordinary. The shopkeepers came and stood at their doors, the women
 leaned out of the windows, the passers-by stopped to look after them.
 People whispered and laughed and pointed to them. Then they were so
 handsome; he superb and triumphant, she so youthful, so submissive, and so
 proud, that an involuntary indulgence gradually gained on every one.
 People could not help defending them and loving them, and they ended by
 smiling on them in a delightful contagion of tenderness. A charm emanated
 from them which brought back all hearts to them. The new town, with its bourgeois
 population of functionaries and townspeople who had grown wealthy, was the
 last conquest. But the Quartier St. Marc, in spite of its austerity,
 showed itself at once kind and discreetly tolerant when they walked along
 its deserted grass-worn sidewalks, beside the antique houses, now closed
 and silent, which exhaled the evaporated perfume of the loves of other
 days. But it was the old quarter, more especially, that promptly received
 them with cordiality, this quarter of which the common people,
 instinctively touched, felt the grace of the legend, the profound myth of
 the couple, the beautiful young girl supporting the royal and rejuvenated
 master. The doctor was adored here for his goodness, and his companion
 quickly became popular, and was greeted with tokens of admiration and
 approval as soon as she appeared. They, meantime, if they had seemed
 ignorant of the former hostility, now divined easily the forgiveness and
 the indulgent tenderness which surrounded them, and this made them more
 beautiful; their happiness charmed the entire town.
 

 One afternoon, as Pascal and Clotilde turned the corner of the Rue de la
 Banne, they perceived Dr. Ramond on the opposite side of the street. It
 had chanced that they had learned the day before that he had asked and had
 obtained the hand of Mlle. Leveque, the advocate’s daughter. It was
 certainly the most sensible course he could have taken, for his business
 interests made it advisable that he should marry, and the young girl, who
 was very pretty and very rich, loved him. He, too, would certainly love
 her in time. Therefore Clotilde joyfully smiled her congratulations to him
 as a sincere friend. Pascal saluted him with an affectionate gesture. For
 a moment Ramond, a little moved by the meeting, stood perplexed. His first
 impulse seemed to have been to cross over to them. But a feeling of
 delicacy must have prevented him, the thought that it would be brutal to
 interrupt their dream, to break in upon this solitude a deux, in
 which they moved, even amid the elbowings of the street. And he contented
 himself with a friendly salutation, a smile in which he forgave them their
 happiness. This was very pleasant for all three.
 

 At this time Clotilde amused herself for several days by painting a large
 pastel representing the tender scene of old King David and Abishag, the
 young Shunammite. It was a dream picture, one of those fantastic
 compositions into which her other self, her romantic self, put her love of
 the mysterious. Against a background of flowers thrown on the canvas,
 flowers that looked like a shower of stars, of barbaric richness, the old
 king stood facing the spectator, his hand resting on the bare shoulder of
 Abishag. He was attired sumptuously in a robe heavy with precious stones,
 that fell in straight folds, and he wore the royal fillet on his snowy
 locks. But she was more sumptuous still, with only the lilylike satin of
 her skin, her tall, slender figure, her round, slender throat, her supple
 arms, divinely graceful. He reigned over, he leaned, as a powerful and
 beloved master, on this subject, chosen from among all others, so proud of
 having been chosen, so rejoiced to give to her king the rejuvenating gift
 of her youth. All her pure and triumphant beauty expressed the serenity of
 her submission, the tranquillity with which she gave herself, before the
 assembled people, in the full light of day. And he was very great and she
 was very fair, and there radiated from both a starry radiance.
 

 Up to the last moment Clotilde had left the faces of the two figures
 vaguely outlined in a sort of mist. Pascal, standing behind her, jested
 with her to hide his emotion, for he fancied he divined her intention. And
 it was as he thought; she finished the faces with a few strokes of the
 crayon—old King David was he, and she was Abishag, the Shunammite.
 But they were enveloped in a dreamlike brightness, it was themselves
 deified; the one with hair all white, the other with hair all blond,
 covering them like an imperial mantle, with features lengthened by
 ecstasy, exalted to the bliss of angels, with the glance and the smile of
 immortal youth.
 

 “Ah, dear!” he cried, “you have made us too beautiful; you have wandered
 off again to dreamland—yes, as in the days, do you remember, when I
 used to scold you for putting there all the fantastic flowers of the
 Unknown?”
 

 And he pointed to the walls, on which bloomed the fantastic parterre
 of the old pastels, flowers not of the earth, grown in the soil of
 paradise.
 

 But she protested gayly.
 

 “Too beautiful? We could not be too beautiful! I assure you it is thus
 that I picture us to myself, thus that I see us; and thus it is that we
 are. There! see if it is not the pure reality.”
 

 She took the old fifteenth century Bible which was beside her, and showed
 him the simple wood engraving.
 

 “You see it is exactly the same.”
 

 He smiled gently at this tranquil and extraordinary affirmation.
 

 “Oh, you laugh, you look only at the details of the picture. It is the
 spirit which it is necessary to penetrate. And look at the other
 engravings, it is the same theme in all—Abraham and Hagar, Ruth and
 Boaz. And you see they are all handsome and happy.”
 

 Then they ceased to laugh, leaning over the old Bible whose pages she
 turned with her white fingers, he standing behind her, his white beard
 mingling with her blond, youthful tresses.
 

 Suddenly he whispered to her softly:
 

 “But you, so young, do you never regret that you have chosen me—me,
 who am so old, as old as the world?”
 

 She gave a start of surprise, and turning round looked at him.
 

 “You old! No, you are young, younger than I!”
 

 And she laughed so joyously that he, too, could not help smiling. But he
 insisted a little tremulously:
 

 “You do not answer me. Do you not sometimes desire a younger lover, you
 who are so youthful?”
 

 She put up her lips and kissed him, saying in a low voice:
 

 “I have but one desire, to be loved—loved as you love me, above and
 beyond everything.”
 

 The day on which Martine saw the pastel nailed to the wall, she looked at
 it a moment in silence, then she made the sign of the cross, but whether
 it was because she had seen God or the devil, no one could say. A few days
 before Easter she had asked Clotilde if she would not accompany her to
 church, and the latter having made a sign in the negative, she departed
 for an instant from the deferential silence which she now habitually
 maintained. Of all the new things which astonished her in the house, what
 most astonished her was the sudden irreligiousness of her young mistress.
 So she allowed herself to resume her former tone of remonstrance, and to
 scold her as she used to do when she was a little girl and refused to say
 her prayers. “Had she no longer the fear of the Lord before her, then? Did
 she no longer tremble at the idea of going to hell, to burn there
 forever?”
 

 Clotilde could not suppress a smile.
 

 “Oh, hell! you know that it has never troubled me a great deal. But you
 are mistaken if you think I am no longer religious. If I have left off
 going to church it is because I perform my devotions elsewhere, that is
 all.”
 

 Martine looked at her, open-mouthed, not comprehending her. It was all
 over; mademoiselle was indeed lost. And she never again asked her to
 accompany her to St. Saturnin. But her own devotion increased until it at
 last became a mania. She was no longer to be met, as before, with the
 eternal stocking in her hand which she knitted even when walking, when not
 occupied in her household duties. Whenever she had a moment to spare, she
 ran to church and remained there, repeating endless prayers. One day when
 old Mme. Rougon, always on the alert, found her behind a pillar, an hour
 after she had seen her there before, Martine excused herself, blushing
 like a servant who had been caught idling, saying:
 

 “I was praying for monsieur.”
 

 Meanwhile Pascal and Clotilde enlarged still more their domain, taking
 longer and longer walks every day, extending them now outside the town
 into the open country. One afternoon, as they were going to La Seguiranne,
 they were deeply moved, passing by the melancholy fields where the
 enchanted gardens of Le Paradou had formerly extended. The vision of
 Albine rose before them. Pascal saw her again blooming like the spring, in
 the rejuvenation which this living flower had brought him too, feeling the
 pressure of this pure arm against his heart. Never could he have believed,
 he who had already thought himself very old when he used to enter this
 garden to give a smile to the little fairy within, that she would have
 been dead for years when life, the good mother, should bestow upon him the
 gift of so fresh a spring, sweetening his declining years. And Clotilde,
 having felt the vision rise before them, lifted up her face to his in a
 renewed longing for tenderness. She was Albine, the eternal lover. He
 kissed her on the lips, and though no word had been uttered, the level
 fields sown with corn and oats, where Le Paradou had once rolled its
 billows of luxuriant verdure, thrilled in sympathy.
 

 Pascal and Clotilde were now walking along the dusty road, through the
 bare and arid country. They loved this sun-scorched land, these fields
 thinly planted with puny almond trees and dwarf olives, these stretches of
 bare hills dotted with country houses, that showed on them like pale
 patches accentuated by the dark bars of the secular cypresses. It was like
 an antique landscape, one of those classic landscapes represented in the
 paintings of the old schools, with harsh coloring and well balanced and
 majestic lines. All the ardent sunshine of successive summers that had
 parched this land flowed through their veins, and lent them a new beauty
 and animation, as they walked under the sky forever blue, glowing with the
 clear flame of eternal love. She, protected from the sun by her straw hat,
 bloomed and luxuriated in this bath of light like a tropical flower, while
 he, in his renewed youth, felt the burning sap of the soil ascend into his
 veins in a flood of virile joy.
 

 This walk to La Seguiranne had been an idea of the doctor’s, who had
 learned through Aunt Dieudonne of the approaching marriage of Sophie to a
 young miller of the neighborhood; and he desired to see if every one was
 well and happy in this retired corner. All at once they were refreshed by
 a delightful coolness as they entered the avenue of tall green oaks. On
 either side the springs, the mothers of these giant shade trees, flowed on
 in their eternal course. And when they reached the house of the shrew they
 came, as chance would have it, upon the two lovers, Sophie and her miller,
 kissing each other beside the well; for the girl’s aunt had just gone down
 to the lavatory behind the willows of the Viorne. Confused, the couple
 stood in blushing silence. But the doctor and his companion laughed
 indulgently, and the lovers, reassured, told them that the marriage was
 set for St. John’s Day, which was a long way off, to be sure, but which
 would come all the same. Sophie, saved from the hereditary malady, had
 improved in health and beauty, and was growing as strong as one of the
 trees that stood with their feet in the moist grass beside the springs,
 and their heads bare to the sunshine. Ah, the vast, glowing sky, what life
 it breathed into all created things! She had but one grief, and tears came
 to her eyes when she spoke of her brother Valentin, who perhaps would not
 live through the week. She had had news of him the day before; he was past
 hope. And the doctor was obliged to prevaricate a little to console her,
 for he himself expected hourly the inevitable termination. When he and his
 companion left La Seguiranne they returned slowly to Plassans, touched by
 this happy, healthy love saddened by the chill of death.
 

 In the old quarter a woman whom Pascal was attending informed him that
 Valentin had just died. Two of the neighbors were obliged to take away La
 Guiraude, who, half-crazed, clung, shrieking, to her son’s body. The
 doctor entered the house, leaving Clotilde outside. At last, they again
 took their way to La Souleiade in silence. Since Pascal had resumed his
 visits he seemed to make them only through professional duty; he no longer
 became enthusiastic about the miracles wrought by his treatment. But as
 far as Valentin’s death was concerned, he was surprised that it had not
 occurred before; he was convinced that he had prolonged the patient’s life
 for at least a year. In spite of the extraordinary results which he had
 obtained at first, he knew well that death was the inevitable end. That he
 had held it in check for months ought then to have consoled him and
 soothed his remorse, still unassuaged, for having involuntarily caused the
 death of Lafouasse, a few weeks sooner than it would otherwise have
 occurred. But this did not seem to be the case, and his brow was knitted
 in a frown as they returned to their beloved solitude. But there a new
 emotion awaited him; sitting under the plane trees, whither Martine had
 sent him, he saw Sarteur, the hatter, the inmate of the Tulettes whom he
 had been so long treating by his hypodermic injections, and the experiment
 so zealously continued seemed to have succeeded. The injections of nerve
 substance had evidently given strength to his will, since the madman was
 here, having left the asylum that morning, declaring that he no longer had
 any attacks, that he was entirely cured of the homicidal mania that
 impelled him to throw himself upon any passer-by to strangle him. The
 doctor looked at him as he spoke. He was a small dark man, with a
 retreating forehead and aquiline features, with one cheek perceptibly
 larger than the other. He was perfectly quiet and rational, and filled
 with so lively a gratitude that he kissed his saviour’s hands. The doctor
 could not help being greatly affected by all this, and he dismissed the
 man kindly, advising him to return to his life of labor, which was the
 best hygiene, physical and moral. Then he recovered his calmness and sat
 down to table, talking gaily of other matters.
 

 Clotilde looked at him with astonishment and even with a little
 indignation.
 

 “What is the matter, master?” she said. “You are no longer satisfied with
 yourself.”
 

 “Oh, with myself I am never satisfied!” he answered jestingly. “And with
 medicine, you know—it is according to the day.”
 

 It was on this night that they had their first quarrel. She was angry with
 him because he no longer had any pride in his profession. She returned to
 her complaint of the afternoon, reproaching him for not taking more credit
 to himself for the cure of Sarteur, and even for the prolongation of
 Valentin’s life. It was she who now had a passion for his fame. She
 reminded him of his cures; had he not cured himself? Could he deny the
 efficacy of his treatment? A thrill ran through him as he recalled the
 great dream which he had once cherished—to combat debility, the sole
 cause of disease; to cure suffering humanity; to make a higher, and
 healthy humanity; to hasten the coming of happiness, the future kingdom of
 perfection and felicity, by intervening and giving health to all! And he
 possessed the liquor of life, the universal panacea which opened up this
 immense hope!
 

 Pascal was silent for a moment. Then he murmured:
 

 “It is true. I cured myself, I have cured others, and I still think that
 my injections are efficacious in many cases. I do not deny medicine.
 Remorse for a deplorable accident, like that of Lafouasse, does not render
 me unjust. Besides, work has been my passion, it is in work that I have up
 to this time spent my energies; it was in wishing to prove to myself the
 possibility of making decrepit humanity one day strong and intelligent
 that I came near dying lately. Yes, a dream, a beautiful dream!”
 

 “No, no! a reality, the reality of your genius, master.”
 

 Then, lowering his voice almost to a whisper, he breathed this confession:
 

 “Listen, I am going to say to you what I would say to no one else in the
 world, what I would not say to myself aloud. To correct nature, to
 interfere, in order to modify it and thwart it in its purpose, is this a
 laudable task? To cure the individual, to retard his death, for his
 personal pleasure, to prolong his existence, doubtless to the injury of
 the species, is not this to defeat the aims of nature? And have we the
 right to desire a stronger, a healthier humanity, modeled after our idea
 of health and strength? What have we to do in the matter? Why should we
 interfere in this work of life, neither the means nor the end of which are
 known to us? Perhaps everything is as it ought to be. Perhaps we should
 risk killing love, genius, life itself. Remember, I make the confession to
 you alone; but doubt has taken possession of me, I tremble at the thought
 of my twentieth century alchemy. I have come to believe that it is greater
 and wiser to allow evolution to take its course.”
 

 He paused; then he added so softly that she could scarcely hear him:
 

 “Do you know that instead of nerve-substance I often use only water with
 my patients. You no longer hear me grinding for days at a time. I told you
 that I had some of the liquor in reserve. Water soothes them, this is no
 doubt simply a mechanical effect. Ah! to soothe, to prevent suffering—that
 indeed I still desire! It is perhaps my greatest weakness, but I cannot
 bear to see any one suffer. Suffering puts me beside myself, it seems a
 monstrous and useless cruelty of nature. I practise now only to prevent
 suffering.”
 

 “Then, master,” she asked, in the same indistinct murmur, “if you no
 longer desire to cure, do you still think everything must be told? For the
 frightful necessity of displaying the wounds of humanity had no other
 excuse than the hope of curing them.”
 

 “Yes, yes, it is necessary to know, in every case, and to conceal nothing;
 to tell everything regarding things and individuals. Happiness is no
 longer possible in ignorance; certainty alone makes life tranquil. When
 people know more they will doubtless accept everything. Do you not
 comprehend that to desire to cure everything, to regenerate everything is
 a false ambition inspired by our egotism, a revolt against life, which we
 declare to be bad, because we judge it from the point of view of
 self-interest? I know that I am more tranquil, that my intellect has
 broadened and deepened ever since I have held evolution in respect. It is
 my love of life which triumphs, even to the extent of not questioning its
 purpose, to the extent of confiding absolutely in it, of losing myself in
 it, without wishing to remake it according to my own conception of good
 and evil. Life alone is sovereign, life alone knows its aim and its end. I
 can only try to know it in order to live it as it should be lived. And
 this I have understood only since I have possessed your love. Before I
 possessed it I sought the truth elsewhere, I struggled with the fixed idea
 of saving the world. You have come, and life is full; the world is saved
 every hour by love, by the immense and incessant labor of all that live
 and love throughout space. Impeccable life, omnipotent life, immortal
 life!”
 

 They continued to talk together in low tones for some time longer,
 planning an idyllic life, a calm and healthful existence in the country.
 It was in this simple prescription of an invigorating environment that the
 experiments of the physician ended. He exclaimed against cities. People
 could be well and happy only in the country, in the sunshine, on the
 condition of renouncing money, ambition, even the proud excesses of
 intellectual labor. They should do nothing but live and love, cultivate
 the soil, and bring up their children.
 

 
 
 

 Dr. Pascal then resumed his professional visits in the town and the
 surrounding country. And he was generally accompanied by Clotilde, who
 went with him into the houses of the poor, where she, too, brought health
 and cheerfulness.
 

 But, as he had one night confessed to her in secret, his visits were now
 only visits of relief and consolation. If he had before practised with
 repugnance it was because he had felt how vain was medical science.
 Empiricism disheartened him. From the moment that medicine ceased to be an
 experimental science and became an art, he was filled with disquiet at the
 thought of the infinite variety of diseases and of their remedies,
 according to the constitution of the patient. Treatment changed with every
 new hypothesis; how many people, then, must the methods now abandoned have
 killed! The perspicacity of the physician became everything, the healer
 was only a happily endowed diviner, himself groping in the dark and
 effecting cures through his fortunate endowment. And this explained why he
 had given up his patients almost altogether, after a dozen years of
 practise, to devote himself entirely to study. Then, when his great labors
 on heredity had restored to him for a time the hope of intervening and
 curing disease by his hypodermic injections, he had become again
 enthusiastic, until the day when his faith in life, after having impelled
 him, to aid its action in this way, by restoring the vital forces, became
 still broader and gave him the higher conviction that life was
 self-sufficing, that it was the only giver of health and strength, in
 spite of everything. And he continued to visit, with his tranquil smile,
 only those of his patients who clamored for him loudly, and who found
 themselves miraculously relieved when he injected into them only pure
 water.
 

 Clotilde now sometimes allowed herself to jest about these hypodermic
 injections. She was still at heart, however, a fervent worshiper of his
 skill; and she said jestingly that if he performed miracles as he did it
 was because he had in himself the godlike power to do so. Then he would
 reply jestingly, attributing to her the efficacy of their common visits,
 saying that he cured no one now when she was absent, that it was she who
 brought the breath of life, the unknown and necessary force from the
 Beyond. So that the rich people, the bourgeois, whose houses she
 did not enter, continued to groan without his being able to relieve them.
 And this affectionate dispute diverted them; they set out each time as if
 for new discoveries, they exchanged glances of kindly intelligence with
 the sick. Ah, this wretched suffering which revolted them, and which was
 now all they went to combat; how happy they were when they thought it
 vanquished! They were divinely recompensed when they saw the cold sweats
 disappear, the moaning lips become stilled, the deathlike faces recover
 animation. It was assuredly the love which they brought to this humble,
 suffering humanity that produced the alleviation.
 

 “To die is nothing; that is in the natural order of things,” Pascal would
 often say. “But why suffer? It is cruel and unnecessary!”
 

 One afternoon the doctor was going with the young girl to the little
 village of Sainte-Marthe to see a patient, and at the station, for they
 were going by train, so as to spare Bonhomme, they had a reencounter. The
 train which they were waiting for was from the Tulettes. Sainte-Marthe was
 the first station in the opposite direction, going to Marseilles. When the
 train arrived, they hurried on board and, opening the door of a
 compartment which they thought empty, they saw old Mme. Rougon about to
 leave it. She did not speak to them, but passing them by, sprang down
 quickly in spite of her age, and walked away with a stiff and haughty air.
 

 “It is the 1st of July,” said Clotilde when the train had started.
 “Grandmother is returning from the Tulettes, after making her monthly
 visit to Aunt Dide. Did you see the glance she cast at me?”
 

 Pascal was at heart glad of the quarrel with his mother, which freed him
 from the continual annoyance of her visits.
 

 “Bah!” he said simply, “when people cannot agree it is better for them not
 to see each other.”
 

 But the young girl remained troubled and thoughtful. After a few moments
 she said in an undertone:
 

 “I thought her changed—looking paler. And did you notice? she who is
 usually so carefully dressed had only one glove on—a yellow glove,
 on the right hand. I don’t know why it was, but she made me feel sick at
 heart.”
 

 Pascal, who was also disturbed, made a vague gesture. His mother would no
 doubt grow old at last, like everybody else. But she was very active, very
 full of fire still. She was thinking, he said, of bequeathing her fortune
 to the town of Plassans, to build a house of refuge, which should bear the
 name of Rougon. Both had recovered their gaiety when he cried suddenly:
 

 “Why, it is to-morrow that you and I are to go to the Tulettes to see our
 patients. And you know that I promised to take Charles to Uncle
 Macquart’s.”
 

 Felicite was in fact returning from the Tulettes, where she went regularly
 on the first of every month to inquire after Aunt Dide. For many years
 past she had taken a keen interest in the madwoman’s health, amazed to see
 her lasting so long, and furious with her for persisting in living so far
 beyond the common term of life, until she had become a very prodigy of
 longevity. What a relief, the fine morning on which they should put under
 ground this troublesome witness of the past, this specter of expiation and
 of waiting, who brought living before her the abominations of the family!
 When so many others had been taken she, who was demented and who had only
 a spark of life left in her eyes, seemed forgotten. On this day she had
 found her as usual, skeleton-like, stiff and erect in her armchair. As the
 keeper said, there was now no reason why she should ever die. She was a
 hundred and five years old.
 

 When she left the asylum Felicite was furious. She thought of Uncle
 Macquart. Another who troubled her, who persisted in living with
 exasperating obstinacy! Although he was only eighty-four years old, three
 years older than herself, she thought him ridiculously aged, past the
 allotted term of life. And a man who led so dissipated a life, who had
 gone to bed dead drunk every night for the last sixty years! The good and
 the sober were taken away; he flourished in spite of everything, blooming
 with health and gaiety. In days past, just after he had settled at the
 Tulettes, she had made him presents of wines, liqueurs and brandy, in the
 unavowed hope of ridding the family of a fellow who was really
 disreputable, and from whom they had nothing to expect but annoyance and
 shame. But she had soon perceived that all this liquor served, on the
 contrary, to keep up his health and spirits and his sarcastic humor, and
 she had left off making him presents, seeing that he throve on what she
 had hoped would prove a poison to him. She had cherished a deadly hatred
 toward him since then. She would have killed him if she had dared, every
 time she saw him, standing firmly on his drunken legs, and laughing at her
 to her face, knowing well that she was watching for his death, and
 triumphant because he did not give her the pleasure of burying with him
 all the old dirty linen of the family, the blood and mud of the two
 conquests of Plassans.
 

 “You see, Felicite,” he would often say to her with his air of wicked
 mockery, “I am here to take care of the old mother, and the day on which
 we both make up our minds to die it would be through compliment to you—yes,
 simply to spare you the trouble of running to see us so good-naturedly, in
 this way, every month.”
 

 Generally she did not now give herself the disappointment of going to
 Macquart’s, but inquired for him at the asylum. But on this occasion,
 having learned there that he was passing through an extraordinary attack
 of drunkenness, not having drawn a sober breath for a fortnight, and so
 intoxicated that he was probably unable to leave the house, she was seized
 with the curiosity to learn for herself what his condition really was. And
 as she was going back to the station, she went out of her way in order to
 stop at Macquart’s house.
 

 The day was superb—a warm and brilliant summer day. On either side
 of the path which she had taken, she saw the fields that she had given him
 in former days—all this fertile land, the price of his secrecy and
 his good behavior. Before her appeared the house, with its pink tiles and
 its bright yellow walls, looking gay in the sunshine. Under the ancient
 mulberry trees on the terrace she enjoyed the delightful coolness and the
 beautiful view. What a pleasant and safe retreat, what a happy solitude
 was this for an old man to end in joy and peace a long and well-spent
 life!
 

 But she did not see him, she did not hear him. The silence was profound.
 The only sound to be heard was the humming of the bees circling around the
 tall marshmallows. And on the terrace there was nothing to be seen but a
 little yellow dog, stretched at full length on the bare ground, seeking
 the coolness of the shade. He raised his head growling, about to bark,
 but, recognizing the visitor, he lay down again quietly.
 

 Then, in this peaceful and sunny solitude she was seized with a strange
 chill, and she called:
 

 “Macquart! Macquart!”
 

 The door of the house under the mulberry trees stood wide open. But she
 did not dare to go in; this empty house with its wide open door gave her a
 vague uneasiness. And she called again:
 

 “Macquart! Macquart!”
 

 Not a sound, not a breath. Profound silence reigned again, but the humming
 of the bees circling around the tall marshmallows sounded louder than
 before.
 

 At last Felicite, ashamed of her fears, summoned courage to enter. The
 door on the left of the hall, opening into the kitchen, where Uncle
 Macquart generally sat, was closed. She pushed it open, but she could
 distinguish nothing at first, as the blinds had been closed, probably in
 order to shut out the heat. Her first sensation was one of choking, caused
 by an overpowering odor of alcohol which filled the room; every article of
 furniture seemed to exude this odor, the whole house was impregnated with
 it. At last, when her eyes had become accustomed to the semi-obscurity,
 she perceived Macquart. He was seated at the table, on which were a glass
 and a bottle of spirits of thirty-six degrees, completely empty. Settled
 in his chair, he was sleeping profoundly, dead drunk. This spectacle
 revived her anger and contempt.
 

 “Come, Macquart,” she cried, “is it not vile and senseless to put one’s
 self in such a state! Wake up, I say, this is shameful!”
 

 His sleep was so profound that she could not even hear him breathing. In
 vain she raised her voice, and slapped him smartly on the hands.
 

 “Macquart! Macquart! Macquart! Ah, faugh! You are disgusting, my dear!”
 

 Then she left him, troubling herself no further about him, and walked
 around the room, evidently seeking something. Coming down the dusky road
 from the asylum she had been seized with a consuming thirst, and she
 wished to get a glass of water. Her gloves embarrassed her, and she took
 them off and put them on a corner of the table. Then she succeeded in
 finding the jug, and she washed a glass and filled it to the brim, and was
 about to empty it when she saw an extraordinary sight—a sight which
 agitated her so greatly that she set the glass down again beside her
 gloves, without drinking.
 

 By degrees she had begun to see objects more clearly in the room, which
 was lighted dimly by a few stray sunbeams that filtered through the cracks
 of the old shutters. She now saw Uncle Macquart distinctly, neatly dressed
 in a blue cloth suit, as usual, and on his head the eternal fur cap which
 he wore from one year’s end to the other. He had grown stout during the
 last five or six years, and he looked like a veritable mountain of flesh
 overlaid with rolls of fat. And she noticed that he must have fallen
 asleep while smoking, for his pipe—a short black pipe—had
 fallen into his lap. Then she stood still, stupefied with amazement—the
 burning tobacco had been scattered in the fall, and the cloth of the
 trousers had caught fire, and through a hole in the stuff, as large
 already as a hundred-sous piece, she saw the bare thigh, whence issued a
 little blue flame.
 

 At first Felicite had thought that it was linen—the drawers or the
 shirt—that was burning. But soon doubt was no longer possible, she
 saw distinctly the bare flesh and the little blue flame issuing from it,
 lightly dancing, like a flame wandering over the surface of a vessel of
 lighted alcohol. It was as yet scarcely higher than the flame of a night
 light, pale and soft, and so unstable that the slightest breath of air
 caused it to change its place. But it increased and spread rapidly, and
 the skin cracked and the fat began to melt.
 

 An involuntary cry escaped from Felicite’s throat.
 

 “Macquart! Macquart!”
 

 But still he did not stir. His insensibility must have been complete;
 intoxication must have produced a sort of coma, in which there was an
 absolute paralysis of sensation, for he was living, his breast could be
 seen rising and falling, in slow and even respiration.
 

 “Macquart! Macquart!”
 

 Now the fat was running through the cracks of the skin, feeding the flame,
 which was invading the abdomen. And Felicite comprehended vaguely that
 Uncle Macquart was burning before her like a sponge soaked with brandy. He
 had, indeed, been saturated with it for years past, and of the strongest
 and most inflammable kind. He would no doubt soon be blazing from head to
 foot, like a bowl of punch.
 

 Then she ceased to try to awaken him, since he was sleeping so soundly.
 For a full minute she had the courage to look at him, awe-stricken, but
 gradually coming to a determination. Her hands, however, began to tremble,
 with a little shiver which she could not control. She was choking, and
 taking up the glass of water again with both hands, she emptied it at a
 draught. And she was going away on tiptoe, when she remembered her gloves.
 She went back, groped for them anxiously on the table and, as she thought,
 picked them both up. Then she left the room, closing the door behind her
 carefully, and as gently as if she were afraid of disturbing some one.
 

 When she found herself once more on the terrace, in the cheerful sunshine
 and the pure air, in face of the vast horizon bathed in light, she heaved
 a sigh of relief. The country was deserted; no one could have seen her
 entering or leaving the house. Only the yellow dog was still stretched
 there, and he did not even deign to look up. And she went away with her
 quick, short step, her youthful figure lightly swaying. A hundred steps
 away, an irresistible impulse compelled her to turn round to give a last
 look at the house, so tranquil and so cheerful on the hillside, in the
 declining light of the beautiful day.
 

 Only when she was in the train and went to put on her gloves did she
 perceive that one of them was missing. But she supposed that it had fallen
 on the platform at the station as she was getting into the car. She
 believed herself to be quite calm, but she remained with one hand gloved
 and one hand bare, which, with her, could only be the result of great
 agitation.
 

 On the following day Pascal and Clotilde took the three o’clock train to
 go to the Tulettes. The mother of Charles, the harness-maker’s wife, had
 brought the boy to them, as they had offered to take him to Uncle
 Macquart’s, where he was to remain for the rest of the week. Fresh
 quarrels had disturbed the peace of the household, the husband having
 resolved to tolerate no longer in his house another man’s child, that
 do-nothing, imbecile prince’s son. As it was Grandmother Rougon who had
 dressed him, he was, indeed, dressed on this day, again, in black velvet
 trimmed with gold braid, like a young lord, a page of former times going
 to court. And during the quarter of an hour which the journey lasted,
 Clotilde amused herself in the compartment, in which they were alone, by
 taking off his cap and smoothing his beautiful blond locks, his royal hair
 that fell in curls over his shoulders. She had a ring on her finger, and
 as she passed her hand over his neck she was startled to perceive that her
 caress had left behind it a trace of blood. One could not touch the boy’s
 skin without the red dew exuding from it; the tissues had become so lax
 through extreme degeneration that the slightest scratch brought on a
 hemorrhage. The doctor became at once uneasy, and asked him if he still
 bled at the nose as frequently as formerly. Charles hardly knew what to
 answer; first saying no, then, recollecting himself, he said that he had
 bled a great deal the other day. He seemed, indeed, weaker; he grew more
 childish as he grew older; his intelligence, which had never developed,
 had become clouded. This tall boy of fifteen, so beautiful, so
 girlish-looking, with the color of a flower that had grown in the shade,
 did not look ten.
 

 At the Tulettes Pascal decided that they would first take the boy to Uncle
 Macquart’s. They ascended the steep road. In the distance the little house
 looked gay in the sunshine, as it had looked on the day before, with its
 yellow walls and its green mulberry trees extending their twisted branches
 and covering the terrace with a thick, leafy roof. A delightful sense of
 peace pervaded this solitary spot, this sage’s retreat, where the only
 sound to be heard was the humming of the bees, circling round the tall
 marshmallows.
 

 “Ah, that rascal of an uncle!” said Pascal, smiling, “how I envy him!”
 

 But he was surprised not to have already seen him standing at the edge of
 the terrace. And as Charles had run off dragging Clotilde with him to see
 the rabbits, as he said, the doctor continued the ascent alone, and was
 astonished when he reached the top to see no one. The blinds were closed,
 the hill door yawned wide open. Only the yellow dog was at the threshold,
 his legs stiff, his hair bristling, howling with a low and continuous
 moan. When he saw the visitor, whom he no doubt recognized, approaching,
 he stopped howling for an instant and went and stood further off, then he
 began again to whine softly.
 

 Pascal, filled with apprehension, could not keep back the uneasy cry that
 rose to his lips:
 

 “Macquart! Macquart!”
 

 No one answered; a deathlike silence reigned over the house, with its door
 yawning wide open, like the mouth of a cavern. The dog continued to howl.
 

 Then Pascal grew impatient, and cried more loudly.
 

 “Macquart! Macquart!”
 

 There was not a stir; the bees hummed, the sky looked down serenely on the
 peaceful scene. Then he hesitated no longer. Perhaps Macquart was asleep.
 But the instant he pushed open the door of the kitchen on the left of the
 hall, a horrible odor escaped from it, an odor of burned flesh and bones.
 When he entered the room he could hardly breathe, so filled was it by a
 thick vapor, a stagnant and nauseous cloud, which choked and blinded him.
 The sunbeams that filtered through the cracks made only a dim light. He
 hurried to the fireplace, thinking that perhaps there had been a fire, but
 the fireplace was empty, and the articles of furniture around appeared to
 be uninjured. Bewildered, and feeling himself growing faint in the
 poisoned atmosphere, he ran to the window and threw the shutters wide
 open. A flood of light entered.
 

 Then the scene presented to the doctor’s view filled him with amazement.
 Everything was in its place; the glass and the empty bottle of spirits
 were on the table; only the chair in which Uncle Macquart must have been
 sitting bore traces of fire, the front legs were blackened and the straw
 was partially consumed. What had become of Macquart? Where could he have
 disappeared? In front of the chair, on the brick floor, which was
 saturated with grease, there was a little heap of ashes, beside which lay
 the pipe—a black pipe, which had not even broken in falling. All of
 Uncle Macquart was there, in this handful of fine ashes; and he was in the
 red cloud, also, which floated through the open window; in the layer of
 soot which carpeted the entire kitchen; the horrible grease of burnt
 flesh, enveloping everything, sticky and foul to the touch.
 

 It was the finest case of spontaneous combustion physician had ever seen.
 The doctor had, indeed, read in medical papers of surprising cases, among
 others that of a shoemaker’s wife, a drunken woman who had fallen asleep
 over her foot warmer, and of whom they had found only a hand and foot. He
 had, until now, put little faith in these cases, unwilling to admit, like
 the ancients, that a body impregnated with alcohol could disengage an
 unknown gas, capable of taking fire spontaneously and consuming the flesh
 and the bones. But he denied the truth of them no longer; besides,
 everything became clear to him as he reconstructed the scene—the
 coma of drunkenness producing absolute insensibility; the pipe falling on
 the clothes, which had taken fire; the flesh, saturated with liquor,
 burning and cracking; the fat melting, part of it running over the ground
 and part of it aiding the combustion, and all, at last—muscles,
 organs, and bones—consumed in a general blaze. Uncle Macquart was
 all there, with his blue cloth suit, and his fur cap, which he wore from
 one year’s end to the other. Doubtless, as soon as he had begun to burn
 like a bonfire he had fallen forward, which would account for the chair
 being only blackened; and nothing of him was left, not a bone, not a
 tooth, not a nail, nothing but this little heap of gray dust which the
 draught of air from the door threatened at every moment to sweep away.
 

 Clotilde had meanwhile entered, Charles remaining outside, his attention
 attracted by the continued howling of the dog.
 

 “Good Heavens, what a smell!” she cried. “What is the matter?”
 

 When Pascal explained to her the extraordinary catastrophe that had taken
 place, she shuddered. She took up the bottle to examine it, but she put it
 down again with horror, feeling it moist and sticky with Uncle Macquart’s
 flesh. Nothing could be touched, the smallest objects were coated, as it
 were, with this yellowish grease which stuck to the hands.
 

 A shudder of mingled awe and disgust passed through her, and she burst
 into tears, faltering:
 

 “What a sad death! What a horrible death!”
 

 Pascal had recovered from his first shock, and he was almost smiling.
 

 “Why horrible? He was eighty-four years old; he did not suffer. As for me,
 I think it a superb death for that old rascal of an uncle, who, it may be
 now said, did not lead a very exemplary life. You remember his envelope;
 he had some very terrible and vile things upon his conscience, which did
 not prevent him, however, from settling down later and growing old,
 surrounded by every comfort, like an old humbug, receiving the recompense
 of virtues which he did not possess. And here he lies like the prince of
 drunkards, burning up of himself, consumed on the burning funeral pile of
 his own body!”
 

 And the doctor waved his hand in admiration.
 

 “Just think of it. To be drunk to the point of not feeling that one is on
 fire; to set one’s self aflame, like a bonfire on St. John’s day; to
 disappear in smoke to the last bone. Think of Uncle Macquart starting on
 his journey through space; first diffused through the four corners of the
 room, dissolved in air and floating about, bathing all that belonged to
 him; then escaping in a cloud of dust through the window, when I opened it
 for him, soaring up into the sky, filling the horizon. Why, that is an
 admirable death! To disappear, to leave nothing of himself behind but a
 little heap of ashes and a pipe beside it!”
 

 And he picked up the pipe to keep it, as he said, as a relic of Uncle
 Macquart; while Clotilde, who thought she perceived a touch of bitter
 mockery in his eulogistic rhapsody, shuddered anew with horror and
 disgust. But suddenly she perceived something under the table—part
 of the remains, perhaps.
 

 “Look at that fragment there.”
 

 He stooped down and picked up with surprise a woman’s glove, a yellow
 glove.
 

 “Why!” she cried, “it is grandmother’s glove; the glove that was missing
 last evening.”
 

 They looked at each other; by a common impulse the same explanation rose
 to their lips, Felicite was certainly there yesterday; and a sudden
 conviction forced itself on the doctor’s mind—the conviction that
 his mother had seen Uncle Macquart burning and that she had not quenched
 him. Various indications pointed to this—the state of complete
 coolness in which he found the room, the number of hours which he
 calculated to have been necessary for the combustion of the body. He saw
 clearly the same thought dawning in the terrified eyes of his companion.
 But as it seemed impossible that they should ever know the truth, he
 fabricated aloud the simplest explanation:
 

 “No doubt your grandmother came in yesterday on her way back from the
 asylum, to say good day to Uncle Macquart, before he had begun drinking.”
 

 “Let us go away! let us go away!” cried Clotilde. “I am stifling here; I
 cannot remain here!”
 

 Pascal, too, wished to go and give information of the death. He went out
 after her, shut up the house, and put the key in his pocket. Outside, they
 heard the little yellow dog still howling. He had taken refuge between
 Charles’ legs, and the boy amused himself pushing him with his foot and
 listening to him whining, without comprehending.
 

 The doctor went at once to the house of M. Maurin, the notary at the
 Tulettes, who was also mayor of the commune. A widower for ten years past,
 and living with his daughter, who was a childless widow, he had maintained
 neighborly relations with old Macquart, and had occasionally kept little
 Charles with him for several days at a time, his daughter having become
 interested in the boy who was so handsome and so much to be pitied. M.
 Maurin, horrified at the news, went at once with the doctor to draw up a
 statement of the accident, and promised to make out the death certificate
 in due form. As for religious ceremonies, funeral obsequies, they seemed
 scarcely possible. When they entered the kitchen the draught from the door
 scattered the ashes about, and when they piously attempted to collect them
 again they succeeded only in gathering together the scrapings of the
 flags, a collection of accumulated dirt, in which there could be but
 little of Uncle Macquart. What, then, could they bury? It was better to
 give up the idea. So they gave it up. Besides, Uncle Macquart had been
 hardly a devout Catholic, and the family contented themselves with causing
 masses to be said later on for the repose of his soul.
 

 The notary, meantime, had immediately declared that there existed a will,
 which had been deposited with him, and he asked Pascal to meet him at his
 house on the next day but one for the reading; for he thought he might
 tell the doctor at once that Uncle Macquart had chosen him as his
 executor. And he ended by offering, like a kindhearted man, to keep
 Charles with him until then, comprehending how greatly the boy, who was so
 unwelcome at his mother’s, would be in the way in the midst of all these
 occurrences. Charles seemed enchanted, and he remained at the Tulettes.
 

 It was not until very late, until seven o’clock, that Clotilde and Pascal
 were able to take the train to return to Plassans, after the doctor had at
 last visited the two patients whom he had to see. But when they returned
 together to the notary’s on the day appointed for the meeting, they had
 the disagreeable surprise of finding old Mme. Rougon installed there. She
 had naturally learned of Macquart’s death, and had hurried there on the
 following day, full of excitement, and making a great show of grief; and
 she had just made her appearance again to-day, having heard the famous
 testament spoken of. The reading of the will, however, was a simple
 matter, unmarked by any incident. Macquart had left all the fortune that
 he could dispose of for the purpose of erecting a superb marble monument
 to himself, with two angels with folded wings, weeping. It was his own
 idea, a reminiscence of a similar tomb which he had seen abroad—in
 Germany, perhaps—when he was a soldier. And he had charged his
 nephew Pascal to superintend the erection of the monument, as he was the
 only one of the family, he said, who had any taste.
 

 During the reading of the will Clotilde had remained in the notary’s
 garden, sitting on a bench under the shade of an ancient chestnut tree.
 When Pascal and Felicite again appeared, there was a moment of great
 embarrassment, for they had not spoken to one another for some months
 past. The old lady, however, affected to be perfectly at her ease, making
 no allusion whatever to the new situation, and giving it to be understood
 that they might very well meet and appear united before the world, without
 for that reason entering into an explanation or becoming reconciled. But
 she committed the mistake of laying too much stress on the great grief
 which Macquart’s death had caused her. Pascal, who suspected the
 overflowing joy, the unbounded delight which it gave her to think that
 this family ulcer was to be at last healed, that this abominable uncle was
 at last out of the way, became gradually possessed by an impatience, an
 indignation, which he could not control. His eyes fastened themselves
 involuntarily on his mother’s gloves, which were black.
 

 Just then she was expressing her grief in lowered tones:
 

 “But how imprudent it was, at his age, to persist in living alone—like
 a wolf in his lair! If he had only had a servant in the house with him!”
 

 Then the doctor, hardly conscious of what he was saying, terrified at
 hearing himself say the words, but impelled by an irresistible force,
 said:
 

 “But, mother, since you were there, why did you not quench him?”
 

 Old Mme. Rougon turned frightfully pale. How could her son have known? She
 looked at him for an instant in open-mouthed amazement; while Clotilde
 grew as pale as she, in the certainty of the crime, which was now evident.
 It was an avowal, this terrified silence which had fallen between the
 mother, the son, and the granddaughter—the shuddering silence in
 which families bury their domestic tragedies. The doctor, in despair at
 having spoken, he who avoided so carefully all disagreeable and useless
 explanations, was trying desperately to retract his words, when a new
 catastrophe extricated him from his terrible embarrassment.
 

 Felicite desired to take Charles away with her, in order not to trespass
 on the notary’s kind hospitality; and as the latter had sent the boy after
 breakfast to spend an hour or two with Aunt Dide, he had sent the maid
 servant to the asylum with orders to bring him back immediately. It was at
 this juncture that the servant, whom they were waiting for in the garden,
 made her appearance, covered with perspiration, out of breath, and greatly
 excited, crying from a distance:
 

 “My God! My God! come quickly. Master Charles is bathed in blood.”
 

 Filled with consternation, all three set off for the asylum. This day
 chanced to be one of Aunt Dide’s good days; very calm and gentle she sat
 erect in the armchair in which she had spent the hours, the long hours for
 twenty-two years past, looking straight before her into vacancy. She
 seemed to have grown still thinner, all the flesh had disappeared, her
 limbs were now only bones covered with parchment-like skin; and her
 keeper, the stout fair-haired girl, carried her, fed her, took her up and
 laid her down as if she had been a bundle. The ancestress, the forgotten
 one, tall, bony, ghastly, remained motionless, her eyes, only seeming to
 have life, her eyes shining clear as spring water in her thin withered
 face. But on this morning, again a sudden rush of tears had streamed down
 her cheeks, and she had begun to stammer words without any connection;
 which seemed to prove that in the midst of her senile exhaustion and the
 incurable torpor of madness, the slow induration of the brain and the
 limbs was not yet complete; there still were memories stored away, gleams
 of intelligence still were possible. Then her face had resumed its vacant
 expression. She seemed indifferent to every one and everything, laughing,
 sometimes, at an accident, at a fall, but most often seeing nothing and
 hearing nothing, gazing fixedly into vacancy.
 

 When Charles had been brought to her the keeper had immediately installed
 him before the little table, in front of his great-great-grandmother. The
 girl kept a package of pictures for him—soldiers, captains, kings
 clad in purple and gold, and she gave them to him with a pair of scissors,
 saying:
 

 “There, amuse yourself quietly, and behave well. You see that to-day
 grandmother is very good. You must be good, too.”
 

 The boy raised his eyes to the madwoman’s face, and both looked at each
 other. At this moment the resemblance between them was extraordinary.
 Their eyes, especially, their vacant and limpid eyes, seemed to lose
 themselves in one another, to be identical. Then it was the physiognomy,
 the whole face, the worn features of the centenarian, that passed over
 three generations to this delicate child’s face, it, too, worn already, as
 it were, and aged by the wear of the race. Neither smiled, they regarded
 each other intently, with an air of grave imbecility.
 

 “Well!” continued the keeper, who had acquired the habit of talking to
 herself to cheer herself when with her mad charge, “you cannot deny each
 other. The same hand made you both. You are the very spit-down of each
 other. Come, laugh a bit, amuse yourselves, since you like to be
 together.”
 

 But to fix his attention for any length of time fatigued Charles, and he
 was the first to lower his eyes; he seemed to be interested in his
 pictures, while Aunt Dide, who had an astonishing power of fixing her
 attention, as if she had been turned into stone, continued to look at him
 fixedly, without even winking an eyelid.
 

 The keeper busied herself for a few moments in the little sunny room, made
 gay by its light, blue-flowered paper. She made the bed which she had been
 airing, she arranged the linen on the shelves of the press. But she
 generally profited by the presence of the boy to take a little relaxation.
 She had orders never to leave her charge alone, and now that he was here
 she ventured to trust her with him.
 

 “Listen to me well,” she went on, “I have to go out for a little, and if
 she stirs, if she should need me, ring for me, call me at once; do you
 hear? You understand, you are a big enough boy to be able to call one.”
 

 He had looked up again, and made a sign that he had understood and that he
 would call her. And when he found himself alone with Aunt Dide he returned
 to his pictures quietly. This lasted for a quarter of an hour amid the
 profound silence of the asylum, broken only at intervals by some prison
 sound—a stealthy step, the jingling of a bunch of keys, and
 occasionally a loud cry, immediately silenced. But the boy must have been
 tired by the excessive heat of the day, for sleep gradually stole over
 him. Soon his head, fair as a lily, drooped, and as if weighed down by the
 too heavy casque of his royal locks, he let it sink gently on the pictures
 and fell asleep, with his cheek resting on the gold and purple kings. The
 lashes of his closed eyelids cast a shadow on his delicate skin, with its
 small blue veins, through which life pulsed feebly. He was beautiful as an
 angel, but with the indefinable corruption of a whole race spread over his
 countenance. And Aunt Dide looked at him with her vacant stare in which
 there was neither pleasure nor pain, the stare of eternity contemplating
 things earthly.
 

 At the end of a few moments, however, an expression of interest seemed to
 dawn in the clear eyes. Something had just happened, a drop of blood was
 forming on the edge of the left nostril of the boy. This drop fell and
 another formed and followed it. It was the blood, the dew of blood,
 exuding this time, without a scratch, without a bruise, which issued and
 flowed of itself in the laxity of the degenerate tissues. The drops became
 a slender thread which flowed over the gold of the pictures. A little pool
 covered them, and made its way to a corner of the table; then the drops
 began again, splashing dully one by one upon the floor. And he still
 slept, with the divinely calm look of a cherub, not even conscious of the
 life that was escaping from him; and the madwoman continued to look at
 him, with an air of increasing interest, but without terror, amused,
 rather, her attention engaged by this, as by the flight of the big flies,
 which her gaze often followed for hours.
 

 Several minutes more passed, the slender thread had grown larger, the
 drops followed one another more rapidly, falling on the floor with a
 monotonous and persistent drip. And Charles, at one moment, stirred,
 opened his eyes, and perceived that he was covered with blood. But he was
 not frightened; he was accustomed to this bloody spring, which issued from
 him at the slightest cause. He merely gave a sigh of weariness. Instinct,
 however, must have warned him, for he moaned more loudly than before, and
 called confusedly in stammering accents:
 

 “Mamma! mamma!”
 

 His weakness was no doubt already excessive, for an irresistible stupor
 once more took possession of him, his head dropped, his eyes closed, and
 he seemed to fall asleep again, continuing his plaint, as if in a dream,
 moaning in fainter and fainter accents:
 

 “Mamma! mamma!”
 

 Now the pictures were inundated; the black velvet jacket and trousers,
 braided with gold, were stained with long streaks of blood, and the little
 red stream began again to flow persistently from his left nostril, without
 stopping, crossed the red pool on the table and fell upon the ground,
 where it at last formed a veritable lake. A loud cry from the madwoman, a
 terrified call would have sufficed. But she did not cry, she did not call;
 motionless, rigid, emaciated, sitting there forgotten of the world, she
 gazed with the fixed look of the ancestress who sees the destinies of her
 race being accomplished. She sat there as if dried up, bound; her limbs
 and her tongue tied by her hundred years, her brain ossified by madness,
 incapable of willing or of acting. And yet the sight of the little red
 stream began to stir some feeling in her. A tremor passed over her
 deathlike countenance, a flush mounted to her cheeks. Finally, a last
 plaint roused her completely:
 

 “Mamma! mamma!”
 

 Then it was evident that a terrible struggle was taking place in Aunt
 Dide. She carried her skeleton-like hand to her forehead as if she felt
 her brain bursting. Her mouth was wide open, but no sound issued from it;
 the dreadful tumult that had arisen within her had no doubt paralyzed her
 tongue. She tried to rise, to run, but she had no longer any muscles; she
 remained fastened to her seat. All her poor body trembled in the
 superhuman effort which she was making to cry for help, without being able
 to break the bonds of old age and madness which held her prisoner. Her
 face was distorted with terror; memory gradually awakening, she must have
 comprehended everything.
 

 And it was a slow and gentle agony, of which the spectacle lasted for
 several minutes more. Charles, silent now, as if he had again fallen
 asleep, was losing the last drops of blood that had remained in his veins,
 which were emptying themselves softly. His lily-like whiteness increased
 until it became a deathlike pallor. His lips lost their rosy color, became
 a pale pink, then white. And, as he was about to expire, he opened his
 large eyes and fixed them on his great-great-grandmother, who watched the
 light dying in them. All the waxen face was already dead, the eyes only
 were still living. They still kept their limpidity, their brightness. All
 at once they became vacant, the light in them was extinguished. This was
 the end—the death of the eyes, and Charles had died, without a
 struggle, exhausted, like a fountain from which all the water has run out.
 Life no longer pulsed through the veins of his delicate skin, there was
 now only the shadow of its wings on his white face. But he remained
 divinely beautiful, his face lying in blood, surrounded by his royal blond
 locks, like one of those little bloodless dauphins who, unable to bear the
 execrable heritage of their race, die of decrepitude and imbecility at
 sixteen.
 

 The boy exhaled his latest breath as Dr. Pascal entered the room, followed
 by Felicite and Clotilde. And when he saw the quantity of blood that
 inundated the floor, he cried:
 

 “Ah, my God! it is as I feared, a hemorrhage from the nose! The poor
 darling, no one was with him, and it is all over!”
 

 But all three were struck with terror at the extraordinary spectacle that
 now met their gaze. Aunt Dide, who seemed to have grown taller, in the
 superhuman effort she was making, had almost succeeded in raising herself
 up, and her eyes, fixed on the dead boy, so fair and so gentle, and on the
 red sea of blood, beginning to congeal, that was lying around him, kindled
 with a thought, after a long sleep of twenty-two years. This final lesion
 of madness, this irremediable darkness of the mind, was evidently not so
 complete but that some memory of the past, lying hidden there, might
 awaken suddenly under the terrible blow which had struck her. And the
 ancestress, the forgotten one, lived again, emerged from her oblivion,
 rigid and wasted, like a specter of terror and grief.
 

 For an instant she remained panting. Then with a shudder, which made her
 teeth chatter, she stammered a single phrase:
 

 “The gendarme! the gendarme!”
 

 Pascal and Felicite and Clotilde understood. They looked at one another
 involuntarily, turning very pale. The whole dreadful history of the old
 mother—of the mother of them all—rose before them, the ardent
 love of her youth, the long suffering of her mature age. Already two moral
 shocks had shaken her terribly—the first, when she was in her ardent
 prime, when a gendarme shot down her lover Macquart, the smuggler,
 like a dog; the second, years ago, when another gendarme shattered
 with a pistol shot the skull of her grandson Silvere, the insurgent, the
 victim of the hatred and the sanguinary strife of the family. Blood had
 always bespattered her. And a third moral shock finished her; blood
 bespattered her again, the impoverished blood of her race, which she had
 just beheld flowing slowly, and which lay upon the ground, while the fair
 royal child, his veins and his heart empty, slept.
 

 Three times—face to face with her past life, her life red with
 passion and suffering, haunted by the image of expiation—she
 stammered:
 

 “The gendarme! the gendarme! the gendarme!”
 

 Then she sank back into her armchair. They thought she was dead, killed by
 the shock.
 

 But the keeper at this moment at last appeared, endeavoring to excuse
 herself, fearing that she would be dismissed. When, aided by her, Dr.
 Pascal had placed Aunt Dide on the bed, he found that the old mother was
 still alive. She was not to die until the following day, at the age of one
 hundred and five years, three months, and seven days, of congestion of the
 brain, caused by the last shock she had received.
 

 Pascal, turning to his mother, said:
 

 “She will not live twenty-four hours; to-morrow she will be dead. Ah!
 Uncle Macquart, then she, and this poor boy, one after another. How much
 misery and grief!”
 

 He paused and added in a lower tone:
 

 “The family is thinning out; the old trees fall and the young die
 standing.”
 

 Felicite must have thought this another allusion. She was sincerely
 shocked by the tragic death of little Charles. But, notwithstanding, above
 the horror which she felt there arose a sense of immense relief. Next
 week, when they should have ceased to weep, what a rest to be able to say
 to herself that all this abomination of the Tulettes was at an end, that
 the family might at last rise, and shine in history!
 

 Then she remembered that she had not answered the involuntary accusation
 made against her by her son at the notary’s; and she spoke again of
 Macquart, through bravado:
 

 “You see now that servants are of no use. There was one here, and yet she
 prevented nothing; it would have been useless for Uncle Macquart to have
 had one to take care of him; he would be in ashes now, all the same.”
 

 She sighed, and then continued in a broken voice:
 

 “Well, well, neither our own fate nor that of others is in our hands;
 things happen as they will. These are great blows that have fallen upon
 us. We must only trust to God for the preservation and the prosperity of
 our family.”
 

 Dr. Pascal bowed with his habitual air of deference and said:
 

 “You are right, mother.”
 

 Clotilde knelt down. Her former fervent Catholic faith had revived in this
 chamber of blood, of madness, and of death. Tears streamed down her
 cheeks, and with clasped hands she was praying fervently for the dear ones
 who were no more. She prayed that God would grant that their sufferings
 might indeed be ended, their faults pardoned, and that they might live
 again in another life, a life of unending happiness. And she prayed with
 the utmost fervor, in her terror of a hell, which after this miserable
 life would make suffering eternal.
 

 From this day Pascal and Clotilde went to visit their sick side by side,
 filled with greater pity than ever. Perhaps, with Pascal, the feeling of
 his powerlessness against inevitable disease was even stronger than
 before. The only wisdom was to let nature take its course, to eliminate
 dangerous elements, and to labor only in the supreme work of giving health
 and strength. But the suffering and the death of those who are dear to us
 awaken in us a hatred of disease, an irresistible desire to combat and to
 vanquish it. And the doctor never tasted so great a joy as when he
 succeeded, with his hypodermic injections, in soothing a paroxysm of pain,
 in seeing the groaning patient grow tranquil and fall asleep. Clotilde, in
 return, adored him, proud of their love, as if it were a consolation which
 they carried, like the viaticum, to the poor.
 

 
 
 

 Martine one morning obtained from Dr. Pascal, as she did every three
 months, his receipt for fifteen hundred francs, to take it to the notary
 Grandguillot, to get from him what she called their “income.” The doctor
 seemed surprised that the payment should have fallen due again so soon; he
 had never been so indifferent as he was now about money matters, leaving
 to Martine the care of settling everything. And he and Clotilde were under
 the plane trees, absorbed in the joy that filled their life, lulled by the
 ceaseless song of the fountain, when the servant returned with a
 frightened face, and in a state of extraordinary agitation. She was so
 breathless with excitement that for a moment she could not speak.
 

 “Oh, my God! Oh, my God!” she cried at last. “M. Grandguillot has gone
 away!”
 

 Pascal did not at first comprehend.
 

 “Well, my girl, there is no hurry,” he said; “you can go back another
 day.”
 

 “No, no! He has gone away; don’t you hear? He has gone away forever—”
 

 And as the waters rush forth in the bursting of a dam, her emotion vented
 itself in a torrent of words.
 

 “I reached the street, and I saw from a distance a crowd gathered before
 the door. A chill ran through me; I felt that some misfortune had
 happened. The door closed, and not a blind open, as if there was somebody
 dead in the house. They told me when I got there that he had run away;
 that he had not left a sou behind him; that many families would be
 ruined.”
 

 She laid the receipt on the stone table.
 

 “There! There is your paper! It is all over with us, we have not a sou
 left, we are going to die of starvation!” And she sobbed aloud in the
 anguish of her miserly heart, distracted by this loss of a fortune, and
 trembling at the prospect of impending want.
 

 Clotilde sat stunned and speechless, her eyes fixed on Pascal, whose
 predominating feeling at first seemed to be one of incredulity. He
 endeavored to calm Martine. Why! why! it would not do to give up in this
 way. If all she knew of the affair was what she had heard from the people
 in the street, it might be only gossip, after all, which always
 exaggerates everything. M. Grandguillot a fugitive; M. Grandguillot a
 thief; that was monstrous, impossible! A man of such probity, a house
 liked and respected by all Plassans for more than a century past. Why
 people thought money safer there than in the Bank of France.
 

 “Consider, Martine, this would not have come all of a sudden, like a
 thunderclap; there would have been some rumors of it beforehand. The
 deuce! an old reputation does not fall to pieces in that way, in a night.”
 

 At this she made a gesture of despair.
 

 “Ah, monsieur, that is what most afflicts me, because, you see, it throws
 some of the responsibility on me. For weeks past I have been hearing
 stories on all sides. As for you two, naturally you hear nothing; you
 don’t even know whether you are alive or dead.”
 

 Neither Pascal nor Clotilde could refrain from smiling; for it was indeed
 true that their love lifted them so far above the earth that none of the
 common sounds of existence reached them.
 

 “But the stories I heard were so ugly that I didn’t like to worry you with
 them. I thought they were lies.”
 

 She was silent for a moment, and then added that while some people merely
 accused M. Grandguillot of having speculated on the Bourse, there were
 others who accused him of still worse practises. And she burst into fresh
 sobs.
 

 “My God! My God! what is going to become of us? We are all going to die of
 starvation!”
 

 Shaken, then, moved by seeing Clotilde’s eyes, too, filled with tears,
 Pascal made an effort to remember, to see clearly into the past. Years
 ago, when he had been practising in Plassans, he had deposited at
 different times, with M. Grandguillot, the twenty thousand francs on the
 interest of which he had lived comfortably for the past sixteen years, and
 on each occasion the notary had given him a receipt for the sum deposited.
 This would no doubt enable him to establish his position as a personal
 creditor. Then a vague recollection awoke in his memory; he remembered,
 without being able to fix the date, that at the request of the notary, and
 in consequence of certain representations made by him, which Pascal had
 forgotten, he had given the lawyer a power of attorney for the purpose of
 investing the whole or a part of his money, in mortgages, and he was even
 certain that in this power the name of the attorney had been left in
 blank. But he was ignorant as to whether this document had ever been used
 or not; he had never taken the trouble to inquire how his money had been
 invested. A fresh pang of miserly anguish made Martine cry out:
 

 “Ah, monsieur, you are well punished for your sin. Was that a way to
 abandon one’s money? For my part, I know almost to a sou how my account
 stands every quarter; I have every figure and every document at my
 fingers’ ends.”
 

 In the midst of her distress an unconscious smile broke over her face,
 lighting it all up. Her long cherished passion had been gratified; her
 four hundred francs wages, saved almost intact, put out at interest for
 thirty years, at last amounted to the enormous sum of twenty thousand
 francs. And this treasure was put away in a safe place which no one knew.
 She beamed with delight at the recollection, and she said no more.
 

 “But who says that our money is lost?” cried Pascal.
 

 “M. Grandguillot had a private fortune; he has not taken away with him his
 house and his lands, I suppose. They will look into the affair; they will
 make an investigation. I cannot make up my mind to believe him a common
 thief. The only trouble is the delay: a liquidation drags on so long.”
 

 He spoke in this way in order to reassure Clotilde, whose growing anxiety
 he observed. She looked at him, and she looked around her at La Souleiade;
 her only care his happiness; her most ardent desire to live here always,
 as she had lived in the past, to love him always in this beloved solitude.
 And he, wishing to tranquilize her, recovered his fine indifference; never
 having lived for money, he did not imagine that one could suffer from the
 want of it.
 

 “But I have some money!” he cried, at last. “What does Martine mean by
 saying that we have not a sou left, and that we are going to die of
 starvation!”
 

 And he rose gaily, and made them both follow him saying:
 

 “Come, come, I am going to show you some money. And I will give some of it
 to Martine that she may make us a good dinner this evening.”
 

 Upstairs in his room he triumphantly opened his desk before them. It was
 in a drawer of this desk that for years past he had thrown the money which
 his later patients had brought him of their own accord, for he had never
 sent them an account. Nor had he ever known the exact amount of his little
 treasure, of the gold and bank bills mingled together in confusion, from
 which he took the sums he required for his pocket money, his experiments,
 his presents, and his alms. During the last few months he had made
 frequent visits to his desk, making deep inroads into its contents. But he
 had been so accustomed to find there the sums he required, after years of
 economy during which he had spent scarcely anything, that he had come to
 believe his savings inexhaustible.
 

 He gave a satisfied laugh, then, as he opened the drawer, crying:
 

 “Now you shall see! Now you shall see!”
 

 And he was confounded, when, after searching among the heap of notes and
 bills, he succeeded in collecting only a sum of 615 francs—two notes
 of 100 francs each, 400 francs in gold, and 15 francs in change. He shook
 out the papers, he felt in every corner of the drawer, crying:
 

 “But it cannot be! There was always money here before, there was a heap of
 money here a few days ago. It must have been all those old bills that
 misled me. I assure you that last week I saw a great deal of money. I had
 it in my hand.”
 

 He spoke with such amusing good faith, his childlike surprise was so
 sincere, that Clotilde could not keep from smiling. Ah, the poor master,
 what a wretched business man he was! Then, as she observed Martine’s look
 of anguish, her utter despair at sight of this insignificant sum, which
 was now all there was for the maintenance of all three, she was seized
 with a feeling of despair; her eyes filled with tears, and she murmured:
 

 “My God, it is for me that you have spent everything; if we have nothing
 now, if we are ruined, it is I who am the cause of it!”
 

 Pascal had already forgotten the money he had taken for the presents.
 Evidently that was where it had gone. The explanation tranquilized him.
 And as she began to speak in her grief of returning everything to the
 dealers, he grew angry.
 

 “Give back what I have given you! You would give a piece of my heart with
 it, then! No, I would rather die of hunger, I tell you!”
 

 Then his confidence already restored, seeing a future of unlimited
 possibilities opening out before him, he said:
 

 “Besides, we are not going to die of hunger to-night, are we, Martine?
 There is enough here to keep us for a long time.”
 

 Martine shook her head. She would undertake to manage with it for two
 months, for two and a half, perhaps, if people had sense, but not longer.
 Formerly the drawer was replenished; there was always some money coming
 in; but now that monsieur had given up his patients, they had absolutely
 no income. They must not count on any help from outside, then. And she
 ended by saying:
 

 “Give me the two one-hundred-franc bills. I’ll try and make them last for
 a month. Then we shall see. But be very prudent; don’t touch the four
 hundred francs in gold; lock the drawer and don’t open it again.”
 

 “Oh, as to that,” cried the doctor, “you may make your mind easy. I would
 rather cut off my right hand.”
 

 And thus it was settled. Martine was to have entire control of this last
 purse; and they might trust to her economy, they were sure that she would
 save the centimes. As for Clotilde, who had never had a private purse, she
 would not even feel the want of money. Pascal only would suffer from no
 longer having his inexhaustible treasure to draw upon, but he had given
 his promise to allow the servant to buy everything.
 

 “There! That is a good piece of work!” he said, relieved, as happy as if
 he had just settled some important affair which would assure them a living
 for a long time to come.
 

 A week passed during which nothing seemed to have changed at La Souleiade.
 In the midst of their tender raptures neither Pascal nor Clotilde thought
 any more of the want which was impending. And one morning during the
 absence of the latter, who had gone with Martine to market, the doctor
 received a visit which filled him at first with a sort of terror. It was
 from the woman who had sold him the beautiful corsage of old point
 d’Alencon, his first present to Clotilde. He felt himself so weak against
 a possible temptation that he trembled. Even before the woman had uttered
 a word he had already begun to defend himself—no, no, he neither
 could nor would buy anything. And with outstretched hands he prevented her
 from taking anything out of her little bag, declaring to himself that he
 would look at nothing. The dealer, however, a fat, amiable woman, smiled,
 certain of victory. In an insinuating voice she began to tell him a long
 story of how a lady, whom she was not at liberty to name, one of the most
 distinguished ladies in Plassans, who had suddenly met with a reverse of
 fortune, had been obliged to part with one of her jewels; and she then
 enlarged on the splendid chance—a piece of jewelry that had cost
 twelve hundred francs, and she was willing to let it go for five hundred.
 She opened her bag slowly, in spite of the terrified and ever-louder
 protestations of the doctor, and took from it a slender gold necklace set
 simply with seven pearls in front; but the pearls were of wonderful
 brilliancy—flawless, and perfect in shape. The ornament was simple,
 chaste, and of exquisite delicacy. And instantly he saw in fancy the
 necklace on Clotilde’s beautiful neck, as its natural adornment. Any other
 jewel would have been a useless ornament, these pearls would be the
 fitting symbol of her youth. And he took the necklace in his trembling
 fingers, experiencing a mortal anguish at the idea of returning it. He
 defended himself still, however; he declared that he had not five hundred
 francs, while the dealer continued, in her smooth voice, to push the
 advantage she had gained. After another quarter an hour, when she thought
 she had him secure, she suddenly offered him the necklace for three
 hundred francs, and he yielded; his mania for giving, his desire to please
 his idol, to adorn her, conquered. When he went to the desk to take the
 fifteen gold pieces to count them out to the dealer, he felt convinced
 that the notary’s affairs would be arranged, and that they would soon have
 plenty of money.
 

 When Pascal found himself once more alone, with the ornament in his
 pocket, he was seized with a childish delight, and he planned his little
 surprise, while waiting, excited and impatient, for Clotilde’s return. The
 moment she made her appearance his heart began to beat violently. She was
 very warm, for an August sun was blazing in the sky, and she laid aside
 her things quickly, pleased with her walk, telling him, laughing, of the
 good bargain Martine had made—two pigeons for eighteen sous. While
 she was speaking he pretended to notice something on her neck.
 

 “Why, what have you on your neck? Let me see.”
 

 He had the necklace in his hand, and he succeeded in putting it around her
 neck, while feigning to pass his fingers over it, to assure himself that
 there was nothing there. But she resisted, saying gaily:
 

 “Don’t! There is nothing on my neck. Here, what are you doing? What have
 you in your hand that is tickling me?”
 

 He caught hold of her, and drew her before the long mirror, in which she
 had a full view of herself. On her neck the slender chain showed like a
 thread of gold, and the seven pearls, like seven milky stars, shone with
 soft luster against her satin skin. She looked charmingly childlike.
 Suddenly she gave a delighted laugh, like the cooing of a dove swelling
 out its throat proudly.
 

 “Oh, master, master, how good you are! Do you think of nothing but me,
 then? How happy you make me!”
 

 And the joy which shone in her eyes, the joy of the woman and the lover,
 happy to be beautiful and to be adored, recompensed him divinely for his
 folly.
 

 She drew back her head, radiant, and held up her mouth to him. He bent
 over and kissed her.
 

 “Are you happy?”
 

 “Oh, yes, master, happy, happy! Pearls are so sweet, so pure! And these
 are so becoming to me!”
 

 For an instant longer she admired herself in the glass, innocently vain of
 her fair flower-like skin, under the nacre drops of the pearls. Then,
 yielding to a desire to show herself, hearing the servant moving about
 outside, she ran out, crying:
 

 “Martine, Martine! See what master has just given me! Say, am I not
 beautiful!”
 

 But all at once, seeing the old maid’s severe face, that had suddenly
 turned an ashen hue, she became confused, and all her pleasure was
 spoiled. Perhaps she had a consciousness of the jealous pang which her
 brilliant youth caused this poor creature, worn out in the dumb
 resignation of her servitude, in adoration of her master. This, however,
 was only a momentary feeling, unconscious in the one, hardly suspected by
 the other, and what remained was the evident disapprobation of the
 economical servant, condemning the present with her sidelong glance.
 

 Clotilde was seized with a little chill.
 

 “Only,” she murmured, “master has rummaged his desk again. Pearls are very
 dear, are they not?”
 

 Pascal, embarrassed, too, protested volubly, telling them of the splendid
 opportunity presented by the dealer’s visit. An incredibly good stroke of
 business—it was impossible to avoid buying the necklace.
 

 “How much?” asked the young girl with real anxiety.
 

 “Three hundred francs.”
 

 Martine, who had not yet opened her lips, but who looked terrible in her
 silence, could not restrain a cry.
 

 “Good God! enough to live upon for six weeks, and we have not bread!”
 

 Large tears welled from Clotilde’s eyes. She would have torn the necklace
 from her neck if Pascal had not prevented her. She wished to give it to
 him on the instant, and she faltered in heart-broken tones:
 

 “It is true, Martine is right. Master is mad, and I am mad, too, to keep
 this for an instant, in the situation in which we are. It would burn my
 flesh. Let me take it back, I beg of you.”
 

 Never would he consent to this, he said. Now his eyes, too, were moist, he
 joined in their grief, crying that he was incorrigible, that they ought to
 have taken all the money away from him. And running to the desk he took
 the hundred francs that were left, and forced Martine to take them,
 saying:
 

 “I tell you that I will not keep another sou. I should spend this, too.
 Take it, Martine; you are the only one of us who has any sense. You will
 make the money last, I am very certain, until our affairs are settled. And
 you, dear, keep that; do not grieve me.”
 

 Nothing more was said about this incident. But Clotilde kept the necklace,
 wearing it under her gown; and there was a sort of delightful mystery in
 feeling on her neck, unknown to every one, this simple, pretty ornament.
 Sometimes, when they were alone, she would smile at Pascal and draw the
 pearls from her dress quickly, and show them to him without a word; and as
 quickly she would replace them again on her warm neck, filled with
 delightful emotion. It was their fond folly which she thus recalled to
 him, with a confused gratitude, a vivid and radiant joy—a joy which
 nevermore left her.
 

 A straitened existence, sweet in spite of everything, now began for them.
 Martine made an exact inventory of the resources of the house, and it was
 not reassuring. The provision of potatoes only promised to be of any
 importance. As ill luck would have it, the jar of oil was almost out, and
 the last cask of wine was also nearly empty. La Souleiade, having neither
 vines nor olive trees, produced only a few vegetables and some fruits—pears,
 not yet ripe, and trellis grapes, which were to be their only delicacies.
 And meat and bread had to be bought every day. So that from the first day
 the servant put Pascal and Clotilde on rations, suppressing the former
 sweets, creams, and pastry, and reducing the food to the quantity barely
 necessary to sustain life. She resumed all her former authority, treating
 them like children who were not to be consulted, even with regard to their
 wishes or their tastes. It was she who arranged the menus, who knew better
 than themselves what they wanted; but all this like a mother, surrounding
 them with unceasing care, performing the miracle of enabling them to live
 still with comfort on their scanty resources; occasionally severe with
 them, for their own good, as one is severe with a child when it refuses to
 eat its food. And it seemed as if this maternal care, this last
 immolation, the illusory peace with which she surrounded their love, gave
 her, too, a little happiness, and drew her out of the dumb despair into
 which she had fallen. Since she had thus watched over them she had begun
 to look like her old self, with her little white face, the face of a nun
 vowed to chastity; her calm ash-colored eyes, which expressed the
 resignation of her thirty years of servitude. When, after the eternal
 potatoes and the little cutlet at four sous, undistinguishable among the
 vegetables, she was able, on certain days, without compromising her
 budget, to give them pancakes, she was triumphant, she laughed to see them
 laugh.
 

 Pascal and Clotilde thought everything she did was right, which did not
 prevent them, however, from jesting about her when she was not present.
 The old jests about her avarice were repeated over and over again. They
 said that she counted the grains of pepper, so many grains for each dish,
 in her passion for economy. When the potatoes had too little oil, when the
 cutlets were reduced to a mouthful, they would exchange a quick glance,
 stifling their laughter in their napkins, until she had left the room.
 Everything was a source of amusement to them, and they laughed innocently
 at their misery.
 

 At the end of the first month Pascal thought of Martine’s wages. Usually
 she took her forty francs herself from the common purse which she kept.
 

 “My poor girl,” he said to her one evening, “what are you going to do for
 your wages, now that we have no more money?”
 

 She remained for a moment with her eyes fixed on the ground, with an air
 of consternation, then she said:
 

 “Well, monsieur, I must only wait.”
 

 But he saw that she had not said all that was in her mind, that she had
 thought of some arrangement which she did not know how to propose to him,
 so he encouraged her.
 

 “Well, then, if monsieur would consent to it, I should like monsieur to
 sign me a paper.”
 

 “How, a paper?”
 

 “Yes, a paper, in which monsieur should say, every month, that he owes me
 forty francs.”
 

 Pascal at once made out the paper for her, and this made her quite happy.
 She put it away as carefully as if it had been real money. This evidently
 tranquilized her. But the paper became a new subject of wondering
 amusement to the doctor and his companion. In what did the extraordinary
 power consist which money has on certain natures? This old maid, who would
 serve him on bended knees, who adored him above everything, to the extent
 of having devoted to him her whole life, to ask for this silly guarantee,
 this scrap of paper which was of no value, if he should be unable to pay
 her.
 

 So far neither Pascal nor Clotilde had any great merit in preserving their
 serenity in misfortune, for they did not feel it. They lived high above
 it, in the rich and happy realm of their love. At table they did not know
 what they were eating; they might fancy they were partaking of a princely
 banquet, served on silver dishes. They were unconscious of the increasing
 destitution around them, of the hunger of the servant who lived upon the
 crumbs from their table; and they walked through the empty house as
 through a palace hung with silk and filled with riches. This was
 undoubtedly the happiest period of their love. The workroom had pleasant
 memories of the past, and they spent whole days there, wrapped luxuriously
 in the joy of having lived so long in it together. Then, out of doors, in
 every corner of La Souleiade, royal summer had set up his blue tent,
 dazzling with gold. In the morning, in the embalsamed walks on the pine
 grove; at noon under the dark shadow of the plane trees, lulled by the
 murmur of the fountain; in the evening on the cool terrace, or in the
 still warm threshing yard bathed in the faint blue radiance of the first
 stars, they lived with rapture their straitened life, their only ambition
 to live always together, indifferent to all else. The earth was theirs,
 with all its riches, its pomps, and its dominions, since they loved each
 other.
 

 Toward the end of August however, matters grew bad again. At times they
 had rude awakenings, in the midst of this life without ties, without
 duties, without work; this life which was so sweet, but which it would be
 impossible, hurtful, they knew, to lead always. One evening Martine told
 them that she had only fifty francs left, and that they would have
 difficulty in managing for two weeks longer, even giving up wine. In
 addition to this the news was very serious; the notary Grandguillot was
 beyond a doubt insolvent, so that not even the personal creditors would
 receive anything. In the beginning they had relied on the house and the
 two farms which the fugitive notary had left perforce behind him, but it
 was now certain that this property was in his wife’s name and, while he
 was enjoying in Switzerland, as it was said, the beauty of the mountains,
 she lived on one of the farms, which she cultivated quietly, away from the
 annoyances of the liquidation. In short, it was infamous—a hundred
 families ruined; left without bread. An assignee had indeed been
 appointed, but he had served only to confirm the disaster, since not a
 centime of assets had been discovered. And Pascal, with his usual
 indifference, neglected even to go and see him to speak to him about his
 own case, thinking that he already knew all that there was to be known
 about it, and that it was useless to stir up this ugly business, since
 there was neither honor nor profit to be derived from it.
 

 Then, indeed, the future looked threatening at La Souleiade. Black want
 stared them in the face. And Clotilde, who, in reality, had a great deal
 of good sense, was the first to take alarm. She maintained her
 cheerfulness while Pascal was present, but, more prescient than he, in her
 womanly tenderness, she fell into a state of absolute terror if he left
 her for an instant, asking herself what was to become of him at his age
 with so heavy a burden upon his shoulders. For several days she cherished
 in secret a project—to work and earn money, a great deal of money,
 with her pastels. People had so often praised her extraordinary and
 original talent that, taking Martine into her confidence, she sent her one
 fine morning to offer some of her fantastic bouquets to the color dealer
 of the Cours Sauvaire, who was a relation, it was said, of a Parisian
 artist. It was with the express condition that nothing was to be exhibited
 in Plassans, that everything was to be sent to a distance. But the result
 was disastrous; the merchant was frightened by the strangeness of the
 design, and by the fantastic boldness of the execution, and he declared
 that they would never sell. This threw her into despair; great tears
 welled her eyes. Of what use was she? It was a grief and a humiliation to
 be good for nothing. And the servant was obliged to console her, saying
 that no doubt all women were not born for work; that some grew like the
 flowers in the gardens, for the sake of their fragrance; while others were
 the wheat of the fields that is ground up and used for food.
 

 Martine, meantime, cherished another project; it was to urge the doctor to
 resume his practise. At last she mentioned it to Clotilde, who at once
 pointed out to her the difficulty, the impossibility almost, of such an
 attempt. She and Pascal had been talking about his doing so only the day
 before. He, too, was anxious, and had thought of work as the only chance
 of salvation. The idea of opening an office again was naturally the first
 that had presented itself to him. But he had been for so long a time the
 physician of the poor! How could he venture now to ask payment when it was
 so many years since he had left off doing so? Besides, was it not too
 late, at his age, to recommence a career? not to speak of the absurd
 rumors that had been circulating about him, the name which they had given
 him of a crack-brained genius. He would not find a single patient now, it
 would be a useless cruelty to force him to make an attempt which would
 assuredly result only in a lacerated heart and empty hands. Clotilde, on
 the contrary, had used all her influence to turn him from the idea.
 Martine comprehended the reasonableness of these objections, and she too
 declared that he must be prevented from running the risk of so great a
 chagrin. But while she was speaking a new idea occurred to her, as she
 suddenly remembered an old register, which she had met with in a press,
 and in which she had in former times entered the doctor’s visits. For a
 long time it was she who had kept the accounts. There were so many
 patients who had never paid that a list of them filled three of the large
 pages of the register. Why, then, now that they had fallen into
 misfortune, should they not ask from these people the money which they
 justly owed? It might be done without saying anything to monsieur, who had
 never been willing to appeal to the law. And this time Clotilde approved
 of her idea. It was a perfect conspiracy. Clotilde consulted the register,
 and made out the bills, and the servant presented them. But nowhere did
 she receive a sou; they told her at every door that they would look over
 the account; that they would stop in and see the doctor himself. Ten days
 passed, no one came, and there were now only six francs in the house,
 barely enough to live upon for two or three days longer.
 

 Martine, when she returned with empty hands on the following day from a
 new application to an old patient, took Clotilde aside and told her that
 she had just been talking with Mme. Felicite at the corner of the Rue de
 la Banne. The latter had undoubtedly been watching for her. She had not
 again set foot in La Souleiade. Not even the misfortune which had befallen
 her son—the sudden loss of his money, of which the whole town was
 talking—had brought her to him; she still continued stern and
 indignant. But she waited in trembling excitement, she maintained her
 attitude as an offended mother only in the certainty that she would at
 last have Pascal at her feet, shrewdly calculating that he would sooner or
 later be compelled to appeal to her for assistance. When he had not a sou
 left, when he knocked at her door, then she would dictate her terms; he
 should marry Clotilde, or, better still, she would demand the departure of
 the latter. But the days passed, and he did not come. And this was why she
 had stopped Martine, assuming a pitying air, asking what news there was,
 and seeming to be surprised that they had not had recourse to her purse,
 while giving it to be understood that her dignity forbade her to take the
 first step.
 

 “You should speak to monsieur, and persuade him,” ended the servant. And
 indeed, why should he not appeal to his mother? That would be entirely
 natural.
 

 “Oh! never would I undertake such a commission,” cried Clotilde. “Master
 would be angry, and with reason. I truly believe he would die of
 starvation before he would eat grandmother’s bread.”
 

 But on the evening of the second day after this, at dinner, as Martine was
 putting on the table a piece of boiled beef left over from the day before,
 she gave them notice.
 

 “I have no more money, monsieur, and to-morrow there will be only
 potatoes, without oil or butter. It is three weeks now that you have had
 only water to drink; now you will have to do without meat.”
 

 They were still cheerful, they could still jest.
 

 “Have you salt, my good girl?”
 

 “Oh, that; yes, monsieur, there is still a little left.”
 

 “Well, potatoes and salt are very good when one is hungry.”
 

 That night, however, Pascal noticed that Clotilde was feverish; this was
 the hour in which they exchanged confidences, and she ventured to tell him
 of her anxiety on his account, on her own, on that of the whole house.
 What was going to become of them when all their resources should be
 exhausted? For a moment she thought of speaking to him of his mother. But
 she was afraid, and she contented herself with confessing to him what she
 and Martine had done—the old register examined, the bills made out
 and sent, the money asked everywhere in vain. In other circumstances he
 would have been greatly annoyed and very angry at this confession;
 offended that they should have acted without his knowledge, and contrary
 to the attitude he had maintained during his whole professional life. He
 remained for a long tine silent, strongly agitated, and this would have
 sufficed to prove how great must be his secret anguish at times, under his
 apparent indifference to poverty. Then he forgave Clotilde, clasping her
 wildly to his breast, and finally he said that she had done right, that
 they could not continue to live much longer as they were living, in a
 destitution which increased every day. Then they fell into silence, each
 trying to think of a means of procuring the money necessary for their
 daily wants, each suffering keenly; she, desperate at the thought of the
 tortures that awaited him; he unable to accustom himself to the idea of
 seeing her wanting bread. Was their happiness forever ended, then? Was
 poverty going to blight their spring with its chill breath?
 

 At breakfast, on the following day, they ate only fruit. The doctor was
 very silent during the morning, a prey to a visible struggle. And it was
 not until three o’clock that he took a resolution.
 

 “Come, we must stir ourselves,” he said to his companion. “I do not wish
 you to fast this evening again; so put on your hat, we will go out
 together.”
 

 She looked at him, waiting for an explanation.
 

 “Yes, since they owe us money, and have refused to give it to you, I will
 see whether they will also refuse to give it to me.”
 

 His hands trembled; the thought of demanding payment in this way, after so
 many years, evidently made him suffer terribly; but he forced a smile, he
 affected to be very brave. And she, who knew from the trembling of his
 voice the extent of his sacrifice, had tears in her eyes.
 

 “No, no, master; don’t go if it makes you suffer so much. Martine can go
 again.”
 

 But the servant, who was present, approved highly of monsieur’s intention.
 

 “And why should not monsieur go? There’s no shame in asking what is owed
 to one, is there? Every one should have his own; for my part, I think it
 quite right that monsieur should show at last that he is a man.”
 

 Then, as before, in their hours of happiness, old King David, as Pascal
 jestingly called himself, left the house, leaning on Abishag’s arm.
 Neither of them was yet in rags; he still wore his tightly buttoned
 overcoat; she had on her pretty linen gown with red spots, but doubtless
 the consciousness of their poverty lowered them in their own estimation,
 making them feel that they were now only two poor people who occupied a
 very insignificant place in the world, for they walked along by the
 houses, shunning observation. The sunny streets were almost deserted. A
 few curious glances embarrassed them. They did not hasten their steps,
 however; only their hearts were oppressed at the thought of the visits
 they were about to make.
 

 Pascal resolved to begin with an old magistrate whom he had treated for an
 affection of the liver. He entered the house, leaving Clotilde sitting on
 the bench in the Cours Sauvaire. But he was greatly relieved when the
 magistrate, anticipating his demand, told him that he did not receive his
 rents until October, and that he would pay him then. At the house of an
 old lady of seventy, a paralytic, the rebuff was of a different kind. She
 was offended because her account had been sent to her through a servant
 who had been impolite; so that he hastened to offer her his excuses,
 giving her all the time she desired. Then he climbed up three flights of
 stairs to the apartment of a clerk in the tax collector’s office, whom he
 found still ill, and so poor that he did not even venture to make his
 demand. Then followed a mercer, a lawyer’s wife, an oil merchant, a baker—all
 well-to-do people; and all turned him away, some with excuses, others by
 denying him admittance; a few even pretended not to know what he meant.
 There remained the Marquise de Valqueyras, the sole representative of a
 very ancient family, a widow with a girl of ten, who was very rich, and
 whose avarice was notorious. He had left her for the last, for he was
 greatly afraid of her. Finally he knocked at the door of her ancient
 mansion, at the foot of the Cours Sauvaire, a massive structure of the
 time of Mazarin. He remained so long in the house that Clotilde, who was
 walking under the trees, at last became uneasy.
 

 When he finally made his appearance, at the end of a full half hour, she
 said jestingly, greatly relieved:
 

 “Why, what was the matter? Had she no money?”
 

 But here, too, he had been unsuccessful; she complained that her tenants
 did not pay her.
 

 “Imagine,” he continued, in explanation of his long absence, “the little
 girl is ill. I am afraid that it is the beginning of a gastric fever. So
 she wished me to see the child, and I examined her.”
 

 A smile which she could not suppress came to Clotilde’s lips.
 

 “And you prescribed for her?”
 

 “Of course; could I do otherwise?”
 

 She took his arm again, deeply affected, and he felt her press it against
 her heart. For a time they walked on aimlessly. It was all over; they had
 knocked at every debtor’s door, and nothing now remained for them to do
 but to return home with empty hands. But this Pascal refused to do,
 determined that Clotilde should have something more than the potatoes and
 water which awaited them. When they ascended the Cours Sauvaire, they
 turned to the left, to the new town; drifting now whither cruel fate led
 them.
 

 “Listen,” said Pascal at last; “I have an idea. If I were to speak to
 Ramond he would willingly lend us a thousand francs, which we could return
 to him when our affairs are arranged.”
 

 She did not answer at once. Ramond, whom she had rejected, who was now
 married and settled in a house in the new town, in a fair way to become
 the fashionable physician of the place, and to make a fortune! She knew,
 indeed, that he had a magnanimous soul and a kind heart. If he had not
 visited them again it had been undoubtedly through delicacy. Whenever they
 chanced to meet, he saluted them with so admiring an air, he seemed so
 pleased to see their happiness.
 

 “Would that be disagreeable to you?” asked Pascal ingenuously. For his
 part, he would have thrown open to the young physician his house, his
 purse, and his heart.
 

 “No, no,” she answered quickly. “There has never been anything between us
 but affection and frankness. I think I gave him a great deal of pain, but
 he has forgiven me. You are right; we have no other friend. It is to
 Ramond that we must apply.”
 

 Ill luck pursued them, however. Ramond was absent from home, attending a
 consultation at Marseilles, and he would not be back until the following
 evening. And it young Mme. Ramond, an old friend of Clotilde’s, some three
 years her junior, who received them. She seemed a little embarrassed, but
 she was very amiable, notwithstanding. But the doctor, naturally, did not
 prefer his request, and contented himself with saying, in explanation of
 his visit, that he had missed Ramond. When they were in the street again,
 Pascal and Clotilde felt themselves once more abandoned and alone. Where
 now should they turn? What new effort should they make? And they walked on
 again aimlessly.
 

 “I did not tell you, master,” Clotilde at last ventured to murmur, “but it
 seems that Martine met grandmother the other day. Yes, grandmother has
 been uneasy about us. She asked Martine why we did not go to her, if we
 were in want. And see, here is her house.”
 

 They were in fact, in the Rue de la Banne. They could see the corner of
 the Place de la Sous-Prefecture. But he at once silenced her.
 

 “Never, do you hear! Nor shall you go either. You say that because it
 grieves you to see me in this poverty. My heart, too, is heavy, to think
 that you also are in want, that you also suffer. But it is better to
 suffer than to do a thing that would leave one an eternal remorse. I will
 not. I cannot.”
 

 They emerged from the Rue de la Banne, and entered the old quarter.
 

 “I would a thousand times rather apply to a stranger. Perhaps we still
 have friends, even if they are only among the poor.”
 

 And resolved to beg, David continued his walk, leaning on the arm of
 Abishag; the old mendicant king went from door to door, leaning on the
 shoulder of the loving subject whose youth was now his only support. It
 was almost six o’clock; the heat had abated; the narrow streets were
 filling with people; and in this populous quarter where they were loved,
 they were everywhere greeted with smiles. Something of pity was mingled
 with the admiration they awakened, for every one knew of their ruin. But
 they seemed of a nobler beauty than before, he all white, she all blond,
 pressing close to each other in their misfortune. They seemed more united,
 more one with each other than ever; holding their heads erect, proud of
 their glorious love, though touched by misfortune; he shaken, while she,
 with a courageous heart, sustained him. And in spite of the poverty that
 had so suddenly overtaken them they walked without shame, very poor and
 very great, with the sorrowful smile under which they concealed the
 desolation of their souls. Workmen in dirty blouses passed them by, who
 had more money in their pockets than they. No one ventured to offer them
 the sou which is not refused to those who are hungry. At the Rue Canoquin
 they stopped at the house of Gulraude. She had died the week before. Two
 other attempts which they made failed. They were reduced now to consider
 where they could borrow ten francs. They had been walking about the town
 for three hours, but they could not resolve to go home empty-handed.
 

 Ah, this Plassans, with its Cours Sauvaire, its Rue de Rome, and its Rue
 de la Banne, dividing it into three quarters; this Plassans; with its
 windows always closed, this sun-baked town, dead in appearance, but which
 concealed under this sleeping surface a whole nocturnal life of the
 clubhouse and the gaming table. They walked through it three times more
 with slackened pace, on this clear, calm close of a glowing August day. In
 the yard of the coach office a few old stage-coaches, which still plied
 between the town and the mountain villages, were standing unharnessed; and
 under the thick shade of the plane trees at the doors of the cafes, the
 customers, who were to be seen from seven o’clock in the morning, looked
 after them smiling. In the new town, too, the servants came and stood at
 the doors of the wealthy houses; they met with less sympathy here than in
 the deserted streets of the Quartier St. Marc, whose antique houses
 maintained a friendly silence. They returned to the heart of the old
 quarter where they were most liked; they went as far as St. Saturnin, the
 cathedral, whose apse was shaded by the garden of the chapter, a sweet and
 peaceful solitude, from which a beggar drove them by himself asking an
 alms from them. They were building rapidly in the neighborhood of the
 railway station; a new quarter was growing up there, and they bent their
 steps in that direction. Then they returned a last time to the Place de la
 Sous-Prefecture, with a sudden reawakening of hope, thinking that they
 might meet some one who would offer them money. But they were followed
 only by the indulgent smile of the town, at seeing them so united and so
 beautiful. Only one woman had tears in her eyes, foreseeing, perhaps, the
 sufferings that awaited them. The stones of the Viorne, the little sharp
 paving stones, wounded their feet. And they had at last to return to La
 Souleiade, without having succeeded in obtaining anything, the old
 mendicant king and his submissive subject; Abishag, in the flower of her
 youth, leading back David, old and despoiled of his wealth, and weary from
 having walked the streets in vain.
 

 It was eight o’clock, and Martine, who was waiting for them, comprehended
 that she would have no cooking to do this evening. She pretended that she
 had dined, and as she looked ill Pascal sent her at once to bed.
 

 “We do not need you,” said Clotilde. “As the potatoes are on the fire we
 can take them up very well ourselves.”
 

 The servant, who was feverish and out of humor, yielded. She muttered some
 indistinct words—when people had eaten up everything what was the
 use of sitting down to table? Then, before shutting herself into her room,
 she added:
 

 “Monsieur, there is no more hay for Bonhomme. I thought he was looking
 badly a little while ago; monsieur ought to go and see him.”
 

 Pascal and Clotilde, filled with uneasiness, went to the stable. The old
 horse was, in fact, lying on the straw in the somnolence of expiring old
 age. They had not taken him out for six months past, for his legs, stiff
 with rheumatism, refused to support him, and he had become completely
 blind. No one could understand why the doctor kept the old beast. Even
 Martine had at last said that he ought to be slaughtered, if only through
 pity. But Pascal and Clotilde cried out at this, as much excited as if it
 had been proposed to them to put an end to some aged relative who was not
 dying fast enough. No, no, he had served them for more than a quarter of a
 century; he should die comfortably with them, like the worthy fellow he
 had always been. And to-night the doctor did not scorn to examine him, as
 if he had never attended any other patients than animals. He lifted up his
 hoofs, looked at his gums, and listened to the beating of his heart.
 

 “No, there is nothing the matter with him,” he said at last. “It is simply
 old age. Ah, my poor old fellow, I think, indeed, we shall never again
 travel the roads together.”
 

 The idea that there was no more hay distressed Clotilde. But Pascal
 reassured her—an animal of that age, that no longer moved about,
 needed so little. She stooped down and took a few handfuls of grass from a
 heap which the servant had left there, and both were rejoiced when
 Bonhomme deigned, solely and simply through friendship, as it seemed, to
 eat the grass out of her hand.
 

 “Oh,” she said, laughing, “so you still have an appetite! You cannot be
 very sick, then; you must not try to work upon our feelings. Good night,
 and sleep well.”
 

 And they left him to his slumbers after having each given him, as usual, a
 hearty kiss on either side of his nose.
 

 Night fell, and an idea occurred to them, in order not to remain
 downstairs in the empty house—to close up everything and eat their
 dinner upstairs. Clotilde quickly took up the dish of potatoes, the
 salt-cellar, and a fine decanter of water; while Pascal took charge of a
 basket of grapes, the first which they had yet gathered from an early vine
 at the foot of the terrace. They closed the door, and laid the cloth on a
 little table, putting the potatoes in the middle between the salt-cellar
 and the decanter, and the basket of grapes on a chair beside them. And it
 was a wonderful feast, which reminded them of the delicious breakfast they
 had made on the morning on which Martine had obstinately shut herself up
 in her room, and refused to answer them. They experienced the same delight
 as then at being alone, at waiting upon themselves, at eating from the
 same plate, sitting close beside each other. This evening, which they had
 anticipated with so much dread, had in store for them the most delightful
 hours of their existence. As soon as they found themselves at home in the
 large friendly room, as far removed from the town which they had just been
 scouring as if they had been a hundred leagues away from it, all
 uneasiness and all sadness vanished—even to the recollection of the
 wretched afternoon wasted in useless wanderings. They were once more
 indifferent to all that was not their affection; they no longer remembered
 that they had lost their fortune; that they might have to hunt up a friend
 on the morrow in order to be able to dine in the evening. Why torture
 themselves with fears of coming want, when all they required to enjoy the
 greatest possible happiness was to be together?
 

 But Pascal felt a sudden terror.
 

 “My God! and we dreaded this evening so greatly! Is it wise to be happy in
 this way? Who knows what to-morrow may have in store for us?”
 

 But she put her little hand over his mouth; she desired that he should
 have one more evening of perfect happiness.
 

 “No, no; to-morrow we shall love each other as we love each other to-day.
 Love me with all your strength, as I love you.”
 

 And never had they eaten with more relish. She displayed the appetite of a
 healthy young girl with a good digestion; she ate the potatoes with a
 hearty appetite, laughing, thinking them delicious, better than the most
 vaunted delicacies. He, too, recovered the appetite of his youthful days.
 They drank with delight deep draughts of pure water. Then the grapes for
 dessert filled them with admiration; these grapes so fresh, this blood of
 the earth which the sun had touched with gold. They ate to excess; they
 became drunk on water and fruit, and more than all on gaiety. They did not
 remember ever before to have enjoyed such a feast together; even the
 famous breakfast they had made, with its luxuries of cutlets and bread and
 wine, had not given them this intoxication, this joy in living, when to be
 together was happiness enough, changing the china to dishes of gold, and
 the miserable food to celestial fare such as not even the gods enjoyed.
 

 It was now quite dark, but they did not light the lamp. Through the wide
 open windows they could see the vast summer sky. The night breeze entered,
 still warm and laden with a faint odor of lavender. The moon had just
 risen above the horizon, large and round, flooding the room with a silvery
 light, in which they saw each other as in a dream light infinitely bright
 and sweet.
 

 
 
 

 But on the following day their disquietude all returned. They were now
 obliged to go in debt. Martine obtained on credit bread, wine, and a
 little meat, much to her shame, be it said, forced as she was to maneuver
 and tell lies, for no one was ignorant of the ruin that had overtaken the
 house. The doctor had indeed thought of mortgaging La Souleiade, but only
 as a last resource. All he now possessed was this property, which was
 worth twenty thousand francs, but for which he would perhaps not get
 fifteen thousand, if he should sell it; and when these should be spent
 black want would be before them, the street, without even a stone of their
 own on which to lay their heads. Clotilde therefore begged Pascal to wait
 and not to take any irrevocable step so long as things were not utterly
 desperate.
 

 Three or four days passed. It was the beginning of September, and the
 weather unfortunately changed; terrible storms ravaged the entire country;
 a part of the garden wall was blown down, and as Pascal was unable to
 rebuild it, the yawning breach remained. Already they were beginning to be
 rude at the baker’s. And one morning the old servant came home with the
 meat from the butcher’s in tears, saying that he had given her the refuse.
 A few days more and they would be unable to obtain anything on credit. It
 had become absolutely necessary to consider how they should find the money
 for their small daily expenses.
 

 One Monday morning, the beginning of another week of torture, Clotilde was
 very restless. A struggle seemed to be going on within her, and it was
 only when she saw Pascal refuse at breakfast his share of a piece of beef
 which had been left over from the day before that she at last came to a
 decision. Then with a calm and resolute air, she went out after breakfast
 with Martine, after quietly putting into the basket of the latter a little
 package—some articles of dress which she was giving her, she said.
 

 When she returned two hours later she was very pale. But her large eyes,
 so clear and frank, were shining. She went up to the doctor at once and
 made her confession.
 

 “I must ask your forgiveness, master, for I have just been disobeying you,
 and I know that I am going to pain you greatly.”
 

 “Why, what have you been doing?” he asked uneasily, not understanding what
 she meant.
 

 Slowly, without removing her eyes from him, she drew from her pocket an
 envelope, from which she took some bank-notes. A sudden intuition
 enlightened him, and he cried:
 

 “Ah, my God! the jewels, the presents I gave you!”
 

 And he, who was usually so good-tempered and gentle, was convulsed with
 grief and anger. He seized her hands in his, crushing with almost brutal
 force the fingers which held the notes.
 

 “My God! what have you done, unhappy girl? It is my heart that you have
 sold, both our hearts, that had entered into those jewels, which you have
 given with them for money! The jewels which I gave you, the souvenirs of
 our divinest hours, your property, yours only, how can you wish me to take
 them back, to turn them to my profit? Can it be possible—have you
 thought of the anguish that this would give me?”
 

 “And you, master,” she answered gently, “do you think that I could consent
 to our remaining in the unhappy situation in which we are, in want of
 everything, while I had these rings and necklaces and earrings laid away
 in the bottom of a drawer? Why, my whole being would rise in protest. I
 should think myself a miser, a selfish wretch, if I had kept them any
 longer. And, although it was a grief for me to part with them—ah,
 yes, I confess it, so great a grief that I could hardly find the courage
 to do it—I am certain that I have only done what I ought to have
 done as an obedient and loving woman.”
 

 And as he still grasped her hands, tears came to her eyes, and she added
 in the same gentle voice and with a faint smile:
 

 “Don’t press so hard; you hurt me.”
 

 Then repentant and deeply moved, Pascal, too, wept.
 

 “I am a brute to get angry in this way. You acted rightly; you could not
 do otherwise. But forgive me; it was hard for me to see you despoil
 yourself. Give me your hands, your poor hands, and let me kiss away the
 marks of my stupid violence.”
 

 He took her hands again in his tenderly; he covered them with kisses; he
 thought them inestimably precious, so delicate and bare, thus stripped of
 their rings. Consoled now, and joyous, she told him of her escapade—how
 she had taken Martine into her confidence, and how both had gone to the
 dealer who had sold him the corsage of point d’Alencon, and how after
 interminable examining and bargaining the woman had given six thousand
 francs for all the jewels. Again he repressed a gesture of despair—six
 thousand francs! when the jewels had cost him more than three times that
 amount—twenty thousand francs at the very least.
 

 “Listen,” he said to her at last; “I will take this money, since, in the
 goodness of your heart, you have brought it to me. But it is clearly
 understood that it is yours. I swear to you that I will, for the future,
 be more miserly than Martine herself. I will give her only the few sous
 that are absolutely necessary for our maintenance, and you will find in
 the desk all that may be left of this sum, if I should never be able to
 complete it and give it back to you entire.”
 

 He clasped her in an embrace that still trembled with emotion. Presently,
 lowering his voice to a whisper, he said:
 

 “And did you sell everything, absolutely everything?”
 

 Without speaking, she disengaged herself a little from his embrace, and
 put her fingers to her throat, with her pretty gesture, smiling and
 blushing. Finally, she drew out the slender chain on which shone the seven
 pearls, like milky stars. Then she put it back again out of sight.
 

 He, too, blushed, and a great joy filled his heart. He embraced her
 passionately.
 

 “Ah!” he cried, “how good you are, and how I love you!”
 

 But from this time forth the recollection of the jewels which had been
 sold rested like a weight upon his heart; and he could not look at the
 money in his desk without pain. He was haunted by the thought of
 approaching want, inevitable want, and by a still more bitter thought—the
 thought of his age, of his sixty years which rendered him useless,
 incapable of earning a comfortable living for a wife; he had been suddenly
 and rudely awakened from his illusory dream of eternal love to the
 disquieting reality. He had fallen unexpectedly into poverty, and he felt
 himself very old—this terrified him and filled him with a sort of
 remorse, of desperate rage against himself, as if he had been guilty of a
 crime. And this embittered his every hour; if through momentary
 forgetfulness he permitted himself to indulge in a little gaiety his
 distress soon returned with greater poignancy than ever, bringing with it
 a sudden and inexplicable sadness. He did not dare to question himself,
 and his dissatisfaction with himself and his suffering increased every
 day.
 

 Then a frightful revelation came to him. One morning, when he was alone,
 he received a letter bearing the Plassans postmark, the superscription on
 which he examined with surprise, not recognizing the writing. This letter
 was not signed; and after reading a few lines he made an angry movement as
 if to tear it up and throw it away; but he sat down trembling instead, and
 read it to the end. The style was perfectly courteous; the long phrases
 rolled on, measured and carefully worded, like diplomatic phrases, whose
 only aim is to convince. It was demonstrated to him with a superabundance
 of arguments that the scandal of La Souleiade had lasted too long already.
 If passion, up to a certain point, explained the fault, yet a man of his
 age and in his situation was rendering himself contemptible by persisting
 in wrecking the happiness of the young relative whose trustfulness he
 abused. No one was ignorant of the ascendency which he had acquired over
 her; it was admitted that she gloried in sacrificing herself for him; but
 ought he not, on his side, to comprehend that it was impossible that she
 should love an old man, that what she felt was merely pity and gratitude,
 and that it was high time to deliver her from this senile love, which
 would finally leave her with a dishonored name! Since he could not even
 assure her a small fortune, the writer hoped he would act like an
 honorable man, and have the strength to separate from her, through
 consideration for her happiness, if it were not yet too late. And the
 letter concluded with the reflection that evil conduct was always punished
 in the end.
 

 From the first sentence Pascal felt that this anonymous letter came from
 his mother. Old Mme. Rougon must have dictated it; he could hear in it the
 very inflections of her voice. But after having begun the letter angry and
 indignant, he finished it pale and trembling, seized by the shiver which
 now passed through him continually and without apparent cause. The letter
 was right, it enlightened him cruelly regarding the source of his mental
 distress, showing him that it was remorse for keeping Clotilde with him,
 old and poor as he was. He got up and walked over to a mirror, before
 which he stood for a long time, his eyes gradually filling with tears of
 despair at sight of his wrinkles and his white beard. The feeling of
 terror which arose within him, the mortal chill which invaded his heart,
 was caused by the thought that separation had become necessary,
 inevitable. He repelled the thought, he felt that he would never have the
 strength for a separation, but it still returned; he would never now pass
 a single day without being assailed by it, without being torn by the
 struggle between his love and his reason until the terrible day when he
 should become resigned, his strength and his tears exhausted. In his
 present weakness, he trembled merely at the thought of one day having this
 courage. And all was indeed over, the irrevocable had begun; he was filled
 with fear for Clotilde, so young and so beautiful, and all there was left
 him now was the duty of saving her from himself.
 

 Then, haunted by every word, by every phrase of the letter, he tortured
 himself at first by trying to persuade himself that she did not love him,
 that all she felt for him was pity and gratitude. It would make the
 rupture more easy to him, he thought, if he were once convinced that she
 sacrificed herself, and that in keeping her with him longer he was only
 gratifying his monstrous selfishness. But it was in vain that he studied
 her, that he subjected her to proofs, she remained as tender and devoted
 as ever, making the dreaded decision still more difficult. Then he
 pondered over all the causes that vaguely, but ceaselessly urged their
 separation. The life which they had been leading for months past, this
 life without ties or duties, without work of any sort, was not good. He
 thought no longer of himself, he considered himself good for nothing now
 but to go away and bury himself out of sight in some remote corner; but
 for her was it not an injurious life, a life which would deteriorate her
 character and weaken her will? And suddenly he saw himself in fancy dying,
 leaving her alone to perish of hunger in the streets. No, no! this would
 be a crime; he could not, for the sake of the happiness of his few
 remaining days, bequeath to her this heritage of shame and misery.
 

 One morning Clotilde went for a walk in the neighborhood, from which she
 returned greatly agitated, pale and trembling, and as soon as she was
 upstairs in the workroom, she almost fainted in Pascal’s arms, faltering:
 

 “Oh, my God! oh, my God! those women!”
 

 Terrified, he pressed her with questions.
 

 “Come, tell me! What has happened?”
 

 A flush mounted to her face. She flung her arms around his neck and hid
 her head on his shoulder.
 

 “It was those women! Reaching a shady spot, I was closing my parasol, and
 I had the misfortune to throw down a child. And they all rose against me,
 crying out such things, oh, such things—things that I cannot repeat,
 that I could not understand!”
 

 She burst into sobs. He was livid; he could find nothing to say to her; he
 kissed her wildly, weeping like herself. He pictured to himself the whole
 scene; he saw her pursued, hooted at, reviled. Presently he faltered:
 

 “It is my fault, it is through me you suffer. Listen, we will go away from
 here, far, far away, where we shall not be known, where you will be
 honored, where you will be happy.”
 

 But seeing him weep, she recovered her calmness by a violent effort. And
 drying her tears, she said:
 

 “Ah! I have behaved like a coward in telling you all this. After promising
 myself that I would say nothing of it to you. But when I found myself at
 home again, my anguish was so great that it all came out. But you see now
 it is all over, don’t grieve about it. I love you.”
 

 She smiled, and putting her arms about him she kissed him in her turn,
 trying to soothe his despair.
 

 “I love you. I love you so dearly that it will console me for everything.
 There is only you in the world, what matters anything that is not you? You
 are so good; you make me so happy!”
 

 But he continued to weep, and she, too, began to weep again, and there was
 a moment of infinite sadness, of anguish, in which they mingled their
 kisses and their tears.
 

 Pascal, when she left him alone for an instant, thought himself a wretch.
 He could no longer be the cause of misfortune to this child, whom he
 adored. And on the evening of the same day an event took place which
 brought about the solution hitherto sought in vain, with the fear of
 finding it. After dinner Martine beckoned him aside, and gave him a
 letter, with all sorts of precautions, saying:
 

 “I met Mme. Felicite, and she charged me to give you this letter,
 monsieur, and she told me to tell you that she would have brought it to
 you herself, only that regard for her reputation prevented her from
 returning here. She begs you to send her back M. Maxime’s letter, letting
 her know mademoiselle’s answer.”
 

 It was, in fact, a letter from Maxime, and Mme. Felicite, glad to have
 received it, used it as a new means of conquering her son, after having
 waited in vain for misery to deliver him up to her, repentant and
 imploring. As neither Pascal nor Clotilde had come to demand aid or succor
 from her, she had once more changed her plan, returning to her old idea of
 separating them; and, this time, the opportunity seemed to her decisive.
 Maxime’s letter was a pressing one; he urged his grandmother to plead his
 cause with his sister. Ataxia had declared itself; he was able to walk now
 only leaning on his servant’s arm. His solitude terrified him, and he
 urgently entreated his sister to come to him. He wished to have her with
 him as a rampart against his father’s abominable designs; as a sweet and
 upright woman after all, who would take care of him. The letter gave it to
 be understood that if she conducted herself well toward him she would have
 no reason to repent it; and ended by reminding the young girl of the
 promise she had made him, at the time of his visit to Plassans, to come to
 him, if the day ever arrived when he really needed her.
 

 Pascal turned cold. He read the four pages over again. Here an opportunity
 to separate presented itself, acceptable to him and advantageous for
 Clotilde, so easy and so natural that they ought to accept it at once;
 yet, in spite of all his reasoning he felt so weak, so irresolute still
 that his limbs trembled under him, and he was obliged to sit down for a
 moment. But he wished to be heroic, and controlling himself, he called to
 his companion.
 

 “Here!” he said, “read this letter which your grandmother has sent me.”
 

 Clotilde read the letter attentively to the end without a word, without a
 sign. Then she said simply:
 

 “Well, you are going to answer it, are you not? I refuse.”
 

 He was obliged to exercise a strong effort of self-control to avoid
 uttering a great cry of joy, as he pressed her to his heart. As if it were
 another person who spoke, he heard himself saying quietly:
 

 “You refuse—impossible! You must reflect. Let us wait till to-morrow
 to give an answer; and let us talk it over, shall we?”
 

 Surprised, she cried excitedly:
 

 “Part from each other! and why? And would you really consent to it? What
 folly! we love each other, and you would have me leave you and go away
 where no one cares for me! How could you think of such a thing? It would
 be stupid.”
 

 He avoided touching on this side of the question, and hastened to speak of
 promises made—of duty.
 

 “Remember, my dear, how greatly affected you were when I told you that
 Maxime was in danger. And think of him now, struck down by disease,
 helpless and alone, calling you to his side. Can you abandon him in that
 situation? You have a duty to fulfil toward him.”
 

 “A duty?” she cried. “Have I any duties toward a brother who has never
 occupied himself with me? My only duty is where my heart is.”
 

 “But you have promised. I have promised for you. I have said that you were
 rational, and you are not going to belie my words.”
 

 “Rational? It is you who are not rational. It is not rational to separate
 when to do so would make us both die of grief.”
 

 And with an angry gesture she closed the discussion, saying:
 

 “Besides, what is the use of talking about it? There is nothing simpler;
 it is only necessary to say a single word. Answer me. Are you tired of me?
 Do you wish to send me away?”
 

 He uttered a cry.
 

 “Send you away! I! Great God!”
 

 “Then it is all settled. If you do not send me away I shall remain.”
 

 She laughed now, and, running to her desk, wrote in red pencil across her
 brother’s letter two words—“I refuse;” then she called Martine and
 insisted upon her taking the letter back at once. Pascal was radiant; a
 wave of happiness so intense inundated his being that he let her have her
 way. The joy of keeping her with him deprived him even of his power of
 reasoning.
 

 But that very night, what remorse did he not feel for having been so
 cowardly! He had again yielded to his longing for happiness. A deathlike
 sweat broke out upon him when he saw her in imagination far away; himself
 alone, without her, without that caressing and subtle essence that
 pervaded the atmosphere when she was near; her breath, her brightness, her
 courageous rectitude, and the dear presence, physical and mental, which
 had now become as necessary to his life as the light of day itself. She
 must leave him, and he must find the strength to die of it. He despised
 himself for his want of courage, he judged the situation with terrible
 clear-sightedness. All was ended. An honorable existence and a fortune
 awaited her with her brother; he could not carry his senile selfishness so
 far as to keep her any longer in the misery in which he was, to be scorned
 and despised. And fainting at the thought of all he was losing, he swore
 to himself that he would be strong, that he would not accept the sacrifice
 of this child, that he would restore her to happiness and to life, in her
 own despite.
 

 And now the struggle of self-abnegation began. Some days passed; he had
 demonstrated to her so clearly the rudeness of her “I refuse,” on Maxime’s
 letter, that she had written a long letter to her grandmother, explaining
 to her the reasons for her refusal. But still she would not leave La
 Souleiade. As Pascal had grown extremely parsimonious, in his desire to
 trench as little as possible on the money obtained by the sale of the
 jewels, she surpassed herself, eating her dry bread with merry laughter.
 One morning he surprised her giving lessons of economy to Martine. Twenty
 times a day she would look at him intently and then throw herself on his
 neck and cover his face with kisses, to combat the dreadful idea of a
 separation, which she saw always in his eyes. Then she had another
 argument. One evening after dinner he was seized with a palpitation of the
 heart, and almost fainted. This surprised him; he had never suffered from
 the heart, and he believed it to be simply a return of his old nervous
 trouble. Since his great happiness he had felt less strong, with an odd
 sensation, as if some delicate hidden spring had snapped within him.
 Greatly alarmed, she hurried to his assistance. Well! now he would no
 doubt never speak again of her going away. When one loved people, and they
 were ill, one stayed with them to take care of them.
 

 The struggle thus became a daily, an hourly one. It was a continual
 assault made by affection, by devotion, by self-abnegation, in the one
 desire for another’s happiness. But while her kindness and tenderness made
 the thought of her departure only the more cruel for Pascal, he felt every
 day more and more strongly the necessity for it. His resolution was now
 taken. But he remained at bay, trembling and hesitating as to the means of
 persuading her. He pictured to himself her despair, her tears; what should
 he do? how should he tell her? how could they bring themselves to give
 each other a last embrace, never to see each other again? And the days
 passed, and he could think of nothing, and he began once more to accuse
 himself of cowardice.
 

 Sometimes she would say jestingly, with a touch of affectionate malice:
 

 “Master, you are too kind-hearted not to keep me.”
 

 But this vexed him; he grew excited, and with gloomy despair answered:
 

 “No, no! don’t talk of my kindness. If I were really kind you would have
 been long ago with your brother, leading an easy and honorable life, with
 a bright and tranquil future before you, instead of obstinately remaining
 here, despised, poor, and without any prospect, to be the sad companion of
 an old fool like me! No, I am nothing but a coward and a dishonorable
 man!”
 

 She hastily stopped him. And it was in truth his kindness of heart, above
 all, that bled, that immense kindness of heart which sprang from his love
 of life, which he diffused over persons and things, in his continual care
 for the happiness of every one and everything. To be kind, was not this to
 love her, to make her happy, at the price of his own happiness? This was
 the kindness which it was necessary for him to exercise, and which he felt
 that he would one day exercise, heroic and decisive. But like the wretch
 who has resolved upon suicide, he waited for the opportunity, the hour,
 and the means, to carry out his design. Early one morning, on going into
 the workroom, Clotilde was surprised to see Dr. Pascal seated at his
 table. It was many weeks since he had either opened a book or touched a
 pen.
 

 “Why! you are working?” she said.
 

 Without raising his head he answered absently:
 

 “Yes; this is the genealogical tree that I had not even brought up to
 date.”
 

 She stood behind him for a few moments, looking at him writing. He was
 completing the notices of Aunt Dide, of Uncle Macquart, and of little
 Charles, writing the dates of their death. Then, as he did not stir,
 seeming not to know that she was there, waiting for the kisses and the
 smiles of other mornings, she walked idly over to the window and back
 again.
 

 “So you are in earnest,” she said, “you are really working?”
 

 “Certainly; you see I ought to have noted down these deaths last month.
 And I have a heap of work waiting there for me.”
 

 She looked at him fixedly, with that steady inquiring gaze with which she
 sought to read his thoughts.
 

 “Very well, let us work. If you have papers to examine, or notes to copy,
 give them to me.”
 

 And from this day forth he affected to give himself up entirely to work.
 Besides, it was one of his theories that absolute rest was unprofitable,
 that it should never be prescribed, even to the overworked. As the fish
 lives in the water, so a man lives only in the external medium which
 surrounds him, the sensations which he receives from it transforming
 themselves in him into impulses, thoughts, and acts; so that if there were
 absolute rest, if he continued to receive sensations without giving them
 out again, digested and transformed, an engorgement would result, a malaise,
 an inevitable loss of equilibrium. For himself he had always found work to
 be the best regulator of his existence. Even on the mornings when he felt
 ill, if he set to work he recovered his equipoise. He never felt better
 than when he was engaged on some long work, methodically planned out
 beforehand, so many pages to so many hours every morning, and he compared
 this work to a balancing-pole, which enabled him to maintain his
 equilibrium in the midst of daily miseries, weaknesses, and mistakes. So
 that he attributed entirely to the idleness in which he had been living
 for some weeks past, the palpitation which at times made him feel as if he
 were going to suffocate. If he wished to recover his health he had only to
 take up again his great work.
 

 And Pascal spent hours developing and explaining these theories to
 Clotilde, with a feverish and exaggerated enthusiasm. He seemed to be once
 more possessed by the love of knowledge and study in which, up to the time
 of his sudden passion for her, he had spent his life exclusively. He
 repeated to her that he could not leave his work unfinished, that he had
 still a great deal to do, if he desired to leave a lasting monument behind
 him. His anxiety about the envelopes seemed to have taken possession of
 him again; he opened the large press twenty times a day, taking them down
 from the upper shelf and enriching them by new notes. His ideas on
 heredity were already undergoing a transformation; he would have liked to
 review the whole, to recast the whole, to deduce from the family history,
 natural and social, a vast synthesis, a resume, in broad strokes, of all
 humanity. Then, besides, he reviewed his method of treatment by hypodermic
 injections, with the purpose of amplifying it—a confused vision of a
 new therapeutics; a vague and remote theory based on his convictions and
 his personal experience of the beneficent dynamic influence of work.
 

 Now every morning, when he seated himself at his table, he would lament:
 

 “I shall not live long enough; life is too short.”
 

 He seemed to feel that he must not lose another hour. And one morning he
 looked up abruptly and said to his companion, who was copying a manuscript
 at his side:
 

 “Listen well, Clotilde. If I should die—”
 

 “What an idea!” she protested, terrified.
 

 “If I should die,” he resumed, “listen to me well—close all the
 doors immediately. You are to keep the envelopes, you, you only. And when
 you have collected all my other manuscripts, send them to Ramond. These
 are my last wishes, do you hear?”
 

 But she refused to listen to him.
 

 “No, no!” she cried hastily, “you talk nonsense!”
 

 “Clotilde, swear to me that you will keep the envelopes, and that you will
 send all my other papers to Ramond.”
 

 At last, now very serious, and her eyes filled with tears, she gave him
 the promise he desired. He caught her in his arms, he, too, deeply moved,
 and lavished caresses upon her, as if his heart had all at once reopened
 to her. Presently he recovered his calmness, and spoke of his fears. Since
 he had been trying to work they seemed to have returned. He kept constant
 watch upon the press, pretending to have observed Martine prowling about
 it. Might they not work upon the fanaticism of this girl, and urge her to
 a bad action, persuading her that she was securing her master’s eternal
 welfare? He had suffered so much from suspicion! In the dread of
 approaching solitude his former tortures returned—the tortures of
 the scientist, who is menaced and persecuted by his own, at his own
 fireside, in his very flesh, in the work of his brain.
 

 One evening, when he was again discussing this subject with Clotilde, he
 said unthinkingly:
 

 “You know that when you are no longer here—”
 

 She turned very pale and, as he stopped with a start, she cried:
 

 “Oh, master, master, you have not given up that dreadful idea, then? I can
 see in your eyes that you are hiding something from me, that you have a
 thought which you no longer share with me. But if I go away and you should
 die, who will be here then to protect your work?”
 

 Thinking that she had become reconciled, to the idea of her departure, he
 had the strength to answer gaily:
 

 “Do you suppose that I would allow myself to die without seeing you once
 more. I will write to you, of course. You must come back to close my
 eyes.”
 

 Now she burst out sobbing, and sank into a chair.
 

 “My God! Can it be! You wish that to-morrow we should be together no
 longer, we who have never been separated!”
 

 From this day forth Pascal seemed more engrossed than ever in his work. He
 would sit for four or five hours at a time, whole mornings and afternoons,
 without once raising his head. He overacted his zeal. He would allow no
 one to disturb him, by so much as a word. And when Clotilde would leave
 the room on tiptoe to give an order downstairs or to go on some errand, he
 would assure himself by a furtive glance that she was gone, and then let
 his head drop on the table, with an air of profound dejection. It was a
 painful relief from the extraordinary effort which he compelled himself to
 make when she was present; to remain at his table, instead of going over
 and taking her in his arms and covering her face with sweet kisses. Ah,
 work! how ardently he called on it as his only refuge from torturing
 thoughts. But for the most part he was unable to work; he was obliged to
 feign attention, keeping his eyes fixed upon the page, his sorrowful eyes
 that grew dim with tears, while his mind, confused, distracted, filled
 always with one image, suffered the pangs of death. Was he then doomed to
 see work fail now its effect, he who had always considered it of sovereign
 power, the creator and ruler of the world? Must he then throw away his
 pen, renounce action, and do nothing in future but exist? And tears would
 flow down his white beard; and if he heard Clotilde coming upstairs again
 he would seize his pen quickly, in order that she might find him as she
 had left him, buried seemingly in profound meditation, when his mind was
 now only an aching void.
 

 It was now the middle of September; two weeks that had seemed interminable
 had passed in this distressing condition of things, without bringing any
 solution, when one morning Clotilde was greatly surprised by seeing her
 grandmother, Felicite, enter. Pascal had met his mother the day before in
 the Rue de la Banne, and, impatient to consummate the sacrifice, and not
 finding in himself the strength to make the rupture, he had confided in
 her, in spite of his repugnance, and begged her to come on the following
 day. As it happened, she had just received another letter from Maxime, a
 despairing and imploring letter.
 

 She began by explaining her presence.
 

 “Yes, it is I, my dear, and you can understand that only very weighty
 reasons could have induced me to set my foot here again. But, indeed, you
 are getting crazy; I cannot allow you to ruin your life in this way,
 without making a last effort to open your eyes.”
 

 She then read Maxime’s letter in a tearful voice. He was nailed to an
 armchair. It seemed he was suffering from a form of ataxia, rapid in its
 progress and very painful. Therefore he requested a decided answer from
 his sister, hoping still that she would come, and trembling at the thought
 of being compelled to seek another nurse. This was what he would be
 obliged to do, however, if they abandoned him in his sad condition. And
 when she had finished reading the letter she hinted that it would be a
 great pity to let Maxime’s fortune pass into the hands of strangers; but,
 above all, she spoke of duty; of the assistance one owed to a relation,
 she, too, affecting to believe that a formal promise had been given.
 

 “Come, my dear, call upon your memory. You told him that if he should ever
 need you, you would go to him; I can hear you saying it now. Was it not
 so, my son?”
 

 Pascal, his face pale, his head slightly bent, had kept silence since his
 mother’s entrance, leaving her to act. He answered only by an affirmative
 nod.
 

 Then Felicite went over all the arguments that he himself had employed to
 persuade Clotilde—the dreadful scandal, to which insult was now
 added; impending want, so hard for them both; the impossibility of
 continuing the life they were leading. What future could they hope for,
 now that they had been overtaken by poverty? It was stupid and cruel to
 persist longer in her obstinate refusal.
 

 Clotilde, standing erect and with an impenetrable countenance, remained
 silent, refusing even to discuss the question. But as her grandmother
 tormented her to give an answer, she said at last:
 

 “Once more, I have no duty whatever toward my brother; my duty is here. He
 can dispose of his fortune as he chooses; I want none of it. When we are
 too poor, master shall send away Martine and keep me as his servant.”
 

 Old Mme. Rougon wagged her chin.
 

 “Before being his servant it would be better if you had begun by being his
 wife. Why have you not got married? It would have been simpler and more
 proper.”
 

 And Felicite reminded her how she had come one day to urge this marriage,
 in order to put an end to gossip, and how the young girl had seemed
 greatly surprised, saying that neither she nor the doctor had thought of
 it, but that, notwithstanding, they would get married later on, if
 necessary, for there was no hurry.
 

 “Get married; I am quite willing!” cried Clotilde. “You are right,
 grandmother.”
 

 And turning to Pascal:
 

 “You have told me a hundred times that you would do whatever I wished.
 Marry me; do you hear? I will be your wife, and I will stay here. A wife
 does not leave her husband.”
 

 But he answered only by a gesture, as if he feared that his voice would
 betray him, and that he should accept, in a cry of gratitude, the eternal
 bond which she had proposed to him. His gesture might signify a
 hesitation, a refusal. What was the good of this marriage in extremis,
 when everything was falling to pieces?
 

 “Those are very fine sentiments, no doubt,” returned Felicite. “You have
 settled it all in your own little head. But marriage will not give you an
 income; and, meantime, you are a great expense to him; you are the
 heaviest of his burdens.”
 

 The effect which these words had upon Clotilde was extraordinary. She
 turned violently to Pascal, her cheeks crimson, her eyes filled with
 tears.
 

 “Master, master! is what grandmother has just said true? Has it come to
 this, that you regret the money I cost you here?”
 

 Pascal grew still paler; he remained motionless, in an attitude of utter
 dejection. But in a far-away voice, as if he were talking to himself, he
 murmured:
 

 “I have so much work to do! I should like to go over my envelopes, my
 manuscripts, my notes, and complete the work of my life. If I were alone
 perhaps I might be able to arrange everything. I would sell La Souleiade,
 oh! for a crust of bread, for it is not worth much. I should shut myself
 and my papers in a little room. I should work from morning till night, and
 I should try not to be too unhappy.”
 

 But he avoided her glance; and, agitated as she was, these painful and
 stammering utterances were not calculated to satisfy her. She grew every
 moment more and more terrified, for she felt that the irrevocable word was
 about to be spoken.
 

 “Look at me, master, look me in the face. And I conjure you, be brave,
 choose between your work and me, since you say, it seems, that you send me
 away that you may work the better.”
 

 The moment for the heroic falsehood had come. He lifted his head and
 looked her bravely in the face, and with the smile of a dying man who
 desires death, recovering his voice of divine goodness, he said:
 

 “How excited you get! Can you not do your duty quietly, like everybody
 else? I have a great deal of work to do, and I need to be alone; and you,
 dear, you ought to go to your brother. Go then, everything is ended.”
 

 There was a terrible silence for the space of a few seconds. She looked at
 him earnestly, hoping that he would change his mind. Was he really
 speaking the truth? was he not sacrificing himself in order that she might
 be happy? For a moment she had an intuition that this was the case, as if
 some subtle breath, emanating from him, had warned her of it.
 

 “And you are sending me away forever? You will not permit me to come back
 to-morrow?”
 

 But he held out bravely; with another smile he seemed to answer that when
 one went away like this it was not to come back again on the following
 day. She was now completely bewildered; she knew not what to think. It
 might be possible that he had chosen work sincerely; that the man of
 science had gained the victory over the lover. She grew still paler, and
 she waited a little longer, in the terrible silence; then, slowly, with
 her air of tender and absolute submission, she said:
 

 “Very well, master, I will go away whenever you wish, and I will not
 return until you send for me.”
 

 The die was cast. The irrevocable was accomplished. Each felt that neither
 would attempt to recall the decision that had been made; and, from this
 instant, every minute that passed would bring nearer the separation.
 

 Felicite, surprised at not being obliged to say more, at once desired to
 fix the time for Clotilde’s departure. She applauded herself for her
 tenacity; she thought she had gained the victory by main force. It was now
 Friday, and it was settled that Clotilde should leave on the following
 Sunday. A despatch was even sent to Maxime.
 

 For the past three days the mistral had been blowing. But on this evening
 its fury was redoubled, and Martine declared, in accordance with the
 popular belief, that it would last for three days longer. The winds at the
 end of September, in the valley of the Viorne, are terrible. So that the
 servant took care to go into every room in the house to assure herself
 that the shutters were securely fastened. When the mistral blew it caught
 La Souleiade slantingly, above the roofs of the houses of Plassans, on the
 little plateau on which the house was built. And now it raged and beat
 against the house, shaking it from garret to cellar, day and night,
 without a moment’s cessation. The tiles were blown off, the fastenings of
 the windows were torn away, while the wind, entering the crevices, moaned
 and sobbed wildly through the house; and the doors, if they were left open
 for a moment, through forgetfulness, slammed to with a noise like the
 report of a cannon. They might have fancied they were sustaining a siege,
 so great were the noise and the discomfort.
 

 It was in this melancholy house shaken by the storm that Pascal, on the
 following day, helped Clotilde to make her preparations for her departure.
 Old Mme. Rougon was not to return until Sunday, to say good-by. When
 Martine was informed of the approaching separation, she stood still in
 dumb amazement, and a flash, quickly extinguished, lighted her eyes; and
 as they sent her out of the room, saying that they would not require her
 assistance in packing the trunks, she returned to the kitchen and busied
 herself in her usual occupations, seeming to ignore the catastrophe which
 was about to revolutionize their household of three. But at Pascal’s
 slightest call she would run so promptly and with such alacrity, her face
 so bright and so cheerful, in her zeal to serve him, that she seemed like
 a young girl. Pascal did not leave Clotilde for a moment, helping her,
 desiring to assure himself that she was taking with her everything she
 could need. Two large trunks stood open in the middle of the disordered
 room; bundles and articles of clothing lay about everywhere; twenty times
 the drawers and the presses had been visited. And in this work, this
 anxiety to forget nothing, the painful sinking of the heart which they
 both felt was in some measure lessened. They forgot for an instant—he
 watching carefully to see that no space was lost, utilizing the hat-case
 for the smaller articles of clothing, slipping boxes in between the folds
 of the linen; while she, taking down the gowns, folded them on the bed,
 waiting to put them last in the top tray. Then, when a little tired they
 stood up and found themselves again face to face, they would smile at each
 other at first; then choke back the sudden tears that started at the
 recollection of the impending and inevitable misfortune. But though their
 hearts bled they remained firm. Good God! was it then true that they were
 to be no longer together? And then they heard the wind, the terrible wind,
 which threatened to blow down the house.
 

 How many times during this last day did they not go over to the window,
 attracted by the storm, wishing that it would sweep away the world. During
 these squalls the sun did not cease to shine, the sky remained constantly
 blue, but a livid blue, windswept and dusty, and the sun was a yellow sun,
 pale and cold. They saw in the distance the vast white clouds rising from
 the roads, the trees bending before the blast, looking as if they were
 flying all in the same direction, at the same rate of speed; the whole
 country parched and exhausted by the unvarying violence of the wind that
 blew ceaselessly, with a roar like thunder. Branches were snapped and
 whirled out of sight; roofs were lifted up and carried so far away that
 they were never afterward found. Why could not the mistral take them all
 up together and carry them off to some unknown land, where they might be
 happy? The trunks were almost packed when Pascal went to open one of the
 shutters that the wind had blown to, but so fierce a gust swept in through
 the half open window that Clotilde had to go to his assistance. Leaning
 with all their weight, they were able at last to turn the catch. The
 articles of clothing in the room were blown about, and they gathered up in
 fragments a little hand mirror which had fallen from a chair. Was this a
 sign of approaching death, as the women of the faubourg said?
 

 In the evening, after a mournful dinner in the bright dining-room, with
 its great bouquets of flowers, Pascal said he would retire early. Clotilde
 was to leave on the following morning by the ten o’clock train, and he
 feared for her the long journey—twenty hours of railway traveling.
 But when he had retired he was unable to sleep. At first he thought it was
 the wind that kept him awake. The sleeping house was full of cries, voices
 of entreaty and voices of anger, mingled together, accompanied by endless
 sobbing. Twice he got up and went to listen at Clotilde’s door, but he
 heard nothing. He went downstairs to close a door that banged
 persistently, like misfortune knocking at the walls. Gusts blew through
 the dark rooms, and he went to bed again, shivering and haunted by
 lugubrious visions.
 

 At six o’clock Martine, fancying she heard her master knocking for her on
 the floor of his room, went upstairs. She entered the room with the alert
 and excited expression which she had worn for the past two days; but she
 stood still, astonished and uneasy, when she saw him lying, half-dressed,
 across his bed, haggard, biting the pillow to stifle his sobs. He got out
 of bed and tried to finish dressing himself, but a fresh attack seized
 him, and, his head giddy and his heart palpitating to suffocation,
 recovering from a momentary faintness, he faltered in agonized tones:
 

 “No, no, I cannot; I suffer too much. I would rather die, die now—”
 

 He recognized Martine, and abandoning himself to his grief, his strength
 totally gone, he made his confession to her:
 

 “My poor girl, I suffer too much, my heart is breaking. She is taking away
 my heart with her, she is taking away my whole being. I cannot live
 without her. I almost died last night. I would be glad to die before her
 departure, not to have the anguish of seeing her go away. Oh, my God! she
 is going away, and I shall have her no longer, and I shall be left alone,
 alone, alone!”
 

 The servant, who had gone upstairs so gaily, turned as pale as wax, and a
 hard and bitter look came into her face. For a moment she watched him
 clutching the bedclothes convulsively, uttering hoarse cries of despair,
 his face pressed against the coverlet. Then, by a violent effort, she
 seemed to make up her mind.
 

 “But, monsieur, there is no sense in making trouble for yourself in this
 way. It is ridiculous. Since that is how it is, and you cannot do without
 mademoiselle, I shall go and tell her what a state you have let yourself
 get into.”
 

 At these words he got up hastily, staggering still, and, leaning for
 support on the back of a chair, he cried:
 

 “I positively forbid you to do so, Martine!”
 

 “A likely thing that I should listen to you, seeing you like that! To find
 you some other time half dead, crying your eyes out! No, no! I shall go to
 mademoiselle and tell her the truth, and compel her to remain with us.”
 

 But he caught her angrily by the arm and held her fast.
 

 “I command you to keep quiet, do you hear? Or you shall go with her! Why
 did you come in? It was this wind that made me ill. That concerns no one.”
 

 Then, yielding to a good-natured impulse, with his usual kindness of
 heart, he smiled.
 

 “My poor girl, see how you vex me? Let me act as I ought, for the
 happiness of others. And not another word; you would pain me greatly.”
 

 Martine’s eyes, too, filled with tears. It was just in time that they made
 peace, for Clotilde entered almost immediately. She had risen early, eager
 to see Pascal, hoping doubtless, up to the last moment, that he would keep
 her. Her own eyelids were heavy from want of sleep, and she looked at him
 steadily as she entered, with her inquiring air. But he was still so
 discomposed that she began to grow uneasy.
 

 “No, indeed, I assure you, I would even have slept well but for the
 mistral. I was just telling you so, Martine, was I not?”
 

 The servant confirmed his words by an affirmative nod. And Clotilde, too,
 submitted, saying nothing of the night of anguish and mental conflict she
 had spent while he, on his side, had been suffering the pangs of death.
 Both of the women now docilely obeyed and aided him, in his heroic
 self-abnegation.
 

 “What,” he continued, opening his desk, “I have something here for you.
 There! there are seven hundred francs in that envelope.”
 

 And in spite of her exclamations and protestations he persisted in
 rendering her an account. Of the six thousand francs obtained by the sale
 of the jewels two hundred only had been spent, and he had kept one hundred
 to last till the end of the month, with the strict economy, the
 penuriousness, which he now displayed. Afterward he would no doubt sell La
 Souleiade, he would work, he would be able to extricate himself from his
 difficulties. But he would not touch the five thousand francs which
 remained, for they were her property, her own, and she would find them
 again in the drawer.
 

 “Master, master, you are giving me a great deal of pain—”
 

 “I wish it,” he interrupted, “and it is you who are trying to break my
 heart. Come, it is half-past seven, I will go and cord your trunks since
 they are locked.”
 

 When Martine and Clotilde were alone and face to face they looked at each
 other for a moment in silence. Ever since the commencement of the new
 situation, they had been fully conscious of their secret antagonism, the
 open triumph of the young mistress, the half concealed jealousy of the old
 servant about her adored master. Now it seemed that the victory remained
 with the servant. But in this final moment their common emotion drew them
 together.
 

 “Martine, you must not let him eat like a poor man. You promise me that he
 shall have wine and meat every day?”
 

 “Have no fear, mademoiselle.”
 

 “And the five thousand francs lying there, you know belong to him. You are
 not going to let yourselves starve to death, I suppose, with those there.
 I want you to treat him very well.”
 

 “I tell you that I will make it my business to do so, mademoiselle, and
 that monsieur shall want for nothing.”
 

 There was a moment’s silence. They were still regarding each other.
 

 “And watch him, to see that he does not overwork himself. I am going away
 very uneasy; he has not been well for some time past. Take good care of
 him.”
 

 “Make your mind easy, mademoiselle, I will take care of him.”
 

 “Well, I give him into your charge. He will have only you now; and it is
 some consolation to me to know that you love him dearly. Love him with all
 your strength. Love him for us both.”
 

 “Yes, mademoiselle, as much as I can.”
 

 Tears came into their eyes; Clotilde spoke again.
 

 “Will you embrace me, Martine?”
 

 “Oh, mademoiselle, very gladly.”
 

 They were in each other’s arms when Pascal reentered the room. He
 pretended not to see them, doubtless afraid of giving way to his emotion.
 In an unnaturally loud voice he spoke of the final preparations for
 Clotilde’s departure, like a man who had a great deal on his hands and was
 afraid that the train might be missed. He had corded the trunks, a man had
 taken them away in a little wagon, and they would find them at the
 station. But it was only eight o’clock, and they had still two long hours
 before them. Two hours of mortal anguish, spent in unoccupied and weary
 waiting, during which they tasted a hundred times over the bitterness of
 parting. The breakfast took hardly a quarter of an hour. Then they got up,
 to sit down again. Their eyes never left the clock. The minutes seemed
 long as those of a death watch, throughout the mournful house.
 

 “How the wind blows!” said Clotilde, as a sudden gust made all the doors
 creak.
 

 Pascal went over to the window and watched the wild flight of the
 storm-blown trees.
 

 “It has increased since morning,” he said. “Presently I must see to the
 roof, for some of the tiles have been blown away.”
 

 Already they had ceased to be one household. They listened in silence to
 the furious wind, sweeping everything before it, carrying with it their
 life.
 

 Finally Pascal looked for a last time at the clock, and said simply:
 

 “It is time, Clotilde.”
 

 She rose from the chair on which she had been sitting. She had for an
 instant forgotten that she was going away, and all at once the dreadful
 reality came back to her. Once more she looked at him, but he did not open
 his arms to keep her. It was over; her hope was dead. And from this moment
 her face was like that of one struck with death.
 

 At first they exchanged the usual commonplaces.
 

 “You will write to me, will you not?”
 

 “Certainly, and you must let me hear from you as often as possible.”
 

 “Above all, if you should fall ill, send for me at once.”
 

 “I promise you that I will do so. But there is no danger. I am very
 strong.”
 

 Then, when the moment came in which she was to leave this dear house,
 Clotilde looked around with unsteady gaze; then she threw herself on
 Pascal’s breast, she held him for an instant in her arms, faltering:
 

 “I wish to embrace you here, I wish to thank you. Master, it is you who
 have made me what I am. As you have often told me, you have corrected my
 heredity. What should I have become amid the surroundings in which Maxime
 has grown up? Yes, if I am worth anything, it is to you alone I owe it,
 you, who transplanted me into this abode of kindness and affection, where
 you have brought me up worthy of you. Now, after having taken me and
 overwhelmed me with benefits, you send me away. Be it as you will, you are
 my master, and I will obey you. I love you, in spite of all, and I shall
 always love you.”
 

 He pressed her to his heart, answering:
 

 “I desire only your good, I am completing my work.”
 

 When they reached the station, Clotilde vowed to herself that she would
 one day come back. Old Mme. Rougon was there, very gay and very brisk, in
 spite of her eighty-and-odd years. She was triumphant now; she thought she
 would have her son Pascal at her mercy. When she saw them both stupefied
 with grief she took charge of everything; got the ticket, registered the
 baggage, and installed the traveler in a compartment in which there were
 only ladies. Then she spoke for a long time about Maxime, giving
 instructions and asking to be kept informed of everything. But the train
 did not start; there were still five cruel minutes during which they
 remained face to face, without speaking to each other. Then came the end,
 there were embraces, a great noise of wheels, and waving of handkerchiefs.
 

 Suddenly Pascal became aware that he was standing alone upon the platform,
 while the train was disappearing around a bend in the road. Then, without
 listening to his mother, he ran furiously up the slope, sprang up the
 stone steps like a young man, and found himself in three minutes on the
 terrace of La Souleiade. The mistral was raging there—a fierce
 squall which bent the secular cypresses like straws. In the colorless sky
 the sun seemed weary of the violence of the wind, which for six days had
 been sweeping over its face. And like the wind-blown trees Pascal stood
 firm, his garments flapping like banners, his beard and hair blown about
 and lashed by the storm. His breath caught by the wind, his hands pressed
 upon his heart to quiet its throbbing, he saw the train flying in the
 distance across the bare plain, a little train which the mistral seemed to
 sweep before it like a dry branch.
 

 
 
 

 From the day following Clotilde’s departure, Pascal shut himself up in the
 great empty house. He did not leave it again, ceasing entirely the rare
 professional visits which he had still continued to make, living there
 with doors and windows closed, in absolute silence and solitude. Martine
 had received formal orders to admit no one under any pretext whatever.
 

 “But your mother, monsieur, Mme. Felicite?”
 

 “My mother, less than any one else; I have my reasons. Tell her that I am
 working, that I require to concentrate my thoughts, and that I request her
 to excuse me.”
 

 Three times in succession old Mme. Rougon had presented herself. She would
 storm at the hall door. He would hear her voice rising in anger as she
 tried in vain to force her way in. Then the noise would be stilled, and
 there would be only a whisper of complaint and plotting between her and
 the servant. But not once did he yield, not once did he lean over the
 banisters and call to her to come up.
 

 One day Martine ventured to say to him:
 

 “It is very hard, all the same, monsieur, to refuse admittance to one’s
 mother. The more so, as Mme. Felicite comes with good intentions, for she
 knows the straits that monsieur is in, and she insists only in order to
 offer her services.”
 

 “Money!” he cried, exasperated. “I want no money, do you hear? And from
 her less than anybody. I will work, I will earn my own living; why should
 I not?”
 

 The question of money, however, began to grow pressing. He obstinately
 refused to take another sou from the five thousand francs locked up in the
 desk. Now that he was alone, he was completely indifferent to material
 things; he would have been satisfied to live on bread and water; and every
 time the servant asked him for money to buy wine, meat, or sweets, he
 shrugged his shoulders—what was the use? there remained a crust from
 the day before, was not that sufficient? But in her affection for her
 master, whom she felt to be suffering, the old servant was heart-broken at
 this miserliness which exceeded her own; this utter destitution to which
 he abandoned himself and the whole house. The workmen of the faubourgs
 lived better. Thus it was that for a whole day a terrible conflict went on
 within her. Her doglike love struggled with her love for her money,
 amassed sou by sou, hidden away, “making more,” as she said. She would
 rather have parted with a piece of her flesh. So long as her master had
 not suffered alone the idea of touching her treasure had not even occurred
 to her. And she displayed extraordinary heroism the morning when, driven
 to extremity, seeing her stove cold and the larder empty, she disappeared
 for an hour and then returned with provisions and the change of a
 hundred-franc note.
 

 Pascal, who just then chanced to come downstairs, asked her in
 astonishment where the money had come from, furious already, and prepared
 to throw it all into the street, imagining she had applied to his mother.
 

 “Why, no; why, no, monsieur!” she stammered, “it is not that at all.”
 

 And she told him the story that she had prepared.
 

 “Imagine, M. Grandguillot’s affairs are going to be settled—or at
 least I think so. It occurred to me this morning to go to the assignee’s
 to inquire, and he told me that you would undoubtedly recover something,
 and that I might have a hundred francs now. Yes, he was even satisfied
 with a receipt from me. He knows me, and you can make it all right
 afterward.”
 

 Pascal seemed scarcely surprised. She had calculated correctly that he
 would not go out to verify her account. She was relieved, however, to see
 with what easy indifference he accepted her story.
 

 “Ah, so much the better!” he said. “You see now that one must never
 despair. That will give me time to settle my affairs.”
 

 His “affairs” was the sale of La Souleiade, about which he had been
 thinking vaguely. But what a grief to leave this house in which Clotilde
 had grown up, where they had lived together for nearly eighteen years! He
 had taken two or three weeks already to reflect over the matter. Now that
 he had the hope of getting back a little of the money he had lost through
 the notary’s failure, he ceased to think any more about it. He relapsed
 into his former indifference, eating whatever Martine served him, not even
 noticing the comforts with which she once more surrounded him, in humble
 adoration, heart-broken at giving her money, but very happy to support him
 now, without his suspecting that his sustenance came from her.
 

 But Pascal rewarded her very ill. Afterward he would be sorry, and regret
 his outbursts. But in the state of feverish desperation in which he lived
 this did not prevent him from again flying into a passion with her, at the
 slightest cause of dissatisfaction. One evening, after he had been
 listening to his mother talking for an interminable time with her in the
 kitchen, he cried in sudden fury:
 

 “Martine, I do not wish her to enter La Souleiade again, do you hear? If
 you ever let her into the house again I will turn you out!”
 

 She listened to him in surprise. Never, during the thirty-two years in
 which she had been in his service, had he threatened to dismiss her in
 this way. Big tears came to her eyes.
 

 “Oh, monsieur! you would not have the courage to do it! And I would not
 go. I would lie down across the threshold first.”
 

 He already regretted his anger, and he said more gently:
 

 “The thing is that I know perfectly well what is going on. She comes to
 indoctrinate you, to put you against me, is it not so? Yes, she is
 watching my papers; she wishes to steal and destroy everything up there in
 the press. I know her; when she wants anything, she never gives up until
 she gets it. Well, you can tell her that I am on my guard; that while I am
 alive she shall never even come near the press. And the key is here in my
 pocket.”
 

 In effect, all his former terror—the terror of the scientist who
 feels himself surrounded by secret enemies, had returned. Ever since he
 had been living alone in the deserted house he had had a feeling of
 returning danger, of being constantly watched in secret. The circle had
 narrowed, and if he showed such anger at these attempts at invasion, if he
 repulsed his mother’s assaults, it was because he did not deceive himself
 as to her real plans, and he was afraid that he might yield. If she were
 there she would gradually take possession of him, until she had subjugated
 him completely. Therefore his former tortures returned, and he passed the
 days watching; he shut up the house himself in the evening, and he would
 often rise during the night, to assure himself that the locks were not
 being forced. What he feared was that the servant, won over by his mother,
 and believing she was securing his eternal welfare, would open the door to
 Mme. Felicite. In fancy he saw the papers blazing in the fireplace; he
 kept constant guard over them, seized again by a morbid love, a torturing
 affection for this icy heap of papers, these cold pages of manuscript, to
 which he had sacrificed the love of woman, and which he tried to love
 sufficiently to be able to forget everything else for them.
 

 Pascal, now that Clotilde was no longer there, threw himself eagerly into
 work, trying to submerge himself in it, to lose himself in it. If he
 secluded himself, if he did not set foot even in the garden, if he had had
 the strength, one day when Martine came up to announce Dr. Ramond, to
 answer that he would not receive him, he had, in this bitter desire for
 solitude, no other aim than to kill thought by incessant labor. That poor
 Ramond, how gladly he would have embraced him! for he divined clearly the
 delicacy of feeling that had made him hasten to console his old master.
 But why lose an hour? Why risk emotions and tears which would leave him so
 weak? From daylight he was at his table, he spent at it his mornings and
 his afternoons, extended often into the evening after the lamp was
 lighted, and far into the night. He wished to put his old project into
 execution—to revise his whole theory of heredity, employing the
 documents furnished by his own family to establish the laws according to
 which, in a certain group of human beings, life is distributed and
 conducted with mathematical precision from one to another, taking into
 account the environment—a vast bible, the genesis of families, of
 societies, of all humanity. He hoped that the vastness of such a plan, the
 effort necessary to develop so colossal an idea, would take complete
 possession of him, restoring to him his health, his faith, his pride in
 the supreme joy of the accomplished work. But it was in vain that he threw
 himself passionately, persistently, without reserve, into his work; he
 succeeded only in fatiguing his body and his mind, without even being able
 to fix his thoughts or to put his heart into his work, every day sicker
 and more despairing. Had work, then, finally lost its power? He whose life
 had been spent in work, who had regarded it as the sole motor, the
 benefactor, and the consoler, must he then conclude that to love and to be
 loved is beyond all else in the world? Occasionally he would have great
 thoughts, he continued to sketch out his new theory of the equilibrium of
 forces, demonstrating that what man receives in sensation he should return
 in action. How natural, full, and happy would life be if it could be lived
 entire, performing its functions like a well-ordered machine, giving back
 in power what was consumed in fuel, maintaining itself in vigor and in
 beauty by the simultaneous and logical play of all its organs. He believed
 physical and intellectual labor, feeling and reasoning should be in equal
 proportions, and never excessive, for excess meant disturbance of the
 equilibrium and, consequently, disease. Yes, yes, to begin life over again
 and to know how to live it, to dig the earth, to study man, to love woman,
 to attain to human perfection, the future city of universal happiness,
 through the harmonious working of the entire being, what a beautiful
 legacy for a philosophical physician to leave behind him would this be!
 And this dream of the future, this theory, confusedly perceived, filled
 him with bitterness at the thought that now his life was a force wasted
 and lost.
 

 At the very bottom of his grief Pascal had the dominating feeling that for
 him life was ended. Regret for Clotilde, sorrow at having her no longer
 beside him, the certainty that he would never see her again, filled him
 with overwhelming grief. Work had lost its power, and he would sometimes
 let his head drop on the page he was writing, and weep for hours together,
 unable to summon courage to take up the pen again. His passion for work,
 his days of voluntary fatigue, led to terrible nights, nights of feverish
 sleeplessness, in which he would stuff the bedclothes into his mouth to
 keep from crying out Clotilde’s name. She was everywhere in this mournful
 house in which he secluded himself. He saw her again, walking through the
 rooms, sitting on the chairs, standing behind the doors. Downstairs, in
 the dining-room, he could not sit at table, without seeing her opposite
 him. In the workroom upstairs she was still his constant companion, for
 she, too, had lived so long secluded in it that her image seemed reflected
 from everything; he felt her constantly beside him, he could fancy he saw
 her standing before her desk, straight and slender—her delicate face
 bent over a pastel. And if he did not leave the house to escape from the
 dear and torturing memory it was because he had the certainty that he
 should find her everywhere in the garden, too: dreaming on the terrace;
 walking with slow steps through the alleys in the pine grove; sitting
 under the shade of the plane trees; lulled by the eternal song of the
 fountain; lying in the threshing yard at twilight, her gaze fixed on
 space, waiting for the stars to come out. But above all, there existed for
 him a sacred sanctuary which he could not enter without trembling—the
 chamber where she had confessed her love. He kept the key of it; he had
 not moved a single object from its place since the sorrowful morning of
 her departure; and a skirt which she had forgotten lay still upon her
 armchair. He opened his arms wildly to clasp her shade floating in the
 soft half light of the room, with its closed shutters and its walls hung
 with the old faded pink calico, of a dawnlike tint.
 

 In the midst of his unremitting toil Pascal had another melancholy
 pleasure—Clotilde’s letters. She wrote to him regularly twice a
 week, long letters of eight or ten pages, in which she described to him
 all her daily life. She did not seem to lead a very happy life in Paris.
 Maxime, who did not now leave his sick chair, evidently tortured her with
 the exactions of a spoiled child and an invalid. She spoke as if she lived
 in complete retirement, always waiting on him, so that she could not even
 go over to the window to look out on the avenue, along which rolled the
 fashionable stream of the promenaders of the Bois; and from certain of her
 expressions it could be divined that her brother, after having entreated
 her so urgently to go to him, suspected her already, and had begun to
 regard her with hatred and distrust, as he did every one who approached
 him, in his continual fear of being made use of and robbed. He did not
 give her the keys, treating her like a servant to whom he found it
 difficult to accustom himself. Twice she had seen her father, who was, as
 always, very gay, and overwhelmed with business; he had been converted to
 the Republic, and was at the height of political and financial success.
 Saccard had even taken her aside, to sympathize with her, saying that poor
 Maxime was really insupportable, and that she would be truly courageous if
 she consented to be made his victim. As she could not do everything, he
 had even had the kindness to send her, on the following day, the niece of
 his hairdresser, a fair-haired, innocent-looking girl of eighteen, named
 Rose, who was assisting her now to take care of the invalid. But Clotilde
 made no complaint; she affected, on the contrary, to be perfectly
 tranquil, contented, and resigned to everything. Her letters were full of
 courage, showing neither anger nor sorrow at the cruel separation, making
 no desperate appeal to Pascal’s affection to recall her. But between the
 lines, he could perceive that she trembled with rebellious anger, that her
 whole being yearned for him, that she was ready to commit the folly of
 returning to him immediately, at his lightest word.
 

 And this was the one word that Pascal would not write. Everything would be
 arranged in time. Maxime would become accustomed to his sister; the
 sacrifice must be completed now that it had been begun. A single line
 written by him in a moment of weakness, and all the advantage of the
 effort he had made would be lost, and their misery would begin again.
 Never had Pascal had greater need of courage than when he was answering
 Clotilde’s letters. At night, burning with fever, he would toss about,
 calling on her wildly; then he would get up and write to her to come back
 at once. But when day came, and he had exhausted himself with weeping, his
 fever abated, and his answer was always very short, almost cold. He
 studied every sentence, beginning the letter over again when he thought he
 had forgotten himself. But what a torture, these dreadful letters, so
 short, so icy, in which he went against his heart, solely in order to wean
 her from him gradually, to take upon himself all the blame, and to make
 her believe that she could forget him, since he forgot her. They left him
 covered with perspiration, and as exhausted as if he had just performed
 some great act of heroism.
 

 One morning toward the end of October, a month after Clotilde’s departure,
 Pascal had a sudden attack of suffocation. He had had, several times
 already, slight attacks, which he attributed to overwork. But this time
 the symptoms were so plain that he could not mistake them—a sharp
 pain in the region of the heart, extending over the whole chest and along
 the left arm, and a dreadful sensation of oppression and distress, while
 cold perspiration broke out upon him. It was an attack of angina pectoris.
 It lasted hardly more than a minute, and he was at first more surprised
 than frightened. With that blindness which physicians often show where
 their own health is concerned, he never suspected that his heart might be
 affected.
 

 As he was recovering his breath Martine came up to say that Dr. Ramond was
 downstairs, and again begged the doctor to see him. And Pascal, yielding
 perhaps to an unconscious desire to know the truth, cried:
 

 “Well, let him come up, since he insists upon it. I will be glad to see
 him.”
 

 The two men embraced each other, and no other allusion was made to the
 absent one, to her whose departure had left the house empty, than an
 energetic and sad hand clasp.
 

 “You don’t know why I have come?” cried Ramond immediately. “It is about a
 question of money. Yes, my father-in-law, M. Leveque, the advocate, whom
 you know, spoke to me yesterday again about the funds which you had with
 the notary Grandguillot. And he advises you strongly to take some action
 in the matter, for some persons have succeeded, he says, in recovering
 something.”
 

 “Yes, I know that that business is being settled,” said Pascal. “Martine
 has already got two hundred francs out of it, I believe.”
 

 “Martine?” said Ramond, looking greatly surprised, “how could she do that
 without your intervention? However, will you authorize my father-in-law to
 undertake your case? He will see the assignee, and sift the whole affair,
 since you have neither the time nor the inclination to attend to it.”
 

 “Certainly, I authorize M. Leveque to do so, and tell him that I thank him
 a thousand times.”
 

 Then this matter being settled, the young man, remarking the doctor’s
 pallor, and questioning him as to its cause, Pascal answered with a smile:
 

 “Imagine, my friend, I have just had an attack of angina pectoris. Oh, it
 is not imagination, all the symptoms were there. And stay! since you are
 here you shall sound me.”
 

 At first Ramond refused, affecting to turn the consultation into a jest.
 Could a raw recruit like him venture to pronounce judgment on his general?
 But he examined him, notwithstanding, seeing that his face looked drawn
 and pained, with a singular look of fright in the eyes. He ended by
 auscultating him carefully, keeping his ear pressed closely to his chest
 for a considerable time. Several minutes passed in profound silence.
 

 “Well?” asked Pascal, when the young physician stood up.
 

 The latter did not answer at once. He felt the doctor’s eyes looking
 straight into his; and as the question had been put to him with quiet
 courage, he answered in the same way:
 

 “Well, it is true, I think there is some sclerosis.”
 

 “Ah! it was kind of you not to attempt to deceive me,” returned the
 doctor, smiling. “I feared for an instant that you would tell me an
 untruth, and that would have hurt me.”
 

 Ramond, listening again, said in an undertone:
 

 “Yes, the beat is strong, the first sound is dull, while the second, on
 the contrary, is sharp. It is evident that the apex has descended and is
 turned toward the armpit. There is some sclerosis, at least it is very
 probable. One may live twenty years with that,” he ended, straightening
 himself.
 

 “No doubt, sometimes,” said Pascal. “At least, unless one chances to die
 of a sudden attack.”
 

 They talked for some time longer, discussed a remarkable case of sclerosis
 of the heart, which they had seen at the hospital at Plassans. And when
 the young physician went away, he said that he would return as soon as he
 should have news of the Grandguillot liquidation.
 

 But when he was alone Pascal felt that he was lost. Everything was now
 explained: his palpitations for some weeks past, his attacks of vertigo
 and suffocation; above all that weakness of the organ, of his poor heart,
 overtasked by feeling and by work, that sense of intense fatigue and
 impending death, regarding which he could no longer deceive himself. It
 was not as yet fear that he experienced, however. His first thought was
 that he, too, would have to pay for his heredity, that sclerosis was the
 species of degeneration which was to be his share of the physiological
 misery, the inevitable inheritance bequeathed him by his terrible
 ancestry. In others the neurosis, the original lesion, had turned to vice
 or virtue, genius, crime, drunkenness, sanctity; others again had died of
 consumption, of epilepsy, of ataxia; he had lived in his feelings and he
 would die of an affection of the heart. And he trembled no longer, he
 rebelled no longer against this manifest heredity, fated and inevitable,
 no doubt. On the contrary, a feeling of humility took possession of him;
 the idea that all revolt against natural laws is bad, that wisdom does not
 consist in holding one’s self apart, but in resigning one’s self to be
 only a member of the whole great body. Why, then, was he so unwilling to
 belong to his family that it filled him with triumph, that his heart beat
 with joy, when he believed himself different from them, without any
 community with them? Nothing could be less philosophical. Only monsters
 grew apart. And to belong to his family seemed to him in the end as good
 and as fine as to belong to any other family, for did not all families, in
 the main, resemble one another, was not humanity everywhere identical with
 the same amount of good and evil? He came at last, humbly and gently, even
 in the face of impending suffering and death, to accept everything life
 had to give him.
 

 From this time Pascal lived with the thought that he might die at any
 moment. And this helped to perfect his character, to elevate him to a
 complete forgetfulness of self. He did not cease to work, but he had never
 understood so well how much effort must seek its reward in itself, the
 work being always transitory, and remaining of necessity incomplete. One
 evening at dinner Martine informed him that Sarteur, the journeyman
 hatter, the former inmate of the asylum at the Tulettes, had just hanged
 himself. All the evening he thought of this strange case, of this man whom
 he had believed he had cured of homicidal mania by his treatment of
 hypodermic injections, and who, seized by a fresh attack, had evidently
 had sufficient lucidity to hang himself, instead of springing at the
 throat of some passer-by. He again saw him, so gentle, so reasonable,
 kissing his hands, while he was advising him to return to his life of
 healthful labor. What then was this destructive and transforming force,
 the desire to murder, changing to suicide, death performing its task in
 spite of everything? With the death of this man his last vestige of pride
 as a healer disappeared; and each day when he returned to his work he felt
 as if he were only a learner, spelling out his task, constantly seeking
 the truth, which as constantly receded from him, assuming ever more
 formidable proportions.
 

 But in the midst of his resignation one thought still troubled him—what
 would become of Bonhomme, his old horse, if he himself should die before
 him? The poor brute, completely blind and his limbs paralyzed, did not now
 leave his litter. When his master went to see him, however, he turned his
 head, he could feel the two hearty kisses which were pressed on his nose.
 All the neighbors shrugged their shoulders and joked about this old
 relation whom the doctor would not allow to be slaughtered. Was he then to
 be the first to go, with the thought that the knacker would be called in
 on the following day. But one morning, when he entered the stable,
 Bonhomme did not hear him, did not raise his head. He was dead; he lay
 there, with a peaceful expression, as if relieved that death had come to
 him so gently. His master knelt beside him and kissed him again and bade
 him farewell, while two big tears rolled down his cheeks.
 

 It was on this day that Pascal saw his neighbor, M. Bellombre, for the
 last time. Going over to the window he perceived him in his garden, in the
 pale sunshine of early November, taking his accustomed walk; and the sight
 of the old professor, living so completely happy in his solitude, filled
 him at first with astonishment. He could never have imagined such a thing
 possible, as that a man of sixty-nine should live thus, without wife or
 child, or even a dog, deriving his selfish happiness from the joy of
 living outside of life. Then he recalled his fits of anger against this
 man, his sarcasms about his fear of life, the catastrophes which he had
 wished might happen to him, the hope that punishment would come to him, in
 the shape of some housekeeper, or some female relation dropping down on
 him unexpectedly. But no, he was still as fresh as ever, and Pascal was
 sure that for a long time to come he would continue to grow old like this,
 hard, avaricious, useless, and happy. And yet he no longer execrated him;
 he could even have found it in his heart to pity him, so ridiculous and
 miserable did he think him for not being loved. Pascal, who suffered the
 pangs of death because he was alone! He whose heart was breaking because
 he was too full of others. Rather suffering, suffering only, than this
 selfishness, this death of all there is in us of living and human!
 

 In the night which followed Pascal had another attack of angina pectoris.
 It lasted for five minutes, and he thought that he would suffocate without
 having the strength to call Martine. Then when he recovered his breath, he
 did not disturb himself, preferring to speak to no one of this aggravation
 of his malady; but he had the certainty that it was all over with him,
 that he might not perhaps live a month longer. His first thought was
 Clotilde. Should he then never see her again? and so sharp a pang seized
 him that he believed another attack was coming on. Why should he not write
 to her to come to him? He had received a letter from her the day before;
 he would answer it this morning. Then the thought of the envelopes
 occurred to him. If he should die suddenly, his mother would be the
 mistress and she would destroy them; and not only the envelopes, but his
 manuscripts, all his papers, thirty years of his intelligence and his
 labor. Thus the crime which he had so greatly dreaded would be
 consummated, the crime of which the fear alone, during his nights of
 fever, had made him get up out of bed trembling, his ear on the stretch,
 listening to hear if they were forcing open the press. The perspiration
 broke out upon him, he saw himself dispossessed, outraged, the ashes of
 his work thrown to the four winds. And when his thoughts reverted to
 Clotilde, he told himself that everything would be satisfactorily
 arranged, that he had only to call her back—she would be here, she
 would close his eyes, she would defend his memory. And he sat down to
 write at once to her, so that the letter might go by the morning mail.
 

 But when Pascal was seated before the white paper, with the pen between
 his fingers, a growing doubt, a feeling of dissatisfaction with himself,
 took possession of him. Was not this idea of his papers, this fine project
 of providing a guardian for them and saving them, a suggestion of his
 weakness, an excuse which he gave himself to bring back Clotilde, and see
 her again? Selfishness was at the bottom of it. He was thinking of
 himself, not of her. He saw her returning to this poor house, condemned to
 nurse a sick old man; and he saw her, above all, in her grief, in her
 awful agony, when he should terrify her some day by dropping down dead at
 her side. No, no! this was the dreadful moment which he must spare her,
 those days of cruel adieus and want afterward, a sad legacy which he could
 not leave her without thinking himself a criminal. Her tranquillity, her
 happiness only, were of any consequence, the rest did not matter. He would
 die in his hole, then, abandoned, happy to think her happy, to spare her
 the cruel blow of his death. As for saving his manuscripts he would
 perhaps find a means of doing so, he would try to have the strength to
 part from them and give them to Ramond. But even if all his papers were to
 perish, this was less of a sacrifice than to resign himself not to see her
 again, and he accepted it, and he was willing that nothing of him should
 survive, not even his thoughts, provided only that nothing of him should
 henceforth trouble her dear existence.
 

 Pascal accordingly proceeded to write one of his usual answers, which, by
 a great effort, he purposely made colorless and almost cold. Clotilde, in
 her last letter, without complaining of Maxime, had given it to be
 understood that her brother had lost his interest in her, preferring the
 society of Rose, the niece of Saccard’s hairdresser, the fair-haired young
 girl with the innocent look. And he suspected strongly some maneuver of
 the father: a cunning plan to obtain possession of the inheritance of the
 sick man, whose vices, so precocious formerly, gained new force as his
 last hour approached. But in spite of his uneasiness he gave Clotilde very
 good advice, telling her that she must make allowance for Maxime’s
 sufferings, that he had undoubtedly a great deal of affection and
 gratitude for her, in short that it was her duty to devote herself to him
 to the end. When he signed the letter tears dimmed his sight. It was his
 death warrant—a death like that of an old and solitary brute, a
 death without a kiss, without the touch of a friendly hand—that he
 was signing. Never again would he embrace her. Then doubts assailed him;
 was he doing right in leaving her amid such evil surroundings, where he
 felt that she was in continual contact with every species of wickedness?
 

 The postman brought the letters and newspapers to La Souleiade every
 morning at about nine o’clock; and Pascal, when he wrote to Clotilde, was
 accustomed to watch for him, to give him his letter, so as to be certain
 that his correspondence was not intercepted. But on this morning, when he
 went downstairs to give him the letter he had just written, he was
 surprised to receive one from him from Clotilde, although it was not the
 usual day for her letters. He allowed his own to go, however. Then he went
 upstairs, resumed his seat at his table, and tore open the envelope.
 

 The letter was short, but its contents filled Pascal with a great joy.
 

 But the sound of footsteps made him control himself. He turned round and
 saw Martine, who was saying:
 

 “Dr. Ramond is downstairs.”
 

 “Ah! let him come up, let him come up,” he said.
 

 It was another piece of good fortune that had come to him. Ramond cried
 gaily from the door:
 

 “Victory, master! I have brought you your money—not all, but a good
 sum.”
 

 And he told the story—an unexpected piece of good luck which his
 father-in-law, M. Leveque, had brought to light. The receipts for the
 hundred and twenty thousand francs, which constituted Pascal the personal
 creditor of Grandguillot, were valueless, since the latter was insolvent.
 Salvation was to come from the power of attorney which the doctor had sent
 him years before, at his request, that he might invest all or part of his
 money in mortgages. As the name of the proxy was in blank in the document,
 the notary, as is sometimes done, had made use of the name of one of his
 clerks, and eighty thousand francs, which had been invested in good
 mortgages, had thus been recovered through the agency of a worthy man who
 was not in the secrets of his employer. If Pascal had taken action in the
 matter, if he had gone to the public prosecutor’s office and the chamber
 of notaries, he would have disentangled the matter long before. However,
 he had recovered a sure income of four thousand francs.
 

 He seized the young man’s hands and pressed them, smiling, his eyes still
 moist with tears.
 

 “Ah! my friend, if you knew how happy I am! This letter of Clotilde’s has
 brought me a great happiness. Yes, I was going to send for her; but the
 thought of my poverty, of the privations she would have to endure here,
 spoiled for me the joy of her return. And now fortune has come back, at
 least enough to set up my little establishment again!”
 

 In the expansion of his feelings he held out the letter to Ramond, and
 forced him to read it. Then when the young man gave it back to him,
 smiling, comprehending the doctor’s emotion, and profoundly touched by it,
 yielding to an overpowering need of affection, he caught him in his arms,
 like a comrade, a brother. The two men kissed each other vigorously on
 either cheek.
 

 “Come, since good fortune has sent you, I am going to ask another service
 from you. You know I distrust every one around me, even my old
 housekeeper. Will you take my despatch to the telegraph office!”
 

 He sat down again at the table, and wrote simply, “I await you; start
 to-night.”
 

 “Let me see,” he said, “to-day is the 6th of November, is it not? It is
 now near ten o’clock; she will have my despatch at noon. That will give
 her time enough to pack her trunks and to take the eight o’clock express
 this evening, which will bring her to Marseilles in time for breakfast.
 But as there is no train which connects with it, she cannot be here until
 to-morrow, the 7th, at five o’clock.”
 

 After folding the despatch he rose:
 

 “My God, at five o’clock to-morrow! How long to wait still! What shall I
 do with myself until then?”
 

 Then a sudden recollection filled him with anxiety, and he became grave.
 

 “Ramond, my comrade, will you give me a great proof of your friendship by
 being perfectly frank with me?”
 

 “How so, master?”
 

 “Ah, you understand me very well. The other day you examined me. Do you
 think I can live another year?”
 

 He fixed his eyes on the young man as he spoke, compelling him to look at
 him. Ramond evaded a direct answer, however, with a jest—was it
 really a physician who put such a question?
 

 “Let us be serious, Ramond, I beg of you.”
 

 Then Ramond answered in all sincerity that, in his opinion, the doctor
 might very justly entertain the hope of living another year. He gave his
 reasons—the comparatively slight progress which the sclerosis had
 made, and the absolute soundness of the other organs. Of course they must
 make allowance for what they did not and could not know, for a sudden
 accident was always possible. And the two men discussed the case as if
 they been in consultation at the bedside of a patient, weighing the pros
 and cons, each stating his views and prognosticating a fatal termination,
 in accordance with the symptoms as defined by the best authorities.
 

 Pascal, as if it were some one else who was in question, had recovered all
 his composure and his heroic self-forgetfulness.
 

 “Yes,” he murmured at last, “you are right; a year of life is still
 possible. Ah, my friend, how I wish I might live two years; a mad wish, no
 doubt, an eternity of joy. And yet, two years, that would not be
 impossible. I had a very curious case once, a wheelwright of the faubourg,
 who lived for four years, giving the lie to all my prognostications. Two
 years, two years, I will live two years! I must live two years!”
 

 Ramond sat with bent head, without answering. He was beginning to be
 uneasy, fearing that he had shown himself too optimistic; and the doctor’s
 joy disquieted and grieved him, as if this very exaltation, this
 disturbance of a once strong brain, warned him of a secret and imminent
 danger.
 

 “Did you not wish to send that despatch at once?” he said.
 

 “Yes, yes, go quickly, my good Ramond, and come back again to see us the
 day after to-morrow. She will be here then, and I want you to come and
 embrace us.”
 

 The day was long, and the following morning, at about four o’clock,
 shortly after Pascal had fallen asleep, after a happy vigil filled with
 hopes and dreams, he was wakened by a dreadful attack. He felt as if an
 enormous weight, as if the whole house, had fallen down upon his chest, so
 that the thorax, flattened down, touched the back. He could not breathe;
 the pain reached the shoulders, then the neck, and paralyzed the left arm.
 But he was perfectly conscious; he had the feeling that his heart was
 about to stop, that life was about to leave him, in the dreadful
 oppression, like that of a vise, which was suffocating him. Before the
 attack reached its height he had the strength to rise and to knock on the
 floor with a stick for Martine. Then he fell back on his bed, unable to
 speak or to move, and covered with a cold sweat.
 

 Martine, fortunately, in the profound silence of the empty house, heard
 the knock. She dressed herself, wrapped a shawl about her, and went
 upstairs, carrying her candle. The darkness was still profound; dawn was
 about to break. And when she perceived her master, whose eyes alone seemed
 living, looking at her with locked jaws, speechless, his face distorted by
 pain, she was awed and terrified, and she could only rush toward the bed
 crying:
 

 “My God! My God! what is the matter, monsieur? Answer me, monsieur, you
 frighten me!”
 

 For a full minute Pascal struggled in vain to recover his breath. Then,
 the viselike pressure on his chest relaxing slowly, he murmured in a faint
 voice:
 

 “The five thousand francs in the desk are Clotilde’s. Tell her that the
 affair of the notary is settled, that she will recover from it enough to
 live upon.”
 

 Then Martine, who had listened to him in open-mouthed wonder, confessed
 the falsehood she had told him, ignorant of the good news that had been
 brought by Ramond.
 

 “Monsieur, you must forgive me; I told you an untruth. But it would be
 wrong to deceive you longer. When I saw you alone and so unhappy, I took
 some of my own money.”
 

 “My poor girl, you did that!”
 

 “Oh, I had some hope that monsieur would return it to me one day.”
 

 By this time the attack had passed off, and he was able to turn his head
 and look at her. He was amazed and moved. What was passing in the heart of
 this avaricious old maid, who for thirty years had been saving up her
 treasure painfully, who had never taken a sou from it, either for herself
 or for any one else? He did not yet comprehend, but he wished to show
 himself kind and grateful.
 

 “You are a good woman, Martine. All that will be returned to you. I truly
 think I am going to die—”
 

 She did not allow him to finish, her whole being rose up in rebellious
 protest.
 

 “Die; you, monsieur! Die before me! I do not wish it. I will not let you
 die!”
 

 She threw herself on her knees beside the bed; she caught him wildly in
 her arms, feeling him, to see if he suffered, holding him as if she
 thought that death would not dare to take him from her.
 

 “You must tell me what is the matter with you. I will take care of you. I
 will save you. If it were necessary to give my life for you, I would give
 it, monsieur. I will sit up day and night with you. I am strong still; I
 will be stronger than the disease, you shall see. To die! to die! oh, no,
 it cannot be! The good God cannot wish so great an injustice. I have
 prayed so much in my life that he ought to listen to me a little now, and
 he will grant my prayer, monsieur; he will save you.”
 

 Pascal looked at her, listened to her, and a sudden light broke in upon
 his mind. She loved him, this miserable woman; she had always loved him.
 He thought of her thirty years of blind devotion, her mute adoration, when
 she had waited upon him, on her knees, as it were, when she was young; her
 secret jealousy of Clotilde later; what she must have secretly suffered
 all that time! And she was here on her knees now again, beside his
 deathbed; her hair gray; her eyes the color of ashes in her pale nun-like
 face, dulled by her solitary life. And he felt that she was unconscious of
 it all; that she did not even know with what sort of love she loved him,
 loving him only for the happiness of loving him: of being with him, and of
 waiting on him.
 

 Tears rose to Pascal’s eyes; a dolorous pity and an infinite human
 tenderness flowed from his poor, half-broken heart.
 

 “My poor girl,” he said, “you are the best of girls. Come, embrace me, as
 you love me, with all your strength.”
 

 She, too, sobbed. She let her gray head, her face worn by her long
 servitude, fall on her master’s breast. Wildly she kissed him, putting all
 her life into the kiss.
 

 “There, let us not give way to emotion, for you see we can do nothing;
 this will be the end, just the same. If you wish me to love you, obey me.
 Now that I am better, that I can breathe easier, do me the favor to run to
 Dr. Ramond’s. Waken him and bring him back with you.”
 

 She was leaving the room when he called to her, seized by a sudden fear.
 

 “And remember, I forbid you to go to inform my mother.”
 

 She turned back, embarrassed, and in a voice of entreaty, said:
 

 “Oh, monsieur, Mme. Felicite has made me promise so often—”
 

 But he was inflexible. All his life he had treated his mother with
 deference, and he thought he had acquired the right to defend himself
 against her in the hour of his death. He would not let the servant go
 until she had promised him that she would be silent. Then he smiled once
 more.
 

 “Go quickly. Oh, you will see me again; it will not be yet.”
 

 Day broke at last, the melancholy dawn of the pale November day. Pascal
 had had the shutters opened, and when he was left alone he watched the