# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2011
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, Ghetto Tragedies
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/35076/35076-h/35076-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

At last the genteel stone-mason found an opportunity of piercing
through the throng of friends that surrounded Mr. Brill, and of
obsequiously inviting the generous orderer of this especially
[341]handsome and profitable tombstone to inspect it. Kitty followed in the
wake of her parents. Almost at the tomb, a corpulent man with graying
hair, issuing suddenly from an avenue of headstones, accosted her. She
frowned.
"You oughtn't to have come," she said.
"Since I belong to the family, Kitty," he remonstrated, playing
nervously with his massive watch seals.
"No, you don't," she retorted. Then, relentingly: "I told you, Moss,
that I could not give you my formal consent till after my sister's
tombstone was set. That is the least respect I can pay her." And she
turned away from the somewhat disconcerted Rosenstein, feeling very
right-minded and very forgiving toward Salvina for delaying by so many
years her marriage with the South African magnate.
Meantime Mr. Brill, in his heavily draped high hat, stood beside the
pompous granite memorial, surveying it approvingly. His wife's hand
lay tenderly in his own. Underneath their feet lay the wormy dust that
had once palpitated with truth and honour, that had kept the
conscience of the household.
"That bit of scroll-work," said the stone-mason admiringly, and with
an air of having thrown it in at a loss; "you don't often see a bit
like that—everybody's been saying so."
[342]"Very fine!" replied Mr. Brill obediently.
"I paid the synagogue bill for you—to save you trouble," added the
stone-mason, insinuatingly.
But Mr. Brill was abstractedly studying the stone, and the mason moved
off delicately. Mrs. Brill tried to spell out a few of the words, but,
as there was no one to reprimand her, admitted her break-down.
"Read it to me, dear heart," she whispered to Mr. Brill.
"I did read it you, my precious one," he said, "when Kitty sent it us.
It says:—

"'Salvina Brill,
Whom God took suddenly,
On May 29th, 1897,
Aged twenty-five;
Loved and lamented by all
For her perfect goodness.'
Then come the Hebrew letters."
"Poor Salvina!" sighed Mrs. Brill. "She deserves it, though she did
spoil our lives for years." He pressed her hand. "I can't tell you how
frightened I was of her," she went on. "She almost made me think I
ought not to forgive you even on the Day of Atonement. But I don't
bear her malice, and I don't grudge her what the stone says."
"No, you mustn't," he said piously. "Besides, everybody knows one
never puts the whole truth on tombstones."
"Suffer not the evil imagination to have dominion over us ...
deliver me from the destructive Satan."—Morning Prayer.
Without, the air was hot, heavy and oppressive; squadrons of dark
clouds had rolled up rapidly from the rim of the horizon, and
threatened each instant to shake heaven and earth with their
artillery. But within the little synagogue of the "Congregation of
Love and Mercy," though it was crowded to suffocation, not a window
was open. The worshippers, arrayed in their Sabbath finery, were too
intent on following the quaint monotonous sing-song of the Cantor
reading the Law to have much attention left for physical discomfort.
They thought of their perspiring brows and their moist undergarments
just about as little as they thought of the meaning of the Hebrew
words the reader was droning. Though the language was perfectly
intelligible to them, yet their consciousness was chiefly and
agreeably occupied with its musical accentuation, their piety being so
interwoven with these beloved and familiar material elements as hardly
to be separable therefrom. [346]Perspiration, too, had come to seem almost
an ingredient of piety on great synagogal occasions. Frequent
experience had linked the two, as the poor opera-goer associates Patti
with crushes. And the present was a great occasion. It was only an
ordinary Sabbath afternoon service, but there was a feast of
intellectual good things to follow. The great Rav Rotchinsky from
Brody was to deliver a sermon; and so the swarthy, eager-eyed,
curly-haired, shrewd-visaged cobblers, tailors, cigar-makers,
peddlers, and beggars, who made up the congregation, had assembled in
their fifties to enjoy the dialectical subtleties, the theological
witticisms and the Talmudical anecdotes which the reputation of the
Galician Maggid foreshadowed. And not only did they come themselves;
many brought their wives, who sat in their wigs and earrings behind a
curtain which cut them off from the view of the men. The general
ungainliness of their figures and the unattractiveness of their
low-browed, high-cheekboned, and heavy-jawed faces would have made
this pious precaution appear somewhat superfluous to an outsider. The
women, whose section of the large room thus converted into a place of
worship was much smaller than the men's, were even more closely packed
on their narrow benches. Little wonder, therefore, that just as a
member of the congregation was intoning from the central platform the
blessing which closes the reading of the Law, a woman disturbed her
neighbours by fainting. [347]She was carried out into the open air, though
not without a good deal of bustle, which invoked indignant
remonstrances in the Jüdisch-Deutsch jargon, of "Hush, little women!"
from the male worshippers, unconscious of the cause. The beadle went
behind the curtain, and, fearing new disturbances, tried to open the
window at the back of the little room, to let in some air from the
back-yard on which it abutted. The sash was, however, too inert from a
long season of sloth to move even in its own groove, and so the beadle
elbowed his way back into the masculine department, and by much
tugging at a cord effected a small slit between a dusty skylight and
the ceiling, neglecting the grumblings of the men immediately beneath.
Hardly had he done so, when all the heavy shadows that lay in the
corners of the synagogue, all the glooms that the storm-clouds cast
upon the day, and that the grimy, cobwebbed windows multiplied, were
sent flying off by a fierce flash of lightning that bathed in a sea of
fire the dingy benches, the smeared walls, the dingily curtained Ark,
the serried rows of swarthy faces. Almost on the heels of the
lightning came the thunder—that vast, instantaneous crash which
denotes that the electric cloud is low.
The service was momentarily interrupted; the congregation was on its
feet; and from all parts rose the Hebrew blessing, "Blessed art thou,
O Lord, performing the work of the Creation;" followed, as [348]the
thunder followed the lightning, by the sonorous "Blessed art thou, O
Lord, whose power and might fill the Universe." Then the congregation,
led by the great Rav Rotchinsky, to whose venerable thought-lined
face, surmounted by its black cap, all eyes had instinctively turned,
sat down again, feeling safe. The blessing was intended to mean, and
meant no more than, a reverential acknowledgment of the majesty of the
Creator revealed in elemental phenomena; but human nature, struggling
amid the terrors and awfulness of the Universe, is always below its
creed, and scarce one but felt the prayer a talisman. A moment
afterward all rose again, as Moshé Grinwitz, wrapped in his Talith, or
praying-shawl, prepared to descend from the Al Memor, or central
platform, bearing in his arms the Scroll of the Law, which had just
been reverentially wrapped in its bandages, and devoutly covered with
its embroidered mantle and lovingly decorated with its ornamental
bells and pointer.
Now, as Moshé Grinwitz stood on the Al Memor with his sacred burden,
another terrible flash of lightning and appalling crash of thunder
startled the worshippers. And Moshé's arms were nervously agitated,
and a frightful thought came into his head. Suppose he should drop
the Holy Scroll! As this dreadful possibility occurred to him he
trembled still more. The Sepher Torah is to the Jew at once the most
precious and the most sacred of possessions, [349]and in the eyes of the
"Congregation of Love and Mercy" their Sepher Torah was, if
possible, invested with a still higher preciousness and sanctity,
because they had only one. They were too poor to afford luxuries; and
so this single Scroll was the very symbol and seal of their
brotherhood; in it lay the very possibility of their existence as a
congregation. Not that it would be rendered "Pasul," imperfect and
invalid, by being dropped; the fall could not erase any of the letters
so carefully written on the parchment; but the calamity would be none
the less awful and ominous. Every person present would have to abstain
for a day from all food and drink, in sign of solemn grief. Moshé felt
that if the idea that had flitted across his brain were to be
realized, he would never have the courage to look his pious wife in
the face after such passive profanity. The congregation, too, which
honoured him, and which now waited to press devout kisses on the
mantle of the Scroll, on its passage to the Ark—he could not but be
degraded in its eyes by so negligent a performance of a duty which was
a coveted privilege. All these thoughts, which were instinctively
felt, rather than clearly conceived, caused Moshé Grinwitz to clasp
the Sacred Scroll, which reached a little above his head, tightly to
his breast. Feeling secure from the peril of dropping it, he made a
step forward, but the bells jangled weirdly to his ears, and when he
came to the two steps which led down from the platform, a horrible
[350]foreboding overcame him that he would stumble and fall in the descent.
He stepped down one of the steps with morbid care, but lo! the feeling
that no power on earth could prevent his falling gained tenfold in
intensity. An indefinable presentiment of evil was upon him; the air
was charged with some awful and maleficent influence, of which the
convulsion of nature seemed a fit harbinger. And now his sensations
became more horrible. The conviction of the impending catastrophe
changed into a desire to take an active part in it, to have it done
with and over. His arms itched to loose their hold of the Sepher
Torah. Oh! if he could only dash the thing to the ground, nay, stamp
upon it, uttering fearful blasphemies, and shake off this dark cloud
that seemed to close round and suffocate him. A last shred of will, of
sanity, wrestled with his wild wishes. The perspiration poured in
streams down his forehead. It was but a moment since he had taken the
Holy Scroll into his arms; but it seemed ages ago.
His foot hovered between the first and second step, when a strange
thing happened. Straight through the narrow slit opened in the
skylight came a swift white arrow of flame, so dazzling that the awed
worshippers closed their eyes; then a long succession of terrific
peals shook the room as with demoniac laughter, and when the
congregants came to their senses and opened their eyes they saw Moshé
Grinwitz sitting dazed upon the steps of the Al [351]Memor, his hands
tightly grasping the ends of his praying-shawl, while the Sepher
Torah lay in the dust of the floor.
For a moment the shock was such that no one could speak or move. There
was an awful, breathless silence, broken only by the mad patter of the
rain on the roof and the windows. The floodgates of heaven were opened
at last, and through the fatal slit a very cascade of water seemed to
descend. Automatically the beadle rushed to the cord and pulled the
window to. His action broke the spell, and a dozen men, their swarthy
faces darker with concern, rushed to raise up the prostrate Scroll,
while a hubbub of broken ejaculations rose from every side.
But ere a hand could reach it, Moshé Grinwitz had darted forward and
seized the precious object. "No, no," he cried, in the jargon which
was the common language of all present. "What do you want? The
mitzvah (good deed) is mine. I alone must carry it." He shouldered
it anew.
"Kiss it, at least," cried the great Rav Rotchinsky in a hoarse,
shocked whisper.
"Kiss it?" cried Moshé Grinwitz, with a sneering laugh. "What! with my
wife in synagogue! Isn't it enough that I embrace it?" Then, without
giving his hearers time to grasp the profanity of his words, he went
on: "Ah, now I can carry thee easily. I can hold thee, and yet breathe
freely. See!" And he held out the Scroll lengthwise, showing the
gilded [352]metal chain and the pointer and the bells contorted by the
lightning. "I didn't hurt thee; God hurt thee," he said, addressing
the Scroll. With a quick jerk of the hand he drew off the mantle and
showed the parchment blackened and disfigured.
A groan burst from some; others looked on in dazed silence. The
pecuniary loss, added to the manifestation of Divine wrath,
overwhelmed them. "Thou hast no soul now to struggle out of my hands,"
went on Moshé Grinwitz contemptuously. "Look!" he added suddenly: "The
lightning has gone back to hell again!" The men nearest him shuddered,
and gazed down at the point on the floor toward which he was inclining
the extremity of the Scroll. The wood was charred, and a small hole
revealed the path the electric current had taken. As they looked in
awestruck silence, a loud wailing burst forth from behind the curtain.
The ill-omened news of the destruction of the Sepher Torah had
reached the women, and their Oriental natures found relief in profuse
lamentation. "Smell! smell!" cried Moshé Grinwitz, sniffing the
sulphurous air with open delight.
"Woe! woe!" wailed the women. "Woe has befallen us!"
"Be silent, all!" thundered the Maggid, suddenly recovering himself.
"Be silent, women! Listen to my words. This is the vengeance of Heaven
for the wickedness ye have committed in England. Since [353]ye left your
native country ye have forgotten your Judaism. There are men in this
synagogue that have shaved the corners of their beard; there are women
who have not separated the Sabbath dough. Hear ye! To-morrow shall be
a fast day for you all. And you, Moshé Grinwitz, bench gomel—thank
the Holy One, blessed be He, for saving your life."
"Not I," said Moshé Grinwitz. "You talk nonsense. If the Holy One,
blessed be He, saved my life, it was He that threatened it. My life
was in no danger if He hadn't interfered."
To hear blasphemies like this from the hitherto respectable and devout
Moshé Grinwitz overwhelmed his hearers. But only for a moment. From a
hundred throats there rose the angry cry, "Epikouros! Epikouros!" And
mingled with this accusation of graceless scepticism there swelled a
gathering tumult of "His is the sin! Cast him out! He is the Jonah! He
is the sinner!" The congregants had all risen long ago and menacing
faces glared behind menacing faces. Some of more heady temperament
were starting from their places. "Moshé Grinwitz," cried the great
Rav, his voice dominating the din, "are you mad?"
"Now for the first time am I sane," replied the man, his brow dark
with defiance, his tall but usually stooping frame rigid, his narrow
chest dilated, his head thrown back so that the somewhat rusty high
hat he wore sloped backward half off his skull. It [354]was always a
strange, arrestive face, was Moshé Grinwitz's, with its sallow skin,
its melancholy dark eyes, its aquiline nose, its hanging side-curls,
and its full, fleshy mouth embowered in a forest of black beard and
mustache; and now there was an uncanny light about it which made it
almost weird. "Now I see that the Socialists and Atheists are right,
and that we trouble ourselves and tear out our very gall to read a
Torah which the Overseer himself, if there is one, scornfully
shrivels up and casts beneath our feet. Know ye what, brethren? Let us
all go to the Socialist Club and smoke our cigarettes. Otherwise are
you mad!" As he uttered these impious words, another flash of flame
lit up the crowded dusk with unearthly light; the building seemed to
rock and crash; the fingers of the storm beat heavily upon the
windows. From the women's compartment came low wails of fear: "Lord,
have mercy! Forgive us for our sins! It is the end of the world!" But
from the men's benches there arose an incoherent cry like the growl of
a tiger, and from all sides excited figures precipitated themselves
upon the blasphemer. But Moshé Grinwitz laughed a wild, maniacal
laugh, and whirled the sacred Scroll round and dashed the first comers
against one another. But a muscular Lithuanian seized the extremity of
the Scroll, and others hung on, and between them they wrested it from
his grasp. Still he fought furiously, as if endowed with sinews of
steel, and his irritated [355]opponents, their faces bleeding and swollen,
closed round him, forgetting that their object was but to expel him,
and bent on doing him a mischief. Another moment and it would have
fared ill with the man, when a voice, whose tones startled all but
Moshé Grinwitz, though they were spoken close to his ear, hissed in
Yiddish: "Well, if this is the way the members of the Congregation of
Love and Mercy spend their Sabbath, methinks they had done as well to
smoke cigarettes at the Socialist Club. What say ye, brethren?" These
words, pregnant and deserved enough in themselves, were underlined by
an accent of indescribable mockery, not bitter, but as gloating over
the enjoyment of their folly. Involuntarily all turned their eyes to
the speaker.
Who was he? Where did he spring from, this black-coated, fur-capped,
red-haired hunchback with the gigantic marble brow, the cold, keen,
steely eyes that drew and enthralled the gazer, the handsome
clean-shaven lips contorted with a sneer? None remembered seeing him
enter—none had seen him sitting at their side, or near them. He was
not of their congregation, nor of their brotherhood, nor of any of
their crafts. Yet as they looked at him the exclamations died away on
their lips, their menacing hands fell to their sides, and a wave of
vague, uneasy remembrance passed over all the men in the synagogue.
There was not one that did not seem to know him; there was not one who
could have told [356]who he was, or when or where he had seen him before.
Even the great Rav Rotchinsky, who had set foot on English soil but a
fortnight ago, felt a stir of shadowy recollection within him; and his
corrugated brow wrinkled itself still more in the search after
definiteness. A deep and sudden silence possessed the synagogue; the
very sobs of the unseeing women were checked. Only the sough of the
storm, the ceaseless plash of the torrent, went on as before. Without,
the busy life of London pulsed, unchecked by the tempest; within, the
little synagogue was given over to mystery and nameless awe.
The sneering hunchback took the Holy Scroll from the nerveless hands
of the Lithuanian, and waved it as in derision. "Blasted! harmless!"
he cried. "The great Name itself mocked by the elements! So this is
what ye toil and sweat for—to store up gold that His words may be
inscribed finely on choice parchment; and then this is how He laughs
at your toil and your self-sacrifice. Listen to Him no more; give not
up the seventh day to idleness when your Lord worketh His lightnings
thereon. Blind yourselves no longer over old-fashioned pages, dusty
and dreary. Rise up against Him and His law, for He is moved with
mirth at your mummeries. He and His angels laugh at you—Heaven is
merry with your folly. What hath He done for His chosen people for
their centuries of anguish and martyrdom? It is for His plaything that
He hath chosen [357]you. He hath given you over into the hand of the
spoiler; ye are a byword among nations; the followers of the
victorious Christ spit in your faces. Here in England your lot is
least hard; but even here ye eat your scanty bread with sorrow and
travail. Sleep may rarely visit your eyes; your homes are noisome
styes; your children perish around you; ye go down in sorrow to the
grave. Rouse yourselves, and be free men. Waste your lives neither for
God nor man. Or, if you will worship, worship the Christ, whose
ministers will pour gold upon you. Eat, drink, and be merry, for
to-morrow ye die."
A charmed silence still hung over his auditors. Their resentment,
their horror, was dead; a waft of fiery air seemed to blow over their
souls, an intoxicating flush of evil thoughts held riot in their
hearts. They felt their whole spirit move under the sway of the daring
speaker, who now seemed to them merely to put into words thoughts long
suppressed in their own hearts, but now rising into active
consciousness. Yes, they had been fools: they would free themselves,
and quaff the wine of life before the Angel of Death, Azrael, spilled
the goblet. Moshé Grinwitz's melancholy eyes blazed with sympathetic
ardour.
"Hush, miserable blasphemer!" faltered the great Rav Rotchinsky, who
alone could find his tongue. "The guardian of Israel neither
slumbereth nor sleepeth." The hunchback wheeled round and cast [358]a
chilling glance at the venerable man. Then, smiling, "The maidens of
England are beautiful," he said. "They are even fairer than the women
of Brody."
The great Rav turned pale, but his eyes shone. He struck out feebly
with his arms, as though beating back some tempting vision.
"You and I have spoken together before, Rabbi," said the hunchback.
"We shall speak again—about women, wine, and other things. Your beard
is long and white, but many days of sunshine are still before you, and
the darkness of the grave is afar."
The rabbi tried to mutter a prayer, but his lips only beat tremulously
together.
"Profane mocker," he muttered at length, "go to thy work and thy wine
and thy pleasure, if thou wouldst desecrate the sacred Sabbath-day;
but tempt not others to sin with thee. Begone; and may the Holy One,
blessed be He, blast thee with His lightnings."
"The Holy One blasteth only that which is holy," grimly rejoined the
dwarfish stranger, exhibiting the Scroll, while a low sound of
applause went up from the audience. "Said I not, ye were a sport and a
mockery unto Him? Ye assemble in your multitude for prayer, and the
vapour of your piety but prepares the air for the passage of His
arrows. Ye adorn His Scroll with bells and chains, and the gilded
metal but draws His lightnings."
[359]He looked around the room and a cat-like gleam of triumph stole into
his wonderful eyes as he noted the effect of his words. He paused, and
again for a moment the tense, awful silence reigned, emphasized by the
loud but decreasing patter of the rain. This time it was broken in a
strange, unexpected fashion.
"Yisgadal, veyiskadash shemé rabbo," rang out a clear, childish
voice from the rear of the synagogue. A little orphan child, who had
come to repeat the Kaddish, the Hebrew mourners' unquestioning
acknowledgment of the Supreme Goodness, had fallen into a sleep,
overcome by the heat, and had slept all through the storm. Awakening
now amid a universal silence, the poor little fellow instinctively
felt that the congregation was waiting for him to pronounce the
prayer. Alone of the male worshippers he had neither seen the
blaspheming hunchback nor listened to his words.
The hunchback's handsome face was distorted with a scowl; he stamped
his broad splay-foot, but hearing no verbal interruption, the child,
its eyes piously closed, continued its prayer—
"In the world which He hath created...."
"The rain has ceased, brethren," huskily whispered the hunchback, for
his words seemed to stick in his throat. "Come outside and I will tell
you how to enjoy this world, for world-to-come there is none." Not a
figure stirred. The child's treble went unfalteringly on. The stranger
hurried [360]toward the door. Arrived there, he looked back. Moshé
Grinwitz alone followed him. He hurled the Scroll at the child's head,
but the lad just then took the three backward steps which accompany
the conclusion of the prayer. The Scroll dashed itself against the
wall; the stranger was gone and with him Moshé Grinwitz. A great wave
of trembling passed through the length and breadth of the synagogue;
the men drew long breaths, as if some heavy and sulphurous vapour had
been dissipated from the atmosphere; the child lifted up with
difficulty the battered Scroll, kissed it and handed it to his
neighbour, who deposited it reverently in the Ark; a dazzling burst of
sunshine flooded the room from above, and transmuted the floating dust
into the golden shafts of some celestial structure; the Cantor and the
congregation continued the words of the service at the point
interrupted, as though all the strange episode had been a dream. They
did not speak or wonder among themselves at it; nor did the rabbi
allude to it in the marvellous exhortation that succeeded the service,
save at its close, when he reminded them that on the morrow they must
observe a solemn fast. But ever afterward they shunned Moshé Grinwitz
as a leper; for the sight of him recalled his companion in blasphemy,
the atheist and socialist propagandist, who had insidiously crept into
their midst, after perverting [361]and crazing their fellow as a
preliminary; and the thought of the strange hunchback set their blood
tingling and their brain surging with wild fancies and audacious
thoughts. The tidings of their misfortune induced a few benevolent men
to join in purchasing a new Scroll of the Law for them, and before the
Feast of Consecration of this precious possession was well over, the
once vivid images of that stormy and disgraceful scene were as shadows
in the minds of men not unaccustomed to heated synagogal discussions,
and not altogether strangers to synagogal affrays.
"She will do him good and not evil all the days of her
life."—Prov. xxxi. 12.
As Moshé Grinwitz followed his new-found friend down the narrow
windings that led to his own home, his whole being surrendered itself
to the new delicious freedom. The burst of sunshine that greeted him
almost as soon as he crossed the threshold of the synagogue seemed to
him to typify the new life that was to be his. He drew up his gaunt
form to his full height, stiffened his curved shoulders, bent by much
stooping over his machine, and adjusted his high hat firmly on his
head. It was not a restful, placid feeling that now possessed him;
rather a busy ferment of ideas, a stirring of nerve currents, an
accumulation of energy striving to discharge itself, a mercurial
flowing of the blood. The [362]weight of old life-long conceptions, nay,
the burden of old learning, of which his store had been vast, was cast
off. He did not know what he should do with the new life that tingled
in his veins; he only felt alive in every pore.
"Ha! brother!" he shouted to the hunchback, who was hurrying on
before. "These fools in the synagogue would do better to come out and
enjoy the fine weather."
"They breathe the musty air to offer it up as a sweet incense,"
responded the dwarf, slackening his steps to allow his companion to
come up with him.
Their short walk was diversified by quite a number of incidents. A
driver lashed his horse so savagely that the animal bolted; two
children walking hand in hand suddenly began to fight; a
foreign-looking, richly dressed gentleman, half-drunk, staggered
along. Moshé felt it a shame that one wealthy man should wear a heavy
gold chain, which would support a poor family for a month; but ere his
own temptation had gathered to a head, the poor gentleman was felled
by a sudden blow, and a respectably clad figure vanished down an alley
with the coveted spoil. Moshé felt glad, and made no attempt to assist
the victim, and his attention was immediately attracted by some boys,
who commenced to tie a cracker to a cat's tail. Occupied by all these
observations, Moshé suddenly noted with a start that they had reached
the house in which he lived. His [363]companion had already entered the
passage, for the door was always ajar, and Moshé had the impression
that it was very kind of his new friend to accept his invitation to
visit him. He felt very pleased, and followed him into the passage,
but no sooner had he done so than an impalpable cloud of distrust
seemed to settle upon him. The house was a tall, old-fashioned and
grimy structure, which had been fine, and even stately, a century
before, but which now sheltered a dozen families, mainly Jewish. Moshé
Grinwitz's one room was situated at the very top, its walls forming
part of the roof. Every flight of stairs Moshé went up, his spirit
grew darker and darker, as if absorbing the darkness that hung around
the cobwebbed, massive balustrades, upon which no direct ray of
sunlight ever fell; and by the time he had reached the dusky landing
outside his own door the vague uneasiness had changed into a horrible
definite conception; a memory had come back upon him which set his
heart thumping guiltily and anxiously in his bosom. His wife! His
pure, virtuous, God-fearing wife! How was he to make her understand?
But immediately a thought came, by which the burden of shame and
anxiety was half lifted. His wife was not at home; she would still be
in the Synagogue of Love and Mercy, where, mercifully blinded by the
curtain, she, perhaps, was still ignorant of the part he had played.
He turned suddenly to his companion, and caught the vanishing traces
[364]of an ugly scowl wrinkling the high white forehead under the fur cap.
The hunchback's hair burnt like fire on the background of the gloom;
his eyes flashed lightning.
"Probably my wife is in the synagogue," said Moshé. "If so, she has
the key, and we can't get in."
"The key matters little," hissed the hunchback. "But you must first
tear down this thing."
Moshé's eyes followed in wonder the direction of his companion's long,
white forefinger, and rested on the Mezuzah, where, in a tin case,
the holy verses and the Name hung upon the door-post.
"Tear it down?" repeated Moshé.
"Tear it down!" replied the hunchback. "Never will I enter a home
where this superstitious gew-gaw is allowed to decorate the door."
Moshé hesitated; the thought of what his wife would say, again welled
up strongly within him; all his new impious daring seemed to be
melting away. But a mocking glance from the cruel eyes thrilled
through him. He put his hand on the Mezuzah, then the unbroken habit
of years asserted its sway, and he removed the finger which had lain
on the Name and kissed it. Instantly another semi-transformation of
his thoughts took place; he longed to take the hunchback by the
throat. But it was an impotent longing, for when a low hiss of intense
scorn and wrath was breathed from the clenched [365]lips of his companion,
he made a violent tug at the firmly fastened Mezuzah. It was
half-loosed from the woodwork when, from behind the door, there issued
in clear, womanly tones the solemn Hebrew words:—
"Blessed is the man that walketh not in the council of the ungodly,
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the
scornful."
It was Rebecca Grinwitz commencing the Book of Psalms, which she read
through every Sabbath afternoon.
A violent shudder agitated Moshé Grinwitz's frame; he paused with his
hand on the Mezuzah, struggled with himself awhile, then kissed his
finger again, and, turning to defy the scorn of his companion, saw
that he had slipped noiselessly downstairs. A sob of intense relief
burst from Moshé's lips.
"Rivkoly, Rivkoly!" he cried hysterically, beating at the door; and in
another moment he was folded in the quiet haven of his wife's arms.
"Who told thee it was I?" said Rebecca, after a moment of delicious
happiness for both. "I told them not to alarm thee, nor to spoil thy
enjoyment of the sermon, because I knew thou wouldst be uneasy and be
wanting to leave the synagogue if thou knewest I had fainted."
"No one told me thou hadst fainted!" Moshé exclaimed, instantly
forgetting his own perturbation.
[366]"And yet thou didst guess it!" said Rebecca, a happy little smile
dimpling her pale cheek, "and came away after me." Then, her face
clouding, "The Satan Mekatrig has tempted us both away from
synagogue," she said, "and even when I commence to say Tehillim
(Psalms) at home, he interrupts me by sending me my darling husband."
Moshé kissed her in acknowledgment of the complimentary termination of
a sentence begun with unquestionable gloom. "But what made my Rivkoly
faint?" he asked, glad, on reflection, that his wife's misconception
obviated the necessity of explanations. "They ought to have opened the
window at the back of the women's room."
Rebecca shuddered. "God forbid!" she cried. "It wasn't the heat—it
was that." Her eyes stared a moment at some unseen vision.
"What?" cried Moshé, catching the contagion of horror.
"He would have come in," she said.
"Who would have come in?" he gasped.
"The Satan Mekatrig," replied his wife. "He was outside, and he
glared at me as if I prevented his coming in."
A nervous silence followed. Moshé's heart beat painfully. Then he
laughed with ghastly merriment. "Thou didst fall asleep from the
heat," he said, "and hadst an evil dream."
"No, no," protested his wife earnestly. "As sure [367]as I stand here, no!
I was looking into my Chumosh (Pentateuch), following the reading of
the Torah, and all at once I felt something plucking my eyes off my
book and turning my head to look through the window immediately behind
me. I wondered what Satan Mekatrig was distracting my thoughts from
the service. For a long time I resisted, but when the reading ceased
for a moment the temptation overcame me and I turned and saw him."
"How looked he?" Moshé asked in a whisper that strove in vain not to
be one.
"Do not ask me," Rebecca replied, with another shudder. "A little
crooked demon with red hair, and a fur cap, and a white forehead, and
baleful eyes, and a cock's talons for toes."
Again Moshé laughed, a strange, hollow laugh. "Little fool!" he said,
"I know the man. He is only a brother-Jew—a poor cutter or
cigar-maker who laughs at Yiddishkeit (Judaism), because he has no
wife like mine to show him the heavenly light. Why, didst thou not see
him afterward? But no, thou must have been gone by the time he came
inside."
"What I saw was no man," returned Rebecca, looking at him sternly. "No
earthly being could have stopped my heart with his glances. It was the
Satan Mekatrig himself, who goeth to and fro on the earth, and
walketh up and down in it. I must have been having wicked thoughts
indeed this [368]Sabbath, thinking of my new dress, for my Sabbath Angel
to have deserted me, and to let the Disturber and the Tempter assail
me unchecked." The poor, conscience-stricken woman burst into tears.
"My Rivkoly have wicked thoughts!" said Moshé incredulously, as he
smoothed her cheek. "If my Rivkoly puts on a new dress in honour of
the Sabbath, is not the dear God pleased? Why, where is thy new
dress?"
"I have changed it for an old one," she sobbed. "I do not want to see
the demon again."
"The Satan Mekatrig has no real existence, I tell thee," said Moshé,
irritated. "He only means our own inward thoughts, that distract us in
the performance of the precepts; our own inward temptations to go
astray after our eyes and after our hearts."
"Moshé!" Rebecca exclaimed in a shocked tone, "have I married an
Epikouros after all? My father, the Rav, peace be unto him, always
said thou hadst the makings of one—that thou didst ask too many
questions."
"Well, whether there is a Satan or not," retorted her husband, "thou
couldst not have seen him; for the person thou describest is the man I
tell thee of."
"And thou keepest company with such a man," she answered; "a man who
scoffs at Yiddishkeit! May the Holy One, blessed be He, forgive
thee! Now I know why we have no children, no son to say [369]Kaddish
after us." And Rebecca wept bitterly—for the children she did not
possess.
Their common cause of grief coming thus unexpectedly into their
consciousness softened them toward one another and dispelled the
gathering irritation. Both had a melancholy vision of themselves
stretched out stiff and stark in their shrouds, with no filial
Kaddish breaking in upon and gladdening their ears. O if their souls
should be doomed to Purgatory, with no son's prayers to release them!
Very soon they were sitting hand in hand, reading together the
interrupted Psalms.
And a deep peace fell upon Moshé Grinwitz. So the immortal allegorist,
John Bunyan, must have felt when the mad longing to utter blasphemies
and obscenities from the pulpit was stifled; and when he felt his soul
once more in harmony with the Spirit of Good. So feel all men who have
wrestled with a Being in the darkness and prevailed.
They were a curious contrast—the tall, sallow, stooping,
black-bearded man, and the small, keen-eyed, plump, pleasant-looking,
if not pretty woman, in her dark wig and striped cotton dress, and as
they sat, steadily going through the whole collection of Psalms to a
strange, melancholy tune, fraught with a haunting and indescribable
pathos, the shadows of twilight gathered unnoticed about the attic,
which was their all in all of home. The iron bed, the wooden chairs,
the gilt-framed Mizrach began to lose [370]their outlines in the
dimness. The Psalms were finished at last, and then the husband and
wife sat, still hand in hand, talking of their plans for the coming
week. For once neither spoke of going to evening service at the
Synagogue of Love and Mercy, and when a silver ray of moonlight lay
broad across the counterpane, and Rebecca Grinwitz, peering into the
quiet sky that overhung the turbid alley, announced that three stars
were visible, the devout couple turned their faces to the east and
sang the hymns that usher out the Sabbath.
And when the evening prayer was over Rebecca produced from the
cupboard the plainly cut goblet of raisin wine, and the metal
wine-cup, the green twisted waxlight, and the spice-box, wherewith to
perform the beautiful symbolical ceremony of the Havdalah, welcoming
in the days of work, the six long days of dreary drudgery, with
cheerful resignation to the will of the Maker of all things—of the
Sabbath and the Day of Work, the Light and the Shadow, the Good and
the Evil, blent into one divine harmony by His inscrutable Wisdom and
Love.
Moshé filled the cup with raisin wine, and, holding it with his right
hand, chanted a short majestic Hebrew poem, whereof the burden was:—
"Lo! God is my salvation; I will trust, and I will not be afraid. Be
with us light and joy, gladness and honour." Then blessing the King of
the Universe, who had created the fruit of the Vine, he [371]placed the
cup on the table and took up the spices, uttering a blessing over them
as he did so. Then having smelled the spice-box, he passed it on to
his wife and spread out his hands toward the light of the spiral wax
taper, reciting solemnly: "Blessed be Thou, O Lord, our God, King of
the Universe, who createst the Light of the Fire." And then looking
down at the Shade made by his bent fingers, he took up the wine-cup
again, and chanted, with especial fervour, and with a renewed sense of
the sanctities and sweet tranquillities of religion: "Blessed be Thou,
O Lord our God, King of the Universe, who makest a distinction between
the Holy and the non-Holy, between Light and Darkness."
"As for that night, let darkness seize upon it."—Job iii. 6.
It was Kol Nidré night, the commencement of the great White Fast,
the Day of Atonement. Throughout the Jewish quarter there was an air
of subdued excitement. The synagogues had just emptied themselves and
everywhere men and women, yet under the solemn shadow of passionate
prayer, were meeting and exchanging the wish that they might weather
the fast safely. The night was dark and starless, as if Nature partook
of the universal mournfulness.
Solitary, though amidst a crowd, a slight, painfully thin woman
shuffled wearily along, her feet clad in the slippers which befitted
the occasion, her head [372]bent, her worn cheek furrowed with
still-falling tears. They were not the last dribblets of an exhausted
emotion, not the meaningless, watery expression of over-excited
sensibility. They were real, salt, bitter tears born of an intense
sorrow. The long, harassing service, with its untiring demands upon
the most exalted and the most poignant emotions, would have been a
blessing if it had dulled her capacity for anguish. But it had not.
Poor Rebecca Grinwitz was still thinking of her husband.
It was of him she thought, even when the ministers, in their long
white cerements, were pouring forth their souls in passionate
vocalization, now rising to a wail, now breaking to a sob, now sinking
to a dread whisper; it was of him she thought when the weeping
worshippers, covered from head to foot in their praying-shawls, rocked
to and fro in a frenzy of grief, and battered the gates of Heaven with
fiery lyrics; it was of him she thought when she beat her breast with
her clenched fist as she made the confession of sin and clamoured for
forgiveness. Sins enough she knew she had—but his sin! Ah! God,
his sin!
For Moshé had gone from bad to worse. He refused to reënter the
synagogue where he had been so roughly handled. His speech became more
and more profane. He said no more prayers; wore no more phylacteries.
Her peaceful home-life wrecked, her reliance on her husband gone, the
poor wife clung to him, still hoping on. At times she did not believe
[373]him sane. Gradually rumours of his mad behaviour on the Sabbath on
which she had fainted reached her ears, and remembering that his
strangeness had begun from the Sunday morning following that delicious
afternoon of common Psalm-saying, she was often inclined to put it all
down to mental aberration. But then his talk—so clever, if so
blasphemous; bristling with little pointed epigrams and maxims such as
she had never before heard from him or any one else. He was full of
new ideas, too, on politics and the social system and other
unpractical topics, picturing endless potentialities of wealth and
happiness for the labourer. Meantime his wages had fallen by a third,
owing to the loss of his former place, his master having been the
president of the Congregation of Love and Mercy. What wonder,
therefore, if Moshé Grinwitz intruded upon all his wife's
thoughts—devotional or worldly? In a very real sense he had become
her Satan Mekatrig.
Up till to-night she had gone on hoping. For when the great White Fast
comes round, a mighty wave as of some subtle magnetism passes through
the world of Jews. Men and women who have not obeyed one precept of
Judaism for a whole year suddenly awake to a remembrance of the faith
in which they were born, and hasten to fast and pray, and abase
themselves before the Throne of Mercy. The long-drawn, tremulous,
stirring notes of the trumpet that ushers in the New Year, seem to
rally and gather together the dispersed of Israel from every region
of [374]the underworld of unfaith and to mass them beneath the cope of
heaven. And to-night surely the newly rooted nightshade of doubt would
wither away in her husband's bosom. Surely this one link still held
him to the religion of his fathers; and this one link would redeem him
and yet save his soul from the everlasting tortures of the damned. But
this last hope had been doomed to disappointment. Utterly unmoved by
all the olden sanctities of the Days of Judgment that initiate the New
Year, the miserable man showed no signs of remorse when the more awful
terrors of the Day of Atonement drew near—the last day of grace for
the sinner, the day on which the Divine Sentence is sealed
irrevocably. And so the wretched woman had gone to the synagogue
alone.
Reaching home, she toiled up the black staircase and turned the handle
of the door. As she threw open the door she uttered a cry. She saw
nothing before her but a gigantic shadow, flickering grotesquely on
the sloping walls and the slip of ceiling. It must be her own shadow,
for other living occupant of the room she could see none. Where was
her husband? Whither had he gone? Why had he recklessly left the door
unlocked?
She looked toward the table gleaming weirdly with its white
tablecloth; the tall wax Yom Kippur Candle, specially lit on the eve
of the solemn fast and intended to burn far on into the next day, had
all but guttered away, and the flame was quivering [375]unsteadily under
the influence of a draught coming from the carelessly opened window.
Rebecca shivered from head to foot; a dread presentiment of evil shook
her soul. For years the Candle had burnt steadily, and her life also
had been steady and undisturbed. Alas! it needed not the omen of the
Yom Kippur Candle to presage woe.
"May the dear God have mercy on me!" she exclaimed, bursting into
fresh tears. Hardly had she uttered the words when a monstrous black
cat, with baleful green eyes, dashed from under the table, sprang upon
the window-sill, and disappeared into the darkness, uttering a
melancholy howl. Almost frantic with terror, the poor woman dragged
herself to the window and closed it with a bang, but ere the sash had
touched the sill, something narrow and white had flashed from the room
through the gap, and the reverberations made in the silent garret by
the shock of the violently closed window were prolonged in mocking
laughter.
"Well thrown, Rav Moshé!" said a grating voice. "Now that you have at
last conquered your reverence for a bit of tin and a morsel of
parchment, I will honour your mansion with my presence."
Instantly Rebecca felt a wild longing to join in the merriment and to
laugh away her fears; but, muttering a potent talismanic verse, she
turned and faced her husband and his guest. Instinct had not deceived
her—the new-comer was the [376]hunchback of that fatal Sabbath. This time
she did not faint.
"A strange hour and occasion to bring a visitor, Moshé," she said
sternly, her face growing even more rigid and white as she caught the
nicotian and alcoholic reek of the two men's breaths.
"Your good Frau is not over-polite," said the visitor. "But it's
Yom Kippur, and so I suppose she feels she must tell the truth."
"I brought him, Rivkoly, to convince thee what a fool thou wast to
assert that thou hadst seen—but I mustn't be impolite," he broke
off, with a coarse laugh. "There's no call for me to tell the truth
because it's Yom Kippur. Down at the Club we celebrated the occasion
by something better than truth—a jolly spread! And our good friend
here actually stood a bottle of champagne! Champagne, Rivkoly! Think
of it! Real, live champagne, like that which fizzes and sparkles on
the table of the Lord Mayor. Oh, he's a jolly good fellow! and so said
all of us, too. And yet thou sayest he isn't a fellow at all."
A drunken leer overspread his sallow face, and was rendered more
ghastly by the flame leaping up from the expiring candle.
"Roshah, sinner!" thundered the woman. Then looking straight into
the cruel eyes of the hunchback, her wan face shining with the stress
of a great emotion, her meagre form convulsed with fury, "Avaunt,
[377]Satan Mekatrig!" she screamed. "Get thee down from my house—get
thee down. In God's name, get thee down—to hell."
Even the brazen-faced hunchback trembled before her passion; but he
grasped his friend's hot hand in his long, nervous fingers, and seemed
to draw courage from the contact.
"If I go, I take your husband!" he hissed, his great eyes blazing in
turn. "He will leave me no more. Send me away, if you will."
"Yes, thou must not send my friend away like this," hiccoughed Moshé
Grinwitz. "Come, make him welcome, like the good wife thou wast wont
to be."
Rebecca uttered a terrible cry, and, cowering down on the ground,
rocked herself to and fro.
The drunkard appeared moved. "Get up, Rivkoly," he said, with a
tremour in his tones. "To see thee one would think thou wast sitting
Shivah over my corpse." He put out his hand as if to raise her up.
"Back!" she screamed, writhing from his grasp. "Touch me not; no
longer am I wife of thine."
"Hear you that, man?" said the hunchback eagerly. "You are free. I am
here as a witness. Think of it; you are free."
"Yes, I am free," repeated Moshé, with a horrible, joyous exultation
on his sickly visage. The gigantic shadow of himself that bent over
him, cast by the [378]dying flame of the Yom Kippur Candle, seemed to
dance in grim triumph, his long side-curls dangling in the spectral
image like barbaric ornaments in the ears of a savage, while the
unshapely, fantastic shadow of the hunchback seemed to nod its head in
applause. Then, as the flame leaped up in an irregular jet, the
distorted shadow of the Tempter intertwined itself in a ghastly
embrace with her own. With frozen blood and stifled breath the
tortured woman turned away, and, as her eyes fell upon the
many-cracked looking-glass which adorned the mantelpiece, she saw, or
her overwrought fancy seemed to see—her husband's dead face, wreathed
with a slavering serpent in the place of the phylacteries he had
ceased to wear, and surrounded by endless perspectives of mocking
marble-browed visages, with fiery snakes for hair and live coals for
eyes.
She felt her senses slipping away from her grasp, but she struggled
wildly against the heavy vapour that seemed to choke her. "Moshé!" she
shrieked, in mad, involuntary appeal for help, as she clutched the
mantel and closed her eyes to shut out the hideous vision.
"I am no longer thy husband," tauntingly replied the man. "I may not
touch thee."
"Hear you that, woman?" came the sardonic voice of the hunchback. "You
are free. I am here as a witness."
"I am here as a witness," a thousand mocking voices seemed to hiss in
echoed sibilance.
[379]A terrible silence followed. At last she turned her white shrunken
face, which the contrast of the jet-black wig rendered weird and
death-like, toward the man who had been her husband, and looked long
and slowly, yearningly yet reproachfully, into his bloodshot eyes.
Again a great wave of agitation shook the man from head to foot.
"Don't look at me like that, Rivkoly," he almost screamed. "I won't
have it. I won't see thee. Curse that candle! Why does it flicker on
eternally and not blot thee from my sight?" He puffed violently at the
tenacious flame and a pall fell over the room. But the next instant
the light leaped up higher than ever.
"Moshé!" Rebecca shrieked in wild dismay. "Dost thou forget it is Kol
Nidré night? How canst thou dare to blow out a light? Besides, it is
the Yom Kippur Candle—it is our life and happiness for the New
Year. If you blow it out, I swear, by my soul and the great Name, that
you shall never look upon my face again."
"It is because I do not wish to see thy face that I will blow it out,"
he replied, laughing hysterically.
"No, no!" she pleaded. "I will go away rather. It is nearly dead of
itself; let it die."
"No! It takes too long dying; 'tis like thy father, the Rav, who had
the corpse-watchers so long in attendance that one died himself," said
Moshé [380]Grinwitz with horrible laughter. "I will kill it!" And bending
down low over the broad socket of the candlestick, so that his head
loomed gigantic on the ceiling, he silenced forever the restless
tongue of fire.
Immediately a thick blackness, as of the grave, settled upon the
chamber. Hollow echoes of the blasphemer's laughter rang and resounded
on every side. Myriads of dreadful faces shaped themselves out of the
gloom, and mowed and gibbered at the woman. At the window, the green,
baleful eyes of the black cat glared with phosphorescent light. A
wreath of fiery serpents twisted themselves in fiendish contortions,
shedding lurid radiance upon the cruel marble brow they garlanded. An
unspeakable Eeriness, an unnameable Unholiness, floated with
far-sweeping, rustling pinions through the Darkness.
With stifling throat that strove in vain to shriek, the woman dashed
out through the well-known door, fled wildly down the stairs, pursued
at every step by the sardonic merriment, met at every corner by the
gibbering shapes—fled on, dashing through the heavy, ever-open street
door into the fresher air of the night—on, instinctively on, through
the almost deserted streets and alleys, where only the vile gin-houses
gleamed with life—on, without pause or rest, till she fell exhausted
upon the dusty door-step of the Synagogue of Love and Mercy.
"All Israel have a portion in the world to come."—Ethics of[381]
the Fathers.
The aged keeper of the synagogue rushed out at the noise.
"Save me! For God's sake, save me, Reb Yitzchok!" cried the fallen
figure. "Save me from the Satan Mekatrig! I have no home—no
husband—any more! Take me in!"
"Take you in?" said Reb Yitzchok pityingly, for he dimly guessed
something of her story. "Where can I take you in? You know my wife and
I are allowed but one tiny room here."
"Take me in!" repeated the woman. "I will pass the night in the
synagogue. I must pray for my husband's soul, for he has no son to
pray for him. Let me come in! Save me from the Satan Mekatrig!"
"You would certainly meet many a Satan Mekatrig in the streets
during the night," said the old man musingly. "But have you no friends
to go to?"
"None—none—but God! Let me in that I may go to Him. Give me shelter,
and He will have mercy on you when the great Tekiah sounds to-morrow
night!"
Without another word Reb Yitzchok went into his room, returned with
the key, and threw open the door of the women's synagogue, revealing a
dazzling flood of light from the numerous candles, big and little,
which had been left burning in their sconces. [382]The low curtain that
served as a partition had been half rolled back by devoted husbands
who had come to inquire after their wives at the end of the service,
and the synagogue looked unusually large and bright, though it was hot
and close, with lingering odours of breaths, and snuff, and tallow,
and smelling-salts.
With a sob of infinite thankfulness Rebecca dropped upon a wooden
bench.
"Would you like a blanket?" said the old man.
"No, no, God bless you!" she replied. "I must watch and weep, not
sleep. For the Scroll of Judgment is written and the Book of Life is
all but closed."
With a pitying sigh the old man turned and left her alone for the
night in the Synagogue of Love and Mercy.
For a few moments Rebecca sat, prayerless, her soul full of a strange
peace. Then she found herself counting the chimes as they rolled out
sonorously from a neighbouring steeple: One, Two, Three, Four, Five,
Six, Seven, Eight, Nine, Ten, Eleven, Twelve!
Starting up suddenly when the last stroke ceased to vibrate on the
air, Rebecca Grinwitz found, to her surprise, that a merciful sleep
must have overtaken her eyelids, that hours must have passed since
midnight had struck, and that the great Day of Atonement must have
dawned. Both [383]compartments of the synagogue were full of the restless
stir of a praying multitude. With a sense of something vaguely
strange, she bent her eyes downward on her neighbour's Machzor. The
woman immediately pushed the prayer-book more toward Rebecca, with a
wonderful smile of love and tenderness, which seemed to go right
through Rebecca's heart, though she could not clearly remember ever
having seen her neighbour before. Nor, wonderingly stealing a first
glance around, could she help feeling that the entire congregation was
somewhat strange and unfamiliar, though she could not quite think why
or how. The male worshippers, too, why did they all wear the
shroud-like garments, usually confined on this solemn occasion to the
ministers and a few extra-devout personages? And had not some
transformation come over the synagogue? Was it only the haze before
her tear-worn eyes or did dim perspectives of worshippers stretch away
boundlessly on all sides of the clearly seen area, which still
retained the form of the room she knew so well?
But the curious undercurrent of undefined wonder lasted but a moment.
In another instant she was reconciled to the scene. All was familiar
and expected; once more she was taking part in divine service with no
sorrowful thoughts of her husband coming to distract her, her whole
soul bathing in and absorbing the Peace of God which passeth all
understanding. Then suddenly she felt a stir of recollection [384]coming
over her, and a stream of love warming her heart, and looking up at
her neighbour's face she saw with joyous content that it was that of
her mother.
The service went on, mother and daughter following it in the book they
had in common. After several hours, during which the huge,
far-spreading congregation alternated with the Cantor in intoning the
beautiful poems of the liturgy of the day, the white curtain with its
mystic cabalistic insignia was rolled back from the Ark of the
Covenant and two Scrolls were withdrawn therefrom. Rebecca noted with
joy that the Ark was filled with Scrolls big and little, in rich
mantles, and that those taken out were swathed in satin beautifully
embroidered, and that the ornaments and the musically tinkling bells
were of pure gold.
Then some of the worshippers were called up in turn to the Al Memor
to be present at the reading of a section of the Law. They were all
well known to Rebecca. First came Moses ben Amram. He walked humbly up
to the Al Memor with bowed head, his long Talith enveloping him
from crown to foot. Rebecca saw his face well, for though it was
covered with a thick veil, it shone luminously through its draping.
"Bless ye the Lord, who is blessed," said Moses ben Amram, the words
seeming all the sweeter from his lips for the slight stammering with
which they were uttered.
[385]"Blessed be the Lord, who is blessed to all eternity and beyond,"
responded the endless congregation, in a low murmur that seemed to be
taken up and vibrated away and away into the infinite distances for
ever and ever.
"Blessed be the Lord, who is blessed to all eternity and beyond,"
echoed the melodious voice. Then, in words that seemed to roll and
fill the great gulfs of space with a choral music of sacred joy, Moses
continued, "Blessed be Thou, O Lord, our God, the King of the
Universe, who hath chosen us from all peoples, and given unto us His
Law. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, who givest the Law."
After him came Aaron ben Amram, whose white beard reached to his
knees. Abraham ben Terah, Isaac ben Abraham, and Jacob ben Isaac—all
venerable figures, with faces which Rebecca felt were radiant with
infinite tenderness and compassion for such poor helpless children as
herself—were also called up, and after the Patriarchs, Elijah the
Prophet. Lastly came a white-haired, stooping figure, whose gait and
whose every gesture told Rebecca that it was her father. How glad she
felt to see him thus honoured! As she listened to his quavering tones
the dusty tombstones of dead years seemed rolled away, and all their
simple joys and griefs to live again, not quite as of yore, but
transfigured by some solemn pathos.
When the reading of the Law was at an end, [386]David ben Jesse, a
royal-looking graybeard, held up the Scroll to the four corners of
space, and it was rolled up by his son Solomon, the Preacher; the
carrying of it to the Ark being given to Rabbi Akiba, whose features
wore a strange, ecstatic look, as though ennobled by suffering. The
vast multitude rose with a great rustling, the sound whereof reached
afar, and sang a hymn of rejoicing, so that the whole universe was
filled with melody. Rebecca alone could not sing. For the first time
she missed her husband, Moshé. Why was he not here, like all the other
friends of her life, whose beloved faces surrounded her on every side
and made a sweet atmosphere of security for her soul? What was he
doing outside of this mighty assembly? Why was he not there to have
the sacred duty of carrying the Scroll entrusted to him? She felt the
tears pouring down her cheeks. She was ready to sink to the earth with
sudden lassitude. "Mother! dear mother!" she cried, "I feel so faint."
"You must have some air, my child, my Rivkoly," said the mother, the
dearly remembered voice falling for the first time with ineffable
sweetness on Rebecca's ears. And she put out her hand, and lo! it grew
longer and longer, till it reached up to the skylight, and then
suddenly the whole roof vanished and the free air of heaven blew in
like celestial balm upon Rebecca's hot forehead. Yet she noted with
wonder that the holy candles burnt on steadily, unfluttered [387]by the
refreshing breeze. And then, lo! the starless heavens above her opened
out in indescribable Glory. The Dark budded into ineffable Beauty; a
supernally pure, luminous Splendour, transcendently dazzling, filled
the infinite depths of the Firmament with melodious coruscations of
Infinite Love made visible, and white-winged hosts of radiant Cherubim
sang "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full
of His Glory." And all the vast congregation fell upon their faces and
cried "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full
of His Glory." And Moses ben Amram arose, and he lifted his hands
toward the Splendour and he cried, "Lord, Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering and full of kindness and truth. Lo, Thou
sealest the seals before the twilight. Seal Thy People, I pray Thee,
in the Book of Life, though Thou blot me out. Forgive them, and pardon
their transgressions for the sake of the merits of the Patriarchs and
for the sake of the merits of the Martyrs, who have shed their blood
like water and offered their flesh to the flames for the
Sanctification of the Name. Forgive them, and blot out their
transgressions."
And all the congregation said "Amen."
Then a surging wave of hope rose within Rebecca's breast, and it
lifted her to her feet and stretched out her arms toward the
Splendour. And she said: "Lord God, forgive Thou my husband, for he is
in the hand of the Tempter. Save him from the power [388]of the Evil One
by Thine outstretched arm and Thy mighty hand. Save him and pardon
him, Lord, in Thine infinite mercy." Then a strange, dread, anxious
silence fell upon the vast spaces of the Firmament, till from the
heart of the Celestial Splendour there fell a Word that floated
through the Universe like the sweet blended strains of all sweet
instruments, a Word that mingled all the harmonies of winds and waters
and mortal and angelic voices into one divine cadence—Salachti.
And with the sweet Word of Forgiveness lingering musically in her
charmed ears, and the sweet assurance at her heart that she, the poor,
miserable tailor's wife, despised and trodden under foot by the rich
and by the heathen around, could lean upon the breast of an Almighty
Father, who had prepared for her immortal glories and raptures amid
all her loved ones in a world where He would wipe the tears from off
all eyes, Rebecca Grinwitz awoke to find the bright morning sunshine
streaming in upon her and the fresh morning air blowing in upon her
fevered brow from the skylight which Reb Yitzchok had just opened.
"Surely He shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler."—Psalm xci. 3.
A shroud of newly fallen snow enveloped the dead earth, over which the
dull, murky sky looked drearily down. Within his fireless garret,
which was almost [389]empty of furniture, Moshé Grinwitz lay, wasted away
to a shadow. His beard was unkempt, his cheek-bones were almost
fleshless, his feverish eyes large and staring, his side-curls tangled
and untended. There did not seem enough strength left in the frame to
resist a babe; yet, when he coughed, the whole skeleton was agitated
as though with galvanic energy.
"Will he never come back?" he murmured uneasily.
"Fear not; so far as lies in my power, I shall be with you always,"
replied the voice of the hunchback as he entered the room. "But, alas!
I have little comfort to bring you. One pawnbroker after another
refused to advance anything on my waistcoat, and at last I sold it
right out for a few pence. See; here is some milk. It is warm."
Moshé tried to clutch the jug, but fell back, helpless. A shade of
anxiety passed over his companion's face. "Have I miscalculated?" he
muttered. He held the jug to the sick man's lips, supporting his head
with the other. Moshé drank, then fell back, and pressed his friend's
hand gratefully.
"Poor Moshé," said the hunchback. "What a shame I tossed into the
gutter the gold my father left me seven months ago! How could I
foresee you would be struck down with this long sickness?"
"No, no, don't regret it," quavered Moshé, his white face lighting up.
"We had jolly old times, jolly old [390]times, while the money lasted. Oh,
you've been a good friend to me—a good friend. If I had never known
you, I should have passed away into nothingness, without ever having
known the mad joys of wine and riot. I have had wild, voluptuous
moments of revelry and mirth. No power in heaven or hell can take away
the past. And then the sweet freedom of doing as you will, thinking as
you will, flying with wings unclogged by superstition—to you I owe it
all! And since I have been ill you have watched over me like—like a
woman."
His words died away in a sob, and then there was silence, except when
his cough sounded strange and hollow in the bare room. Presently he
went on:—
"How unjust Rivkoly was to you! She once said"—here the speaker
laughed a little melancholy laugh—"that you were the Satan Mekatrig
in person."
"Poor afflicted woman!" said his friend, with pitying scorn. "In this
nineteenth century, when among the wise the belief in the gods has
died out, there are yet fools alive who believe in the devil. But she
could only have meant it metaphorically."
The sick man shook his head. "She said the evil influence—of course,
it seemed evil to her—you wielded over her thoughts, and I suppose
mine, too, was more than human—was supernatural."
"Oh, I don't say I'm not more strong-minded than most people. Of
course I am, or I should be [391]howling hymns at the present moment. But
why does a soldier catch fire under the eye of his captain? What
magnetism enables one man to bewitch a nation? Why does one friend's
unspoken thought find unuttered echo in another's? Go to Science,
study Mesmerism, Hypnotism, Thought-Transference, and you will learn
all about Me and my influence."
"Yes, Rivkoly never had any idea of anything outside her prayer-book.
Rivkoly—"
"Mention not her name to me," interrupted the hunchback harshly. "A
woman who deserts her husband—"
"She swore to go if I blew out the Yom Kippur light. And I did."
"A woman who goes out of her wits because her husband gets into his!"
sneered the other. "Doubtless her superstitious fancy conjured up all
sorts of sights in the dark. Ho! ho! ho!" and he laughed a ghastly
laugh. "Happily she will never come back. She's evidently able to get
along without you. Probably she has another husband more to her pious
taste."
Moshé raised himself convulsively. "Don't say that again!" he
screamed. "My Rivkoly!" Then a violent cough shook him and his white
lips were reddened with blood.
The cold eyes of the hunchback glittered strangely as he saw the
blood. "At any rate," he said, more gently, "she cannot break the
mighty oath she sware. She will never come back."
[392]"No, she will never come back," the sick man groaned hopelessly. "But
it was cruel of me to drive her away. Would to G—"
The hunchback hastily put his hand on the speaker's mouth, and
tenderly wiped away the blood. "When I am better," said Moshé, with
sudden resolution, "I will seek her out: perhaps she is starving."
"As you will. You know she can always earn her bread and water at the
cap-making. But you are your own master. When you are rid of this
sickness—which will be soon—you shall go and seek her out and bring
her to abide with you." The words rang sardonically through the
chamber.
"How good you are!" Moshé murmured, as he sank back relieved.
The hunchback leaned over the bed till his gigantic brow almost
touched the sick man's, till his wonderful eyes lay almost on his.
"And yet you will not let me hasten on your recovery in the way I
proposed to you."
"No, no," Moshé said, trembling all over. "What matters if I lie here
a week more or less?"
"Lie here!" hissed his friend. "In a week you will lie rotting."
A wild cry broke from the blood-bespattered lips! "I am not dying! I
am not dying! You said just now I should be better soon."
"So you will; so you will. But only if we have money. Our last
farthing, our last means of raising [393]a farthing, is gone. Without
proper food, without a spark of fire, how can you hold out a week in
this bitter weather? No, unless you would pass from the light and the
gladness of life to the gloom and the shadow of the tomb, you must be
instantly baptized."
"Shmad myself! Never!" said the sick man, the very word conjuring up
an intolerable loathing, deeper than reason; and then another violent
fit of coughing shook him.
"See how this freezing atmosphere tells on you. You must take
Christian gold, I tell you. Thus only shall I be able to get you
fire—to get you fire," repeated the hunchback with horrible emphasis.
"You call yourself a disbeliever. If so, what matters? Why should you
die for a miserable prejudice? But you are no true infidel. So long as
you shrink from professing any religion under the sun, you still
possess a religion. Your unfaith is but foam-drift on the deep sea of
faith; but lip-babble while your heart is still infected with
superstition. Come, bid me fetch the priest with his crucifix and holy
water. Let us fool him to the top of his bent. Rouse yourself; be a
man and live."
"No, no, brother! I will be a man and die."
"Fool!" hissed the hunchback. "It fits not one who has lived for
months by Christian gold to be so nice."
"You lie!" Moshé gasped.
"The seven months that you and I have known [394]each other, it is
Christian gold that has warmed you and fed you and rejoiced you, and
that, melted down, has flowed in your veins as wine. Whence, then,
took I the money for our riotings?"
"From your father, you said."
"Yes, from my spiritual father," was the grim reply. "No, having that
belief, which you still lack, in the hollowness and mockery of all
save pleasure, I became a Christian. For a time they paid me well, but
as soon as I had been put on the annual report I had served my purpose
and the supplies fell off. I could be converted again in another town
or country, but I dare not leave you. But you are a new man, and
should I drag you into the fold they will reward us both well. Instead
of subsisting on dry bread and milk you will fare on champagne and
turtle-soup once more."
Moshé sat up and gazed wildly one long second at the Tempter. He
looked at his own fleshless arms, and shuddered. He felt the icy hand
of Death upon him. He knew himself a young man still. Must he go down
into the eternal darkness, and be folded in the freezing clasp of the
King of Terrors, while the warm bosom of Life offered itself to his
embrace? No; give him Life, Life, Life, polluted and stained with
hypocrisy, but still Life, delicious Life.
The steely eyes of the hunchback watched the contest anxiously.
Suddenly a change came over [395]the wildly working face—it fell back
chill and rigid on the pillow, the eyes closed. The room seemed to
fill with an impalpable, brooding Vapour, as if a thick fog were
falling outside. The watcher caught madly at his friend's wrist and
sought to detect a pulsation. His eyes glowed with horrible exultant
relief.
"Not yet, not yet, Brother Azrael," he said mockingly, as if
addressing the impalpable Vapour; "Thou who art wholly woven of Eyes,
canst Thou not see that it is not yet time to throw the fatal pellet
into his throat? Back, back!"
The Vapour thickened. The minutes passed. The hunchback peered
expectant at the corpse-like face on the dingy pillow. At last the
eyes opened, but in them shone a strange, rapt expression.
"Thank God, Rivkoly!" the dying lips muttered. "I knew thou wouldst
come."
As he spoke there was a frantic beating at the door. The hunchback's
face was convulsed.
"Hasten, hasten, Brother Azrael!" he cried.
The Vapour lightened a little. Moshé Grinwitz seemed to rally. His
face glowed with eagerness.
"Open the door! open the door!" he cried. "It's Rivkoly—my Rivkoly!"
The vain battering at the door grew fiercer, but none noted it in the
house. Since the shadow of the hunchback had first fallen within that
thickly [396]crowded human nest, the doves had become hawks, the hawks
vultures. All was discord and bickering.
"Lie still," said the hunchback; "'tis but your fevered imagination.
Drink."
He put the jug to the dying man's lips, but it was dashed violently
from his hand and shattered into a hundred pieces.
"Give me nothing bought with Christian money!" gasped Moshé hoarsely,
his breath rattling painfully in his throat. "Never will I knowingly
gain by the denial of the Unity of God."
"Then die like a dog!" roared the hunchback. "Hasten, Brother Azrael!"
The Vapour folded itself thickly about the room. The rickety door was
shaken frantically, as by a great gale.
"Moshé! Moshé!" shrieked a voice. "Let me in—me—thy Rivkoly! In
God's name, let me in! I bring thee a precious gift. Or art thou dead,
dead, dead? My God, why didst Thou not cause me to know he was ill
before!"
"Your husband is dying," said the hunchback. "When he is dead, you
shall look upon his face. But he may not look upon your face again.
You have sworn it."
"Devil!" cried the fierce voice of the woman. "I swore it on Kol
Nidré night, when I had just asked the Almighty to absolve me from
all rash oaths. Let me in, I tell you."
[397]"I will not have a sacred oath treated thus lightly," said the
hunchback savagely. "I will keep your soul from sin."
"Cursed be thou to eternity of eternities!" replied the woman. "Pray,
Moshé, pray for thy soul. Pray, for thou art dying."
"Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one," rose the sonorous
Hebrew.
"Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one," wailed the woman.
The very Vapour seemed to cling round and prolong the vibrations of
the sacred words. Only the hunchback was silent. The mocking words
died on his lips, and as the woman, with one last mighty blow, dashed
in through the flying door, he seemed to glide past her and melt into
the darkness of the staircase.
Rivkoly heeded not his contorted, malignant visage, crowned with its
serpentine wreath of fiery hair; she flew straight through the heavy
Vapour, stooped and kissed the livid mouth, read in a moment the
decree of Death in the eyes, and then put something small and warm
into her husband's fast chilling arms.
"Take it, Moshé," she cried, "and comfort thy soul in death. 'Tis thy
child, for God has at last sent us a son. Yom Kippur night—now six
long months ago—I had a dream that God would forgive thee, and I was
glad. But when I thought [398]to go home to thee in the evening, I learnt
that thou hadst been feasting all that dread Day of Atonement with the
Satan Mekatrig; and my heart fell, for I knew that my dream was but
the vain longing of my breast, and that through thine own misguided
soul thou couldst never be saved from the eternal vengeance. Then I
went away, far from here, and toiled and lived hard and lone; and I
believed not in my dream. But I prayed and prayed for thy soul, and
lo! very soon I was answered; for I knew we should have a child. And
then I entreated that it should be a son, to pray for thee, and
perhaps win thee back to God, and to say the Kaddish after thee when
thou shouldst come to die, though I knew not that thy death was at
hand; and a few weeks back the Almighty was gracious and merciful to
me, and I had my wish."
She ceased, her wan face radiant. The Shadow of Death could not chill
her sublime faith, her simple, trustful hope. The husband was clasping
the feebly whimpering babe to his frozen breast, and showering
passionate kisses on its unconscious form.
"Rivkoly!" he whispered, as the tears rolled down his cheeks, "how
pale and thin thou art grown! O God, my sin has been heavy!"
"No, no," she cried, her loving hand in his. "It was the Satan
Mekatrig that led thee astray. I am well and strong. I will work for
our child, and train [399]it up to pray for thee and to love thee. I have
named it Jacob, for it shall wrestle with the Recording Angel and
shall prevail."
The hue of death deepened on Moshé Grinwitz's face, but it was
overspread by a divine calm.
"Ah, the good old times we had at the Cheder in Poland," he said.
"The rabbi was sometimes cross, but we children were always in good
spirits; and when the Rejoicing of the Law came round it was such fun
carrying the candles stuck in hollowed apples, and gnawing at your
candlestick as you walked. I always loved Simchath Torah, Rivkoly.
How long is it to the Rejoicing?"
"It will soon be here again, now Passover is over," she said, pressing
his hand.
"Is Pesach over?" he said mournfully. "I don't remember giving
Seder. Why didst thou not remind me, Rivkoly? It was so wrong of
thee. Thou knowest how I loved the sight of the table—the angels
always seemed to hover about it. Chad Gadyah! Chad Gadyah!" he
commenced to sing in a cracked, hoarse whisper. The child burst into a
wail. "Hush, hush, Yaankely," said the mother, taking it to her
breast.
"A—a—ah!" A wild scream rose from Moshé Grinwitz's lips. "My
Kaddish! Take not away my Kaddish!" He sat up, with clammy,
ghastly brow, and glared with sightless eyes, his arms groping. A thin
stream of blood oozed from his mouth.
[400]"Hear, O Israel!" screamed the woman, as she put her hand to his mouth
to stanch the blood.
He beat her back wildly. "Not thee! I want not thee! My Kaddish!"
came the mad, hoarse whisper. "I have blasphemed God! Give me my
Kaddish! give me my Kaddish!"
She put the child into his arms, and he clutched it in his dying
frenzy. As he felt its feeble form, the old divine peace came over his
face. The babe's cries were hushed in fear. The mother was dumb and
stony. And silently the Vapour crawled in sluggish folds through the
heavy air.
But in a moment the silence was broken by a deep, stertorous rattle.
Moshé Grinwitz's head fell back; his arms relaxed their hold of his
child, which was caught with a wild cry to its mother's bosom. And the
dark Vapour lifted, and showed the three figures to the baleful,
agonized eyes of the hunchback at the open door.
Tchemnovosk, Saturday (midnight).—So! The first words have been
written. For the first time in my life I have commenced a diary. Will
it prove the solace I have heard it is? Shall I find these now cold,
blank pages growing more and more familiar, till I shall turn to them
as to a sympathetic friend; till this little book shall become that
loved and trusted confidant for whom my lonely soul longs? Instead of
either Black or White Clergy, this record in black and white shall be
my father confessor. Our village pope, to whom I have so often
confessed everything but the truth, would be indeed shocked, if he
could gossip with this, his new-created brother. What a heap of
roubles it would take to tranquillize him! Ah, God! Ach, God of
Israel! how is it possible that a man who has known the tenderest
human ties should be so friendless, so solitary in his closing years,
that not even in memory can he commune with a fellow-soul? Verily, the
old curse has [404]wrought itself out, that penalty of apostasy which came
to my mind the other day after nearly forty years of forgetfulness,
that curse which has filled my spirit with shuddering awe, and driven
me to seek daily communion through thee, little book, even with my own
self of yesterday—"And that soul shall be cut off from among its
people." Yea, and from all others, too! For so many days and years
Caterina was my constant companion; I loved her as my own soul. Yet
was she but a sun that dazzled my eyes so that I could not gaze upon
my own soul; but a veil between me and my dead youth. The sun has sunk
forever below the horizon; the veil is rent. No phantom from the other
world hovers to remind me of our happiness. Those years, with all
their raptures and successes, are a dull blank. It is the years of
boyhood and youth which resurge in my consciousness; their tints are
vivid, their tones are clear.
Why is this? Is it Caterina's death? Is it old age? Is it returning to
these village scenes after half a lifetime spent in towns? Is it the
sight of the izbas, and their torpid, tow-haired, sheepskin-clad
inhabitants, and the great slushy cabbage gardens, that has rekindled
the ashen past into colours of flame? And yet, except our
vodka-seller, there isn't a Jew in the place. However it be,
Caterina's face is filmy, phantasmal, compared with my mother's. And
mother died forty years [405]ago; the grass of two short years grows over
my wife's grave. And Paul? He is living—he kissed me but a few
moments back. Yet his face is far-away—elusive. The hues of life
are on my father's—poor, ignorant, narrow-minded, warm-hearted
father, whose heart I broke. Happily I have not to bear the
remembrance of his dying look, but can picture him as I saw him in
those miserable, happy days. My father's kiss is warm upon the lips
which my son's has just left cold. Poor St. Paul, living up there with
your ideals and your theories like a dove in a balloon! And yet,
golubtchik, how I love you, my handsome, gifted boy, fighting the
battle of life so pluckily and well! Ah! it is hard fighting when one
is hampered by a conscience. Is it your fault that the cold iron bar
of a secret lies between our souls; that a bar my own hands have
forged, and which I have not the courage or the strength to break,
keeps you from my inmost heart, and makes us strangers? No; you are
the best of sons, and love me truly. But if your eyes were purged, and
you could see the ugly, hateful thing, and through and beyond it, into
my ugly, hateful soul! Ah, no! That must never be. Your affection,
your reverential affection, is the only sacred and precious thing yet
left to me on earth. If I lost that, if my spirit were cut off even
from the semblance of human sympathy, then might the grave close over
my body, as it would have already [406]closed over my soul. And yet should
I have the courage to die? Yes; for then Paul would know; Paul would
obey my wishes and see me buried among my people. Paul would hire
mourners (God! hired mourners, when I have a son!) to say the
Kaddish. Paul would do his duty, though his heart broke. Terrible,
ominous words! Break my son's heart as I did my father's! The
saints—voi! I mean God—forfend! And for opposite reasons. Ach,
it is a strange world. Is religion, then, a curse, eternally dividing
man from man? No, I will not think these blasphemous thoughts. My
poor, brave Paul!
To-morrow will be a hard day.
Sunday Night.—I have just read over my last entry. How cold, how
tame the words seem, compared with the tempest with which I am shaken.
And yet it is a relief to have uttered them; to have given vent to
my passion and pain. Already this scrawl of mine has become sacred to
me; already this study in which I write has become a sanctuary to
which my soul turns with longing. All day long my diary was in my
thoughts. All my turbulent emotions were softened by the knowledge
that I should come here and survey them with calm; by the hope that
the tranquil reflectiveness which writing induces would lead me into
some haven of rest. And first let me confess that I am glad Paul goes
back to St. Petersburg on Tuesday. [407]It is a comfort to have him here
for a few days, and yet, oh, how I dread to meet his clear gaze! How
irksome this close contact, with the rough rubs it gives to all my
sore places! How I abhorred myself to-day as I went through the
ghastly mimicries of prayer, and crossing myself, and genuflexion, in
our little church. How I hate the sight of its sky-blue dome and its
gilt minarets! When the pope brought me the Gospel to kiss, fiery
shame coursed through my veins. And then when I saw the look of humble
reverence on Paul's face as he pressed his lips to the silver-bound
volume, my blood was frozen to ice. Strange, dead memories seemed to
float about the incense-laden air; shadowy scenes; old, far-away
cadences. And when the deacon walked past me with his bougie, there
seemed to flash upon me some childish recollection of a joyous
candle-bearing procession, whereat my eyes grew filled with sudden
tears. The marble altar, the silver candlesticks, the glittering
jewelled scene faded into mist. And then the choir sang, and under the
music I grew calm again. After all, religions were made for men. And
this one was just fitted for the simple muzhiks who dotted the benches
with their stupid, good natured figures. They must have their
gold-bedecked gods in painting and image; and their saints in gold
brocade to kneel before at all hours to solace themselves with visions
of a brocaded Paradise.
[408]And yet what had I to do with these childish superstitions?—I whose
race preached the great doctrine of the Unity to a world sunk in vice
and superstition; whose childish lips were taught to utter the
Shemang as soon as they could form the syllables; who know that
the Christian creed is a monstrous delusion! To think that I have lent
the sanction of my manhood to these grotesque beliefs. Grotesque, say
I? when to Paul they are the essence of all lofty feeling and
aspiration! And yet I know that he is blind, or sees things with that
strange perversion of vision of which I have heard him accuse the
Jews—my brethren. He believes what he has been taught. And who taught
him? Bozhe moi! was it not I who have brought him up in these
degrading beliefs, which he imagines I share? God! is this my
punishment, that he is faithful to the creed taught him by a father
who was faithless to his own? And yet there were excuses enough for
me, Thou knowest. Why did these forms and ceremonies, which now loom
beautiful to me through a mist of tears, seem hideous chains on the
free limbs of childhood? Was it my father's fault or my own that the
stereotyped routine of the day; that the being dragged out of bed in
the gray dawn to go to synagogue, or to intone in monotonous sing-song
the weary casuistries of the rabbis; that the endless precepts or
prohibitions, made me conceive religion as the most hateful of
tyrannies? Through the cloud of forty years I can but dimly [409]recall
the violence of the repulsion with which things Jewish inspired me—of
how it galled me to feel that I was one of that detested race, that I
was that mockery and byword, a Zhit; that, with little sympathy with
my people, I was yet destined to partake of its burdens and its
disabilities. Bitter as my soul is within me to-day, I can yet
understand, can yet half excuse, that fatal mistake of ignorant and
ambitious youth.
It were easy for me now to acknowledge myself a Jew, even with the
risk of Siberia before me. I am rich, I have some of the education for
which I longed, above all, I have lived. Ah, how differently the
world, with its hopes and its fears, and its praise and censure, looks
to the youth who is climbing slowly up the hill, and the man who is
swiftly descending to the valley! But the knowledge of the vanity of
all things comes too late; this, too, is vanity. Enough that I
sacrificed the sincerity and reality of life for unrealities, which
then seemed to me the only things worth having. There was none to
counsel, and none to listen. I fled my home; I was baptized into the
Church. At once all that hampered me was washed away. Before me
stretched the free, open road of culture and well-being. I was no
longer the slave of wanton laws, the laughing-stock of every Muscovite
infant, liable to be kicked and cuffed and spat at by every true
Russian. What mattered a lip-profession of Christianity, when I cared
[410]as little for Judaism as for it? I never looked back; my prior life
faded quickly from my memory. Alone I fought the battle of
life—alone, unaided by man or hope in God. A few lucky speculations
on the Bourse, starting from the risking of the few kopecks amassed by
tuition, rescued me from the need of pursuing my law-studies. I fell
in love and married. Caterina, your lovely face came effectively
between me and what vague visions of my past, what dim uneasiness of
remorse, yet haunted me. You never knew—your family never knew—that
I was not a Slav to the backbone. The new life lay fold on fold over
the old; the primitive writing of the palimpsest was so thickly
written over, that no thought of what I had once been troubled me
during all those years of wedded life, made happier by your birth and
growth, my Paul, my darling Paul; no voice came from those forgotten
shores, save once, when—who knows through what impalpable medium?—I
learnt or divined my father's death, and all the air was filled with
hollow echoes of reproach. During those years I avoided contact with
Jews as much as I could; when it was inevitable, I made the contact
brief. The thought of the men, of their gabardines and their pious
ringlets, of their studious dronings and their devout quiverings and
wailings, of the women with their coarse figures and their unsightly
wigs; the remembrance of their vulgar dialect, and their shuffling
ways, and their accommodating morality, [411]filled me with repulsion. As
if to justify myself to myself, my mind conceived of them only in
their meanest and tawdriest aspects. The black points alone caught my
eye, and linked themselves into a perfect-seeming picture.
Da, I have been a good Russian, a good Christian. I have not stirred
my little finger to help the Jews in their many and grievous
afflictions. They were nothing to me. Over the vodka and the champagne
I have joined in the laugh against them, without even feeling I was of
them. Why, then, these strange sympathies that agitate me now; these
feelings, shadowy, but strong and resistless as the shadow of death?
Am I sane, or is this but incipient madness? Am I sinking into a
literal second childhood, in which all the terrors and the sanctities
that once froze or stirred my soul have come to possess me once more?
Am I dying? I have heard that the scene of half a century ago may be
more vivid to dying eyes than the chamber of death itself. Has
Caterina's death left a blank which these primitive beloved memories
rush in to fill up? Was it the light of her face that blinded me to
the dear homely faces of my father and mother? If I had not met her,
how would things have been? Should I have repented earlier of my
hollow existence? Was it the genuineness of her faith in her heathen
creed that made me acquiesce in its daily profession and its dominance
in our household life? [412]And are the old currents flowing so strongly
now, only because they were so long artificially dammed up? Of what
avail to ask myself these questions? I asked them yesterday and I
shall be no wiser to-morrow. No man can analyze his own emotions,
least of all I, unskilled to sound the depths of my soul, content if
the surface be unruffled. Perhaps, after all, it is Paul who is the
cause of the troubling of the waters, which yet I am glad have not
been left in their putrid stagnation. For since Caterina's clay-cold
form was laid in the Moscow churchyard, and Paul and I have been
brought the nearer together for the void, my son has opened my eyes to
my baseness. The light that radiates from his own terrible nobleness
has shown me how black and polluted a soul is mine. My whole life has
been shuffled through under false colours. Even if I shared few of the
Jew's beliefs, it should have been my duty—and my proud duty—to
proclaim myself of the race. If, as I fondly believed, I was superior
to my people, then it behoved me to allow that superiority to be
counted to their credit and to the honour of the Jewish flag. My poor
brethren, sore indeed has been your travail, and your cry of pain
pierces the centuries. Perhaps—who knows?—I could have helped a
little if I had been faithful, as faithful as Paul will be to his own
ideals. Ah, if Paul had been a Jew—! My God! is Paul a Jew? Have I
upon my shoulders the guilt of this loss to Judaism, too?
[413]Analyze myself, reproach myself, doubt my own sanity how I may, one
thing is clear. From the bottom of my heart I long, I yearn, I burn to
return to the religion of my childhood. I long to say and to sing the
Hebrew words that come scantily and with effort to my lips. I long to
join my brethren at prayer, to sit with them in the synagogue, in the
study, at the table; to join them in their worship and at their meals;
to share with them their joys and sorrows, their wrongs and their
inner delights. Laugh at myself how I will, I long to bind my arm and
brow with the phylacteries of old and to wrap myself in my fringed
shawl, and to abase myself in the dust before the God of Israel; nay,
to don the greasy gabardine at which I have mocked, and to let my hair
grow even as theirs. As yet this is all but a troubled aspiration, but
it is irresistible and must work itself out in deeds. It cannot be
argued with. The wind bloweth as it listeth; who shall say why I am
tempest-tossed?
Monday Night.—Paul has retired to rest to rise early to-morrow for
the journey to Moscow. For something has happened to alter his plans,
and he goes thither instead of to the capital. He is sleeping the
sleep of the young, the hopeful, and the joyous. Ach, that what
gives him joy should be to me—; but let me write down all. This
morning at breakfast Paul received a letter, which he read with a cry
of astonishment and joy. "Look, little father, [414]look," he exclaimed,
handing it to me. I read, trying to disguise my own feelings and to
sympathize with his gladness. It was a letter from a firm of
well-known publishers in Moscow, offering to publish a work on the
Greek Church, the MS. of which he had submitted to them.
"Nu vot, batiushka," said he, "I will tell you that this book
donnera à penser to the theologians of the bastard forms of
Christianity."
The ribald remark that rose to my lips did not pass them. "But why did
you not tell me of this before?" I asked instead, endeavouring to
infuse a note of reproach into my indifference.
"Ah, father, I did not want you to distress yourself. I knew your
affection for me was so great that you might want to stint yourself,
and put yourself to trouble to help me to pay the expenses of
publication myself. You would have shared my disappointments. I wanted
you to share my triumph—as now. It is two years that I have been
trying to get it published. I wrote it in the year before mother,
whose soul is with the saints, left us. But, eka! I am recompensed
at last." And his pale face beamed and his dark eyes flashed with
excitement.
Yes, Paul was right. As Paul always is. Brought up, I think wisely, to
believe in my comparative poverty, he has become manlier for not
having a crutch to lean upon. Was it not enough that he was devoid
from the start of the dull, dead weight of [415]Judaism which clogged my
own early years? Up to the present, though, he has not done so well as
I. Russian provincial journalism scatters few luxuries to its
votaries. Paul is so stupidly contented with everything that he is not
likely to write anything to make a sensation. He has not invented
gunpowder.
Paul's voice broke in curiously on my reflections. "It ought to make
some sensation. I have collected a whole series of new arguments,
partly textual, partly historical, to show the absolute want of locus
standi of any other than the Orthodox Church."
"Indeed," I murmured, "and what is the Orthodox Church?" Paul stared
at me.
"I mean," I added hastily, "your conception of the Orthodox Church."
"My conception?" said Paul. "I suppose you mean how do I defend the
conception which is embodied in our ceremonies and ritual?" And before
I could stop him, he had given me a summary of his arguments under
which I would not have kept awake if I had not been thinking of other
things. My poor boy! So this wire-drawn stuff about the Sacrament and
the Lord's Supper is what has cost you toilsome days and sleepless
nights, while to me the thought that I had embraced one variety of
Christianity rather than another had never before occurred. All forms
were the same to me, from Catholicism to Calvinism; the baptismal water
had glided from my back as from a duck's. True, I have [416]lived with all
the conventional surroundings of my Christian fellow-countrymen, as I
have lived with the language of Russia on my lips, and subservient to
Russian customs and manners. But all the while I was neither a Russian
nor a Christian. I was a Jew.
Every now and again I roused myself to laudatory assent to one of
Paul's arguments when I divined by his tone that it was due. But when
he wound up with a panegyric on "our glorious Russian State," and "our
little father, the Czar, God's Vicegerent on earth, who alone of
European monarchs incarnates and unites in his person Church and
State, so that loyalty and piety are one," I could not refrain from
pointing out that it was a pure fluke that Russia was "orthodox" at
all.
"Suppose," said I, "Wladimir, when he made his famous choice between
the Creeds of the world, had picked Judaism? It all turned on a single
man's whim."
"Father," Paul cried in a pained tone, "do not be blasphemous.
Wladimir was divinely inspired to dower his country with the true
faith. Just therein lay the wisdom of Providence in achieving such
great results through the medium of an individual. It is impossible
that God should have permitted him to incline his ear to the infidel
Israelite, who has survived to be at once a link with the past and a
living proof of the sterility of the soul that refuses the living
waters. The millions of holy Russia [417]perpetuating the stubborn heresy
of the Jews—adopting an unfaith as a faith! The very thought makes
the blood run cold. Nay, then would every Russian deserve to be sunk
in squalor, dishonesty, and rapacity, even as every Jew."
"Not every Jew, Paul," I remonstrated.
"No, not perhaps every Jew in squalor," he assented, with a sarcastic
laugh; "for too many of the knaves have feathered their nests very
comfortably. Even the Raskolnik is more tolerable. And many of them
are not even Jews. The Russian Press is infested with these fellows,
who take the bread out of the mouths of honest Christians, and will
even write the leaders in the religious papers. Believe me, little
father, these Jewish scribblers who have planted their flagstaffs
everywhere have cost me many a heartache, many a disappointment."
I could not help thinking this sentiment somewhat unworthy of my Paul,
though it threw a flood of light on the struggle, whose details he had
never troubled me with. I began to doubt my wisdom in sending so
unpractical a youth out into the battle of life, to hew his way as
best he might. But how was I to foresee that he would become a writing
man, that he would be tripped up at every turn by some clever Hebrew,
and that his aversion from the race would be intensified?
"But surely," I said, after a moment of silence, "our Slavic
journalists are not all Christians, either."
[418]"They are not," he admitted sadly. "The Universities have much to
answer for. Instead of rigidly excluding every vicious book that
unsettles the great social and religious ideals of which God designed
Russia to be the exponent, the works of Spencer and Taine, and Karl
Marx and Tourguénieff, and every literary Antichrist, are allowed to
poison faith in the sap. The censor only bars the superficially
anti-Russian books. But there will come a reaction. A reaction," he
added solemnly, "to which this work of mine may, by the grace of God,
be permitted to contribute."
I could have laughed at my son if I had not felt so inclined to weep.
Paul's pietism irritated me for the first time. Was it that my
reaction against my past had become stronger than ever, was it that
Paul had never exposed his own narrowness so completely before? I know
not. I only know I felt quite angry with him. "And how do you know
there will ever be a reaction?" I asked.
"Christ never leaves himself without a witness long," he answered
sententiously. "And already there are symptoms enough that the creed
of the materialist does not satisfy the soul. Look at our Tolstoï, who
is coming back to Christianity after ranging at will through the gaudy
pleasure-grounds of science and life; it is true his Christianity is
cast after his own formula, and that he has still much intellectual
pride to conquer, but he is on the right [419]road to the fountain of
life. But, little father, you are unlike yourself this morning," he
went on, putting his hand to my hot forehead. "You are not well." He
kissed me. "Let me give you another cup of tea," he said, and turned
on the tap of the samovar with an air that disposed of the subject.
I sipped at my cup to please him, remarking in the interval between
two sips as indifferently as I could, "But what makes you so bitter
against the Jews?"
"And what makes you so suddenly their champion?" he retorted.
"When have I championed them?" I asked, backing.
"Your pardon," he said. "Of course I should have understood you are
only putting in a word for them for argument's sake. But I confess I
have no patience with any one who has any patience with these
bloodsuckers of the State. Every true Russian must abhor them. They
despise the true faith, and are indifferent to our ideals. They sneak
out of the conscription. They live for themselves, and regard us as
their natural prey. Our peasantry are corrupted by their brandy-shops,
squeezed by their money-lenders, and roused to discontent by the
insidious utterances of their peddlers, d——d wandering Jews, who
hate the Government and the Tschinn and everything Russian. When did a
Jew invest his money in Russian industries? They are a filthy,
[420]treacherous, swindling set. Believe me, batiushka, pity is wasted
upon them."
"Pity is never spent upon them," I retorted. "They are what the
Russians—what we Russians—have made them. Who has pent them into
their foul cellars and reeking dens? They work with their brains, and
you—we—abuse them for not working with their hands. They work with
their hands, and the Czar issues a ukase that they are to be driven
off the soil they have tilled. It is Æsop's fable of the wolf and the
lamb."
"In which the wolf is the Jew," said Paul coolly. "The Jew can always
be trusted to take care of himself. His cunning is devilish. Till his
heart is regenerate, the Jew remains the Ishmael of the modern world,
his hand against every man's, every man's against his."
"'Love thy neighbour as thyself,'" I quoted bitterly.
"Even so," said Paul. "The Jew must be cut off, even as the Christian
must pluck out his own eye if it offendeth him. Christ came among us
to bring not peace but a sword. If the Kingdom of Christ is delayed by
these vermin, they must be poisoned off for the sake of Russia and
humanity at large."
"Vermin, indeed!" I cried hotly, for I could no longer restrain
myself. "And what know you of these vermin of whom you speak with such
assurance? What know you of their inner lives, of their [421]sanctified
homes, of their patient sufferings? Have you penetrated to their
hearths and seen the beautiful naïveté of their lives, their simple
faith in God's protection, though it may well seem illusion, their
unselfish domesticity, their sublime scorn of temptation, their
fidelity to the faith of their ancestors, their touching celebrations
of fast and festival, their stanchness to one another, their humble
living and their high respect for things intellectual, their
unflinching toil from morn till eve for a few kopecks of gain, their
heroic endurance of every form of torment, vilification, contempt—?"
I felt myself bursting into tears and broke from the breakfast table.
Paul followed me to my room in amazement. In the midst of all my
tempest of emotion I was no less amazed at my own indiscretion.
"What is the matter with you?" he said, clasping his arm around my
neck. "Why make yourself so hot over this accursed race, for whom,
from some strange whim or spirit of perverseness, you stand up to-day
for the first time in my recollection?"
"It is true; why indeed?" I murmured, striving to master myself. After
all, the picture I had drawn was as ideal in its beauty as Paul's in
its ugliness. "Nu, I only wanted you to remember that they were
human beings."
"Ach, there is the pity of it," persisted Paul; "that human beings
should fall so low. And who [422]has been telling you of all these angelic
qualities you roll so glibly off your tongue?"
"No one," I answered.
"Then you have invented them. Ha! ha! ha!" And Paul went off into a
fit of good-humoured laughter. That laughter was a sword between his
life and mine, but I let a responsive smile play across my features,
and Paul went to his own room in higher spirits than ever.
We met again at dinner, and again at our early supper, but Paul was
too full of his book, and I of my own thoughts to permit of a renewal
of the dispute. Even a saint, I perceive, has his touch of egotism,
and behind all Paul's talk of Russia's ideals, of the misconceptions
of their fatherland's function by feather-brained Nihilists and
Democrats possessed of that devil, the modern spirit, there danced, I
am convinced, a glorified vision of St. Paul floating down the vistas
of the future, with a nimbus of Russian ideals around his head. If he
has only put them as eloquently into his book as he talks of them he
will at least be read.
But I have bred a bigot.
And the more bigoted he is, the more my heart faints within me for the
simple, sublime faith of my people. Behind all the tangled network of
ceremony and ritual, the larger mind of the man who has lived and
loved sees the outlines of a creed grand in its simplicity, sublime in
its persistence. The spirit [423]has clothed itself on with flesh, as it
must do for human eyes to gaze on it and live with it; and if, in
addition, it has swaddled itself with fold on fold of garment, even so
the music has not gone out of its voice, nor the love out of its eyes.
As soon as Paul is gone to-morrow, I must plan out my future life. His
book will doubtless launch him on the road to fame and fortune. But
what remains for me? To live on as I am doing would be intolerable. To
do nothing for my people, either with voice or purse, to live alone in
this sleepy hamlet, cut off from all human fellowship, alienated from
everything that makes my neighbours' lives endurable—better death
than such a death-in-life. And yet is it possible that I can get into
touch again with my youth, that after a sort of Rip Van Winkle sleep,
I can take up again and retwine the severed strands? How shall my
people receive again a viper into its bosom? Well, come what may,
there must be an end to this. Even at this moment reproachful voices
haunt my ear; and in another moment, when I put down my pen to go to
my sleepless bed, I shall take care to light my bed-room candle before
extinguishing my lamp, for the momentary darkness would be filled with
impalpable solemnity bordering on horror. Flashes and echoes from the
ghostly world of my youth, the faces of my dead parents, strange
fragments of sound and speech, the sough of the wind in the trees of
the [424]"House of the Living," the far-away voice of the Chazan singing
some melancholy tune full of heart-break and weirdness, the little
crowded Cheder where the rabbi intoned the monotonous lesson, the
whizz of the stone little Ivanovitch flung at my forehead because I
had "killed Christ"—. No, my nerves are not strong enough to bear
these visions and voices.
All my life long I see now I have been reserved and solitary. Never
has any one been admitted to my heart of hearts—not even Caterina.
But now I must unburden my soul to some one ere I die. And to another
living soul. For this dead sheet of paper will not, I perceive, do
after all.
Saturday Night.—Nearly a week has passed since I wrote the above
words, and I am driven to your pages again. I would have come to you
last night, but suddenly I recollected that it was the Sabbath. I have
kept the Sabbath. I have prayed a few broken fragments of prayer,
recovered almost miraculously from the deeps of memory. I have rested
from every toil. I stayed myself from stirring up the fire, though it
was cold and I was shivering. And a new peace has come to me.
I have heard from Paul; he has completed the negotiations with the
Moscow booksellers. The book is to have every chance. Of course, in a
way I wish it success. It cannot do much harm, and I am proud of Paul,
after all. What a rabbi he would have [425]made! It seems these publishers
are also the owners of a paper, and Paul is to have some work on it,
which will give him enough to live upon. So he will stay in Moscow for
a few months and see his book through the press. He fears the distance
is too great for him to come to and fro, as he would have done had he
been at the capital. Though I know I shall long for his presence
sometimes in my strange reactions, yet on the whole I feel relieved.
To-morrow without Paul will be an easier day. I shall not go to
church, though honest old Clara Petroffskovna may stare and cross
herself in holy horror, and spoil the borsch. As for the
neighbours—let the startchina and the starostas and the retired
major from Courland, and even the bibulous Prince Shoubinoff, gossip
as they will. I cannot remain here now for more than a few weeks.
Besides, I can be unwell. No, on second thoughts, I shall not be
unwell. I have had enough of shuffling and deceit.
Sunday.—A day of horrible ennui and despair. I tried to read the
Old Testament, of course in Russian, for Hebrew books I have none, and
it is doubtful whether I could read them if I had. But the black cloud
remained. It chokes me as I write. My limbs are as lead, my head
aches. And yet I know the ailment is not of the body.
Monday.—The depression persists. I made a little expedition into
the country. I rowed up the stream in a duscehubka. I tried to
forget everything [426]but the colours of the forest and the sparkle of
the waters. The air was less cold than it has been for the last few
days, but the russet of the pine-leaves spoke to me only of melancholy
and decay. The sun set in blood behind the hills. Once I heard the
howl of the wolves, but they were far away.
Monday.—So. Just a week. Nicholas Alexandrovitch says I must not
write yet, but I must fill up the record, even if in a few lines. It
is strange how every habit—even diary-keeping—enslaves you, till you
think only of your neglected task. Ah, well! if I have been ill, I
have been lucky in my period, for those frightful storms would have
kept me indoors. Nicholas Alexandrovitch says it was a mild attack
of influenza. God preserve me from a severe one! And yet would it not
be better if it had carried me off altogether? But that is a cowardly
thought. I must face the future bravely, for my own hands have forged
my fate. How the writing trembles and contorts itself! I must remember
Nicholas's caution. He is a frank, good-hearted fellow, is our village
doctor, and I have had two or three talks with him from between the
bedclothes. I don't think friend Nicholas is a very devout Christian,
by the by; for he said one or two things which I should have taken
seriously, had I been what he thinks I am; but which had an audacious,
ironical sound to my sympathetic, sceptical ears. How funny was that
story about the Archimandrite of Czernovitch!
[427]Thursday Afternoon.—My haste to be out of bed precipitated me back
again into it. But the actual pain has been small. I have grown very
friendly with Nicholas Alexandrovitch, and he has promised to spend
the evening with me. I am better now in body, though still troubled in
mind. Paul's silence has brought a new anxiety. He has not written for
twelve days. What can be the matter with him? I suppose he is
overworking himself. And now to hunt up my best cigarettes for
Monsieur le médecin. Strange that illness should perhaps have
brought me a friend. Nothing, alas! can bring me a confidant.
11 p.m.—Astounding discovery! Nicholas Alexandrovitch is a Jew! I
don't know how it was, but suddenly something was said; we looked at
each other, and then a sort of light flashed across our faces; we read
the mutual secret in each other's eyes; a magnetic impulse linked our
hands together in a friendly clasp, and we felt that we were brothers.
And yet Nicholas is a whole world apart from me in feeling and
conviction. How strange and mysterious is this latent brotherhood
which binds our race together through all differences of rank,
country, and even faith! For Nicholas is an agnostic of agnostics; he
is even further removed from sympathy with my new-found faith than the
ordinary Christian, and yet my sympathy with him is not only warmer
than, but different in kind from, that which I feel toward [428]any
Christian, even Caterina's brother. I have told him all. Yes, little
book, him also have I told all. And he sneers at me. But there lurks
more fraternity in his sneer than in a Christian's applause. We are
knit below the surface like two ocean rocks, whose isolated crests
rise above the waters. Nicholas laughs at there being any Judaism to
survive, or anything in Judaism worth surviving. He declares that the
chosen people have been chosen for the plaything of the fates, fed
with illusions and windy conceit, and rewarded for their fidelity with
torture and persecution. He pities them, as he would pity a dog that
wanders round its master's grave, and will not eat for grief. In fact,
save for this pity, he is even as I was until these new emotions rent
me. He is outwardly a Christian, because he could not live comfortably
otherwise, but he has nothing but contempt for the poor peasants whose
fever-wrung brows he touches with a woman's hand. He looks upon them
only as a superior variety of cattle, and upon the well-to-do people
here as animals with all the vices of the muzhiks, and none of their
virtues. For my Judaic cravings he has a good-natured mockery, and
tells me I was but sickening for this influenza. He says all my
symptoms are physical, not spiritual; that the loss of Caterina
depressed me, that this depression drove me into solitude, and that
this solitude in its turn reacted on my depression. He thinks that
religion is a secretion of morbid [429]minds, and that my Judaism will
vanish again with the last traces of my influenza. And, indeed, there
is much force in what he says, and much truth in his diagnosis and
analysis of my condition. He advises me to take plenty of outdoor
exercise, and to go back again to one of the great towns. To go back
to Judaism, to ally one's self with an outcast race and a dying
religion is, he thinks, an act of folly only paralleled by its
inutility. The world will outgrow all these forms and prejudices in
time is his confident assurance, as he puffs tranquilly at his
cigarette and sips his Chartreuse. He points out, what is true enough,
that I am not alone in my dissent from the religion I profess; for, as
he epigrammatically puts it, the greatest Raskolniks[2] are the
Orthodox. The religious statistics of the Procurator of the State
Synod are, indeed, a poor index to the facts. Well, there is comfort
in being damned in company. I do not agree with him on any other
point, but he has done me good. The black cloud is partially
lifted—perhaps the trouble was only physical, after all. I feel
brighter and calmer than for months past. Anyhow, if I am to become a
Jew again, I can think it out quietly. Even if I could bear Paul's
contempt, there would always be, as Nicholas points out, great peril
for me in renouncing the Orthodox faith. True, it would be easy enough
to bribe the priest and the authorities, and to [430]continue to receive
my eucharistical certificate. But where is the sacrifice in that? It
is hypocrisy exchanged for hypocrisy. And then what would become of
Paul's prospects if it were known his father was a Zhit? But I
cannot think of all this now. Paul's silence is beginning to fill me
with a frightful uneasiness. A presentiment of evil weighs upon me. My
dear dove, my dusha Paul!
Friday Afternoon.—Still no letter from Paul. Can anything have
happened? I have written to him, briefly informing him that I have
been unwell. I shall ride to Zlotow and telegraph, if I do not hear in
a day or two.
Saturday Morning.—All petty and stupid thoughts of my own spiritual
condition are swallowed up in the thought of Paul. Ever selfish, I
have allowed him to dwell alone in a far-off city, exposed to all the
vicissitudes of life. Perhaps he is ill, perhaps he is half-starved on
his journalistic pittance.
Saturday Night.—A cruel disappointment! A letter came, but it was
only from my man of business, advising investment in some South
American loan. Have given him carte blanche. Of what use is my money
to me? Even Paul couldn't spend it now, with the training I have given
him. He is only fitted for the cowl. He may yet join the Black Clergy.
Why does he not write, my poor St. Paul?
Sunday.—Obedient to the insistent clamour of the bells, I
accompanied Nicholas Alexandrovitch [431]to church, and mechanically
asked help of the Virgin at the street corner. For I have gone back
into my old indifference, as Nicholas predicted. I have given the
necessary orders. The paracladnoi is ready. To-morrow I go to
Zlotow; thence I take the train for Moscow. He will not tell me the
truth if I wire.... The weather is bitterly cold, and the stoves here
are so small.... I am shivering again, but a glass of vodka will put
me right.... A knock.... Clara Petroffskovna has run to the door. Who
can it be? Paul?
Monday Afternoon.—No, it was not Paul. Only Nicholas
Alexandrovitch. He had heard in the village that I was making
preparations for a journey, and came to inquire about it, and to
reproach me for not telling him. He looked relieved when I told him it
was only to Moscow to look after Paul. I fancy he thought I had had a
fit of remorse for my morning's devotions, and was off to seek
readmission into the fold. Except our innkeeper, there is not a Jew in
this truly God-forsaken place. Of course, I don't reckon myself—or
the doctor. I wonder if our pope is a Jew! I laugh—but who knows?
Anyhow I am here, wrapped in my thickest fur cloak, while it is
Nicholas who is on the road to Moscow. He spoke truly in saying I was
too weak yet to undertake the journey—that springless paracladnoi
alone is enough to knock a healthy man up; though whether he was
equally veracious in professing to [432]have business to transact in
Moscow, I cannot say. Da, he is a good fellow, is my brother
Nicholas. To-morrow I shall know if anything has happened to my son,
to my only child.
Tuesday Night.—Thank God! A wire from Nicholas. "Have seen Paul. No
cause for uneasiness. Will write." Blessings on you, my friend, for
the trouble you have taken for me. I feel much better already. Paul
has, I suppose, been throwing himself heart and soul into this new
journalistic work, and has forgotten his loving father. After all, it
is only a fortnight, though it has seemed months. Anyhow, he will
write. I shall hear from him in a day or two now. But a sudden
thought. "Will write." Who will write? Paul or Nicholas? Oh, Paul;
Paul without doubt. Nicholas has told him of my anxiety. Yes.
To-morrow night or the next morning I shall have a letter from Paul.
All is well.
If I were to tell Paul the truth, I wonder what he would say! I am
afraid I shall never know.
Thursday Noon.—A letter from Nicholas. I cannot do better than
place it here.
"My dear Demetrius,—I hope you got my telegram and are
at ease again. I had a lively journey up here, travelling in
company with a Government employé, who is very proud of his
country, and of the Stanislaus cross round his neck. Such a
pompous ass I have never met; he beats even our friend, Prince
Shoubinoff, in his Sunday clothes, with the barina on his arm.
As you may imagine, I drew him out like a telescope. I have many
a droll story for you when I return. To come to Paul. I [433]made it
my business at once to call upon the publishers—it is one of
the largest firms here—and from them I learnt that your son was
still at the same address, in the Kitai-Gorod, as that given
in the first and only letter you have had from him. I did not
care about going there direct, for I thought it best that he
should be unaware of my presence, in case there should be
anything which it would be advisable for me to find out for your
information. However, by haunting the neighbourhood of the
offices of his newspaper, I caught sight of him within a couple
of hours. He has a somewhat over-wrought expression in his
countenance, and does not look particularly well. I fancy he is
exciting himself about the production of his book. He has not
seen me yet, nor shall I let him see me till I ascertain that he
is not in any trouble. It is only his silence to you that makes
me fancy something may be the matter; otherwise I should
unhesitatingly put down his pallor and intensity of expression
to over-work and, perhaps, religious fervour. He went straight
to the Petrovski Cathedral on leaving the offices. I am here for
a few days longer, and will write again. It is frightfully cold.
The thermometer is at freezing point. I sit in my shuba and
shiver. Au revoir.
"Nicholas Alexandrovitch."
There is something not quite satisfying about this letter. It looks as
if there was more beneath the surface. Paul is evidently looking ill
or ecstatic, or both. But, at any rate, my main anxiety is allayed. I
can wait with more composure for Nicholas's second letter. But why
does not the boy write himself? He must have got the letter telling
him I had been unwell. And yet not a word of sympathy! I don't half
like Nicholas's idea of playing the spy, though, as if my son is not
to be trusted. What can he suspect? But Nicholas [434]Alexandrovitch
dearly loves to invent a mystery for the sake of ferreting it out.
These scientific men are so sharp that they often cut themselves.
Friday Afternoon.—At last Paul has written.
"My Darling Papasha,—I am surprised you should be
anxious about me. I am quite comfortable here, and have now
conquered all the difficulties that beset me at the first. How
came you to allow yourself to be unwell? I hope Nicholas
Alexandrovitch is taking care of you. By the by, I almost
thought I saw him here this morning on the bridge, looking over
into the reka, but there was a church procession, and I had
hurried past the man before the thought struck me, and the odds
were so much against its being our zemski-doktor, that I would
not trouble to turn back. I have already corrected the proofs of
several sheets of my book. It will be dedicated, by special
permission, to Archbishop Varenkin. My articles in the Courier
are attracting considerable attention. I have left orders for
the publishers to send you my last, which will appear to-morrow.
May the holy Mother and the saints watch over you.
—Your devoted son,
Paul.
"P.S.—I am making more money than I want, and I shall be glad
to send you some, if you have any wants unsupplied."
My darling boy! How could I ever have felt myself alienated from you?
I will come to you and live with you and share your triumphs. No
miserable scruples shall divide our lives any more. The past is
ineradicable; the future is its inevitable fruit. So be it. My
spiritual yearnings and wrestlings were but the outcome of a morbid
physical condition. Nicholas was right. And now to read my son's
article, which I have here, marked [435]with a blue border. Why should I,
with my superficial ponderings, be right and he wrong?
Saturday Night.—I have a vague remembrance that three stars marked
the close of the Sabbath. And here in the frosty sky I see a whole
host scintillating in the immeasurable depths. The Sabbath is over and
once more I drag myself to my writing desk to pour out the anguish of
a tortured spirit. All day I have sat as in a dumb trance gazing out
beyond the izbas and the cabbage fields toward the eternal hills.
How beautiful and peaceful everything is! God, wilt Thou not impart to
me the secret of peace?
Little did I divine what awaited my eyes when they rested fondly on
the first sentence of Paul's article. Voi, it was a pronouncement on
the Jewish question, venomous, scathing, mordant, terrific. It was an
indictment of the race, lit up with all the glow of moral indignation;
cruel and slanderous, yet noble and righteous in its tone and ideals;
base as hell, yet pure as heaven; breathing a savagery as of
Torquemada, and a saintliness as of Tolstoï. Paul in every line, my
own noble, bigoted, wrong-headed Paul. As I read it, my whole frame
trembled. A corresponding passion and indignation stirred my blood to
fever-heat. All my slumbering Jewish instincts woke again to fresh
life; and I knew myself for the weak, miserable wretch that I am. To
think that a son of mine should thus vilify his own race. What can I
do? Bozhe moi, what can [436]I do? How can I stop this horrible,
unnatural thing? I dare not open Paul's eyes to what he is doing. And
yet it is my duty.... It is my duty. By that token I know I shall not
do it. Heaven have pity on me!
Tuesday.—Heaven have pity on Paul! Here is Nicholas's promised
letter.
"Dear Demetrius,—I have strange news for you. It is
quite providential (I use the word without prejudice, as the
lawyers say) that I came here. But all is well now, so you may
read what follows without alarm. Last Thursday morning, during
my purposeful wanderings within Paul's usual circuit, I came
face to face with our young gentleman. His eyes stared straight
at me without seeing me. His face was ghastly white, and the
lines were rigid as if with some stern determination. His lips
were moving, but I could not catch his mutterings. He held a
sealed letter in his hand. I saw the superscription. It was
addressed to you. Instantly the dread came to my mind that he
was about to commit suicide, and that this was his farewell to
you. I followed him. He posted the letter at the post-office,
turned back, threaded his way like a somnambulist across the
bridge, without, however, approaching the parapet, walked
mechanically onward to his own apartments, put the latch-key
into the house-door, and then fell back in a dead faint—into my
arms. I took him upstairs, explained what had happened, put him
to bed, and—I write this from the bedside. For the crisis is
over now; the brain fever has abated, and he has now nothing to
do but to get well, though he will be longer about it than a
young fellow of his age has a right to be. His body is emaciated
with fasts and vigils and penances. I curse religion when I look
at him. As if the struggle for life were not hard enough without
humanity being hampered by these miserable superstitions. But
you will be wanting to know what is the matter. Well,
batiushka, what should be the matter but the old, old matter?
La femme is, strange to relate, a fine specimen of our own
race [437]of lovely women, my dear Demetrius. She is a Jewess of the
most orthodox family in Moscow, and therein lies the crux of the
situation. (I am not playing upon words, but the phrase is
doubly significant here.) Of course Paul has not the slightest
idea I know all this; but of course I have had it from his hot
lips all the same. As far as I have been able to piece his
broken utterances together, they have had some stolen love
passages, each followed by swift remorse on both sides,
and—another furtive love passage. Paul has been comparing
himself to St. Anthony, and even to Jesus, when Satan, ce chef
admirable, spread a first-class dinner in the wilderness. But
the poor lad must have suffered much behind all his heroics. And
what his final resolution to give her up cost him is pretty
evident. I suppose he must have told you of it in that letter.
Isn't it the oddest thing in the world? Rachel Jacobvina is the
girl's name, and her people keep a clothes' store round the
corner, and her father is the Parnass (you will remember what
that means) of his synagogue. She is a sweet little thing; and
Paul evidently has a taste for other belles than
belles-lettres. From what you told me of him I fully expected
this sort of thing. The poor fellow is looking at me now from
among his iced bandages with a piteous air of resignation to the
will of Nicholas Alexandrovitch in bringing him back to this
world of trouble when he already felt his wings sprouting. Poor
Paul! He little dreams what I am writing; but he will get over
this, and marry some fair, blue-eyed Circassian with
corresponding tastes in fasting, and an enthusiastic longing for
the Kingdom of God, when the year shall be a perpetual Lent. In
his failure to realize history, he thinks it a crime to adore a
Jewish virgin, though he spends half his time in adoring the
Madonna. How shocked he would be if I pointed this out! People
who look through ecclesiastical spectacles so rarely realize
that the Holy Family was a Jewish one. But my pen is running
away with me, and our patient looks thirsty. Proshchaï.
"Nicholas."
"P.S.—There is not the slightest danger of a relapse unless the
image of this diabolical girl comes before him again. And I
[438]keep his attention distracted. Besides, he had finally conquered
his passion. This illness was at once the seal and the witness
of his unchangeable resolve. I have heard him repeat the terms
of the letter of farewell he sent her. It was final."
So this was the meaning of your silence; this the tragedy that lay
behind your simple sentence, "I have now conquered all the
difficulties which beset me at the first." This was the motive that
guided your hand to write those bitter lines about our race, so that
you might henceforth cut yourself off from the possibility of allying
yourself with it even in thought. I understand all now, my poor
high-mettled boy. How you must have suffered! How your pride must have
rebelled at the idea that you might have to make such a confession to
me—little knowing I should have hailed it with delight. That
temptation should have assailed you, too, at such a period—when you
were publishing your great work on the ideals of Holy Russia!
Mysterious, indeed, are the ways of Providence. And yet why may not
all be well after all, and Heaven grant me such grace as I would
willingly sacrifice my life to deserve? It is impossible that my son's
passion can be utterly dead. Such fires are only covered up. I will go
to him and tell him all. The news that he is a Jew will revolutionize
him. His love will flame up afresh and take on the guise and glamour
of duty. Love, posing as logic, will whisper in his ear that no bars
of early training can avail to keep him from the race [439]to which he
belongs by blood and by his father's faith. In this girl's eyes he
will read God's message of command, and I, God's message of Peace and
Reconciliation. The tears are in my eyes; I can hardly see to write.
The happiness I foresee is too great. Blessings on your sweet face,
Rachel Jacobvina, my own darling daughter that is to be. To you is
allotted the blessed task of solving a fearful problem, of rescuing
and reuniting two human lives. Yes, Heaven is indeed merciful.
To-morrow I start for Moscow.
Thursday.—How can I write it? No, there is no pity in Heaven. The
sky smiles in steely blankness. The air cuts like a knife. Paul is
well, or as well as a convalescent can be. He must have had a heart of
ice. But it is fortunate he had, seeing what the icy fates have
wrought. I arrived at Moscow, and hurried in a droshky across the
well-known bridge to Paul's lodgings. A ghastly procession stopped me.
Some burlaks were bearing the corpse of a young girl who had thrown
herself into the ice-laden river. A clammy foreboding gathered at my
heart, but ere I had time to say a word, an old, caftan-clad man, with
agonized eyes and a white, streaming beard, dashed up, pulled off the
face-cloth, revealing a strange, weird loveliness, uttered a scream
which yet rings in my ears, threw himself passionately on the body,
rose up again, murmured something solemnly and resignedly in Hebrew,
rent his garments, [440]readjusted the face-cloth, and followed weeping in
the rear. And from lip to lip, that for once forgot to curl in scorn,
flew the murmur: "Rachel Jacobvina."
Saturday Night.—I slouched into the synagogue this morning, the
cynosure of suspicious eyes. I nearly uncovered my head in
forgetfulness. Somebody offered me a Talith, which I wrapped round
myself with marked awkwardness. The service moved me beyond measure. I
have neither the pen nor the will to describe my sensations. I was a
youth again. The intervening decades faded away. Rachel's father said
the Kaddish. The peace of God has touched my soul. Paul is asleep. I
have made Nicholas take his much-needed rest. I am reading the Hebrew
Psalms. The language comes back to me bit by bit.
Monday.—Paul is sitting up reading—proofs. I have been to condole
with Rachel's father, as he sat mourning upon the ground. I explained
that I was a stranger in the town, and had heard of the accident. I
have given five hundred roubles to the synagogue. The whole
congregation is buzzing with the generosity of the rich Jewish farmer
from the country. Fortunately there is no danger of Paul hearing
anything of my doings. He is a prisoner; and Nicholas and myself keep
watch over him by turns.
Tuesday.—I have just come from a meeting of the Palestine
Colonization Society. Heavens, what [441]ideals burn in these breasts
supposed to throb only with cupidity and cunning! Their souls still
turn to the Orient, as the needle turns to the pole. And how the
better-off among them pity their weaker brethren! With what enthusiasm
they plot and plan to get them beyond the frontier into freer
countries, but chiefly into the centre of all Jewish aspiration, the
Holy Land! How they wept when I doubled their finances at a stroke. My
poor, much-wronged brethren!
Odessa, Monday.—It is almost a year since I closed this book, and
now, after a period of peace, I am driven to it again. Paul has made
an irruption into my tranquil household. For eleven months now I have
lived in this little two-storied house overlooking the roadstead, with
Isaac and the ekonomka for my sole companions. So long as I could
pour my troubles into the ear of the venerable old rabbi (who was
starving for material sustenance when I took him, as I was for
spiritual), so long I had no need of you, my old confidant. But this
visit of Paul has reopened all my sores. I have smuggled the rabbi out
of the way; but even if he were here, he could not understand the
terrible situation. The God of Israel alone knows what I feel at
having to deny Him, at having to hide my faith from my own son. He
must not stay. The New Year is nigh, with its feasts and fasts.
Moreover, surrounded as [442]one is by spies, Paul's presence here may
lead to discoveries that I am not what the authorities imagine.
Perhaps it would have been better if I had gone back to the village.
But no. There was that church-going. A village is so small. In this
great and bustling seaport I am lost, or comparatively so. A few
roubles in the ecclesiastical palm, and complete oblivion settles on
me.
To-night I shall know to what I owe this sudden visit. Paul is
radiant. He plays with his untold news like a child with a new toy. He
drops all sorts of mysterious hints. He frisks around me like a fond
spaniel. But he reserves his tit-bit for to-night, when the tramp of
the sailors and the perambulating peasantry shall have died away, and
we shall be seated cosily in my study, smoking our cigarettes, and
looking out toward the quiet lights of the shipping. Of course it is
good news—Heaven help me, I fear Paul's good news. Good news that
Paul has come all the way from St. Petersburg to tell me, which only
his own lips may tell me, must, if past omens speak truly, be
terrible. God grant I may survive the telling.
What a coward I am! Have I not long since made up my mind that Paul
must go his way and I mine? What difference, then, can his news make
to me? He will never know now that I am a Zhit unless he hears it
from my dying lips as I utter the declaration of the Unity. I made up
my mind to that when I came here. Paul threatens to make his [443]mark as
a writer on theological subjects. To tell him the truth would only
sadden him and do him no good; while to reveal my own Judaism to the
world would but serve to damage him and injure his prospects. This may
seem but a cover for my cowardice, for my fear of State reprisals; but
it is true for all that. Bozhe moi, is it not punishment enough not
to be able to join my brethren in their worship? I must remain here,
where I am unknown, practising my religion unostentatiously and in
secret. The sense of being in a Jewish city satisfies my soul. We are
here more than a fourth of the population. House-rent and fuel are
very dear, but we thrive and prosper, thanks to God. I give to our
poor, through Isaac, but they hardly want my help. I rejoice in the
handsome synagogues, though I dare not enter them. Yes, I am best
here. Why be upset by my boy's visit? Paul will tell me his news, I
shall congratulate him, he will go back to the capital, and all will
be as before.
Monday Midnight.—No, all can never be as before. One last step
remained to divide our lives to all eternity. Voi, Paul has taken
it.
All came off as arranged. We sat together at my window. It was a
glorious night, and a faint, fresh wind blew in from the sea. The
lights in the harbour twinkled, the stars glistened in the sky. But as
Paul told me his good news, the whole horizon was one great flame
before my eyes. He began by recapitulating, though with fuller details
than was [444]possible by letter, what I knew pretty well already; the
story of the great success of his book, which had been reviewed in all
the theological magazines of Europe, and had gone through four
editions in the year, and been translated into German and Italian; the
story of how he had been encouraged to come to St. Petersburg, and how
he had prospered on the press there. And then came the grand news—he
was offered the editorship of the Novoe Vremia, the great St.
Petersburg paper!
In an instant I realized all it meant, and in my horror I almost
fainted. Paul would direct this famous Government and anti-Semitic
organ, Paul would pen day after day those envenomed leaders, goading
on the mob to turn and rend their Jewish fellow-citizens, denying them
the rights of human beings. Paul would direct the flood of sarcasm and
misrepresentation poured forth day after day upon my inoffensive
brethren. The old anguish with which I had read that article a year
ago returned to me; but not the old tempest of wrath. By sheer force
of will I kept myself calm. A great issue was at stake, and I nerved
myself for the contest.
"Paul," said I, "you are a lucky fellow." I kissed him on the brow
with icy lips. He saw my great emotion, but felt it was but natural.
"Da," said he, "I am a lucky fellow. It is a great thing. Few men
have had such an opportunity at twenty-five."
[445]"Nutchozh? And how do you propose to utilize it?" I asked.
"Och, I must conduct the paper on the same general lines," he said;
"of course, with improvements."
"Amongst the latter the omission of the anti-Semitic bias, I hope."
He stared at me. "Certainly not. The proprietors make its continuance
on the same general lines a condition. They are very good. They even
guard me against possible prosecutions by paying a handsome salary to
a man of straw. Ish-lui, it is a fine berth that I've got."
Should I tell him the thing was impossible—that he was a Jew? No;
time for that when all other means had failed. "Och, you have
accepted it?" I said.
"Of course I have, father. Why should I give them time to change their
minds?"
"I should have thought you would have consulted me first."
"Nu, uzh, I have never consulted you yet about accepting work," he
said in a wondering, disappointed tone.
"Nuka, but this puts you finally into a career, does it not?"
"Certainly. That is why I accepted it, and I thought you would be
glad."
"That is why you should have refused it. But I am glad all the
same."
[446]"I do not understand you, father."
"Nuka, golubtchik, listen," I said in my most endearing tone,
drawing my arm round his neck. "Your struggles for existence were but
struggles for the sake of the struggle. You are not as other young
men. You have succeeded; and the moment you win the prize is the
moment for retiring gracefully, leaving it in the hands of him who
needs it. Your fight was but a game I allowed you to play. You are
rich."
"Rich?"
"Rich! Nearly all my life I have been a wealthy man. I own land in
every part of Russia; I hold shares in all the most successful
companies. I have kept this knowledge from you so that you might enjoy
your riches more when you knew the truth."
"Rich?" He repeated the word again in a dazed tone. "Ach, why did I
not know this before?"
"You had not succeeded. You had not had your experience, my son, my
dearest Paul. But now your work is over, or rather your true work
begins. Freed from the detestable routine of a newspaper office, you
shall write your books and work out your ideas at leisure, and
relieved from all material considerations."
"Da, it would have been a beautiful ideal—once," he said; then
added fiercely: "Rich? And I did not know it."
[447]"But you were the happier for your ignorance."
"No, father. The struggle is too terrible. Often have I sat and wept.
Ish-lui, time after time my book—destined as it was to
success—came back to me from the publishers. And I could have
produced it myself all along!"
Pangs of remorse agitated me. Had my plan been, indeed, a failure?
"But you have the pride of unhelped success."
"And the bitter memories. And once—" He paused.
"Once?" I said.
"Once I loved a girl. She is dead now, so it doesn't matter. There
were many and complicated obstacles to our union. With money they
would have been overcome."
"Poor boy!" I said wonderingly, for I knew nothing of this apparently
new love episode. "Forgive me, my son, if I have acted mistakenly.
Anyhow, from this moment your happiness is my sole care."
"No," he said, with sudden determination. "It is too late now. You
meant it for the best, papasha. But I do not want the money now. I
have money of my own—and glory. Why should I give up what my own
hands have won?"
"Because I ask it of you, Paul; because I ask you to allow me to make
reparation for the mischief I have done."
[448]"The truest reparation will be to let things go unrepaired," he said,
with a touch of sarcasm. "I shall be happier as editor of this paper.
What finer medium for my ideas than a great newspaper? What more
potent lever to my hand for raising Holy Russia to a yet higher plane?
No, father. Let bygones be bygones. Give my share of your wealth to a
society for helping struggling talent. I struggle no longer. Leave me
to go on in the path my pen has carved out."
I fell at his feet and begged him to let me have my way, but some
obstinate demon seemed to have taken possession of his breast. I
opened my desk and showered bank-notes upon him. He spurned them, and
one flew out into the night. Neither of us put out a hand to arrest
its flight.
I saw that nothing but the truth had any chance to alter his resolve.
But I played one more card before resorting to this dangerous weapon.
"Listen, my own dearest Paul," I burst out. "If money will not tempt
you, let a father's petition persuade you. Learn, then, that I dread
your taking this position because you will perpetually have to attack
the Jews—"
"As they deserve," he put in.
"Be it so. But I—I have a kindness for this oppressed race."
He looked at me in silence, as if awaiting further [449]explanation. I
gave it, blurting out the shameful lie with ill-concealed confusion.
"Once upon a time I—I loved a Jewess. I could not marry her, of
course. But ever since that time I have had a soft place in my heart
for her unhappy race."
A look of surprise flashed into Paul's eyes. Then his face grew
tender. He took my hand in his.
"Father, we have a common sorrow," he said. "The girl I spoke of was a
Jewess."
"How?" I exclaimed, surprised in my turn. It was the same affair,
then.
"Yes, she was a Jewess. But I taught her the truth. Christ was
revealed to her prisoned soul. She would have fled with me if we had
had the means, and if I had been able to support her in some other
country. But she did not dare be baptized and stay in Moscow or
anywhere near. She said her father would have killed her. The only
alternative was for me to embrace Judaism. Impossible as you may think
it, father, and I confess it to my eternal shame, at the very period I
was correcting the proofs of my book, I was wrestling with a
temptation to embrace this Satanic heresy. But I conquered the
temptation. It was easy to conquer. To renounce the faith which was my
blessed birthright would, as you know, have cost me dear. Selfishness
warred for once on the side of salvation. Rachel wished to fly [450]with
me. I knew she would have been poor and unhappy. I refused to take
advantage of her girlish impetuousness. I heard afterward that she had
drowned herself." The tears rained down his cheeks.
"We had arranged to wait till I could save a stock of money. Voi,
the delay undid us. One day Rachel's father called on me. He had got
wind of our secret. He fell at my feet and tore his hair, and wept and
conjured me not to darken his home and his life. A Jewess could only
wed a Jew, he said. If I had only been born a Jew all would have been
well. But his Rachel had, perhaps, talked of becoming a Christian. Did
I not know that was impossible? As well expect the sheep to howl like
the wolf. Blood was thicker than baptismal water. Her heart would
always cleave to her own religion. And was my love so blind as not to
see that even if she spoke of Christianity it was only to please me?
that she only kissed the crucifix that I might kiss her, and knelt to
the Virgin that I might kneel to her? At home, he swore it with
fearful oaths, she was always bitterly sarcastic at the expense of the
true faith. I believed him. My God, I believed him! For at times I had
feared it myself. I would be no party to such carnal blasphemy, and
charged him with a note of farewell. When he went I felt as if I had
escaped from a terrible temptation. I fell on my knees and thanked the
saints."
[451]"But why did you not tell me this at the time?" I cried in intolerable
anguish.
"Nu; to what end? It would only have worried you. I did not know you
were rich."
"And at this time you offered to send me money!" I said, with sudden
recollection.
"Since I had not enough, you might as well have some of it. Anyhow,
father, you see all this has made no difference to me. I shall never
marry now, of course; but it hasn't altered the opinion I have always
had of the Jews—rather corroborated it. Rachel told me enough of the
superstitious slavery amid which she was forced to live. I have no
doubt now that her father lied. But for his pigheaded tribalism,
Rachel would have been alive to-day. So why your love for a Jewish
girl should make you tender to the race I do not see, dearest father.
There are always exceptions to everything—Rachel was one; the woman
you loved was another. And now it is very late; I think I will go to
bed."
He kissed me and went out at the door. Then he came back and put his
head inside again. A sweet, sad, winning smile lit up his pale,
thoughtful face.
"I will put you on the free list of the Novoe Vremia, father," he
said. "Good-night, papasha."
What could I say? What could I do? I called up a smile to my trembling
lips.
"Good-night, Paul," I said.
I shall never tell him now.
[452]Tuesday, 3 a.m.—I reopen these pages to note an ironic climax to
this bitter day. Through the excitement of Paul's coming I had not
read my letters. After sitting here in a numb trance for hours, I
suddenly bethought me of them. One is from my business man, informing
me that he has just sold the South American stock, respecting which I
gave him carte blanche. I go to bed richer by five thousand roubles.
Odessa, Wednesday Night.—Six months have passed. I am on the free
list of the Novoe Vremia. Almost every day brings me a fresh stab as
I read. But I am a "constant reader." It is my penance, and I bear it
as such. After a long silence, I have just had a letter from Nicholas
Alexandrovitch, and I reopen my diary to note it. He is about to marry
a prosperous widow, and is going over to Catholicism. He writes he is
very happy. Lucky, soulless being. He does not know he will be a
richer man when I die. Happily, I am ready, though it were to-day. My
peace is made, I hope, with God and man, though Paul knows nothing
even now. He could not fail to learn it, though, if he came to Odessa
again. I have bribed the spies and the clergy heavily. Thanks to their
silence, I am one of the most prominent Jews of the town, and nobody
dreams of connecting me with the trenchant editor of the Novoe
Vremia. I see now that I could have acted [453]so all along, if I had not
been such a coward. But I keep Paul away. It is my last cowardice. In
a postscript Nicholas writes that Paul's articles are causing a great
sensation in the remotest parts of Russia. Alas, I know it. Are there
not anti-Jewish riots in all parts, encouraged by cruel Government
measures? Do not the local newspapers everywhere reproduce Paul's
printed firebrands? Have I not the pleasure of coming across them
again in our own Odessa papers, in the Wiertnik and the Listok? I
should not wonder if we had an outbreak here. There was a little
affray yesterday in the pereouloks of the Jewish quarter, though we
are quiet enough down this way.... Great God! What is that noise I
hear?... Yes! it is! it is! "Down with the Zhits! Down with the
Zhits!" There is red on the horizon. Bozhe moi! It is flame!
Voi! They are pillaging the Jewish quarter. The sun sinks in blood,
as on that unhappy day among the village hills.... Ach! Paul, Paul!
Why did I not stop your murderous pen?... But if not you, another
would have written.... No, that is no excuse.... Forgive me, O God, I
have been weak. Ever weak and cowardly from the day I first deserted
Thee, even unto this day.... I am not worthy of my blood, of my
race.... They are coming this way. It goes through me like a knife.
"Down with the Zhits! Down with the Zhits!" And now I see them.
They are mad, drunk with [454]the vodka they have stolen from the Jewish
inns. Great God! They have knives and guns. And their leader is
flourishing a newspaper and shouting out something from it. There are
soldiers among them, and sailors, native and foreign, and mad muzhiks.
Where are the police?... The mob is passing under my window. God pity
me, it is Paul's words they are shouting.... They have passed. No
one thinks of me. Thank God, I am safe. I am safe from these demons.
What a narrow escape!... Ah, God, they have captured Rabbi Isaac and
are dragging him along by his white beard toward the barracks. My
place is by his side. I will rouse my brethren. We are not a few. We
will turn on these dogs and rend them. Proshchaï, my loved diary.
Farewell! I go to proclaim the Unity.
[1] In order to preserve the local colour, the Translator has
occasionally left a word or phrase of the MS. in the original
Russian.
[2] Dissenters.
"Cast off among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave.
Whom Thou rememberest no more, and they are cut off from Thy
hand. Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in dark places, in
the deeps. Thy wrath lieth hard upon me and Thou hast afflicted
me with all Thy waves. Thou hast put mine acquaintance far from
me; Thou hast made me an abomination unto them; I am shut up and
I cannot come forth. Mine eye wasteth away by reason of
affliction. I have called daily upon Thee, O Lord, I have spread
forth my hands unto Thee."—Eighty-eighth Psalm.
There was a restless air about the Refuge. In a few minutes the
friends of the patients would be admitted. The Incurables would hear
the latest gossip of the Ghetto, for the world was still very much
with these abortive lives, avid of sensations, Jewish to the end. It
was an unpretentious institution—two corner houses knocked
together—near the east lung of London; supported mainly by the poor
at a penny a week, and scarcely recognized by the rich; so that
paraplegia and vertigo and rachitis and a dozen other hopeless
diseases knocked hopelessly at its narrow portals. But it was a model
institution all the same, and the patients lacked for nothing except
freedom from pain. There was even [458]a miniature synagogue for their
spiritual needs, with the women's compartment religiously railed off
from the men's, as if these grotesque ruins of sex might still
distract each other's devotions.
Yet the Rabbis knew human nature. The sprightly, hydrocephalous,
paralytic Leah had had the chair she inhabited carried down into the
men's sitting-room to beguile the moments, and was smiling
fascinatingly upon the deaf blind man, who had the Braille Bible at
his fingers' ends, and read on as stolidly as St. Anthony. Mad Mo had
strolled vacuously into the ladies' ward, and, indifferent to the
pretty white-aproned Christian nurses, was loitering by the side of a
weird, hatchet-faced cripple with a stiletto-shaped nose supporting
big spectacles. Like most of the patients she was up and dressed; only
a few of the white pallets ranged along the walls were occupied.
"Leah says she'd be quite happy if she could walk like you," said Mad
Mo in complimentary tones. "She always says Milly walks so beautiful.
She says you can walk the whole length of the garden." Milly, huddled
in her chair, smiled miserably.
"You're crying again, Rebecca," protested a dark-eyed, bright-faced
dwarf in excellent English, as she touched her friend's withered hand.
"You are in the blues again. Why, that page is all blistered."
"No—I feel so nice," said the sad-eyed Russian in her quaint musical
accent. "You sall not tink [459]I cry because I am not happy. Ven I read
sad tings—like my life—den only I am happy."
The dwarf gave a short laugh that made her pendent earrings oscillate.
"I thought you were brooding over your love affairs," she said.
"Me!" cried Rebecca. "I lost too young my leg to be in love. No, it is
Psalm eighty-eight dat I brood over. 'I am afflicted and ready to die
from my yout' up.' Yes, I vas only a girl ven I had to go to
Königsberg to find a doctor to cut off my leg. 'Lover and friend hast
dou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness!'"
Her face shone ecstatic.
"Hush!" whispered the dwarf, with a warning nudge and a slight nod in
the direction of a neighbouring waterbed on which a pale, rigid,
middle-aged woman lay, with shut sleepless eyes.
"Se cannot understand Englis'," said the Russian girl proudly.
"Don't be so sure, look how the nurses here have picked up Yiddish!"
Rebecca shook her head incredulously. "Sarah is a Polis' woman," she
said. "For years dey are in England and dey learn noting."
"Ick bin krank! Krank! Krank!" suddenly moaned a shrivelled Polish
grandmother—an advanced centenarian—as if to corroborate the girl's
contention. She was squatting monkey-like on her bed, every now and
again murmuring her querulous [460]burden of sickness, and jabbering at
the nurses to shut all the windows. Fresh air she objected to as
vehemently as if it were butter or some other heterodox dainty.
Hard upon her crooning came bloodcurdling screams from the room above,
sounds that reminded the visitor he was not in a "Barnum" show, that
the monstrosities were genuine. Pretty Sister Margaret—not yet
indurated—thrilled with pity, as before her inner vision rose the
ashen perspiring face of the palsied sufferer, who sat quivering all
the long day in an easy-chair, her swollen jelly-like hands resting on
cotton-wool pads, an air-pillow between her knees, her whole frame
racked at frequent intervals by fierce spasms of pain, her only
diversion faint blurred reflections of episodes of the street in the
glass of a framed picture; yet morbidly suspicious of slow poison in
her drink, and cursed with an incurable vitality.
Meantime Sarah lay silent, bitter thoughts moving beneath her white,
impassive face like salt tides below a frozen surface. It was a
strong, stern face, telling of a present of pain, and faintly hinting
at a past of prettiness. She seemed alone in the populated ward, and
indeed the world was bare for her. Most of her life had been spent in
the Warsaw Ghetto, where she was married at sixteen, nineteen years
before. Her only surviving son—a youth whom the English atmosphere
had not improved—had sailed away to [461]trade with the Kaffirs. And her
husband had not been to see her for a fortnight!
When the visitors began to arrive, her torpor vanished. She eagerly
raised the half of her that was not paralyzed, partially sitting up.
But gradually expectation died out of her large gray eyes. There was a
buzz of talk in the room—the hydrocephalous girl was the gay centre
of a group; the Polish grandmother who cursed her grandchildren when
they didn't come and when they did, was denouncing their neglect of
her to their faces; everybody had somebody to kiss or quarrel with.
One or two acquaintances approached the bed-ridden wife, too, but she
would speak no word, too proud to ask after her husband, and wincing
under the significant glances occasionally cast in her direction. By
and by she had the red screen placed round her bed, which gave her
artificial walls and a quasi-privacy. Her husband would know where to
look for her—
"Woe is me!" wailed her centenarian country-woman, rocking to and fro.
"What sin have I committed to get such grandchildren? You only come to
see if the old grandmother isn't dead yet. So sick! So sick! So sick!"
Twilight filled the wards. The white beds looked ghostly in the
darkness. The last visitor departed. Sarah's husband had not yet come.
"He is not well, Mrs. Kretznow," Sister Margaret ventured to say in
her best Yiddish. "Or he is busy [462]working. Work is not so slack any
more." Alone in the institution she shared Sarah's ignorance of the
Kretznow scandal. Talk of it died before her youth and sweetness.
"He would have written," said Sarah sternly. "He is awearied of me. I
have lain here a year. Job's curse is on me."
"Shall I to him"—Sister Margaret paused to excogitate the Yiddish
word—"write?"
"No! He hears me knocking at his heart."
They had flashes of strange savage poetry, these crude yet complex
souls. Sister Margaret, who was still liable to be startled, murmured
feebly, "But—"
"Leave me in peace!" with a cry like that of a wounded animal.
The matron gently touched the novice's arm and drew her away. "I
will write to him," she whispered.
Night fell, but sleep fell only for some. Sarah Kretznow tossed in a
hell of loneliness. Ah, surely her husband had not forgotten
her—surely she would not lie thus till death—that far-off death her
strong religious instinct would forbid her hastening! She had gone
into the Refuge to save him the constant sight of her helplessness and
the cost of her keep. Was she now to be cut off forever from the sight
of his strength?
The next day he came—by special invitation. His face was sallow,
rimmed with swarthy hair; his [463]under lip was sensuous. He hung his
head, half veiling the shifty eyes.
Sister Margaret ran to tell his wife. Sarah's face sparkled.
"Put up the screen!" she murmured, and in its shelter drew her
husband's head to her bosom and pressed her lips to his hair.
But he, surprised into indiscretion, murmured: "I thought thou wast
dying."
A beautiful light came into the gray eyes.
"Thy heart told thee right, Herzel, my life. I was dying—for a
sight of thee."
"But the matron wrote to me pressingly," he blurted out. He felt her
breast heave convulsively under his face; with her hands she thrust
him away.
"God's fool that I am—I should have known; to-day is not visiting
day. They have compassion on me—they see my sorrows—it is public
talk."
His pulse seemed to stop. "They have talked to thee of me," he
faltered.
"I did not ask their pity. But they saw how I suffered—one cannot
hide one's heart."
"They have no right to talk," he muttered in sulky trepidation.
"They have every right," she rejoined sharply. "If thou hadst come to
see me even once—why hast thou not?"
"I—I—have been travelling in the country with cheap jewellery. The
tailoring is so slack."
[464]"Look me in the eyes! Law of Moses? No, it is a lie. God shall forgive
thee. Why hast thou not come?"
"I have told thee."
"Tell that to the Sabbath Fire-Woman! Why hast thou not come? Is it so
very much to spare me an hour or two a week? If I could go out like
some of the patients, I would come to thee. But I have tired thee out
utterly—"
"No, no, Sarah," he murmured uneasily.
"Then why—?"
He was covered with shame and confusion. His face was turned away. "I
did not like to come," he said desperately.
"Why not?" Crimson patches came and went on her white cheeks; her
heart beat madly.
"Surely thou canst understand!"
"Understand what? I speak of green and thou answerest of blue!"
"I answer as thou askest."
"Thou answerest not at all."
"No answer is also an answer," he snarled, driven to bay. "Thou
understandest well enough. Thyself saidst it was public talk."
"Ah—h—h!" in a stifled shriek of despair. Her intuition divined
everything. The shadowy, sinister suggestions she had so long beat
back by force of will took form and substance. Her head fell back on
the pillow, the eyes closed.
[465]He stayed on, bending awkwardly over her.
"So sick! So sick! So sick!" moaned the wizened grandmother.
"Thou sayest they have compassion on thee in their talk," he murmured
at last, half deprecatingly, half resentfully; "have they none on me?"
Her silence chilled him. "But thou hast compassion, Sarah," he
urged. "Thou understandest."
Presently she reopened her eyes.
"Thou art not gone?" she murmured.
"No—thou seest I am not tired of thee, Sarah, my life! Only—"
"Wilt thou wash my skin, and not make me wet?" she interrupted
bitterly. "Go home. Go home to her!"
"I will not go home."
"Then go under like Korah."
He shuffled out. That night her lonely hell was made lonelier by the
opening of a peep-hole into Paradise—a paradise of Adam and Eve and
forbidden fruit. For days she preserved a stony silence toward the
sympathy of the inmates. Of what avail words against the flames of
jealousy in which she writhed?
He lingered about the passage on the next visiting day, vaguely
remorseful, but she would not see him. So he went away, vaguely
indignant, and his new housemate comforted him, and he came no more.
When you lie on your back all day and all night [466]you have time to
think, especially if you do not sleep. A situation presents itself in
many lights from dawn to dusk and from dusk to dawn. One such light
flashed on the paradise, and showed it to her as but the portico of
purgatory. Her husband would be damned in the next world, even as she
was in this. His soul would be cut off from among its people.
On this thought she brooded till it loomed horribly in her darkness.
And at last she dictated a letter to the matron, asking Herzel to come
and see her.
He obeyed, and stood shame-faced at her side, fidgeting with his
peaked cap. Her hard face softened momentarily at the sight of him,
her bosom heaved, suppressed sobs swelled her throat.
"Thou hast sent for me?" he murmured.
"Yes—perhaps thou didst again imagine I was on my death-bed!" she
replied, with bitter irony.
"It is not so, Sarah. I would have come of myself—only thou wouldst
not see my face."
"I have seen it for twenty years—it is another's turn now."
He was silent.
"It is true all the same—I am on my death-bed."
He started. A pang shot through his breast. He darted an agitated
glance at her face.
"Is it not so? In this bed I shall die. But God knows how many years I
shall lie in it."
Her calm gave him an uncanny shudder.
[467]"And till the Holy One, blessed be He, takes me, thou wilt live a
daily sinner."
"I am not to blame. God has stricken me. I am a young man."
"Thou art to blame!" Her eyes flashed fire. "Blasphemer! Life is sweet
to thee—yet perchance thou wilt die before me."
His face grew livid. "I am a young man," he repeated tremulously.
"Dost thou forget what Rabbi Eliezer said? 'Repent one day before thy
death'—that is to-day, for who knows?"
"What wouldst thou have me do?"
"Give up—"
"No, no," he interrupted. "It is useless. I cannot. I am so lonely."
"Give up," she repeated inexorably, "thy wife."
"What sayest thou? My wife! But she is not my wife. Thou art my wife."
"Even so. Give me up. Give me Get (divorce)."
His breath failed, his heart thumped at the suggestion.
"Give thee Get!" he whispered.
"Yes. Why didst thou not send me a bill of divorcement when I left thy
home for this?"
He averted his face. "I thought of it," he stammered. "And then—"
"And then?" He seemed to see a sardonic glitter in the gray eyes.
[468]"I—I was afraid."
"Afraid!" She laughed in grim mirthlessness. "Afraid of a bed-ridden
woman!"
"I was afraid it would make thee unhappy." The sardonic gleam melted
into softness, then became more terrible than before.
"And so thou hast made me happy instead!"
"Stab me not more than I merit. I did not think people would be cruel
enough to tell thee."
"Thine own lips told me."
"Nay—by my soul," he cried, startled.
"Thine eyes told me, then."
"I feared so," he said, turning them away. "When she came into my
house, I—I dared not go to see thee—that was why I did not come,
though I always meant to, Sarah, my life. I feared to look thee in the
eyes. I foresaw they would read the secret in mine—so I was afraid."
"Afraid!" she repeated bitterly. "Afraid I would scratch them out!
Nay, they are good eyes. Have they not seen my heart? For twenty years
they have been my light.... Those eyes and mine have seen our children
die."
Spasmodic sobs came thickly now. Swallowing them down, she said, "And
she—did she not ask thee to give me Get?"
"Nay, she was willing to go without. She said thou wast as one
dead—look not thus at me. It is the will of God. It was for thy sake,
too, Sarah, [469]that she did not become my wife by law. She, too, would
have spared thee the knowledge of her."
"Yes; ye have both tender hearts! She is a mother in Israel, and thou
art a spark of our father Abraham."
"Thou dost not believe what I say?"
"I can disbelieve it, and still remain a Jewess."
Then, satire boiling over into passion, she cried vehemently, "We are
threshing empty ears. Thinkest thou I am not aware of the
Judgments—I, the granddaughter of Reb Shloumi (the memory of the
righteous for a blessing)? Thinkest thou I am ignorant thou couldst
not obtain a Get against me—me who have borne thee children, who have
wrought no evil? I speak not of the Beth-Din, for in this impious
country they are loath to follow the Judgments, and from the English
Beth-Din thou wouldst find it impossible to obtain the Get in any
case, even though thou didst not marry me in this country, nor
according to its laws. I speak of our own Rabbonim—thou knowest
even the Maggid would not give thee Get merely because thy wife is
bed-ridden. That—that is what thou wast afraid of."
"But if thou art willing,—" he replied eagerly, ignoring her scornful
scepticism.
His readiness to accept the sacrifice was salt upon her wounds.
"Thou deservest I should let thee burn in the lowest Gehenna," she
cried.
[470]"The Almighty is more merciful than thou," he answered. "It is He that
hath ordained it is not good for man to live alone. And yet men shun
me—people talk—and she—she may leave me to my loneliness again."
His voice faltered with self-pity. "Here thou hast friends, nurses,
visitors. I—I have nothing. True, thou didst bear me children, but
they withered as by the evil eye. My only son is across the ocean; he
hath no love for me or thee."
The recital of their common griefs softened her toward him.
"Go!" she whispered. "Go and send me the Get. Go to the Maggid, he
knew my grandfather. He is the man to arrange it for thee with his
friends. Tell him it is my wish."
"God shall reward thee. How can I thank thee for giving thy consent?"
"What else have I to give thee, my Herzel, I who eat the bread of
strangers? Truly says the Proverb, 'When one begs of a beggar the Herr
God laughs!'"
"I will send thee the Get as soon as possible."
"Thou art right, I am a thorn in thine eye. Pluck me out quickly."
"Thou wilt not refuse the Get, when it comes?" he replied
apprehensively.
"Is it not a wife's duty to submit?" she asked with grim irony. "Nay,
have no fear. Thou shalt have no difficulty in serving the Get upon
me. I [471]will not throw it in the messenger's face.... And thou wilt
marry her?"
"Assuredly. People will no longer talk. And she must needs bide with
me. It is my one desire."
"It is mine likewise. Thou must atone and save thy soul."
He lingered uncertainly.
"And thy dowry?" he said at last. "Thou wilt not make claim for
compensation?"
"Be easy—I scarce know where my Cesubah (marriage certificate) is.
What need have I of money? As thou sayest, I have all I want. I do not
even desire to purchase a grave—lying already so long in a
charity-grave. The bitterness is over."
He shivered. "Thou art very good to me," he said. "Good-bye."
He stooped down—she drew the bedclothes frenziedly over her face.
"Kiss me not!"
"Good-bye, then," he stammered. "God be good to thee!" He moved away.
"Herzel!" She had uncovered her face with a despairing cry. He
slouched back toward her, perturbed, dreading she would retract.
"Do not send it—bring it thyself. Let me take it from thy hand."
A lump rose in his throat. "I will bring it," he said brokenly.
The long days of pain grew longer—the summer [472]was coming, harbingered
by sunny days that flooded the wards with golden mockery. The evening
Herzel brought the Get, Sarah could have read every word on the
parchment plainly, if her eyes had not been blinded by tears.
She put out her hand toward her husband, groping for the document he
bore. He placed it in her burning palm. The fingers closed
automatically upon it, then relaxed, and the paper fluttered to the
floor. But Sarah was no longer a wife.
Herzel was glad to hide his burning face by stooping for the fallen
bill of divorcement. He was long picking it up. When his eyes met hers
again, she had propped herself up in her bed. Two big round tears
trickled down her cheeks, but she received the parchment calmly and
thrust it into her bosom.
"Let it lie there," she said stonily, "there where thy head hath lain.
Blessed be the true Judge."
"Thou art not angry with me, Sarah?"
"Why should I be angry? She was right—I am but a dead woman. Only no
one may say Kaddish for me, no one may pray for the repose of my
soul. I am not angry, Herzel. A wife should light the Sabbath candles,
and throw in the fire the morsel of dough. But thy home was desolate,
there was none to do these things. Here I have all I need. Now thou
wilt be happy, too."
"Thou hast been a good wife, Sarah," he murmured, touched.
[473]"Recall not the past; we are strangers now," she said, with recurrent
harshness.
"But I may come and see thee—sometimes." He had stirrings of remorse
as the moment of final parting came.
"Wouldst thou reopen my wounds?"
"Farewell, then."
He put out his hand timidly; she seized it and held it passionately.
"Yes, yes, Herzel! Do not leave me! Come and see me here—as a friend,
an acquaintance, a man I used to know. The others are thoughtless—they
forget me—I shall lie here—perhaps the Angel of Death will forget me,
too." Her grasp tightened till it hurt him acutely.
"Yes, I will come—I will come often," he said, with a sob of physical
pain.
Her clasp loosened, she dropped his hand.
"But not till thou art married," she said.
"Be it so."
"Of course thou must have a 'still wedding.' The English synagogue
will not marry thee."
"The Maggid will marry me."
"Thou wilt show me her Cesubah when thou comest next?"
"Yes—I will contrive to get it from her."
A week passed—he brought the marriage certificate.
Outwardly she was calm. She glanced through [474]it. "God be thanked," she
said, and handed it back. They chatted of indifferent things, of the
doings of the neighbours. When he was going, she said, "Thou wilt come
again?"
"Yes, I will come again."
"Thou art so good to spend thy time on me thus. But thy wife—will she
not be jealous?"
He stared, bewildered by her strange, eerie moments.
"Jealous of thee?" he murmured.
She took it in its contemptuous sense and her white lips twitched. But
she only said, "Is she aware thou hast come here?"
He shrugged his shoulders. "Do I know? I have not told her."
"Tell her."
"As thou wishest."
There was a pause. Presently the woman spoke.
"Wilt thou not bring her to see me? Then she will know that thou hast
no love left for me—"
He flinched as at a stab. After a painful moment he said: "Art thou in
earnest?"
"I am no marriage-jester. Bring her to me—will she not come to see an
invalid? It is a mitzvah (good deed) to visit the sick. It will wipe
out her trespass."
"She shall come."
She came. Sarah stared at her for an instant with poignant curiosity,
then her eyelids drooped to [475]shut out the dazzle of her youth and
freshness. Herzel's wife moved awkwardly and sheepishly. But she was
beautiful—a buxom, comely country girl from a Russian village, with a
swelling bust and a cheek rosy with health and confusion.
Sarah's breast was racked by a thousand needles. But she found breath
at last.
"God bless—thee, Mrs.—Kretznow," she said gaspingly.
She took the girl's hand.
"How good thou art to come and see a sick creature."
"My husband willed it," the new wife said in deprecation. She had a
simple, stupid air that did not seem wholly due to the constraint of
the strange situation.
"Thou wast right to obey. Be good to him, my child. For three years he
waited on me, when I lay helpless. He has suffered much. Be good to
him!"
With an impulsive movement she drew the girl's head down to her and
kissed her on the lips. Then with an anguished cry of "Leave me for
to-day," she jerked the blanket over her face and burst into tears.
She heard the couple move hesitatingly away. The girl's beauty shone
on her through the opaque coverings.
"O God!" she wailed. "God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, let me die
now. For the merits of the Patriarchs take me soon, take me soon."
[476]Her vain passionate prayer, muffled by the bedclothes, was wholly
drowned by ear-piercing shrieks from the ward above—screams of agony
mingled with half-articulate accusations of attempted poisoning—the
familiar paroxysm of the palsied woman who clung to life.
The thrill passed again through Sister Margaret. She uplifted her
sweet humid eyes.
"Ah, Christ!" she whispered. "If I could die for her!"
The moment came near for the Polish centenarian grandmother to die.
From the doctor's statement it appeared she had only a bad quarter of
an hour to live. Her attack had been sudden, and the grandchildren she
loved to scold could not be present.
She had already battled through the great wave of pain, and was
drifting beyond the boundaries of her earthly Refuge. The nurses,
forgetting the trouble her querulousness and her overweening dietary
scruples had cost them, hung over the bed on which the shrivelled
entity lay. They did not know she was living again through the one
great episode of her life.
Nearly forty years back, when (though already hard upon seventy and a
widow) a Polish village was all her horizon, she received a letter. It
arrived on the eve of Sabbath on a day of rainy summer. It was from
her little boy—her only boy—who kept a country inn seven-and-thirty
miles away, and had a family. She opened the letter with feverish
anxiety. Her son—her Kaddish—was the apple of her eye. [480]The old
woman eagerly perused the Hebrew script, from right to left. Then
weakness overcame her and she nearly fell.
Embedded casually enough in the four pages was a passage that stood
out for her in letters of blood. "I am not feeling very well lately;
the weather is so oppressive and the nights are misty. But it is
nothing serious; my digestion is a little out of order, that's all."
There were roubles for her in the letter, but she let them fall to the
floor unheeded. Panic fear, travelling quicker than the tardy post of
those days, had brought rumour of a sudden outbreak of cholera in her
son's district. Already alarm for her boy had surged about her heart
all day; the letter confirmed her worst apprehensions. Even if the
first touch of the cholera-fiend was not actually on him when he
wrote, still he was by his own confession in that condition in which
the disease takes easiest grip. By this time he was on a bed of
sickness—nay, perhaps on his death-bed, if not dead. Even in those
days the little grandmother had lived beyond the common span; she had
seen many people die, and knew that the Angel of Death does not always
go about his work leisurely. In an epidemic his hands are too full to
enable him to devote much attention to each case. Maternal instinct
tugged at her heart-strings, drawing her toward her boy. The end of
the letter seemed impregnated with special omen—"Come and see me
soon, dear little mother. I shall be unable to get to [481]see you for
some time." Yes, she must go at once—who knew but that it would be
the last time she would look upon his face?
But then came a terrible thought to give her pause. The Sabbath was
just "in"—a moment ago. Driving, riding, or any manner of journeying
was prohibited during the next twenty-four hours. Frantically she
reviewed the situation. Religion permitted the violation of the
Sabbath on one condition—if life was to be saved. By no stretch of
logic could she delude herself into the belief her son's recovery
hinged upon her presence—nay, analyzing the case with the cruel
remorselessness of a scrupulous conscience, she saw his very illness
was only a plausible hypothesis. No; to go to him now were beyond
question to profane the Sabbath.
And yet beneath all the reasoning, her conviction that he was sick
unto death, her resolve to set out at once, never wavered. After an
agonizing struggle she compromised. She could not go by cart—that
would be to make others work into the bargain, and would moreover
involve a financial transaction. She must walk! Sinful as it was to
transgress the limit of two thousand yards beyond her village—the
distance fixed by Rabbinical law—there was no help for it. And of all
the forms of travelling, walking was surely the least sinful. The Holy
One, blessed be He, would know she did not mean to work; perhaps in
His mercy He would make allowance for an [482]old woman who had never
profaned His rest-day before.
And so, that very evening, having made a hasty meal, and lodged the
precious letter in her bosom, the little grandmother girded up her
loins to walk the seven-and-thirty miles. No staff took she with her,
for to carry such came under the Talmudical definition of work.
Neither could she carry an umbrella, though it was a season of rain.
Mile after mile she strode briskly on, toward that pallid face that
lay so far beyond the horizon, and yet ever shone before her eyes like
a guiding star. "I am coming, my lamb," she muttered. "The little
mother is on the way."
It was a muggy night. The sky, flushed with a weird, hectic glamour,
seemed to hang over the earth like a pall. The trees that lined the
roadway were shrouded in a draggling vapour. At midnight the mist
blotted out the stars. But the little grandmother knew the road ran
straight. All night she walked through the forest, fearless as Una,
meeting neither man nor beast, though the wolf and the bear haunted
its recesses, and snakes lurked in the bushes. But only the innocent
squirrels darted across her path. The morning found her spent, and
almost lame. But she walked on. Almost half the journey was yet to do.
She had nothing to eat with her; food, too, was an illegal burden, nor
could she buy any on the [483]holy day. She said her Sabbath morning prayer
walking, hoping God would forgive the disrespect. The recital gave her
partial oblivion of her pains. As she passed through a village the
dreadful rumour of cholera was confirmed; it gave wings to her feet for
ten minutes, then bodily weakness was stronger than everything else,
and she had to lean against the hedges on the outskirts of the village.
It was nearly noon. A passing beggar gave her a piece of bread.
Fortunately it was unbuttered, so she could eat it with only minor
qualms lest it had touched any unclean thing. She resumed her journey,
but the rest had only made her feet move more painfully and
reluctantly. She would have liked to bathe them in a brook, but that,
too, was forbidden. She took the letter from her bosom and reperused
it, and whipped up her flagging strength with a cry of "Courage, my
lamb! the little mother is on the way." Then the leaden clouds melted
into sharp lines of rain, which beat into her face, refreshing her for
the first few moments, but soon wetting her to the skin, making her
sopped garments a heavier burden, and reducing the pathway to mud, that
clogged still further her feeble footsteps. In the teeth of the wind
and the driving shower she limped on. A fresh anxiety consumed her
now—would she have strength to hold out? Every moment her pace
lessened, she was moving like a snail. And the slower she went the more
vivid grew her [484]prescience of what awaited her at the journey's end.
Would she even hear his dying word? Perhaps—terrible thought!—she
would only be in time to look upon his dead face! Mayhap that was how
God would punish her for her desecration of the holy day. "Take heart,
my lamb!" she wailed. "Do not die yet. The little mother comes."
The rain stopped. The sun came out, hot and fierce, and dried her
hands and face, then made them stream again with perspiration. Every
inch won was torture now, but the brave feet toiled on. Bruised and
swollen and crippled, they toiled on. There was a dying voice—very
far off yet, alas!—that called to her, and as she dragged herself
along, she replied: "I am coming, my lamb. Take heart! the little
mother is on the way. Courage! I shall look upon thy face, I shall
find thee alive."
Once a wagoner observed her plight and offered her a lift, but she
shook her head steadfastly. The endless afternoon wore on—she crawled
along the forest-way, stumbling every now and then from sheer
faintness, and tearing her hands and face in the brambles of the
roadside. At last the cruel sun waned, and reeking mists rose from the
forest pools. And still the long miles stretched away, and still she
plodded on, torpid from over-exhaustion, scarcely conscious, and
taking each step only because she had taken the preceding. From time
to time her lips mumbled: "Take heart, my lamb! I am [485]coming." The
Sabbath was "out" ere, broken and bleeding, and all but swooning, the
little grandmother crawled up to her son's inn, on the border of the
forest. Her heart was cold with fatal foreboding. There was none of
the usual Saturday night litter of Polish peasantry about the door.
The sound of many voices weirdly intoning a Hebrew hymn floated out
into the night. A man in a caftan opened the door, and mechanically
raised his forefinger to bid her enter without noise. The little
grandmother saw into the room behind. Her daughter-in-law and her
grandchildren were seated on the floor—the seat of mourners.
"Blessed be the true Judge!" she said, and rent the skirt of her
dress. "When did he die?"
"Yesterday. We had to bury him hastily ere the Sabbath came in."
The little, grandmother lifted up her quavering voice, and joined the
hymn, "I will sing a new song unto Thee, O God; upon a harp of ten
strings will I sing praises unto Thee."
The nurses could not understand what sudden inflow of strength and
impulse raised the mummified figure into a sitting posture. The little
grandmother thrust a shrivelled claw into her peaked, shrunken bosom,
and drew out a paper, crumpled and yellow as herself, covered with
strange crabbed hieroglyphics, whose hue had long since faded. She
held it close [486]to her bleared eyes—a beautiful light came into them,
and illumined the million-puckered face. The lips moved faintly; "I am
coming, my lamb," she mumbled. "Courage! The little mother is on the
way. I shall look on thy face. I shall find thee alive."
Typographical errors corrected in text:

Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has been preserved.
Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.
For a complete list, please see the end of this document.
The "Ghetto Tragedies" collected in a little volume in 1893 have been
so submerged in the present collection that I have relegated the
original name to the sub-title. "Satan Mekatrig" was written in 1889,
"Bethulah" this year. Anyone who should wish to measure the progress
or decay of my imagination during the ten years has therefore
materials to hand. "Noah's Ark" stands on the firmer Ararat of
history, my invention being confined to the figure of Peloni (the
Hebrew for "nobody"). The other stories have also a basis in life. But
neither in pathos nor heroic stimulation can they vie with the literal
tragedy with which the whole book is in a sense involved. Mrs. N.S.
Joseph, the great-hearted lady to whom "Ghetto Tragedies" was
inscribed, herself walked in darkness, yet was not dismayed: in the
prime of life she went down into the valley of the shadow, with no
word save of consideration for others. I trust the new stories would
not have been disapproved by my friend, to whose memory they must now,
alas! be dedicated.
I.Z.
October, 1899.
It was not till she had fasted every Monday and Thursday for a
twelvemonth, that Zillah's long yearning for a child was gratified.
She gave birth—O more than fair-dealing God!—to a boy.
Jossel, who had years ago abandoned the hope of an heir to pray for
his soul, was as delighted as he was astonished. His wife had kept him
in ignorance of the fasts by which she was appealing to Heaven; and
when of a Monday or Thursday evening on his return from his boot
factory in Bethnal Green, he had sat down to his dinner in Dalston, no
suspicion had crossed his mind that it was Zillah's breakfast. He
himself was a prosaic person, incapable of imagining such
spontaneities of religion, though he kept every fast which it behoves
an orthodox Jew to endure who makes no speciality of sainthood. There
was a touch of the fantastic in Zillah's character which he had only
appreciated in its manifestation as girlish liveliness, and which
Zillah knew would find no response from him in its religious
expression.
[2]Not that her spiritual innovations were original inventions. From some
pious old crone, after whom (as she could read Hebrew) a cluster of
neighbouring dames repeated what they could catch of the New Year
prayers in the women's synagogue, Zillah had learnt that certain holy
men were accustomed to afflict their souls on Mondays and Thursdays.
From her unsuspecting husband himself she had further elicited that
these days were marked out from the ordinary, even for the man of the
world, by a special prayer dubbed "the long 'He being merciful.'"
Surely on Mondays and Thursdays, then, He would indeed be merciful. To
make sure of His good-will she continued to be unmerciful to herself
long after it became certain that her prayer had been granted.
Both Zillah and Jossel lived in happy ignorance of most things,
especially of their ignorance. The manufacture of boots and all that
appertained thereto, the synagogue and religion, misunderstood
reminiscences of early days in Russia, the doings and misdoings of a
petty social circle, and such particular narrowness with general
muddle as is produced by stumbling through a Sabbath paper and a
Sunday paper: these were the main items in their intellectual
inventory. Separate Zillah from her husband and she became even
poorer, for she could not read at all.
[3]Yet they prospered. The pavements of the East End resounded with their
hob-nailed boots, and even in many a West End drawing-room their
patent-leather shoes creaked. But they themselves had no wish to stand
in such shoes; the dingy perspectives of Dalston villadom limited
their ambition, already sufficiently gratified by migration from
Whitechapel. The profits went to enlarge their factory and to buy
houses, a favourite form of investment in their set. Zillah could cook
fish to perfection, both fried and stewed, and the latter variety both
sweet and sour. Nothing, in fine, had been wanting to their
happiness—save a son, heir, and mourner.
When he came at last, little that religion or superstition could do
for him was left undone. An amulet on the bedpost scared off Lilith,
Adam's first wife, who, perhaps because she missed being the mother of
the human race, hankers after babes and sucklings. The initiation into
the Abrahamic covenant was graced by a pious godfather with pendent
ear-locks, and in the ceremony of the Redemption of the First-Born the
five silver shekels to the priest were supplemented by golden
sovereigns for the poor. Nor, though Zillah spoke the passable English
of her circle, did she fail to rock her Brum's cradle to the old
"Yiddish" nursery-songs:—
Alas, that with all this, Brum should have grown up a weakling, sickly
and anæmic, with a look that in the child of poorer parents would have
said starvation.
Yet through all the vicissitudes of his infantile career, Zillah's
faith in his survival never faltered. He was emphatically a child from
Heaven, and Providence would surely not fly in its own face. Jossel,
not being aware of this, had a burden of perpetual solicitude, which
Zillah often itched to lighten. Only, not having done so at first, she
found it more and more difficult to confess her negotiation with the
celestial powers. She went as near as she dared.
"If the Highest One has sent us a son after so many years," she said
in the "Yiddish" which was [5]still natural to her for intimate domestic
discussion, "He will not take him away again."
"As well say," Jossel replied gloomily, "that because He has sent us
luck and blessing after all these years, He may not take away our
prosperity."
"Hush! don't beshrew the child!" And Zillah spat out carefully. She
was tremulously afraid of words of ill-omen and of the Evil Eye,
against which, she felt vaguely, even Heaven's protection was not
potent. Secretly she became more and more convinced that some woman,
envious of all this "luck and blessing," was withering Brum with her
Evil Eye. And certainly the poor child was peaking and pining away.
"Marasmus," a physician had once murmured, wondering that so well
dressed a child should appear so ill nourished. "Take him to the
seaside often, and feed him well," was the universal cry of the
doctors; and so Zillah often deserted her husband for a kosher
boarding-house at Brighton or Ramsgate, where the food was voluminous,
and where Brum wrote schoolboy verses to the strange, fascinating sea.
For there were compensations in the premature flowering of his
intellect. Even other mothers gradually came round to admitting he was
a prodigy. The black eyes seemed to burn in the white face as they
looked out on the palpitating universe, or devoured every and any
scrap of print! A pity they had so soon to be dulled behind
spectacles. But [6]Zillah found consolation in the thought that the
glasses would go well with the high black waistcoat and white tie of
the British Rabbi. He had been given to her by Heaven, and to Heaven
must be returned. Besides, that might divert it from any more sinister
methods of taking him back.
In his twelfth year Brum began to have more trouble with his eyes, and
renewed his early acquaintance with the drab ante-rooms of eye
hospitals that led, at the long-expected ting-ting of the doctor's
bell, into a delectable chamber of quaint instruments. But it was not
till he was on the point of Bar-Mitzvah (confirmation at thirteen)
that the blow fell. Unwarned explicitly by any physician, Brum went
blind.
"Oh, mother," was his first anguished cry, "I shall never be able to
read again."
The prepared festivities added ironic complications to the horror.
After Brum should have read in the Law from the synagogue platform,
there was to have been a reception at the house. Brum himself had
written out the invitations with conscious grammar. "Present their
compliments to Mr. and Mrs. Solomon and shall be glad to see them"
(not you, as was the fashion of their set). It was after writing out
so many notes in a fine schoolboy hand, that Brum began to be
conscious of thickening blurs and dancing [7]specks and colours. Now
that the blind boy was crouching in hopeless misery by the glowing
fire, where he had so often recklessly pored over books in the
delicious dusk, there was no one handy to write out the countermands.
As yet the wretched parents had kept the catastrophe secret, as though
it reflected on themselves. And by every post the Confirmation
presents came pouring in.
Brum refused even to feel these shining objects. He had hoped to have
a majority of books, but now the preponderance of watches, rings, and
penknives, left him apathetic. To his parents each present brought a
fresh feeling of dishonesty.
"We must let them know," they kept saying. But the tiny difficulty of
writing to so many prevented action.
"Perhaps he'll be all right by Sabbath," Zillah persisted frenziedly.
She clung to the faith that this was but a cloud: for that the glory
of the Confirmation of a future Rabbi could be so dimmed would argue
an incomprehensible Providence. Brum's performance was to be so
splendid—he was to recite not only his own portion of the Law but the
entire Sabbath Sedrah (section).
"He will never be all right," said Jossel, who, in the utter breakdown
of Zillah, had for the first time made the round of the doctors with
Brum. "None of the physicians, not even the most expensive, hold out
any hope. And the dearest of all said the case [8]puzzled him. It was
like the blindness that often breaks out in Russia after the great
fasts, and specially affects delicate children."
"Yes, I remember," said Zillah; "but that was only among the
Christians."
"We have so many Christian customs nowadays," said Jossel grimly; and
he thought of the pestilent heretic in his own synagogue who advocated
that ladies should be added to the choir.
"Then what shall we do about the people?" moaned Zillah, wringing her
hands in temporary discouragement.
"You can advertise in the Jewish papers," came suddenly from the
brooding Brum. He had a flash of pleasure in the thought of composing
something that would be published.
"Yes, then everybody will read it on the Friday," said Jossel eagerly.
Then Brum remembered that he would not be among the readers, and
despair reconquered him. But Zillah was shaking her head.
"Yes, but if we tell people not to come, and then when Brum opens his
eyes on the Sabbath morning, he can see to read the Sedrah—"
"But I don't want to see to read the Sedrah," said the boy
petulantly; "I know it all by heart."
"My blessed boy!" cried Zillah.
"There's nothing wonderful," said the boy; "even if you read the
scroll, there are no vowels nor musical signs."
[9]"But do you feel strong enough to do it all?" said the father
anxiously.
"God will give him strength," put in the mother. "And he will make his
speech, too, won't you, my Brum?"
The blind face kindled. Yes, he would give his learned address. He had
saved his father the expense of hiring one, and had departed in
original rhetorical ways from the conventional methods of expressing
filial gratitude to the parents who had brought him to manhood. And
was this eloquence to remain entombed in his own breast?
His courageous resolution lightened the gloom. His parents opened
parcels they had not had the heart to touch. They brought him his new
suit, they placed the high hat of manhood on his head, and told him
how fine and tall he looked; they wrapped the new silk praying-shawl
round his shoulders.
"Are the stripes blue or black?" he asked.
"Blue—a beautiful blue," said Jossel, striving to steady his voice.
"It feels very nice," said Brum, smoothing the silk wistfully. "Yes, I
can almost feel the blue."
Later on, when his father, a little brightened, had gone off to the
exigent boot factory, Brum even asked to see the presents. The blind
retain these visual phrases.
Zillah described them to him one by one as he [10]handled them. When it
came to the books it dawned on her that she could not tell him the
titles.
"They have such beautiful pictures," she gushed evasively.
The boy burst into tears.
"Yes, but I shall never be able to read them," he sobbed.
"Yes, you will."
"No, I won't."
"Then I'll read them to you," she cried, with sudden resolution.
"But you can't read."
"I can learn."
"But you will be so long. I ought to have taught you myself. And now
it is too late!"
In order to insure perfection, and prevent stage fright, so to speak,
it had been arranged that Brum should rehearse his reading of the
Sedrah on Friday in the synagogue itself, at an hour when it was
free from worshippers. This rehearsal, his mother thought, was now all
the more necessary to screw up Brum's confidence, but the father
argued that as all places were now alike to the blind boy, the
prominence of a public platform and a large staring audience could no
longer unnerve him.
[11]"But he will feel them there!" Zillah protested.
"But since they are not there on the Friday—?"
"All the more reason. Since he cannot see that they are not there,
he can fancy they are there. On Saturday he will be quite used to
them."
But when Jossel, yielding, brought Brum to the synagogue appointment,
the fusty old Beadle who was faithfully in attendance held up his
hands in holy and secular horror at the blasphemy and the blindness
respectively.
"A blind man may not read the Law to the congregation!" he explained.
"No?" said Jossel.
"Why not?" asked Brum sharply.
"Because it stands that the Law shall be read. And a blind man cannot
read. He can only recite."
"But I know every word of it," protested Brum.
The Beadle shook his head. "But suppose you make a mistake! Shall the
congregation hear a word or a syllable that God did not write? It
would be playing into Satan's hands."
"I shall say every word as God wrote it. Give me a trial."
But the fusty Beadle's piety was invincible. He was highly sympathetic
toward the human affliction, but he refused to open the Ark and
produce the Scroll.
"I'll let the Chazan (cantor) know he must read to-morrow, as
usual," he said conclusively.
[12]Jossel went home, sighing, but silenced. Zillah however, was not so
easily subdued. "But my Brum will read it as truly as an angel!" she
cried, pressing the boy's head to her breast. "And suppose he does
make a mistake! Haven't I heard the congregation correct Winkelstein
scores of times?"
"Hush!" said Jossel, "you talk like an Epicurean. Satan makes us all
err at times, but we must not play into his hands. The Din
(judgment) is that only those who see may read the Law to the
congregation."
"Brum will read it much better than that snuffling old Winkelstein."
"Sha! Enough! The Din is the Din!"
"It was never meant to stop my poor Brum from—"
"The Din is the Din. It won't let you dance on its head or chop
wood on its back. Besides, the synagogue refuses, so make an end."
"I will make an end. I'll have Minyan (congregation) here, in our
own house."
"What!" and the poor man stared in amaze. "Always she falls from
heaven with a new idea!"
"Brum shall not be disappointed." And she gave the silent boy a
passionate hug.
"But we have no Scroll of the Law," Brum said, speaking at last, and
to the point.
"Ah, that's you all over, Zillah," cried Jossel, relieved,—"loud
drumming in front and no soldiers behind!"
[13]"We can borrow a Scroll," said Zillah.
Jossel gasped again. "But the iniquity is just the same," he said.
"As if Brum made mistakes!"
"If you were a Rabbi, the congregation would baptize itself!" Jossel
quoted.
Zillah writhed under the proverb. "It isn't as if you went to the
Rabbi; you took the word of the Beadle."
"He is a learned man."
Zillah donned her bonnet and shawl.
"Where are you going?"
"To the minister."
Jossel shrugged his shoulders, but did not stop her.
The minister, one of the new school of Rabbis who preach sermons in
English and dress like Christian clergymen, as befitted the dignity of
Dalston villadom, was taken aback by the ritual problem, so new and so
tragic. His acquaintance with the vast casuistic literature of his
race was of the shallowest. "No doubt the Beadle is right," he
observed profoundly.
"He cannot be right; he doesn't know my Brum."
Worn out by Zillah's persistency, the minister suggested going to the
Beadle's together. Aware of the Beadle's prodigious lore, he had too
much regard for his own position to risk congregational odium by
flying in the face of an exhumable Din.
[14]At the Beadle's, the Din was duly unearthed from worm-eaten folios,
but Zillah remaining unappeased, further searching of these Rabbinic
scriptures revealed a possible compromise.
If the portion the boy recited was read over again by a reader not
blind, so that the first congregational reading did not count, it
might perhaps be permitted.
It would be of course too tedious to treat the whole Sedrah thus,
but if Brum were content to recite his own particular seventh thereof,
he should be summoned to the Rostrum.
So Zillah returned to Jossel, sufficiently triumphant.
"Abraham, the son of Jossel, shall stand."
In obedience to the Cantor's summons, the blind boy, in his high hat
and silken praying-shawl with the blue stripes, rose, and guided by
his father's hand ascended the platform, amid the emotion of the
synagogue. His brave boyish treble, pursuing its faultless way,
thrilled the listeners to tears, and inflamed Zillah's breast, as she
craned down from the gallery, with the mad hope that the miracle had
happened, after all.
The house-gathering afterward savoured of the grewsome conviviality of
a funeral assemblage. But the praises of Brum, especially after his
great speech, were sung more honestly than those of the buried; than
whom the white-faced dull-eyed boy, cut off from [15]the gaily coloured
spectacle in the sunlit room, was a more tragic figure.
But Zillah, in her fineries and forced smiles, offered the most tragic
image of all. Every congratulation was a rose-wreathed dagger, every
eulogy of Brum's eloquence a reminder of the Rabbi God had thrown away
in him.
Amid the endless babble of suggestions made to her for Brum's cure,
one—repeated several times by different persons—hooked itself to her
distracted brain. Germany! There was a great eye-doctor in Germany,
who could do anything and everything. Yes, she would go to Germany.
This resolution, at which Jossel shrugged his shoulders in despairing
scepticism, was received with rapture by Brum. How he had longed to
see foreign countries, to pass over that shining sea which whispered
and beckoned so, at Brighton and Ramsgate! He almost forgot he would
not see Germany, unless the eye-doctor were a miracle-monger indeed.
But he was doomed to a double disappointment; for instead of his going
to Germany, Germany came to him, so to speak, in the shape of the
specialist's annual visit to London; and the great man had nothing
soothing to say, only a compassionate head to shake, with ominous
warnings to make the best of a bad job and fatten up the poor boy.
[16]Nor did Zillah's attempts to read take her out of the infant primers,
despite long hours of knitted brow and puckered lips, and laborious
triumphs over the childish sentences, by patient addition of syllable
to syllable. She also tried to write, but got no further than her own
name, imitated from the envelopes.
To occupy Brum's days, Jossel, gaining enlightenment in the ways of
darkness, procured Braille books. But the boy had read most of the
stock works thus printed for the blind, and his impatient brain
fretted at the tardiness of finger-reading. Jossel's one consolation
was that the boy would not have to earn his living. The thought,
however, of how his blind heir would be cheated by agents and
rent-collectors was a touch of bitter even in this solitary sweet.
It was the Sabbath Fire-Woman who, appropriately enough, kindled the
next glimmer of hope in Zillah's bosom. The one maid-of-all-work, who
had supplied all the help and grandeur Zillah needed in her
establishment, having transferred her services to a husband, Zillah
was left searching for an angel at thirteen pounds a year. In the
interim the old Irishwoman who made a few pence a week by attending to
the Sabbath fires of the poor Jews of the neighbourhood, became
necessary on Friday nights and Saturdays, to save the household from
cold or sin.
[17]"Och, the quare little brat!" she muttered, when she first came upon
the pale, gnome-like figure by the fender, tapping the big book, for
all the world like the Leprechaun cobbling.
"And can't he see at all, at all?" she asked Zillah confidentially one
Sabbath, when the boy was out of the room.
Zillah shook her head, unable to speak.
"Nebbich!" compassionately sighed the Fire-Woman, who had corrupted
her native brogue with "Yiddish." "And wud he be borrun dark?"
"No, it came only a few months ago," faltered Zillah.
The Fire-Woman crossed herself.
"Sure, and who'll have been puttin' the Evil Oi on him?" she asked.
Zillah's face was convulsed.
"I always said so!" she cried; "I always said so!"
"The divil burrun thim all!" cried the Fire-Woman, poking the coals
viciously.
"Yes, but I don't know who it is. They envied me my beautiful child,
my lamb, my only one. And nothing can be done." She burst into tears.
"Nothin' is a harrd wurrd! If he was my bhoy, the darlint, I'd cure
him, aisy enough, so I wud."
Zillah's sobs ceased. "How?" she asked, her eyes gleaming strangely.
"I'd take him to the Pope, av course."
[18]"The Pope!" repeated Zillah vaguely.
"Ay, the Holy Father! The ownly man in this wurruld that can take away
the Evil Oi."
Zillah gasped. "Do you mean the Pope of Rome?"
She knew the phrase somehow, but what it connoted was very shadowy and
sinister: some strange, mighty chief of hostile heathendom.
"Who else wud I be manin'? The Holy Mother I'd be for prayin' to
meself; but as ye're a Jewess, I dursn't tell ye to do that. But the
Pope, he's a gintleman, an' so he is, an' sorra a bit he'll moind that
ye don't go to mass, whin he shpies that poor, weeshy, pale shrimp o'
yours. He'll just wave his hand, shpake a wurrd, an' whisht! in the
twinklin' of a bedposht ye'll be praisin' the Holy Mother."
Zillah's brain was whirling. "Go to Rome!" she said.
The Fire-Woman poised the poker.
"Well, ye can't expect the Pope to come to Dalston!"
"No, no; I don't mean that," said Zillah, in hasty apology. "Only it's
so far off, and I shouldn't know how to go."
"It's not so far off as Ameriky, an' it's two broths of bhoys I've got
there."
"Isn't it?" asked Zillah.
"No, Lord love ye: an' sure gold carries ye anywhere nowadays, ixcept
to Heaven."
[19]"But if I got to Rome, would the Pope see the child?"
"As sartin as the child wud see him," the Fire-Woman replied
emphatically.
"He can do miracles, then?" inquired Zillah.
"What else wud he be for? Not that 'tis much of a miracle to take away
the Evil Oi, bad scran to the witch!"
"Then perhaps our Rabbi can do it, too?" cried Zillah, with a sudden
hope.
The Fire-Woman shook her head. "Did ye ever hear he could?"
"No," admitted Zillah.
"Thrue for you, mum. Divil a wurrd wud I say aginst your
Priesht—wan's as good as another, maybe, for ivery-day use; but whin
it comes to throuble and heart-scaldin', I pity the poor craythurs who
can't put up a candle to the blessed saints—an' so I do. Niver a bhoy
o' mine has crassed the ocean without the Virgin havin' her candle."
"And did they arrive safe?"
"They did so; ivery mother's son av 'em."
The more the distracted mother pondered over this sensational
suggestion, the more it tugged at her. Science and Judaism had failed
her: perhaps this unknown power, this heathen Pope, had indeed
[20]mastery over things diabolical. Perhaps the strange religion he
professed had verily a saving efficacy denied to her own. Why should
she not go to Rome?
True, the journey loomed before her as fearfully as a Polar Expedition
to an ordinary mortal. Germany she had been prepared to set out for:
it lay on the great route of Jewish migration westwards. But Rome? She
did not even know where it was. But her new skill in reading would,
she felt, help her through the perils. She would be able to make out
the names of the railway stations, if the train waited long enough.
But with the cunning of the distracted she did not betray her
heretical ferment.
"P—o—p—e, Pope," she spelt out of her infants' primer in Brum's
hearing. "Pope? What's that, Brum?"
"Oh, haven't you ever heard of the Pope, mother?"
"No," said Zillah, crimsoning in conscious invisibility.
"He's a sort of Chief Rabbi of the Roman Catholics. He wears a tiara.
Kings and emperors used to tremble before him."
"And don't they now?" she asked apprehensively.
"No; that was in the Middle Ages—hundreds of years ago. He only had
power over the Dark Ages."
[21]"Over the Dark Ages?" repeated Zillah, with a fresh, vague hope.
"When all the world was sunk in superstition and ignorance, mother.
Then everybody believed in him."
Zillah felt chilled and rebuked. "Then he no longer works miracles?"
she said faintly.
Brum laughed. "Oh, I daresay he works as many miracles as ever. Of
course thousands of pilgrims still go to kiss his toe. I meant his
temporal power is gone—that is, his earthly power. He doesn't rule
over any countries; all he possesses is the Vatican, but that is full
of the greatest pictures by Michael Angelo and Raphael."
Zillah gazed open-mouthed at the prodigy she had brought into the
world.
"Raphael—that sounds Jewish," she murmured. She longed to ask in what
country Rome was, but feared to betray herself.
Brum laughed again. "Raphael Jewish! Why—so it is! It's a Hebrew word
meaning 'God's healing.'"
"God's healing!" repeated Zillah, awestruck.
Her mind was made up.
"Knowest thou what, Jossel?" she said in "Yiddish," as they sat by the
Friday-night fireside when [22]Brum had been put to bed. "I have heard of
a new doctor, better than all the others!" After all it was the
doctor, the healer, the exorcist of the Evil Eye, that she was seeking
in the Pope, not the Rabbi of an alien religion.
Jossel shook his head. "You will only throw more money away."
"Better than throwing hope away."
"Well, who is it now?"
"He lives far away."
"In Germany again?"
"No, in Rome."
"In Rome? Why, that's at the end of the world—in Italy!"
"I know it's in Italy!" said Zillah, rejoiced at the information. "But
what then? If organ-grinders can travel the distance, why can't I?"
"But you can't speak Italian!"
"And they can't speak English!"
"Madness! Work, but not wisdom! I could not trust you alone in such a
strange country, and the season is too busy for me to leave the
factory."
"I don't need you with me," she said, vastly relieved. "Brum will be
with me."
He stared at her. "Brum!"
"Brum knows everything. Believe me, Jossel, in two days he will speak
Italian."
"Let be! Let be! Let me rest!"
"And on the way back he will be able to see! He [23]will show me
everything, and Mr. Raphael's pictures. 'God's healing,'" she murmured
to herself.
"But you'd be away for Passover! Enough!"
"No, we shall be easily back by Passover."
"O these women! The Almighty could not have rested on the seventh day
if he had not left woman still uncreated."
"You don't care whether Brum lives or dies!" Zillah burst into sobs.
"It is just because I do that I ask how are you going to live on the
journey? And there are no kosher hotels in Italy."
"We shall manage on eggs and fish. God will forgive us if the hotel
plates are unclean."
"But you won't be properly nourished without meat."
"Nonsense; when we were poor we had to do without it." To herself
she thought, "If he only knew I did without food altogether on Mondays
and Thursdays!"
And so Brum passed at last over the shining, wonderful sea, feeling
only the wind on his forehead and the salt in his nostrils. It was a
beautiful day at the dawn of spring; the far-stretching sea sparkled
with molten diamonds, and Zillah felt that the highest God's blessing
rested like a blue sky over this strange pilgrimage. She was dressed
with great taste, and [24]few would have divined the ignorance under her
silks.
"Mother, can you see France yet?" Brum asked very soon.
"No, my lamb."
"Mother, can you see France yet?" he persisted later.
"I see white cliffs," she said at last.
"Ah! that's only the white cliffs of Old England. Look the other way."
"I am looking the other way. I see white cliffs coming to meet us."
"Has France got white cliffs, too?" cried Brum, disappointed.
On the journey to Paris he wearied her to describe France. In vain she
tried: her untrained vision and poor vocabulary could give him no new
elements to weave into a mental picture. There were trees and
sometimes houses and churches. And again trees. What kind of trees?
Green! Brum was in despair. France was, then, only like England; white
cliffs without, trees and houses within. He demanded the Seine at
least.
"Yes, I see a great water," his mother admitted at last.
"That's it! It rises in the Côte d'Or, flows N.N.W. then W., and N.W.
into the English Channel. It is more than twice as long as the Thames.
Perhaps you'll see the tributaries flowing [25]into it—the little
rivers, the Oise, the Marne, the Yonne."
"No wonder the angels envy me him!" thought Zillah proudly.
They halted at Paris, putting up for the night, by the advice of a
friendly fellow-traveller, at a hotel by the Gare de Lyon, where, to
Zillah's joy and amazement, everybody spoke English to her and
accepted her English gold—a pleasant experience which was destined to
be renewed at each stage, and which increased her hope of a happy
issue.
"How loud Paris sounds!" said Brum, as they drove across it. He had to
construct it from its noises, for in answer to his feverish
interrogations his mother could only explain that some streets were
lined with trees and some foolish unrespectable people sat out in the
cold air, drinking at little tables.
"Oh, how jolly!" said Brum. "But can't you see Notre Dame?"
"What's that?"
"A splendid cathedral, mother—very old. Do look for two towers. We
must go there the first thing to-morrow."
"The first thing to-morrow we take the train. The quicker we get to
the doctor, the better."
"Oh, but we can't leave Paris without seeing Notre Dame, and the
gargoyles, and perhaps Quasimodo, and all that Victor Hugo describes.
I wonder [26]if we shall see a devil-fish in Italy," he added
irrelevantly.
"You'll see the devil if you go to such places," said Zillah, who,
besides shirking the labor of description, was anxious not to provoke
unnecessarily the God of Israel.
"But I've often been to St. Paul's with the boys," said Brum.
"Have you?" She was vaguely alarmed.
"Yes, it's lovely—the stained windows and the organ. Yes, and the
Abbey's glorious, too; it almost makes me cry. I always liked to hear
the music with my eyes shut," he added, with forced cheeriness, "and
now that'll be all right."
"But your father wouldn't like it," said Zillah feebly.
"Father wouldn't like me to read the Pilgrim's Progress," retorted
Brum. "He doesn't understand these things. There's no harm in our
going to Notre Dame."
"No, no; it'll be much better to save all these places for the way
back, when you'll be able to see for yourself."
Too late it struck her she had missed an opportunity of breaking to
Brum the real object of the expedition.
"But the Seine, anyhow!" he persisted. "We can go there to-night."
"But what can you see at night?" cried Zillah, unthinkingly.
[27]"Oh, mother! how beautiful it used to be to look over London Bridge at
night when we came back from the Crystal Palace!"
In the end Zillah accepted the compromise, and after their dinner of
fish and vegetables—for which Brum had scant appetite—they were
confided by the hotel porter to a bulbous-nosed cabman, who had
instructions to restore them to the hotel. Zillah thought wistfully of
her warm parlour in Dalston, with the firelight reflected in the glass
cases of the wax flowers.
The cab stopped on a quay.
"Well?" said Brum breathlessly.
"Little fool!" said Zillah good-humouredly. "There is nothing but
water—the same water as in London."
"But there are lights, aren't there?"
"Yes, there are lights," she admitted cheerfully.
"Where is the moon?"
"Where she always is—in the sky."
"Doesn't she make a silver path on the water?" he said, with a sob in
his voice.
"What are you crying at? The mother didn't mean to make you cry."
She strained him contritely to her bosom, and kissed away his tears.
The train for Switzerland started so early that Brum had no time to
say his morning prayers; so, the carriage being to themselves, he
donned his phylacteries and his praying-shawl with the blue stripes.
Zillah sat listening to the hour-long recitative with admiration of
his memory.
Early in the hour she interrupted him to say: "How lucky I haven't to
say all that! I should get tired."
"That's curious!" replied Brum. "I was just saying, 'Blessed art Thou,
O Lord our God, who hath not made me a woman.' But a woman has to
pray, too, mother. Else why is there given a special form for the
women to substitute?—'Who hath made me according to His will.'"
"Ah, that's only for learned women. Only learned women pray."
"Well, you'd like to pray the Benediction that comes next, mother, I
know. Say it with me—do."
She repeated the Hebrew obediently, then asked: "What does it mean?"
"'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, who openest the eyes of the
blind.'"
"Oh, my poor Brum! Teach it me! Say the Hebrew again."
She repeated it till she could say it unprompted. And then throughout
the journey her lips moved [29]with it at odd times. It became a
talisman—a compromise with the God who had failed her.
"Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, who openest the eyes of the blind."
Mountains were the great sensation of the passage through Switzerland.
Brum had never seen a mountain, and the thought of being among the
highest mountains in Europe was thrilling. Even Zillah's eyes could
scarcely miss the mountains. She painted them in broad strokes. But
they did not at all correspond to Brum's expectations of the Alps.
"Don't you see glaciers?" he asked anxiously.
"No," replied Zillah, but kept a sharp eye on the windows of passing
chalets till the boy discovered that she was looking for glaziers at
work.
"Great masses of ice," he explained, "sliding down very slowly, and
glittering like the bergs in the Polar regions."
"No, I see none," she said, blushing.
"Ah! wait till we come to Mont Blanc."
Mont Blanc was an obsession; his geography was not minute enough to
know that the route did not pass within sight of it. He had expected
it to dominate Switzerland as a cathedral spire dominates a little
town.
[30]"Mont Blanc is 15,784 feet above the sea," he said voluptuously.
"Eternal snow is on its top, but you will not see that, because it is
above the clouds."
"It is, then, in Heaven," said Zillah.
"God is there," replied Brum gravely, and burst out with Coleridge's
lines from his school-book:—
"Who openest the eyes of the blind," murmured Zillah.
"There are five torrents rushing down, also," added Brum. "'And you,
ye five wild torrents fiercely glad.' You'll recognize Mont Blanc by
that. Don't you see them yet, mother?"
"Wait, I think I see them coming."
Presently she announced Mont Blanc definitely; described it with
glaciers and torrents and its top reaching to God.
Brum's face shone.
"Poor lamb! I may as well give him Mont Blanc," she thought tenderly.
Endless other quaint dialogues passed between mother and son on that
tedious and harassing journey southwards.
[31]"There'll be no more snow when we get to Italy," Brum explained.
"Italy's the land of beauty—always sunshine and blue sky. It's the
country of the old Gods—Venus, the goddess of beauty; Juno, with her
peacocks; Jupiter, with his thunderbolts, and lots of others."
"But I thought the Pope was a Christian," said Zillah.
"So he is. It was long ago, before people believed in Christianity."
"But then they were all Jews."
"Oh no, mother. There were Pagan gods that people used to believe in
at Rome and in Greece. In Greece, though, these gods changed their
names."
"So!" said Zillah scornfully; "I suppose they wanted to have a fresh
chance. And what's become of them now?"
"They weren't ever there, not really."
"And yet people believed in them? Is it possible?" Zillah clucked her
tongue with contemptuous surprise. Then she murmured mechanically,
"'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, who openest the eyes of the
blind.'"
"Well, and what do people believe in now? The Pope!" Brum reminded
her. "And yet he's not true."
Zillah's heart sank. "But he's really there," she protested feebly.
"Oh yes, he's there, because pilgrims come from all parts of the world
to get his blessing."
[32]Her hopes revived.
"But they wouldn't come unless he really did them good."
"Well, if you argue like that, mother, you might as well say we ought
to believe in Christ."
"Hush! hush!" The forbidden word jarred on Zillah. She felt chilled
and silenced. She had to call up the image of the Irish Fire-Woman to
restore herself to confidence. It was clear Brum must not be told; his
unfaith might spoil all. No, the deception must be kept up till his
eyes were opened—in more than one sense.
After Mont Blanc, Brum's great interest was the leaning tower of Pisa.
"It is one of the wonders of the world," he said; "there are seven
altogether."
"Yes, it is a wonderful world," said Zillah; "I never thought about it
before."
And in truth Italy was beginning to touch sleeping chords. The
cypresses, the sunset on the mountains, the white towns dozing on the
hills under the magical blue sky,—all these broad manifestations of
an obvious beauty, under the spur of Brum's incessant interrogatory,
began to penetrate. Nature in unusual combinations spoke to her as its
habitual phenomena had never done. Her replies to Brum did rough
justice to Italy.
[33]Florence recalled "Romola" to the boy. He told his mother about
Savonarola. "He was burnt!"
"What!" cried Zillah. "Burn a Christian! No wonder, then, they burnt
Jews. But why?"
"He wanted the people to be good. All good people suffer."
"Oh, nonsense, Brum! It is the bad who suffer."
Then she looked at his wasted, white face, grown thinner with the
weariness of the long journey through perpetual night, and wonder at
her own words struck her silent.
They arrived at last in the Eternal City, having taken a final run of
many hours without a break. But the Pope was still to seek.
Leaving the exhausted Brum in bed, Zillah drove the first morning to
the Vatican, where Brum said he lived, and asked to see him.
A glittering Swiss Guard stared blankly at her, and directed her by
dumb show to follow the stream of people—the pilgrims, Zillah told
herself. She was made to scrawl her name, and, thanking God that she
had acquired that accomplishment, she went softly up a gorgeous flight
of steps, and past awe-inspiring creatures in tufted helmets, into the
Sistine Chapel, where she wondered at people staring ceilingwards
through opera-glasses, or looking [34]downwards into little mirrors.
Zillah also stared up through the gloom till she had a crick in the
neck, but saw no sign of the Pope. She inquired of the janitor whether
he was the Pope, and realized that English was, after all, not the
universal language. She returned gloomily to see after Brum, and to
consider her plan of campaign.
"The great doctor was not at home," she said. "We must wait a little."
"And yet you made us hurry so through everything," grumbled Brum.
Brum remained in bed while Zillah went to get some lunch in the
dining-room. A richly dressed old lady who sat near her noticed that
she was eating Lenten fare, like herself, and, assuming her a
fellow-Catholic, spoke to her, in foreign-sounding English, about the
blind boy whose arrival she had observed.
Zillah asked her how one could get to see the Pope, and the old lady
told her it was very difficult.
"Ah, those blessed old times before 1870!—ah, the splendid ceremonies
in St. Peter's! Do you remember them?"
Zillah shook her head. The old lady's assumption of spiritual
fellowship made her uneasy.
But St. Peter's stuck in her mind. Brum had already told her it was
the Pope's house of prayer. Clearly, therefore, it was only necessary
to loiter about there with Brum to chance upon him and extort his
compassionate withdrawal of the spell of [35]the Evil Eye. With a
culminating inspiration she bought a photograph of the Pope, and
overcoming the first shock of hereditary repulsion at the sight of the
large pendent crucifix at his breast, she studied carefully the
Pontiff's face and the Papal robes.
Then, when Brum declared himself strong enough to get up, they drove
to St. Peter's, the instruction being given quietly to the driver so
that Brum should not overhear it.
It was the first time Zillah had ever been in a cathedral; and the
vastness and glory of it swept over her almost as a reassuring sense
of a greater God than she had worshipped in dingy synagogues. She
walked about solemnly, leading Brum by the hand, her breast swelling
with suppressed sobs of hope. Her eyes roved everywhere, searching for
the Pope; but at moments she well-nigh forgot her disappointment at
his absence in the wonder and ghostly comfort of the great dim spaces,
and the mysterious twinkle of the countless lights before the bronze
canopy with its golden-flashing columns.
"Where are we, mother?" said Brum at last.
"We are waiting for the doctor."
"But where?"
"In the waiting-room."
"It seems very large, mother."
"No, I am walking round and round."
"There is a strange smell, mother,—I don't know what—something
religious."
[36]"Oh, nonsense!" She laughed uneasily.
"I know what it smells like: cold marble pillars and warm coloured
windows."
Her blood froze at such uncanny sensibility.
"It is the smell of the medicines," she murmured. Somehow his
divination made it more difficult to confess to him.
"It feels like being in St. Paul's or the Abbey," he persisted, "when
I used to shut my eyes to hear the organ better." He had scarcely
ceased speaking, when a soft, slow music began to thrill with life the
great stone spaces.
Brum's grasp tightened convulsively: a light leapt into the blind
face. Both came to a standstill, silent. In Zillah's breast rapture
made confusion more confounded; and as this pealing grandeur, swelling
more passionately, uplifted her high as the mighty Dome, she forgot
everything—even the need of explanation to Brum—in this wonderful
sense of a Power that could heal, and her Hebrew benediction flowed
out into sobbing speech:—
"'Blessed art Thou, O Lord our God, who openest the eyes of the
blind.'"
But Brum had fainted, and hung heavy on her arm.
When Brum awoke, in bed again, after his long fainting-fit, he related
with surprise his vivid dream [37]of St. Paul's, and Zillah weakly
acquiesced in the new deception, especially as the doctor warned her
against exciting the boy. But her hopes were brighter than ever; for
the old lady had beneficently appeared from behind a pillar in St.
Peter's to offer eau de Cologne for the unconscious Brum, and had
then, interesting herself in the couple, promised to procure for her
fellow-Catholics admission to the next Papal reception. Being a very
rich and fashionable old lady, she kept her word; but unfortunately,
when the day came round, Brum was terribly low and forbidden to leave
his bed.
Zillah was distracted. If she should miss the great chance after all!
It might never recur again.
"Brum," she said at last, "this is the only day for a long time that
the great eye-doctor receives patients. Do you think you could go, my
lamb?"
"Why won't he come here—like the other doctors?"
"He is too great."
"Well, I daresay I can manage. It's miserable lying in bed. Fancy
coming to Rome and seeing nothing!"
With infinite care Brum was dressed and wrapped up, and placed in a
specially comfortable brougham; and thus at last mother and son stood
waiting in one of the ante-chambers of the Vatican, amid twenty other
pilgrims whispering in strange languages. Zillah was radiantly
assured: the mighty Power, whatever it was, that spoke in music and in
mountains, [38]would never permit such weary journeyings and waitings to
end in the old darkness; the malice of witches could not prevail
against this great spirit of sunshine. For Brum, too, the long
pilgrimage had enveloped the doctor with a miraculous glamour as of an
eighth wonder of the world.
Drooping wearily on his mother's arm, but wrought up to joyous
anticipation, Brum had an undoubting sense of the patient crowd around
him waiting, as in his old hospital days, for admission to the
doctor's sanctum. His ear was strung for the ting-ting of the bell
summoning the sufferers one by one.
At last a wave of awe swept over the little fashionable gathering, and
set Zillah's heart thumping and the room fading in mist, through which
the tall, venerable, robed figure, the eagle features softened in
benediction, gleamed like a god's. Then she found herself on her
knees, with Brum at her side, and the wonderful figure passing between
two rows of reverent pilgrims.
"Why must I kneel, mother?" murmured Brum feebly.
"Hush! hush!" she whispered. "The great doc—" she hesitated in awe of
the venerable figure—"the great healer is here."
"The great healer!" breathed Brum. His face was transfigured with
ecstatic forevision. "'Who openeth the eyes of the blind,'" he
murmured, as he fell forward in death.
The day came when old Daniel Peyser could no longer withstand his
wife's desire for a wider social sphere and a horizon blacker with
advancing bachelors. For there were seven daughters, and not a man to
the pack. Indeed, there had been only one marriage in the whole
Portsmouth congregation during the last five years, and the Christian
papers had had reports of the novel ceremony, with the ritual bathing
of the bride and the breaking of the glass under the bridegroom's
heel. To Mrs. Peyser, brought up amid the facile pairing of the
Russian pale, this congestion of celibacy approached immorality.
Portsmouth with its careless soldiers and sailors might be an
excellent town for pawnbroking, especially when one was not too
punctiliously acceptant of the ethics of the heathen, but as a market
for maidens—even with dowries and pretty faces—it was hopeless. But
it was not wholly as an emporium for bachelors that London appealed.
It was the natural goal of the provincial Jew, the reward of his
[42]industry. The best people had all drifted to the mighty magic city,
whose fascination survived even cheap excursions to it.
Would father deny that they had now made enough to warrant the
migration? No, father would not deny it. Ever since he had left
Germany as a boy he had been saving money, and his surplus he had
shrewdly invested in the neighbouring soil of Southsea, fast growing
into a watering-place. Even allowing three thousand pounds for each
daughter's dowry, he would still have a goodly estate.
Was there any social reason why they should not cut as great a dash as
the Benjamins or the Rosenweilers? No, father would not deny that his
girls were prettier and more polished than the daughters of these
pioneers, especially when six of them crowded around the stern granite
figure, arguing, imploring, cajoling, kissing.
"But I don't see why we should waste the money," he urged, with the
cautious instincts of early poverty.
"Waste!" and the pretty lips made reproachful "Oh's!"
"Yes, waste!" he retorted. "In India one treads on diamonds and gold,
but in London the land one treads on costs diamonds and gold."
"But are we never to have a grandson?" cried Mrs. Peyser.
The Indian item was left unquestioned, so that little Schnapsie, whose
childish imagination was [43]greatly impressed by these eventful family
debates, had for years a vivid picture of picking her way with bare
feet over sharp-pointed diamonds and pebbly gold. Indeed, long after
she had learned to wonder at her father's naïve geography the word
"India" always shone for her with barbaric splendour.
Environed by so much persistent femininity, the rugged elderly toiler
was at last nagged into accepting a leisured life in London.
And so the family spread its wings joyfully and migrated to the
wonder-town. Only its head and tail—old Daniel and little
Schnapsie—felt the least sentiment for the things left behind. Old
Daniel left the dingy synagogue to whose presidency he had mounted
with the fattening of his purse, and in which he bought for himself,
or those he delighted to honour, the choicest privileges of
ark-opening or scroll-bearing; left the cronies who dropped in to play
"Klabberjagd" on Sunday afternoons; left the bustling lucrative
Saturday nights in the shop when the heathen housewives came to redeem
their Sabbath finery.
And little Schnapsie—who was only eleven, and not keen about
husbands—left the twinkling tarry harbour, with its heroic hulks and
modern men-of-war amid which the half-penny steamer plied; left the
[44]great waves that smashed on the pebbly beach, and the friendly moon
that threw shimmering paths across their tranquillity; left the narrow
lively streets in which she had played, and the school in which she
had always headed her class, and the salt wind that blew over all.
Little Schnapsie was only Schnapsie to her father. Her real name was
Florence. The four younger girls all bore pagan names—Sylvia, Lily,
Daisy, Florence—symbolic of the influence upon the family councils of
the three elder girls, grown to years of discretion and disgust with
their own Leah, Rachael, and Rebecca. Between these two strata of
girls—Jewish and pagan—two boys had intervened, but their stay was
brief and pitiful, so that all this plethora of progeny had not
provided the father with a male mourner to say the Kaddish. But it
seemed likely a grandson would not long be a-wanting, for the eldest
girl was twenty-five, and all were good-looking. As if in irony, the
Jewish group was blond, almost Christian, in colouring (for they took
after the Teuton father), while the pagan group had characteristically
Oriental traits. In little Schnapsie these Eastern charms—a whit
heavy in her sisters—were repeated in a key of exquisite refinement.
The thick black eyebrows and hair were soft as silk, dark dreamy eyes
suffused her oval face with poetry, and her skin was like dead ivory
flushing into life.
The first year at Highbury, that genteel suburb in the north of
London, was an enchanted ecstasy for the mother and the Jewish group
of girls, taken at once to the bosom of a great German clan, and
admitted to a new world of dances and dinners, of "at homes" and
theatres and card parties. The eldest of the pagan group,
Sylvia—tyrannically kept young in the interests of her sisters—was
the only one who grumbled at the change, for Lily and Daisy found
sufficient gain in the prospect of replacing the elder group when it
should have passed away in an odour of orange blossom. The scent of
that was always in the air, and Mrs. Peyser and her three hopefuls
sniffed it night and day.
"No, no; Rebecca shall have him."
"Not me! I am not going to marry a man with carroty hair. Leah's the
eldest; it's her turn first."
"Thank you, my dear. Don't give away what you haven't got."
Every new young man who showed the faintest signs of liking to drop
in, provoked a similar semi-facetious but also semi-serious
canvassing—his person, his income, and the girl to whom he should be
allotted supplying the sauce of every meal at which he—or his
fellow—was not present.
Thus, whether in the flesh or the spirit, the Young Man—for so many
of him appeared on the scene [46]that he hovered in the air rather as a
type than an individual—was a permanent guest at the Peyser table.
But all this new domestic excitement did not compensate little
Schnapsie for her moonlit waters and the strange ships that came and
went with their cargo of mystery.
And poor old Daniel found no cronies to appeal to him like the old,
nothing in the roar of London to compensate for the Saturday night
bustle of the pawn-shop, no dingy little synagogue desirous of his
presidential pomp. He sat inconspicuously in a handsome half-empty
edifice, and knew himself a superfluous atom in a vast lonely
wilderness.
He was not, indeed, an imposing figure, with his ragged graying
whiskers and his boyish blue eyes. In the street he had the stoop and
shuffle of the Ghetto, and forgot to hide his coarse red hands with
gloves; in the house he persisted in wearing a pious skull-cap. At
first his more adaptable wife and his English-bred daughters tried to
fit him for decent society, and to make him feel at home during their
"at homes." But he was soon relegated to the background of these
brilliant social tableaux; for he was either too silent or too
talkative, with old-fashioned Jewish jokes which disconcerted the
smart young men, and with Hebrew quotations which they could not even
understand. And sometimes there thrilled through the small-talk the
trumpet-note of [47]his nose, as he blew it into a coloured handkerchief.
Gradually he was eliminated from the drawing-room altogether.
But for some years longer he reigned supreme in the dining-room—when
there was no company. Old habit kept the girls at table when he
intoned with noisy unction the Hebrew grace after meals; they even
joined in the melodious morceaux that diversified the plain-chant. But
little by little their contributions dwindled to silence. And when
they had smart company to dinner, the old man himself was hushed by
rows of blond and bugle eyebrows; especially after he had once or
twice put young men to shame by offering them the honour of reciting
the grace they did not know.
Daniel's prayer on such occasions was at length reduced to a pious
mumbling, which went unobserved amid the joyous clatter of dessert,
even as his pious skull-cap passed as a preventive against cold.
Last stage of all, the mumbling of his company manners passed over
into the domestic circle; and this humble whispering to God became
symbolic of his suppression.
"I don't think he means Rachael at all."
"Oh, how can you say so, Leah? It was me he took down to supper."
[48]"Nonsense! it isn't either of you he's after; that's only his
politeness to my sisters. Didn't he say the bouquet was for me?"
"Don't be silly, Rebecca. You know you can't have him. The eldest must
take precedence."
This changed tone indicated their humbler attitude toward the Young
Man as the years went by. For the first young man did not propose,
either to the sisterhood en bloc or to a particular sister. And his
example was followed by his successors. In fact, a procession of young
men passed and repassed through the house, or danced with the girls at
balls, without a single application for any of these many hands. And
the first season passed into the second, and the second into the
third, with tantalizing mirages of marriage. Balls, dances, dinners, a
universe of nebulous matrimonial matter on the whirl, but never the
shot-off star of an engagement! Mrs. Peyser's hair began to whiten
faster. She even surreptitiously called in the Shadchan, or rather
surrendered to his solicitations.
"Pooh! Not find any one suitable?" he declared, rubbing his hands. "I
have hundreds of young men on my books, just your sort, real
gentlemen."
At first the girls refused to consider applications from such a
source. It was not done in their set, they said.
Mrs. Peyser snorted sceptically. "Oh, indeed! and pray how did those
Rosenweiler girls find husbands?"
[49]"Oh, yes, the Rosenweilers!" They shrugged their shoulders; they knew
they had not that disadvantage of hideousness.
Nevertheless they lent an ear to the agent's suggestions as filtered
through the mother, though under pretence of deriding them.
But the day came when even that pretence was dropped, and with broken
spirit they waited eagerly for each new possibility. And with the
passing of the years the Young Man aged. He grew balder, less
gentlemanly, poorer.
Once indeed, he turned up as a handsome and wealthy Christian, but
this time it was he that was rejected in a unanimous sisterly shudder.
Five slow years wore by, then of a sudden the luck changed. A
water-proof manufacturer on the sunny side of forty appeared, the long
glacial epoch was broken up, and the first orange blossom ripened for
the Peyser household.
It was Rebecca, the youngest of the Jewish group, who proved the
pioneer to the canopy, but her marriage gave a new lease of youth even
to the oldest. And miraculously, mysteriously, within a few months two
other girls flew off Mrs. Peyser's shoulders—a Jewish and a
pagan—though Sylvia was not yet formally "out."
And though Leah, the first born, still remained unchosen, yet Sylvia's
marriage to a Bayswater household had raised the family status, and
provided [50]a better field for operations. The Shadchan was frozen off.
But he returned. For despite all these auguries and auspices another
arctic winter set in. No orange blossoms, only desolate lichens of
fruitless flirtation.
Gradually the pagan group pushed its way into unconcealable womanhood.
The problem darkened all the horizon. The Young Man grew middle-aged
again. He lost all his money; he wanted old Daniel to set him up in
business. Even this seemed better than a barren fine ladyhood, and
Leah might have even harked back to the parental pawn-shop had not
another sudden epidemic of felicity married off all save little
Schnapsie within eighteen months. Mrs. Peyser was knocked breathless
by all these shocks. First a rich German banker, then a prosperous
solicitor (for Leah), then a Cape financier—any one in himself catch
enough to "gouge out the eyes" of the neighbours.
"I told you so," she said, her portly bosom swelling portlier with
exultation as the sixth bride was whirled off in a rice shower from
the Highbury villa, while the other five sat around in radiant
matronhood. "I told you to come to London."
Daniel pressed her hand in gratitude for all the happiness she had
given herself and the girls.
"If it were not for Florence," she went on wistfully.
"Ah, little Schnapsie!" sighed Daniel. Somehow he felt he would have
preferred her hymeneal felicity [51]to all these marvellous marriages.
For there had grown up a strange sympathy between the poor lonely old
man, now nearly seventy, and his little girl, now twenty-four. They
never conversed except about commonplaces, but somehow he felt that
her presence warmed the air. And she—she divined his solitude, albeit
dimly; had an intuition of what life had been for him in the days
before she was born: the long days behind the counter, the risings in
the gray dawn to chant orisons and don phylacteries ere the pawn-shop
opened, the lengthy prayer and the swift supper when the shutters were
at last put up—all the bare rock on which this floriage of prosperity
had been sown. And long after the others had dropped kissing him
good-night, she would tender her lips, partly because of the necessary
domestic fiction that she was still a baby, but also because she felt
instinctively that the kiss counted in his life.
Through all these years of sordid squabbles and canvassings and weary
waiting, all those endless scenes of hysteria engendered by the mutual
friction of all that close-packed femininity, poor Schnapsie had
lived, shuddering. Sometimes a sense of the pathos of it all, of the
tragedy of women's lives, swept over her. She regretted every inch she
grew, it seemed to shame her celibate sisters so. She clung willingly
to short skirts until she was of age, wore her long raven hair in a
plait with a red ribbon.
"Well, Florence," said Leah genially, when the [52]last outsider at
Daisy's wedding had departed, "it's your turn next. You'd better hurry
up."
"Thank you," said Florence coldly. "I shall take my own time;
fortunately there is no one behind me."
"Humph!" said Leah, playing with her diamond rings. "It don't do to be
too particular. Why don't you come round and see me sometimes?"
"There are so many of you now," murmured Florence. She was not
attracted by the solicitors and traders in whose society and carriages
her mother lolled luxuriously, and she resented the matronly airs of
her sisters. With Leah, however, she was conscious of a different and
more paradoxical provocation. Leah had an incredible air of
juvenility. All those unthinkable, innumerable years little Schnapsie
had conceived of her eldest sister as an old maid, hopeless,
senescent, despite the wonderful belt that had kept her figure
dashing; but now that she was married she had become the girlish
bride, kittenish, irresistible, while little Schnapsie was the old
maid, the sister in peril of being passed by. And indeed she felt
herself appallingly ancient, prematurely aged by her long stay at
seventeen.
"Yes, you are right, Leah," she said pensively, with a touch of
malice. "To-morrow I shall be twenty-four."
"What?" shrieked Leah.
"Yes," Florence said obstinately. "And oh, how [53]glad I shall be!" She
raised her arms exultingly and stretched herself, as if shooting up
seven years as soon as the pressure of her sisters was removed.
"Do you hear, mother?" whispered Leah. "That fool of a Florence is
going to celebrate her twenty-fourth birthday. Not the slightest
consideration for us!"
"I didn't say I would celebrate it publicly," said Florence.
"Besides," she suggested, smiling, "very soon people will forget that
I am not the eldest."
"Then your folly will recoil on your own head," said Leah.
Little Schnapsie gave a devil-may-care shrug—a Ghetto trait that
still clung to all the sisters.
"Yes," added Mrs. Peyser. "Think what it will be in ten years' time!"
"I shall be thirty-four," said Florence imperturbably. Another little
smile lit up the dreamy eyes. "Then I shall be the eldest."
"Madness!" cried Mrs. Peyser, aloud, forgetting that her daughters'
husbands were about. "God forbid I should live to see any girl of mine
thirty-four!"
"Hush, mother!" said Florence quietly. "I hope you will; indeed, I am
sure you will, for I shall never marry. So don't bother to put me on
the books—I'm not on the market. Good-night."
She sought out poor Daniel, who, awed by the culture and standing of
his five sons-in-law, not to [54]speak of the guests, was hanging about
the deserted supper-room, smoking cigar after cigar, much to the
disgust of the caterer's men, who were waiting to spirit away the box.
Having duly kissed her father, little Schnapsie retired to bed to read
Browning's love-poems. Her mother had to take a glass of champagne to
restore her ruffled nerves to the appropriate ecstasy.
Poor portly Mrs. Peyser was not destined to enjoy her harvest of
happiness for more than a few years. But these years were an
overbrimming cup, with only the bitter drop of Florence's heretical
indifference to the Young Man. Environed by the six households which
she had begotten, Mrs. Peyser breathed that atmosphere of ebullient
babyhood which was the breath of her Jewish nostrils; babies appeared
almost every other month. It was a seething well-spring of healthy
life. Religious ceremonies connected with these chubby new-comers, or
medical recipes for their bodily salvation, absorbed her. But her
exuberant grandmotherliness usually received a check in the summer,
when the babies were deported to scattered sea-shores; and thus it
came to pass that the summer of her death found her still lingering in
London with a bad cold, with only Daniel and little Schnapsie at
[55]hand. And before the others could be called, Mrs. Peyser passed away
in peace, in the old Portsmouth bed, overlooked by the old Hebrew
picture exiled from the London dining-room.
It was a curious end. She did not know she was dying, but Daniel was
anxious she should not be reft into silence before she had made the
immemorial proclamation of the Unity. At the same time he hesitated to
appall her with the grim knowledge.
He was blubbering piteously, yet striving to hide his sobs. The early
days of his struggle came back, the first weeks of wedded happiness,
then the long years of progressive prosperity and godly cheerfulness
in Portsmouth ere she had grown fashionable and he unimportant; and a
vast self-pity mingled with his pitiful sense of her excellencies—the
children she had borne him in agony, the economy of her house
management, the good bargains she had driven with the clod-pated
soldiers and sailors, the later splendour of her social achievement.
And little Schnapsie wept with a sense of the vanity of these dual
existences to which she owed her own empty life.
Suddenly Mrs. Peyser, over whose black eyes a glaze had been stealing,
let the long dark eyelashes fall over them.
"Sarah!" whispered Daniel frantically. "Say the Shemang!"
[56]"Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one," said the sensuous
lips obediently.
Little Schnapsie shrugged her shoulders rebelliously. The dogma seemed
so irrelevant.
Mrs. Peyser opened her eyes, and a beautiful mother-light came into
them as she saw the weeping girl.
"Ah, Florrie, do not fret," she said reassuringly, in her long-lapsed
Yiddish. "I will find thee a bridegroom."
Her eyes closed, and little Schnapsie shuddered with a weird image of
a lover fetched from the shrouded dead.
After his Sarah had been lowered into "The House of Life," and the
excitement of the tombstone recording her virtues had subsided, Daniel
would have withered away in an empty world but for little Schnapsie.
The two kept house together; the same big house that had reeked with
so much feminine life, and about which the odours of perfumes and
powders still seemed to linger. But father and daughter only met at
meals. He spent hours over the morning paper, with the old quaint
delusions about India and other things he read of, and he pottered
about the streets, or wandered into the Beth-Hamidrash, which a local
fanatic had just instituted in North London, and in which, under [57]the
guidance of a Polish sage, Daniel strove to concentrate his aged wits
on the ritual problems of Babylon. At long intervals he brushed his
old-fashioned high hat carefully, and timidly rang the bell of one of
his daughters' mansions, and was permitted to caress a loudly
remonstrating baby; but they all lived so far from him and one another
in this mighty London. From Sylvia's, where there was a boy with
buttons, he had always been frightened off, and when the others began
to emulate her, his visits ceased altogether. As for the sisters
coming to see him, all pleaded overwhelming domestic duty, and the
frigidity of Florence's reception of them. "Now if you lived alone—or
with one of us!" But somehow Daniel felt the latter alternative would
be as desolate as the former. And though he knew some wide vague river
flowed between even his present housemate's life and his own, yet he
felt far more clearly the bridge of love over which their souls passed
to each other.
Figure then the septuagenarian's amaze when, one fine morning, as he
was shuffling about in his carpet slippers, the servant brought him
word that his six daughters demanded his instantaneous presence in the
drawing-room.
The shock drove out all thoughts of toilet; his heart beat quicker
with a painful premonition of he knew not what. This simultaneous
visit recalled funerals, weddings. He looked out of a [58]window and saw
four carriages drawn up, and that completed his sense of something
elemental. He tottered into the drawing-room—grown dingy now that it
had no more daughters to dispose of—and shrank before the
resplendence with which their presence reinvested it. They rustled
with silks, shone with gold necklaces, and impregnated the air with
its ancient aroma of powders and perfumes. He felt himself dwindling
before all this pungent prosperity, like some more creative
Frankenstein before a congress of his own monsters.
They did not rise as he entered. The Jewish group and the pagan group
were promiscuously seated—marriage had broken down all the ancient
landmarks. They all looked about the same agelessness—a standstill
buxom matronhood.
Daniel stood at the door, glancing from one to another. Some coughed;
others fidgeted with muffs.
"Sit down, sit down, father," said Rachael kindly, though she retained
the arm-chair,—and there was a general air of relief at her voice.
But the old embarrassment returned as the silence reëstablished itself
when Daniel had drooped into a stiff chair.
At last Leah took the word: "We have come while Florrie is at her
slumming—"
"At her slumming!" repeated Sylvia, with more significance, and a
meaning smile spread over the six faces.
[59]"Yes?" Daniel murmured.
"—Because we did not want her to know of our coming."
"It concerns Schnapsie?" he murmured.
"Yes, your little Schnapsie," said Daisy viciously.
"Yes; she has no time to come and see us," cried Rebecca. "But she
has plenty of time for her—slumming."
"Well, she does good," he murmured apologetically.
"A fat lot of good!" sniggered Rachael.
"To herself!" corrected Lily.
"I do not understand," he muttered uneasily.
"Well—" began Lily. "You tell him, Leah; you know more about it."
"You know as much as I do."
He looked appealingly from one to the other.
"I always said the slums were dangerous places for people of our
class," said Sylvia. "She doesn't even confine herself to her own
people."
The faces began to lighten—evidently they felt the ice broken.
"Dangerous!" he repeated, catching at the ominous word.
"Dreadful!" in a common shudder.
He half rose. "You have bad news?" he cried.
The faces gloomed over, the heads nodded.
"About Schnapsie?" he shrieked, jumping up.
"Sit down, sit down; she's not dead," said Leah contemptuously.
[60]He sat down.
"Well, what is it? What has happened?"
"She's engaged!" In Leah's mouth the word sounded like a death-bell.
"Engaged!" he breathed, with a glimmering foreboding of the horror.
"To a Christian!" said Daisy brutally.
He sank back, pale and trembling. A tense silence fell on the room.
"But how? Who?" he murmured at last.
The girls recovered themselves. Now they were all speaking at once.
"Another slummer."
"He's the son of an archdeacon."
"An awful Christian crank."
"And that's your pet Schnapsie."
"If we had wanted Christians, we could have been married twenty
years ago."
"It's a terrible disgrace for us."
"She doesn't consider us in the least."
"She'll be miserable, anyhow. When they quarrel, he'll always throw it
up to her that she's a Jewess."
"And wouldn't join our Daughters of Mercy committee—had no time."
"Wasn't going to marry—turned up her nose at all the Jewish young
men!"
"But she would have told me!" he murmured hopelessly. "I don't believe
it. My little Schnapsie!"
[61]"Don't believe it?" snorted Leah. "Why, she didn't even deny it."
"Have you spoken to her, then?"
"Have we spoken to her! Why, she says Judaism is all nonsense! She
will disgrace us all."
The blind racial instinct spoke through them—the twenty-five
centuries of tested separateness. But Daniel felt in super-addition
the conscious religious horror.
"But is she to be married in a Christian church?" he breathed.
"Oh, she isn't going to marry—yet."
His poor heart fluttered at the reprieve.
"She doesn't care a pin for our feelings," went on Leah. "But of
course she won't marry while you are alive."
Lily took up the thread. "We all told her if she'd only marry a Jew,
we'd all be glad to have you—in turn. But she said it wasn't that.
She could have you herself; her Alfred wouldn't mind. It's the shock
to your religious feelings that keeps her back. She doesn't want to
hurt you."
"God bless her, my good little Schnapsie!" he murmured. His dazed
brain did not grasp all the bearings, was only conscious of a vast
relief.
Disgust darkened all the faces.
He groped to understand it, putting his hand over the white hairs that
straggled from his skull-cap.
"But then—then it's all right."
[62]"Yes, all right," said Leah brutally. "But for how long?"
Her meaning seized him like an icy claw upon his heart. For the first
time in his life he realized the certainty of death, and
simultaneously with the certainty its imminence.
"We want you to put a stop to it now," said Sylvia. "For our sakes
make her promise that even when— You're the only one who has any
influence over her."
She rose, as if to wind up the painful interview, and the others rose,
too, with a multiplex rustling of silken skirts. He shook the six
jewelled hands as in a dream, and promised to do his best; and as he
watched the little procession of carriages roll off, it seemed to him
indeed a funeral, and his own.
Ah God, that it should have come to this. Little Schnapsie could not
be happy till he was dead. Well, why should he keep her waiting? What
mattered the few odd years or months? He was already dead. There was
his funeral going down the street.
To speak to Schnapsie he had never intended, even while he was
promising it. Those years of silent life together had made real
conversation impossible. The bridge on which his soul passed over to
[63]hers was a bridge over which hung a sacred silence. Under the weight
of words, especially of angry parental words, it might break down
forever. And that would be worse than death.
No; little Schnapsie had her own life, and he somehow knew he had not
the right to question it, even though it seemed on the verge of deadly
sin. He could not have expressed it in logical speech, was not even
clearly conscious of it; but his tender relation with her had educated
him to a sense of her moral rightness, which now survived and
subsisted with his conviction that she was hopelessly astray. No, he
had not the right to interfere with her life, with her prospect of
happiness in her own way. He must give up living. Little Schnapsie
must be nearly thirty; the best of her youth was gone. She should be
happy with this strange man.
But if he killed himself, that would bring disgrace on the family—and
little Schnapsie. Perhaps, too, Alfred would not marry her. Was there
no way of slipping quietly out of existence? But then suicide was
another deadly sin. If only that had really been his funeral
procession!
"O God, God of Israel, tell me what to do!"
A sudden inspiration leapt to his heart. She should not have to wait
for his death to be happy; [64]he would live to see her happy. He would
pretend that her marriage cost him no pang; indeed, would not truly
the pang be swallowed up in the thought of her happiness? But would
she be happy? Could she be happy with this alien? Ah, there was the
chilling doubt! If a quarrel came, would not the man always throw it
in her face that she was a Jewess? Well, that must be left to herself.
She was old enough not to rush into misery. Through all these years he
had taken her pensive brow as the seat of all wisdom, her tender eyes
as the glow of all goodness, and he could not suddenly readjust
himself to a contradictory conception. By the time she came in he had
composed himself for his task.
"Ah, my dear," he said, with a beaming smile, "I have heard the good
news."
The answering smile died out of her eyes. She looked frightened.
"It's all right, little Schnapsie," he said roguishly. "So now I shall
have seven sons-in-law. And Alfred the Second, eh?"
"You have heard?"
"Yes," he said, pinching her ear. "Thinks she can keep anything from
her old father, does she?"
"But do you know that he is a—a—"
"A Christian? Of course. What's the difference, as long as he's a good
man, eh?" He laughed noisily.
Little Schnapsie looked more frightened than ever. Were her father's
wits wandering at last?
[65]"But I thought—"
"Thought I would want you to sacrifice yourself! No, no, my dear; we
are not in India, where women are burnt alive to please their dead
husbands."
Little Schnapsie had an irrelevant vision of herself treading on
diamonds and gold. She murmured, "Who told you?"
"Leah."
"Leah! But Leah is angry about it!"
"So she is. She came to me in a tantrum, but I told her whatever
little Schnapsie did was right."
"Father!" With a sudden cry of belief and affection she fell on his
neck and kissed him. "But isn't the darling old Jew shocked?" she
said, half smiling, half weeping.
Cunning lent him clairvoyance. "How much Judaism is there in your
sisters' husbands?" he said. "And without the religion, what is the
use of the race?"
"Why, father, that's what I'm always preaching!" she cried, in
astonishment. "Think what our Judaism was in the dear old Portsmouth
days. What is the Sabbath here? A mockery. Not one of your sons-in-law
closes his business. But there, when the Sabbath came in, how
beautiful! Gradually it glided, glided; you heard the angel's wings.
Then its shining presence was upon you, and a holy peace settled over
the house."
"Yes, yes." His eyes filled with tears. He saw [66]the row of innocent
girl faces at the white Sabbath table. What had London and prosperity
brought him instead?
"And then the Atonement days, when the ram's horn thrilled us with a
sense of sin and judgment, when we thought the heavenly scrolls were
being signed and sealed. Who feels that here, father? Some of us don't
even fast."
"True, true." He forgot his part. "Then you are a good Jewess still?"
She shook her head sadly. "We have outlived our destiny. Our isolation
is a meaningless relic."
But she had kindled a new spark of hope.
"Can't you bring him over to us?"
"To what? To our empty synagogues?"
"Then you are going over to him?" He tried to keep his voice steady.
"I must; his father is an archdeacon."
"I know, I know," he said, though she might as well have said an
archangel.
"But you do not believe in—in—"
"I believe in self-sacrifice; that is Christianity."
"Is it? I thought it was three Gods."
"That is not the essential."
"Thank God!" he said. Then he added hurriedly: "But will you be happy
with him? Such different bringing up! You can't really feel close to
him."
She laughed and blushed. "There are deeper things than one's bringing
up, father."
[67]"But if after marriage you should have a quarrel, he would always
throw up to you that you are a Jewess."
"No, Alfred will never do that."
"Then make haste, little Schnapsie, or your old father won't live to
see you under the canopy."
She smiled happily, believing him. "But there won't be any canopy,"
she said.
"Well, well, whatever it is," he laughed back, with horrid imagining
that it might be a Cross.
It was agreed between them that, to avoid endless family councils, the
sisters should not be told, and that the ceremony should be conducted
as privately as possible. The archdeacon himself was coming up to town
to perform the ceremony in the church of another of his sons in Chalk
Farm. After the short honeymoon, Daniel was to come and live with the
couple in Whitechapel, for they were to live in the centre of their
labours. Poor Daniel tried to find some comfort in the thought that
Whitechapel was a more Jewish and a homelier quarter than Highbury.
But the unhomely impression produced upon him by his latest son-in-law
neutralized everything. All his other sons-in-law had more or less
awed him, but beneath the awe ran a tunnel of brotherhood. With [68]this
Alfred, however, he was conscious of a glacial current, which not all
the young man's cordiality could tepefy.
"Are you sure you will be happy with him, little Schnapsie?" he asked
anxiously.
"You dear worrying old thing!"
"But if after marriage you quarrel, he will always throw it up to you
that you are—"
"And I'll throw it up to him that he is a Christian, and oughtn't to
quarrel."
He was silenced. But his heart thanked God that his dear old wife had
been spared the coming ordeal.
"This too was for good," he murmured, in the Hebrew proverb.
And so the tragic day drew nigh.
One short week before, Daniel was wandering about, dazed by the near
prospect. An unholy fascination drew him toward Chalk Farm, to gaze on
the church in which the profane union would be perpetrated. Perhaps he
ought even to go inside; to get over his first horror at being in such
a building, so as not to betray himself during the actual ceremony.
As he drew near the heathen edifice he saw a striped awning,
carriages, a bustle of people entering, a pressing, peeping crowd. A
wedding!
[69]Ah, good! There was no doubt now he must go in; he would see what this
unknown ceremony in this unknown building was like. It would be a sort
of rehearsal; it would help to steel him at the tragic moment. He was
passing through the central doors with some other men, but a policeman
motioned them to a side door. He shuffled timidly within.
Full as the church was, the chill stone spaces struck cold to his
heart; all the vast alien life they typified froze his soul. The dread
word Meshumad—apostate—seemed echoing and reëchoing from the cold
pillars. He perceived his companions had bared their heads, and he
hastily snatched off his rusty beaver. The unaccustomed sensation in
his scalp completed his sense of unholiness.
Nothing seemed going on yet, but as he slipped into a seat in the
aisle he became aware of an organ playing joyous preludes, almost
jiggish. For a moment he wondered dully what there was to be gay
about, and his eyes filled with bitter tears.
A craning forward in the nondescript congregation made the old man
peer forward.
He saw, at the far end of the church, a sort of platform upon which
four men, in strange, flowing robes, stood under a cross. He hid his
eyes from the sight of the symbol that had overshadowed his ancestors'
lives. When he opened his eyes again the men were kneeling. Would he
have to kneel, he wondered. Would his old joints have to assume [70]that
pagan posture? Presently four bridesmaids, shielded by great glowing
bouquets, appeared on the platform, and descending, passed with
measured theatric pace down the farther avenue, too remote for his
clear vision. His neighbours stood up to stare at them, and he rose,
too. And throughout the organ bubbled out its playful cadenzas.
A stir and a buzz swept through the church. A procession began to file
in. At its head was a pale, severe young man, supported by a cheerful
young man. Other young men followed; then the bridesmaids reappeared.
And finally—target of every glance—there passed a glory of white
veil supported by an old military looking man in a satin waistcoat.
Ah, that would be he and Schnapsie, then. Up that long avenue, beneath
all these curious Christian eyes, he, Daniel Peyser, would have to
walk. He tried to rehearse it mentally now, so that he might not shame
her; he paced pompously and stiffly, with beautiful Schnapsie on his
arm, a glory of white veil. He saw himself slowly reaching the
platform, under the chilling cross; then everything swam before him,
and he sank shuddering into his seat. His little Schnapsie! She was
being sucked up into all this hateful heathendom, to the seductive
music of satanic orchestras.
He sat in a strange daze, vaguely conscious that the organ had ceased,
and that some preacher's recitative had begun instead. When he looked
up [71]again, the bridal party before the altar loomed vague, as through
a mist. He passed his hand over his clouded brow. Of a sudden a
sentence of the recitative pierced sharply to his brain:—
"Therefore if any man can show any just cause why they may not
lawfully be joined together, let him now speak, or else hereafter
forever hold his peace."
O God of Israel! Then it was the last chance! He sprang to his feet,
and shouted in agony: "No, no, she must not marry him! She must not!"
All heads turned toward the shabby old man. An electric shiver ran
through the church. The bride paled; a bridesmaid shrieked; the
minister, taken aback, stood silent. A white-gloved usher hurried up.
"Do you forbid the banns?" called the minister.
The old man's mind awoke, and groped mistily.
"Come, what have you to say?" snapped the usher.
"I—I—nothing," he murmured in awed confusion.
"He is drunk," said the usher. "Out with you, my man." He hustled
Daniel toward the side door, and let it swing behind him.
But Daniel shrank from facing the cordon of spectators outside. He
hung miserably about the vestibule till the Wedding March swelled in
ironic triumph, and the human outpour swept him into the street.
His abstracted look, his ragged talk, troubled Schnapsie at the
evening meal, but she could not elicit that anything had happened.
In the evening paper, her eye, avid of marriage items, paused on a
big-headed paragraph.
"I FORBID THE BANNS!"
STRANGE SCENE AT A CHALK FARM CHURCH.
When she had finished the paragraph and read another, the first began
to come back to her, shadowed with a strange suspicion. Why, this was
the very church—? A Jewish-looking old man—! Great heavens! Then all
this had been mere pose, self-sacrifice. And his wits were straying
under the too heavy burden! Only blind craving for her own happiness
could have made her believe that the mental habits of seventy years
could be broken off.
"Well, father," she said brightly, "you will be losing me very soon
now."
His lips quivered into a pathetic smile.
"I am very glad." He paused, struggling with himself. "If you are sure
you will be happy!"
"But haven't we talked that over enough, father?"
"Yes—but you know—if a quarrel arose, he would always throw it
up—that—"
"Nonsense, nonsense," she laughed. But the [73]repetition of the old
thought struck her poignantly as a sign of maundering wits.
"And you are sure you will get along together?"
"Quite sure."
"Then I am glad." He drew her to him, and kissed her.
She broke down and wept under the conviction of his lying. He became
the comforter in his turn.
"Don't cry, little Schnapsie, don't cry. I didn't mean to frighten
you. Alfred is a good man, and I am sure, even if you quarrel, he will
never throw it—" The mumbling passed into a kiss on her wet cheek.
That night, after a long passionate vigil in her bedroom, little
Schnapsie wrote a letter:—
"Dearest Alfred,—This will be as painful for you to
read as for me to write. I find at the eleventh hour I cannot
marry you. I owe it to you to state my reason. As you know, I
did not consent to our love being crowned by union till my
father had given his consent. I now find that this consent was
not the free outcome of my father's soul, that it was only to
promote my happiness. Try to imagine what it means for an old
man of seventy odd years to wrench himself away from all his
life-long prejudices, and you will realize what he has been
trying to do for me. But the wrench was beyond his strength. He
is breaking his heart over it, and, I fear, even wandering in
his mind.
"You will say, let us again consent to wait for a contingency
which I am not cold-blooded enough to set down more openly. [74]But
I do not think it is fair to you to let you risk your happiness
further by keeping it entangled with mine. A new current of
thought has been set going in my mind. If a religion that I
thought all formalism is capable of producing such types of
abnegation as my dear father, then it must, too, somewhere or
other, hold in solution all those ennobling ingredients, all
those stimuli to self-sacrifice, which the world calls
Christian. Perhaps I have always misunderstood. We were so badly
taught. Perhaps the prosaic epoch of Judaism into which I was
born is only transitional, perhaps it only belongs to the middle
classes, for I know I felt more of its poetry in my childhood;
perhaps the future will develop (or recultivate) its diviner
sides and lay more stress upon the life beautiful, and thus all
this blind instinct of isolation may prove only the conservation
of the race for its nobler future, when it may still become, in
very truth, a witness to the Highest, a chosen people in whom
all the families of the earth may be blessed. I do not know; all
this is very confused and chaotic to me to-night. I only know I
can hold out no certain hope of the earthly fulfilment of our
love. I, too, feel in transition, and I know not to what. But,
dearest Alfred, shall we not be living the Christian life—the
life of abnegation—more truly if we give up the hope of
personal happiness? Forgive me, darling, the pain I am causing
you, and thus help me to bear my own.
"Your friend till death,
"Florence."
It was an hour past midnight ere the letter was finished, and when it
was sealed a sense of relief at remaining in the Jewish fold stole
over her, though she would scarcely acknowledge it to herself, and
impatiently analyzed it away as hereditary. And despite it, if she
slept on the letter, would it ever be posted?
But the house was sunk in darkness. She was [75]the only creature
stirring. And yet she yearned to have the thing over, irrevocable.
Perhaps she might venture out herself with her latch-key. There was a
letter-box at the street corner. She lit a candle and stole out on the
landing, casting a monstrous shadow which frightened her. In her
over-wrought mood it almost seemed an uncanny creature grinning at
her. Her mother's death-bed rose suddenly before her; her mother's
voice cried: "Ah, Florrie, do not fret. I will find thee a
bridegroom." Was this the bridegroom—was this the only one she would
ever know?
"Father! father!" she shrieked, with sudden terror.
A door was thrown open; a figure shambled forth in carpet slippers—a
dear, homely, reassuring figure—holding the coloured handkerchief
which had helped to banish him from the drawing-room. His face was
smeared; his eyelids under the pushed-up horn spectacles were red: he,
too, had kept vigil.
"What is it? What is it, little Schnapsie?"
"Nothing. I—I—I only wanted to ask you if you would be good enough
to post this letter—to-night."
"Good enough? Why, I shall enjoy a breath of air."
He took the letter and essayed a roguish laugh as his eye caught the
superscription.
"Ho! ho!" He pinched her cheek. "So we [76]mustn't let a day pass without
writing to him, eh?"
She quivered under this unforeseen misconception.
"No," she echoed, with added firmness, "we mustn't let a day pass."
"But go to bed at once, little Schnapsie. You look quite pale. If you
stay up so late writing him letters, you won't make him a beautiful
bride."
"No," she repeated, "I won't make him a beautiful bride."
She heard the hall door close gently upon his cautious footsteps, and
her eyes dimmed with divine tears as she thought of the joy that
awaited his return.
On a summer's day toward the close of the first quarter of the
nineteenth century after Christ, Peloni walked in "the good place" of
the Frankfort Judengasse and pondered. At times he came to a
standstill and appeared to study the inscriptions on the tumbled
tombstones, or the carven dragons, shields, and stars, but his black
eyes burnt inward and he saw less the tragedy of Jewish death than the
tragedy of Jewish life.
For "the good place" was the place of death.
Here alone in Frankfort—in this shut-in bit of the shut-in
Jew-street—was true peace for Israel. The rest of the Jew-street
offered comparative tranquillity even for the living; yet when, ninety
years before Peloni was born, the great fire had raged therein, the
inhabitants had locked the Ghetto-gate against the Christians, less
fearful of the ravaging flames than of their fellow-citizens. Even
to-day, if he ventured outside the Judengasse, Peloni must tread
delicately. The foot-path was not for him: he must plod on the dusty
road, with all the other [80]beasts. In some places the very road was too
holy for him, and any passer-by might snatch off his hat in punishment
for his breaking bounds. The ragged street urchin or the staggering
drunkard might cry to him "'Jud,' mach mores: Jew, mind your
manners."
Some ten years ago the Frankfort Ghetto had been verbally abolished by
a civilized archduke, caught up in the wave of Napoleonic toleration.
Peloni had shared in the exultation of the Jews at the final
dissipation of the long night of mediævalism. He had written a Hebrew
poem on it, brilliantly rhymed, congested with apt quotations from
Bible and Talmud, the whole making an acrostic upon the name of the
enlightened Karl Theodor von Dalberg. Henceforth Israel would take his
place among the peoples, honour on his brow, love in his heart,
manhood in his limbs. A gracious letter of acknowledgment from the
archduke was displayed in the window of Peloni's little bookselling
establishment, amid the door-amulets, phylacteries, praying-shawls,
Purim-scrolls, and Hebrew volumes.
But now the prince had been ousted, Napoleon was dead, everywhere the
Ghetto-gates were locked again, and the Poem lay stacked on the
remainder shelves. In vain had the grateful Jews hastened to fight for
the Fatherland, tendered it body and soul. Poor little curly-haired
Peloni had been attacked in the streets as an alien that very morning.
Roysterers [81]had raised the old cry of "Hep! Hep!"—fatal, immemorial
cry, ghastly heritage of the Crusades. Century after century that cry
had gone echoing through Europe. Century after century the Jews
thought they had lived it down, bought it down, died it down. But no!
it rose again, buoyant, menacing, irresponsible. Ah, what a fool he
had been to hope! There was no hope.
Rarely, indeed, since the Dark Ages had persecution flaunted itself so
openly. Riots and massacres were breaking out all over Germany, and in
his own Ghetto Peloni had seen sights that had turned his patriotism
to gall, and crushed his trust in the Christian, his beautiful
bubble-dreams of the Millennium. Rothschild himself, whose house in
the Judengasse with the sign of the red shield had been the centre
of the attack, was well-nigh unable to maintain his position in the
town. And these local successes inflamed the Jew-haters everywhere.
"Let the children of Israel be sold to the English," recommended a
popular pamphlet of the period, "who could employ them in their Indian
plantations instead of the blacks. The best plan would be to purge the
land entirely of this vermin, either by exterminating them, or, as