# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Emile Zola, Abbe Mouret's Transgression
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/14200/14200-h/14200-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

She had risen from the ground. Serge confessed that he, too, would find
 some food acceptable.
 

 ‘You goose!’ she said, ‘you didn’t understand, then, that I brought you
 here to breakfast. We sha’n’t die of hunger here. We can help ourselves to
 all there is.’ 
 

 They went along under the trees, pushing aside the branches and making
 their way to the thickest of the fruit. Albine, who went first, turned,
 and in her flute-like voice asked her companion: ‘What do you like best?
 Pears, apricots, cherries, or currants? I warn you that the pears are
 still green; but they are very nice all the same.’ 
 

 Serge decided upon having cherries, and Albine agreed it would be as well
 to start with them; but when she saw him foolishly beginning to scramble
 up the first cherry tree he found, she made him go on for another ten
 minutes through a frightful entanglement of branches. The cherries on this
 tree, she said, were small and good for nothing; those on that were sour;
 those on another would not be ripe for at least a week. She knew all the
 trees.
 

 ‘Stop, climb this one,’ she said at last, as she stopped at the foot of a
 tree, so heavily laden with fruit that clusters of it hung down to the
 ground, like strings of coral beads.
 

 Serge settled himself comfortably between two branches and began his
 breakfast. He no longer paid attention to Albine. He imagined she was in
 another tree, a few yards away, when, happening to cast his eyes towards
 the ground, he saw her calmly lying on her back beneath him. She had
 thrown herself there, and, without troubling herself to use her hands, was
 plucking with her teeth the cherries which dangled over her mouth.
 

 When she saw she was discovered, she broke out into a peal of laughter,
 and twisted about on the grass like a fish taken from the water. And
 finally, crawling along on her elbows, she gradually made the circuit of
 the tree, snapping up the plumpest cherries as she went along.
 

 ‘They tickle me so,’ she cried. ‘See, there’s a beauty just fallen on my
 neck. They are so deliciously fresh and juicy. They get into my ears, my
 eyes, my nose, everywhere. They are much sweeter down here than up there.’ 
 

 ‘Ah!’ said Serge, laughing, ‘you say that because you daren’t climb up.’ 
 

 She remained for a moment silent with indignation. ‘Daren’t!—I!—’ 
 she stammered.
 

 Then, having gathered up her skirts, she tightly grasped the tree and
 pulled herself up the trunk with a single effort of her strong wrists. And
 afterwards she stepped lightly along the branches, scarcely using her
 hands to steady herself. She had all the agile nimbleness of a squirrel,
 and made her way onward, maintaining her equilibrium only by the swaying
 poise of her body. When she was quite aloft at the end of a frail branch,
 which shook dangerously beneath her weight, she cried; ‘Now you see
 whether I daren’t climb.’ 
 

 ‘Come down at once,’ implored Serge, full of alarm for her. ‘I beg of you
 to come down. You will be injuring yourself.’ 
 

 But she, enjoying her triumph, began to mount still higher. She crawled
 along to the extreme end of a branch, grasping its leaves in her hands to
 maintain her hold.
 

 ‘The branch will break!’ cried Serge, thoroughly frightened.
 

 ‘Let it break,’ she answered, with a laugh; ‘it will save me the trouble
 of getting down.’ 
 

 And the branch did break, but only slowly, with such deliberation that, as
 it gradually settled towards the ground, it let Albine slip down in very
 gentle fashion. She did not appear in the least degree frightened; but
 gave herself a shake, and said: ‘That was really nice. It was quite like
 being in a carriage.’ 
 

 Serge had jumped down from the tree to catch her in his arms. As he stood
 there, quite pale from fright, she laughed at him. ‘One tumbles down from
 trees every day,’ she exclaimed, ‘but there is never any harm done. Look
 more cheerful, you great stupid! Stay, just wet your finger and rub it
 upon my neck. I have scratched it.’ 
 

 Serge wetted his finger and touched her neck with it.
 

 ‘There, I am all right again now,’ she cried, as she bounded off. ‘Let us
 play at hide and seek, shall we?’ 
 

 She was the first to hide. She disappeared, and presently from the depths
 of the greenery, which she alone knew, and where Serge could not possibly
 find her, she called, ‘Cuckoo, cuckoo.’ But this game of hide and seek did
 not put a stop to the onslaught upon the fruit trees. Breakfasting went on
 in all the nooks and corners where the two big children sought each other.
 Albine, while gliding beneath the branches, would stretch out her hand to
 pluck a green pear or fill her skirt with apricots. Then in some of her
 lurking-places she would come upon such rich discoveries as would make her
 careless of the game, content to sit upon the ground and remain eating.
 Once, however, she lost sound of Serge’s movements. So, in her turn, she
 set about seeking him; and she was surprised, almost vexed, when she
 discovered him under a plum-tree, of whose existence she herself had been
 ignorant, and whose ripe fruit had a delicious musky perfume. She soundly
 rated him. Did he want to eat everything himself, that he hadn’t called to
 her to come? He pretended to know nothing about the trees, but he
 evidently had a very keen scent to be able to find all the good things.
 She was especially indignant with the poor tree itself—a stupid tree
 which no one had known of, and which must have sprung up in the night on
 purpose to put people out. As she stood there pouting, refusing to pluck a
 single plum, it occurred to Serge to shake the tree violently. And then a
 shower, a regular hail, of plums came down. Albine, standing in the midst
 of the downfall, received plums on her arms, plums on her neck, plums on
 the very tip of her nose. At this she could no longer restrain her
 laughter; she stood in the midst of the deluge, crying ‘More! more!’ 
 amused as she was by the round bullet-like fruit which fell around her as
 she squatted there, with hands and mouth open, and eyes closed.
 

 It was a morning of childish play, of wild gambols in the Paradou. Albine
 and Serge spent hours, scampering up and down, shouting and sporting with
 each other, their thoughts still all innocence. And in what a delicious
 spot they found themselves! Depths of greenery, with undiscoverable
 hiding-places; paths, along whose windings it was never possible to be
 serious, such greedy laughter fell from the very hedges. In this happy
 orchard, there was such a playful straggling of bushes, such fresh and
 appetising shade, such a wealth of old trees laden like kindly
 grandfathers with sweet dainties. Even in the depths of the recesses green
 with moss, beneath the broken trunks which compelled them to creep the one
 behind the other, in the narrow leafy alleys, the young folks never
 succumbed to the perilous reveries of silence. No trouble touched them in
 that happy wood.
 

 And when they had grown weary of the apricot-trees and the plum-trees and
 the cherry-trees, they ran beneath the slender almond-trees; eating green
 almonds, scarcely yet as big as peas, hunting for strawberries in the
 grassy carpet, and regretting that the melons were not already ripe.
 Albine finished by running as fast as she could go, pursued by Serge, who
 was unable to overtake her. She rushed amongst the fig-trees, leaping over
 their heavy branches, and pulling off the leaves to throw them behind her
 in her companion’s face. In a few strides she had cleared the clumps of
 arbutus, whose red berries she tasted on her way; and it was in the jungle
 of nettle-trees, medlars, and jujube-trees that Serge lost her. At first
 he thought she was hiding behind a pomegranate; but found that he had
 mistaken two clustering blossoms for the rosy roundness of her wrists.
 Then he scoured the plantation of orange-trees, rejoicing in their beauty
 and perfume, and thinking that he must have reached the abode of the
 fairies of the sun. In the midst of them he caught sight of Albine, who,
 not believing him so near her, was peering inquisitively into the green
 depths.
 

 ‘What are you looking for?’ he cried. ‘You know very well that is
 forbidden.’ 
 

 She sprang up hastily, and slightly blushed for the first time that day.
 Then sitting down by the side of Serge, she told him of the fine times
 there would be when the oranges should be ripe. The wood would then be all
 golden, all bright with those round stars, dotting with yellow sparks the
 arching green.
 

 When at last they really set off homeward she halted at every wild-growing
 fruit tree, and filled her pockets with sour pears and bitter plums,
 saying that they world be good to eat on their way. They would prove a
 hundred times more enjoyable than anything they had tasted before. Serge
 was obliged to swallow some of them, in spite of the grimaces he made at
 each bite. And eventually they found themselves indoors again, tired out
 but feeling very happy.
 

 
 
 

 A week later there was another expedition to the park. They had planned to
 extend their rambles beyond the orchard, striking out to the left through
 the meadows watered by the four streams. They would travel several miles
 over the thick grass, and they might live on fish, if they happened to
 lose themselves.
 

 ‘I will take my knife,’ said Albine, holding up a broad-bladed peasant’s
 knife.
 

 She crammed all kinds of things into her pockets, string, bread, matches,
 a small bottle of wine, some rags, a comb, and some needles. Serge took a
 rug, but by the time they had passed the lime-trees and reached the ruins
 of the chateau, he found it such an encumbrance that he hid it beneath a
 piece of fallen wall.
 

 The sun was hotter than before, Albine had delayed their departure by her
 extensive preparations. Thus in the heat of the morning they stepped along
 side by side, almost quietly. They actually managed to take twenty paces
 at a time without pushing one another or laughing. They began to talk.
 

 ‘I never can wake up,’ began Albine. ‘I slept so soundly last night. Did
 you?’ 
 

 ‘Yes, indeed, very soundly,’ replied Serge.
 

 ‘What does it mean when you dream of a bird that talks to you?’ the girl
 resumed.
 

 ‘I don’t know. What did your bird say to you?’ 
 

 ‘Oh, I have forgotten. But it said all kinds of things, and many of them
 sounded very comical. Stop, look at that big poppy over there. You sha’n’t
 get it, you sha’n’t get it!’ 
 

 And then she sprang forward; but Serge, thanks to his long legs,
 outstripped her and plucked the poppy, which he waved about victoriously.
 She stood there with lips compressed, saying nothing, but feeling a strong
 inclination to cry. Serge threw down the flower. Nothing else occurred to
 him. Then, to make his peace with her, he asked: ‘Would you like me to
 carry you as I did the other day?’ 
 

 ‘No, no.’ 
 

 She pouted a little, but she had not gone another thirty steps, when she
 turned round smiling. A bramble had caught hold of her dress.
 

 ‘I thought it was you who were treading on my dress purposely. It won’t
 let me go. Come and unfasten me.’ 
 

 When she was released, they walked on again, side by side, very quietly.
 Albine pretended that it was much more amusing to stroll along in this
 fashion, like steady grown-up folks. They had just reached the meadows.
 Far away, in front of them, stretched grassy expanses scarce broken here
 and there by the tender foliage of willows. The grass looked soft and
 downy, like velvet. It was a deep green, subsiding in the distance into
 lighter tints, and on the horizon assuming a bright yellow glow beneath
 the flaring sun. The clumps of willows right over yonder seemed like pure
 gold, bathed in the tremulous brilliance of the sunshine. Dancing dust
 tipped the blades of grass with quivering light, and as the gentle breezes
 swept over the free expanse, moire-like reflections appeared on the
 caressed and quivering herbage. In the nearer fields a multitude of little
 white daisies, now in swarms, now straggling, and now in groups, like
 holiday makers at some public rejoicing, brightly peopled the dark grass.
 Buttercups showed themselves, gay like little brass bells which the touch
 of a fly’s wing would set tinkling. Here and there big lonely poppies
 raised fiery cups, and others, gathered together further away, spread out
 like vats purple with lees of wine. Big cornflowers balanced aloft their
 light blue caps which looked as if they would fly away at every breath of
 air. Then under foot there were patches of woolly feather-grass and
 fragrant meadow-sweet, sheets of fescue, dog’s-tail, creeping-bent, and
 meadow grass. Sainfoin reared its long fine filaments; clover unfurled its
 clear green leaves, plantains brandished forests of spears, lucerne spread
 out in soft beds of green satin broidered with purple flowers. And all
 these were seen, to right, to left, in front, everywhere, rolling over the
 level soil, showing like the mossy surface of a stagnant sea, asleep
 beneath the sky which ever seemed to expand. Here and there, in the vast
 expanse, the vegetation was of a limpid blue, as though it reflected the
 colour of the heavens.
 

 Albine and Serge stepped along over the meadow-lands, with the grass
 reaching to their knees. It was like wading through a pool. Now and then,
 indeed, they found themselves caught by a current in which a stream of
 bending stalks seemed to flow away between their legs. Then there were
 placid-looking, slumbering lakes, basins of short grass, which scarcely
 reached their ankles. As they walked along together, their joy found
 expression not in wild gambols, as in the orchard a week before, but
 rather in loitering, with their feet caught among the supple arms of the
 herbage, tasting as it were the caresses of a pure stream which calmed the
 exuberance of their youth. Albine turned aside and slipped into a lofty
 patch of vegetation which reached to her chin. Only her head appeared. For
 a moment or two she stood there in silence. Then she called to Serge:
 ‘Come here, it is just like a bath. It is as if one had green water all
 over one.’ 
 

 Then she gave a jump and scampered off without waiting for him, and they
 both walked along the margin of the first stream which barred their onward
 course. It was a shallow tranquil brook between banks of wild cress. It
 flowed on so placidly and gently that its surface reflected like a mirror
 the smallest reed that grew beside it. Albine and Serge followed this
 stream, whose onward motion was slower than their own, for a long time
 before they came across a tree that flung a long shadow upon the idle
 waters. As far as their eyes could reach they saw the bare brook stretch
 out and slumber in the sunlight like a blue serpent half uncoiled. At last
 they reached a clump of three willows. Two had their roots in the stream;
 the third was set a little backward. Their trunks, rotten and crumbling
 with age, were crowned with the bright foliage of youth. The shadow they
 cast was so slight as scarcely to be perceptible upon the sunlit bank. Yet
 here the water, which, both above and below, was so unruffled, showed a
 transient quiver, a rippling of its surface, as though it were surprised
 to find even this light veil cast over it. Between the three willows the
 meadow-land sloped down to the stream, and some crimson poppies had sprung
 up in the crevices of the decaying old trunks. The foliage of the willows
 looked like a tent of greenery fixed upon three stakes by the water’s
 edge, beside a rolling prairie.
 

 ‘This is the place,’ cried Albine, ‘this is the place;’ and she glided
 beneath the willows.
 

 Serge sat down by her side, his feet almost in the water. He glanced round
 him, and murmured: ‘You know everything, you know all the best spots. One
 might almost think this was an island, ten feet square, right in the
 middle of the sea.’ 
 

 ‘Yes, indeed, we are quite at home,’ she replied, as she gleefully drummed
 the grass with her fists. ‘It is altogether our own, and we are going to
 do everything ourselves.’ Then, as if struck by a brilliant idea, she
 sprang towards him, and, with her face close to his, asked him joyously:
 ‘Will you be my husband? I will be your wife.’ 
 

 He was delighted at the notion, and replied that he would gladly be her
 husband, laughing even more loudly than she had done herself. Then Albine
 suddenly became grave, and assumed the anxious air of a housewife.
 

 ‘You know,’ she said, ‘that it is I who will have to give the orders. We
 will have breakfast as soon as you have laid the table.’ 
 

 She gave him her orders in an imperious fashion. He had to stow all the
 various articles which she extracted from her pockets into a hole in one
 of the willows, which bole she called the cupboard. The rags supplied the
 household linen, while the comb represented the toilette necessaries. The
 needles and string were to be used for mending the explorers’ clothes.
 Provision for the inner man consisted of the little bottle of wine and a
 few crusts which she had saved from yesterday. She had, to be sure, some
 matches, by the aid of which she intended to cook the fish they were going
 to catch.
 

 When Serge had finished laying the table, the bottle of wine in the
 centre, and three crusts grouped round it, he hazarded the observation
 that the fare seemed to be scanty. But Albine shrugged her shoulders with
 feminine superiority. And wading into the water, she said in a severe
 tone, ‘I will catch the fish; you can watch me.’ 
 

 For half an hour she strenuously exerted herself in trying to catch some
 of the little fishes with her hands. She had gathered up her petticoats
 and fastened them together with a piece of string. And she advanced
 quietly into the water, taking the greatest care not to disturb it. When
 she was quite close to some tiny fish, that lay lurking between a couple
 of pebbles, she thrust down her bare arm, made a wild grasp, and brought
 her hand up again with nothing in it but sand and gravel. Serge then broke
 out into noisy laughter which brought her back to the bank, indignant. She
 told him that he had no business to laugh at her.
 

 ‘But,’ he ended by asking, ‘how are we going to cook your fish when you
 have caught it? There is no wood about.’ 
 

 That put the finishing touch to her discouragement. However, the fish in
 that stream didn’t seem to be good for much; so she came out of the water
 and ran through the long grass to get her feet dry.
 

 ‘See,’ she suddenly exclaimed, ‘here is some pimpernel. It is very nice.
 Now we shall have a feast.’ 
 

 Serge was ordered to gather a quantity of the pimpernel and place it on
 the table. They ate it with their crusts. Albine declared that it was much
 better than nuts. She assumed the position of mistress of the
 establishment, and cut Serge’s bread for him, for she would not trust him
 with the knife. At last she made him store away in the ‘cupboard’ the few
 drops of wine that remained at the bottom of the bottle. He was also
 ordered to sweep the grass. Then Albine lay down at full length.
 

 ‘We are going to sleep now, you know. You must lie down by my side.’ 
 

 He did as he was ordered. They lay there stiffly staring into the air, and
 saying that they were asleep, and that it was very nice. After a while,
 however, they drew slightly away from one another, averting their heads as
 if they felt some discomfort. And at last breaking the silence which had
 fallen between them, Serge exclaimed: ‘I love you very much.’ 
 

 It was love such as it is without any sensual feeling; that instinctive
 love which wakens in the bosom of a little man ten years old at the sight
 of some white-robed baby-girl. The meadow-lands, spreading around them all
 open and free, dissipated the slight fear each felt of the other. They
 knew that they lay there, seen of all the herbage, that the blue sky
 looked down upon them through the light foliage of the willows, and the
 thought was pleasant to them. The willow canopy over their heads was a
 mere open screen. The shade it cast was so imperceptible that it wafted to
 them none of the languor that some dim coppice might have done. From the
 far-off horizon came a healthy breeze fraught with all the freshness of
 the grassy sea, swelling here and there into waves of flowers; while, at
 their feet, the stream, childlike as they were, flowed idly along with a
 gentle babbling that sounded to them like the laughter of a companion. Ah!
 happy solitude, so tranquil and placid, immensity wherein the little patch
 of grass serving as their couch took the semblance of an infant’s cradle.
 

 ‘There, that’s enough; said Albine, getting up; ‘we’ve rested long
 enough.’ 
 

 Serge seemed a little surprised at this speedy termination of their sleep.
 He stretched out his arm and caught hold of Albine, as though to draw her
 near him again; and when she, laughing, dropped upon her knees he grasped
 her elbows and gazed up at her. He knew not to what impulse he was
 yielding. But when she had freed herself, and again had risen to her feet,
 he buried his face amongst the grass where she had lain, and which still
 retained the warmth of her body.
 

 ‘Yes,’ he said at last, ‘it is time to get up,’ and then he rose from the
 ground.
 

 They scoured the meadow-lands until evening began to fall. They went on
 and on, inspecting their garden. Albine walked in front, sniffing like a
 young dog, and saying nothing, but she was ever in search of the happy
 glade, although where they found themselves there were none of the big
 trees of which her thoughts were full. Serge meanwhile indulged in all
 kinds of clumsy gallantry. He rushed forward so hastily to thrust the tall
 herbage aside, that he nearly tripped her up; and he almost tore her arm
 from her body as he tried to assist her over the brooks. Their joy was
 great when they came to the three other streams. The first flowed over a
 bed of pebbles, between two rows of willows, so closely planted that they
 had to grope between the branches with the risk of falling into some deep
 part of the water. It only rose to Serge’s knees, however, and having
 caught Albine in his arms he carried her to the opposite bank, to save her
 from a wetting. The next stream flowed black with shade beneath a lofty
 canopy of foliage, passing languidly onward with the gentle rustling and
 rippling of the satin train of some lady, dreamily sauntering through the
 woodland depths. It was a deep, cold, and rather dangerous-looking stream,
 but a fallen tree that stretched from bank to bank served them as a
 bridge. They crossed over, bestriding the tree with dangling feet, at
 first amusing themselves by stirring the water which looked like a mirror
 of burnished steel, but then suddenly hastening, frightened by the strange
 eyes which opened in the depths of the sleepy current at the slightest
 splash. But it was the last stream which delayed them the most. It was
 sportive like themselves, it flowed more slowly at certain bends, whence
 it started off again with merry ripples, past piles of big stones, into
 the shelter of some clump of trees, and grew calmer once more. It
 exhibited every humour as it sped along over soft sand or rocky boulders,
 over sparkling pebbles or greasy clay, where leaping frogs made yellow
 puddles. Albine and Serge dabbled about in delight, and even walked
 homewards through the stream in preference to remaining on the bank. At
 every little island that divided the current they landed. They conquered
 the savage spot or rested beneath the lofty canes and reeds, which seemed
 to grow there expressly as shelter for shipwrecked adventurers. Thus they
 made a delightful progress, amused by the changing scenery of the banks,
 enlivened by the merry humour of the living current.
 

 But when they were about to leave the river, Serge realised that Albine
 was still seeking something along the banks, on the island, even among the
 plants that slept on the surface of the water. He was obliged to go and
 pull her from the midst of a patch of water-lilies whose broad leaves set
 collerettes around her limbs. He said nothing, but shook his finger
 at her. And at last they went home, walking along, arm in arm, like young
 people after a day’s outing. They looked at each other, and thought one
 another handsomer and stronger than before, and of a certainty their
 laughter had a different ring from that with which it had sounded in the
 morning.
 

 
 
 

 And when he saw Albine shrug her shoulders with a weary air, he added, in
 a teasing kind of way, ‘You have got tired of looking for your tree,
 then?’ 
 

 They joked about the tree all day and made fun of it. It didn’t exist. It
 was only a nursery-story. Yet they both spoke of it with a slight feeling
 of awe. And on the morrow they settled that they would go to the far end
 of the park and pay a visit to the great forest-trees which Serge had not
 yet seen. Albine refused to take anything along with them. They
 breakfasted before starting and did not set off till late. The heat of the
 sun, which was then great, brought them a feeling of languor, and they
 sauntered along gently, side by side, seeking every patch of sheltering
 shade. They lingered neither in the garden nor the orchard, through which
 they had to pass. When they gained the shady coolness beneath the big
 trees, they dropped into a still slower pace; and, without a word, but
 with a deep sigh, as though it were welcome relief to escape from the
 glare of day, they pushed on into the forest’s depths. And when they had
 nothing but cool green leaves about them, when no glimpse of the sunlit
 expanse was afforded by any gap in the foliage, they looked at each other
 and smiled, with a feeling of vague uneasiness.
 

 ‘How nice it is here!’ murmured Serge.
 

 Albine simply nodded her head. A choking sensation in her throat prevented
 her from speaking. Their arms were not passed as usual round each other’s
 waist, but swung loosely by their sides. They walked along without
 touching each other, and with their heads inclined towards the ground.
 

 But Serge suddenly stopped short on seeing tears trickle down Albine’s
 cheeks and mingle with the smile that played around her lips.
 

 ‘What is the matter with you?’ he exclaimed; ‘are you in pain? Have you
 hurt yourself?’ 
 

 ‘No, don’t you see I’m smiling? I don’t know how it is, but the scent of
 all these trees forces tears into my eyes.’ She glanced at him, and then
 resumed: ‘Why, you’re crying too! You see you can’t help it.’ 
 

 ‘Yes,’ he murmured, ‘all this deep shade affects one. It seems so
 peaceful, so mournful here that one feels a little sad. But you must tell
 me, you know, if anything makes you really unhappy. I have not done
 anything to annoy you, have I? you are not vexed with me?’ 
 

 She assured him that she was not. She was quite happy, she said.
 

 ‘Then why are you not enjoying yourself more? Shall we have a race?’ 
 

 ‘Oh! no, we can’t race,’ she said, disdainfully, with a pout. And when he
 went on to suggest other amusements, such as bird-nesting or gathering
 strawberries or violets, she replied a little impatiently: ‘We are too big
 for that sort of thing. It is childish to be always playing. Doesn’t it
 please you better to walk on quietly by my side?’ 
 

 She stepped along so prettily, that it was, indeed, a pleasure to hear the
 pit-pat of her little boots on the hard soil of the path. Never before had
 he paid attention to the rhythmic motion of her figure, the sweep of her
 skirts that followed her with serpentine motion. It was happiness never to
 be exhausted, to see her thus walking sedately by his side, for he was
 ever discovering some new charm in the lissom suppleness of her limbs.
 

 ‘You are right,’ he said, ‘this is really the best. I would walk by your
 side to the end of the world, if you wished it.’ 
 

 A little further on, however, he asked her if she were not tired, and
 hinted that he would not be sorry to have a rest himself.
 

 ‘We might sit down for a few minutes,’ he suggested in a stammering voice.
 

 ‘No,’ she replied, ‘I don’t want to.’ 
 

 ‘But we might lie down, you know, as we did in the meadows the other day.
 We should be quite comfortable.’ 
 

 ‘No, no; I don’t want to.’ 
 

 And she suddenly sprang aside, as if scared by the masculine arms
 outstretched towards her. Serge called her a big stupid, and tried to
 catch her. But at the light touch of his fingers she cried out with such
 an expression of pain that he drew back, trembling.
 

 ‘I have hurt you?’ he said.
 

 She did not reply for a moment, surprised, herself, at her cry of fear,
 and already smiling at her own alarm.
 

 ‘No; leave me, don’t worry me;’ and she added in a grave tone, though she
 tried to feign jocularity: ‘you know that I have my tree to look for.’ 
 

 Then Serge began to laugh, and offered to help her in her search. He
 conducted himself very gently in order that he might not again alarm her,
 for he saw that she was even yet trembling, though she had resumed her
 slow walk beside him. What they were contemplating was forbidden, and
 could bring them no luck; and he, like her, felt a delightful awe, which
 thrilled him at each repeated sigh of the forest trees. The perfume of the
 foliage, the soft green light which filtered through the leaves, the
 soughing silence of the undergrowth, filled them with tremulous
 excitement, as though the next turn of the path might lead them to some
 perilous happiness.
 

 And for hours they walked on under the cool trees. They retained their
 reserved attitude towards each other, and scarcely exchanged a word,
 though they never left each other’s side, but went together through the
 darkest greenery of the forest. At first their way lay through a jungle of
 saplings with trunks no thicker than a child’s wrist. They had to push
 them aside, and open a path for themselves through the tender shoots which
 threw a wavy lacework of foliage before their eyes. The saplings closed up
 again behind them, leaving no trace of their passage, and they struggled
 on and on at random, ignorant of where they might be, and leaving nothing
 behind them to mark their progress, save a momentary waving of shaken
 boughs. Albine, weary of being unable to see more than three steps in
 front of her, was delighted when they at last found themselves free of
 this jungle, whose end they had long tried to discover. They had now
 reached a little clearing, whence several narrow paths, fringed with green
 hedges, struck out in various directions, twisting hither and thither,
 intersecting one another, bending and stretching in the most capricious
 fashion. Albine and Serge rose on tip-toes to peep over the hedges; but
 they were in no haste, and would willingly have stayed where they were,
 lost in the mazy windings, without ever getting anywhere, if they had not
 seen before them the proud lines of the lofty forest trees. They passed at
 last beneath their shade, solemnly and with a touch of sacred awe, as when
 one enters some vaulted cathedral. The straight lichen-stained trunks of
 the mighty trees, of a dingy grey, like discoloured stone, towered
 loftily, line by line, like a far-reaching infinity of columns. Naves
 opened far away, with lower, narrower aisles; naves strangely bold in
 their proportions, whose supporting pillars were very slender, richly
 caned, so finely chiselled that everywhere they allowed a glimpse of the
 blue heavens. A religious silence reigned beneath the giant arches, the
 ground below lay hard as stone in its austere nakedness; not a blade of
 green was there, nought but a ruddy dust of dead leaves. And Serge and
 Albine listened to their ringing footsteps as they went on, thrilled by
 the majestic solitude of this temple.
 

 Here, indeed, if anywhere, must be the much-sought tree, beneath whose
 shade perfect happiness had made its home. They felt that it was nigh,
 such was the delight which stole through them amidst the dimness of those
 mighty arches. The trees seemed to be creatures of kindliness, full of
 strength and silence and happy restfulness. They looked at them one by
 one, and they loved them all; and they awaited from their majestic
 tranquillity some revelation whereby they themselves might grow, expand
 into the bliss of strong and perfect life. The maples, the ashes, the
 hornbeams, the cornels, formed a nation of giants, a multitude full of
 proud gentleness, who lived in peace, knowing that the fall of any one of
 them would have sufficed to wreck a whole corner of the forest. The elms
 displayed colossal bodies and limbs full of sap, scarce veiled by light
 clusters of little leaves. The birches and the alders, delicate as sylphs,
 swayed their slim figures in the breeze to which they surrendered the
 foliage that streamed around them like the locks of goddesses already half
 metamorphosed into trees. The planes shot up regularly with glossy
 tattooed bark, whence scaly fragments fell. Down a gentle slope descended
 the larches, resembling a band of barbarians, draped in sayons of
 woven greenery. But the oaks were the monarchs of all—the mighty
 oaks, whose sturdy trunks thrust out conquering arms that barred the sun’s
 approach from all around them; Titan-like trees, oft lightning-struck,
 thrown back in postures like those of unconquered wrestlers, with
 scattered limbs that alone gave birth to a whole forest.
 

 Could the tree which Serge and Albine sought be one of those colossal
 oaks? or was it one of those lovely planes, or one of those pale, maidenly
 birches, or one of those creaking elms? Albine and Serge still plodded on,
 unable to tell, completely lost amongst the crowding trees. For a moment
 they thought they had found the object of their quest in the midst of a
 group of walnut trees from whose thick foliage fell so cold a shadow that
 they shivered beneath it. Further on they felt another thrill of emotion
 as they came upon a little wood of chestnut trees, green with moss and
 thrusting out big strange-shaped branches, on which one might have built
 an aerial village. But further still Albine caught sight of a clearing,
 whither they both ran hastily. Here, in the midst of a carpet of fine
 turf, a locust tree had set a very toppling of greenery, a foliaged Babel,
 whose ruins were covered with the strangest vegetation. Stones, sucked up
 from the ground by the mounting sap, still remained adhering to the trunk.
 High branches bent down to earth again, and, taking root, surrounded the
 parent tree with lofty arches, a nation of new trunks which ever increased
 and multiplied. Upon the bark, seared with bleeding wounds, were ripening
 fruit-pods; the mere effort of bearing fruit strained the old monster’s
 skin until it split. The young folks walked slowly round it, passing under
 the arched branches which formed as it were the streets of a city, and
 stared at the gaping cracks of the naked roots. Then they went off, for
 they had not felt there the supernatural happiness they sought.
 

 ‘Where are we?’ asked Serge.
 

 Albine did not know. She had never before come to this part of the park.
 They were now in a grove of cytisus and acacias, from whose clustering
 blossoms fell a soft, almost sugary perfume. ‘We are quite lost,’ she
 laughed. ‘I don’t know these trees at all.’ 
 

 ‘But the garden must come to an end somewhere,’ said Serge. ‘When we get
 to the end, you will know where you are, won’t you?’ 
 

 ‘No,’ she answered, waving her hands afar.
 

 They fell into silence; never yet had the vastness of the park filled them
 with such pleasure. They joyed at knowing that they were alone in so
 far-spreading a domain that even they themselves could not reach its
 limits.
 

 ‘Well, we are lost,’ said Serge, gaily; then humbly drawing near her he
 inquired: ‘You are not afraid, are you?’ 
 

 ‘Oh! no. There’s no one except you and me in the garden. What could I be
 afraid of? The walls are very high. We can’t see them, but they guard us,
 you know.’ 
 

 Serge was now quite close to her, and he murmured, ‘But a little time ago
 you were afraid of me.’ 
 

 She looked him straight in the face, perfectly calm, without the least
 faltering in her glance. ‘You hurt me,’ she replied, ‘but you are
 different now. Why should I be afraid of you?’ 
 

 ‘Then you will let me hold you like this. We will go back under the
 trees.’ 
 

 ‘Yes, you may put your arm around me, it makes me feel happy. And we’ll
 walk slowly, eh? so that we may not find our way again too soon.’ 
 

 He had passed his arm round her waist, and it was thus that they sauntered
 back to the shade of the great forest trees, under whose arching vaults
 they slowly went, with love awakening within them. Albine said that she
 felt a little tired, and rested her head on Serge’s shoulder. The fabulous
 tree was now forgotten. They only sought to draw their faces nearer
 together that they might smile in one another’s eyes. And it was the
 trees, the maples, the elms, the oaks, with their soft green shade, that
 whisperingly suggested to them the first words of love.
 

 ‘I love you!’ said Serge, while his breath stirred the golden hair that
 clustered round Albine’s temples. He tried to think of other words, but he
 could only repeat, ‘I love you! I love you!’ 
 

 Albine listened with a delightful smile upon her face. The music of her
 heart was in accord with his.
 

 ‘I love you! I love you!’ she sighed, with all the sweetness of her soft
 young voice.
 

 Then, lifting up her blue eyes, in which the light of love was dawning,
 she asked, ‘How do you love me?’ 
 

 Serge reflected for a moment. The forest was wrapped in solemn quietude,
 the lofty naves quivered only with the soft footsteps of the young pair.
 

 ‘I love you beyond everything,’ he answered. ‘You are more beautiful than
 all else that I see when I open my window in the morning. When I look at
 you, I want nothing more. If I could have you only, I should be perfectly
 happy.’ 
 

 She lowered her eyes, and swayed her head as if accompanying a strain of
 music. ‘I love you,’ he went on. ‘I know nothing about you. I know not who
 you are, nor whence you came. You are neither my mother nor my sister; and
 yet I love you to a point that I have given you my whole heart and kept
 nought of it for others. Listen, I love those cheeks of yours, so soft and
 satiny; I love your mouth with its rose-sweet breath; I love your eyes, in
 which I see my own love reflected; I love even your eyelashes, even those
 little veins which blue the whiteness of your temples. Ah! yes, I love
 you, I love you, Albine.’ 
 

 ‘And I love you, too,’ she answered. ‘You are strong, and tall, and
 handsome. I love you, Serge.’ 
 

 For a moment or two they remained silent, enraptured. It seemed to them
 that soft, flute-like music went before them, that their own words came
 from some dulcet orchestra which they could not see. Shorter and shorter
 became their steps as they leaned one towards the other, ever threading
 their way amidst the mighty trees. Afar off through the long vista of the
 colonnades were glimpses of waning sunlight, showing like a procession of
 white-robed maidens entering church for a betrothal ceremony amid the low
 strains of an organ.
 

 ‘And why do you love me?’ asked Albine again.
 

 He only smiled, and did not answer her immediately; then he said, ‘I love
 you because you came to me. That expresses all.... Now we are together and
 we love one another. It seems to me that I could not go on living if I did
 not love you. You are the very breath of my life.’ 
 

 He bent his head, speaking almost as though he were in a dream.
 

 ‘One does not know all that at first. It grows up in one as one’s heart
 grows. One has to grow, one has to get strong.... Do you remember how we
 loved one another though we didn’t speak of it? One is childish and silly
 at first. Then, one fine day, it all becomes clear, and bursts out. You
 see, we have nothing to trouble about; we love one another because our
 love and our life are one.’ 
 

 Albine’s head was cast back, her eyes were tightly closed, and she scarce
 drew her breath. Serge’s caressing words enraptured her: ‘Do you really,
 really love me?’ she murmured, without opening her eyes.
 

 Serge remained silent, sorely troubled that he could find nothing further
 to say to prove to her the force of his love. His eyes wandered over her
 rosy face, which lay upon his shoulder with the restfulness of sleep. Her
 eyelids were soft as silk. Her moist lips were curved into a bewitching
 smile, her brow was pure white, with just a rim of gold below her hair. He
 would have liked to give his whole being with the word which seemed to be
 upon his tongue but which he could not utter. Again he bent over her, and
 seemed to consider on what sweet spot of that fair face he should whisper
 the supreme syllables. But he said nothing, he only breathed a little
 sigh. Then he kissed Albine’s lips.
 

 ‘Albine, I love you!’ 
 

 ‘I love you, Serge!’ 
 

 Then they stopped short, thrilled, quivering with that first love kiss.
 She had opened her eyes quite widely. He was standing with his lips
 protruding slightly towards hers. They looked at each other without a
 blush. They felt they were under the influence of some sovereign power. It
 was like the realisation of a long dreamt-of meeting, in which they beheld
 themselves grown, made one for the other, for ever joined. For a moment
 they remained wondering, raising their eyes to the solemn vault of
 greenery above them, questioning the tranquil nation of trees as if
 seeking an echo of their kiss. But, beneath the serene complacence of the
 forest, they yielded to prolonged, ringing lovers’ gaiety, full of all the
 tenderness now born.
 

 ‘Tell me how long you have loved me. Tell me everything. Did you love me
 that day when you lay sleeping upon my hand? Did you love me when I fell
 out of the cherry tree, and you stood beneath it, stretching out your arms
 to catch me, and looking so pale? Did you love me when you took hold of me
 round the waist in the meadows to help me over the streams?’ 
 

 ‘Hush, let me speak. I have always loved you. And you, did you love me;
 did you?’ 
 

 Until the evening closed round them they lived upon that one word ‘love,’ 
 in which they ever seemed to find some new sweetness. They brought it into
 every sentence, ejaculated it inconsequentially, merely for the pleasure
 they found in pronouncing it. Serge, however, did not think of pressing a
 second kiss to Albine’s lips. The perfume of the first sufficed them in
 their purity. They had found their way again, or rather had stumbled upon
 it, for they had paid no attention to the paths they took. As they left
 the forest, twilight had fallen, and the moon was rising, round and
 yellow, between the black foliage. It was a delightful walk home through
 the park, with that discreet luminary peering at them through the gaps in
 the big trees. Albine said that the moon was surely following them. The
 night was balmy, warm too with stars. Far away a long murmur rose from the
 forest trees, and Serge listened, thinking: ‘They are talking of us.’ 
 

 When they reached the parterre, they passed through an atmosphere of
 sweetest perfumes; the perfume of flowers at night, which is richer, more
 caressing than by day, and seems like the very breath of slumber.
 

 ‘Good night, Serge.’ 
 

 ‘Good night, Albine.’ 
 

 They clasped each other by the hand on the landing of the first floor,
 without entering the room where they usually wished each other good night.
 They did not kiss. But Serge, when he was alone, remained seated on the
 edge of his bed, listening to Albine’s every movement in the room above.
 He was weary with happiness, a happiness that benumbed his limbs.
 

 
 
 

 For the next few days Albine and Serge experienced a feeling of
 embarrassment. They avoided all allusion to their walk beneath the trees.
 They had not again kissed each other, or repeated their confession of
 love. It was not any feeling of shame which had sealed their lips, but
 rather a fear of in any way spoiling their happiness. When they were
 apart, they lived upon the dear recollection of love’s awakening, plunged
 into it, passed once more through the happy hours which they had spent,
 with their arms around each other’s waist, and their faces close together.
 It all ended by throwing them both into a feverish state. They looked at
 each other with heavy eyes, and talked, in a melancholy mood, of things
 that did not interest them in the least. Then, after a long interval of
 silence, Serge would say to Albine in a tone full of anxiety: ‘You are
 ill?’ 
 

 But she shook her head as she answered, ‘No, no. It is you who are not
 well; your hands are burning.’ 
 

 The thought of the park filled them with vague uneasiness which they could
 not understand. They felt that danger lurked for them in some by-path, and
 would seize them and do them hurt. They never spoke about these
 disquieting thoughts, but certain timid glances revealed to them the
 mutual anguish which held them apart as though they were foes. One
 morning, however, Albine ventured, after much hesitation, to say to Serge:
 ‘It is wrong of you to keep always indoors. You will fall ill again.’ 
 

 Serge laughed in rather an embarrassed way. ‘Bah!’ he muttered, ‘we have
 been everywhere, we know all the garden by heart.’ 
 

 But Albine shook her head, and in a whisper replied, ‘No, no, we don’t
 know the rocks, we have never been to the springs. It was there that I
 warmed myself last winter. There are some nooks where the stones seem to
 be actually alive.’ 
 

 The next morning, without having said another word on the subject, they
 set out together. They climbed up to the left behind the grotto where the
 marble woman lay slumbering; and as they set foot on the lowest stones,
 Serge remarked: ‘We must see everything. Perhaps we shall feel quieter
 afterwards.’ 
 

 The day was very hot, there was thunder in the air. They had not ventured
 to clasp each other’s waist; but stepped along, one behind the other,
 glowing beneath the sunlight. Albine took advantage of a widening of the
 path to let Serge go on in front; for the warmth of his breath upon her
 neck troubled her. All around them the rocks arose in broad tiers, storeys
 of huge flags, bristling with coarse vegetation. They first came upon
 golden gorse, clumps of sage, thyme, lavender, and other balsamic plants,
 with sour-berried juniper trees and bitter rosemary, whose strong scent
 made them dizzy. Here and there the path was hemmed in by holly, that grew
 in quaint forms like cunningly wrought metal work, gratings of blackened
 bronze, wrought iron, and polished copper, elaborately ornamented, covered
 with prickly rosaces. And before reaching the springs, they had to
 pass through a pine-wood. Its shadow seemed to weigh upon their shoulders
 like lead. The dry needles crackled beneath their feet, throwing up a
 light resinous dust which burned their lips.
 

 ‘Your garden doesn’t make itself very agreeable just here,’ said Serge,
 turning towards Albine.
 

 They smiled at each other. They were now near the edge of the springs. The
 sight of the clear waters brought them relief. Yet these springs did not
 hide beneath a covering of verdure, like those that bubble up on the
 plains and set thick foliage growing around them that they may slumber
 idly in the shade. They shot up in the full light of day from a cavity in
 the rock, without a blade of grass near by to tinge the clear water with
 green. Steeped in the sunshine they looked silvery. In their depths the
 sun beat against the sand in a breathing living dust of light. And they
 darted out of their basin like arms of purest white, they rebounded like
 nude infants at play, and then suddenly leapt down in a waterfall whose
 curve suggested a woman’s breast.
 

 ‘Dip your hands in,’ cried Albine; ‘the water is icy cold at the bottom.’ 
 

 They were indeed able to refresh their hot hands. They threw water over
 their faces too, and lingered there amidst the spray which rose up from
 the streaming springs.
 

 ‘Look,’ cried Albine; ‘look, there is the garden, and there are the
 meadows and the forest.’ 
 

 For a moment they looked at the Paradou spread out beneath their feet.
 

 ‘And you see,’ she added, ‘there isn’t the least sign of any wall. The
 whole country belongs to us, right up to the sky.’ 
 

 By this time, almost unawares, they had slipped their arms round each
 other’s waist. The coolness of the springs had soothed their feverish
 disquietude. But just as they were going away, Albine seemed to recall
 something and led Serge back again, saying:
 

 ‘Down there, below the rocks, a long time ago, I once saw the wall.’ 
 

 ‘But there is nothing to be seen,’ replied Serge, turning a little pale.
 

 ‘Yes, yes; it must be behind that avenue of chestnut trees on the other
 side of those bushes.’ 
 

 Then, on feeling Serge’s arm tremble, she added: ‘But perhaps I am
 mistaken.... Yet I seem to remember that I suddenly came upon it as I left
 the avenue. It stopped my way, and was so high that I felt a little
 afraid. And a few steps farther on, I came upon another surprise. There
 was a huge hole in it, through which I could see the whole country
 outside.’ 
 

 Serge looked at her with entreaty in his eyes. She gave a little shrug of
 her shoulders to reassure him, and went on: ‘But I stopped the hole up; I
 have told you that we are quite alone, and we are. I stopped it up at
 once. I had my knife with me, and I cut down some brambles and rolled up
 some big stones. I would defy even a sparrow to force its way through. If
 you like, we will go and look at it one of these days, and then you will
 be satisfied.’ 
 

 But he shook his head. Then they went away together, still holding each
 other by the waist; but they had grown anxious once more. Serge gazed down
 askance at Albine’s face, and she felt perturbed beneath his glance. They
 would have liked to go down again at once, and thus escape the uneasiness
 of a longer walk. But, in spite of themselves, as though impelled by some
 stronger power, they skirted a rocky cliff and reached a table-land, where
 once more they found the intoxication of the full sunlight. They no longer
 inhaled the soft languid perfumes of aromatic plants, the musky scent of
 thyme, and the incense of lavender. Now they were treading a foul-smelling
 growth under foot; wormwood with bitter, penetrating smell; rue that
 reeked like putrid flesh; and hot valerian, clammy with aphrodisiacal
 exudations. Mandragoras, hemlocks, hellebores, dwales, poured forth their
 odours, and made their heads swim till they reeled and tottered one
 against the other.
 

 ‘Shall I hold you up?’ Serge asked Albine, as he felt her leaning heavily
 upon him.
 

 He was already pressing her in his arms, but she struggled out of his
 grasp, and drew a long breath.
 

 ‘No; you stifle me,’ she said. ‘Leave me alone. I don’t know what is the
 matter with me. The ground seems to give way under my feet. It is there I
 feel the pain.’ 
 

 She took hold of his hand and laid it upon her breast. Then Serge turned
 quite pale. He was even more overcome than she. And both had tears in
 their eyes as they saw each other thus ill and troubled, unable to think
 of a remedy for the evil which had fallen upon them. Were they going to
 die here of that mysterious, suffocating faintness?
 

 ‘Come and sit down in the shade,’ said Serge. ‘It is these plants which
 are poisoning us with their noxious odours.’ 
 

 He led her gently along by her finger-tips, for she shivered and trembled
 when he but touched her wrist. It was beneath a fine cedar, whose level
 roof-like branches spread nearly a dozen yards around, that she seated
 herself. Behind grew various quaint conifers; cypresses, with soft flat
 foliage that looked like heavy lace; spruce firs, erect and solemn, like
 ancient druidical pillars, still black with the blood of sacrificed
 victims; yews, whose dark robes were fringed with silver; evergreen trees
 of all kinds, with thick-set foliage, dark leathery verdure, splashed here
 and there with yellow and red. There was a weird-looking araucaria that
 stood out strangely with large regular arms resembling reptiles grafted
 one on the other, and bristling with imbricated leaves that suggested the
 scales of an excited serpent. In this heavy shade, the warm air lulled one
 to voluptuous drowsiness. The atmosphere slept, breathless; and a perfume
 of Eastern love, the perfume that came from the painted lips of the
 Shunamite, was exhaled by the odorous trees.
 

 ‘Are you not going to sit down?’ said Albine.
 

 And she slipped a little aside to make room for him; but Serge stepped
 back and remained standing. Then, as she renewed her request, he dropped
 upon his knees, a little distance away, and said, softly: ‘No, I am more
 feverish even than you are; I should make you hot. If I wasn’t afraid of
 hurting you, I would take you in my arms, and clasp you so tightly that we
 should no longer feel any pain.’ 
 

 He dragged himself nearer to her on his knees.
 

 ‘Oh! to have you in my arms! In the night I awake from dreams in which I
 see you near me; but, alas! you are ever far away. There seems to be some
 wall built up between us which I can never beat down. And yet I am now
 quite strong again; I could catch you up in my arms and swing you over my
 shoulder, and carry you off as though you belonged to me.’ 
 

 He had let himself sink upon his elbows, in an attitude of deep adoration.
 And he breathed a kiss upon the hem of Albine’s skirt. But at this the
 girl sprang up, as though it was she herself that had received the kiss.
 She hid her brow with her hands, perturbed, quivering, and stammering
 forth: ‘Don’t! don’t! I beg of you. Let us go on.’ 
 

 She did not hurry away, but let Serge follow her as she walked slowly on,
 stumbling against the roots of the plants, and with her hands still
 clasped round her head, as though to check the excitement that thrilled
 her. When they came out of the little wood, they took a few steps over
 ledges of rocks, on which a whole nation of ardent fleshy plants was
 squatting. It was like a crawling, writhing assemblage of hideous nameless
 monsters such as people a nightmare; monsters akin to spiders,
 caterpillars, and wood-lice, grown to gigantic proportions, some with bare
 glaucous skins, others tufted with filthy matted hairs, whilst many had
 sickly limbs—dwarf legs, and shrivelled, palsied arms—sprawling
 around them. And some displayed horrid dropsical bellies; some had spines
 bossy with hideous humps, and others looked like dislocated skeletons.
 Mamillaria threw up living pustules, a crawling swarm of greenish
 tortoises, bristling hideously with long hairs that were stiffer than
 iron. The echinocacti, which showed more flesh, suggested nests of young
 writhing, knotted vipers. The echinopses were mere excrescent red-haired
 growths that made one think of huge insects rolled into balls. The
 prickly-pears spread out fleshy leaves spotted with ruddy spikes that
 resembled swarms of microscopic bees. The gasterias sprawled about like
 big shepherd-spiders turned over on their backs, with long-speckled and
 striated legs. The cacti of the cereus family showed a horrid vegetation,
 huge polyps, the diseases of an overheated soil, the maladies of poisoned
 sap. But the aloes, languidly unfolding their hearts, were particularly
 numerous and conspicuous. Among them one found every possible tint of
 green, pale green and vivid, yellowish green and greyish, browny green,
 dashed with a ruddy tone, and deep green, fringed with pale gold. And the
 shapes of their leaves were as varied as their tints. Some were broad and
 heart-shaped, others were long and narrow like sword-blades; some bristled
 with spikey thorns, while yet others looked as though they had been
 cunningly hemmed at the edges. There were giant ones, in lonely majesty,
 with flower stalks that towered up aloft like poles wreathed with rosy
 coral; and there were tiny ones clustering thickly together on one and the
 same stem, and throwing forth on all sides leaves that gleamed and
 quivered like adders’ tongues.
 

 ‘Let us go back to the shade,’ begged Serge. ‘You can sit down there as
 you did just now, and I will lie at your feet and talk to you.’ 
 

 Where they stood the sun rays fell like torrential rain. It was as if the
 triumphant orb seized upon the shadowless ground, and strained it to his
 blazing breast. Albine grew faint, staggered, and turned to Serge for
 support.
 

 But the moment they felt each other’s touch, they fell together without
 even a word. It was as though the very rock beneath them had opened, as
 though they were ever going down and down. Their hands sought each other
 caressingly, embracingly, but such keen anguish did they experience that
 they suddenly tore themselves apart, and fled, each in a different
 direction. Serge did not cease running till he had reached the pavilion,
 and had thrown himself upon his bed, his brain on fire, and despair in his
 heart. Albine did not return till nightfall, after hours of weeping in a
 corner of the garden. It was the first time that they had not returned
 home together, tired after their long wanderings. For three days they kept
 apart, feeling terribly unhappy.
 

 
 
 

 Yet now the park was entirely their own. They had taken sovereign
 possession of it. There was not a corner of it that was not theirs to use
 as they willed. For them alone the thickets of roses put forth their
 blossoms, and the parterre exhaled its soft perfume, which lulled them to
 sleep as they lay at night with their windows open. The orchard provided
 them with food, filling Albine’s skirts with fruits, and spread over them
 the shade of its perfumed boughs, under which it was so pleasant to
 breakfast in the early morning. Away in the meadows the grass and the
 streams were all theirs; the grass, which extended their kingdom to such
 boundless distance, spreading an endless silky carpet before them; and the
 streams, which were the best of their joys, emblematic of their own purity
 and innocence, ever offering them coolness and freshness in which they
 delighted to bathe their youth. The forest, too, was entirely theirs, from
 the mighty oaks, which ten men could not have spanned, to the slim birches
 which a child might have snapped; the forest, with all its trees, all its
 shade, all its avenues and clearings, its cavities of greenery, of which
 the very birds themselves were ignorant; the forest which they used as
 they listed, as if it were a giant canopy, beneath which they might
 shelter from the noontide heat their new-born love. They reigned
 everywhere, even among the rocks and the springs, even over that gruesome
 stretch of ground that teemed with such hideous growth, and which had
 seemed to sink and give way beneath their feet, but which they loved yet
 even more than the soft grassy couches of the garden, for the strange
 thrill of passion they had felt there.
 

 Thus, now, in front of them, behind them, to the right of them and to the
 left, all was theirs. They had gained possession of the whole domain, and
 they walked through a friendly expanse which knew them, and smiled kindly
 greetings to them as they passed, devoting itself to their pleasure, like
 a faithful and submissive servitor. The sky, with its vast canopy of blue
 overhead, was also theirs to enjoy. The park walls could not enclose it,
 their eyes could ever revel in its beauty, and it entered into the joy of
 their life, at daytime with its triumphal sun, at night with its golden
 rain of stars. At every moment of the day it delighted them afresh, its
 expression ever varying. In the early morning it was pale as a maiden just
 risen from her slumber; at noon, it was flushed, radiant as with a longing
 for fruitfulness, and in the evening it became languid and breathless, as
 after keen enjoyment. Its countenance was constantly changing.
 Particularly in the evenings, at the hour of parting, did it delight them.
 The sun, hastening towards the horizon, ever found a fresh smile.
 Sometimes he disappeared in the midst of serene calmness, unflecked by a
 single cloud, sinking gradually beneath a golden sea. At other times he
 threw out crimson glories, tore his vaporous robe to shreds, and set
 amidst wavy flames that streaked the skies like the tails of gigantic
 comets, whose radiant heads lit up the crests of the forest trees. Then,
 again, extinguishing his rays one by one, he would softly sink to rest on
 shores of ruddy sand, far-reaching banks of blushing coral; and then, some
 other night, he would glide away demurely behind a heavy cloud that
 figured the grey hangings of some alcove, through which the eye could only
 detect a spark like that of a night-light. Or else he would rush to his
 couch in a tumult of passion, rolled round with white forms which
 gradually crimsoned beneath his fiery embraces, and finally disappeared
 with him below the horizon in a confused chaos of gleaming, struggling
 limbs.
 

 It was only the plants which had not made their submission. Albine and
 Serge passed like monarchs through the kingdom of animals, who rendered
 them humble and loyal obeisance. When they crossed the parterre, flights
 of butterflies arose to delight their eyes, to fan them with quivering
 wings, and to follow in their train like living sunbeams or flying
 blossoms. In the orchard, they were greeted by the birds that banqueted in
 the fruit-trees. The sparrows, the chaffinches, the golden orioles, the
 bullfinches, showed them the ripest fruit scarred by their hungry beaks;
 and while they sat astride the branches and breakfasted, birds twittered
 and sported round them like children at play, and even purloined the fruit
 beneath their very feet. Albine found even more amusement in the meadows,
 where she caught the little green frogs with eyes of gold, that lay
 squatting amongst the reeds, absorbed in contemplation; while Serge, with
 a piece of straw, poked the crickets out of their hiding-places, or
 tickled the grasshoppers to make them sing. He picked up insects of all
 colours, blue ones, red ones, yellow ones, and set them creeping upon his
 sleeve, where they gleamed and glittered like buttons of sapphire and ruby
 and topaz.
 

 Then there was all the mysterious life of the streams; the grey-backed
 fishes that threaded the dim waters, the eels whose presence was betrayed
 by a slight quivering of the water-plants, the young fry, which dispersed
 like blackish sand at the slightest sound, the long-legged flies and the
 water-beetles that ruffled into circling silvery ripples the stagnant
 surface of the pools; all that silent teeming life which drew them to the
 water and impelled them to dabble and stand in it, so that they might feel
 those millions of existences ever and ever gliding past their limbs. At
 other times, when the day was hot and languid, they would betake
 themselves beneath the voiceful shade of the forest and listen to the
 serenades of their musicians, the clear fluting of the nightingales, the
 silvery bugle-notes of the tomtits, and the far-off accompaniment of the
 cuckoos. They gazed with delight upon the swift flight of the pheasants,
 whose plumes gleamed like sudden sun rays amidst the branches, and with a
 smile they stayed their steps to let a troop of young roebucks bound past,
 or else a couple of grave stags that slackened their pace to look at them.
 Again, on other days they would climb up amongst the rocks, when the sun
 was blazing in the heavens, and find a pleasure in watching the swarms of
 grasshoppers which at the sound of their footsteps arose with a great
 crepitation of wings from the beds of thyme. The snakes that lay uncoiled
 beneath the parched bushes, or the lizards that sprawled over the red-hot
 stones, watched them with friendly eyes.
 

 Of all the life that thus teemed round them in the park, Albine and Serge
 had only become really conscious since the day when a kiss had awakened
 them to life themselves. Now it deafened them at times, and spoke to them
 in a language which they did not understand. It was that life—all
 the voices of the animal creation, all the perfumes and soft shadows of
 the flowers and trees—which perturbed them to such a point as to
 make them angry with one another. And yet throughout the whole park they
 found nothing but loving familiarity. Every plant and every creature was
 their friend. All the Paradou was one great caress.
 

 Before they had come thither, the sun had for a whole century reigned over
 it in lonely majesty. The garden, then, had known no other master; it had
 beheld him, every morning, scaling the boundary wall with his slanting
 rays, at noontide it had seen him pour his vertical heat upon the panting
 soil; and at evening it had seen him go off, on the other side, with a
 kiss of farewell upon its foliage. And so the garden had no shyness; it
 welcomed Albine and Serge, as it had so long welcomed the sun, as pleasant
 companions, with whom one puts on no ceremony. The animals, the trees, the
 streams, the rocks, all continued in an unrestrained state of nature,
 speaking aloud, living openly, without a secret, displaying the innocent
 shamelessness, the hearty tenderness of the world’s first days. Serge and
 Albine, however, suffered from these voluptuous surroundings, and at times
 felt minded to curse the garden. On the afternoon when Albine had wept so
 bitterly after their saunter amongst the rocks, she had called out to the
 Paradou, whose intensity of life and passion filled her with distress:
 

 ‘If you really be our friend, why, why do you make us so wretched?’ 
 

 
 
 

 The next morning Serge barricaded himself in his room. The perfume from
 the garden irritated him. He drew the calico curtains closely across the
 window to shut out the sight of the park. Perhaps he thought he might
 recover all his old serenity and calm if he shut himself off from that
 greenery, whose shade sent such passionate thrills quivering through him.
 

 During the long hours they spent together, Albine and he never now spoke
 of the rocks or the streams, the trees or the sky. The Paradou might no
 longer have been in existence. They strove to forget it. And yet they were
 all the time conscious of its presence on the other side of those slight
 curtains. Scented breezes forced their way in through the interstices of
 the window frame, the many voices of nature made the panes resound. All
 the life of the park laughed, chattered, and whispered in ambush beneath
 their window. As it reached them their cheeks would pale and they would
 raise their voices, seeking some occupation which might prevent them from
 hearing it.
 

 ‘Have you noticed,’ said Serge one morning during these uneasy intervals,
 ‘there is a painting of a woman over the door there? She is like you.’ 
 

 He laughed noisily as he finished speaking. They both turned to the
 paintings and dragged the table once more alongside the wall, with a
 nervous desire to occupy themselves.
 

 ‘Oh! no,’ murmured Albine. ‘She is much fatter than I am. But one can’t
 see her very well; her position is so queer.’ 
 

 They relapsed into silence. From the decayed, faded painting a scene,
 which they had never before noticed, now showed forth. It was as if the
 picture had taken shape and substance again beneath the influence of the
 summer heat. You could sea a nymph with arms thrown back and pliant figure
 on a bed of flowers which had been strewn for her by young cupids, who,
 sickle in hand, ever added fresh blossoms to her rosy couch. And nearer,
 you could also see a cloven-hoofed faun who had surprised her thus. But
 Albine repeated, ‘No, she is not like me, she is very plain.’ 
 

 Serge said nothing. He looked at the girl and then at Albine, as though he
 were comparing them one with the other. Albine pulled up one of her
 sleeves, as if to show that her arm was whiter than that of the pictured
 girl. Then they subsided into silence again, and gazed at the painting;
 and for a moment Albine’s large blue eyes turned to Serge’s grey ones,
 which were glowing.
 

 ‘You have got all the room painted again, then?’ she cried, as she sprang
 from the table. ‘These people look as though they were all coming to life
 again.’ 
 

 They began to laugh, but there was a nervous ring about their merriment as
 they glanced at the nude and frisking cupids which started to life again
 on all the panels. They no longer took those survivals of voluptuous
 eighteenth century art to represent mere children at play. They were
 disturbed by the sight of them, and as Albine felt Serge’s hot breath on
 her neck she started and left his side to seat herself on the sofa. ‘They
 frighten me,’ she murmured. ‘The men are like robbers, and the women, with
 their dying eyes, look like people who are being murdered.’ 
 

 Serge sat down in a chair, a little distance away, and began to talk of
 other matters. But they remained uneasy. They seemed to think that all
 those painted figures were gazing at them. It was as if the trooping
 cupids were springing out of the panelling, casting the flowers they held
 around them, and threatening to bind them together with the blue ribbons
 which already enchained two lovers in one corner of the ceiling. And the
 whole story of the nymph and her faun lover, from his first peep at her to
 his triumph among the flowers, seemed to burst into warm life. Were all
 those lovers, all those impudent shameless cupids about to step down from
 their panels and crowd around them? They already seemed to hear their
 panting sighs, and to feel their breath filling the spacious room with the
 perfume of voluptuousness.
 

 ‘It’s quite suffocating, isn’t it?’ sighed Albine. ‘In spite of every
 airing I have given it, the room has always seemed close to me!
 

 ‘The other night,’ said Serge, ‘I was awakened by such a penetrating
 perfume, that I called out to you, thinking you had come into the room. It
 was just like the soft warmth of your hair when you have decked it with
 heliotropes.... In the earlier times it seemed to be wafted to me from a
 distance, it was like the lingering memory of a perfume; but now I can’t
 sleep for it, and it is so strong and penetrating that it quite stupefies
 me. The alcove grows so hot, too, at night that I shall be obliged to lie
 on the couch.’ 
 

 Albine laid her fingers on her lips, and whispered, ‘It is the dead girl—she
 who once lived here.’ 
 

 They sniffed the odorous air with forced gaiety, but in reality feeling
 very troubled. Certainly never before had the room exhaled such a
 disquieting aroma. The very walls seemed to be still echoing the faint
 rustling of perfumed skirts; and the floor had retained the fragrance of
 satin slippers dropped by the bedside, and near the head of the bed itself
 Serge thought he could trace the imprint of a little hand, which had left
 behind it a clinging scent of violets. Over all the furniture the phantom
 presence of the dead girl still lingered fragrantly.
 

 ‘See, this is the armchair where she used to sit,’ cried Albine; ‘there is
 the scent of her shoulders at the back of it yet.’ 
 

 She sat down in it herself, and bade Serge drop upon his knees and kiss
 her hand.
 

 ‘You remember the day when I first let you in and said, “Good morrow, my
 dear lord!” But that wasn’t all, was it? He kissed her hands when the door
 was closed. There they are, my hands. They are yours.’ 
 

 Then they tried to resume their old frolics in order that they might
 forget the Paradou, whose joyous murmur they heard ever rising outside,
 and that they might no longer think of the pictures nor yield to the
 languor-breathing influence of the room. Albine put on an affected manner,
 leant back in her chair, and finally laughed at the foolish figure which
 Serge made at her feet.
 

 ‘You stupid!’ she said, ‘take me round the waist, and say pretty things to
 me, since you are supposed to be in love with me. Don’t you know how to
 make love then?’ 
 

 But as soon as she felt him clasp her with eager impetuosity, she began to
 struggle, and freed herself from his embrace.
 

 ‘No, no; leave me alone. I can’t bear it. I feel as though I were choking
 in this room.’ 
 

 From that day forward they felt the same kind of fear for the room as they
 already felt for the garden. Their one remaining harbour of refuge was now
 a place to be shunned and dreaded, a spot where they could no longer find
 themselves together without watching each other furtively. Albine now
 scarcely ventured to enter it, but remained near the threshold, with the
 door wide open behind her so as to afford her an immediate retreat. Serge
 lived there in solitude, a prey to sickening restlessness, half-stifling,
 lying on the couch and vainly trying to close his ears to the sighs of the
 soughing park and his nostrils to the haunting fragrance of the old
 furniture. At night he dreamt wild passionate dreams, which left him in
 the morning nervous and disquieted. He believed that he was falling ill
 again, that he would never recover plenitude of health. For days and days
 he remained there in silence, with dark rings round his sleepy eyes, only
 starting into wakefulness when Albine came to visit him. They would remain
 face to face, gazing at one another sadly, and uttering but a few soft
 words, which seemed to choke them. Albine’s eyes were even darker than
 Serge’s, and were filled with an imploring gaze.
 

 Then, after a week had gone by, Albine’s visit never lasted more than a
 few minutes. She seemed to shun him. When she came to the room, she
 appeared thoughtful, remained standing, and hurried off as soon as
 possible. When he questioned her about this change in her demeanour
 towards him, and reproached her for no longer being friendly, she turned
 her head away and avoided replying. He never could get her to tell him how
 she spent the mornings that she passed alone. She would only shake her
 head, and talk about being very idle. If he pressed her more closely, she
 bounded out of the room, just wishing him a hasty good-night as she
 disappeared through the doorway. He often noticed, however, that she had
 been crying. He observed, too, in her expression the phases of a hope that
 was never fulfilled, the perpetual struggling of a desire eager to be
 satisfied. Sometimes she seemed quite overwhelmed with melancholy,
 dragging herself about with an air of utter discouragement, like one who
 no longer had any pleasure in living. At other times she laughed lightly,
 her face shone with an expression of triumphant hope, of which, however,
 she would not yet speak, and her feet could not remain still, so eager was
 she to dart away to what seemed to her some last certainty. But on the
 following day, she would sink again into desperation, to soar afresh on
 the morrow on the pinions of renewed hope. One thing which she could not
 conceal from Serge was that she suffered from extreme lassitude. Even
 during the few moments they spent together she could not prevent her head
 from nodding, or keep herself from dozing off.
 

 Serge, recognising that she was unwilling to reply, had ceased to question
 her; and, when she now entered his room, he contented himself with casting
 an anxious glance at her, fearful lest some evening she should no longer
 have strength enough to come to him. Where could she thus reduce herself
 to such exhaustion? What perpetual struggle was it that brought about
 those alternations of joy and despair? One morning he started at the sound
 of a light footfall beneath his window. It could not be a roe venturing
 abroad in that manner. Moreover he could recognise that light footfall.
 Albine was wandering about the Paradou without him. It was from the
 Paradou that she returned to him with all those hopes and fears and inward
 wrestlings, all that lassitude which was killing her. And he could well
 guess what she was seeking out there, alone in the woody depths, with all
 the silent obstinacy of a woman who has vowed to effect her purpose. After
 that he used to listen for her steps. He dared not draw aside the curtain
 and watch her as she hurried along through the trees; but he experienced
 strange, almost painful emotion, in listening to ascertain what direction
 she took, whether she turned to right or to left, whether she went
 straight on through the flower-beds, and how far her ramble extended.
 Amidst all the noisy life of the Paradou, amidst the soughing chorus of
 the trees, the rustling of the streams, and the ceaseless songs of the
 birds, he could distinguish the gentle pit-pat of her shoes so plainly
 that he could have told whether she was stepping over the gravel near the
 rivers, the crumbling mould of the forest, or the bare ledges of the
 rocks. In time he even learned to tell, from the sound of her nervous
 footfall, whether she came back hopeful or depressed. As soon as he heard
 her step on the staircase, he hurried from the window, and he never let
 her know that he had thus followed her from afar in her wanderings. But
 she must have guessed it, for with a glance she always afterwards told him
 where she had been.
 

 ‘Stay indoors, and don’t go out,’ he begged her, with clasped hands, one
 morning when he saw her still unrecovered from the fatigue of the previous
 day. ‘You drive me to despair.’ 
 

 But she hastened away in irritation. The garden, now that it rang with
 Albine’s footfalls, seemed to have a more depressing influence than ever
 upon Serge. The pit-pat of her feet was yet another voice that called him;
 an imperious voice that echoed ever more and more loudly within him. He
 closed his ears and tried to shut out the sound, but the distant footsteps
 still echoed to him in the throbbings of his heart. And when she came
 back, in the evening, it was the whole park that came back with her, with
 the memories of their walks together, and of the slow dawn of their love,
 in the midst of conniving nature. She seemed to have grown taller and
 graver, mellowed, matured by her solitary rambles. There was nothing left
 in her of the frolicsome child, and his teeth would suddenly set at times
 when he looked at her and beheld her so desirable.
 

 One day, about noon, Serge heard Albine returning in hot haste. He had
 restrained himself from listening for her steps when she went away.
 Usually, she did not return till late, and he was amazed at her
 impetuosity as she sped along, forcing her way through the branches that
 barred her path. As she passed beneath his window, he heard her laugh; and
 as she mounted the stairway, she panted so heavily that he almost thought
 he could feel her hot breath streaming against his face. She threw the
 door wide open, and cried out: ‘I have found it!’ 
 

 Then she sat down and repeated softly, breathlessly: ‘I have found it! I
 have found it!’ 
 

 Serge, distracted, laid his fingers on her lips, and stammered: ‘Don’t
 tell me anything, I beg you. I want to know nothing of it. It will kill
 me, if you speak.’ 
 

 Then she sank into silence with gleaming eyes and lips tightly pressed
 lest the words she kept back should spring out in spite of her. And she
 stayed in the room till evening, trying to meet Serge’s glance, and
 imparting to him, each time that their eyes met, something of that which
 she had discovered. Her whole face beamed with radiance, she exhaled a
 delicious odour, she was full of life; and Serge felt that she permeated
 him through all his senses. Despairingly did he struggle against this
 gradual invasion of his being.
 

 On the morrow she returned to his room as soon as she was up.
 

 ‘Aren’t you going out?’ he asked, conscious that he would be vanquished
 should she remain there.
 

 ‘No,’ she said; she wasn’t going out any more. As by degrees she recovered
 from her fatigue he felt her becoming stronger, more triumphant. She would
 soon be able to take him by the hand and drag him to that spot, whose
 charm her silence proclaimed so loudly. That day, however, she did not
 speak; she contented herself with keeping him seated on a cushion at her
 feet. It was not till the next morning that she ventured to say: ‘Why do
 you shut yourself up here? It is so pleasant under the trees.’ 
 

 He rose from her feet, and stretched out his arms entreatingly. But she
 laughed at him.
 

 ‘Well, well, then, we won’t go out, since you would rather not.... But
 this room has such a strange scent, and we should be much more comfortable
 in the garden. It is very wrong of you to have taken such a dislike to
 it.’ 
 

 He had again settled himself at her feet in silence, his eyelids lowered,
 his features quivering with passionate emotion.
 

 ‘We won’t go out,’ she repeated, ‘so don’t worry. But do you really prefer
 these pictures to the grass and flowers in the park? Do you remember all
 we saw together? It is these paintings which make us feel so unhappy. They
 are a nuisance, always looking and watching us as they do.’ 
 

 As Serge gradually leant more closely against her, she passed her arm
 round his neck and laid his head upon her lap, while murmuring in yet a
 lower tone: ‘There is a little corner there I know, where we might be so
 very happy. Nothing would trouble us there; the fresh air would cool your
 feverishness.’ 
 

 Then she stopped, as she felt him quivering. She was afraid lest she might
 again revive his old fears. But she gradually conquered him merely by the
 caressing gaze of her blue eyes. His eyelids were now raised, and he
 rested there quietly, wholly hers, his tremor past.
 

 ‘Ah! if you only knew!’ she softly breathed; and seeing that he continued
 to smile, she went on boldly: ‘It is all a lie; it is not forbidden. You
 are a man now and ought not to be afraid. If we went there, and any danger
 threatened me, you would protect me, you would defend me, would you not?
 You could carry me off on your back, couldn’t you? I am never the least
 afraid when I have you with me. Look how strong your arms have grown. What
 is there for any one with such strong arms as yours to be afraid of?’ 
 

 She caressed him beguilingly as she spoke, stroking his hair and neck and
 shoulders with her hand.
 

 ‘No, it is not forbidden,’ she resumed. ‘That is only a story for stupids,
 and was invented, long ago, by some one who didn’t want to be disturbed in
 the most charming spot in the whole garden. As soon as you sat down on
 that grassy carpet, you would be happy and well again. Listen, then, come
 with me.’ 
 

 He shook his head but without any sign of vexation, as though indeed he
 liked thus being teased. Then after a short silence, grieved to see her
 pouting, and longing for a renewal of her caresses, he opened his lips and
 asked: ‘Where is it?’ 
 

 She did not answer him immediately. Her eyes seemed to be wandering far
 away: ‘It is over yonder,’ she murmured at last. ‘I cannot explain to you
 clearly. One has to go down the long avenue, and then to turn to the left,
 and then again to the left. We must have passed it at least a score of
 times. You might look for it for ever without finding it, if I didn’t go
 with you to show you. I could find my way to it quite straight, though I
 could never explain it to you.’ 
 

 ‘And who took you there?’ 
 

 ‘I don’t know. That morning the trees and plants seemed to drive me there.
 The long branches pushed me on, the grass bent down before me invitingly,
 the paths seemed to open expressly for me to take them. And I believe the
 animals themselves helped to lead me there, for I saw a stag trotting on
 before me as though he wanted me to follow; while a company of bullfinches
 flitted on from tree to tree, and warned me with their cries whenever I
 was about to take a wrong direction.’ 
 

 ‘And is it very beautiful?’ 
 

 Again she did not reply. Deep ecstasy filled her eyes; at last, when she
 was able to speak again, she said: ‘Ah! so beautiful, that I could never
 tell you of it. I was so charmed that I was conscious only of some supreme
 joy, which I could not name, falling from the leaves and slumbering amid
 the grass. And I ran back here to take you along with me that I might not
 be without you.’ 
 

 Then she clasped her arms round his neck again, and entreated him
 passionately, her lips almost pressed to his own.
 

 ‘Oh! you will come!’ she stammered; ‘you must come; you will make me so
 miserable if you don’t. You can’t want me to be miserable.... And even if
 you knew that you would die there, even if that shade should be fatal to
 both of us, would you hesitate or cast a regretful look behind? We should
 remain there, at the foot of the tree, and sleep on quietly for ever, in
 one anther’s arms. Ah! would it not be bliss indeed?’ 
 

 ‘Yes, yes!’ he stammered, transported by her passionate entreaties.
 

 ‘But we shall not die,’ she continued, raising her voice, and laughing
 with the laugh which proclaims woman’s victory; ‘we shall live to love
 each other. It is a tree of life, a tree whose shadow will make us
 stronger, more perfect, more complete. You will see that all will now go
 happily. Some blessed joy will assuredly descend on us from heaven! Will
 you come?’ 
 

 His face paled, and his eyelids quivered, as though too powerful a light
 were suddenly beating against them.
 

 ‘Will you come? will you come?’ she cried again, yet more passionately,
 and already half rising to her feet.
 

 He sprang up and followed her, at first with tottering steps and then with
 his arm thrown round her waist, as if he could endure no separation from
 her. He went where she went, carried along in the warm fragrance that
 streamed from her hair. And as he thus remained slightly in the rear, she
 turned upon him a face so radiant with love, such tempting lips and eyes,
 which so imperiously bade him follow, that he would have gone with her
 anywhere, trusting and unquestioning, like a dog.
 

 
 
 

 They went down and out into the garden without the smile fading from
 Serge’s face. All that he saw of the greenery around him was such as was
 reflected in the clear depths of Albine’s eyes. As they approached, the
 garden smiled and smiled again, a murmur of content sped from leaf to leaf
 and from bough to bough to the furthest depths of the avenues. For days
 and days the garden must have been hoping and expecting to see them thus,
 clinging to one another, making their peace again with the trees and
 searching for their lost love on the grassy banks. A solemn warning breath
 sighed through the branches; the afternoon sky was drowsy with heat; the
 plants raised their bowing heads to watch them pass.
 

 ‘Listen,’ whispered Albine. ‘They drop into silence as we come near them;
 but over yonder they are expecting us, they are telling each other the way
 they must lead us.... I told you we should have no trouble about the
 paths, the trees themselves will direct us with their spreading arms.’ 
 

 The whole park did, indeed, appear to be impelling them gently onward. In
 their rear it seemed as if a barrier of brush-wood had bristled up to
 prevent them from retracing their steps; while, in front of them, the
 grassy lawns spread out so invitingly, that they glided along the soft
 slopes, without thought of choosing their way.
 

 ‘And the birds are coming with us, too,’ said Albine. ‘It is the tomtits
 this time. Don’t you see them? They are skimming over the hedges, and they
 stop at each turning to see that we don’t lose our way.’ Then she added:
 ‘All the living things of the park are with us. Can’t you hear them? There
 is a deep rustling close behind us. It is the birds in the trees, the
 insects in the grass, the roebucks and the stags in the coppices, and even
 the little fishes splashing the quiet water with their beating fins. Don’t
 turn round, or you will frighten them. Ah! I am sure we have a rare train
 behind us.’ 
 

 They still walked on, unfatigued. Albine spoke only to charm Serge with
 the music of her voice, while Serge obeyed the slightest pressure of her
 hand. They knew not what they passed, but they were certain that they were
 going straight towards their goal. And as they went along, the garden
 became gradually graver, more discreet; the soughing of the branches died
 away, the streams hushed their plashing waters, the birds, the beasts, and
 the insects fell into silence. All around them reigned solemn stillness.
 

 Then Albine and Serge instinctively raised their heads. In front of them
 they beheld a colossal mass of foliage; and, as they hesitated for a
 moment, a roe, after gazing at them with its sweet soft eyes, bounded into
 the thickets.
 

 ‘It is there,’ said Albine.
 

 She led the way, her face again turned towards Serge, whom she drew with
 her, and they disappeared amid the quivering leaves, and all grew quiet
 again. They were entering into delicious peace.
 

 In the centre there stood a tree covered with so dense a foliage that one
 could not recognise its species. It was of giant girth, with a trunk that
 seemed to breathe like a living breast, and far-reaching boughs that
 stretched like protecting arms around it. It towered up there beautiful,
 strong, virile, and fruitful. It was the king of the garden, the father of
 the forest, the pride of the plants, the beloved of the sun, whose
 earliest and latest beams smiled daily on its crest. From its green vault
 poured all the joys of creation: fragrance of flowers, music of birds,
 gleams of golden light, wakeful freshness of dawn, slumbrous warmth of
 evening twilight. So strong was the sap that it burst through the very
 bark, bathing the tree with the powers of fruitfulness, making it the
 symbol of earth’s virility. Its presence sufficed to give the clearing an
 enchanting charm. The other trees built up around it an impenetrable wall,
 which isolated it as in a sanctuary of silence and twilight. There was but
 greenery there, not a scrap of sky, not a glimpse of horizon; nothing but
 a swelling rotunda, draped with green silkiness of leaves, adorned below
 with mossy velvet. And one entered, as into the liquid crystal of a
 source, a greenish limpidity, a sheet of silver reposing beneath reflected
 reeds. Colours, perfumes, sounds, quivers, all were vague, indeterminate,
 transparent, steeped in a felicity amidst which everything seemed to faint
 away. Languorous warmth, the glimmer of a summer’s night, as it fades on
 the bare shoulder of some fair girl, a scarce perceptible murmur of love
 sinking into silence, lingered beneath the motionless branches, unstirred
 by the slightest zephyr. It was hymeneal solitude, a chamber where Nature
 lay hidden in the embraces of the sun.
 

 Albine and Serge stood there in an ecstasy of joy. As soon as the tree had
 received them beneath its shade, they felt eased of all the anxious
 disquiet which had so long distressed them. The fears which had made them
 avoid each other, the fierce wrestling of spirit which had torn and
 wounded them, without consciousness on their part of what they were really
 contending against, vanished, and left them in perfect peace. Absolute
 confidence, supreme serenity, now pervaded them, they yielded
 unhesitatingly to the joy of being together in that lonely nook, so
 completely hidden from the outside world. They had surrendered themselves
 to the garden, they awaited in all calmness the behests of that tree of
 life. It enveloped them in such ecstasy of love that the whole clearing
 seemed to disappear from before their eyes, and to leave them wrapped in
 an atmosphere of perfume.
 

 ‘The air is like ripe fruit,’ murmured Albine.
 

 And Serge whispered in his turn: ‘The grass seems so full of life and
 motion, that I could almost think I was treading on your dress.’ 
 

 It was a kind of religious feeling which made them lower their voices. No
 sentiment of curiosity impelled them to raise their heads and scan the
 tree. The consciousness of its majesty weighed heavily upon them. With a
 glance Albine asked whether she had overrated the enchantment of the
 greenery, and Serge answered her with two tears that trickled down his
 cheeks. The joy that filled them at being there could not be expressed in
 words.
 

 ‘Come,’ she whispered in his ear, in a voice that was softer than a sigh.
 

 And she glided on in front of him, and seated herself at the very foot of
 the tree. Then, with a fond smile, she stretched out her hands to him;
 while he, standing before her, grasped them in his own with a responsive
 smile. Then she drew him slowly towards her and he sank down by her side.
 

 ‘Ah! do you remember,’ he said, ‘that wall which seemed to have grown up
 between us? Now there is nothing to keep us apart—you are not
 unhappy now?’ 
 

 ‘No, no,’ she answered; ‘very happy.’ 
 

 For a moment they relapsed into silence whilst soft emotion stole over
 them. Then Serge, caressing Albine, exclaimed: ‘Your face is mine; your
 eyes, your mouth, your cheeks are mine. Your arms are mine, from your
 shoulders to the tips of your nails. You are wholly mine.’ And as he spoke
 he kissed her lips, her eyes, her cheeks. He kissed her arms, with quick
 short kisses, from her fingers to her shoulders. He poured upon her a rain
 of kisses hot as a summer shower, deluging her cheeks, her forehead, her
 lips, and her neck.
 

 ‘But if you are mine, I am yours,’ said he; ‘yours for ever; for I now
 well know that you are my queen, my sovereign, whom I must worship on
 bended knee. I am here only to obey you, to lie at your feet, to
 anticipate your wishes, to shelter you with my arms, to drive away
 whatever might trouble your tranquillity. And you are my life’s goal.
 Since I first awoke in this garden, you have ever been before me; I have
 grown up that I might be yours. Ever, as my end, my reward, have I gazed
 upon your grace. You passed in the sunshine with the sheen of your golden
 hair; you were a promise that I should some day know all the mysteries and
 necessities of creation, of this earth, of these trees, these waters,
 these skies, whose last secret is yet unrevealed. I belong to you; I am
 your slave; I will listen to you and obey you, with my lips upon your
 feet.’ 
 

 He said this, bowed to the ground, adoring Woman. And Albine, full of
 pride, allowed herself to be adored. She yielded her hands, her cheeks,
 her lips, to Serge’s rapturous kisses. She felt herself indeed a queen as
 she saw him, who was so strong, bending so humbly before her. She had
 conquered him, and held him there at her mercy. With a single word she
 could dispose of him. And that which helped her to recognise her
 omnipotence was that she heard the whole garden rejoicing at her triumph,
 with gradually swelling paeans of approval.
 

 ‘Ah! if we could fly off together, if we could but die even, in one
 another’s arms,’ faltered Serge, scarce able to articulate. But Albine had
 strength enough to raise her finger as though to bid him listen.
 

 It was the garden that had planned and willed it all. For weeks and weeks
 it had been favouring and encouraging their passion, and at last, on that
 supreme day, it had lured them to that spot, and now it became the Tempter
 whose every voice spoke of love. From the flower-beds, amid the fragrance
 of the languid blossoms, was wafted a soft sighing, which told of the
 weddings of the roses, the love-joys of the violets; and never before had
 the heliotropes sent forth so voluptuous a perfume. Mingled with the soft
 air which arose from the orchard were all the exhalations of ripe fruit,
 the vanilla of apricots, the musk of oranges, all the luscious aroma of
 fruitfulness. From the meadows came fuller notes, the million sighs of the
 sun-kissed grass, the multitudinous love-plaints of legions of living
 things, here and there softened by the refreshing caresses of the
 rivulets, on whose banks the very willows palpitated with desire. And the
 forest proclaimed the mighty passion of the oaks. Through the high
 branches sounded solemn music, organ strains like the nuptial marches of
 the ashes and the birches, the hornbeams and the planes, while from the
 bushes and the young coppices arose noisy mirth like that of youthful
 lovers chasing one another over banks and into hollows amid much crackling
 and snapping of branches. From afar, too, the faint breeze wafted the
 sounds of the rocks splitting in their passion beneath the burning heat,
 while near them the spiky plants loved in a tragic fashion of their own,
 unrefreshed by the neighbouring springs, which themselves glowed with the
 love of the passionate sun.
 

 ‘What do they say?’ asked Serge, half swooning, as Albine pressed him to
 her bosom. The voices of the Paradou were growing yet more distinct. The
 animals, in their turn, joined in the universal song of nature. The
 grasshoppers grew faint with the passion of their chants; the butterflies
 scattered kisses with their beating wings. The amorous sparrows flew to
 their mates; the rivers rippled over the loves of the fishes; whilst in
 the depths of the forest the nightingales sent forth pearly, voluptuous
 notes, and the stags bellowed their love aloud. Reptiles and insects,
 every species of invisible life, every atom of matter, the earth itself
 joined in the great chorus. It was the chorus of love and of nature—the
 chorus of the whole wide world; and in the very sky the clouds were
 radiant with rapture, as to those two children Love revealed the Eternity
 of Life.
 

 
 
 

 ‘I love you, Albine,’ said Serge.
 

 ‘Serge, I love you,’ Albine answered.
 

 And never before had those syllables ‘I love you’ had for them so supreme
 a meaning. They expressed everything. Joy pervaded those young lovers, who
 had attained to the fulness of life. They felt that they were now on a
 footing of equality with the forces of the world; and with their happiness
 mingled the placid conviction that they had obeyed the universal law. And
 Serge seemed to have awakened to life, lion-like, to rule the whole far
 expanse under the free heavens. His feet planted themselves more firmly on
 the ground, his chest expanded, there was pride and confidence in his gait
 and demeanour. He took Albine by the hands, she was trembling, and he was
 obliged to support her.
 

 ‘Don’t be afraid,’ he said; ‘you are she whom I love.’ 
 

 It was Albine now who had become the submissive one. She drooped her head
 upon his shoulder, glancing up at him with anxious scrutiny. Would he
 never bear her spite for that hour of adoration in which he had called
 himself her slave? But he smiled, and stroked her hair, while she said to
 him: ‘Let me stay like this, in your arms, for I cannot walk without you.
 I will make myself so small and light, that you will scarcely know I am
 there.’ Then becoming very serious she added, ‘You must always love me;
 and I will be very obedient and do whatever you wish. I will yield to you
 in all things if you but love me.’ 
 

 Serge felt more powerful and virile on seeing her so humble. ‘Why are you
 trembling so?’ he asked her; ‘I can have no cause to reproach you.’ 
 

 But she did not answer him, she gazed almost sadly upon the tree and the
 foliage and the grass around them.
 

 ‘Foolish child!’ he said, laughing; ‘are you afraid that I shall be angry
 with you for your love? We have loved as we were meant to love. Let me
 kiss you.’ 
 

 But, dropping her eyelids so that she might not see the tree, she said, in
 a low whisper, ‘Take me away!’ 
 

 Serge led her thence, pacing slowly and giving one last glance at the spot
 which love had hallowed. The shadows in the clearing were growing darker,
 and a gentle quiver coursed through the foliage. When they emerged from
 the wood and caught sight of the sun, still shining brightly in the
 horizon, they felt easier. Everything around Serge now seemed to bend down
 before him and pay homage to his love. The garden was now nothing but an
 appanage of Albine’s beauty, and seemed to have grown larger and fairer
 amid the love-kisses of its rulers.
 

 But Albine’s joy was still tinged with disquietude. She would suddenly
 pause amid her laughter and listen anxiously.
 

 ‘What is the matter?’ asked Serge.
 

 ‘Nothing,’ she replied, casting furtive glances behind her.
 

 They did not know in what out-of-the-way corner of the park they were. To
 lose themselves in their capricious wanderings only served to amuse them
 as a rule; but that day they experienced anxious embarrassment. By degrees
 they quickened their pace, plunging more and more deeply into a labyrinth
 of bushes.
 

 ‘Don’t you hear?’ asked Albine, nervously, as she suddenly stopped short,
 almost breathless.
 

 Serge listened, a prey, in his turn, to the anxiety which the girl could
 no longer conceal.
 

 ‘All the coppice seems full of voices,’ she continued. ‘It sounds as
 though there were people deriding us. Listen! Wasn’t that a laugh that
 sounded from that tree? And over yonder did not the grass murmur something
 as my dress brushed against it?’ 
 

 ‘No, no,’ he said, anxious to reassure her, ‘the garden loves us; and, if
 it said anything, it would not be to vex or annoy us. Don’t you remember
 all the sweet words which sounded through the leaves? You are nervous and
 fancy things.’ 
 

 But she shook her head and faltered: ‘I know very well that the garden is
 our friend.... So it must be some one who has broken into it. I am certain
 I hear some one. I am trembling all over. Oh! take me away and hide me
 somewhere, I beseech you.’ 
 

 Then they went on again, scanning every tree and bush, and imagining that
 they could see faces peering at them from behind every trunk. Albine was
 certain, she said, that there were steps pursuing them in the distance.
 ‘Let us hide ourselves,’ she begged.
 

 She had turned quite scarlet. It was new-born modesty, a sense of shame
 which had laid hold of her like a fever, mantling over the snowy whiteness
 of her skin, which never previously had known that flush. Serge was
 alarmed at seeing her thus crimson, her face full of distress, her eyes
 brimming with tears. He tried to clasp her in his arms again and to soothe
 her with a caress; but she slipped away from him, and, with a despairing
 gesture, made sign that they were not alone. And her blushes grew deeper
 as her eyes fell upon her bare arms. She shuddered when her loose hanging
 hair stirred against her neck and shoulders. The slightest touch of a
 waving bough or a passing insect, the softest breath of air, now made her
 tremble as if some invisible hand were grasping at her.
 

 ‘Calm yourself,’ begged Serge, ‘there is no one. You are as crimson as
 though you had a fever. Let us rest here for a moment. Do; I beg you.’ 
 

 She had no fever at all, she said, but she wanted to get back as quickly
 as possible, so that no one might laugh at her. And, ever increasing her
 pace, she plucked handfuls of leaves and tendrils from the hedges, which
 she entwined about her. She fastened a branch of mulberry over her hair,
 twisted bindweed round her arms, and tied it to her wrists, and circled
 her neck with such long sprays of laurustinus, that her bosom was hidden
 as by a veil of leaves.
 

 And that shame of hers proved contagious. Serge, who first had jested,
 asking her if she were going to a ball, glanced at himself, and likewise
 felt alarmed and ashamed, to a point that he also wound foliage about his
 person.
 

 Meantime, they could discover no way out of the labyrinth of bushes, but
 all at once, at the end of the path, they found themselves face to face
 with an obstacle, a tall, grey, grave mass of stone. It was the wall of
 the Paradou.
 

 ‘Come away! come away!’ cried Albine.
 

 And she sought to drag him thence; but they had not taken another twenty
 steps before they again came upon the wall. They then skirted it at a ran,
 panic-stricken. It stretched along, gloomy and stern, without a break in
 its surface. But suddenly, at a point where it fringed a meadow, it seemed
 to fall away. A great breach gaped in it, like a huge window of light
 opening on to the neighbouring valley. It must have been the very hole
 that Albine had one day spoken of, which she said she had blocked up with
 brambles and stones. But the brambles now lay scattered around like
 severed bits of rope, the stones had been thrown some distance away, and
 the breach itself seemed to have been enlarged by some furious hand.
 

 
 
 

 ‘Ah! I felt sure of it,’ cried Albine, in accents of supreme despair. ‘I
 begged you to take me away—Serge, I beseech you, don’t look through
 it.’ 
 

 But Serge, in spite of himself, stood rooted to the ground, on the
 threshold of the breach through which he gazed. Down below, in the depths
 of the valley, the setting sun cast a sheet of gold upon the village of
 Les Artaud, which showed vision-like amidst the twilight in which the
 neighbouring fields were already steeped. One could plainly distinguish
 the houses that straggled along the high road; the little yards with their
 dunghills, and the narrow gardens planted with vegetables. Higher up, the
 tall cypress in the graveyard reared its dusky silhouette, and the red
 tiles on the church glowed brazier-like, the dark bell looking down on
 them like a human face, while the old parsonage at the side threw its
 doors and windows open to the evening air.
 

 ‘For pity’s sake,’ sobbed Albine, ‘don’t look out, Serge. Remember that
 you promised you would always love me. Ah! will you ever love me enough,
 now? Stay, let me cover your eyes with my hands. You know it was my hands
 that cured you. You won’t push me away.’ 
 

 But he put her from him gently. Then, while she fell down and clung to his
 legs, he passed his hands across his face, as though he were wiping from
 his brow and eyes some last lingering traces of sleep. It was yonder,
 then, that lay the unknown world, the strange land of which he had never
 dreamed without vague fear. Where had he seen that country? From what
 dream was he awakening, that he felt such keen anguish swelling up in his
 breast till it almost choked him? The village was breaking out into life
 at the close of the day’s work. The men were coming home from the fields
 with weary gait, their jackets thrown over their shoulders; the women,
 standing by their doors, were beckoning to them to hasten on; while the
 children, in noisy bands, chased the fowls about and pelted them with
 stones. In the churchyard a couple of scapegraces, a lad and a girl, were
 creeping along under the shelter of the wall in order to escape notice.
 Swarms of sparrows were retiring to roost beneath the eaves of the church;
 and, on the steps of the parsonage, a blue calico skirt had just appeared,
 of such spreading dimensions as to quite block the doorway.
 

 ‘Oh! he is looking out! he is looking out!’ sobbed Albine. ‘Listen to me.
 It was only just now that you promised to obey me. I beg of you to turn
 round and to look upon the garden. Haven’t you been very happy in the
 garden? It was the garden which gave me to you. Think of the happy days it
 has in store for us, what lasting bliss and enjoyment. Instead of which it
 will be death that will force its way through that hole, if you don’t
 quickly flee and take me with you. See, all those people yonder will come
 and thrust themselves between us. We were so quite alone, so secluded, so
 well guarded by the trees! Oh! the garden is our love! Look on the garden,
 I beg it of you on my knees!’ 
 

 But Serge was quivering. He had began to recollect. The past was
 re-awakening. He could distinctly hear the stir of the village life. Those
 peasants, those women and children, he knew them. There was the mayor,
 Bambousse, returning from Les Olivettes, calculating how much the
 approaching vintage would yield him; there were the Brichets, the husband
 crawling along, and the wife moaning with misery. There was Rosalie
 flirting with big Fortune behind a wall. He recognised also the pair in
 the churchyard, that mischievous Vincent and that bold hussy Catherine,
 who were catching big grasshoppers amongst the tombstones. Yes, and they
 had Voriau, the black dog, with them, helping them and ferreting about in
 the dry grass, and sniffing at every crack in the old stones. Under the
 eaves of the church the sparrows were twittering and bickering before
 going to roost. The boldest of them flew down and entered the church
 through the broken windows, and, as Serge followed them with his eyes, he
 recollected all the noise they had formerly made below the pulpit and on
 the step by the altar rails, where crumbs were always put for them. And
 that was La Teuse yonder, on the parsonage doorstep, looking fatter than
 ever in her blue calico dress. She was turning her head to smile at
 Desiree, who was coming up from the yard, laughing noisily. Then they both
 vanished indoors, and Serge, distracted with all these revived memories,
 stretched out his arms.
 

 ‘It is all over now,’ faltered Albine, as she sank down amongst the broken
 brambles. ‘You will never love me enough again.’ 
 

 She wept, while Serge stood rooted by the breach, straining his ears to
 catch the slightest sound that might be wafted from the village, waiting,
 as it were, for some voice that might fully awaken him. The bell in the
 church-tower had begun to sway, and slowly through the quiet evening air
 the three chimes of the Angelus floated up to the Paradou. It was a
 soft and silvery summons. The bell now seemed to be alive.
 

 ‘O God!’ cried Serge, falling on his knees, quite overcome by the emotion
 which the soft notes of the bell had excited in him.
 

 He bent down towards the ground, and he felt the three peals of the Angelus
 pass over his neck and echo through his heart. The voice of the bell
 seemed to grow louder. It was raised again sternly, pitilessly, for a few
 moments which seemed to him to be years. It summoned up before him all his
 old life, his pious childhood, his happy days at the seminary, and his
 first Masses in that burning valley of Les Artaud, where he had dreamt of
 a solitary, saintly life. He had always heard it speaking to him as it was
 doing now. He recognised every inflection of that sacred voice, which had
 so constantly fallen upon his ears, like the grave and gentle voice of a
 mother. Why had he so long ceased to hear it? In former times it had
 promised him the coming of Mary. Had Mary come then and taken him and
 carried him off into those happy green fastnesses, which the sound of the
 bell could not reach? He would never have lapsed into forgetfulness if the
 bell had not ceased to ring. And as he bent his head still lower towards
 the earth, the contact of his beard with his hands made him start. He
 could not recognise his own self with that long silky beard. He twisted it
 and fumbled about in his hair seeking for the bare circle of the tonsure,
 but a heavy growth of curls now covered his whole head from his brow to
 the nape of his neck.
 

 ‘Ah! you were right,’ he said, casting a look of despair at Albine. ‘It
 was forbidden. We have sinned, and we have merited some terrible
 punishment.... But I, indeed, I tried to reassure you, I did not hear the
 threats which sounded in your ears through the branches.’ 
 

 Albine tried to clasp him in her arms again as she sobbed out, ‘Get up,
 and let us escape together. Perhaps even yet there is time for us to love
 each other.’ 
 

 ‘No, no; I haven’t the strength. I should stumble and fall over the
 smallest pebble in the path. Listen to me. I am afraid of myself. I know
 not what man dwells in me. I have murdered myself, and my hands are red
 with blood. If you took me away, you would never see aught in my eyes save
 tears.’ 
 

 She kissed his wet eyes, as she answered passionately, ‘No matter! Do you
 love me?’ 
 

 He was too terrified to answer her. A heavy step set the pebbles rolling
 on the other side of the wall. A growl of anger seemed to draw nigh.
 Albine had not been mistaken. Some one was, indeed, there, disturbing the
 woodland quiet with jealous inquisition. Then both Albine and Serge, as if
 overwhelmed with shame, sought to bide themselves behind a bush. But
 Brother Archangias, standing in front of the breach, could already see
 them.
 

 The Brother remained for a moment silent, clenching his fists and looking
 at Albine clinging round Serge’s neck, with the disgust of a man who has
 espied some filth by the roadside.
 

 ‘I suspected it,’ he mumbled between his teeth. ‘It was virtually certain
 that they had hidden him here.’ 
 

 Then he took a few steps, and cried out: ‘I see you. It is an abomination.
 Are you a brute beast to go coursing through the woods with that female?
 She has led you far astray, has she not? She has besmeared you with filth,
 and now you are hairy like a goat.... Pluck a branch from the trees
 wherewith to smite her on the back.’ 
 

 Again Albine whispered in an ardent, prayerful voice: ‘Do you love me? Do
 you love me?’ 
 

 But Serge, with bowed head, kept silence, though he did not yet drive her
 from him.
 

 ‘Fortunately, I have found you,’ continued Brother Archangias. ‘I
 discovered this hole.... You have disobeyed God, and have slain your own
 peace. Henceforward, for ever, temptation will gnaw you with its fiery
 tooth, and you will no longer have ignorance of evil to help you to fight
 it. It was that creature who tempted you to your fall, was it not? Do you
 not see the serpent’s tail writhing amongst her hair? The mere sight of
 her shoulders is sufficient to make one vomit with disgust.... Leave her.
 Touch her not, for she is the beginning of hell. In the name of God, come
 forth from that garden.’ 
 

 ‘Do you love me? Oh! do you love me?’ reiterated Albine.
 

 But Serge hastily drew away from her as though her bare arms and shoulders
 really scorched him.
 

 ‘In the name of God! In the name of God!’ cried the Brother, in a voice of
 thunder.
 

 Serge unresistingly stepped towards the breach. As soon as Brother
 Archangias, with rough violence, had dragged him out of the Paradou,
 Albine, who had fallen half fainting to the ground, with hands wildly
 stretched towards the love which was deserting her, rose up again, choking
 with sobs. And she fled, vanished into the midst of the trees, whose
 trunks she lashed with her streaming hair.
 

 
 

 
 

 When Abbe Mouret had said the Pater, he bowed to the altar, and
 went to the Epistle side. Then he came down, and made the sign of the
 cross over big Fortune and Rosalie, who were kneeling, side by side,
 before the altar-rails.
 

 ‘Ego conjungo vos in matrimonium, in nomine Patris, et Filii, et
 Spiritus Sancti.’ 
 

 ‘Amen,’ responded Vincent, who was serving the mass, and glancing
 curiously at his big brother out of the corner of his eye.
 

 Fortune and Rosalie bent their heads, affected by some slight emotion,
 although they had nudged each other with their elbows when they knelt
 down, by way of making one another laugh. But Vincent went to get the
 basin and the sprinkler. Fortune placed the ring in the basin, a thick
 ring of solid silver. When the priest had blessed it, sprinkling it
 crosswise, he returned it to Fortune, who slipped it upon Rosalie’s
 finger. Her hand was still discoloured with grass-stains, which soap had
 not been able to remove.
 

 ‘In nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti,’ Abbe Mouret
 murmured again, giving them a final benediction.
 

 ‘Amen,’ responded Vincent.
 

 It was early morning. The sun was not yet shining through the big windows
 of the church. Outside one could hear the noisy twittering of the sparrows
 in the branches of the service tree, whose foliage shot through the broken
 panes. La Teuse, who had not previously had time to clean the church, was
 now dusting the altar, craning up on her sound leg to wipe the feet of the
 ochre and lake-bedaubed Christ, and arranging the chairs as quietly as
 possible; all the while bowing and crossing herself, and following the
 service, but not omitting a single sweep of her feather broom. Quite
 alone, at the foot of the pulpit, was mother Brichet, praying in a very
 demonstrative fashion. She kept on her knees, and repeated the prayers in
 so loud a whisper that it seemed as if a swarm of bluebottles had taken
 possession of the nave.
 

 At the other end of the church near the confessional, Catherine held an
 infant in swaddling clothes. As it began to cry, she turned her back upon
 the altar, and tossed it up, and amused it with the bell-rope, which
 dangled just over its nose.
 

 ‘Dominus vobiscum,’ said the priest, turning round, and spreading
 out his hands.
 

 ‘Et cum spiritu tuo,’ responded Vincent.
 

 At that moment three big girls came into the church. They were too shy to
 go far up, though they jostled one another to get a better view of what
 was going on. They were three friends of Rosalie, who had dropped in for a
 minute or two on their way to the fields, curious as they were to hear
 what his reverence would say to the bride and bridegroom. They had big
 scissors hanging at their waists. At last they hid themselves behind the
 font, where they pinched each other and twisted themselves about, while
 trying to choke their bursts of laughter with their clenched fists.
 

 ‘Well,’ whispered La Rousse, a finely built girl, with copper-coloured
 skin and hair, ‘there won’t be any scrimmage to get out of church when
 it’s all over.’ 
 

 ‘Oh! old Bambousse is quite right,’ murmured Lisa, a short dark girl, with
 gleaming eyes; ‘when one has vines, one looks after them. Since his
 reverence so particularly desired to marry Rosalie, he can very well do it
 all alone.’ 
 

 The other girl, Babet, who was humpbacked, tittered. ‘There’s mother
 Brichet,’ she said; ‘she is always here. She prays for the whole family.
 Listen, do you hear how she’s buzzing? All that will mean something in her
 pocket. She knows very well what she is about, I can tell you.’ 
 

 ‘She is playing the organ for them,’ retorted La Rousse.
 

 At this all three burst into a laugh. La Teuse, in the distance,
 threatened them with her broom. At the altar, Abbe Mouret was taking the
 sacrament. As he went from the Epistle side towards Vincent, so that the
 water of ablution might be poured upon his thumb and fore-finger, Lisa
 said more softly: ‘It’s nearly over. He will begin to talk to them
 directly.’ 
 

 ‘Yes,’ said La Rousse, ‘and so big Fortune will still be able to go to his
 work, and Rosalie won’t lose her day’s pay at the vintage. It is very
 convenient to be married so early in the morning. He looks very sheepish,
 that big Fortune.’ 
 

 ‘Of course,’ murmured Babet. ‘It tires him, keeping so long on his knees.
 You may be sure that he has never knelt so long since his first
 communion.’ 
 

 But the girls’ attention was suddenly distracted by the baby which
 Catherine was dangling in her arms. It wanted to get hold of the
 bell-rope, and was quite blue with rage, frantically stretching out its
 little hands and almost choking itself with crying.
 

 ‘Ah! so the youngster is there,’ said La Rousse.
 

 The baby now burst into still louder wailing, and struggled like a little
 Imp.
 

 ‘Turn it over on its stomach, and let it suck,’ said Babet to Catherine.
 

 Catherine lifted up her head, and began to laugh, with the shamelessness
 of a little minx. ‘It’s not at all amusing,’ she said, giving the baby a
 shake. ‘Be quiet, will you, little pig! My sister plumped it down on my
 knees.’ 
 

 ‘Naturally,’ said Babet, mischievously. ‘You could scarcely have expected
 her to give the brat to Monsieur le Cure to nurse.’ 
 

 At this sally, La Rousse almost fell over in a fit of laughter. She leaned
 against the wall, holding her sides with her hands. Lisa threw herself
 against her, and attempted to soothe her by pinching her back and
 shoulders; while Babet laughed with a hunchback’s laugh, which grated on
 the ear like the sound of a saw.
 

 ‘If it hadn’t been for the little one,’ she continued, ‘Monsieur le Cure
 would have lost all use for his holy water. Old Bambousse had made up his
 mind to marry Rosalie to young Laurent, of Figuieres.’ 
 

 However, the girls’ merriment and their chatter now came to an end, for
 they saw La Teuse limping furiously towards them. At this the three big
 hussies felt alarmed, stepped back, and subsided into sedateness.
 

 ‘You worthless things!’ hissed La Teuse. ‘You come to talk a lot of filth
 here, do you? Aren’t you ashamed of yourself, La Rousse? You ought to be
 there, on your knees, before the altar, like Rosalie. I will throw you
 outside if you stir again. Do you hear?’ 
 

 La Rousse’s copper cheeks were tinged with a rising blush, and Babet
 glanced at her and tittered.
 

 ‘And you,’ continued La Teuse, turning towards Catherine, ‘just you leave
 that baby alone. You are pinching it on purpose to make it scream. Don’t
 tell me you are not. Give it to me.’ 
 

 She took the child, hushed it in her arms for a moment, and then laid it
 upon a chair, where it went to sleep, peacefully like a cherub. The church
 then subsided into solemn quietness, disturbed only by the chattering of
 the sparrows on the rowan tree outside. At the altar, Vincent had carried
 the missal to the right again, and Abbe Mouret had just folded the
 corporal and slipped it within the burse. He was now saying the concluding
 prayers with a solemn earnestness, which neither the screams of the baby
 nor the giggling of the three girls had been able to disturb. He seemed to
 hear nothing of them, but to be wholly absorbed in the prayers which he
 was offering up to Heaven for the happiness of the pair whose union he had
 just blessed. The sky that morning was grey with a hazy heat, which veiled
 the sun. Through the broken windows a russet vapour streamed into the
 church, betokening a stormy day. Along the walls the gaudily coloured
 pictures of the Stations of the Cross displayed their red, blue, and
 yellow patches; at the bottom of the nave the dry woodwork of the gallery
 creaked and strained; and under the doorway the tall grass by the steps
 thrust ripening straw, all alive with little brown grasshoppers. The
 clock, in its wooden case, made a whirring noise, as though it were some
 consumptive trying to clear his throat, and then huskily struck half-past
 six.
 

 ‘Ite, missa est,’ said the priest, turning round to the
 congregation.
 

 ‘Deo gratias,’ responded Vincent.
 

 Then, having kissed the altar, Abbe Mouret once more turned round, and
 murmured over the bent heads of the newly married pair the final
 benediction: ‘Deus Abraham, Deus Isaac, et Deus Jacob vobiscum sit’—his
 voice dying away into a gentle whisper.
 

 ‘Now, he’s going to address them,’ said Babet to her friends.
 

 ‘He is very pale,’ observed Lisa. ‘He isn’t a bit like Monsieur Caffin,
 whose fat face always seemed to be on the laugh. My little sister Rose
 says that she daren’t tell him anything when she goes to confess.’ 
 

 ‘All the same,’ murmured La Rousse, ‘he’s not ugly. His illness has aged
 him a little, but it seems to suit him. He has bigger eyes, and lines at
 the corners of his mouth which make him look like a man. Before he had the
 fever, he was too much like a girl.’ 
 

 ‘I believe he’s got some great trouble,’ said Babet. ‘He looks as though
 he were pining away. His face is deadly pale, but how his eyes glitter!
 When he drops his eyelids, it is just as though he were doing it to
 extinguish the fire in his eyes.’ 
 

 La Teuse again shook her broom at them. ‘Hush!’ she hissed out, so
 energetically that it seemed as if a blast of wind had burst into the
 church.
 

 Meantime Abbe Mouret had collected himself, and he began, in a rather low
 voice:
 

 ‘My dear brother, my dear sister, you are joined together in Jesus. The
 institution of marriage symbolises the sacred union between Jesus and His
 Church. It is a bond which nothing can break; which God wills shall be
 eternal, so that man may not sever those whom Heaven has joined. In making
 you flesh of each other’s flesh, and bone of each other’s bone, God
 teaches you that it is your duty to walk side by side through life, a
 faithful couple, along the paths which He, in His omnipotence, appoints
 for you. And you must love each other with God-like love. The slightest
 ill-feeling between you will be disobedience to the Creator, Who has
 joined you together as a single body. Remain, then, for ever united, after
 the likeness of the Church, which Jesus has espoused, in giving to us all
 His body and blood.’ 
 

 Big Fortune and Rosalie sat listening, with their noses peaked up
 inquisitively.
 

 ‘What does he say?’ asked Lisa, who was a little deaf.
 

 ‘Oh! he says what they all say,’ answered La Rousse. ‘He has a glib
 tongue, like all the priests have.’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret went on with his address, his eyes wandering over the heads of
 the newly wedded couple towards a shadowy corner of the church. And by
 degrees his voice became more flexible, and he put emotion into the words
 he spoke, words which he had formerly learned by heart from a manual
 intended for the use of young priests. He had turned slightly towards
 Rosalie, and whenever his memory failed him, he added sentences of his
 own:
 

 ‘My dear sister, submit yourself to your husband, as the Church submits
 itself to Jesus. Remember that you must leave everything to follow him,
 like a faithful handmaiden. You must give up father and mother, you must
 cleave only to your husband, and you must obey him that you may obey God
 also. And your yoke will be a yoke of love and peace. Be his comfort, his
 happiness, the perfume of his days of strength, the support of his days of
 weakness. Let him find you, as a grace, ever by his side. Let him have but
 to reach out his hand to find yours grasping it. It is thus that you will
 step along together, never losing your way, and that you will meet with
 happiness in the carrying out of the divine laws. Oh! my dear sister, my
 dear daughter, your humility will hear sweet fruit; it will give birth to
 all the domestic virtues, to the joys of the hearth, and the prosperity
 that attends a God-fearing family. Have for your husband the love of
 Rachel, the wisdom of Rebecca, the constant fidelity of Sarah. Tell
 yourself that a pure life is the source of all happiness. Pray to God each
 morning that He may give you strength to live as a woman who respects her
 responsibilities and duties; for the punishment you would otherwise incur
 is terrible: you would lose your love. Oh! to live loveless, to tear flesh
 from flesh, to belong no more to the one who is half of your very self, to
 live on in pain and agony, bereft of the one you have loved! In vain would
 you stretch out your arms to him; he would turn away from you. You would
 yearn for happiness, but you would find in your heart nothing but shame
 and bitterness. Hear me, my daughter, it is in your own conduct, in your
 obedience, in your purity, in your love, that God has established the
 strength of your union.’ 
 

 As Abbe Mouret spoke these words, there was a burst of laughter at the
 other end of the church. The baby had just woke up on the chair where La
 Teuse had laid it. But it was no longer in a bad temper. Having kicked
 itself free of its swaddling clothes, it was laughing merrily, and shaking
 its rosy little feet in the air. It was the sight of these little feet
 that made it laugh.
 

 Rosalie, who was beginning to find the priest’s address rather tedious,
 turned her head to smile at the child. But, when she saw it kicking about
 on the chair, she grew alarmed, and cast an angry look at Catherine.
 

 ‘Oh! you can look at me as much as you like,’ said Catherine. ‘I’m not
 going to take it any more. It would only begin to cry again.’ 
 

 And she turned aside to ferret in an ant-hole at a corner of one of the
 stone flags under the gallery.
 

 ‘Monsieur Caffin didn’t talk so long,’ now remarked La Rousse. ‘When he
 married Miette, he just gave her two taps on the cheek and told her to be
 good.’ 
 

 My dear brother,’ resumed Abbe Mouret, turning towards big Fortune, ‘it is
 God who, to-day, gives you a companion, for He does not wish that man
 should live alone. But, if He ordains that she shall be your servant, He
 demands from you that you shall be to her a master full of gentleness and
 love. You will love her, because she is part of your own flesh, of your
 own blood, and your own bone. You will protect her, because God has given
 you strong arms only that you may stretch them over her head in the hour
 of danger. Remember that she is entrusted to you, and that you cannot
 abuse her submission and weakness without sin. Oh! my dear brother, what
 proud happiness should be yours! Henceforth, you will no longer live in
 the selfish egotism of solitude. At all hours you will have a lovable duty
 before you. There is nothing better than to love, unless it be to protect
 those whom we love. Your heart will expand; your manly strength will
 increase a hundredfold. Oh! to be a support and stay, to have a love given
 into your keeping, to see a being sink her existence in yours and say,
 “Take me and do with me what you will! I trust myself wholly to you!” And
 may you be accursed if you ever abandon her! It would be a cowardly
 desertion which God would assuredly punish. From the moment she gives
 herself to you, she becomes yours for ever. Carry her rather in your arms,
 and set her not upon the ground until it be certain that she will be there
 in safety. Give up everything, my dear brother—’ 
 

 But here the Abbe’s voice faltered, and only an indistinct murmur came
 from his lips. He had quite closed his eyes, his face was deathly white,
 and his voice betokened such deep distress that big Fortune himself shed
 tears without knowing why.
 

 ‘He hasn’t recovered yet,’ said Lisa. ‘It is wrong of him to fatigue
 himself. See, there’s Fortune crying!’ 
 

 ‘Men are softer-hearted than women,’ murmured Babet.
 

 ‘He spoke very well, all the same,’ remarked La Rousse. ‘Those priests
 think of a lot of things that wouldn’t occur to anybody else.’ 
 

 ‘Hush!’ cried La Teuse, who was already making ready to extinguish the
 candles.
 

 But Abbe Mouret still stammered on, trying to utter a few more sentences.
 ‘It is for this reason, my dear brother, my dear sister, that you must
 live in the Catholic Faith, which alone can ensure the peace of your
 hearth. Your families have taught you to love God, to pray to Him every
 morning and evening, to look only for the gifts of His mercy—’ 
 

 He was unable to finish. He turned round, took the chalice off the altar,
 and retired, with bowed head, into the vestry, preceded by Vincent, who
 almost let the cruets and napkin fall, in trying to see what Catherine
 might be doing at the end of the church.
 

 ‘Oh! the heartless creature!’ said Rosalie, who left her husband to go and
 take her baby in her arms. The child laughed. She kissed it, and
 rearranged its swaddling clothes, while threatening Catherine with her
 fist. ‘If it had fallen,’ she cried out, ‘I would have boxed your ears for
 you, nicely.’ 
 

 Big Fortune now came slouching along. The three girls stepped towards him,
 with compressed lips.
 

 ‘See how proud he is,’ murmured Babet to the others. ‘He is sure of
 inheriting old Bambousse’s money now. I used to see him creeping along
 every night under the little wall with Rosalie.’ 
 

 Then they giggled, and big Fortune, standing there in front of them,
 laughed even louder than they did. He pinched La Rousse, and let Lisa jeer
 at him. He was a sturdy young blood, and cared nothing for anybody. The
 priest’s address had annoyed him.
 

 ‘Hallo! mother, come on!’ he called in his loud voice. But mother Brichet
 was begging at the vestry door. She stood there, tearful and wizen, before
 La Teuse, who was slipping some eggs into the pocket of her apron. Fortune
 didn’t seem to feel the least sense of shame. He just winked and remarked:
 ‘She is a knowing old card, my mother is. But then the Cure likes to see
 people at mass.’ 
 

 Meanwhile, Rosalie had grown calm again. Before leaving the church, she
 asked Fortune if he had begged the priest to come and bless their room,
 according to the custom of the country. So Fortune ran off to the vestry,
 striding heavily through the church, as if it were a field. He soon
 reappeared, shouting that his reverence would come. La Teuse, who was
 scandalised at the noise made by all these people, who seemed to think
 themselves in a public street, gently clapped her hands, and pushed them
 towards the door.
 

 ‘It is all over,’ said she; ‘go away and get to your work.’ 
 

 She thought they had all gone, when her eye caught sight of Catherine,
 whom Vincent had joined. They were bending anxiously over the ants’ nest.
 Catherine was poking a long straw into the hole so roughly, that a swarm
 of frightened ants had rushed out upon the floor. Vincent declared,
 however, that she must get her straw right to the bottom if she wished to
 find the queen.
 

 ‘Ah! you young imps!’ cried La Teuse, ‘what are you after there? Can’t you
 leave the poor little things alone? That is Mademoiselle Desiree’s ants’ 
 nest. She would be nicely pleased if she saw you!’ 
 

 At this the children promptly took to their heels.
 

 
 
 

 Abbe Mouret, now wearing his cassock but still bareheaded, had come back
 to kneel at the foot of the altar. In the grey light that streamed through
 the window, his tonsure showed like a large livid spot amidst his hair;
 and a slight quiver, as if from cold, sped down his neck. With his hands
 tightly clasped he was praying earnestly, so absorbed in his devotions
 that he did not hear the heavy footsteps of La Teuse, who hovered around
 without daring to disturb him. She seemed to be grieved at seeing him
 bowed down there on his knees. For a moment, she thought that he was in
 tears, and thereupon she went behind the altar to watch him. Since his
 return, she had never liked to leave him in the church alone, for one
 evening she had found him lying in a dead faint upon the flagstones, with
 icy lips and clenched teeth, like a corpse.
 

 ‘Come in, mademoiselle!’ she said to Desiree, who was peeping through the
 vestry-doorway. ‘He is still here, and he will lay himself up. You know
 you are the only person that he will listen to.’ 
 

 ‘It is breakfast-time,’ she replied softly, ‘and I am very hungry.’ 
 

 Then she gently sidled up to the priest, passed an arm round his neck, and
 kissed him.
 

 ‘Good morning, brother,’ she said. ‘Do you want to make me die of hunger
 this morning?’ 
 

 The face he turned upon her was so intensely sad, that she kissed him
 again on both his cheeks. He was emerging from agony. Then, on recognising
 her, he tried to put her from him, but she kept hold of one of his hands
 and would not release it. She would scarcely allow him to cross himself,
 but insisted upon leading him away.
 

 ‘Come! Come! for I am very hungry. You must be hungry too.’ 
 

 La Teuse had laid out the breakfast beneath two big mulberry trees, whose
 spreading branches formed a sheltering roof at the bottom of the little
 garden. The sun, which had at last succeeded in dissipating the
 stormy-looking vapours of early morning, was warming the beds of
 vegetables, while the mulberry-trees cast a broad shadow over the rickety
 table, on which were laid two cups of milk and some thick slices of bread.
 

 ‘You see how nice it looks,’ said Desiree, delighted at breakfasting in
 the fresh air.
 

 She was already cutting some of the bread into strips, which she ate with
 eager appetite. And as she saw La Teuse still standing in front of them,
 she said, ‘Why don’t you eat something?’ 
 

 ‘I shall, presently,’ the old servant answered. ‘My soup is warming.’ 
 

 Then, after a moment’s silence, looking with admiration at the girl’s big
 bites, she said to the priest: ‘It is quite a pleasure to see her. Doesn’t
 she make you feel hungry, Monsieur le Cure? You should force yourself.’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret smiled as he glanced at his sister. ‘Yes, yes,’ he murmured;
 ‘she gets on famously, she grows fatter every day.’ 
 

 ‘That’s because I eat,’ said Desiree. ‘If you would eat you would get fat,
 too. Are you ill again? You look very melancholy. I don’t want to have it
 all over again, you know. I was so very lonely when they took you away to
 cure you.’ 
 

 ‘She is right,’ said La Teuse. ‘You don’t behave reasonably, Monsieur le
 Cure. You can’t expect to be strong, living, as you do, on two or three
 crumbs a day, as though you were a bird. You don’t make blood; and that’s
 why you are so pale. Don’t you feel ashamed of keeping as thin as a lath
 when we are so fat; we who are only women? People will begin to think that
 we gobble up everything and leave you nothing but the empty plates.’ 
 

 Then both La Teuse and Desiree, brimful of health and strength, scolded
 him affectionately. His eyes seemed very large and bright, but empty,
 expressionless. He was still gently smiling.
 

 ‘I am not ill,’ he said; ‘I have nearly finished my milk.’ He had
 swallowed two mouthfuls of it, but had not touched the bread.
 

 ‘The animals, now,’ said Desiree, thoughtfully, ‘seem to get on much more
 comfortably than we do. The fowls never have headaches, have they? The
 rabbits grow as fat as ever one wants them to be. And you never saw my pig
 looking sad.’ 
 

 Then, turning towards her brother, she went on with an air of rapture:
 

 ‘I have named it Matthew, because it is so like that fat man who brings
 the letters. It is growing so big and strong. It is very unkind of you to
 refuse to come and look at it as you always do. You will come to see it
 some day, won’t you?’ 
 

 While she was thus talking she had laid hold of her brother’s share of
 bread, and was eating away at it. She had already finished one piece, and
 was beginning the second, when La Teuse became aware of what she was
 doing.
 

 ‘That doesn’t belong to you, that bread! You are actually stealing his
 food from him now!’ 
 

 ‘Let her have it,’ said Abbe Mouret, gently. ‘I shouldn’t have touched it
 myself. Eat it all, my dear, eat it all.’ 
 

 For a moment Desiree fell into confusion, with her eyes fixed upon the
 bread, whilst she struggled to check her rising tears. Then she began to
 laugh, and finished the slice.
 

 ‘My cow,’ said she, continuing her remarks, ‘is never as sad as you are.
 You were not here when uncle Pascal gave her to me, on the promise that I
 would be a good girl, or you would have seen how pleased she was when I
 kissed her for the first time.’ 
 

 She paused to listen. A cock crowed in the yard, and a great uproar
 followed, with flapping of wings and cackling, grunting, and hoarse cries
 as if the whole yard were in a state of commotion.
 

 ‘Ah! you know,’ resumed Desiree, clapping her hands, ‘she must be in calf
 now. I took her to the bull at Beage, three leagues from here. There are
 very few bulls hereabouts, you know.’ 
 

 La Teuse shrugged her shoulders, and glanced at the priest with an
 expression of annoyance.
 

 ‘It would be much better, mademoiselle,’ said she, ‘if you were to go and
 quiet your fowls. They all seem to be murdering one another.’ 
 

 Indeed, the uproar in the yard had now become so great that the girl was
 already hurrying off with a great rustling of her petticoats, when the
 priest called her back. ‘The milk, my dear; you have not finished the
 milk.’ 
 

 He held out his cup to her, which he had scarcely touched. And she came
 back and drank the milk without the slightest scruple, in spite of La
 Teuse’s angry look. Then she again set off for the poultry-yard, where
 they soon heard her reducing the fowls to peace and order. She had,
 perhaps, sat down in the midst of them, for she could be heard gently
 humming as though she were trying to lull them to sleep.
 

 
 
 

 ‘Now my soup is too hot!’ grumbled La Teuse, as she returned from the
 kitchen with a basin, from which a wooden spoon was projecting.
 

 She placed herself just in front of Abbe Mouret, and began to eat very
 cautiously from the edge of the spoon. She wanted to enliven the Abbe and
 to draw him out of his melancholy moodiness. Ever since he had returned
 from the Paradou, he had declared himself well again, and had never
 complained. Often, indeed, he smiled in so soft and sweet a fashion, that
 his fever seemed to have increased his saintliness, at least so thought
 the villagers. But, at intervals, he had fits of gloomy silence, and
 appeared to be suffering torture which he strove to bear uncomplainingly.
 It was a mute agony which bore down upon him, and, for hours at a time,
 left him stupefied, a prey to a frightful inward struggle, the violence of
 which could only be guessed by the sweat of anguish that streamed down his
 face.
 

 At such times La Teuse refused to leave him, and overwhelmed him with a
 torrent of gossip, until he had gradually recovered tranquillity by
 crushing the rebellion of his blood. On that particular morning, the old
 servant foresaw a more grievous attack than usual, and poured forth an
 amazing flood of talk, while continuing her wary manoeuvres with the
 spoon, which threatened to burn her tongue.
 

 ‘Well, well,’ said she, ‘one has to live among a lot of wild beasts to see
 such goings-on. Would any one ever think in a decent village of being
 married by candlelight? It shows what a poor sort these Artauds are. When
 I was in Normandy, I used to see weddings that threw every one into
 commotion for a couple of leagues round. They would feast for three whole
 days. The priest would be there, and the mayor, too; and at the marriage
 of one of my cousins, all the firemen came as well. And didn’t they have a
 fine time of it! But to make a priest get up before sunrise and marry
 people before even the chickens have left their roost, why, there’s no
 sense in it! If I had been your reverence, I should have refused to do it.
 You haven’t had your proper sleep, and you may have caught cold in the
 church. It is that which has upset you. Besides which it would be better
 to marry brute beasts than that Rosalie and her ugly lout. That brat of
 theirs dirtied one of the chairs.—But you ought to tell me when you
 feel poorly, and I could make you something warm.—Eh! Monsieur le
 Cure, speak to me!’ 
 

 He answered, in a feeble voice, that he was quite well, and only needed a
 little fresh air. He had just leant against one of the mulberry-trees, and
 was breathing rather quickly, as if faint.
 

 ‘Oh! all right,’ went on La Teuse, ‘do just as you like. Go on marrying
 people when you haven’t the strength for it, and when you know very well
 that it’s bound to upset you. I knew how it would be; I told you so
 yesterday. And if you took my advice, you wouldn’t stay where you are. The
 smell of the yard is bad for you. It is frightful just now. I can’t
 imagine what Mademoiselle Desiree can be stirring about there. She’s
 singing away, and doesn’t seem to mind it at all. Ah! that reminds me of
 something I want to tell you. You know that I did all I could to keep her
 from taking the cow to Beage; but she’s like you, obstinate, and will go
 her own way. Fortunately, however, for her, she’s none the worse for it.
 She delights to be amongst the animals and their young ones. But come now,
 your reverence, do be reasonable. Let me take you to your room. You must
 lie down and rest a little. What, you don’t want to! Well, then, so much
 the worse for you, if you suffer! Besides, it’s absurd to keep one’s
 worries locked up in one’s heart till they stifle one.’ 
 

 Then, in her indignation, she hastily swallowed a big spoonful of soup at
 the risk of burning her throat. She rattled the handle of the spoon
 against the bowl, muttering and grumbling to herself.
 

 ‘There never was such a man,’ said she. ‘He would die rather than say a
 word. But it’s all very well for him to keep silent. I know quite enough,
 and it doesn’t require much cleverness to guess the rest. Well! well! let
 him keep it to himself. I dare say it is better.’ 
 

 La Teuse was jealous. Dr. Pascal had had a tremendous fight with her in
 order to get her patient away at the time when he had come to the
 conclusion that the young priest’s case would be quite hopeless if he
 should remain at the parsonage. He had then explained to her that the
 sound of the bell would aggravate and intensify Serge’s fever, that the
 religious pictures and statuettes scattered about his room would fill his
 brain with hallucinations, and that entirely new surroundings were
 necessary if he was to be restored to health and strength and peacefulness
 of mind. She, however, had vigorously shaken her head, and declared that
 her ‘dear child’ would nowhere find a better nurse than herself. Still,
 she had ended by yielding. She had even resigned herself to seeing him go
 to the Paradou, though protesting against this selection of the doctor’s,
 which astonished her. But she retained a strong feeling of hatred for the
 Paradou; and she was hurt by the silence which Abbe Mouret maintained as
 to the time he had spent there. She had frequently laid all sorts of
 unsuccessful traps to induce him to talk of it. That morning, exasperated
 by his ghastly pallor, and his obstinacy in suffering in silence, she
 ended by waving her spoon about and crying:
 

 ‘You should go back yonder again, Monsieur le Cure, if you were so happy
 there—I dare say there is some one there who would nurse you better
 than I do.’ 
 

 It was the first time she had ventured upon a direct allusion to her
 suspicions. The blow was so painful to the priest that he could not check
 a slight cry, as he raised his grief-racked countenance. At this La
 Teuse’s kindly heart was filled with regret.
 

 ‘Ah!’ she murmured, ‘it is all the fault of your uncle Pascal. I told him
 what it would be. But those clever men cling so obstinately to their own
 ideas. Some of them would kill you, just for the sake of rummaging in your
 body afterwards—It made me so angry that I would never speak of it
 to any one. Yes, Monsieur le Cure, you have me to thank that nobody knew
 where you were; I was so angry about it. I thought it abominable! When
 Abbe Guyot, from Saint-Eutrope, who took your place during your absence,
 came to say mass here on Sundays, I told him all sorts of stories. I said
 you had gone to Switzerland. I don’t even know where Switzerland is.—Well!
 well! I surely don’t want to say anything to pain you, but it was
 certainly over yonder that you got your trouble. Very finely they’ve cured
 you indeed! It would have been very much better if they had left you with
 me. I shouldn’t have thought of trying to turn your head.’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret, whose brow was again lowered, made no attempt to interrupt
 her. La Teuse had seated herself upon the ground a few yards away from
 him, in order if possible to catch his eye. And she went on again in her
 motherly way, delighted at his seeming complacency in listening to her.
 

 ‘You would never let me tell you about Abbe Caffin. As soon as I began to
 speak of him, you always made me stop. Well, well; Abbe Caffin had had his
 troubles in my part of the world, at Canteleu. And yet he was a very holy
 man, with an irreproachable character. But, you see, he was a man of very
 delicate taste, and liked soft pretty things. Well, there was a young
 party who was always prowling round him, the daughter of a miller, whom
 her parents had sent to a boarding-school. Well, to put it shortly, what
 was likely to happen did happen. When the story got about, all the
 neighbourhood was very indignant with the Abbe. But he managed to escape
 to Rouen, and poured out his grief to the Archbishop there. Then he was
 sent here. The poor man was punished quite enough by being made to live in
 this hole of a place. I heard of the girl afterwards. She had married a
 cattle-dealer, and was very happy.’ 
 

 La Teuse, delighted at having been allowed to tell her story, interpreted
 the priest’s silence as an encouragement to continue her gossiping. So she
 drew a little nearer to him and said:
 

 ‘He was very friendly with me, was good Monsieur Caffin, and often spoke
 to me of his sin. It won’t keep him out of heaven, I’m sure. He can rest
 quite peacefully out there under the turf, for he never harmed any one.
 For my part, I can’t understand why people should get so angry with a
 priest when such a thing unhappily befalls him. Of course it’s wrong, and
 likely to anger God; but then one can confess and repent, and get
 absolution. Isn’t it so, your reverence, that when one truly repents, one
 is saved in spite of one’s sins?’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret slowly raised his head. By a supreme effort he had overcome
 his agony, and though his face was still very pale, he exclaimed in a firm
 voice, ‘One should never sin; never! never!’ 
 

 ‘Ah! sir,’ cried the old servant, ‘you are too proud and reserved. It is
 not a nice thing, that pride of yours.—If I were in your place, I
 would not harden myself like that. I would talk of what was troubling me,
 and not try to rend my heart in pieces. You should reconcile yourself to
 the separation gradually. The worry wears off little by little. But,
 instead of that, you won’t even allow people’s names to be uttered. You
 forbid them to be mentioned. It is as though they were dead. Since you
 came back, I have not dared to tell you the least bit of news. Well, well,
 I am going to speak now, and I shall tell you all I know; because I see
 quite well that it is all this silence that is preying upon your heart.’ 
 

 He looked at her sternly, and lifted his finger to silence her.
 

 ‘Yes, yes,’ she went on, ‘I get news from over yonder, very often indeed,
 and I am going to tell it to you. To begin with, there is some one there
 who is no happier than you are.’ 
 

 ‘Silence! Silence!’ said Abbe Mouret, summoning all his strength to rise
 and move away.
 

 But La Teuse also rose and barred his way with her bulky figure. She was
 angry, and cried out:
 

 ‘There, you see, you want to be off already! But you are going to listen
 to me. You know quite well that I am not over fond of the people yonder,
 don’t you? If I talk to you about them, it is for your own good. Some
 people say that I am jealous. Well, one day I mean to take you over there.
 You would be with me, and you wouldn’t be afraid of any harm happening.
 Will you go?’ 
 

 He motioned her away from him with his hands, and his face was calm again
 as he said:
 

 ‘I desire nothing. I wish to know nothing. There is high mass to-morrow.
 You must see that the altar is made ready.’ 
 

 Then, as he walked away, he added, smiling:
 

 ‘Don’t be uneasy, my good Teuse. I am stronger than you imagine. I shall
 be able to cure myself without any one’s assistance.’ 
 

 With these words he went off, bearing himself sturdily, with his head
 erect, for he had vanquished his feelings. His cassock rustled very gently
 against the borders of thyme. La Teuse, who for a moment had remained
 rooted to the spot where she was standing, sulkily picked up her basin and
 wooden spoon. Then, shrugging her big shoulders again and again, she
 mumbled between her teeth:
 

 ‘That’s all bravado of his. He imagines that he is differently made from
 other men, just because he is a priest. Well, as a matter of fact, he is
 very firm and determined. I have known some who wouldn’t have had to be
 wheedled so long. And he is quite capable of crushing his heart, just as
 one might crush a flea. It must be the Almighty who gives him his
 strength.’ 
 

 As she returned to the kitchen she saw Abbe Mouret standing by the gate of
 the farmyard. Desiree had stopped him there to make him feel a capon which
 she had been fattening for some weeks past. He told her pleasantly that it
 was very heavy, and the big child chuckled with glee.
 

 ‘Ah! well,’ said La Teuse in a fury, ‘that bird has got to crush its heart
 too. But then it can’t help itself.’ 
 

 
 
 

 Abbe Mouret spent his days at the parsonage. He shunned the long walks
 which he had been wont to take before his illness. The scorched soil of
 Les Artaud, the ardent heat of that valley where the vines could never
 even grow straight, distressed him. On two occasions, in the morning, he
 had attempted to go out and read his breviary as he strolled along the
 road; but he had not gone beyond the village. He had returned home,
 overcome by the perfumes, the heat, the breadth of the landscape. It was
 only in the evening, in the cool twilight air, that he ventured to saunter
 a little in front of the church, on the terrace which led to the
 graveyard. In the afternoons, to fill up his time, and satisfy his craving
 for some kind of occupation, he had imposed upon himself the task of
 pasting paper over the broken panes of the church windows, This had kept
 him for a week mounted on a ladder, arranging his paper panes with great
 exactness, and laying on the paste with the most scrupulous care in order
 to avoid any mess.
 

 La Teuse stood at the foot of the ladder and watched him. And Desiree
 urged that he must not fill up all the windows, or else the sparrows would
 no longer be able to get through. To please her, the priest left a pane or
 two in each window unfilled. Then, having completed these repairs, he was
 seized with the ambition of decorating the church, without summoning to
 his aid either mason or carpenter or painter. He would do it all himself.
 This sort of handiwork would amuse him, he said, and help to bring back
 his strength. Uncle Pascal encouraged him every time he called at the
 parsonage, assuring him that such exercise and fatigue were better than
 all the drugs in the world. And so Abbe Mouret began to stop up the holes
 in the walls with plaster, to drive fresh nails into the disjoined altars,
 and to crush and mix paints, in order that he might put a new coating on
 the pulpit and confessional-box. It was quite an event in the district,
 and folks talked of it for a couple of leagues round. Peasants would come
 and stand gazing, with their hands behind their backs, at his reverence’s
 work. The Abbe himself, with a blue apron tied round his waist, and his
 hands all soiled with his labour, became absorbed in it, and used it as an
 excuse for no longer going out. He spent his days in the midst of his
 repairs, and was more tranquil than he had been before; almost cheerful,
 indeed, as he forgot the outer world, the trees and the sunshine and the
 warm breezes, which had formerly disturbed him so much.
 

 ‘Monsieur le Cure is free to do as he pleases, since the parish hasn’t got
 to find the money,’ said old Bambousse, who came round every evening to
 see how the work was progressing.
 

 Abbe Mouret spent all his savings on it. Some of his decorations, indeed,
 were so awkward that they would have excited many people’s smiles. The
 replastering of the stonework soon tired him: so he contented himself with
 patching up the church walls all round to a height of some six feet from
 the ground. La Teuse mixed the plaster. When she talked of repairing the
 parsonage as well, for she was continually fearing that it would topple
 down on their heads, he told her that he did not think he could manage it,
 that a regular workman would be necessary; a reply which led to a terrible
 quarrel between them. La Teuse said it was quite ridiculous to go on
 ornamenting the church, where nobody slept, while their bedrooms were in
 such a crazy condition, for she was quite sure they would all be found,
 one morning, crushed to death by the fallen ceilings.
 

 ‘I shall end by bringing my bed here, and placing it behind the altar,’ 
 she grumbled. ‘I feel quite terrified sometimes at night.’ 
 

 However, when the plaster was all used up, she said no more about
 repairing the parsonage. The painting which the priest executed quite
 delighted her. It was the chief charm of the improvements. The Abbe, who
 had repaired the woodwork everywhere with bits of boards, took particular
 pleasure in spreading his big brush, dipped in bright yellow paint, over
 all this woodwork. The gentle, up-and-down motion of the brush lulled him,
 left him thoughtless for hours whilst he gazed on the oily streaks of
 paint. When everything was quite yellow, the pulpit, the confessional-box,
 the altar rails, even the clock-case itself, he ventured to try his hand
 at imitation marble work by way of touching up the high altar. Then,
 growing bolder, he painted it all over. Glistening with white and yellow
 and blue, it was pronounced superb. People who had not been to mass for
 fifty years streamed into the church to see it.
 

 And now the paint was dry. All that remained for Abbe Mouret to do was to
 edge the panels with brown beading. So, that afternoon, he set to work at
 it, wishing to get it done by evening; for on the following day, as he had
 reminded La Teuse, there would be high mass. She was there ready to
 arrange the altar. She had already placed on the credence the candlesticks
 and the silver cross, the porcelain vases filled with artificial roses,
 and the laced cloth which was only used on great festivals. The beading,
 however, proved so difficult of execution, that it was not completed till
 late in the evening. It was growing quite dark as the Abbe finished his
 last panel.
 

 ‘It will be really too beautiful,’ said a rough voice from amidst the
 greyish gloom of twilight which was filling the church.
 

 La Teuse, who had knelt down to get a better view of the Abbe’s brush as
 it glided along his rule, started with alarm.
 

 ‘Ah! it’s Brother Archangias,’ she said, turning round. ‘You came in by
 the sacristy then? You gave me quite a turn. Your voice seemed to sound
 from under the floor.’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret had resumed his work, after greeting the Brother with a slight
 nod. The Brother remained standing there in silence, with his fat hands
 clasped in front of his cassock. Then, shrugging his shoulders, as he
 observed with what scrupulous care the priest sought to make his beading
 perfectly straight, he repeated:
 

 ‘It will be really too beautiful.’ 
 

 La Teuse, who knelt near by in ecstasy, started again.
 

 ‘Dear me!’ she said, ‘I had quite forgotten you were there. You really
 ought to cough before you speak. You have a voice that comes on one so
 suddenly that one might think it was a voice from the grave.’ 
 

 She rose up and drew back a little the better to admire the Abbe’s work.
 

 ‘Why too beautiful?’ she asked. ‘Nothing can be too beautiful when it is
 done for the Almighty. If his reverence had only had some gold, he would
 have done it with gold, I’m sure.’ 
 

 When the priest had finished, she hastened to change the altar-cloth,
 taking the greatest care not to smudge the beading. Then she arranged the
 cross, the candlesticks, and the vases symmetrically. Abbe Mouret had gone
 to lean against the wooden screen which separated the choir from the nave,
 by the side of Brother Archangias. Not a word passed between them. Their
 eyes were fixed upon the silver crucifix, which, in the increasing gloom,
 still cast some glimmer of light on the feet and the left side and the
 right temple of the big Christ. When La Teuse had finished, she came down
 towards them, triumphantly.
 

 ‘Doesn’t it look lovely?’ she asked. ‘Just you see what a crowd there will
 be at mass to-morrow! Those heathens will only come to God’s house when
 they think He is well-to-do. Now, Monsieur le Cure, we must do as much for
 the Blessed Virgin’s altar.’ 
 

 ‘Waste of money!’ growled Brother Archangias.
 

 But La Teuse flew into a tantrum; and, as Abbe Mouret remained silent, she
 led them both before the altar of the Virgin, pushing them and dragging
 them by their cassocks.
 

 ‘Just look at it,’ said she; ‘it is too shabby for anything, now that the
 high altar is so smart. It looks as though it had never been painted at
 all. However much I may rub it of a morning, the dust sticks to it. It is
 quite black; it is filthy. Do you know what people will say about you,
 your reverence? They will say that you care nothing for the Blessed
 Virgin; that’s what they’ll say.’ 
 

 ‘Well, what of it?’ queried Brother Archangias.
 

 La Teuse looked at him, half suffocated by indignation.
 

 ‘What of it? It would be sinful, of course,’ she muttered. ‘This altar is
 like a neglected tomb in a graveyard. If it were not for me, the spiders
 would spin their webs across it, and moss would soon grow over it. From
 time to time, when I can spare a bunch of flowers, I give it to the
 Virgin. All the flowers in our garden used to be for her once.’ 
 

 She had mounted the altar steps, and she took up two withered bunches of
 flowers, which had been left there, forgotten.
 

 ‘See! it is just as it is in the graveyards,’ she said, throwing the
 flowers at Abbe Mouret’s feet.
 

 He picked them up, without replying. It was quite dark now, and Brother
 Archangias stumbled about amongst the chairs and nearly fell. He growled
 and muttered some angry words, in which the names of Jesus and Mary
 recurred. When La Teuse, who had gone for a lamp, returned into the
 church, she asked the priest:
 

 ‘So I can put the brushes and pots away in the attic, then?’ 
 

 ‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘I have finished. We will see about the rest later
 on.’ 
 

 She walked away in front of them, carrying all the things with her, and
 keeping silence, lest she should say too much. And as Abbe Mouret had kept
 the withered bunches of flowers in his hand, Brother Archangias said to
 him, as they passed the farmyard: ‘Throw those things away.’ 
 

 The Abbe took a few steps more, with downcast head; and then over the
 palings he flung the flowers upon a manure-heap.
 

 
 
 

 The Brother, who had already had his own meal, seated himself astride a
 chair, while the priest dined. Since Serge’s return to Les Artaud, the
 Brother had thus spent most of his evenings at the parsonage; but never
 before had he imposed his presence upon the other in so rough a fashion.
 He stamped on the tiled floor with his heavy boots, his voice thundered
 and he smote the furniture, whilst he related how he had whipped some of
 his pupils that morning, or expounded his moral principles in terms as
 stern, as uncompromising as bludgeon-blows. Then feeling bored, he
 suggested that he and La Teuse should have a game at cards. They had
 endless bouts of ‘Beggar-my-neighbour’ together, that being the only game
 which La Teuse had ever been able to learn. Abbe Mouret would smilingly
 glance at the first few cards flung on the table and would then gradually
 sink into reverie, remaining for hours forgetful of his self-restraint,
 oblivious of his surroundings, beneath the suspicious glances of Brother
 Archangias.
 

 That evening La Teuse felt so cross that she had talked of going to bed as
 soon as the cloth was removed. The Brother, however, wanted his game of
 cards. So he caught hold of her shoulders and sat her down, so roughly
 that the chair creaked beneath her. And forthwith he began to shuffle the
 cards. Desiree, who hated him, had gone off carrying her dessert, which
 she generally took upstairs with her every evening to eat in bed.
 

 ‘I want the red cards,’ said La Teuse.
 

 Then the struggle began. The old woman at first won some of the Brother’s
 best cards. But before long two aces fell together on the table.
 

 ‘Here’s a battle!’ she cried, wild with excitement.
 

 She threw down a nine, which rather alarmed her, but as the Brother, in
 his turn, only put down a seven, she picked up the cards with a triumphant
 air. At the end of half an hour, however, she had only gained two aces, so
 that the chances remained fairly equal. And a quarter of an hour later she
 lost an ace. The knaves and kings and queens were perpetually coming and
 going as the battle furiously progressed.
 

 ‘It’s a splendid game, eh?’ said Brother Archangias, turning towards Abbe
 Mouret.
 

 But when he saw him sitting there, so absorbed in his reverie, with such a
 gentle smile playing unconsciously round his lips, he roughly raised his
 voice:
 

 ‘Why, Monsieur le Cure, you are not paying any attention to us! It isn’t
 polite of you. We are only playing on your account. We were trying to
 amuse you. Come and watch the game. It would do you more good than dozing
 and dreaming away there. Where were you just now?’ 
 

 The priest started. He said nothing, but with quivering eyelids tried to
 force himself to look at the game. The play went on vigorously. La Teuse
 won her ace back, and then lost it again. On some evenings they would
 fight in this way over the aces for quite four hours, and often they would
 go off to bed, angry at having failed to bring the contest to a decisive
 issue.
 

 ‘But, dear me! I’ve only just remembered it!’ suddenly cried La Teuse, who
 greatly feared that she was going to be beaten. ‘His reverence has to go
 out to-night. He promised Fortune and Rosalie that he would go to bless
 their room, according to the custom. Make haste, Monsieur le Cure! The
 Brother will go with you.’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret had already risen from his chair, and was looking for his hat.
 But Brother Archangias, still holding his cards, flew into a tantrum: ‘Oh!
 don’t bother about it,’ said he. ‘What does it want to be blessed for that
 pigsty of theirs? It is a custom that you should do away with. I can’t see
 any sense in it. Stay here and let us finish the game. That is much the
 best thing to do.’ 
 

 ‘No,’ said the priest, ‘I promised to go. Those good people might feel
 hurt if I didn’t. You stay here and play your game out while you are
 waiting for me.’ 
 

 La Teuse glanced uneasily at Brother Archangias.
 

 ‘Well, yes, I will stay here,’ cried the Brother. ‘It is really too
 absurd.’ 
 

 But before Abbe Mouret could open the door, he flung his cards on the
 table and rose to follow him. Then half turning back he called to La
 Teuse:
 

 ‘I should have won. Leave the cards as they are, and we will play the game
 out to-morrow.’ 
 

 ‘Oh! they are all mixed now,’ answered the old servant, who had lost no
 time in shuffling them together. ‘Did you suppose that I was going to put
 your hand away under a glass case? And, besides, I might very well have
 won, for I still had an ace left.’ 
 

 A few strides brought Brother Archangias up with Abbe Mouret, who was
 walking down the narrow path that led to the village. The Brother had
 undertaken the task of keeping watch over the Abbe’s movements. He
 incessantly played the spy upon him, accompanying him everywhere, or, if
 he could not go in person, sending some school urchin to follow him. With
 that terrible laugh of his, he was wont to remark that he was ‘God’s
 gendarme.’ 
 

 And, in truth, the Abbe seemed like a culprit ever guarded by the black
 shadow of the Brother’s cassock; a culprit to be treated distrustfully,
 since in his weakness he might well lapse into fresh crime were he left
 free from surveillance for a single moment. Thus he was watched and
 guarded with all the spiteful eagerness that some jealous old maid might
 have displayed, the overreaching zeal of a gaoler who might carry
 precautions so far as to exclude even such rays of light as might creep
 through the chinks of the prison-house. Brother Archangias was always on
 the watch to keep out the sunlight, to prevent even a whiff of air from
 entering, to shut up his prison so completely that nothing from outside
 could gain access to it. He noted the Abbe’s slightest fits of weakness,
 and by his glance divined his tender thoughts, which with a word he
 pitilessly crushed, as though they were poisonous vermin. The priest’s
 intervals of silence, his smiles, the paling of his brow, the faint
 quivering of his limbs, were all noted by the Brother. But he never spoke
 openly of the transgression. His presence alone was a sufficient reproach.
 The manner in which he uttered certain words imparted to them all the
 sting of a whip stroke. With a mere gesture he expressed his utter disgust
 for the priest’s sin. Like one of those betrayed husbands who enjoy
 torturing their wives with cruel allusions, he contented himself with
 recalling the scene at the Paradou, in an indirect fashion, by some word
 or phrase which sufficed to annihilate the Abbe, whenever the latter’s
 flesh rebelled.
 

 It was nearly ten o’clock and most of the villagers of Les Artaud had
 retired to rest. But from a brightly lighted house at the far end, near
 the mill, there still came sounds of merriment. While keeping the best
 rooms for his own use, old Bambousse had given a corner of his house to
 his daughter and son-in-law. They were all assembled there, drinking a
 last glass, while waiting for the priest.
 

 ‘They are drunk,’ growled Brother Archangias. ‘Don’t you hear the row they
 are making?’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret made no reply. It was a lovely night and all looked bluish in
 the moonlight, which lent to the distant part of the valley the aspect of
 a sleeping lake. The priest slackened his pace that he might the more
 fully enjoy the charm of that soft radiance, and now and then he even
 stopped as he came upon some expanse of light, experiencing the delightful
 quiver which the proximity of fresh water brings one on a hot day. But the
 Brother continued striding along, grumbling and calling him.
 

 ‘Come along; come along! It isn’t good to loiter out of doors at this time
 of night. You would be much better in bed.’ 
 

 All at once, however, just as they were entering the village, Archangias
 himself stopped short in the middle of the road. He was looking towards
 the heights, where the white lines of the roads vanished amidst black
 patches of pine-woods, and he growled to himself, like a dog that scents
 danger.
 

 ‘Who can be coming down so late?’ he muttered.
 

 But the priest, who neither saw nor heard anything, was now, in his turn,
 anxious to press on.
 

 ‘Stay! stay! there he is,’ eagerly added Brother Archangias. ‘He has just
 turned the corner. See! he is in the moonlight now. One can see him
 plainly. It is a tall man, with a stick.’ 
 

 Then, after a moment’s silence, he resumed, in a voice husky with fury:
 ‘It is he, that beggar! I felt sure it was!’ 
 

 Thereupon, the new-comer having now reached the bottom of the hill, Abbe
 Mouret saw that it was Jeanbernat. In spite of his eighty years, the old
 man set his feet down with such force, that his heavy, nailed boots sent
 sparks flying from the flints on the road. And he walked along as upright
 as an oak, without the aid of his stick, which he carried across his
 shoulder like a musket.
 

 ‘Ah! the villain!’ stammered the Brother, still standing motionless. ‘May
 the fiend light all the blazes of hell under his feet!’ 
 

 The priest, who felt greatly disturbed, and despaired of inducing his
 companion to come on, turned round to continue his journey, hoping that,
 by a quick walk to the Bambousses’ house, he might yet manage to avoid
 Jeanbernat. But he had not taken five strides before he heard the
 bantering voice of the old man close behind him.
 

 ‘Hie! Cure! wait for me. Are you afraid of me?’ 
 

 And as Abbe Mouret stopped, he came up and continued: ‘Ah! those cassocks
 of yours are tiresome things, aren’t they? They prevent your getting along
 too quickly. It’s such a fine clear night, too, that one can recognise you
 by your gown a long way off. When I was right at the top of the hill, I
 said to myself, “Surely that is the little priest down yonder.” Oh! yes, I
 still have very good eyes.... Well, so you never come to see us now?’ 
 

 ‘I have had so much to do,’ murmured the priest, who had turned very pale.
 

 ‘Well, well, every one’s free to please himself. If I’ve mentioned the
 matter, it’s only because I want you to know that I don’t bear you any
 grudge for being a priest. We wouldn’t even talk about your religion, it’s
 all one and the same to me. But the little one thinks that it’s I who
 prevents your coming. I said to her, “The priest is an idiot,” and I think
 so, indeed. Did I try to eat you during your illness? Why, I didn’t even
 go upstairs to see you. Every one’s free, you know.’ 
 

 He spoke on in the most unconcerned manner, pretending that he did not
 notice the presence of Brother Archangias; but as the latter suddenly
 broke into an angry grunt, he added, ‘Why, Cure, so you bring your pig out
 with you?’ 
 

 ‘Take care, you bandit!’ hissed the Brother, clenching his fists.
 

 Jeanbernat, whose stick was still raised, then pretended to recognise him.
 

 ‘Hands off!’ he cried. ‘Ah! it’s you, you soul-saver! I ought to have
 known you by your smell. We have a little account to settle together,
 remember. I have sworn to cut off your ears in the middle of your school.
 It will amuse the children you are poisoning.’ 
 

 The Brother fell back before the raised staff, a flood of abuse rising to
 his lips; but he began to stammer and went on disjointedly:
 

 ‘I will set the gendarmes after you, scoundrel! You spat on the church; I
 saw you. You give the plague to the poor people who merely pass your door.
 At Saint-Eutrope you made a girl die by forcing her to chew a consecrated
 wafer which you had stolen. At Beage you went and dug up the bodies of
 little dead children and carried them away on your back. You are an old
 sorcerer! Everybody knows it, you scoundrel! You are the disgrace of the
 district. Whoever strangles you will gain heaven for the deed.’ 
 

 The old man listened with a sneer, twirling the while his staff between
 his fingers. And between the Brother’s successive insults he ejaculated in
 an undertone:
 

 ‘Go on, go on; relieve yourself, you viper. I’ll break your back for you
 by-and-by.’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret tried to interfere, but Brother Archangias pushed him away,
 exclaiming: ‘You are led by him yourself! Didn’t he make you trample upon
 the cross? Deny it, if you dare!’ Then again, turning to Jeanbernat, he
 yelled: ‘Ah! Satan, you must have chuckled and no mistake when you held a
 priest in your grasp! May Heaven curse those who abetted you in that
 sacrilege! What was it you did, at night, while he slept? You came and
 moistened his tonsure with your saliva, eh? so that his hair might grow
 more quickly. And then you breathed upon his chin and his cheeks that his
 beard might grow a hand’s breadth in a single night. And you rubbed all
 your philters into his body, and breathed into his mouth the
 lasciviousness of a dog. You turned him into a brute-beast, Satan.’ 
 

 ‘He’s idiotic,’ said Jeanbernat, resting his stick on his shoulder. ‘He
 quite bores me.’ 
 

 The Brother, however, growing bolder, thrust his fists under the old man’s
 nose.
 

 ‘And that drab of yours!’ he cried, ‘you can’t deny that you set her on to
 damn the priest.’ 
 

 Then he suddenly sprang backwards, with a shriek, for the old man,
 swinging his stick with all his strength, had just broken it over his
 back. Retreating yet a little further, Archangias picked from a heap of
 stones beside the road a piece of flint twice the size of a man’s fist,
 and threw it at Jeanbernat. It would surely have split the other’s
 forehead open if he had not bent down. He, however, now likewise crossed
 over to a heap of stones, sheltered himself behind it, and provided
 himself with missiles; and from one heap to the other a terrible combat
 began, with a perfect hail of flints. The moon now shone very brightly,
 and their dark shadows fell distinctly on the ground.
 

 ‘Yes, yes, you set that hussy on to ruin him!’ repeated the Brother, wild
 with rage. ‘Ah! you are astonished that I know all about it! You hope for
 some monstrous result from it all. Every morning you make the thirteen
 signs of hell over that minx of yours! You would like her to become the
 mother of Antichrist. You long for Antichrist, you villain! But may this
 stone blind you!’ 
 

 ‘And may this one bung your mouth up!’ retorted Jeanbernat, who was now
 quite calm again. ‘Is he cracked, the silly fellow, with all those stories
 of his?... Shall I have to break your head for you, before I can get on my
 way? Is it your catechism that has turned your brain?’ 
 

 ‘Catechism, indeed! Do you know what catechism is taught to accursed ones
 like you? Ah! I will show you how to make the sign of the cross.—This
 stone is for the Father, and this for the Son, and this for the Holy
 Ghost. Ah! you are still standing. Wait a bit, wait a bit. Amen!’ Then he
 threw a handful of small pebbles like a volley of grape-shot. Jeanbernat,
 who was struck upon the shoulder, dropped the stones he was holding, and
 quietly stepped forwards, while Brother Archangias picked two fresh
 handfuls from the heap, blurting out:
 

 I am going to exterminate you. It is God who wills it. God is acting
 through my arm.’ 
 

 ‘Will you be quiet!’ said the old man, grasping him by the nape of the
 neck.
 

 Then came a short struggle amidst the dust of the road, all bluish with
 moonlight. The Brother, finding himself the weaker of the two, tried to
 bite. But Jeanbernat’s sinewy limbs were like coils of rope which pinioned
 him so tightly that he could almost feel them cutting into his flesh. He
 panted and ceased to struggle, meditating some act of treachery.
 

 The old man, having got the other under him, scoffingly exclaimed: ‘I have
 a good mind to break one of your arms. You see that it isn’t you who are
 the stronger, but that it is I who am exterminating you.... Now I’m going
 to cut your ears off. You have tried my endurance too far.’ 
 

 Jeanbernat calmly drew his knife from his pocket. But Abbe Mouret, who had
 several times attempted to part the combatants, now raised such strenuous
 opposition to the old man’s design that he consented to defer the
 operation till another time.
 

 ‘You are acting foolishly, Cure,’ said he. ‘It would do this scoundrel
 good to be well bled; but, since it seems to displease you, I’ll wait a
 little longer; I shall be meeting him again in some quiet corner.’ 
 

 And as the Brother broke out into a growl, Jeanbernat cried threateningly:
 ‘If you don’t keep still I will cut your ears off at once!’ 
 

 ‘But you are sitting on his chest,’ said the priest, ‘get up and let him
 breathe.’ 
 

 ‘No, no; he would begin his tomfoolery again. I will give him his liberty
 when I go away, but not before.... Well, I was telling you, Cure, when
 this good-for-nothing interrupted us, that you would be very welcome
 yonder. The little one is mistress, you know; I don’t attempt to interfere
 with her any more than I do with my salad-plants. There are only fools
 like this croaker here who see any harm in it. Where did you see anything
 wrong, scoundrel? It was yourself who imagined it, villain that you are!’ 
 

 And thereupon he gave the Brother another shaking. ‘Let him get up,’ 
 begged Abbe Mouret.
 

 ‘By-and-by. The little one has not been well for a long time. I did not
 notice anything myself, but she told me; and now I am on my way to tell
 your uncle Pascal, at Plassans. I like the night for walking; it is quiet,
 and, as a rule, one isn’t delayed by meeting people.... Yes, yes, the
 little one is quite ailing.’ 
 

 The priest could not find a word to say. He staggered, and his head sank.
 

 ‘It made her so happy to look after you,’ continued the old man. ‘While I
 smoked my pipe I used to hear her laugh. That was quite sufficient for me.
 Girls are like the hawthorns; when they break out into blossom, they do
 all they can. Well, now, you will come, if your heart prompts you to it. I
 am sure it would please the little one. Good night, Cure.’ 
 

 He got up slowly, keeping a firm grasp of the Brother’s wrists, to guard
 against any treacherous attack. Then he proceeded on his way, with
 swinging strides, without once turning his head. The Brother silently
 crept to the heap of stones, and waited till the old man was some distance
 off. Then, with both hands, and with mad violence, he again began flinging
 stones, but they fell harmlessly upon the dusty road. Jeanbernat did not
 condescend to notice them, but went his way, upright like a tree, through
 the clear night.
 

 ‘The accursed one!—Satan carries him on!’ shrieked Brother
 Archangias, as he hurled his last stone. ‘An old scoundrel, that the least
 touch ought to upset! But he is baked in hell’s fire. I smelt his claws.’ 
 

 The Brother stamped with impotent rage on the scattered flints. Then he
 suddenly attacked Abbe Mouret. ‘It was all your fault,’ he cried; ‘you
 ought to have helped me, and, between us, we could have strangled him.’ 
 

 Meantime, at the other end of the village, the uproar in the Bambousses’ 
 house had become greater than ever. The rhythmic tapping of glasses on a
 table could be distinctly heard. The priest resumed his walk without
 raising his head, making his way towards the flood of bright light that
 streamed out of the window like the flare of a fire of vine-cuttings. The
 Brother followed him gloomily; his cassock soiled with dust, and one of
 his cheeks bleeding from a stone-cut. And, after a short interval of
 silence, he asked, in his harsh voice: ‘Shall you go?’ 
 

 Then as Abbe Mouret did not answer, he went on: ‘Take care! You are
 lapsing into sin again. It was sufficient for that man to pass by to send
 a thrill through your whole body. I saw you by the light of the moon
 looking as pale as a girl. Take care! take care! Do you hear me? Another
 time God will not pardon you—you will sink into the lowest abyss!
 Ah! wretched piece of clay that you are, filth is mastering you!’ 
 

 Thereupon, the priest at last raised his head. Big tears were streaming
 from his eyes, and it was in gentle heartbroken accents that he spoke:
 ‘Why do you speak to me like that?—You are always with me, and you
 know my ceaseless struggles. Do not doubt me, leave me strength to master
 myself.’ 
 

 Those simple words, bathed with silent tears, fell on the night air with
 such an expression of superhuman suffering, that even Brother Archangias,
 in spite of all his harshness, felt touched. He made no reply, but shook
 his dusty cassock, and wiped his bleeding cheek. When they reached the
 Bambousses’ house, he refused to go inside. He seated himself, a few yards
 away, on the body of an overturned cart, where he waited for the Abbe with
 dog-like patience.
 

 ‘Ah! here is Monsieur le Cure!’ cried all the company of Bambousses and
 Brichets as Serge entered.
 

 They filled their glasses once more. Abbe Mouret was compelled to take
 one, too. There had been no regular wedding-feast; but, in the evening,
 after dinner, a ten-gallon ‘Dame Jane’ had been placed upon the table, and
 they were making it their business to empty it before going to bed. There
 were ten of them, and old Bambousse was already with one hand tilting over
 the jar whence only a thread of red liquor now flowed. Rosalie, in a very
 sportive frame of mind, was dipping her baby’s chin into her glass, while
 big Fortune showed off his strength by lifting up the chairs with his
 teeth. All the company passed into the bedroom. Custom required that the
 priest should there drink the glass of wine which had been poured out for
 him. It brought good luck, and prevented quarrels in the household. In
 Monsieur Caffin’s time, it had always been a very merry ceremony, for the
 old priest loved a joke. He had even gained a reputation for the skilful
 way in which he could drain his glass, without leaving a single drop at
 the bottom of it; and the Artaud women pretended that every drop undrunk
 meant a year’s less love for the newly married pair. But with Abbe Mouret
 they dare not joke so freely. However, he drank his wine at one gulp,
 which seemed to greatly please old Bambousse. Mother Brichet looked at the
 bottom of the glass and saw but a drop or two of the liquid remaining
 there. Then, after a few jokes, they all returned to the living room,
 where Vincent and Catherine had remained by themselves. Vincent, standing
 upon a chair, was clasping the huge jar in his arms, and draining the last
 drops of wine into Catherine’s open mouth.
 

 ‘We are much obliged to you, Monsieur le Cure,’ said old Bambousse, as he
 escorted the priest to the door. ‘Well, they’re married now, so I suppose
 you are satisfied. And they are not likely to complain, I’m sure.... Good
 night, sleep well, your reverence.’ 
 

 Brother Archangias had slowly risen from his seat on the old cart.
 

 ‘May the devil pile hot coals over them, and roast them!’ he murmured.
 

 Then without again opening his lips he accompanied Abbe Mouret to the
 parsonage. And he waited outside till the door was closed. Even then he
 did not go off without twice looking round to make sure that the Abbe was
 not coming out again. As for the priest, when he reached his bedroom, he
 threw himself in his clothes upon his bed, clasping his hands to his ears,
 and pressing his face to the pillow, in order that he might shut out all
 sound and sight. And thus stilling his senses he fell into death-like
 slumber.
 

 
 
 

 The next day was Sunday. As the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross
 fell on a high mass day, Abbe Mouret desired to celebrate the festival
 with especial solemnity. He was now full of extraordinary devotion for the
 Cross, and had replaced the image of the Immaculate Conception in his
 bedroom by a large crucifix of black wood, before which he spent long
 hours in worship. To exalt the Cross, to plant it before him, above all
 else, in a halo of glory, as the one object of his life, gave him the
 strength he needed to suffer and to struggle. He sometimes dreamed of
 hanging there himself, in Jesus’s place, his head crowned with thorns,
 nails driven through his hands and feet, and his side rent by spears. What
 a coward he must be to complain of an imaginary wound, when God bled there
 from His whole body, and yet preserved on His lips the blessed smile of
 the Redemption! And however unworthy it might be, he offered up his wound
 as a sacrifice, ended by falling into ecstasy, and believing that blood
 did really stream from his brow and side and limbs. Those were hours of
 relief, for he fancied that all the impurity within him flowed forth from
 his wounds. And he then usually drew himself up with the heroism of a
 martyr, and longed to be called upon to suffer the most frightful
 tortures, in order that he might bear them without a quiver of the flesh.
 

 At early dawn that day he knelt before the crucifix, and grace came upon
 him abundantly as dew. He made no effort, he simply fell upon his knees,
 to receive it in his heart, to be permeated with it to the marrow of his
 bones in sweetest and most refreshing fulness. On the previous day he had
 prayed for grace in agony, and it had not come. At times it long remained
 deaf to his entreaties, and then, when he simply clasped his hands, in
 quite childlike fashion, it flowed down to succour him. It came upon him
 that morning like a benediction, bringing perfect serenity, absolute
 trusting faith. He forgot his anguish of the previous days, and
 surrendered himself wholly to the triumphant joy of the Cross. He seemed
 to be cased in such impenetrable armour that the world’s most deadly blows
 would glide off from it harmlessly. When he came down from his bedroom, he
 stepped along with an air of serenity and victory. La Teuse was
 astonished, and went to find Desiree, that he might kiss her; and both of
 them clapped their hands, and said that they had not seen him looking so
 well for the last six months.
 

 But it was in the church, at high mass, that the priest felt that he had
 really recovered divine grace. It was a long time since he had approached
 the altar with such loving emotion; and he had to make a great effort to
 restrain himself from weeping whilst he remained with his lips pressed to
 the altar-cloth. It was a solemn high mass. The local rural guard, an
 uncle of Rosalie, chanted in a deep bass voice which rumbled through the
 low nave like a hoarse organ. Vincent, robed in a surplice much too large
 for him, which had formerly belonged to Abbe Caffin, carried an old silver
 censer, and was vastly amused by the tinkling of its chains; he swung it
 to a great height, so as to produce copious clouds of smoke, and glanced
 behind him every now and then to see if he had succeeded in making any one
 cough. The church was almost full, for everybody wanted to see his
 reverence’s painting. Peasant women laughed with pleasure because the
 place smelt so nice, while the men, standing under the gallery, jerked
 their heads approvingly at each deeper and deeper note that came from the
 rural guard. Filtering through the paper window panes the full morning sun
 lighted up the brightly painted walls, on which the women’s caps cast
 shadows resembling huge butterflies. The artificial flowers, with which
 the altar was decorated, almost seemed to possess the moist freshness of
 natural ones newly gathered; and when the priest turned round to bless the
 congregation, he felt even stronger emotion than before, as he saw his
 church so clean, so full, and so steeped in music and incense and light.
 

 After the offertory, however, a buzzing murmur sped through the peasant
 women. Vincent inquisitively turned his head, and in doing so, almost let
 the charcoal in his censer fall upon the priest’s chasuble. And, wishing
 to excuse himself, as he saw the Abbe looking at him with an expression of
 reproof, he murmured: ‘It is your reverence’s uncle, who has just come
 in.’ 
 

 At the end of the church, standing beside one of the slender wooden
 pillars that supported the gallery, Abbe Mouret then perceived Doctor
 Pascal. The doctor was not wearing his usual cheerful and slightly
 scoffing expression. Hat in hand, he stood there looking very grave, and
 followed the service with evident impatience. The sight of the priest at
 the altar, his solemn demeanour, his slow gestures, and the perfect
 serenity of his countenance, appeared to gradually increase his
 irritation. He could not stay there till the end of the mass, but left the
 church, and walked up and down beside his horse and gig, which he had
 secured to one of the parsonage shutters.
 

 ‘Will that nephew of mine never have finished censing himself?’ he asked
 of La Teuse, who was just coming out of the vestry.
 

 ‘It is all over,’ she replied. ‘Won’t you come into the drawing-room? His
 reverence is unrobing. He knows you are here.’ 
 

 ‘Well, unless he were blind, he couldn’t very well help it,’ growled the
 doctor, as he followed La Teuse into the cold-looking, stiffly furnished
 chamber, which she pompously called the drawing-room. Here for a few
 minutes he paced up and down. The gloomy coldness of his surroundings
 seemed to increase his irritation. As he strode about, flourishing a stick
 he carried, he kept on striking the well-worn chair-seats of horsehair
 which sounded hard and dead as stone. Then, tired of walking, he took his
 stand in front of the mantelpiece, in the centre of which a gaudily
 painted image of Saint Joseph occupied the place of a clock.
 

 ‘Ah! here he comes at last,’ he said, as he heard the door opening. And
 stepping towards the Abbe he went on: ‘Do you know that you made me listen
 to half a mass? It is a very long time since that happened to me. But I
 was bent on seeing you to-day. I have something to say to you.’ 
 

 Then he stopped, and looked at the priest with an expression of surprise.
 Silence fell. ‘You at all events are quite well,’ he resumed, in a
 different voice.
 

 ‘Yes, I am very much better than I was,’ replied Abbe Mouret, with a
 smile. ‘I did not expect you before Thursday. Sunday isn’t your day for
 coming. Is there something you want to tell me?’ 
 

 Uncle Pascal did not give an immediate answer. He went on looking at the
 Abbe. The latter was still fresh from the influence of the church and the
 mass. His hair was fragrant with the perfume of the incense, and in his
 eyes shone all the joy of the Cross. His uncle jogged his head, as he
 noticed that expression of triumphant peace.
 

 ‘I have come from the Paradou,’ he said, abruptly. ‘Jeanbernat came to
 fetch me there. I have seen Albine, and she disquiets me. She needs much
 careful treatment.’ 
 

 He kept his eyes fixed upon the priest as he spoke, but he did not detect
 so much as a quiver of Serge’s eyelids.
 

 ‘She took great care of you, you know,’ he added, more roughly. ‘Without
 her, my boy, you might now be in one of the cells at Les Tulettes, with a
 strait waistcoat on.... Well, I promised that you would go to see her. I
 will take you with me. It will be a farewell meeting. She is anxious to go
 away.’ 
 

 ‘I can do nothing more than pray for the person of whom you speak,’ said
 Abbe Mouret, softly.
 

 And as the doctor, losing his temper, brought his stick down heavily upon
 the couch, he added calmly, but in a firm voice:
 

 ‘I am a priest, and can only help with prayers.’ 
 

 ‘Ah, well! Yes, you are right,’ said Uncle Pascal, dropping down into an
 armchair, ‘it is I who am an old fool. Yes, I wept like a child, as I came
 here alone in my gig. That is what comes of living amongst books. One
 learns a lot from them, but one makes a fool of oneself in the world. How
 could I guess that it would all turn out so badly?’ 
 

 He rose from his chair and began to walk about again, looking exceedingly
 troubled.
 

 ‘But yes, but yes, I ought to have guessed. It was all quite natural.
 Though with one in your position, it was bound to be abominable! You are
 not as other men. But listen to me, I assure you that otherwise you would
 never have recovered. It was she alone, with the atmosphere she set round
 you, who saved you from madness. There is no need for me to tell you what
 a state you were in. It is one of my most wonderful cures. But I can’t
 take any pride, any pleasure in it, for now the poor girl is dying of it!’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret remained there erect, perfectly calm, his face reflecting all
 the quiet serenity of a martyr whom nothing that man might do could
 disturb.
 

 ‘God will take mercy upon her,’ he said.
 

 ‘God! God!’ muttered the doctor below his breath. ‘Ah! He would do better
 not to interfere. We might manage matters if we were left to ourselves.’ 
 Then, raising his voice, he added: ‘I thought I had considered everything
 carefully, that is the most wonderful part of it. Oh! what a fool I was!
 You would stay there, I thought, for a month to recover your strength. The
 shade of the trees, the cheerful chatter of the girl, all the youthfulness
 about you would quickly bring you round. And then you, on your side, it
 seemed to me, would do something to reclaim the poor child from her wild
 ways; you would civilise her, and, between us, we should turn her into a
 young lady, for whom we should, by-and-by, find a suitable husband. It
 seemed such a perfect scheme. And then how was I to guess that old
 philosophising Jeanbernat would never stir an inch from his lettuce-beds?
 Well! well! I myself never left my own laboratory. I had such pressing
 work there.... And it is all my fault! Ah! I am a stupid bungler!’ 
 

 He was choking, and wished to go off. And he began to look about him for
 his hat, though, all the while, he had it on his head.
 

 ‘Good-bye!’ he stammered; ‘I am going. So you won’t come? Do, now—for
 my sake! You see how miserable, how upset I am. I swear to you that she
 shall go away immediately afterwards. That is all settled. My gig is here;
 you might be back in an hour. Come, do come, I beg you.’ 
 

 The priest made a sweeping gesture; such a gesture as the doctor had seen
 him make before the altar.
 

 ‘No,’ he said, ‘I cannot.’ 
 

 Then, as he accompanied his uncle out of the room, he added:
 

 ‘Tell her to fall on her knees and pray to God. God will hear her as He
 heard me, and He will comfort her as He has comforted me. There is no
 other means of salvation.’ 
 

 The doctor looked him full in the face, and shrugged his shoulders.
 

 ‘Good-bye, then,’ he repeated. ‘You are quite well now, and have no
 further need of me.’ 
 

 But, as he was unfastening his horse, Desiree, who had heard his voice,
 came running up. She was extremely attached to her uncle. When she had
 been younger he had been wont to listen to her childish prattle for hours
 without showing the least sign of weariness. And, even now, he did his
 best to spoil her, and manifested the greatest interest in her farmyard,
 often spending a whole afternoon with her amongst her fowls and ducks, and
 smiling at her with his bright eyes. He seemed to consider her superior to
 other girls. And so she now flung herself round his neck, in an impulse of
 affection, and cried:
 

 ‘Aren’t you going to stay and have some lunch with us?’ 
 

 But having kissed her, he said he could not remain, and unfastened her
 arms from his neck with a somewhat pettish air. She laughed however, and
 again clasped her arms round him.
 

 ‘Oh! but you must,’ she persisted. ‘I have some eggs that have only just
 been laid. I have been looking in the nests, and there are fourteen eggs
 this morning. And, if you will stay, we can have a fowl, the white one,
 that is always quarrelling with the others. When you were here on
 Thursday, you know, it pecked the big spotted hen’s eye out.’ 
 

 But her uncle persisted in his refusal. He was irritated to find that he
 could not unfasten the knot in which he had tied his reins. And then she
 began to skip round him, clapping her hands and repeating in a sing-song
 voice: ‘Yes! yes! you’ll stay, and we will eat it up, we’ll eat it up!’ 
 

 Her uncle could no longer resist her blandishments; he raised his head and
 smiled at her. She seemed so full of life and health and sincerity; her
 gaiety was as frank and natural as the sheet of sunlight which was gilding
 her bare arms.
 

 ‘You big silly!’ he said; and clasping her by the wrists as she continued
 skipping gleefully about him, he went on: ‘No, dear; not to-day. I have to
 go to see a poor girl who is ill. But I will come some other morning. I
 promise you faithfully.’ 
 

 ‘When? when?’ she persisted. ‘On Thursday? The cow is in calf, you know,
 and she hasn’t seemed at all well these last two days. You are a doctor,
 and you ought to be able to give her something to do her good.’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret, who had calmly remained there, could not restrain a slight
 laugh.
 

 The doctor gaily got into his gig and exclaimed: ‘All right, my dear, I
 will attend to your cow. Come and let me kiss you. Ah! how nice and
 healthy you are! And you are worth more than all the others put together.
 Ah! if every one was like my big silly, this earth would be too
 beautiful!’ 
 

 He set his horse off with a cluck of his tongue, and continued talking to
 himself as the gig rattled down the hill.
 

 ‘Yes, yes! there should be nothing but animals. Ah! if they were mere
 animals, how happy and gay and strong they would all be! It has gone well
 with the girl, who is as happy as her cow; but it has gone badly with the
 lad, who is in torture beneath his cassock. A drop too much blood, a
 little too much nerve, and one’s whole life is wrecked! ... They are true
 Rougons and true Macquarts those children there! The tail-end of the stock—its
 final degeneracy.’ 
 

 Then, urging on his horse, he drove at a trot up the hill that led to the
 Paradou.
 

 
 
 

 Sunday was a busy day for Abbe Mouret. He had to think of vespers, which
 he generally said to empty seats, for even mother Brichet did not carry
 her piety so far as to go back to church in the afternoon. Then, at four
 o’clock, Brother Archangias brought the little rogues from his school to
 repeat their catechism to his reverence. This lesson sometimes lasted
 until late. When the children showed themselves quite intractable, La
 Teuse was summoned to frighten them with her broom.
 

 On that particular Sunday, about four o’clock, Desiree found herself quite
 alone in the parsonage. As she felt a little bored, she went to gather
 some food for her rabbits in the churchyard, where there were some
 magnificent poppies, of which rabbits are extremely fond. Dragging herself
 about on her knees between the grave-stones, she gathered apronfuls of
 juicy verdure on which her pets fell greedily.
 

 ‘Oh! what lovely plantains!’ she muttered, stooping before Abbe Caffin’s
 tombstone, and delighted with the discovery she had made.
 

 There were, indeed, some magnificent plantains spreading out their broad
 leaves beside the stone. Desiree had just finished filling her apron with
 them when she fancied she heard a strange noise behind her. A rustling of
 branches and a rolling of small pebbles came from the ravine which skirted
 one side of the graveyard, and at the bottom of which flowed the Mascle, a
 stream which descended from the high lands of the Paradou. But the ascent
 here was so rough, so impracticable, that Desiree imagined that the noise
 could only have been made by some lost dog or straying goat. She stepped
 quickly to the edge, and, as she looked over, she was amazed to see amidst
 the brambles a girl who was climbing up the rocks with extraordinary
 agility.
 

 ‘I will give you a hand,’ she said. ‘You might easily break your neck
 there.’ 
 

 The girl, directly she saw she was discovered, started back, as though she
 would rather go down again, but after a moment’s hesitation she ventured
 to take the hand that was held out to her.
 

 ‘Oh! I know who you are,’ said Desiree, with a beaming smile, and letting
 her apron fall that she might grasp the girl by the waist. ‘You once gave
 me some blackbirds, but they all died, poor little dears. I was so sorry
 about it.—Wait a bit, I know your name, I have heard it before. La
 Teuse often mentions it when Serge isn’t there; but she told me that I was
 not to repeat it. Wait a moment, I shall remember it directly!’ 
 

 She tried to recall the name, and grew quite grave in the attempt. Then,
 having succeeded in remembering it, she became gay again, and seemingly
 found great pleasure in dwelling upon its musical sound.
 

 ‘Albine! Albine!—— What a sweet name it is! At first I used to
 think you must be a tomtit, because I once had a tomtit with a name very
 like yours, though I don’t remember exactly what it was.’ 
 

 Albine did not smile. Her face was very pale, and there was a feverish
 gleam in her eyes. A few drops of blood trickled from her hands. When she
 had recovered her breath, she hastily exclaimed:
 

 No! no! leave it alone. You will only stain your handkerchief. It is
 nothing but a scratch. I didn’t want to come by the road, as I should have
 been seen—so I preferred coming along the bed of the torrent——
 Is Serge there?’ 
 

 Desiree did not feel at all shocked at hearing the girl pronounce her
 brother’s name thus familiarly and with an expression of subdued passion.
 She simply replied that he was in the church hearing the children say
 their catechism.
 

 ‘You must not speak at all loudly,’ she added, raising her finger to her
 lips. ‘Serge forbade me to talk loudly when he is catechising the
 children, and we shall get into trouble if we don’t keep quiet. Let us go
 into the stable—shall we? We can talk better there.’ 
 

 ‘I want to see Serge,’ said Albine, simply.
 

 Desiree cast a hasty glance at the church, and then whispered, ‘Yes, yes;
 Serge will be finely caught. Come with me. We will hide ourselves, and
 keep quite quiet. We shall have some fine fun!’ 
 

 She had picked up the herbage which had fallen from her apron, and
 quitting the graveyard she stole back to the parsonage, telling Albine to
 hide herself behind her and make herself as little as possible. As they
 stealthily glided through the farmyard, they caught sight of La Teuse, who
 was crossing over to the vestry, but she did not appear to notice them.
 

 ‘There! There!’ said Desiree, quite delighted, as they stowed themselves
 away in the stable; ‘keep quiet, and no one will know that we are here.
 There is some straw there for you to lie down upon.’ 
 

 Albine seated herself on a truss of straw.
 

 ‘And Serge?’ she asked, persisting in her one fixed idea.
 

 ‘Listen! You can hear his voice. When he claps his hands, it will be all
 over, and the children will go away—Listen! he is telling them a
 tale.’ 
 

 They could indeed just hear Abbe Mouret’s voice, which was wafted to them
 through the vestry doorway which La Teuse had doubtless left open. It came
 to them like a solemn murmur, in which they could distinguish the name of
 Jesus thrice repeated. Albine trembled. She sprang up as though to hasten
 to that beloved voice whose caressing accents she knew so well, but all
 sound of it suddenly died away, shut off by the closing of the door. Then
 she sat down again, to wait, her hands tightly clasped, and her clear eyes
 gleaming with the intensity of her thoughts. Desiree, who was lying at her
 feet, gazed up at her with innocent admiration.
 

 ‘How beautiful you are!’ she whispered. ‘You are like an image that Serge
 used to have in his bedroom. It was quite white like you are, with great
 curls floating about the neck; and the heart was quite bare and uncovered,
 just in the place where I can feel yours beating—— But you are
 not listening to me. You are looking quite sad. Let us play at something?
 Will you?’ 
 

 Then she stopped short, holding her breath and saying between her teeth:
 ‘Ah! the wretches! they will get us caught!’ She still had her apron full
 of herbage with her, and her pets were taking it by assault. A troop of
 fowls had surrounded her, clucking and calling each other, and pecking at
 the hanging green stuff. The goat pushed its head slyly under her arm, and
 began to eat the longer leaves. Even the cow, which was tethered to the
 wall, strained at its cord and poked out its nose, kissing her with its
 warm breath.
 

 ‘Oh! you thieves!’ cried Desiree. ‘But this is for the rabbits, not for
 you! Leave me alone, won’t you! You, there, will get your ears boxed, if
 you don’t go away! And you too will have your tail pulled if I catch you
 at it again. The wretches! they will be eating my hands soon!’ 
 

 She drove the goat off, dispersed the fowls with her feet, and tapped the
 cow’s nose with her fists. But the creatures just shook themselves, and
 then came back more greedily than ever, surrounding her, jumping on her,
 and tearing open her apron. At this she whispered to Albine, as though she
 were afraid the animals might hear her.
 

 ‘Aren’t they amusing, the dears? Watch them eat.’ 
 

 Albine looked on with a grave expression.
 

 ‘Now, now, be good,’ resumed Desiree; ‘you shall all have some, but you
 must wait your turns. Now, big Lisa, you first. Eh! how fond you are of
 plantain, aren’t you?’ 
 

 Big Lisa was the cow. She slowly munched a handful of the juicy leaves
 which had grown beside Abbe Caffin’s tomb. A thread of saliva hung down
 from her mouth, and her great brown eyes shone with quiet enjoyment.
 

 ‘There! now it’s your turn,’ continued Desiree, turning towards the goat.
 ‘You are fond of poppies, I know; and you like the flowers best, don’t
 you? The buds that shine in your teeth like red-hot butterflies! See, here
 are some splendid ones; they came from the left-hand corner, where there
 was a burial last year.’ 
 

 As she spoke, she gave the goat a bunch of scarlet flowers, which the
 animal ate from her hand. When there was nothing left in her grasp but the
 stalks, she pushed these between its teeth. Behind her, in the meanwhile,
 the fowls were desperately pecking away at her petticoats. She threw them
 some wild chicory and dandelions which she had gathered amongst the old
 slabs that were ranged alongside the church walls. It was particularly
 over the dandelions that the fowls quarrelled, so voraciously indeed, with
 such scratchings and flapping of wings, that the other fowls in the yard
 heard them. And then came a general invasion. The big yellow cock,
 Alexander, was the first to appear; having seized a dandelion and torn it
 in halves, without attempting to eat it, he called to the hens who were
 still outside to come and peck. Then a white hen strutted in, then a black
 one, and then a whole crowd of hens, who hustled one another, and trod on
 one another’s tails, and ended by forming a wild flood of feathers. Behind
 the fowls came the pigeons, and the ducks, and the geese, and, last of
 all, the turkeys. Desiree laughed at seeing herself thus surrounded by
 this noisy, squabbling mob.
 

 ‘This is what always happens,’ said she, ‘every time that I bring any
 green stuff from the graveyard. They nearly kill each other to get at it;
 they must find it very nice.’ 
 

 Then she made a fight to keep a few handfuls of the leaves from the greedy
 beaks which rose all round her, saying that something must really be saved
 for the rabbits. She would surely get angry with them if they went on like
 that, and give them nothing but dry bread in future. However, she was
 obliged to give way. The geese tugged at her apron so violently that she
 was almost pulled down upon her knees; the ducks gobbled away at her
 ankles; two of the pigeons flew upon her head, and some of the fowls
 fluttered about her shoulders. It was the ferocity of creatures who smell
 flesh: the fat plantains, the crimson poppies, the milky dandelions, in
 which remained some of the life of the dead. Desiree laughed loudly, and
 felt that she was on the point of slipping down, and letting go of her
 last two handfuls, when the fowls were panic-stricken by a terrible
 grunting.
 

 ‘Ah! it’s you, my fatty,’ she exclaimed, quite delighted; ‘eat them up,
 and set me at liberty.’ 
 

 The pig waddled in; he was no longer the little pig of former days—pink
 as a newly painted toy, with a tiny little tail, like a bit of string; but
 a fat wobbling creature, fit to be killed, with a belly as round as a
 monk’s, and a back all bristling with rough hairs, that reeked of fatness.
 His stomach had grown quite yellow from his habit of sleeping on the
 manure heap. Waddling along on his shaky feet, he charged with lowered
 snout at the scared fowls, and so left Desiree at liberty to escape, and
 take the rabbits the few scraps of green stuff which she had so
 strenuously defended. When she came back, all was peace again. The stupid,
 ecstatic-looking geese were lazily swaying their long necks about, the
 ducks and turkeys were waddling in ungainly fashion alongside the wall;
 the fowls were quietly clucking and peaking at invisible grains on the
 hard ground of the stable; while the pig, the goat, and the big cow, were
 drowsily blinking their eyes, as though they were falling asleep. Outside
 it had just begun to rain.
 

 ‘Ah! well, there’s a shower coming on!’ cried Desiree, throwing herself
 down on the straw. ‘You had better stay where you are, my dears, if you
 don’t want to get soaked.’ 
 

 Then she turned to Albine and added: ‘How stupid they all look, don’t
 they? They only wake up just to eat!’ 
 

 Albine still remained silent. The merry laughter of that buxom girl as she
 struggled amidst those greedy necks and gluttonous beaks, which tickled
 and kissed her, and seemed bent on devouring her very flesh, had rendered
 the unhappy daughter of the Paradou yet paler than she had been before. So
 much gaiety, so much vitality, so much boisterous health made her despair.
 She strained her feverish arms to her desolate bosom, which desertion had
 parched.
 

 ‘And Serge?’ she asked again, in the same clear, stubborn voice.
 

 ‘Hush!’ said Desiree. ‘I heard him just now. He hasn’t finished yet——
 We have been making a pretty disturbance; La Teuse must surely have grown
 deaf this afternoon—— Let us keep quiet now. I like to hear
 the rain fall.’ 
 

 The shower beat in at the open doorway, casting big drops upon the
 threshold. The restless fowls, after venturing out for a moment, had
 quickly retreated to the far end of the stable; where, indeed, with the
 exception of three ducks who remained quietly walking in the rain, all the
 pets had now taken refuge, clustering round the girl’s skirts. It was
 growing very warm amongst the straw. Desiree pulled two big trusses
 together, made a bed of them, and lay down at full length. She felt
 extremely comfortable there.
 

 ‘It is so nice,’ she murmured. ‘Come and lie down like me. It is so
 springy and soft, all this straw; and it tickles one so funnily in the
 neck. Do you roll about in the straw at home? There is nothing I am fonder
 of—— Sometimes I tickle the soles of my feet with it. That is
 very funny, too——’ 
 

 But at that moment, the big yellow cock, who had been gravely stalking
 towards her, jumped upon her breast.
 

 ‘Get away with you, Alexander! get away!’ she cried. ‘What a tiresome
 creature he is! The idea of his perching himself on me—— You
 are too rough, sir, and you scratch me with your claws. Do you hear me? I
 don’t want you to go away, but you must be good, and mustn’t peck at my
 hair.’ 
 

 Then she troubled herself no further about him. The cock still maintained
 his position, every now and then glancing inquisitively at the girl’s chin
 with his gleaming eye. The other birds all began to cluster round her.
 After rolling amongst the straw, she was now lying lazily on her back with
 her arms stretched out.
 

 ‘Ah! how pleasant it is,’ she said; ‘but then it makes me feel so sleepy.
 Straw always makes one drowsy, doesn’t it? Serge doesn’t like it. Perhaps
 you don’t either. What do you like? Tell me, so that I may know.’ 
 

 She was gradually dozing off. For a moment she opened her eyes widely, as
 though she were looking for something, and then her eyelids fell with a
 tranquil smile of content. She seemed to be asleep, but after a few
 minutes she opened her eyes again, and said:
 

 ‘The cow is going to have a calf—— That will be so nice, and
 will please me more than anything.’ 
 

 Then she sank into deep slumber. The fowls had ended by perching on her
 body; she was buried beneath a wave of living plumage. Hens were brooding
 over her feet; geese stretched their soft downy necks over her legs. The
 pig lay against her left side, while on the right, the goat poked its
 bearded head under her arm. The pigeons were roosting and nestling all
 over her, on her hands, her waist, and her shoulders. And there she lay
 asleep, in all her rosy freshness, caressed by the cow’s warm breath,
 while the big cock still squatted just below her bosom with gleaming comb
 and quivering wings.
 

 Outside, the rain was falling less heavily. A sunbeam, escaping from
 beneath a cloud, gilded the fine drops of water. Albine, who had remained
 perfectly still, watched the slumber of Desiree, that big, plump girl who
 found her great delight in rolling about in the straw. She wished that
 she, too, could slumber away so peacefully, and feel such pleasure,
 because a few straws had tickled her neck. And she felt jealous of those
 strong arms, that firm bosom, all that vitality, all that purely animal
 development which made the other like a tranquil easy-minded sister of the
 big red and white cow.
 

 However, the rain had now quite ceased. The three cats of the parsonage
 filed out into the yard one after the other, keeping close to the wall,
 and taking the greatest precautions to avoid wetting their paws. They
 peeped into the stable, and then stalked up to the sleeping girl, and lay
 down, purring, close by her. Moumou, the big black cat, curled itself up
 close to her cheek, and gently licked her chin.
 

 ‘And Serge?’ murmured Albine, quite mechanically.
 

 What was it that kept them apart? Who was it that prevented them from
 being happy together? Why might she not love him, and why might she not be
 loved, freely and in the broad sunlight, as the trees lived and loved? She
 knew not, but she felt that she had been forsaken, and had received a
 mortal wound. Yet she was possessed by a stubborn, determined longing, a
 very necessity, indeed, of once more clasping her love in her arms, of
 concealing him somewhere, that he might be hers in all felicity. She rose
 to her feet. The vestry door had just been opened again. A clapping of
 hands sounded, followed by the uproar of a swarm of children clattering in
 wooden shoes over the stone flags. The catechising was over. Then Albine
 gently glided out of the stable, where she had been waiting for an hour
 amidst the reeking warmth that emanated from Desiree’s pets.
 

 As she quietly slipped through the passage that led to the vestry, she
 caught sight of La Teuse, who was going to her kitchen, and who
 fortunately did not turn her head. Certain, now, of not being seen and
 stopped, Albine softly pushed the door which was before her, keeping hold
 of it in order that it might make no noise as it closed again.
 

 And she found herself in the church.
 

 
 
 

 At first she could see nobody. Outside, the rain had again begun to fall
 in fine close drops. The church looked very grey and gloomy. She passed
 behind the high altar, and walked on towards the pulpit. In the middle of
 the nave, there were only a number of empty benches, left there in
 disorder by the urchins of the catechism class. Amidst all this void came
 a low tic-tac from the swaying pendulum. She went down the church to knock
 at the confessional-box, which she saw standing at the other end. But,
 just as she passed the Chapel of the Dead, she caught sight of Abbe Mouret
 prostrated before the great bleeding Christ. He did not stir; he must have
 thought that it was only La Teuse putting the seats in order behind him.
 

 But Albine laid her hand upon his shoulder.
 

 ‘Serge,’ she said, ‘I have come for you.’ 
 

 The priest raised his head with a start. His face was very pale. He
 remained on his knees and crossed himself, while his lips still quivered
 with the words of his prayer.
 

 ‘I have been waiting for you,’ she continued. ‘Every morning and every
 evening I looked to see if you were not coming. I have counted the days
 till I could keep the reckoning no longer. Ah! for weeks and weeks——
 Then, when I grew sure that you were not coming, I set out myself, and
 came here. I said to myself: “I will fetch him away with me.” Give me your
 hand and let us go.’ 
 

 She stretched out her hands, as though to help him to rise. But he only
 crossed himself, afresh. He still continued his prayers as he looked at
 her. He had succeeded in calming the first quiver of his flesh. From the
 Divine grace which had been streaming around him since the early morning,
 like a celestial bath, he derived a superhuman strength.
 

 ‘It is not right for you to be here,’ he said, gravely. ‘Go away. You are
 aggravating your sufferings.’ 
 

 ‘I suffer no longer,’ she said, with a smile. ‘I am well again; I am
 cured, now that I see you once more—— Listen! I made myself
 out worse than I really was, to induce them to go and fetch you. I am
 quite willing to confess it now. And that promise of going away, of
 leaving the neighbourhood, you didn’t suppose I should have kept it, did
 you? No, indeed, unless I had carried you away with me on my shoulders.
 The others don’t know it, but you must know that I cannot now live
 anywhere but at your side.’ 
 

 She grew quite cheerful again, and drew close to the priest with the
 caressing ways of a child of nature, never noticing his cold and rigid
 demeanour. And she became impatient, clapped her hands, and exclaimed:
 

 ‘Come, Serge; make up your mind and come. We are only losing time. There
 is no necessity to think so much about it. It is quite simple; I am going
 to take you with me. If you don’t want any one to see you, we will go
 along by the Mascle. It is not very easy walking, but I managed it all by
 myself; and, when we are together, we can help each other. You know the
 way, don’t you? We cross the churchyard, we descend to the torrent, and
 then we shall only have to follow its course right up to the garden. And
 one is quite at home down there. Nobody can see us, there is nothing but
 brambles and big round stones. The bed of the stream is nearly dry. As I
 came along, I thought: “By-and-by, when he is with me, we will walk along
 gently together and kiss one another.” Come, Serge, be quick; I am waiting
 for you.’ 
 

 The priest no longer appeared to hear her. He had betaken himself to his
 prayers again, and was asking Heaven to grant him the courage of the
 saints. Before entering upon the supreme struggle, he was arming himself
 with the flaming sword of faith. For a moment he had feared he was
 wavering. He had required all a martyr’s courage and endurance to remain
 firmly kneeling there on the flagstones, while Albine was calling him: his
 heart had leapt out towards her, all his blood had surged passionately
 through his veins, filling him with an intense yearning to clasp her in
 his arms and kiss her hair. Her mere breath had awakened all the memory of
 their love; the vast garden, their saunters beneath the trees, and all the
 joy of their companionship.
 

 But Divine grace was poured down upon him more abundantly, and the
 torturing strife, during which all his blood seemed to quit his veins,
 lasted but a moment. Nothing human then remained within him. He had become
 wholly God’s.
 

 Albine, however, again touched him on the shoulder. She was growing uneasy
 and angry.
 

 ‘Why do you not speak to me?’ she asked. ‘You can’t refuse; you will come
 with me? Remember that I shall die if you refuse. But no! you can’t; it is
 impossible. We lived together once; it was vowed that we should never
 separate. Twenty times, at least, did you give yourself to me. You bade me
 take you wholly, your limbs, your breath, your very life itself. I did not
 dream it all. There is nothing of you that you have not given to me; not a
 hair in your head which is not mine. Your hands are mine. For days and
 days have I held them clasped in mine. Your face, your lips, your eyes,
 your brow, all, all are mine, and I have lavished my love upon them. Do
 you hear me, Serge?’ 
 

 She stood erect before him, full of proud assertion, with outstretched
 arms. And, in a louder voice, she repeated:
 

 ‘Do you hear me, Serge? You belong to me.’ 
 

 Then Abbe Mouret slowly rose to his feet. He leant against the altar, and
 replied:
 

 ‘No. You are mistaken. I belong to God.’ 
 

 He was full of serenity. His shorn face seemed like that of some stone
 saint, whom no impulse of the flesh can disturb. His cassock fell around
 him in straight folds like a black winding-sheet, concealing all the
 outlines of his body. Albine dropped back at the sight of that sombre
 phantom of her former love. She missed his freely flowing beard, his
 freely flowing curls. And in the midst of his shorn locks she saw the
 pallid circle of his tonsure, which disquieted her as if it had been some
 mysterious evil, some malignant sore which had grown there, and would eat
 away all memory of the happy days they had spent together. She could
 recognise neither his hands, once so warm with caresses, nor his lissom
 neck, once so sonorous with laughter; nor his agile feet, which had
 carried her into the recesses of the woodlands. Could this, indeed, be the
 strong youth with whom she had lived one whole season—the youth with
 soft down gleaming on his bare breast, with skin browned by the sun’s
 rays, with every limb full of vibrating life? At this present hour he
 seemed fleshless; his hair had fallen away from him, and all his virility
 had withered within that womanish gown, which left him sexless.
 

 ‘Oh! you frighten me,’ she murmured. ‘Did you think then that I was dead,
 that you put on mourning? Take off that black thing; put on a blouse. You
 can tuck up the sleeves, and we will catch crayfishes again. Your arms
 used to be as white as mine.’ 
 

 She laid her hand on his cassock, as though to tear it off him; but he
 repulsed her with a gesture, without touching her. He looked at her now
 and strengthened himself against temptation by never allowing his eyes to
 leave her. She seemed to him to have grown taller. She was no longer the
 playful damsel adorned with bunches of wild-flowers, and casting to the
 winds gay, gipsy laughter, nor was she the amorosa in white skirts,
 gracefully bending her slender form as she sauntered lingeringly beside
 the hedges. Now, there was a velvety bloom upon her lips; her hips were
 gracefully rounded; her bosom was in full bloom. She had become a woman,
 with a long oval face that seemed expressive of fruitfulness. Life
 slumbered within her. And her cheeks glowed with luscious maturity.
 

 The priest, bathed in the voluptuous atmosphere that seemed to emanate
 from all that feminine ripeness, took a bitter pleasure in defying the
 caresses of her coral lips, the tempting smile of her eyes, the witching
 charm of her bosom, and all the intoxication which seemed to pour from her
 at every movement. He even carried his temerity so far as to search with
 his gaze for the spots that he had once so hotly kissed, the corners of
 her eyes and lips, her narrow temples, soft as satin, and the ambery nape
 of her neck, which was like velvet. And never, even in her embrace, had he
 tasted such felicity as he now felt in martyring himself, by boldly
 looking in the face the love that he refused. At last, fearing lest he
 might there yield to some new allurement of the flesh, he dropped his
 eyes, and said, very gently:
 

 ‘I cannot hear you here. Let us go out, if you, indeed, persist in adding
 to the pain of both of us. Our presence in this place is a scandal. We are
 in God’s house.’ 
 

 ‘God!’ cried Albine, excitedly, suddenly becoming a child of nature once
 more. ‘God! Who is He? I know nothing of your God! I want to know nothing
 of Him if He has stolen you away from me, who have never harmed Him. My
 uncle Jeanbernat was right then when he said that your God was only an
 invention to frighten people, and make them weep! You are lying; you love
 me no longer, and that God of yours does not exist.’ 
 

 ‘You are in His house now,’ said Abbe Mouret, sternly. ‘You blaspheme.
 With a breath He might turn you into dust.’ 
 

 She laughed with proud disdain, and raised her hands as if to defy Heaven.
 

 ‘Ah! then,’ said she, ‘you prefer your God to me. You think He is stronger
 than I am, and you imagine that He will love you better than I did. Oh!
 but you are a child, a foolish child. Come, leave all this folly. We will
 return to the garden together, and love each other, and be happy and free.
 That, that is life!’ 
 

 This time she succeeded in throwing an arm round his waist, and she tried
 to drag him away. But he, quivering all over, freed himself from her
 embrace, and again took his stand against the altar.
 

 ‘Go away!’ he faltered. ‘If you still love me, go away.... O Lord, pardon
 her, and pardon me too, for thus defiling this Thy house. Should I go with
 her beyond the door, I might, perhaps, follow her. Here, in Thy presence,
 I am strong. Suffer that I may remain here, to protect Thee from insult.’ 
 

 Albine remained silent for a moment. Then, in a calm voice, she said:
 

 ‘Well, let us stay here, then. I wish to speak to you. You cannot, surely,
 be cruel. You will understand me. You will not let me go away alone. Oh!
 do not begin to excuse yourself. I will not lay my hands upon you again,
 since it distresses you. I am quite calm now as you can see. We will talk
 quietly, as we used to do in the old days when we lost our way, and did
 not hurry to find it again, that we might have the more time to talk
 together.’ 
 

 She smiled at that memory, and continued:
 

 ‘I don’t know about these things myself. My uncle Jeanbernat used to
 forbid me to go to church. “Silly girl,” he’d say to me, “why do you want
 to go to a stuffy building when you have got a garden to run about in?” I
 grew up quite happy and contented. I used to look in the birds’ nests
 without even taking the eggs. I did not even pluck the flowers, for fear
 of hurting the plants; and you know that I could never torture an insect.
 Why, then, should God be angry with me?’ 
 

 ‘You should learn to know Him, pray to Him, and render Him the constant
 worship which is His due,’ answered the priest.
 

 ‘Ah! it would please you if I did, would it not?’ she said. ‘You would
 forgive me, and love me again? Well, I will do all that you wish me. Tell
 me about God, and I will believe in Him, and worship Him. All that you
 tell me shall be a truth to which I will listen on my knees. Have I ever
 had a thought that was not your own? We will begin our long walks again;
 and you shall teach me, and make of me whatever you will. Say “yes,” I beg
 of you.’ 
 

 Abbe Mouret pointed to his cassock.
 

 ‘I cannot,’ he simply said. ‘I am a priest.’ 
 

 ‘A priest!’ she repeated after him, the smile dying out of her eyes. ‘My
 uncle says that priests have neither wife, nor sister, nor mother. So that
 is true, then. But why did you ever come? It was you who took me for your
 sister, for your wife. Were you then lying?’ 
 

 The priest raised his pale face, moist with the sweat of agony. ‘I have
 sinned,’ he murmured.
 

 ‘When I saw you so free,’ the girl went on, ‘I thought that you were no
 longer a priest. I believed that all that was over, that you would always
 remain there with me, and for my sake.—— And now, what would
 you have me do, if you rob me of my whole life?’ 
 

 ‘What I do,’ he answered; ‘kneel down, suffer on your knees, and never
 rise until God pardons you.’ 
 

 ‘Are you a coward, then?’ she exclaimed, her anger roused once more, her
 lips curving scornfully.
 

 He staggered, and kept silence. Agony held him by the throat; but he
 proved stronger than pain. He held his head erect, and a smile almost
 played about his trembling lips. Albine for a moment defied him with her
 fixed glance; then, carried away by a fresh burst of passion, she
 exclaimed:
 

 ‘Well, answer me. Accuse me! Say it was I who came to tempt you! That will
 be the climax! Speak, and say what you can for yourself. Strike me if you
 like. I should prefer your blows to that corpse-like stiffness you put on.
 Is there no blood left in your veins? Have you no spirit? Don’t you hear
 me calling you a coward? Yes, indeed, you are a coward. You should never
 have loved me, since you may not be a man. Is it that black robe of yours
 which holds you back? Tear it off! When you are naked, perhaps you will
 remember yourself again.’ 
 

 The priest slowly repeated his former words:
 

 ‘I have sinned. I had no excuse for my sin. I do penitence for my sin
 without hope of pardon. If I tore off my cassock, I should tear away my
 very flesh, for I have given myself wholly to God, soul and body. I am a
 priest.’ 
 

 ‘And I! what is to become of me?’ cried Albine.
 

 He looked unflinchingly at her.
 

 ‘May your sufferings be reckoned against me as so many crimes! May I be
 eternally punished for the desertion in which I am forced to leave you!
 That will be only just. All unworthy though I be, I pray for you each
 night.’ 
 

 She shrugged her shoulders with an air of great discouragement. Her anger
 was subsiding. She almost felt inclined to pity him.
 

 ‘You are mad,’ she murmured. ‘Keep your prayers. It is you yourself that I
 want. But you will never understand me. There were so many things I wanted
 to tell you! Yet you stand there and irritate me with your chatter of
 another world. Come, let us try to talk sensibly. Let us wait for a moment
 till we are calmer. You cannot dismiss me in this way, I cannot leave you
 here. It is because you are here that you are so corpse-like, so cold that
 I dare not touch you. We won’t talk any more just now. We will wait a
 little.’ 
 

 She ceased speaking, and took a few steps, examining the little church.
 The rain was still gently pattering against the windows; and the cold damp
 light seemed to moisten the walls. Not a sound came from outside save the
 monotonous plashing of the rain. The sparrows were doubtless crouching for
 shelter under the tiles, and the rowan-tree’s deserted branches showed but
 indistinctly in the veiling, drenching downpour. Five o’clock struck,
 grated out, stroke by stroke, from the wheezy chest of the old clock; and
 then the silence fell again, seeming to grow yet deeper, dimmer, and more
 despairing. The priest’s painting work, as yet scarcely dry, gave to the
 high altar and the wainscoting an appearance of gloomy cleanliness, like
 that of some convent chapel where the sun never shines. Grievous anguish
 seemed to fill the nave, splashed with the blood that flowed from the
 limbs of the huge Christ; while, along the walls, the fourteen scenes of
 the Passion displayed their awful story in red and yellow daubs, reeking
 with horror. It was life that was suffering the last agonies there, amidst
 that deathlike quiver of the atmosphere, upon those altars which resembled
 tombs, in that bare vault which looked like a sepulchre. The surroundings
 all spoke of slaughter and gloom, terror and anguish and nothingness. A
 faint scent of incense still lingered there, like the last expiring breath
 of some dead girl, who had been hurriedly stifled beneath the flagstones.
 

 ‘Ah,’ said Albine at last, ‘how sweet it used to be in the sunshine! Don’t
 you remember? One morning we walked past a hedge of tall rose bushes, to
 the left of the flower-garden. I recollect the very colour of the grass;
 it was almost blue, shot with green. When we reached the end of the hedge
 we turned and walked back again, so sweet was the perfume of the sunny
 air. And we did nothing else, that morning; we took just twenty paces
 forward and then twenty paces back. It was so sweet a spot you would not
 leave it. The bees buzzed all around; and there was a tomtit that never
 left us, but skipped along by our side from branch to branch. You
 whispered to me, “How delightful is life!” Ah! life! it was the green
 grass, the trees, the running waters, the sky, and the sun, amongst which
 we seemed all fair and golden.’ 
 

 She mused for another moment and then continued: ‘Life ‘twas the Paradou.
 How vast it used to seem to us! Never were we able to find the end of it.
 The sea of foliage rolled freely with rustling waves as far as the eye
 could reach. And all that glorious blue overhead! we were free to grow,
 and soar, and roam, like the clouds without meeting more obstacles than
 they. The very air was ours!’ 
 

 She stopped and pointed to the low walls of the church.
 

 ‘But, here, you are in a grave. You cannot stretch out your hand without
 hurting it against the stones. The roof hides the sky from you and blots
 out the sun. It is all so small and confined that your limbs grow stiff
 and cramped as though you were buried alive.’ 
 

 ‘No,’ answered the priest. ‘The church is wide as the world.’ 
 

 But she waved her hands towards the crosses, and the dying Christ, and the
 pictures of the Passion.
 

 ‘And you live in the very midst of death. The grass, the trees, the
 springs, the sun, the sky, all are in the death throes around you.’ 
 

 ‘No, no; all revives, all grows purified and reascends to the source of
 light.’ 
 

 He had now drawn himself quite erect, with flashing eyes. And feeling that
 he was now invincible, so permeated with faith as to disdain temptation,
 he quitted the altar, took Albine’s hand, and led her, as though she had
 been his sister, to the ghastly pictures of the Stations of the Cross.
 

 ‘See,’ he said, ‘this is what God suffered! Jesus is cruelly scourged.
 Look! His shoulders are naked; His flesh is torn; His blood flows down His
 back.... And Jesus is crowned with thorns. Tears of blood trickle down His
 gashed brow. On His temple is a jagged wound.... Again Jesus is insulted
 by the soldiers. His murderers have scoffingly thrown a purple robe around
 His shoulders, and they spit upon His face and strike Him, and press the
 thorny crown deep into His flesh.’ 
 

 Albine turned away her head, that she might not see the crudely painted
 pictures, in which the ochreous flesh of Christ had been plentifully
 bedaubed with carmine wounds. The purple robe round His shoulders seemed
 like a shred of His skin torn away.
 

 ‘Why suffer? why die?’ she said. ‘O Serge, if you would only remember!...
 You told me, that morning, that you were tired. But I knew that you were
 only pretending, for the air was quite cool and we had only been walking
 for a quarter of an hour. But you wanted to sit down that you might hold
 me in your arms. Right down in the orchard, by the edge of a stream, there
 was a cherry tree—you remember it, don’t you?—which you never
 could pass without wishing to kiss my hands. And your kisses ran all up my
 arms and shoulders to my lips. Cherry time was over, and so you devoured
 my lips.... It used to make us feel so sad to see the flowers fading, and
 one day, when you found a dead bird in the grass, you turned quite pale,
 and caught me to your breast, as if to forbid the earth to take me.’ 
 

 But the priest drew her towards the other Stations of the Cross.
 

 ‘Hush! hush!’ he cried, ‘look here, and here! Bow down in grief and pity——
 Jesus falls beneath the weight of His cross. The ascent of Calvary is very
 tiring. He has dropped down on His knees. But He does not stay to wipe
 even the sweat from His brow, He rises up again and continues His
 journey.... And again Jesus falls beneath the weight of His cross. At each
 step He staggers. This time He has fallen on His side, so heavily that for
 a moment He lies there quite breathless. His lacerated hands have relaxed
 their hold upon the cross. His bruised and aching feet leave blood-stained
 prints behind them. Agonising weariness overwhelms Him, for He carries
 upon His shoulders the sins of the whole world.’ 
 

 Albine gazed at the pictured Jesus, lying in a blue shirt prostrate
 beneath the cross, the blackness of which bedimmed the gold of His
 aureole. Then, with her glance wandering far away, she said:
 

 ‘Oh! those meadow-paths! Have you no memory left, Serge? Have you
 forgotten those soft grassy walks through the meadows, amidst very seas of
 greenery? On the afternoon I am telling you of, we had only meant to stay
 out of doors an hour; but we went wandering on and were still wandering
 when the stars came out above us. Ah! how velvety it was, that endless
 carpet, soft as finest silk! It was just like a green sea whose gentle
 waters lapped us round. And well we knew whither those beguiling paths
 that led nowhere, were taking us! They were taking us to our love, to the
 joy of living together, to the certainty of happiness.’ 
 

 With his hands trembling with anguish, Abbe Mouret pointed to the
 remaining pictures.
 

 ‘Jesus,’ he stammered, ‘Jesus is nailed to the cross. The nails are
 hammered through His outspread hands. A single nail suffices for his feet,
 whose bones split asunder. He, Himself, while His flesh quivers with pain,
 fixes His eyes upon heaven and smiles.... Jesus is crucified between two
 thieves. The weight of His body terribly aggravates His wounds. From His
 brow, from His limbs, does a bloody sweat stream down. The two thieves
 insult Him, the passers-by mock at Him, the soldiers cast lots for His
 raiment. And the shadowy darkness grows deeper and the sun hides
 himself.... Jesus dies upon the cross. He utters a piercing cry and gives
 up the ghost. Oh! most terrible of deaths! The veil of the temple is rent
 in twain from top to bottom. The earth quakes, the stones are broken, and
 the very graves open.’ 
 

 The priest had fallen on his knees, his voice choked by sobs, his eyes
 fixed upon the three crosses of Calvary, where writhed the gaunt pallid
 bodies of the crucified. Albine placed herself in front of the paintings
 in order that he might no longer see them.
 

 ‘One evening,’ she said, ‘I lay through the long gloaming with my head
 upon your lap. It was in the forest, at the end of that great avenue of
 chestnut-trees, through which the setting sun shot a parting ray. Ah! what
 a caressing farewell He bade us! He lingered awhile by our feet with a
 kindly smile, as if saying “Till to-morrow.” The sky slowly grew paler. I
 told you merrily that it was taking off its blue gown, and donning its
 gold-flowered robe of black to go out for the evening. And it was not
 night that fell, but a soft dimness, a veil of love and mystery, reminding
 us of those dusky paths, where the foliage arches overhead, one of those
 paths in which one hides for a moment with the certainty of finding the
 joyousness of daylight at the other end.
 

 ‘That evening the calm clearness of the twilight gave promise of a
 splendid morrow. When I saw that it did not grow dark as quickly as you
 wished, I pretended to fall asleep. I may confess it to you now, but I was
 not really sleeping while you kissed me on the eyes. I felt your kisses
 and tried to keep from laughing. And then, when the darkness really came,
 it was like one long caress. The trees slept no more than I did. At night,
 don’t you remember, the flowers always breathed a stronger perfume.’ 
 

 Then, as he still remained on his knees, while tears streamed down his
 face, she caught him by the wrists, and pulled him to his feet, resuming
 passionately:
 

 ‘Oh! if you knew you would bid me carry you off; you would fasten your
 arms about my neck, lest I should go away without you.... Yesterday I had
 a longing to see the garden once more. It seems larger, deeper, more
 unfathomable than ever. I discovered there new scents, so sweetly aromatic
 that they brought tears into my eyes. In the avenues I found a rain of
 sunbeams that thrilled me with desire. The roses spoke to me of you. The
 bullfinches were amazed at seeing me alone. All the garden broke out into
 sighs. Oh! come! Never has the grass spread itself out more softly. I have
 marked with a flower the hidden nook whither I long to take you. It is a
 nest of greenery in the midst of a tangle of brushwood. And there one can
 hear all the teeming life of the garden, of the trees and the streams and
 the sky. The earth’s very breathing will softly lull us to rest there. Oh!
 come! come! and let us love one another amidst that universal loving!’ 
 

 But he pushed her from him. He had returned to the Chapel of the Dead and
 stood in front of the painted papier-mache Christ, big as a ten-year-old
 boy, that writhed in such horridly realistic agony. There were real iron
 nails driven into the figure’s limbs, and the wounds gaped in the torn and
 bleeding flesh.
 

 ‘O Jesus, Who hast died for us!’ cried the priest, ‘convince her of our
 nothingness! Tell her that we are but dust, rottenness, and damnation! Ah!
 suffer that I may hide my head in a hair-cloth and rest it against Thy
 feet and stay there, motionless, until I rot away in death. The earth will
 no longer exist for me. The sun will no longer shine. I shall see nothing
 more, feel nothing, hear nothing. Nought of all this wretched world will
 come to turn my soul from its adoration of Thee.’ 
 

 He was gradually becoming more and more excited, and he stepped towards
 Albine with upraised hands.
 

 ‘You said rightly. It is Death that is present here; Death that is before
 my eyes; Death that delivers and saves one from all rottenness. Hear me! I
 renounce, I deny life, I wholly refuse it, I spit upon it. Those flowers
 of yours stink; your sun dazzles and blinds; your grass makes lepers of
 those that lie upon it; your garden is but a charnel-place where all rots
 and putrefies. The earth reeks with abomination. You lie when you talk of
 love and light and gladsome life in the depths of your palace of greenery.
 There is nought but darkness there. Those trees of yours exhale a poison
 which transforms men into beasts; your thickets are charged with the venom
 of vipers; your streams carry pestilence in their blue waters. If I could
 snatch away from that world of nature, which you extol, its kirtle of
 sunshine and its girdle of greenery, you would see it hideous like a very
 fury, a skeleton, rotting away with disease and vice.
 

 ‘And even if you spoke the truth, even if your hands were really filled
 with pleasures, even if you should carry me to a couch of roses and offer
 me the dreams of Paradise, I would defend myself yet the more desperately
 from your embraces. There is war between us; war eternal and implacable.
 See! the church is very small; it is poverty-stricken; it is ugly; its
 confessional-box and pulpit are made of common deal, its font is merely of
 plaster, its altars are formed of four boards which I have painted myself.
 But what of that? It is yet vaster than your garden, greater than the
 valley, greater, even, than the whole earth. It is an impregnable fortress
 which nothing can ever break down. The winds, the sun, the forests, the
 ocean, all that is, may combine to assault it; yet it will stand erect and
 unshaken for ever!
 

 ‘Yes, let all the jungles tower aloft and assail the walls with their
 thorny arms, let all the legions of insects swarm out of their holes in
 the ground and gnaw at the walls; the church, ruinous though it may seem,
 will never fall before the invasion of life. It is Death, Death the
 inexpugnable!... And do you know what will one day happen? The tiny church
 will grow and spread to such a colossal size, and will cast around such a
 mighty shadow, that all that nature, you speak of, will give up the ghost.
 Ah! Death, the Death of everything, with the skies gaping to receive our
 souls, above the curse-stricken ruins of the world!’ 
 

 As he shouted those last words, he pushed Albine forcibly towards the
 door. She, extremely pale, retreated step by step. When he had finished in
 a gasping voice she very gravely answered:
 

 ‘It is all over, then? You drive me away? Yet, I am your wife. It is you
 who made me so. And God, since He permitted it, cannot punish us to such a
 point as this.’ 
 

 She was now on the threshold, and she added:
 

 ‘Listen! Every day, at sunset, I go to the end of the garden, to the spot
 where the wall has fallen in. I shall wait for you there.’ 
 

 And then she disappeared. The vestry door fell back with a sound like a
 deep sigh.
 

 
 
 

 The church was perfectly silent, except for the murmuring sound of the
 rain, which was falling heavily once more. In that sudden change to
 quietude the priest’s anger subsided, and he even felt moved. It was with
 his face streaming with tears, his frame shaken by sobs, that he went back
 to throw himself on his knees before the great crucifix. A torrent of
 ardent thanksgiving burst from his lips.
 

 ‘Thanks be to Thee, O God, for the help which Thou hast graciously
 bestowed upon me. Without Thy grace I should have hearkened unto the
 promptings of my flesh, and should have miserably returned to my sin. It
 was Thy grace that girded my loins as with armour for battle; Thy grace
 was indeed my armour, my courage, the support of my soul, that kept me
 erect, beyond weakness. Oh! my God, Thou wert in me; it was Thy voice that
 spoke in me, for I no longer felt the cowardice of the flesh, I could have
 cut asunder my very heart-strings. And now, O God, I offer Thee my
 bleeding heart. It no longer belongs to any creature of this world; it is
 Thine alone. To give it to Thee I have wrenched it from all worldly
 affection. But think not, O God, that I take any pride to myself for this
 victory. I know that without Thee I am nothing; and I humbly cast myself
 at Thy feet.’ 
 

 He sank down upon the altar steps, unable to utter another word, while his
 breath panted incense-like from his parted lips. The divine grace bathed
 him in ineffable ecstasy. He sought Jesus in the recesses of his being, in
 that sanctuary of love which he was ever preparing for His worthy
 reception. And Jesus was now present there. The Abbe knew it by the sweet
 influences which permeated him. And thereupon he joined with Jesus in that
 spiritual converse which at times bore him away from earth to
 companionship with God. He sighed out the verse from the ‘Song of
 Solomon,’ ‘My beloved is mine, and I am his; He feedeth his flock among
 the lilies, until the day be cool, and the shadows flee away.’ He pondered
 over the words of the ‘Imitation:’ ‘It is a great art to know how to talk
 with Jesus, and it requires much prudence to keep Him near one.’ And then,
 with adorable condescension, Jesus came down to him, and spoke with him
 for hours of his needs, his happiness, and his hopes. Their confidences
 were not less affectionate and touching than those of two friends, who
 meet after long separation and quietly retire to converse on the bank of
 some lonely stream; for during those hours of divine condescension Jesus
 deigned to be his friend, his best, most faithful friend, one who never
 forsook him, and who in return for a little love gave him all the
 treasures of eternal life. That day the priest was eager to prolong the
 sweet converse, and indeed, when six o’clock sounded through the quiet
 church, he was still listening to the words which echoed through his soul.
 

 On his side there was unreserved confession, unimpeded by the restraints
 of language, natural effusion of the heart which spoke even more quickly
 than the mind. Abbe Mouret told everything to Jesus, as to a God who had
 come down in all the intimacy of the most loving tenderness, and who would
 listen to everything. He confessed that he still loved Albine; and he was
 surprised that he had been able to speak sternly to her and drive her
 away, without his whole being breaking out into revolt. He marvelled at
 it, and smiled as though it were some wonderful miracle performed by
 another. And Jesus told him that he must not be astonished, and that the
 greatest saints were often but unconscious instruments in the hands of
 God. Then the Abbe gave expression to a doubt. Had he not lost merit in
 seeking refuge in the Cross and even in the Passion of his Saviour? Had he
 not shown that he possessed as yet but little courage, since he had not
 dared to fight unaided? But Jesus evinced kindly tolerance, and answered
 that man’s weakness was God’s continual care, and that He especially loved
 those suffering souls, to whose assistance He went, like a friend to the
 bedside of a sick companion.
 

 But was it a sin to love Albine, a sin for which he, Serge, would be
 damned? No; if his love was clean of all fleshly taint, and added another
 hope to his desire for eternal life. But, then, how was he to love her? In
 silence; without speaking a word to her, without taking a step towards
 her; simply allowing his pure affection to breathe forth, like a sweet
 perfume, pleasing unto heaven. And Jesus smiled with increasing
 kindliness, drawing nearer as if to encourage confession, in such wise
 that the priest grew bolder and began to recapitulate Albine’s charms. She
 had hair that was fair and golden as an angel’s; she was very white, with
 big soft eyes, like those of the aureoled saints. Jesus seemed to listen
 to this in silence, though a smile still played upon His face. And the
 priest continued: She had grown much taller. She was now like a queen,
 with rounded form and splendid shoulders. Oh! to clasp her waist, were it
 only for a second, and to feel her shoulders drawn close by his embrace!
 But the smile on the divine countenance then paled and died away, as a
 star sinks and falls beneath the horizon. Abbe Mouret now spoke all alone.
 Ah! had he not shown himself too hard-hearted? Why had he driven her away
 without one single word of affection, since Heaven allowed him to love
 her?
 

 ‘I do love her! I do love her!’ he cried aloud, in a distracted voice,
 that rang through the church.
 

 He thought he saw her still standing there. She was stretching out her
 arms to him; she was beautiful enough to make him break all his vows. He
 threw himself upon her bosom without thought of the reverence due to his
 surroundings, he clasped her and rained kisses upon her face. It was
 before her that he now knelt, imploring her mercy, and beseeching her to
 forgive him his unkindness. He told her that, at times a voice which was
 not his own spoke through his lips. Could he himself ever have treated her
 harshly? It was the strange voice that had repulsed her. It could not,
 surely, be he himself, for he would have been unable to touch a hair of
 her head without loving emotion. And yet he had driven her away. The
 church was really empty! Whither should he hasten to find her again, to
 bring her back, and wipe her tears away with kisses? The rain was
 streaming down more violently than ever. The roads must be rivers of mud.
 He pictured her to himself lashed by the downpour, tottering alongside the
 ditches, her clothes soaked and clinging to her skin. No! no! it could not
 have been himself; it was that other voice, the jealous voice that had so
 cruelly sought to slay his love.
 

 ‘O Jesus!’ he cried in desperation, ‘be merciful and give her back to me!’ 
 

 But his Lord was no longer there. Then Abbe Mouret, awaking with a start,
 turned horribly pale. He understood it all. He had not known how to keep
 Jesus with him. He had lost his friend, and had been left defenceless
 against the powers of evil. Instead of that inward light, which had shone
 so brightly within him as he received his God, he now found utter
 darkness, a foul vapour that irritated his senses. Jesus had withdrawn His
 grace on leaving him; and he, who since early morning had been so strong
 with heaven-sent help, now felt utterly miserable, forsaken, weak and
 helpless as an infant. How frightful was his fall! How galling its
 bitterness! To have straggled so heroically, to have remained unshaken,
 invincible, implacable, while the temptress actually stood before him,
 with all her warm life, her swelling bosom and superb shoulders, her
 perfume of love and passion; and then to fall so shamefully, to throb with
 desire, when she had disappeared, leaving behind her but the echo of her
 skirts, and the fragrance diffused from her white neck! Now, these mere
 recollections sufficed to make her all powerful, her influence permeated
 the church.
 

 ‘Jesus! Jesus!’ cried the priest, once more, ‘return, come back to me;
 speak to me once again!’ 
 

 But Jesus remained deaf to his cry. For a moment Abbe Mouret raised his
 arms to heaven in desperate entreaty. His shoulders cracked and strained
 beneath the wild violence of his supplications. But soon his hands fell
 down again in discouragement. Heaven preserved that hopeless silence which
 suppliants at times encounter. Then he once more sat down on the altar
 steps, heart-crushed and with ashen face, pressing his elbows to his
 sides, as though he were trying to reduce his flesh to the smallest
 proportions possible.
 

 ‘My God! Thou deserted me!’ he murmured. ‘Nevertheless, Thy will be done!’ 
 

 He spoke not another word, but sat there, panting breathlessly, like a
 hunted beast that cowers motionless in fear of the hounds. Ever since his
 sin, he had thus seemed to be the sport of the divine grace. It denied
 itself to his most ardent prayers; it poured down upon him, unexpectedly
 and refreshingly, when he had lost all hope of winning it for long years
 to come.
 

 At first he had been inclined to rebel against this dispensation of
 Heaven, complaining like a betrayed lover, and demanding the immediate
 return of that consoling grace, whose kiss made him so strong. But
 afterwards, after unavailing outbursts of anger, he had learned to
 understand that humility profited him most and could alone enable him to
 endure the withdrawal of the divine assistance. Then, for hours and for
 days, he would humble himself and wait for comfort which came not. In vain
 he cast himself unreservedly into the hands of God, annihilated himself
 before the Divinity, wearied himself with the incessant repetition of
 prayers. He could not perceive God’s presence with him; and his flesh,
 breaking free from all restraint, rose up in rebellious desire. It was a
 slow agony of temptation, in which the weapons of faith fell, one by one,
 from his faltering hands, in which he lay inert in the clutch of passion,
 in which he beheld with horror his own ignominy, without having the
 courage to raise his little finger to free himself from the thraldom of
 sin.
 

 Such was now his life. He had felt sin’s attacks in every form. Not a day
 passed that he was not tried. Sin assumed a thousand guises, assailed him
 through his eyes and ears, flew boldly at his throat, leaped treacherously
 upon his shoulders, or stole torturingly into his bones. His transgression
 was ever present, he almost always beheld Albine dazzling as the sunshine,
 lighting up the greenery of the Paradou. He only ceased to see her in
 those rare moments when the divine grace deigned to close his eyes with
 its cool caresses. And he strove to hide his sufferings as one hides those
 of some disgraceful disease. He wrapped himself in the endless silence,
 which no one knew how to make him break, filling the parsonage with his
 martyrdom and resignation, and exasperating La Teuse, who, at times, when
 his back was turned, would shake her fist at heaven.
 

 This time he was alone now, and need take no care to hide his torment. Sin
 had just struck him such an overwhelming blow, that he had not strength
 left to move from the altar steps, where he had fallen. He remained there,
 sighing, and groaning, parched with agony, incapable of a single tear. And
 he thought of the calm unruffled life that had once been his. Ah! the
 perfect peace, the full confidence of his first days at Les Artaud! The
 path of salvation had seemed so straight and easy then! He had smiled at
 the very mention of temptation. He had lived in the midst of wickedness,
 without knowledge of it, without fear of it, certain of being able to
 withstand it. He had been a model priest, so pure and chaste, so
 inexperienced and innocent in God’s sight, that God had led him by the
 hand like a little child.
 

 But now, all that childlike innocence was dead, God visited him in the
 morning, and forthwith tried him. A state of temptation became his life on
 earth. Now that full manhood and sin had come upon him, he entered into
 the everlasting struggle. Could it be that God really loved him more now
 than before? The great saints have all left fragments of their torn flesh
 upon the thorns of the way of sorrow. He tried to gather some consolation
 from this circumstance. At each laceration of his flesh, each racking of
 his bones, he tried to assure himself of some exceeding great reward. And
 then, no infliction that Heaven might now cast upon him could be too
 heavy. He even looked back with scorn on his former serenity, his easy
 fervour, which had set him on his knees with mere girlish enthusiasm, and
 left him unconscious even of the bruising of the hard stones. He strove
 also to discover pleasure in pain, in plunging into it, annihilating
 himself in it. But, even while he poured out thanks to God, his teeth
 chattered with growing terror, and the voice of his rebellious blood cried
 out to him that this was all falsehood, and that the only happiness worth
 desiring was in Albine’s arms, amongst the flowers of the Paradou.
 

 Yet he had put aside Mary for Jesus, sacrificing his heart that he might
 subdue his flesh, and hoping to implant some virility in his faith. Mary
 disquieted him too much, with her smoothly braided hair, her outstretched
 hands, and her womanly smile. He could never kneel before her without
 dropping his eyes, for fear of catching sight of the hem of her dress.
 Then, too, he accused her of having treated him too tenderly in former
 times. She had kept him sheltered so long within the folds of her robe,
 that he had let himself slip from her arms to those of a human creature
 without being conscious even of the change of his affection. He thought of
 all the roughness of Brother Archangias, of his refusal to worship Mary,
 of the distrustful glances with which he had seemed to watch her. He
 himself despaired of ever rising to such a height of roughness, and so he
 simply left her, hiding her images and deserting her altar. Yet she
 remained in his heart, like some love which, though unavowed, is ever
 present. Sin, with sacrilege whose very horror made him shudder, made use
 of her to tempt him.
 

 Whenever he still invoked her, as he did at times of irrepressible
 emotion, it was Albine who showed herself beneath the white veil, with the
 blue scarf knotted round her waist and the golden roses blooming on her
 bare feet. All the representations of the Virgin, the Virgin with the
 royal mantle of cloth-of-gold, the Virgin crowned with stars, the Virgin
 visited by the Angel of the Annunciation, the peaceful Virgin poised
 between a lily and a distaff, all brought him some memory of Albine, her
 smiling eyes or her delicately curved mouth or her softly rounded cheeks.
 

 Thereupon, by a supreme effort, he drove the female element from his
 worship, and sought refuge in Jesus, though even His gentle mildness
 sometimes proved a source of disquietude to him. What he needed was a
 jealous God, an implacable God, the Jehovah of the Old Testament, girded
 with thunder and manifesting Himself only to chastise the terrified world.
 He had done with the saints and the angels and the Divine Mother; he bowed
 down before God Himself alone, the omnipotent Master, who demanded from
 him his every breath. And he felt the hand of this God laid heavily upon
 him, holding him helpless at His mercy through space and time, like a
 guilty atom. Ah! to be nothing, to be damned, to dream of hell, to wrestle
 vainly against hideous temptations, all that was surely good.
 

 From Jesus he took but the cross. He was seized with that passion for the
 cross which has made so many lips press themselves again and again to the
 crucifix till they were worn away with kissing. He took up the cross and
 followed Jesus. He sought to make it heavier, the mightiest of burdens; it
 was great joy to him to fall beneath its weight, to drag it on his knees,
 his back half broken. In it he beheld the only source of strength for the
 soul, of joy for the mind, of the consummation of virtue and the
 perfection of holiness. In it lay all that was good; all ended in death
 upon it. To suffer and to die, those words ever sounded in his ears, as
 the end and goal of mortal wisdom. And, when he had fastened himself to
 the cross, he enjoyed the boundless consolation of God’s love. It was no
 longer, now, upon Mary that he lavished filial tenderness or lover’s
 passion. He loved for love’s mere sake, with an absolute abstract love. He
 loved God with a love that lifted him out of himself, out of all else, and
 wrapped him round with a dazzling radiance of glory. He was like a torch
 that burns away with blazing light. And death seemed to him to be only a
 great impulse of love.
 

 But what had he omitted to do that he was thus so sorely tried? With his
 hand he wiped away the perspiration that streamed down his brow, and
 reflected that, that very morning, he had made his usual self-examination
 without finding any great guilt within him. Was he not leading a life of
 great austerity and mortification of the flesh? Did he not love God solely
 and blindly? Ah! how he would have blessed His Holy Name had He only
 restored him his peace, deeming him now sufficiently punished for his
 transgression! But, perhaps, that sin of his could never be expiated. And
 then, in spite of himself, his mind reverted to Albine and the Paradou,
 and all their memories.
 

 At first he tried to make excuses for himself. He had fallen, one evening,
 senseless upon the tiled floor of his bedroom, stricken with brain fever.
 For three weeks he had remained unconscious. His blood surged furiously
 through his veins and raged within him like a torrent that had burst its
 banks. His whole body, from the crown of his head to the soles of his
 feet, was so scoured and renewed and wrought afresh by the mighty
 labouring of his ailment, that in his delirium he had sometimes thought he
 could hear the very hammer blows of workmen that nailed his bones together
 again. Then, one morning, he had awakened, feeling like a new being. He
 was born a second time, freed of all that his five-and-twenty years of
 life had successively implanted in him. His childish piety, his education
 at the seminary, the faith of his early priesthood, had all vanished, had
 been carried off, and their place was bare and empty. In truth, it could
 be hell alone that had thus prepared him for the reception of evil,
 disarming him of all his former weapons, and reducing his body to languor
 and softness, through which sin might readily enter.
 

 He, perfectly unconscious of it all, unknowingly surrendered himself to
 the gradual approach of evil. When he had reopened his eyes in the
 Paradou, he had felt himself an infant once more, with no memory of the
 past, no knowledge of his priesthood. He experienced a gentle pleasure, a
 glad feeling of surprise at thus beginning life afresh, as though it were
 all new and strange to him and would be delightful to learn. Oh! the sweet
 apprenticeship, the charming observations, the delicious discoveries! That
 Paradou was a vast abode of felicity; and hell, in placing him there, had
 known full well that he would be defenceless. Never, in his first youth,
 had he known such enjoyment in growing. That first youth of his, when he
 now thought of it, seemed quite black and gloomy, graceless, wan and
 inactive, as if it had been spent far away from the sunlight.
 

 But at the Paradou, how joyfully had he hailed the sun! How admiringly had
 he gazed at the first tree, at the first flower, at the tiniest insect he
 had seen, at the most insignificant pebble he had picked up! The very
 stones charmed him. The horizon was a source of never-ending amazement.
 One clear morning, the memory of which still filled his eyes, bringing
 back a perfume of jasmine, a lark’s clear song, he had been so affected by
 emotion that he felt all power desert his limbs. He had long found
 pleasure in learning the sensations of life. And, ah! the morning when
 Albine had been born beside him amidst the roses! As he thought of it, an
 ecstatic smile broke out upon his face. She rose up like a star that was
 necessary to the very sun’s existence. She illumined everything, she made
 everything clear. She made his life complete.
 

 Then in fancy he once again walked with her through the Paradou. He
 remembered the little curls that waved behind her neck as she ran on
 before him. She exhaled delicious scent, and the touch of her warm swaying
 skirts seemed like a caress. And when she clasped him with her supple
 curving arms, he half expected to see her, so slight and slender she was,
 twine herself around him. It was she who went foremost. She led him
 through winding paths, where they loitered, that their walk might last the
 longer. It was she who instilled into him love for nature; and it was by
 watching the loves of the plants that he had learned to love her, with a
 love that was long, indeed, in bursting into life, but whose sweetness had
 been theirs at last. Beneath the shade of the giant tree they had reached
 their journey’s goal. Oh! to clasp her once again—yet once again!
 

 A low groan suddenly came from the priest. He hastily sprang up and then
 flung himself down again. Temptation had just assailed him afresh. Into
 what paths were his recollections leading him? Did he not know, only too
 well, that Satan avails himself of every wile to insinuate his
 serpent-head into the soul, even when it is absorbed in self-examination?
 No! no! he had no excuse. His illness had in no wise authorised him to
 sin. He should have set strict guard upon himself, and have sought God
 anew upon recovering from his fever. And what a frightful proof he now had
 of his vileness: he was not even able to make calm confession of his sin.
 Would he never be able to silence his nature? He wildly thought of
 scooping his brains out of his skull that he might be able to think no
 more, and of opening his veins that his blood might no longer torment him.
 For a moment he buried his face within his hands, shuddering as though the
 beasts that he felt prowling around him might infect him with the hot
 breath of temptation.
 

 But his thoughts strayed on in spite of himself, and his blood throbbed
 wildly in his very heart. Though he held his clenched fists to his eyes,
 he still saw Albine, dazzling like a sun. Every effort that he made to
 press the vision from his sight only made her shine out before him with
 increased brilliancy. Was God, then, utterly forsaking him, that he could
 find no refuge from temptation? And, in spite of all his efforts to
 control his thoughts, he espied every tiny blade of grass that thrust
 itself up by Albine’s skirts; he saw a little thistle-flower fastened in
 her hair, against which he remembered that he had pricked his lips. Even
 the perfumed atmosphere of the Paradou floated round him, and
 well-remembered sounds came back, the repeated call of a bird, then an
 interval of hushed silence, then a sigh floating through the trees.
 

 Why did not Heaven at once strike him dead with its lightning? That would
 have been less cruel. It was with a voluptuous pang, like the pangs which
 assail the damned, that he recalled his transgression. He shuddered when
 he again heard in his heart the abominable words that he had spoken at
 Albine’s feet. Their echoes were now accusing him before the throne of
 God. He had acknowledged Woman as his sovereign. He had yielded to her as
 a slave, kissing her feet, longing to be the water she drank and the bread
 she ate. He began to understand now why he could no longer recover
 self-control. God had given him over to Woman. But he would chastise her,
 scourge her, break her very limbs to force her to let him go! It was she
 who was the slave; she, the creature of impurity, to whom the Church
 should have denied a soul. Then he braced himself, and shook his fists at
 the vision of Albine; but his fists opened and his hands glided along her
 shoulders in a loving caress, while his lips, just now breathing out anger
 and insult, pressed themselves to her hair, stammering forth words of
 adoration.
 

 Abbe Mouret opened his eyes again. The burning apparition of Albine
 vanished. It was sudden and unexpected solace. He was able to weep. Tears
 flowed slowly and refreshingly down his cheeks, and he drew a long breath,
 still fearing to move, lest the Evil One should again grip him by the
 neck, for he yet thought that he heard the snarl of a beast behind him.
 And then he found such pleasure in the cessation of his sufferings that
 his one thought was to prolong the enjoyment of it.
 

 Outside the rain had ceased falling. The sun was setting in a vast crimson
 glow, which spread across the windows like curtains of rose-coloured
 satin. The church was quite warm and bright in the parting breath of the
 sinking luminary. The priest thanked God for the respite He had been
 pleased to vouchsafe to him. A broad ray of light, like a beam of
 gold-dust, streamed through the nave and illumined the far end of the
 building, the clock, the pulpit, and the high altar. Perhaps the Divine
 grace was returning to him from heaven along that radiant path. He watched
 with interest the atoms that came and went with prodigious speed through
 the ray, like a swarm of busy messengers ever hastening with news from the
 sun to the earth. A thousand lighted candles would not have filled the
 church with such splendour. Curtains of cloth-of-gold seemed to hang
 behind the high altar; treasures of the goldsmith’s art covered all the
 ledges; candle-holders arose in dazzling sheaves; censers glowed full of
 burning gems; sacred vases gleamed like fiery comets; and around all there
 seemed to be a rain of luminous flowers amidst waving lacework—beds,
 bouquets, and garlands of roses, from whose expanding petals dropped
 showers of stars.
 

 Never had Abbe Mouret desired such magnificence for his poor church. He
 smiled, and dreamt of how he might retain all that splendour there, and
 then arrange it most effectively. He would have preferred to see the
 curtains of cloth-of-gold hung rather higher; the vases, too, needed more
 careful arrangement; and he thought that the bouquets of flowers might be
 tied up more neatly, and the garlands be more regularly shaped. Yet how
 wondrously magnificent it all was! He was the pontiff of a church of gold.
 Bishops, princes, princesses, arrayed in royal mantles, multitudes of
 believers, bending to the ground, were coming to visit it, encamping in
 the valley, waiting for weeks at the door until they should be able to
 enter. They kissed his feet, for even his feet had turned to gold, and
 worked miracles. The bath of gold mounted to his knees. A golden heart was
 beating within his golden breast, with so clear a musical pulsation that
 the waiting crowds could hear it from outside. Then a feeling of
 overweening pride seized upon him. He was an idol. The golden beam mounted
 still higher, the high altar was all ablaze with glory, and the priest
 grew certain that the Divine grace must be returning to him, such was his
 inward satisfaction. The fierce snarl behind him had now grown gentle and
 coaxing, and he only felt on his shoulder a soft velvety pressure, as
 though some giant cat were lightly caressing him.
 

 He still pursued his reverie. Never before had he seen things under such a
 favourable light. Everything seemed quite easy to him now that he once
 more felt full of strength. Since Albine was waiting for him, he would go
 and join her. It was only natural. On the previous morning he had married
 Fortune and Rosalie. The Church did not forbid marriages. He saw that
 young couple again as they knelt before him, smiling and nudging each
 other while his hands were held over them in benediction. Then, in the
 evening, they had shown him their room. Each word that he had spoken to
 them echoed loudly in his ear. He had told Fortune that God had sent him a
 companion, because He did not wish man to live alone; and he had told
 Rosalie that she must cleave to her husband, never leaving him, but always
 acting as his obedient helpmate. But he had said these things also for
 Albine and himself. Was she not his companion, his obedient helpmate, whom
 God had sent to him that his manhood might not wither up in solitude?
 Besides, they had been joined the one to the other. He felt surprised that
 he had not understood and recognised it at once; that he had not gone away
 with her, as his duty plainly required that he should have done. But he
 had quite made up his mind now; he would certainly join her in the
 morning. He could be with her in half an hour. He would go through the
 village, and take the road up the hill; it was much the shortest way. He
 could do what he pleased; he was the master, and no one would presume to
 say anything to him. If any one looked at him, a wave of his hand would
 force them to bend their heads. He would live with Albine. He would call
 her his wife. They would be very happy together.
 

 The golden stream mounted still higher, and played amongst his fingers.
 Again did he seem to be immersed in a bath of gold. He would take the
 altar-vases away to ornament his house, he would keep up a fine
 establishment, he would pay his servants with fragments of chalices which
 he could easily break with his fingers. He would hang his bridal-bed with
 the cloth-of-gold that draped the altar; and he would give his wife for
 jewels the golden hearts and chaplets and crosses that hung from the necks
 of the Virgin and the saints. The church itself, if another storey were
 added to it, would supply them with a palace. God would have no objection
 to make since He had allowed them to love each other. And, besides, was it
 not he who was now God, with the people kissing his golden miracle-working
 feet?
 

 Abbe Mouret rose. He made that sweeping gesture of Jeanbernat’s, that wide
 gesture of negation, that took in everything as far as the horizon.
 

 ‘There is nothing, nothing, nothing!’ he said. ‘God does not exist.’ 
 

 A mighty shudder seemed to sweep through the church. The terrified priest
 turned deadly pale and listened. Who had spoken? Who was it that had
 blasphemed? Suddenly the velvety caress, whose gentle pressure he had felt
 upon his shoulder, turned fierce and savage: sharp talons seemed to be
 rending his flesh, and once more he felt his blood streaming forth. Yet he
 remained on his feet, struggling against the sudden attack. He cursed and
 reviled the triumphant sin that sniggered and grinned round his temples,
 whilst all the hammers of the Evil One battered at them. Why had he not
 been on his guard against Satan’s wiles? Did he not know full well that it
 was his habit to glide up softly with gentle paws that he might drive them
 like blades into the very vitals of his victim?
 

 His anger increased as he thought how he had been entrapped, like a mere
 child. Was he destined, then, to be ever hurled to the ground, with sin
 crouching victoriously on his breast? This time he had actually denied his
 God. It was all one fatal descent. His transgression had destroyed his
 faith, and then dogma had tottered. One single doubt of the flesh,
 pleading abomination, sufficed to sweep heaven away. The divine ordinances
 irritated one; the divine mysteries made one smile. Then came other
 temptations and allurements; gold, power, unrestrained liberty, an
 irresistible longing for enjoyment, culminating in luxuriousness,
 sprawling on a bed of wealth and pride. And then God was robbed. His
 vessels were broken to adorn woman’s impurity. Ah! well, then, he was
 damned. Nothing could make any difference to him now. Sin might speak
 aloud. It was useless to struggle further. The monsters who had hovered
 about his neck were battening on his vitals now. He yielded to them with
 hideous satisfaction. He shook his fists at the church. No; he believed no
 longer in the divinity of Christ; he believed no longer in the Holy
 Trinity; he believed in naught but himself, and his muscles and the
 appetites of his body. He wanted to live. He felt the necessity of being a
 man. Oh! to speed along through the open air, to be lusty and strong, to
 owe obedience to no jealous master, to fell one’s enemies with stones, to
 carry off the fair maidens that passed upon one’s shoulders. He would