# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2006
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	NA
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/8600/8600-h/8600-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

"You are doing down again?" asked her mother, who was unable even to turn
      her head.
    

      "Yes; I've forgotten something. I shall come up again. Good evening."
    

      And she did not return. On the morrow when the Coupeaus were sobered they
      fought together, reproaching each other with being the cause of Nana's
      flight. Ah! she was far away if she were running still! As children are
      told of sparrows, her parents might set a pinch of salt on her tail, and
      then perhaps they would catch her. It was a great blow, and crushed
      Gervaise, for despite the impairment of her faculties, she realized
      perfectly well that her daughter's misconduct lowered her still more; she
      was alone now, with no child to think about, able to let herself sink as
      low as she could fall. She drank steadily for three days. Coupeau prowled
      along the exterior Boulevards without seeing Nana and then came home to
      smoke his pipe peacefully. He was always back in time for his soup.
    

      In this tenement, where girls flew off every month like canaries whose
      cages are left open, no one was astonished to hear of the Coupeaus'
      mishap. But the Lorilleuxs were triumphant. Ah! they had predicted that
      the girl would reward her parents in this fashion. It was deserved; all
      artificial flower-girls went that way. The Boches and the Poissons also
      sneered with an extraordinary display and outlay of grief. Lantier alone
      covertly defended Nana. Mon Dieu! said he, with his puritanical
      air, no doubt a girl who so left her home did offend her parents; but,
      with a gleam in the corner of his eyes, he added that, dash it! the girl
      was, after all, too pretty to lead such a life of misery at her age.
    

      "Do you know," cried Madame Lorilleux, one day in the Boches' room, where
      the party were taking coffee; "well, as sure as daylight, Clump-clump sold
      her daughter. Yes she sold her, and I have proof of it! That old fellow,
      who was always on the stairs morning and night, went up to pay something
      on account. It stares one in the face. They were seen together at the
      Ambigu Theatre—the young wench and her old tom cat. Upon my word of
      honor, they're living together, it's quite plain."
    

      They discussed the scandal thoroughly while finishing their coffee. Yes,
      it was quite possible. Soon most of the neighborhood accepted the
      conclusion that Gervaise had actually sold her daughter.
    

      Gervaise now shuffled along in her slippers, without caring a rap for
      anyone. You might have called her a thief in the street, she wouldn't have
      turned round. For a month past she hadn't looked at Madame Fauconnier's;
      the latter had had to turn her out of the place to avoid disputes. In a
      few weeks' time she had successively entered the service of eight
      washerwomen; she only lasted two or three days in each place before she
      got the sack, so badly did she iron the things entrusted to her, careless
      and dirty, her mind failing to such a point that she quite forgot her own
      craft. At last realizing her own incapacity she abandoned ironing; and
      went out washing by the day at the wash-house in the Rue Neuve, where she
      still jogged on, floundering about in the water, fighting with filth,
      reduced to the roughest but simplest work, a bit lower on the down-hill
      slopes. The wash-house scarcely beautified her. A real mud-splashed dog
      when she came out of it, soaked and showing her blue skin. At the same
      time she grew stouter and stouter, despite her frequent dances before the
      empty sideboard, and her leg became so crooked that she could no longer
      walk beside anyone without the risk of knocking him over, so great indeed
      was her limp.
    

      Naturally enough when a woman falls to this point all her pride leaves
      her. Gervaise had divested herself of all her old self-respect, coquetry
      and need of sentiment, propriety and politeness. You might have kicked
      her, no matter where, she did not feel kicks for she had become too fat
      and flabby. Lantier had altogether neglected her; he no longer escorted
      her or even bothered to give her a pinch now and again. She did not seem
      to notice this finish of a long liaison slowly spun out, and ending in
      mutual insolence. It was a chore the less for her. Even Lantier's intimacy
      with Virginie left her quite calm, so great was her indifference now for
      all that she had been so upset about in the past. She would even have held
      a candle for them now.
    

      Everyone was aware that Virginie and Lantier were carrying on. It was much
      too convenient, especially with Poisson on duty every other night. Lantier
      had thought of himself when he advised Virginie to deal in dainties. He
      was too much of a Provincial not to adore sugared things; and in fact he
      would have lived off sugar candy, lozenges, pastilles, sugar plums and
      chocolate. Sugared almonds especially left a little froth on his lips so
      keenly did they tickle his palate. For a year he had been living only on
      sweetmeats. He opened the drawers and stuffed himself whenever Virginie
      asked him to mind the shop. Often, when he was talking in the presence of
      five or six other people, he would take the lid off a jar on the counter,
      dip his hand into it and begin to nibble at something sweet; the glass jar
      remained open and its contents diminished. People ceased paying attention
      to it, it was a mania of his so he had declared. Besides, he had devised a
      perpetual cold, an irritation of the throat, which he always talked of
      calming.
    

      He still did not work, for he had more and more important schemes than
      ever in view. He was contriving a superb invention—the umbrella hat,
      a hat which transformed itself into an umbrella on your head as soon as a
      shower commenced to fall; and he promised Poisson half shares in the
      profit of it, and even borrowed twenty franc pieces of him to defray the
      cost of experiments. Meanwhile the shop melted away on his tongue. All the
      stock-in-trade followed suit down to the chocolate cigars and pipes in
      pink caramel. Whenever he was stuffed with sweetmeats and seized with a
      fit of tenderness, he paid himself with a last lick on the groceress in a
      corner, who found him all sugar with lips which tasted like burnt almonds.
      Such a delightful man to kiss! He was positively becoming all honey. The
      Boches said he merely had to dip a finger into his coffee to sweeten it.
    

      Softened by this perpetual dessert, Lantier showed himself paternal
      towards Gervaise. He gave her advice and scolded her because she no longer
      liked to work. Indeed! A woman of her age ought to know how to turn
      herself round. And he accused her of having always been a glutton.
      Nevertheless, as one ought to hold out a helping hand, even to folks who
      don't deserve it, he tried to find her a little work. Thus he had
      prevailed upon Virginie to let Gervaise come once a week to scrub the shop
      and the rooms. That was the sort of thing she understood and on each
      occasion she earned her thirty sous. Gervaise arrived on the Saturday
      morning with a pail and a scrubbing brush, without seeming to suffer in
      the least at having to perform a dirty, humble duty, a charwoman's work in
      the dwelling-place where she had reigned as the beautiful fair-haired
      mistress. It was a last humiliation, the end of her pride.
    

      One Saturday she had a hard job of it. It had rained for three days and
      the customers seemed to have brought all the mud of the neighborhood into
      the shop on the soles of their boots. Virginie was at the counter doing
      the grand, with her hair well combed, and wearing a little white collar
      and a pair of lace cuffs. Beside her, on the narrow seat covered with red
      oil-cloth, Lantier did the dandy, looking for the world as if he were at
      home, as if he were the real master of the place, and from time to time he
      carelessly dipped his hand into a jar of peppermint drops, just to nibble
      something sweet according to his habit.
    

      "Look here, Madame Coupeau!" cried Virginie, who was watching the
      scrubbing with compressed lips, "you have left some dirt over there in the
      corner. Scrub that rather better please."
    

      Gervaise obeyed. She returned to the corner and began to scrub again. She
      bent double on her knees in the midst of the dirty water, with her
      shoulders protruding, her arms stiff and purple with cold. Her old skirt,
      fairly soaked, stuck to her figure. And there on the floor she looked a
      dirty, ill-combed drab, the rents in her jacket showing her puffy form,
      her fat, flabby flesh which heaved, swayed and floundered about as she
      went about her work; and all the while she perspired to such a point that
      from her moist face big drops of sweat fell on to the floor.
    

      "The more elbow grease one uses, the more it shines," said Lantier,
      sententiously, with his mouth full of peppermint drops.
    

      Virginie, who sat back with the demeanor of a princess, her eyes partly
      open, was still watching the scrubbing, and indulging in remarks. "A
      little more on the right there. Take care of the wainscot. You know I was
      not very well pleased last Saturday. There were some stains left."
    

      And both together, the hatter and the groceress assumed a more important
      air, as if they had been on a throne whilst Gervaise dragged herself
      through the black mud at their feet. Virginie must have enjoyed herself,
      for a yellowish flame darted from her cat's eyes, and she looked at
      Lantier with an insidious smile. At last she was revenged for that hiding
      she had received at the wash-house, and which she had never forgotten.
    

      Whenever Gervaise ceased scrubbing, a sound of sawing could be heard from
      the back room. Through the open doorway, Poisson's profile stood out
      against the pale light of the courtyard. He was off duty that day and was
      profiting by his leisure time to indulge in his mania for making little
      boxes. He was seated at a table and was cutting out arabesques in a cigar
      box with extraordinary care.
    

      "Say, Badingue!" cried Lantier, who had given him this surname again, out
      of friendship. "I shall want that box of yours as a present for a young
      lady."
    

      Virginie gave him a pinch and he reached under the counter to run his
      fingers like a creeping mouse up her leg.
    

      "Quite so," said the policeman. "I was working for you, Auguste, in view
      of presenting you with a token of friendship."
    

      "Ah, if that's the case, I'll keep your little memento!" rejoined Lantier
      with a laugh. "I'll hang it round my neck with a ribbon."
    

      Then suddenly, as if this thought brought another one to his memory, "By
      the way," he cried, "I met Nana last night."
    

      This news caused Gervaise such emotion that she sunk down in the dirty
      water which covered the floor of the shop.
    

      "Ah!" she muttered speechlessly.
    

      "Yes; as I was going down the Rue des Martyrs, I caught sight of a girl
      who was on the arm of an old fellow in front of me, and I said to myself:
      I know that shape. I stepped faster and sure enough found myself face to
      face with Nana. There's no need to pity her, she looked very happy, with
      her pretty woolen dress on her back, a gold cross and an awfully pert
      expression."
    

      "Ah!" repeated Gervaise in a husky voice.
    

      Lantier, who had finished the pastilles, took some barley-sugar out of
      another jar.
    

      "She's sneaky," he resumed. "She made a sign to me to follow her, with
      wonderful composure. Then she left her old fellow somewhere in a cafe—oh
      a wonderful chap, the old bloke, quite used up!—and she came and
      joined me under the doorway. A pretty little serpent, pretty, and doing
      the grand, and fawning on you like a little dog. Yes, she kissed me, and
      wanted to have news of everyone—I was very pleased to meet her."
    

      "Ah!" said Gervaise for the third time. She drew herself together, and
      still waited. Hadn't her daughter had a word for her then? In the silence
      Poisson's saw could be heard again. Lantier, who felt gay, was sucking his
      barley-sugar, and smacking his lips.
    

      "Well, if I saw her, I should go over to the other side of the
      street," interposed Virginie, who had just pinched the hatter again most
      ferociously. "It isn't because you are there, Madame Coupeau, but your
      daughter is rotten to the core. Why, every day Poisson arrests girls who
      are better than she is."
    

      Gervaise said nothing, nor did she move; her eyes staring into space. She
      ended by jerking her head to and fro, as if in answer to her thoughts,
      whilst the hatter, with a gluttonous mien, muttered:
    

      "Ah, a man wouldn't mind getting a bit of indigestion from that sort of
      rottenness. It's as tender as chicken."
    

      But the grocer gave him such a terrible look that he had to pause and
      quiet her with some delicate attention. He watched the policeman, and
      perceiving that he had his nose lowered over his little box again, he
      profited of the opportunity to shove some barley-sugar into Virginie's
      mouth. Thereupon she laughed at him good-naturedly and turned all her
      anger against Gervaise.
    

      "Just make haste, eh? The work doesn't do itself while you remain stuck
      there like a street post. Come, look alive, I don't want to flounder about
      in the water till night time."
    

      And she added hatefully in a lower tone: "It isn't my fault if her
      daughter's gone and left her."
    

      No doubt Gervaise did not hear. She had begun to scrub the floor again,
      with her back bent and dragging herself along with a frog-like motion. She
      still had to sweep the dirty water out into the gutter, and then do the
      final rinsing.
    

      After a pause, Lantier, who felt bored, raised his voice again: "Do you
      know, Badingue," he cried, "I met your boss yesterday in the Rue de
      Rivoli. He looked awfully down in the mouth. He hasn't six months' life
      left in his body. Ah! after all, with the life he leads—"
    

      He was talking about the Emperor. The policeman did not raise his eyes,
      but curtly answered: "If you were the Government you wouldn't be so fat."
    

      "Oh, my dear fellow, if I were the Government," rejoined the hatter,
      suddenly affecting an air of gravity, "things would go on rather better, I
      give you my word for it. Thus, their foreign policy—why, for some
      time past it has been enough to make a fellow sweat. If I—I who
      speak to you—only knew a journalist to inspire him with my ideas."
    

      He was growing animated, and as he had finished crunching his
      barley-sugar, he opened a drawer from which he took a number of jujubes,
      which he swallowed while gesticulating.
    

      "It's quite simple. Before anything else, I should give Poland her
      independence again, and I should establish a great Scandinavian state to
      keep the Giant of the North at bay. Then I should make a republic out of
      all the little German states. As for England, she's scarcely to be feared;
      if she budged ever so little I should send a hundred thousand men to
      India. Add to that I should send the Sultan back to Mecca and the Pope to
      Jerusalem, belaboring their backs with the butt end of a rifle. Eh? Europe
      would soon be clean. Come, Badingue, just look here."
    

      He paused to take five or six jujubes in his hand. "Why, it wouldn't take
      longer than to swallow these."
    

      And he threw one jujube after another into his open mouth.
    

      "The Emperor has another plan," said the policeman, after reflecting for a
      couple of minutes.
    

      "Oh, forget it," rejoined the hatter. "We know what his plan is. All
      Europe is laughing at us. Every day the Tuileries footmen find your boss
      under the table between a couple of high society floozies."
    

      Poisson rose to his feet. He came forward and placed his hand on his
      heart, saying: "You hurt me, Auguste. Discuss, but don't involve
      personalities."
    

      Thereupon Virginie intervened, bidding them stop their row. She didn't
      care a fig for Europe. How could two men, who shared everything else,
      always be disputing about politics? For a minute they mumbled some
      indistinct words. Then the policeman, in view of showing that he harbored
      no spite, produced the cover of his little box, which he had just
      finished; it bore the inscription in marquetry: "To Auguste, a token of
      friendship." Lantier, feeling exceedingly flattered, lounged back and
      spread himself out so that he almost sat upon Virginie. And the husband
      viewed the scene with his face the color of an old wall and his bleared
      eyes fairly expressionless; but all the same, at moments the red hairs of
      his moustaches stood up on end of their own accord in a very singular
      fashion, which would have alarmed any man who was less sure of his
      business than the hatter.
    

      This beast of a Lantier had the quiet cheek which pleases ladies. As
      Poisson turned his back he was seized with the idea of printing a kiss on
      Madame Poisson's left eye. As a rule he was stealthily prudent, but when
      he had been disputing about politics he risked everything, so as to show
      the wife his superiority. These gloating caresses, cheekily stolen behind
      the policeman's back, revenged him on the Empire which had turned France
      into a house of quarrels. Only on this occasion he had forgotten
      Gervaise's presence. She had just finished rinsing and wiping the shop,
      and she stood near the counter waiting for her thirty sous. However, the
      kiss on Virginie's eye left her perfectly calm, as being quite natural,
      and as part of a business she had no right to mix herself up in. Virginie
      seemed rather vexed. She threw the thirty sous on to the counter in front
      of Gervaise. The latter did not budge but stood there waiting, still
      palpitating with the effort she had made in scrubbing, and looking as
      soaked and as ugly as a dog fished out of the sewer.
    

      "Then she didn't tell you anything?" she asked the hatter at last.
    

      "Who?" he cried. "Ah, yes; you mean Nana. No, nothing else. What a
      tempting mouth she has, the little hussy! Real strawberry jam!"
    

      Gervaise went off with her thirty sous in her hand. The holes in her shoes
      spat water forth like pumps; they were real musical shoes, and played a
      tune as they left moist traces of their broad soles along the pavement.
    

      In the neighborhood the feminine tipplers of her own class now related
      that she drank to console herself for her daughter's misconduct. She
      herself, when she gulped down her dram of spirits on the counter, assumed
      a dramatic air, and tossed the liquor into her mouth, wishing it would
      "do" for her. And on the days when she came home boozed she stammered that
      it was all through grief. But honest folks shrugged their shoulders. They
      knew what that meant: ascribing the effects of the peppery fire of
      l'Assommoir to grief, indeed! At all events, she ought to have called it
      bottled grief. No doubt at the beginning she couldn't digest Nana's
      flight. All the honest feelings remaining in her revolted at the thought,
      and besides, as a rule a mother doesn't like to have to think that her
      daughter, at that very moment, perhaps, is being familiarly addressed by
      the first chance comer. But Gervaise was already too stultified with a
      sick head and a crushed heart, to think of the shame for long. With her it
      came and went. She remained sometimes for a week together without thinking
      of her daughter, and then suddenly a tender or an angry feeling seized
      hold of her, sometimes when she had her stomach empty, at others when it
      was full, a furious longing to catch Nana in some corner, where she would
      perhaps have kissed her or perhaps have beaten her, according to the fancy
      of the moment.
    

      Whenever these thoughts came over her, Gervaise looked on all sides in the
      streets with the eyes of a detective. Ah! if she had only seen her little
      sinner, how quickly she would have brought her home again! The
      neighborhood was being turned topsy-turvy that year. The Boulevard Magenta
      and the Boulevard Ornano were being pierced; they were doing away with the
      old Barriere Poissonniere and cutting right through the outer Boulevard.
      The district could not be recognized. The whole of one side of the Rue des
      Poissonniers had been pulled down. From the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or a large
      clearing could now be seen, a dash of sunlight and open air; and in place
      of the gloomy buildings which had hidden the view in this direction there
      rose up on the Boulevard Ornano a perfect monument, a six-storied house,
      carved all over like a church, with clear windows, which, with their
      embroidered curtains, seemed symbolical of wealth. This white house,
      standing just in front of the street, illuminated it with a jet of light,
      as it were, and every day it caused discussions between Lantier and
      Poisson.
    

      Gervaise had several times had tidings of Nana. There are always ready
      tongues anxious to pay you a sorry compliment. Yes, she had been told that
      the hussy had left her old gentleman, just like the inexperienced girl she
      was. She had gotten along famously with him, petted, adored, and free,
      too, if she had only known how to manage the situation. But youth is
      foolish, and she had no doubt gone off with some young rake, no one knew
      exactly where. What seemed certain was that one afternoon she had left her
      old fellow on the Place de la Bastille, just for half a minute, and he was
      still waiting for her to return. Other persons swore they had seen her
      since, dancing on her heels at the "Grand Hall of Folly," in the Rue de la
      Chapelle. Then it was that Gervaise took it into her head to frequent all
      the dancing places of the neighborhood. She did not pass in front of a
      public ball-room without going in. Coupeau accompanied her. At first they
      merely made the round of the room, looking at the drabs who were jumping
      about. But one evening, as they had some coin, they sat down and ordered a
      large bowl of hot wine in view of regaling themselves and waiting to see
      if Nana would turn up. At the end of a month or so they had practically
      forgotten her, but they frequented the halls for their own pleasure,
      liking to look at the dancers. They would remain for hours without
      exchanging a word, resting their elbows on the table, stultified amidst
      the quaking of the floor, and yet no doubt amusing themselves as they
      stared with pale eyes at the Barriere women in the stifling atmosphere and
      ruddy glow of the hall.
    

      It happened one November evening that they went into the "Grand Hall of
      Folly" to warm themselves. Out of doors a sharp wind cut you across the
      face. But the hall was crammed. There was a thundering big swarm inside;
      people at all the tables, people in the middle, people up above, quite an
      amount of flesh. Yes, those who cared for tripes could enjoy themselves.
      When they had made the round twice without finding a vacant table, they
      decided to remain standing and wait till somebody went off. Coupeau was
      teetering on his legs, in a dirty blouse, with an old cloth cap which had
      lost its peak flattened down on his head. And as he blocked the way, he
      saw a scraggy young fellow who was wiping his coat-sleeve after elbowing
      him.
    

      "Say!" cried Coupeau in a fury, as he took his pipe out of his black
      mouth. "Can't you apologize? And you play the disgusted one? Just because
      a fellow wears a blouse!"
    

      The young man turned round and looked at the zinc-worker from head to
      foot.
    

      "I'll just teach you, you scraggy young scamp," continued Coupeau, "that
      the blouse is the finest garment out; yes! the garment of work. I'll wipe
      you if you like with my fists. Did one ever hear of such a thing—a
      ne'er-do-well insulting a workman!"
    

      Gervaise tried to calm him, but in vain. He drew himself up in his rags,
      in full view, and struck his blouse, roaring: "There's a man's chest under
      that!"
    

      Thereupon the young man dived into the midst of the crowd, muttering:
      "What a dirty blackguard!"
    

      Coupeau wanted to follow and catch him. He wasn't going to let himself be
      insulted by a fellow with a coat on. Probably it wasn't even paid for!
      Some second-hand toggery to impress a girl with, without having to fork
      out a centime. If he caught the chap again, he'd bring him down on his
      knees and make him bow to the blouse. But the crush was too great; there
      was no means of walking. He and Gervaise turned slowly round the dancers;
      there were three rows of sightseers packed close together, whose faces
      lighted up whenever any of the dancers showed off. As Coupeau and Gervaise
      were both short, they raised themselves up on tiptoe, trying to see
      something besides the chignons and hats that were bobbing about. The
      cracked brass instruments of the orchestra were furiously thundering a
      quadrille, a perfect tempest which made the hall shake; while the dancers,
      striking the floor with their feet, raised a cloud of dust which dimmed
      the brightness of the gas. The heat was unbearable.
    

      "Look there," said Gervaise suddenly.
    

      "Look at what?"
    

      "Why, at that velvet hat over there."
    

      They raised themselves up on tiptoe. On the left hand there was an old
      black velvet hat trimmed with ragged feathers bobbing about—regular
      hearse's plumes. It was dancing a devil of a dance, this hat—bouncing
      and whirling round, diving down and then springing up again. Coupeau and
      Gervaise lost sight of it as the people round about moved their heads, but
      then suddenly they saw it again, swaying farther off with such droll
      effrontery that folks laughed merely at the sight of this dancing hat,
      without knowing what was underneath it.
    

      "Well?" asked Coupeau.
    

      "Don't you recognize that head of hair?" muttered Gervaise in a stifled
      voice. "May my head be cut off if it isn't her."
    

      With one shove the zinc-worker made his way through the crowd. Mon
      Dieu! yes, it was Nana! And in a nice pickle too! She had nothing on
      her back but an old silk dress, all stained and sticky from having wiped
      the tables of boozing dens, and with its flounces so torn that they fell
      in tatters round about. Not even a bit of a shawl over her shoulders. And
      to think that the hussy had had such an attentive, loving gentleman, and
      had yet fallen to this condition, merely for the sake of following some
      rascal who had beaten her, no doubt! Nevertheless she had remained fresh
      and insolent, with her hair as frizzy as a poodle's, and her mouth bright
      pink under that rascally hat of hers.
    

      "Just wait a bit, I'll make her dance!" resumed Coupeau.
    

      Naturally enough, Nana was not on her guard. You should have seen how she
      wriggled about! She twisted to the right and to the left, bending double
      as if she were going to break herself in two, and kicking her feet as high
      as her partner's face. A circle had formed about her and this excited her
      even more. She raised her skirts to her knees and really let herself go in
      a wild dance, whirling and turning, dropping to the floor in splits, and
      then jigging and bouncing.
    

      Coupeau was trying to force his way through the dancers and was disrupting
      the quadrille.
    

      "I tell you, it's my daughter!" he cried; "let me pass."
    

      Nana was now dancing backwards, sweeping the floor with her flounces,
      rounding her figure and wriggling it, so as to look all the more tempting.
      She suddenly received a masterly blow just on the right cheek. She raised
      herself up and turned quite pale on recognizing her father and mother. Bad
      luck and no mistake.
    

      "Turn him out!" howled the dancers.
    

      But Coupeau, who had just recognized his daughter's cavalier as the
      scraggy young man in the coat, did not care a fig for what the people
      said.
    

      "Yes, it's us," he roared. "Eh? You didn't expect it. So we catch you
      here, and with a whipper-snapper, too, who insulted me a little while
      ago!"
    

      Gervaise, whose teeth were tight set, pushed him aside, exclaiming, "Shut
      up. There's no need of so much explanation."
    

      And, stepping forward, she dealt Nana a couple of hearty cuffs. The first
      knocked the feathered hat on one side, and the second left a red mark on
      the girl's white cheek. Nana was too stupefied either to cry or resist.
      The orchestra continued playing, the crowd grew angry and repeated
      savagely, "Turn them out! Turn them out!"
    

      "Come, make haste!" resumed Gervaise. "Just walk in front, and don't try
      to run off. You shall sleep in prison if you do."
    

      The scraggy young man had prudently disappeared. Nana walked ahead, very
      stiff and still stupefied by her bad luck. Whenever she showed the lest
      unwillingness, a cuff from behind brought her back to the direction of the
      door. And thus they went out, all three of them, amid the jeers and banter
      of the spectators, whilst the orchestra finished playing the finale with
      such thunder that the trombones seemed to be spitting bullets.
    

      The old life began again. After sleeping for twelve hours in her closet,
      Nana behaved very well for a week or so. She had patched herself a modest
      little dress, and wore a cap with the strings tied under her chignon.
      Seized indeed with remarkable fervor, she declared she would work at home,
      where one could earn what one liked without hearing any nasty work-room
      talk; and she procured some work and installed herself at a table, getting
      up at five o'clock in the morning on the first few days to roll her sprigs
      of violets. But when she had delivered a few gross, she stretched her arms
      and yawned over her work, with her hands cramped, for she had lost her
      knack of stem-rolling, and suffocated, shut up like this at home after
      allowing herself so much open air freedom during the last six months. Then
      the glue dried, the petals and the green paper got stained with grease,
      and the flower-dealer came three times in person to make a row and claim
      his spoiled materials.
    

      Nana idled along, constantly getting a hiding from her father, and
      wrangling with her mother morning and night—quarrels in which the
      two women flung horrible words at each other's head. It couldn't last; the
      twelfth day she took herself off, with no more luggage than her modest
      dress on her back and her cap perched over one ear. The Lorilleuxs, who
      had pursed their lips on hearing of her return and repentance, nearly died
      of laughter now. Second performance, eclipse number two, all aboard for
      the train for Saint-Lazare, the prison-hospital for streetwalkers! No, it
      was really too comical. Nana took herself off in such an amusing style.
      Well, if the Coupeaus wanted to keep her in the future, they must shut her
      up in a cage.
    

      In the presence of other people the Coupeaus pretended they were very glad
      to be rid of the girl, though in reality they were enraged. However, rage
      can't last forever, and soon they heard without even blinking that Nana
      was seen in the neighborhood. Gervaise, who accused her of doing it to
      enrage them, set herself above the scandal; she might meet her daughter on
      the street, she said; she wouldn't even dirty her hand to cuff her; yes,
      it was all over; she might have seen her lying in the gutter, dying on the
      pavement, and she would have passed by without even admitting that such a
      hussy was her own child.
    

      Nana meanwhile was enlivening the dancing halls of the neighborhood. She
      was known from the "Ball of Queen Blanche" to the "Great Hall of Folly."
      When she entered the "Elysee-Montmartre," folks climbed onto the tables to
      see her do the "sniffling crawfish" during the pastourelle. As she had
      twice been turned out of the "Chateau Rouge" hall, she walked outside the
      door waiting for someone she knew to escort her inside. The "Black Ball"
      on the outer Boulevard and the "Grand Turk" in the Rue des Poissonniers,
      were respectable places where she only went when she had some fine dress
      on. Of all the jumping places of the neighborhood, however, those she most
      preferred were the "Hermitage Ball" in a damp courtyard and "Robert's
      Ball" in the Impasse du Cadran, two dirty little halls, lighted up with a
      half dozen oil lamps, and kept very informally, everyone pleased and
      everyone free, so much so that the men and their girls kissed each other
      at their ease, in the dances, without being disturbed. Nana had ups and
      downs, perfect transformations, now tricked out like a stylish woman and
      now all dirt. Ah! she had a fine life.
    

      On several occasions the Coupeaus fancied they saw her in some shady dive.
      They turned their backs and decamped in another direction so as not to be
      obliged to recognize her. They didn't care to be laughed at by a whole
      dancing hall again for the sake of bringing such a dolt home. One night as
      they were going to bed, however, someone knocked at the door. It was Nana
      who matter-of-factly came to ask for a bed; and in what a state. Mon
      Dieu! her head was bare, her dress in tatters, and her boots full of
      holes—such a toilet as might have led the police to run her in, and
      take her off to the Depot. Naturally enough she received a hiding, and
      then she gluttonously fell on a crust of stale bread and went to sleep,
      worn out, with the last mouthful between her teeth.
    

      Then this sort of life continued. As soon as she was somewhat recovered
      she would go off and not a sight or sound of her. Weeks or months would
      pass and she would suddenly appear with no explanation. The Coupeaus got
      used to these comings and goings. Well, as long as she didn't leave the
      door open. What could you expect?
    

      There was only one thing that really bothered Gervaise. This was to see
      her daughter come home in a dress with a train and a hat covered with
      feathers. No, she couldn't stomach this display. Nana might indulge in
      riotous living if she chose, but when she came home to her mother's she
      ought to dress like a workgirl. The dresses with trains caused quite a
      sensation in the house; the Lorilleuxs sneered; Lantier, whose mouth
      sneered, turned the girl round to sniff at her delicious aroma; the Boches
      had forbidden Pauline to associate with this baggage in her frippery. And
      Gervaise was also angered by Nana's exhausted slumber, when after one of
      her adventures, she slept till noon, with her chignon undone and still
      full of hair pins, looking so white and breathing so feebly that she
      seemed to be dead. Her mother shook her five or six times in the course of
      the morning, threatening to throw a jugful of water over her. The sight of
      this handsome lazy girl, half naked and besotted with wine, exasperated
      her, as she saw her lying there. Sometimes Nana opened an eye, closed it
      again, and then stretched herself out all the more.
    

      One day after reproaching her with the life she led and asking her if she
      had taken on an entire battalion of soldiers, Gervaise put her threat into
      execution to the extent of shaking her dripping hand over Nana's body.
      Quite infuriated, the girl pulled herself up in the sheet, and cried out:
    

      "That's enough, mamma. It would be better not to talk of men. You did as
      you liked, and now I do the same!"
    

      "What! What!" stammered the mother.
    

      "Yes, I never spoke to you about it, for it didn't concern me; but you
      didn't used to be very fussy. I often saw you when we lived at the shop
      sneaking off as soon as papa started snoring. So just shut up; you
      shouldn't have set me the example."
    

      Gervaise remained pale, with trembling hands, turning round without
      knowing what she was about, whilst Nana, flattened on her breast, embraced
      her pillow with both arms and subsided into the torpor of her leaden
      slumber.
    

      Coupeau growled, no longer sane enough to think of launching out a whack.
      He was altogether losing his mind. And really there was no need to call
      him an unprincipled father, for liquor had deprived him of all
      consciousness of good and evil.
    

      Now it was a settled thing. He wasn't sober once in six months; then he
      was laid up and had to go into the Sainte-Anne hospital; a pleasure trip
      for him. The Lorilleuxs said that the Duke of Bowel-Twister had gone to
      visit his estates. At the end of a few weeks he left the asylum, repaired
      and set together again, and then he began to pull himself to bits once
      more, till he was down on his back and needed another mending. In three
      years he went seven times to Sainte-Anne in this fashion. The neighborhood
      said that his cell was kept ready for him. But the worst of the matter was
      that this obstinate tippler demolished himself more and more each time so
      that from relapse to relapse one could foresee the final tumble, the last
      cracking of this shaky cask, all the hoops of which were breaking away,
      one after the other.
    

      At the same time, he forgot to improve in appearance; a perfect ghost to
      look at! The poison was having terrible effects. By dint of imbibing
      alcohol, his body shrunk up like the embryos displayed in glass jars in
      chemical laboratories. When he approached a window you could see through
      his ribs, so skinny had he become. Those who knew his age, only forty
      years just gone, shuddered when he passed by, bent and unsteady, looking
      as old as the streets themselves. And the trembling of his hands
      increased, the right one danced to such an extent, that sometimes he had
      to take his glass between both fists to carry it to his lips. Oh! that
      cursed trembling! It was the only thing that worried his addled brains.
      You could hear him growling ferocious insults against those hands of his.
    

      This last summer, during which Nana usually came home to spend her nights,
      after she had finished knocking about, was especially bad for Coupeau. His
      voice changed entirely as if liquor had set a new music in his throat. He
      became deaf in one ear. Then in a few days his sight grew dim, and he had
      to clutch hold of the stair railings to prevent himself from falling. As
      for his health, he had abominable headaches and dizziness. All on a sudden
      he was seized with acute pains in his arms and legs; he turned pale; was
      obliged to sit down, and remained on a chair witless for hours; indeed,
      after one such attack, his arm remained paralyzed for the whole day. He
      took to his bed several times; he rolled himself up and hid himself under
      the sheet, breathing hard and continuously like a suffering animal. Then
      the strange scenes of Sainte-Anne began again. Suspicious and nervous,
      worried with a burning fever, he rolled about in a mad rage, tearing his
      blouse and biting the furniture with his convulsed jaws; or else he sank
      into a great state of emotion, complaining like a child, sobbing and
      lamenting because nobody loved him. One night when Gervaise and Nana
      returned home together they were surprised not to find him in his bed. He
      had laid the bolster in his place. And when they discovered him, hiding
      between the bed and the wall, his teeth were chattering, and he related
      that some men had come to murder him. The two women were obliged to put
      him to bed again and quiet him like a child.
    

      Coupeau knew only one remedy, to toss down a pint of spirits; a whack in
      his stomach, which set him on his feet again. This was how he doctored his
      gripes of a morning. His memory had left him long ago, his brain was
      empty; and he no sooner found himself on his feet than he poked fun at
      illness. He had never been ill. Yes, he had got to the point when a fellow
      kicks the bucket declaring that he's quite well. And his wits were going
      a-wool-gathering in other respects too. When Nana came home after gadding
      about for six weeks or so he seemed to fancy she had returned from doing
      some errand in the neighborhood. Often when she was hanging on an
      acquaintance's arm she met him and laughed at him without his recognizing
      her. In short, he no longer counted for anything; she might have sat down
      on him if she had been at a loss for a chair.
    

      When the first frosts came Nana took herself off once more under the
      pretence of going to the fruiterer's to see if there were any baked pears.
      She scented winter and didn't care to let her teeth chatter in front of
      the fireless stove. The Coupeaus had called her no good because they had
      waited for the pears. No doubt she would come back again. The other winter
      she had stayed away three weeks to fetch her father two sous' worth of
      tobacco. But the months went by and the girl did not show herself. This
      time she must have indulged in a hard gallop. When June arrived she did
      not even turn up with the sunshine. Evidently it was all over, she had
      found a new meal ticket somewhere or other. One day when the Coupeaus were
      totally broke they sold Nana's iron bedstead for six francs, which they
      drank together at Saint-Ouen. The bedstead had been in their way.
    

      One morning in July Virginie called to Gervaise, who was passing by, and
      asked her to lend a hand in washing up, for Lantier had entertained a
      couple of friends on the day before. And while Gervaise was cleaning up
      the plates and dishes, greasy with the traces of the spread, the hatter,
      who was still digesting in the shop, suddenly called out:
    

      "Say, I saw Nana the other day."
    

      Virginie, who was seated at the counter looking very careworn in front of
      the jars and drawers which were already three parts emptied, jerked her
      head furiously. She restrained herself so as not to say too much, but
      really it was angering her. Lantier was seeing Nana often. Oh! she was by
      no means sure of him; he was a man to do much worse than that, when a
      fancy for a woman came into his head. Madame Lerat, very intimate just
      then with Virginie, who confided in her, had that moment entered the shop,
      and hearing Lantier's remark, she pouted ridiculously, and asked:
    

      "What do you mean, you saw her?"
    

      "Oh, in the street here," answered the hatter, who felt highly flattered,
      and began to laugh and twirl his moustaches. "She was in a carriage and I
      was floundering on the pavement. Really it was so, I swear it! There's no
      use denying it, the young fellows of position who are on friendly terms
      with her are terribly lucky!"
    

      His eyes had brightened and he turned towards Gervaise who was standing in
      the rear of the shop wiping a dish.
    

      "Yes, she was in a carriage, and wore such a stylish dress! I didn't
      recognise her, she looked so much like a lady of the upper set, with her
      white teeth and her face as fresh as a flower. It was she who waved her
      glove to me. She has caught a count, I believe. Oh! she's launched for
      good. She can afford to do without any of us; she's head over heels in
      happiness, the little beggar! What a love of a little kitten! No, you've
      no idea what a little kitten she is!"
    

      Gervaise was still wiping the same plate, although it had long since been
      clean and shiny. Virginie was reflecting, anxious about a couple of bills
      which fell due on the morrow and which she didn't know how to pay; whilst
      Lantier, stout and fat, perspiring the sugar he fed off, ventured his
      enthusiasm for well-dressed little hussies. The shop, which was already
      three parts eaten up, smelt of ruin. Yes, there were only a few more burnt
      almonds to nibble, a little more barley-sugar to suck, to clean the
      Poissons' business out. Suddenly, on the pavement over the way, he
      perceived the policeman, who was on duty, pass by all buttoned up with his
      sword dangling by his side. And this made him all the gayer. He compelled
      Virginie to look at her husband.
    

      "Dear me," he muttered, "Badingue looks fine this morning! Just look, see
      how stiff he walks. He must have stuck a glass eye in his back to surprise
      people."
    

      When Gervaise went back upstairs, she found Coupeau seated on the bed, in
      the torpid state induced by one of his attacks. He was looking at the
      window-panes with his dim expressionless eyes. She sat herself down on a
      chair, tired out, her hands hanging beside her dirty skirt; and for a
      quarter of an hour she remained in front of him without saying a word.
    

      "I've had some news," she muttered at last. "Your daughter's been seen.
      Yes, your daughter's precious stylish and hasn't any more need of you.
      She's awfully happy, she is! Ah! Mon Dieu! I'd give a great deal to
      be in her place."
    

      Coupeau was still staring at the window-pane. But suddenly he raised his
      ravaged face, and stammered with an idiotic laugh:
    

      "Well, my little lamb, I'm not stopping you. You're not yet so bad looking
      when you wash yourself. As folks say, however old a pot may be, it ends by
      finding its lid. And, after all, I wouldn't care if it only buttered our
      bread."
    

      
 
    

      It must have been the Saturday after quarter day, something like the 12th
      or 13th of January—Gervaise didn't quite know. She was losing her
      wits, for it was centuries since she had had anything warm in her stomach.
      Ah! what an infernal week! A complete clear out. Two loaves of four pounds
      each on Tuesday, which had lasted till Thursday; then a dry crust found
      the night before, and finally not a crumb for thirty-six hours, a real
      dance before the cupboard! What did she know, by the way, what she felt on
      her back, was the frightful cold, a black cold, the sky as grimy as a
      frying-pan, thick with snow which obstinately refused to fall. When winter
      and hunger are both together in your guts, you may tighten your belt as
      much as you like, it hardly feeds you.
    

      Perhaps Coupeau would bring back some money in the evening. He said that
      he was working. Anything is possible, isn't it? And Gervaise, although she
      had been caught many and many a time, had ended by relying on this coin.
      After all sorts of incidents, she herself couldn't find as much as a
      duster to wash in the whole neighborhood; and even an old lady, whose
      rooms she did, had just given her the sack, charging her with swilling her
      liqueurs. No one would engage her, she was washed up everywhere; and this
      secretly suited her, for she had fallen to that state of indifference when
      one prefers to croak rather than move one's fingers. At all events, if
      Coupeau brought his pay home they would have something warm to eat. And
      meanwhile, as it wasn't yet noon, she remained stretched on the mattress,
      for one doesn't feel so cold or so hungry when one is lying down.
    

      The bed was nothing but a pile of straw in a corner. Bed and bedding had
      gone, piece by piece, to the second-hand dealers of the neighborhood.
      First she had ripped open the mattress to sell handfuls of wool at ten
      sous a pound. When the mattress was empty she got thirty sous for the sack
      so as to be able to have coffee. Everything else had followed. Well,
      wasn't the straw good enough for them?
    

      Gervaise bent herself like a gun-trigger on the heap of straw, with her
      clothes on and her feet drawn up under her rag of a skirt, so as to keep
      them warm. And huddled up, with her eyes wide open, she turned some
      scarcely amusing ideas over in her mind that morning. Ah! no, they
      couldn't continue living without food. She no longer felt her hunger, only
      she had a leaden weight on her chest and her brain seemed empty. Certainly
      there was nothing gay to look at in the four corners of the hovel. A
      perfect kennel now, where greyhounds, who wear wrappers in the streets,
      would not even have lived in effigy. Her pale eyes stared at the bare
      walls. Everything had long since gone to "uncle's." All that remained were
      the chest of drawers, the table and a chair. Even the marble top of the
      chest of drawers and the drawers themselves, had evaporated in the same
      direction as the bedstead. A fire could not have cleaned them out more
      completely; the little knick-knacks had melted, beginning with the ticker,
      a twelve franc watch, down to the family photos, the frames of which had
      been bought by a woman keeping a second-hand store; a very obliging woman,
      by the way, to whom Gervaise carried a saucepan, an iron, a comb and who
      gave her five, three or two sous in exchange, according to the article;
      enough, at all events to go upstairs again with a bit of bread. But now
      there only remained a broken pair of candle snuffers, which the woman
      refused to give her even a sou for.
    

      Oh! if she could only have sold the rubbish and refuse, the dust and the
      dirt, how speedily she would have opened shop, for the room was filthy to
      behold! She only saw cobwebs in the corners and although cobwebs are good
      for cuts, there are, so far, no merchants who buy them. Then turning her
      head, abandoning the idea of doing a bit of trade, Gervaise gathered
      herself together more closely on her straw, preferring to stare through
      the window at the snow-laden sky, at the dreary daylight, which froze the
      marrow in her bones.
    

      What a lot of worry! Though, after all, what was the use of putting
      herself in such a state and puzzling her brains? If she had only been able
      to have a snooze. But her hole of a home wouldn't go out of her mind.
      Monsieur Marescot, the landlord had come in person the day before to tell
      them that he would turn them out into the street if the two quarters' rent
      now overdue were not paid during the ensuing week. Well, so he might, they
      certainly couldn't be worse off on the pavement! Fancy this ape, in his
      overcoat and his woolen gloves, coming upstairs to talk to them about
      rent, as if they had had a treasure hidden somewhere!
    

      Just the same with that brute of a Coupeau, who couldn't come home now
      without beating her; she wished him in the same place as the landlord. She
      sent them all there, wishing to rid herself of everyone, and of life too.
      She was becoming a real storehouse for blows. Coupeau had a cudgel, which
      he called his ass's fan, and he fanned his old woman. You should just have
      seen him giving her abominable thrashings, which made her perspire all
      over. She was no better herself, for she bit and scratched him. Then they
      stamped about in the empty room and gave each other such drubbings as were
      likely to ease them of all taste for bread for good. But Gervaise ended by
      not caring a fig for these thwacks, not more than she did for anything
      else. Coupeau might celebrate Saint Monday for weeks altogether, go off on
      the spree for months at a time, come home mad with liquor, and seek to
      sharpen her as he said, she had grown accustomed to it, she thought him
      tiresome, but nothing more. It was on these occasions that she wished him
      somewhere else. Yes, somewhere, her beast of a man and the Lorilleuxs, the
      Boches, and the Poissons too; in fact, the whole neighborhood, which she
      had such contempt for. She sent all Paris there with a gesture of supreme
      carelessness, and was pleased to be able to revenge herself in this style.
    

      One could get used to almost anything, but still, it is hard to break the
      habit of eating. That was the one thing that really annoyed Gervaise, the
      hunger that kept gnawing at her insides. Oh, those pleasant little snacks
      she used to have. Now she had fallen low enough to gobble anything she
      could find.
    

      On special occasions, she would get waste scraps of meat from the butcher
      for four sous a pound. Blacked and dried out meat that couldn't find a
      purchaser. She would mix this with potatoes for a stew. On other
      occasions, when she had some wine, she treated herself to a sop, a true
      parrot's pottage. Two sous' worth of Italian cheese, bushels of white
      potatoes, quarts of dry beans, cooked in their own juice, these also were
      dainties she was not often able to indulge in now. She came down to
      leavings from low eating dens, where for a sou she had a pile of
      fish-bones, mixed with the parings of moldy roast meat. She fell even
      lower—she begged a charitable eating-house keeper to give her his
      customers' dry crusts, and she made herself a bread soup, letting the
      crusts simmer as long as possible on a neighbor's fire. On the days when
      she was really hungry, she searched about with the dogs, to see what might
      be lying outside the tradespeople's doors before the dustmen went by; and
      thus at times she came across rich men's food, rotten melons, stinking
      mackerel and chops, which she carefully inspected for fear of maggots.
    

      Yes, she had come to this. The idea may be a repugnant one to
      delicate-minded folks, but if they hadn't chewed anything for three days
      running, we should hardly see them quarreling with their stomachs; they
      would go down on all fours and eat filth like other people. Ah! the death
      of the poor, the empty entrails, howling hunger, the animal appetite that
      leads one with chattering teeth to fill one's stomach with beastly refuse
      in this great Paris, so bright and golden! And to think that Gervaise used
      to fill her belly with fat goose! Now the thought of it brought tears to
      her eyes. One day, when Coupeau bagged two bread tickets from her to go
      and sell them and get some liquor, she nearly killed him with the blow of
      a shovel, so hungered and so enraged was she by this theft of a bit of
      bread.
    

      However, after a long contemplation of the pale sky, she had fallen into a
      painful doze. She dreamt that the snow-laden sky was falling on her, so
      cruelly did the cold pinch. Suddenly she sprang to her feet, awakened with
      a start by a shudder of anguish. Mon Dieu! was she going to die?
      Shivering and haggard she perceived that it was still daylight. Wouldn't
      the night ever come? How long the time seems when the stomach is empty!
      Hers was waking up in its turn and beginning to torture her. Sinking down
      on the chair, with her head bent and her hands between her legs to warm
      them, she began to think what they would have for dinner as soon as
      Coupeau brought the money home: a loaf, a quart of wine and two platefuls
      of tripe in the Lyonnaise fashion. Three o'clock struck by father
      Bazouge's clock. Yes, it was only three o'clock. Then she began to cry.
      She would never have strength enough to wait until seven. Her body swayed
      backwards and forwards, she oscillated like a child nursing some sharp
      pain, bending herself double and crushing her stomach so as not to feel
      it. Ah! an accouchement is less painful than hunger! And unable to ease
      herself, seized with rage, she rose and stamped about, hoping to send her
      hunger to sleep by walking it to and fro like an infant. For half an hour
      or so, she knocked against the four corners of the empty room. Then,
      suddenly, she paused with a fixed stare. So much the worse! They might say
      what they liked; she would lick their feet if needs be, but she would go
      and ask the Lorilleuxs to lend her ten sous.
    

      At winter time, up these stairs of the house, the paupers' stairs, there
      was a constant borrowing of ten sous and twenty sous, petty services which
      these hungry beggars rendered each other. Only they would rather have died
      than have applied to the Lorilleuxs, for they knew they were too
      tight-fisted. Thus Gervaise displayed remarkable courage in going to knock
      at their door. She felt so frightened in the passage that she experienced
      the sudden relief of people who ring a dentist's bell.
    

      "Come in!" cried the chainmaker in a sour voice.
    

      How warm and nice it was inside. The forge was blazing, its white flame
      lighting up the narrow workroom, whilst Madame Lorilleux set a coil of
      gold wire to heat. Lorilleux, in front of his worktable, was perspiring
      with the warmth as he soldered the links of a chain together. And it smelt
      nice. Some cabbage soup was simmering on the stove, exhaling a steam which
      turned Gervaise's heart topsy-turvy, and almost made her faint.
    

      "Ah! it's you," growled Madame Lorilleux, without even asking her to sit
      down. "What do you want?"
    

      Gervaise did not answer for a moment. She had recently been on fairly good
      terms with the Lorilleuxs, but she saw Boche sitting by the stove. He
      seemed very much at home, telling funny stories.
    

      "What do you want?" repeated Lorilleux.
    

      "You haven't seen Coupeau?" Gervaise finally stammered at last. "I thought
      he was here."
    

      The chainmakers and the concierge sneered. No, for certain, they hadn't
      seen Coupeau. They didn't stand treat often enough to interest Coupeau.
      Gervaise made an effort and resumed, stuttering:
    

      "It's because he promised to come home. Yes, he's to bring me some money.
      And as I have absolute need of something—"
    

      Silence followed. Madame Lorilleux was roughly fanning the fire of the
      stove; Lorilleux had lowered his nose over the bit of chain between his
      fingers, while Boche continued laughing, puffing out his face till it
      looked like the full moon.
    

      "If I only had ten sous," muttered Gervaise, in a low voice.
    

      The silence persisted.
    

      "Couldn't you lend me ten sous? Oh! I would return them to you this
      evening!"
    

      "When you're dead—listen to this—when you're dead, it's for a
      long, long time."
    

      
 
    

      Then followed four years of hard work. In the neighborhood, Gervaise and
      Coupeau had the reputation of being a happy couple, living in retirement
      without quarrels, and taking a short walk regularly every Sunday in the
      direction of St. Ouen. The wife worked twelve hours a day at Madame
      Fauconnier's, and still found means to keep their lodging as clean and
      bright as a new coined sou and to prepare the meals for all her little
      family, morning and evening. The husband never got drunk, brought his
      wages home every fortnight, and smoked a pipe at his window in the
      evening, to get a breath of fresh air before going to bed. They were
      frequently alluded to on account of their nice, pleasant ways; and as
      between them they earned close upon nine francs a day, it was reckoned
      that they were able to put by a good deal of money.
    

      However, during their first months together they had to struggle hard to
      get by. Their wedding had left them owing two hundred francs. Also, they
      detested the Hotel Boncoeur as they didn't like the other occupants. Their
      dream was to have a home of their own with their own furniture. They were
      always figuring how much they would need and decided three hundred and
      fifty francs at least, in order to be able to buy little items that came
      up later.
    

      They were in despair at ever being able to collect such a large sum when a
      lucky chance came their way. An old gentleman at Plassans offered to take
      the older boy, Claude, and send him to an academy down there. The old man,
      who loved art, had previously been much impressed by Claude's sketches.
      Claude had already begun to cost them quite a bit. Now, with only Etienne
      to support, they were able to accumulate the money in a little over seven
      months. One day they were finally able to buy their own furniture from a
      second-hand dealer on Rue Belhomme. Their hearts filled with happiness,
      they celebrated by walking home along the exterior Boulevards.
    

      They had purchased a bed, a night table, a chest of drawers with a marble
      top, a wardrobe, a round table covered with oilcloth, and six chairs. All
      were of dark mahogany. They also bought blankets, linen, and kitchen
      utensils that were scarcely used. It meant settling down and giving
      themselves a status in life as property owners, as persons to be
      respected.
    

      For two months past they had been busy seeking some new apartments. At
      first they wanted above everything to hire these in the big house of the
      Rue de la Goutte-d'Or. But there was not a single room to let there; so
      that they had to relinquish their old dream. To tell the truth, Gervaise
      was rather glad in her heart; the neighborhood of the Lorilleux almost
      door to door, frightened her immensely. Then, they looked about elsewhere.
      Coupeau, very properly did not wish to be far from Madame Fauconnier's so
      that Gervaise could easily run home at any hour of the day. And at length
      they met with exactly what suited them, a large room with a small closet
      and a kitchen, in the Rue Neuve de la Goutte-d'Or, almost opposite the
      laundress's. This was in a small two-story building with a very steep
      staircase. There were two apartments on the second floor, one to the left,
      the other to the right, The ground floor was occupied by a man who rented
      out carriages, which filled the sheds in the large stable yard by the
      street.
    

      Gervaise was delighted with this as it made her feel she was back in a
      country town. With no close neighbors there would be no gossip to worry
      about in this little corner. It reminded her of a small lane outside the
      ramparts of Plassans. She could even see her own window while ironing at
      the laundry by just tilting her head to the side.
    

      They took possession of their new abode at the April quarter. Gervaise was
      then eight months advanced. But she showed great courage, saying with a
      laugh that the baby helped her as she worked; she felt its influence
      growing within her and giving her strength. Ah, well! She just laughed at
      Coupeau whenever he wanted her to lie down and rest herself! She would
      take to her bed when the labor pains came. That would be quite soon enough
      as with another mouth to feed, they would have to work harder than ever.
    

      She made their new place bright and shiny before helping her husband
      install the furniture. She loved the furniture, polishing it and becoming
      almost heart-broken at the slightest scratch. Any time she knocked into
      the furniture while cleaning she would stop with a sudden shock as though
      she had hurt herself.
    

      The chest of drawers was especially dear to her. She thought it handsome,
      sturdy and most respectable-looking. The dream that she hadn't dared to
      mention was to get a clock and put it right in the middle of the marble
      top. It would make a splendid effect. She probably would have bought one
      right away except for the expected baby.
    

      The couple were thoroughly enchanted with their new home. Etienne's bed
      occupied the small closet, where there was still room to put another
      child's crib. The kitchen was a very tiny affair and as dark as night, but
      by leaving the door wide open, one could just manage to see; besides,
      Gervaise had not to cook meals for thirty people, all she wanted was room
      to make her soup. As for the large room, it was their pride. The first
      thing in the morning, they drew the curtains of the alcove, white calico
      curtains; and the room was thus transformed into a dining-room, with the
      table in the centre, and the wardrobe and chest of drawers facing each
      other.
    

      They stopped up the chimney since it burned as much as fifteen sous of
      coal a day. A small cast-iron stove on the marble hearth gave them enough
      warmth on cold days for only seven sous. Coupeau had also done his best to
      decorate the walls. There was a large engraving showing a marshal of
      France on horseback with a baton in his hand. Family photographs were
      arranged in two rows on top of the chest of drawers on each side of an old
      holy-water basin in which they kept matches. Busts of Pascal and Beranger
      were on top of the wardrobe. It was really a handsome room.
    

      "Guess how much we pay here?" Gervaise would ask of every visitor she had.
    

      And whenever they guessed too high a sum, she triumphed and delighted at
      being so well suited for such a little money, cried:
    

      "One hundred and fifty francs, not a sou more! Isn't it almost like having
      it for nothing!"
    

      The street, Rue Neuve de la Goutte d'Or, played an important part in their
      contentment. Gervaise's whole life was there, as she traveled back and
      forth endlessly between her home and Madame Fauconnier's laundry. Coupeau
      now went down every evening and stood on the doorstep to smoke his pipe.
      The poorly-paved street rose steeply and had no sidewalks. Toward Rue de
      la Goutte d'Or there were some gloomy shops with dirty windows. There were
      shoemakers, coopers, a run-down grocery, and a bankrupt cafe whose closed
      shutters were covered with posters. In the opposite direction, toward
      Paris, four-story buildings blocked the sky. Their ground floor shops were
      all occupied by laundries with one exception—a green-painted store
      front typical of a small-town hair-dresser. Its shop windows were full of
      variously colored flasks. It lighted up this drab corner with the gay
      brightness of its copper bowls which were always shining.
    

      The most pleasant part of the street was in between, where the buildings
      were fewer and lower, letting in more sunlight. The carriage sheds, the
      plant which manufactured soda water, and the wash-house opposite made a
      wide expanse of quietness. The muffled voices of the washerwomen and the
      rhythmic puffing of the steam engine seemed to deepen the almost religious
      silence. Open fields and narrow lanes vanishing between dark walls gave it
      the air of a country village. Coupeau, always amused by the infrequent
      pedestrians having to jump over the continuous streams of soapy water,
      said it reminded him of a country town where his uncle had taken him when
      he was five years old. Gervaise's greatest joy was a tree growing in the
      courtyard to the left of their window, an acacia that stretched out a
      single branch and yet, with its meager foliage, lent charm to the entire
      street.
    

      It was on the last day of April that Gervaise was confined. The pains came
      on in the afternoon, towards four o'clock, as she was ironing a pair of
      curtains at Madame Fauconnier's. She would not go home at once, but
      remained there wriggling about on a chair, and continuing her ironing
      every time the pain allowed her to do so; the curtains were wanted quickly
      and she obstinately made a point of finishing them. Besides, perhaps after
      all it was only a colic; it would never do to be frightened by a bit of a
      stomach-ache. But as she was talking of starting on some shirts, she
      became quite pale. She was obliged to leave the work-shop, and cross the
      street doubled in two, holding on to the walls. One of the workwomen
      offered to accompany her; she declined, but begged her to go instead for
      the midwife, close by, in the Rue de la Charbonniere. This was only a
      false alarm; there was no need to make a fuss. She would be like that no
      doubt all through the night. It was not going to prevent her getting
      Coupeau's dinner ready as soon as she was indoors; then she might perhaps
      lie down on the bed a little, but without undressing. On the staircase she
      was seized with such a violent pain, that she was obliged to sit down on
      one of the stairs; and she pressed her two fists against her mouth to
      prevent herself from crying out, for she would have been ashamed to have
      been found there by any man, had one come up. The pain passed away; she
      was able to open her door, feeling relieved, and thinking that she had
      decidedly been mistaken. That evening she was going to make a stew with
      some neck chops. All went well while she peeled the potatoes. The chops
      were cooking in a saucepan when the pains returned. She mixed the gravy as
      she stamped about in front of the stove, almost blinded with her tears. If
      she was going to give birth, that was no reason why Coupeau should be kept
      without his dinner. At length the stew began to simmer on a fire covered
      with cinders. She went into the other room, and thought she would have
      time to lay the cloth at one end of the table. But she was obliged to put
      down the bottle of wine very quickly; she no longer had strength to reach
      the bed; she fell prostrate, and she had more pains on a mat on the floor.
      When the midwife arrived, a quarter of an hour later, she found mother and
      baby lying there on the floor.
    

      The zinc-worker was still employed at the hospital. Gervaise would not
      have him disturbed. When he came home at seven o'clock, he found her in
      bed, well covered up, looking very pale on the pillow, and the child
      crying, swathed in a shawl at its mother's feet.
    

      "Ah, my poor wife!" said Coupeau, kissing Gervaise. "And I was joking only
      an hour ago, whilst you were crying with pain! I say, you don't make much
      fuss about it—the time to sneeze and it's all over."
    

      She smiled faintly; then she murmured: "It's a girl."
    

      "Right!" the zinc-worker replied, joking so as to enliven her, "I ordered
      a girl! Well, now I've got what I wanted! You do everything I wish!" And,
      taking the child up in his arms, he continued: "Let's have a look at you,
      miss! You've got a very black little mug. It'll get whiter, never fear.
      You must be good, never run about the streets, and grow up sensible like
      your papa and mamma."
    

      Gervaise looked at her daughter very seriously, with wide open eyes,
      slowly overshadowed with sadness, for she would rather have had a boy.
      Boys can talk care of themselves and don't have to run such risks on the
      streets of Paris as girls do. The midwife took the infant from Coupeau.
      She forbade Gervaise to do any talking; it was bad enough there was so
      much noise around her.
    

      Then the zinc-worker said that he must tell the news to mother Coupeau and
      the Lorilleuxs, but he was dying with hunger, he must first of all have
      his dinner. It was a great worry to the invalid to see him have to wait on
      himself, run to the kitchen for the stew, eat it out of a soup plate, and
      not be able to find the bread. In spite of being told not to do so, she
      bewailed her condition, and fidgeted about in her bed. It was stupid of
      her not to have managed to set the cloth, the pains had laid her on her
      back like a blow from a bludgeon. Her poor old man would not think it kind
      of her to be nursing herself up there whilst he was dining so badly. At
      least were the potatoes cooked enough? She no longer remembered whether
      she had put salt in them.
    

      "Keep quiet!" cried the midwife.
    

      "Ah! if only you could stop her from wearing herself out!" said Coupeau
      with his mouth full. "If you were not here, I'd bet she'd get up to cut my
      bread. Keep on your back, you big goose! You mustn't move about, otherwise
      it'll be a fortnight before you'll be able to stand on your legs. Your
      stew's very good. Madame will eat some with me, won't you, Madame?"
    

      The midwife declined; but she was willing to accept a glass of wine,
      because it had upset her, said she to find the poor woman with the baby on
      the mat. Coupeau at length went off to tell the news to his relations.
      Half an hour later he returned with all of them, mother Coupeau, the
      Lorilleuxs, and Madame Lerat, whom he had met at the latter's.
    

      "I've brought you the whole gang!" cried Coupeau. "It can't be helped!
      They wanted to see you. Don't open your mouth, it's forbidden. They'll
      stop here and look at you without ceremony, you know. As for me, I'm going
      to make them some coffee, and of the right sort!"
    

      He disappeared into the kitchen. Mother Coupeau after kissing Gervaise,
      became amazed at the child's size. The two other women also kissed the
      invalid on her cheeks. And all three, standing before the bed, commented
      with divers exclamations on the details of the confinement—a most
      remarkable confinement, just like having a tooth pulled, nothing more.
    

      Madame Lerat examined the baby all over, declared she was well formed,
      even added that she could grow up into an attractive woman. Noticing that
      the head had been squeezed into a point on top, she kneaded it gently
      despite the infant's cries, trying to round it a bit. Madame Lorilleux
      grabbed the baby from her; that could be enough to give the poor little
      thing all sorts of vicious tendencies, meddling with it like that while
      her skull was still soft. She then tried to figure out who the baby
      resembled. This almost led to a quarrel. Lorilleux, peering over the
      women's shoulders, insisted that the little girl didn't look the least bit
      like Coupeau. Well, maybe a little around the nose, nothing more. She was
      her mother all over again, with big eyes like hers. Certainly there were
      no eyes like that in the Coupeau family.
    

      Coupeau, however, had failed to reappear. One could hear him in the
      kitchen struggling with the grate and the coffee-pot. Gervaise was
      worrying herself frightfully; it was not the proper thing for a man to
      make coffee; and she called and told him what to do, without listening to
      the midwife's energetic "hush!"
    

      "Here we are!" said Coupeau, entering with the coffee-pot in his hand.
      "Didn't I just have a bother with it! It all went wrong on purpose! Now
      we'll drink out of glasses, won't we? Because you know, the cups are still
      at the shop."
    

      They seated themselves around the table, and the zinc-worker insisted on
      pouring out the coffee himself. It smelt very strong, it was none of that
      weak stuff. When the midwife had sipped hers up, she went off; everything
      was going on nicely, she was not required. If the young woman did not pass
      a good night they were to send for her on the morrow. She was scarcely
      down the staircase, when Madame Lorilleux called her a glutton and a
      good-for-nothing. She put four lumps of sugar in her coffee, and charged
      fifteen francs for leaving you with your baby all by yourself. But Coupeau
      took her part; he would willingly fork out the fifteen francs. After all
      those sort of women spent their youth in studying, they were right to
      charge a good price.
    

      It was then Lorilleux who got into a quarrel with Madame Lerat by
      maintaining that, in order to have a son, the head of the bed should be
      turned to the north. She shrugged her shoulders at such nonsense, offering
      another formula which consisted in hiding under the mattress, without
      letting your wife know, a handful of fresh nettles picked in bright
      sunlight.
    

      The table had been pushed over close to the bed. Until ten o'clock
      Gervaise lay there, smiling although she was only half awake. She was
      becoming more and more weary, her head turned sideways on the pillow. She
      no longer had the energy to venture a remark or a gesture. It seemed to
      her that she was dead, a very sweet death, from the depths of which she
      was happy to observe the others still in the land of the living. The thin
      cries of her baby daughter rose above the hum of heavy voices that were
      discussing a recent murder on Rue du Bon Puits, at the other end of La
      Chapelle.
    

      Then, as the visitors were thinking of leaving, they spoke of the
      christening. The Lorilleux had promised to be godfather and godmother;
      they looked very glum over the matter. However, if they had not been asked
      to stand they would have felt rather peculiar. Coupeau did not see any
      need for christening the little one; it certainly would not procure her an
      income of ten thousand francs, and besides she might catch a cold from it.
      The less one had to do with priests the better. But mother Coupeau called
      him a heathen. The Lorilleux, without going and eating consecrated bread
      in church, plumed themselves on their religious sentiments.
    

      "It shall be next Sunday, if you like," said the chainmaker.
    

      And Gervaise having consented by a nod, everyone kissed her and told her
      to take good care of herself. They also wished the baby good-bye. Each one
      went and leant over the little trembling body with smiles and loving words
      as though she were able to understand. They called her Nana, the pet name
      for Anna, which was her godmother's name.
    

      "Good night, Nana. Come be a good girl, Nana."
    

      When they had at length gone off, Coupeau drew his chair close up to the
      bed and finished his pipe, holding Gervaise's hand in his. He smoked
      slowly, deeply affected and uttering sentences between the puffs.
    

      "Well, old woman, they've made your head ache, haven't they? You see I
      couldn't prevent them coming. After all, it shows their friendship. But
      we're better alone, aren't we? I wanted to be alone like this with you. It
      has seemed such a long evening to me! Poor little thing, she's had a lot
      to go through! Those shrimps, when they come out into the world, have no
      idea of the pain they cause. It must really almost be like being split in
      two. Where does it hurt the most, that I may kiss it and make it well?"
    

      He had carefully slid one of his big hands under her back, and now he drew
      her toward him, bending over to kiss her stomach through the covers,
      touched by a rough man's compassion for the suffering of a woman in
      childbirth. He inquired if he was hurting her. Gervaise felt very happy,
      and answered him that it didn't hurt any more at all. She was only worried
      about getting up as soon as possible, because there was no time to lie
      about now. He assured her that he'd be responsible for earning the money
      for the new little one. He would be a real bum if he abandoned her and the
      little rascal. The way he figured it, what really counted was bringing her
      up properly. Wasn't that so?
    

      Coupeau did not sleep much that night. He covered up the fire in the
      stove. Every hour he had to get up to give the baby spoonfuls of lukewarm
      sugar and water. That did not prevent his going off to his work in the
      morning as usual. He even took advantage of his lunch-hour to make a
      declaration of the birth at the mayor's. During this time Madame Boche,
      who had been informed of the event, had hastened to go and pass the day
      with Gervaise. But the latter, after ten hours of sleep, bewailed her
      position, saying that she already felt pains all over her through having
      been so long in bed. She would become quite ill if they did not let her
      get up. In the evening, when Coupeau returned home, she told him all her
      worries; no doubt she had confidence in Madame Boche, only it put her
      beside herself to see a stranger installed in her room, opening the
      drawers, and touching her things.
    

      On the morrow the concierge, on returning from some errand, found her up,
      dressed, sweeping and getting her husband's dinner ready; and it was
      impossible to persuade her to go to bed again. They were trying to make a
      fool of her perhaps! It was all very well for ladies to pretend to be
      unable to move. When one was not rich one had no time for that sort of
      thing. Three days after her confinement she was ironing petticoats at
      Madame Fauconnier's, banging her irons and all in a perspiration from the
      great heat of the stove.
    

      On the Saturday evening, Madame Lorilleux brought her presents for her
      godchild—a cup that cost thirty-five sous, and a christening dress,
      plaited and trimmed with some cheap lace, which she had got for six
      francs, because it was slightly soiled. On the morrow, Lorilleux, as
      godfather, gave the mother six pounds of sugar. They certainly did things
      properly! At the baptism supper which took place at the Coupeaus that
      evening, they did not come empty-handed. Lorilleux carried a bottle of
      fine wine under each arm and his wife brought a large custard pie from a
      famous pastry shop on Chaussee Clignancourt. But the Lorilleuxs made sure
      that the entire neighborhood knew they had spent twenty francs. As soon as
      Gervaise learned of their gossiping, furious, she stopped giving them
      credit for generosity.
    

      It was at the christening feast that the Coupeaus ended by becoming
      intimately acquainted with their neighbors on the opposite side of the
      landing. The other lodging in the little house was occupied by two
      persons, mother and son, the Goujets as they were called. Until then the
      two families had merely nodded to each other on the stairs and in the
      street, nothing more; the Coupeaus thought their neighbors seemed rather
      bearish. Then the mother, having carried up a pail of water for Gervaise
      on the morrow of her confinement, the latter had thought it the proper
      thing to invite them to the feast, more especially as she considered them
      very respectable people. And naturally, they there became well acquainted
      with each other.
    

      The Goujets came from the Departement du Nord. The mother mended lace; the
      son, a blacksmith, worked at an iron bolt factory. They had lived in their
      lodging for five years. Behind the quiet peacefulness of their life, a
      long standing sorrow was hidden. Goujet the father, one day when furiously
      drunk at Lille, had beaten a comrade to death with an iron bar and had
      afterwards strangled himself in prison with his handkerchief. The widow
      and child, who had come to Paris after their misfortune, always felt the
      tragedy hanging over their heads, and atoned for it by a strict honesty
      and an unvarying gentleness and courage. They had a certain amount of
      pride in their attitude and regarded themselves as better than other
      people.
    

      Madame Goujet, dressed in black as usual, her forehead framed in a nun's
      hood, had a pale, calm, matronly face, as if the whiteness of the lace and
      the delicate work of her fingers had cast a glow of serenity over her.
      Goujet was twenty-three years old, huge, magnificently built, with deep
      blue eyes and rosy cheeks, and the strength of Hercules. His comrades at
      the shop called him "Golden Mouth" because of his handsome blonde beard.
    

      Gervaise at once felt a great friendship for these people. When she
      entered their home for the first time, she was amazed at the cleanliness
      of the lodging. There was no denying it, one might blow about the place
      without raising a grain of dust; and the tiled floor shone like a mirror.
      Madame Goujet made her enter her son's room, just to see it. It was pretty
      and white like the room of a young girl; an iron bedstead with muslin
      curtains, a table, a washstand, and a narrow bookcase hanging against the
      wall. Then there were pictures all over the place, figures cut out,
      colored engravings nailed up with four tacks, and portraits of all kinds
      of persons taken from the illustrated papers.
    

      Madame Goujet said with a smile that her son was a big baby. He found that
      reading in the evening put him to sleep, so he amused himself looking at
      pictures. Gervaise spent an hour with her neighbor without noticing the
      passing of time. Madame Goujet had gone to sit by the window and work on
      her lace. Gervaise was fascinated by the hundreds of pins that held the
      lace, and she felt happy to be there, breathing in the good clean
      atmosphere of this home where such a delicate task enforced a sort of
      meditative silence.
    

      The Goujets were worth visiting. They worked long hours, and placed more
      than a quarter of their fortnight's earnings in the savings-bank. In the
      neighborhood everyone nodded to them, everyone talked of their savings.
      Goujet never had a hole in his clothes, always went out in a clean short
      blue blouse, without a stain. He was very polite, and even a trifle timid,
      in spite of his broad shoulders. The washerwomen at the end of the street
      laughed to see him hold down his head when he passed them. He did not like
      their oaths, and thought it disgusting that women should be constantly
      uttering foul words. One day, however, he came home tipsy. Then Madame
      Goujet, for sole reproach, held his father's portrait before him, a daub
      of a painting hidden away at the bottom of a drawer; and, ever since that
      lesson, Goujet never drank more than was good for him, without however,
      any hatred of wine, for wine is necessary to the workman. On Sundays he
      walked out with his mother, who took hold of his arm. He would generally
      conduct her to Vincennes; at other times they would go to the theatre. His
      mother remained his passion. He still spoke to her as though he were a
      little child. Square-headed, his skin toughened by the wielding of the
      heavy hammer, he somewhat resembled the larger animals: dull of intellect,
      though good-natured all the same.
    

      In the early days of their acquaintance, Gervaise embarrassed him
      immensely. Then in a few weeks he became accustomed to her. He watched for
      her that he might carry up her parcels, treated her as a sister, with an
      abrupt familiarity, and cut out pictures for her. One morning, however,
      having opened her door without knocking, he beheld her half undressed,
      washing her neck; and, for a week, he did not dare to look her in the
      face, so much so that he ended by making her blush herself.
    

      Young Cassis, with the casual wit of a born Parisian, called Golden Mouth
      a dolt. It was all right not to get drunk all the time or chase women, but
      still, a man must be a man, or else he might as well wear skirts. Coupeau
      teased him in front of Gervaise, accusing him of making up to all the
      women in the neighborhood. Goujet vigorously defended himself against the
      charge.
    

      But this didn't prevent the two workingmen from becoming best of friends.
      They went off to work together in the mornings and sometimes had a glass
      of beer together on the way home.
    

      It eventually came about that Golden Mouth could render a service to Young
      Cassis, one of those favors that is remembered forever.
    

      It was the second of December. The zinc-worker decided, just for the fun
      of it, to go into the city and watch the rioting. He didn't really care
      about the Republic, or Napoleon or anything like that, but he liked the
      smell of gunpowder and the sound of the rifles firing. He would have been
      arrested as a rioter if the blacksmith hadn't turned up at the barricade
      at just that moment and helped him escape. Goujet was very serious as they
      walked back up the Rue du Faubourg Poissonniere. He was interested in
      politics and believed in the Republic. But he had never fired a gun
      because the common people were getting tired of fighting battles for the
      middle classes who always seemed to get the benefit of them.
    

      As they reached the top of the slope of the Rue du Faubourg Poissonniere,
      Goujet turned to look back at Paris and the mobs. After all, some day
      people would be sorry that they just stood by and did nothing. Coupeau
      laughed at this, saying you would be pretty stupid to risk your neck just
      to preserve the twenty-five francs a day for the lazybones in the
      Legislative Assembly. That evening the Coupeaus invited the Goujets to
      dinner. After desert Young Cassis and Golden Mouth kissed each other on
      the cheek. Their lives were joined till death.
    

      For three years the existence of the two families went on, on either side
      of the landing, without an event. Gervaise was able to take care of her
      daughter and still work most of the week. She was now a skilled worker on
      fine laundry and earned up to three francs a day. She decided to put
      Etienne, now nearly eight, into a small boarding-school on Rue de Chartres
      for five francs a week. Despite the expenses for the two children, they
      were able to save twenty or thirty francs each month. Once they had six
      hundred francs saved, Gervaise often lay awake thinking of her ambitious
      dream: she wanted to rent a small shop, hire workers, and go into the
      laundry business herself. If this effort worked, they would have a steady
      income from savings in twenty years. They could retire and live in the
      country.
    

      Yet she hesitated, saying she was looking for the right shop. She was
      giving herself time to think it over. Their savings were safe in the bank,
      and growing larger. So, in three years' time she had only fulfilled one of
      her dreams—she had bought a clock. But even this clock, made of
      rosewood with twined columns and a pendulum of gilded brass, was being
      paid for in installments of twenty-two sous each Monday for a year. She
      got upset if Coupeau tried to wind it; she liked to be the only one to
      lift off the glass dome. It was under the glass dome, behind the clock,
      that she hid her bank book. Sometimes, when she was dreaming of her shop,
      she would stare fixedly at the clock, lost in thought.
    

      The Coupeaus went out nearly every Sunday with the Goujets. They were
      pleasant little excursions, sometimes to have some fried fish at
      Saint-Ouen, at others a rabbit at Vincennes, in the garden of some
      eating-house keeper without any grand display. The men drank sufficient to
      quench their thirst, and returned home as right as nine-pins, giving their
      arms to the ladies. In the evening before going to bed, the two families
      made up accounts and each paid half the expenses; and there was never the
      least quarrel about a sou more or less.
    

      The Lorilleuxs became jealous of the Goujets. It seemed strange to them to
      see Young Cassis and Clump-clump going places all the time with strangers
      instead of their own relations. But, that's the way it was; some folks
      didn't care a bit about their family. Now that they had saved a few sous,
      they thought they were really somebody. Madame Lorilleux was much annoyed
      to see her brother getting away from her influence and begin to
      continually run down Gervaise to everyone. On the other hand, Madame Lerat
      took the young wife's side. Mother Coupeau tried to get along with
      everybody. She only wanted to be welcomed by all three of her children.
      Now that her eyesight was getting dimmer and dimmer she only had one
      regular house cleaning job but she was able to pick up some small jobs now
      and again.
    

      On the day on which Nana was three years old, Coupeau, on returning home
      in the evening, found Gervaise quite upset. She refused to talk about it;
      there was nothing at all the matter with her, she said. But, as she had
      the table all wrong, standing still with the plates in her hands, absorbed
      in deep reflection, her husband insisted upon knowing what was the matter.
    

      "Well, it is this," she ended by saying, "the little draper's shop in the
      Rue de la Goutte-d'Or, is to let. I saw it only an hour ago, when going to
      buy some cotton. It gave me quite a turn."
    

      It was a very decent shop, and in that big house where they dreamed of
      living in former days. There was the shop, a back room, and two other
      rooms to the right and left; in short, just what they required. The rooms
      were rather small, but well placed. Only, she considered they wanted too
      much; the landlord talked of five hundred francs.
    

      "So you've been over the place, and asked the price?" said Coupeau.
    

      "Oh! you know, only out of curiosity!" replied she, affecting an air of
      indifference. "One looks about, and goes in wherever there's a bill up—that
      doesn't bind one to anything. But that shop is altogether too dear.
      Besides, it would perhaps be foolish of me to set up in business."
    

      However, after dinner, she again referred to the draper's shop. She drew a
      plan of the place on the margin of a newspaper. And, little by little, she
      talked it over, measuring the corners, and arranging the rooms, as though
      she were going to move all her furniture in there on the morrow. Then
      Coupeau advised her to take it, seeing how she wanted to do so; she would
      certainly never find anything decent under five hundred francs; besides
      they might perhaps get a reduction. He knew only one objection to it and
      that was living in the same house as the Lorilleux, whom she could not
      bear.
    

      Gervaise declared that she wasn't mad at anybody. So much did she want her
      own shop that she even spoke up for the Lorilleuxs, saying that they
      weren't mean at heart and that she would be able to get along just fine
      with them. When they went to bed, Coupeau fell asleep immediately, but she
      stayed awake, planning how she could arrange the new place even though she
      hadn't yet made up her mind completely.
    

      On the morrow, when she was alone, she could not resist removing the glass
      cover from the clock, and taking a peep at the savings-bank book. To think
      that her shop was there, in those dirty pages, covered with ugly writing!
      Before going off to her work, she consulted Madame Goujet, who highly
      approved her project of setting up in business for herself; with a husband
      like hers, a good fellow who did not drink, she was certain of getting on,
      and of not having her earnings squandered. At the luncheon hour Gervaise
      even called on the Lorilleuxs to ask their advice; she did not wish to
      appear to be doing anything unknown to the family. Madame Lorilleux was
      struck all of a heap. What! Clump-clump was going in for a shop now! And
      her heart bursting with envy, she stammered, and tried to pretend to be
      pleased: no doubt the shop was a convenient one—Gervaise was right
      in taking it. However, when she had somewhat recovered, she and her
      husband talked of the dampness of the courtyard, of the poor light of the
      rooms on the ground floor. Oh! it was a good place for rheumatism. Yet, if
      she had made up her mind to take it, their observations, of course, would
      not make her alter her decision.
    

      That evening Gervaise frankly owned with a laugh that she would have
      fallen ill if she had been prevented from having the shop. Nevertheless,
      before saying "it's done!" she wished to take Coupeau to see the place,
      and try and obtain a reduction in the rent.
    

      "Very well, then, to-morrow, if you like," said her husband. "You can come
      and fetch me towards six o'clock at the house where I'm working, in the
      Rue de la Nation, and we'll call in at the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or on our
      way home."
    

      Coupeau was then finishing the roofing of a new three-storied house. It so
      happened that on that day he was to fix the last sheets of zinc. As the
      roof was almost flat, he had set up his bench on it, a wide shutter
      supported on two trestles. A beautiful May sun was setting, giving a
      golden hue to the chimney-pots. And, right up at the top, against the
      clear sky, the workman was quietly cutting up his zinc with a big pair of
      shears, leaning over the bench, and looking like a tailor in his shop
      cutting out a pair of trousers. Close to the wall of the next house, his
      boy, a youngster of seventeen, thin and fair, was keeping the fire of the
      chafing dish blazing by the aid of an enormous pair of bellows, each puff
      of which raised a cloud of sparks.
    

      "Hi! Zidore, put in the irons!" cried Coupeau.
    

      The boy stuck the soldering irons into the midst of the charcoal, which
      looked a pale rose color in the daylight. Then he resumed blowing. Coupeau
      held the last sheet of zinc. It had to be placed at the edge of the roof,
      close to the gutter-pipe; there was an abrupt slant there, and the gaping
      void of the street opened beneath. The zinc-worker, just as though in his
      own home, wearing his list-shoes, advanced, dragging his feet, and
      whistling the air, "Oh! the little lambs." Arrived in front of the
      opening, he let himself down, and then, supporting himself with one knee
      against the masonry of a chimney-stack, remained half-way out over the
      pavement below. One of his legs dangled. When he leant back to call that
      young viper, Zidore, he held on to a corner of the masonry, on account of
      the street beneath him.
    

      "You confounded dawdler! Give me the irons! It's no use looking up in the
      air, you skinny beggar! The larks won't tumble into your mouth already
      cooked!"
    

      But Zidore did not hurry himself. He was interested in the neighboring
      roofs, and in a cloud of smoke which rose from the other side of Paris,
      close to Grenelle; it was very likely a fire. However, he came and laid
      down on his stomach, his head over the opening, and he passed the irons to
      Coupeau. Then the latter commenced to solder the sheet. He squatted, he
      stretched, always managing to balance himself, sometimes seated on one
      side, at other times standing on the tip of one foot, often only holding
      on by a finger. He had a confounded assurance, the devil's own cheek,
      familiar with danger, and braving it. It knew him. It was the street that
      was afraid, not he. As he kept his pipe in his mouth, he turned round
      every now and then to spit onto the pavement.
    

      "Look, there's Madame Boche," he suddenly exclaimed and called down to
      her. "Hi! Madame Boche."
    

      He had just caught sight of the concierge crossing the road. She raised
      her head and recognised him, and a conversation ensued between them. She
      hid her hands under her apron, her nose elevated in the air. He, standing
      up now, his left arm passed round a chimney-pot, leant over.
    

      "Have you seen my wife?" asked he.
    

      "No, I haven't," replied the concierge. "Is she around here?"
    

      "She's coming to fetch me. And are they all well at home?"
    

      "Why, yes, thanks; I'm the most ill, as you see. I'm going to the Chaussee
      Clignancourt to buy a small leg of mutton. The butcher near the
      Moulin-Rouge only charges sixteen sous."
    

      They raised their voices, because a vehicle was passing. In the wide,
      deserted Rue de la Nation, their words, shouted out with all their might,
      had only caused a little old woman to come to her window; and this little
      old woman remained there leaning out, giving herself the treat of a grand
      emotion by watching that man on the roof over the way, as though she
      expected to see him fall, from one minute to another.
    

      "Well! Good evening," cried Madame Boche. "I won't disturb you."
    

      Coupeau turned round, and took back the iron that Zidore was holding for
      him. But just as the concierge was moving off, she caught sight of
      Gervaise on the other side of the way, holding Nana by the hand. She was
      already raising her head to tell the zinc-worker, when the young woman
      closed her mouth by an energetic gesture, and, in a low voice, so as not
      to be heard up there, she told her of her fear: she was afraid, by showing
      herself suddenly, of giving her husband a shock which might make him lose
      his balance. During the four years, she had only been once to fetch him at
      his work. That day was the second time. She could not witness it, her
      blood turned cold when she beheld her old man between heaven and earth, in
      places where even the sparrows would not venture.
    

      "No doubt, it's not pleasant," murmured Madame Boche. "My husband's a
      tailor, so I have none of these terrors."
    

      "If you only knew, in the early days," said Gervaise again, "I had frights
      from morning till night. I was always seeing him on a stretcher, with his
      head smashed. Now, I don't think of it so much. One gets used to
      everything. Bread must be earned. All the same, it's a precious dear loaf,
      for one risks one's bones more than is fair."
    

      And she left off speaking, hiding Nana in her skirt, fearing a cry from
      the little one. Very pale, she looked up in spite of herself. At that
      moment Coupeau was soldering the extreme edge of the sheet close to the
      gutter; he slid down as far as possible, but without being able to reach
      the edge. Then, he risked himself with those slow movements peculiar to
      workmen. For an instant he was immediately over the pavement, no long
      holding on, all absorbed in his work; and, from below, one could see the
      little white flame of the solder frizzling up beneath the carefully
      wielded iron. Gervaise, speechless, her throat contracted with anguish,
      had clasped her hands together, and held them up in mechanical gesture of
      prayer. But she breathed freely as Coupeau got up and returned back along
      the roof, without hurrying himself, and taking the time to spit once more
      into the street.
    

      "Ah! ah! so you've been playing the spy on me!" cried he, gaily, on
      beholding her. "She's been making a stupid of herself, eh, Madame Boche?
      She wouldn't call to me. Wait a bit, I shall have finished in ten
      minutes."
    

      All that remained to do was to fix the top of the chimney—a mere
      nothing. The laundress and the concierge waited on the pavement,
      discussing the neighborhood, and giving an eye to Nana, to prevent her
      from dabbling in the gutter, where she wanted to look for little fishes;
      and the two women kept glancing up at the roof, smiling and nodding their
      heads, as though to imply that they were not losing patience. The old
      woman opposite had not left her window, had continued watching the man,
      and waiting.
    

      "Whatever can she have to look at, that old she-goat?" said Madame Boche.
      "What a mug she has!"
    

      One could hear the loud voice of the zinc-worker up above singing, "Ah!
      it's nice to gather strawberries!" Bending over his bench, he was now
      artistically cutting out his zinc. With his compasses he traced a line,
      and he detached a large fan-shaped piece with the aid of a pair of curved
      shears; then he lightly bent this fan with his hammer into the form of a
      pointed mushroom. Zidore was again blowing the charcoal in the
      chafing-dish. The sun was setting behind the house in a brilliant rosy
      light, which was gradually becoming paler, and turning to a delicate
      lilac. And, at this quiet hour of the day, right up against the sky, the
      silhouettes of the two workmen, looking inordinately large, with the dark
      line of the bench, and the strange profile of the bellows, stood out from
      the limpid back-ground of the atmosphere.
    

      When the chimney-top was got into shape, Coupeau called out: "Zidore! The
      irons!"
    

      But Zidore had disappeared. The zinc-worker swore, and looked about for
      him, even calling him through the open skylight of the loft. At length he
      discovered him on a neighboring roof, two houses off. The young rogue was
      taking a walk, exploring the environs, his fair scanty locks blowing in
      the breeze, his eyes blinking as they beheld the immensity of Paris.
    

      "I say, lazy bones! Do you think you're having a day in the country?"
      asked Coupeau, in a rage. "You're like Monsieur Beranger, composing
      verses, perhaps! Will you give me those irons! Did any one ever see such a
      thing! Strolling about on the house-tops! Why not bring your sweetheart at
      once, and tell her of your love? Will you give me those irons? You
      confounded little shirker!"
    

      He finished his soldering, and called to Gervaise: "There, it's done. I'm
      coming down."
    

      The chimney-pot to which he had to fix the flue was in the middle of the
      roof. Gervaise, who was no longer uneasy, continued to smile as she
      followed his movements. Nana, amused all on a sudden by the view of her
      father, clapped her little hands. She had seated herself on the pavement
      to see the better up there.
    

      "Papa! Papa!" called she with all her might. "Papa! Just look!"
    

      The zinc-worker wished to lean forward, but his foot slipped. Then
      suddenly, stupidly, like a cat with its legs entangled, he rolled and
      descended the slight slope of the roof without being able to grab hold of
      anything.
    

      "Mon Dieu," he cried in a choked voice.
    

      And he fell. His body described a gentle curve, turned twice over on
      itself, and came smashing into the middle of the street with the dull thud
      of a bundle of clothes thrown from on high.
    

      Gervaise, stupefied, her throat rent by one great cry, stood holding up
      her arms. Some passers-by hastened to the spot; a crowd soon formed.
      Madame Boche, utterly upset, her knees bending under her, took Nana in her
      arms, to hide her head and prevent her seeing. Meanwhile, the little old
      woman opposite quietly closed her window, as though satisfied.
    

      Four men ended by carrying Coupeau into a chemist's, at the corner of the
      Rue des Poissonniers; and he remained there on a blanket, in the middle of
      the shop, whilst they sent to the Lariboisiere Hospital for a stretcher. He
      was still breathing.
    

      Gervaise, sobbing, was kneeling on the floor beside him, her face smudged
      with tears, stunned and unseeing. Her hands would reach to feel her
      husband's limbs with the utmost gentleness. Then she would draw back as
      she had been warned not to touch him. But a few seconds later she would
      touch him to assure herself that he was still warm, feeling somehow that
      she was helping him.
    

      When the stretcher at length arrived, and they talked of starting for the
      hospital, she got up, saying violently:
    

      "No, no, not to the hospital! We live in the Rue Neuve de la Goutte-d'Or."
    

      It was useless for them to explain to her that the illness would cost her
      a great deal of money, if she took her husband home. She obstinately
      repeated:
    

      "Rue Neuve de la Goutte-d'Or; I will show you the house. What can it
      matter to you? I've got money. He's my husband, isn't he? He's mine, and I
      want him at home."
    

      And they had to take Coupeau to his own home. When the stretcher was
      carried through the crowd which was crushing up against the chemist's
      shop, the women of the neighborhood were excitedly talking of Gervaise.
      She limped, the dolt, but all the same she had some pluck. She would be
      sure to save her old man; whilst at the hospital the doctors let the
      patients die who were very bad, so as not to have the bother of trying to
      cure them. Madame Boche, after taking Nana home with her, returned, and
      gave her account of the accident, with interminable details, and still
      feeling agitated with the emotion she had passed through.
    

      "I was going to buy a leg of mutton; I was there, I saw him fall,"
      repeated she. "It was all through the little one; he turned to look at
      her, and bang! Ah! good heavens! I never want to see such a sight again.
      However, I must be off to get my leg of mutton."
    

      For a week Coupeau was very bad. The family, the neighbors, everyone,
      expected to see him turn for the worse at any moment. The doctor—a
      very expensive doctor, who charged five francs for each visit—apprehended
      internal injuries, and these words filled everyone with fear. It was said
      in the neighborhood that the zinc-worker's heart had been injured by the
      shock. Gervaise alone, looking pale through her nights of watching,
      serious and resolute, shrugged her shoulders. Her old man's right leg was
      broken, everyone knew that; it would be set for him, and that was all. As
      for the rest, the injured heart, that was nothing. She knew how to restore
      a heart with ceaseless care. She was certain of getting him well and
      displayed magnificent faith. She stayed close by him and caressed him
      gently during the long bouts of fever without a moment of doubt. She was
      on her feet continuously for a whole week, completely absorbed by her
      determination to save him. She forgot the street outside, the entire city,
      and even her own children. On the ninth day, the doctor finally said that
      Coupeau would live. Gervaise collapsed into a chair, her body limp from
      fatigue. That night she consented to sleep for two hours with her head
      against the foot of the bed.
    

      Coupeau's accident had created quite a commotion in the family. Mother
      Coupeau passed the nights with Gervaise; but as early as nine o'clock she
      fell asleep on a chair. Every evening, on returning from work, Madame
      Lerat went a long round out of her way to inquire how her brother was
      getting on. At first the Lorilleuxs had called two or three times a day,
      offering to sit up and watch, and even bringing an easy-chair for
      Gervaise. Then it was not long before there were disputes as to the proper
      way to nurse invalids. Madame Lorilleux said that she had saved enough
      people's lives to know how to go about it. She accused the young wife of
      pushing her aside, of driving her away from her own brother's bed.
      Certainly that Clump-clump ought to be concerned about Coupeau's getting
      well, for if she hadn't gone to Rue de la Nation to disturb him at his
      job, he would never had fallen. Only, the way she was taking care of him,
      she would certainly finish him.
    

      When Gervaise saw that Coupeau was out of danger, she ceased guarding his
      bedside with so much jealous fierceness. Now, they could no longer kill
      him, and she let people approach without mistrust. The family invaded the
      room. The convalescence would be a very long one; the doctor had talked of
      four months. Then, during the long hours the zinc-worker slept, the
      Lorilleux talked of Gervaise as of a fool. She hadn't done any good by
      having her husband at home. At the hospital they would have cured him
      twice as quickly. Lorilleux would have liked to have been ill, to have
      caught no matter what, just to show her that he did not hesitate for a
      moment to go to Lariboisiere. Madame Lorilleux knew a lady who had just
      come from there. Well! She had had chicken to eat morning and night.
    

      Again and again the two of them went over their estimate of how much four
      months of convalescence would cost; workdays lost, the doctor and the
      medicines, and afterward good wine and fresh meat. If the Coupeaus only
      used up their small savings, they would be very lucky indeed. They would
      probably have to go into debt. Well, that was to be expected and it was
      their business. They had no right to expect any help from the family,
      which couldn't afford the luxury of keeping an invalid at home. It was
      just Clump-clump's bad luck, wasn't it? Why couldn't she have done as
      others did and let her man be taken to hospital? This just showed how
      stuck up she was.
    

      One evening Madame Lorilleux had the spitefulness to ask Gervaise
      suddenly:
    

      "Well! And your shop, when are you going to take it?"
    

      "Yes," chuckled Lorilleux, "the landlord's still waiting for you."
    

      Gervaise was astonished. She had completely forgotten the shop; but she
      saw the wicked joy of those people, at the thought that she would no
      longer be able to take it, and she was bursting with anger. From that
      evening, in fact, they watched for every opportunity to twit her about her
      hopeless dream. When any one spoke of some impossible wish, they would say
      that it might be realized on the day that Gervaise started in business, in
      a beautiful shop opening onto the street. And behind her back they would
      laugh fit to split their sides. She did not like to think such an unkind
      thing, but, really, the Lorilleuxs now seemed to be very pleased at
      Coupeau's accident, as it prevented her setting up as a laundress in the
      Rue de la Goutte-d'Or.
    

      Then she also wished to laugh, and show them how willingly she parted with
      the money for the sake of curing her husband. Each time she took the
      savings-bank book from beneath the glass clock-tower in their presence,
      she would say gaily:
    

      "I'm going out; I'm going to rent my shop."
    

      She had not been willing to withdraw the money all at once. She took it
      out a hundred francs at a time, so as not to keep such a pile of gold and
      silver in her drawer; then, too, she vaguely hoped for some miracle, some
      sudden recovery, which would enable them not to part with the entire sum.
      At each journey to the savings-bank, on her return home, she added up on a
      piece of paper the money they had still left there. It was merely for the
      sake of order. Their bank account might be getting smaller all the time,
      yet she went on with her quiet smile and common-sense attitude, keeping
      the account straight. It was a consolation to be able to use this money
      for such a good purpose, to have had it when faced with their misfortune.
    

      While Coupeau was bed-ridden the Goujets were very kind to Gervaise.
      Madame Goujet was always ready to assist. She never went to shop without
      stopping to ask Gervaise if there was anything she needed, sugar or butter
      or salt. She always brought over hot bouillon on the evenings she cooked
      pot au feu. Sometimes, when Gervaise seemed to have too much to do,
      Madame Goujet helped her do the dishes, or cleaned the kitchen herself.
      Goujet took her water pails every morning and filled them at the tap on
      Rue des Poissonniers, saving her two sous a day. After dinner, if no
      family came to visit, the Goujets would come over to visit with the
      Coupeaus.
    

      Until ten o'clock, the blacksmith would smoke his pipe and watch Gervaise
      busy with her invalid. He would not speak ten words the entire evening. He
      was moved to pity by the sight of her pouring Coupeau's tea and medicine
      into a cup, or stirring the sugar in it very carefully so as to make no
      sound with the spoon. It stirred him deeply when she would lean over
      Coupeau and speak in her soft voice. Never before had he known such a fine
      woman. Her limp increased the credit due her for wearing herself out doing
      things for her husband all day long. She never sat down for ten minutes,
      not even to eat. She was always running to the chemist's. And then she
      would still keep the house clean, not even a speck of dust. She never
      complained, no matter how exhausted she became. Goujet developed a very
      deep affection for Gervaise in this atmosphere of unselfish devotion.
    

      One day he said to the invalid, "Well, old man, now you're patched up
      again! I wasn't worried about you. Your wife works miracles."
    

      Goujet was supposed to be getting married. His mother had found a suitable
      girl, a lace-mender like herself, whom she was urging him to marry. He had
      agreed so as not to hurt her feelings and the wedding had been set for
      early September. Money had long since been saved to set them up in
      housekeeping. However, when Gervaise referred to his coming marriage, he
      shook his head, saying, "Not every woman is like you, Madame Coupeau. If
      all women were like you, I'd marry ten of them."
    

      At the end of two months, Coupeau was able to get up. He did not go far,
      only from the bed to the window, and even then Gervaise had to support
      him. There he would sit down in the easy-chair the Lorilleuxs had brought,
      with his right leg stretched out on a stool. This joker, who used to laugh
      at the people who slipped down on frosty days, felt greatly put out by his
      accident. He had no philosophy. He had spent those two months in bed, in
      cursing, and in worrying the people about him. It was not an existence,
      really, to pass one's life on one's back, with a pin all tied up and as
      stiff as a sausage. Ah, he certainly knew the ceiling by heart; there was
      a crack, at the corner of the alcove, that he could have drawn with his
      eyes shut. Then, when he was made comfortable in the easy-chair, it was
      another grievance. Would he be fixed there for long, just like a mummy?
    

      Nobody ever passed along the street, so it was no fun to watch. Besides,
      it stank of bleach water all day. No, he was just growing old; he'd have
      given ten years of his life just to go see how the fortifications were
      getting along. He kept going on about his fate. It wasn't right, what had
      happened to him. A good worker like him, not a loafer or a drunkard, he
      could have understood in that case.
    

      "Papa Coupeau," said he, "broke his neck one day that he'd been boozing. I
      can't say that it was deserved, but anyhow it was explainable. I had had
      nothing since my lunch, was perfectly quiet, and without a drop of liquor
      in my body; and yet I came to grief just because I wanted to turn round to
      smile at Nana! Don't you think that's too much? If there is a providence,
      it certainly arranges things in a very peculiar manner. I, for one, shall
      never believe in it."
    

      And when at last he was able to use his legs, he retained a secret grudge
      against work. It was a handicraft full of misfortunes to pass one's days,
      like the cats, on the roofs of the houses. The employers were no fools!
      They sent you to your death—being far too cowardly to venture
      themselves on a ladder—and stopped at home in safety at their
      fire-sides without caring a hang for the poorer classes; and he got to the
      point of saying that everyone ought to fix the zinc himself on his own
      house. Mon Dieu! It was the only fair way to do it! If you don't
      want the rain to come in, do the work yourself. He regretted he hadn't
      learned another trade, something more pleasant, something less dangerous,
      maybe cabinetmaking. It was really his father's fault. Lots of fathers
      have the foolish habit of shoving their sons into their own line of work.
    

      For another two months Coupeau hobbled about on crutches. He had first of
      all managed to get as far as the street, and smoke his pipe in front of
      the door. Then he had managed to reach the exterior Boulevard, dragging
      himself along in the sunshine, and remaining for hours on one of the
      seats. Gaiety returned to him; his infernal tongue got sharper in these
      long hours of idleness. And with the pleasure of living, he gained there a
      delight in doing nothing, an indolent feeling took possession of his
      limbs, and his muscles gradually glided into a very sweet slumber. It was
      the slow victory of laziness, which took advantage of his convalescence to
      obtain possession of his body and unnerve him with its tickling. He
      regained his health, as thorough a banterer as before, thinking life
      beautiful, and not seeing why it should not last for ever.
    

      As soon as he could get about without the crutches, he made longer walks,
      often visiting construction jobs to see old comrades. He would stand with
      his arms folded, sneering and shaking his head, ridiculing the workers
      slaving at the job, stretching out his leg to show them what you got for
      wearing yourself out. Being able to stand about and mock others while they
      were working satisfied his spite against hard work. No doubt he'd have to
      go back to it, but he'd put it off as long as possible. He had a reason
      now to be lazy. Besides, it seemed good to him to loaf around like a bum!
    

      On the afternoons when Coupeau felt dull, he would call on the Lorilleuxs.
      The latter would pity him immensely, and attract him with all sorts of
      amiable attentions. During the first years following his marriage, he had
      avoided them, thanks to Gervaise's influence. Now they regained their sway
      over him by twitting him about being afraid of his wife. He was no man,
      that was evident! The Lorilleuxs, however, showed great discretion, and
      were loud in their praise of the laundress's good qualities. Coupeau,
      without as yet coming to wrangling, swore to the latter that his sister
      adored her, and requested that she would behave more amiably to her. The
      first quarrel which the couple had occurred one evening on account of
      Etienne. The zinc-worker had passed the afternoon with the Lorilleuxs. On
      arriving home, as the dinner was not quite ready, and the children were
      whining for their soup, he suddenly turned upon Etienne, and boxed his
      ears soundly. And during an hour he did not cease to grumble; the brat was
      not his; he did not know why he allowed him to be in the place; he would
      end by turning him out into the street. Up till then he had tolerated the
      youngster without all that fuss. On the morrow he talked of his dignity.
      Three days after, he kept kicking the little fellow, morning and evening,
      so much so that the child, whenever he heard him coming, bolted into the
      Goujets' where the old lace-mender kept a corner of the table clear for
      him to do his lessons.
    

      Gervaise had for some time past, returned to work. She no longer had the
      trouble of looking under the glass cover of the clock; all the savings
      were gone; and she had to work hard, work for four, for there were four to
      feed now. She alone maintained them. Whenever she heard people pitying
      her, she at once found excuses for Coupeau. Recollect! He had suffered so
      much; it was not surprising if his disposition had soured! But it would
      pass off when his health returned. And if any one hinted that Coupeau
      seemed all right again, that he could very well return to work, she
      protested: No, no; not yet! She did not want to see him take to his bed
      again. They would allow her to know best what the doctor said, perhaps! It
      was she who prevented him returning to work, telling him every morning to
      take his time and not to force himself. She even slipped twenty sou pieces
      into his waistcoat pocket. Coupeau accepted this as something perfectly
      natural. He was always complaining of aches and pains so that she would
      coddle him. At the end of six months he was still convalescing.
    

      Now, whenever he went to watch others working, he was always ready to join
      his comrades in downing a shot. It wasn't so bad, after all. They had
      their fun, and they never stayed more than five minutes. That couldn't
      hurt anybody. Only a hypocrite would say he went in because he wanted a
      drink. No wonder they had laughed at him in the past. A glass of wine
      never hurt anybody. He only drank wine though, never brandy. Wine never
      made you sick, didn't get you drunk, and helped you to live longer. Soon
      though, several times, after a day of idleness in going from one building
      job to another, he came home half drunk. On those occasions Gervaise
      pretended to have a terrible headache and kept their door closed so that
      the Goujets wouldn't hear Coupeau's drunken babblings.
    

      Little by little, the young woman lost her cheerfulness. Morning and
      evening she went to the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or to look at the shop, which
      was still to be let; and she would hide herself as though she were
      committing some childish prank unworthy of a grown-up person. This shop
      was beginning to turn her brain. At night-time, when the light was out she
      experienced the charm of some forbidden pleasure by thinking of it with
      her eyes open. She again made her calculations; two hundred and fifty
      francs for the rent, one hundred and fifty francs for utensils and moving,
      one hundred francs in hand to keep them going for a fortnight—in all
      five hundred francs at the very lowest figure. If she was not continually
      thinking of it aloud, it was for fear she should be suspected of
      regretting the savings swallowed up by Coupeau's illness. She often became
      quite pale, having almost allowed her desire to escape her and catching
      back her words, quite confused as though she had been thinking of
      something wicked. Now they would have to work for four or five years
      before they would succeed in saving such a sum. Her regret was at not
      being able to start in business at once; she would have earned all the
      home required, without counting on Coupeau, letting him take months to get
      into the way of work again; she would no longer have been uneasy, but
      certain of the future and free from the secret fears which sometimes
      seized her when he returned home very gay and singing, and relating some
      joke of that animal My-Boots, whom he had treated to a drink.
    

      One evening, Gervaise being at home alone, Goujet entered, and did not
      hurry off again, according to his habit. He seated himself, and smoked as
      he watched her. He probably had something very serious to say; he thought
      it over, let it ripen without being able to put it into suitable words. At
      length, after a long silence, he appeared to make up his mind, and took
      his pipe out of his mouth to say all in a breath:
    

      "Madame Gervaise, will you allow me to lend you some money?"
    

      She was leaning over an open drawer, looking for some dish-cloths. She got
      up, her face very red. He must have seen her then, in the morning,
      standing in ecstacy before the shop for close upon ten minutes. He was
      smiling in an embarrassed way, as though he had made some insulting
      proposal. But she hastily refused. Never would she accept money from any
      one without knowing when she would be able to return it. Then also it was
      a question of too large an amount. And as he insisted, in a frightened
      manner, she ended by exclaiming:
    

      "But your marriage? I certainly can't take the money you've been saving
      for your marriage!"
    

      "Oh, don't let that bother you," he replied, turning red in his turn. "I'm
      not going to be married now. That was just an idea, you know. Really, I
      would much sooner lend you the money."
    

      Then they both held down their heads. There was something very pleasant
      between them to which they did not give expression. And Gervaise accepted.
      Goujet had told his mother. They crossed the landing, and went to see her
      at once. The lace-mender was very grave, and looked rather sad as she bent
      her face over her tambour-frame. She would not thwart her son, but she no
      longer approved Gervaise's project; and she plainly told her why. Coupeau
      was going to the bad; Coupeau would swallow up her shop. She especially
      could not forgive the zinc-worker for having refused to learn to read
      during his convalescence. The blacksmith had offered to teach him, but the
      other had sent him to the right about, saying that learning made people
      get thin. This had almost caused a quarrel between the two workmen; each
      went his own way. Madame Goujet, however, seeing her big boy's beseeching
      glances, behaved very kindly to Gervaise. It was settled that they would
      lend their neighbors five hundred francs; the latter were to repay the
      amount by installments of twenty francs a month; it would last as long as
      it lasted.
    

      "I say, the blacksmith's sweet on you," exclaimed Coupeau, laughing, when
      he heard what had taken place. "Oh, I'm quite easy; he's too big a muff.
      We'll pay him back his money. But, really, if he had to deal with some
      people, he'd find himself pretty well duped."
    

      On the morrow the Coupeaus took the shop. All day long, Gervaise was
      running from Rue Neuve de la Goutte-d'Or. When the neighbors beheld her
      pass thus, nimble and delighted to the extent that she no longer limped,
      they said she must have undergone some operation.
    

      
 
    

      It so happened that the Boches had left the Rue des Poissonniers at the
      April quarter, and were now taking charge of the great house in the Rue de
      la Goutte-d'Or. It was a curious coincidence, all the same! One thing that
      worried Gervaise who had lived so quietly in her lodgings in the Rue
      Neuve, was the thought of again being under the subjection of some
      unpleasant person, with whom she would be continually quarrelling, either
      on account of water spilt in the passage or of a door shut too noisily at
      night-time. Concierges are such a disagreeable class! But it would be a
      pleasure to be with the Boches. They knew one another—they would
      always get on well together. It would be just like members of the same
      family.
    

      On the day the Coupeaus went to sign their lease, Gervaise felt her heart
      swollen with pride as she passed through the high doorway. She was then at
      length going to live in that house as vast as a little town, with its
      interminable staircases, and passages as long and winding as streets. She
      was excited by everything: the gray walls with varicolored rugs hanging
      from windows to dry in the sun, the dingy courtyard with as many holes in
      its pavement as a public square, the hum of activity coming through the
      walls. She felt joy that she was at last about to realize her ambition.
      She also felt fear that she would fail and be crushed in the endless
      struggle against the poverty and starvation she could feel breathing down
      her neck. It seemed to her that she was doing something very bold,
      throwing herself into the midst of some machinery in motion, as she
      listened to the blacksmith's hammers and the cabinetmakers' planes,
      hammering and hissing in the depths of the work-shops on the ground floor.
      On that day the water flowing from the dyer's under the entrance porch was
      a very pale apple green. She smilingly stepped over it; to her the color
      was a pleasant omen.
    

      The meeting with the landlord was to take place in the Boches' room.
      Monsieur Marescot, a wealthy cutler of the Rue de la Paix, had at one time
      turned a grindstone through the streets. He was now stated to be worth
      several millions. He was a man of fifty-five, large and big-boned. Even
      though he now wore a decoration in his button-hole, his huge hands were
      still those of a former workingman. It was his joy to carry off the
      scissors and knives of his tenants, to sharpen them himself, for the fun
      of it. He often stayed for hours with his concierges, closed up in the
      darkness of their lodges, going over the accounts. That's where he did all
      his business. He was now seated by Madame Boche's kitchen table, listening
      to her story of how the dressmaker on the third floor, staircase A, had
      used a filthy word in refusing to pay her rent. He had had to work
      precious hard once upon a time. But work was the high road to everything.
      And, after counting the two hundred and fifty francs for the first two
      quarters in advance, and dropping them into his capacious pocket, he
      related the story of his life, and showed his decoration.
    

      Gervaise, however, felt rather ill at ease on account of the Boches'
      behavior. They pretended not to know her. They were most assiduous in
      their attentions to the landlord, bowing down before him, watching for his
      least words, and nodding their approval of them. Madame Boche suddenly ran
      out and dispersed a group of children who were paddling about in front of
      the cistern, the tap of which they had turned full on, causing the water
      to flow over the pavement; and when she returned, upright and severe in
      her skirts, crossing the courtyard and glancing slowly up at all the
      windows, as though to assure herself of the good behavior of the
      household, she pursed her lips in a way to show with what authority she
      was invested, now that she reigned over three hundred tenants. Boche again
      spoke of the dressmaker on the second floor; he advised that she should be
      turned out; he reckoned up the number of quarters she owed with the
      importance of a steward whose management might be compromised. Monsieur
      Marescot approved the suggestion of turning her out, but he wished to wait
      till the half quarter. It was hard to turn people out into the street,
      more especially as it did not put a sou into the landlord's pocket. And
      Gervaise asked herself with a shudder if she too would be turned out into
      the street the day that some misfortune rendered her unable to pay.
    

      The concierge's lodge was as dismal as a cellar, black from smoke and
      crowded with dark furniture. All the sunlight fell upon the tailor's
      workbench by the window. An old frock coat that was being reworked lay on
      it. The Boches' only child, a four-year-old redhead named Pauline, was
      sitting on the floor, staring quietly at the veal simmering on the stove,
      delighted with the sharp odor of cooking that came from the frying pan.
    

      Monsieur Marescot again held out his hand to the zinc-worker, when the
      latter spoke of the repairs, recalling to his mind a promise he had made
      to talk the matter over later on. But the landlord grew angry, he had
      never promised anything; besides, it was not usual to do any repairs to a
      shop. However, he consented to go over the place, followed by the Coupeaus
      and Boche. The little linen-draper had carried off all his shelves and
      counters; the empty shop displayed its blackened ceiling and its cracked
      wall, on which hung strips of an old yellow paper. In the sonorous
      emptiness of the place, there ensued a heated discussion. Monsieur
      Marescot exclaimed that it was the business of shopkeepers to embellish
      their shops, for a shopkeeper might wish to have gold put about
      everywhere, and he, the landlord, could not put out gold. Then he related
      that he had spent more than twenty thousand francs in fitting up his
      premises in the Rue de la Paix. Gervaise, with her woman's obstinacy, kept
      repeating an argument which she considered unanswerable. He would repaper
      a lodging, would he not? Then, why did he not treat the shop the same as a
      lodging? She did not ask him for anything else—only to whitewash the
      ceiling, and put some fresh paper on the walls.
    

      Boche, all this while, remained dignified and impenetrable; he turned
      about and looked up in the air, without expressing an opinion. Coupeau
      winked at him in vain; he affected not to wish to take advantage of his
      great influence over the landlord. He ended, however, by making a slight
      grimace—a little smile accompanied by a nod of the head. Just then
      Monsieur Marescot, exasperated, and seemingly very unhappy, and clutching
      his fingers like a miser being despoiled of his gold, was giving way to
      Gervaise, promising to do the ceiling and repaper the shop on condition
      that she paid for half of the paper. And he hurried away declining to
      discuss anything further.
    

      Now that Boche was alone with the Coupeaus, the concierge became quite
      talkative and slapped them on the shoulders. Well, well, see what they had
      gotten. Without his help, they would never have gotten the concessions.
      Didn't they notice how the landlord had looked to him out of the corner of
      his eye for advice and how he'd made up his mind suddenly when he saw
      Boche smile? He confessed to them confidentially that he was the real boss
      of the building. It was he who decided who got eviction notices and who
      could become tenants. He collected all the rents and kept them for a
      couple of weeks in his bureau drawer.
    

      That evening the Coupeaus, to express their gratitude to the Boches, sent
      them two bottles of wine as a present.
    

      The following Monday the workmen started doing up the shop. The purchasing
      of the paper turned out especially to be a very big affair. Gervaise
      wanted a grey paper with blue flowers, so as to enliven and brighten the
      walls. Boche offered to take her to the dealers, so that she might make
      her own selection. But the landlord had given him formal instructions not
      to go beyond the price of fifteen sous the piece. They were there an hour.
      The laundress kept looking in despair at a very pretty chintz pattern
      costing eighteen sous the piece, and thought all the other papers hideous.
      At length the concierge gave in; he would arrange the matter, and, if
      necessary, would make out there was a piece more used than was really the
      case. So, on her way home, Gervaise purchased some tarts for Pauline. She
      did not like being behindhand—one always gained by behaving nicely
      to her.
    

      The shop was to be ready in four days. The workmen were there three weeks.
      At first it was arranged that they should merely wash the paint. But this
      paint, originally maroon, was so dirty and so sad-looking, that Gervaise
      allowed herself to be tempted to have the whole of the frontage painted a
      light blue with yellow moldings. Then the repairs seemed as though they
      would last for ever. Coupeau, as he was still not working, arrived early
      each morning to see how things were going. Boche left the overcoat or
      trousers on which he was working to come and supervise. Both of them would
      stand and watch with their hands behind their backs, puffing on their
      pipes.
    

      The painters were very merry fellows who would often desert their work to
      stand in the middle of the shop and join the discussion, shaking their
      heads for hours, admiring the work already done. The ceiling had been
      whitewashed quickly, but the paint on the walls never seemed to dry in a
      hurry.
    

      Around nine o'clock the painters would arrive with their paint pots which
      they stuck in a corner. They would look around and then disappear. Perhaps
      they went to eat breakfast. Sometimes Coupeau would take everyone for a
      drink—Boche, the two painters and any of Coupeau's friends who were
      nearby. This meant another afternoon wasted.
    

      Gervaise's patience was thoroughly exhausted, when, suddenly, everything
      was finished in two days, the paint varnished, the paper hung, and the
      dirt all cleared away. The workmen had finished it off as though they were
      playing, whistling away on their ladders, and singing loud enough to
      deafen the whole neighborhood.
    

      The moving in took place at once. During the first few days Gervaise felt
      as delighted as a child. Whenever she crossed the road on returning from
      some errand, she lingered to smile at her home. From a distance her shop
      appeared light and gay with its pale blue signboard, on which the word
      "Laundress" was painted in big yellow letters, amidst the dark row of the
      other frontages. In the window, closed in behind by little muslin
      curtains, and hung on either side with blue paper to show off the
      whiteness of the linen, some shirts were displayed, with some women's caps
      hanging above them on wires. She thought her shop looked pretty, being the
      same color as the heavens.
    

      Inside there was more blue; the paper, in imitation of a Pompadour chintz,
      represented a trellis overgrown with morning-glories. A huge table, taking
      up two-thirds of the room, was her ironing-table. It was covered with
      thick blanketing and draped with a strip of cretonne patterned with blue
      flower sprays that hid the trestles beneath.
    

      Gervaise was enchanted with her pretty establishment and would often seat
      herself on a stool and sigh with contentment, delighted with all the new
      equipment. Her first glance always went to the cast-iron stove where the
      irons were heated ten at a time, arranged over the heat on slanting rests.
      She would kneel down to look into the stove to make sure the apprentice
      had not put in too much coke.
    

      The lodging at the back of the shop was quite decent. The Coupeaus slept
      in the first room, where they also did the cooking and took their meals; a
      door at the back opened on to the courtyard of the house. Nana's bed was
      in the right hand room, which was lighted by a little round window close
      to the ceiling. As for Etienne, he shared the left hand room with the
      dirty clothes, enormous bundles of which lay about on the floor. However,
      there was one disadvantage—the Coupeaus would not admit it at first—but
      the damp ran down the walls, and it was impossible to see clearly in the
      place after three o'clock in the afternoon.
    

      In the neighborhood the new shop produced a great sensation. The Coupeaus
      were accused of going too fast, and making too much fuss. They had, in
      fact, spent the five hundred francs lent by the Goujets in fitting up the
      shop and in moving, without keeping sufficient to live upon for a
      fortnight, as they had intended doing. The morning that Gervaise took down
      her shutters for the first time, she had just six francs in her purse. But
      that did not worry her, customers began to arrive, and things seemed
      promising. A week later on the Saturday, before going to bed, she remained
      two hours making calculations on a piece of paper, and she awoke Coupeau
      to tell him, with a bright look on her face, that there were hundreds and
      thousands of francs to be made, if they were only careful.
    

      "Ah, well!" said Madame Lorilleux all over the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or, "my
      fool of a brother is seeing some funny things! All that was wanting was
      that Clump-clump should go about so haughty. It becomes her well, doesn't
      it?"
    

      The Lorilleuxs had declared a feud to the death against Gervaise. To begin
      with, they had almost died of rage during the time while the repairs were
      being done to the shop. If they caught sight of the painters from a
      distance, they would walk on the other side of the way, and go up to their
      rooms with their teeth set. A blue shop for that "nobody," it was enough
      to discourage all honest, hard-working people! Besides, the second day
      after the shop opened the apprentice happened to throw out a bowl of
      starch just at the moment when Madame Lorilleux was passing. The
      zinc-worker's sister caused a great commotion in the street, accusing her
      sister-in-law of insulting her through her employees. This broke off all
      relations. Now they only exchanged terrible glares when they encountered
      each other.
    

      "Yes, she leads a pretty life!" Madame Lorilleux kept saying. "We all know
      where the money came from that she paid for her wretched shop! She
      borrowed it from the blacksmith; and he springs from a nice family too!
      Didn't the father cut his own throat to save the guillotine the trouble of
      doing so? Anyhow, there was something disreputable of that sort!"
    

      She bluntly accused Gervaise of flirting with Goujet. She lied—she
      pretended she had surprised them together one night on a seat on the
      exterior Boulevards. The thought of this liaison, of pleasures that her
      sister-in-law was no doubt enjoying, exasperated her still more, because
      of her own ugly woman's strict sense of propriety. Every day the same cry
      came from her heart to her lips.
    

      "What does she have, that wretched cripple, for people to fall in love
      with her? Why doesn't any one want me?"
    

      She busied herself in endless gossiping among the neighbors. She told them
      the whole story. The day the Coupeaus got married she turned up her nose
      at her. Oh, she had a keen nose, she could smell in advance how it would
      turn out. Then, Clump-clump pretended to be so sweet, what a hypocrite!
      She and her husband had only agreed to be Nana's godparents for the sake
      of her brother. What a bundle it had cost, that fancy christening. If
      Clump-clump were on her deathbed she wouldn't give her a glass of water,
      no matter how much she begged.
    

      She didn't want anything to do with such a shameless baggage. Little Nana
      would always be welcome when she came up to see her godparents. The child
      couldn't be blamed for her mother's sins. But there was no use trying to
      tell Coupeau anything. Any real man in his situation would have beaten his
      wife and put a stop to it all. All they wanted was for him to insist on
      respect for his family. Mon Dieu! If she, Madame Lorilleux, had
      acted like that, Coupeau wouldn't be so complacent. He would have stabbed
      her for sure with his shears.
    

      The Boches, however, who sternly disapproved of quarrels in their
      building, said that the Lorilleuxs were in the wrong. The Lorilleuxs were
      no doubt respectable persons, quiet, working the whole day long, and
      paying their rent regularly. But, really, jealousy had driven them mad.
      And they were mean enough to skin an egg, real misers. They were so stingy
      that they'd hide their bottle when any one came in, so as not to have to
      offer a glass of wine—not regular people at all.
    

      Gervaise had brought over cassis and soda water one day to drink with the
      Boches. When Madame Lorilleux went by, she acted out spitting before the
      concierge's door. Well, after that when Madame Boche swept the corridors
      on Saturdays, she always left a pile of trash before the Lorilleuxs' door.
    

      "It isn't to be wondered at!" Madame Lorilleux would exclaim,
      "Clump-clump's always stuffing them, the gluttons! Ah! they're all alike;
      but they had better not annoy me! I'll complain to the landlord. Only
      yesterday I saw that sly old Boche chasing after Madame Gaudron's skirts.
      Just fancy! A woman of that age, and who has half a dozen children, too;
      it's positively disgusting! If I catch them at anything of the sort again,
      I'll tell Madame Boche, and she'll give them both a hiding. It'll be
      something to laugh at."
    

      Mother Coupeau continued to visit the two houses, agreeing with everybody
      and even managing to get asked oftener to dinner, by complaisantly
      listening one night to her daughter and the next night to her
      daughter-in-law.
    

      However, Madame Lerat did not go to visit the Coupeaus because she had
      argued with Gervaise about a Zouave who had cut the nose of his mistress
      with a razor. She was on the side of the Zouave, saying it was evidence of
      a great passion, but without explaining further her thought. Then, she had
      made Madame Lorilleux even more angry by telling her that Clump-clump had
      called her "Cow Tail" in front of fifteen or twenty people. Yes, that's
      what the Boches and all the neighbors called her now, "Cow Tail."
    

      Gervaise remained calm and cheerful among all these goings-on. She often
      stood by the door of her shop greeting friends who passed by with a nod
      and a smile. It was her pleasure to take a moment between batches of
      ironing to enjoy the street and take pride in her own stretch of sidewalk.
    

      She felt that the Rue de la Goutte d'Or was hers, and the neighboring
      streets, and the whole neighborhood. As she stood there, with her blonde
      hair slightly damp from the heat of the shop, she would look left and
      right, taking in the people, the buildings, and the sky. To the left Rue
      de la Goutte d'Or was peaceful and almost empty, like a country town with
      women idling in their doorways. While, to the right, only a short distance
      away, Rue des Poissonniers had a noisy throng of people and vehicles.
    

      The stretch of gutter before her own shop became very important in her
      mind. It was like a wide river which she longed to see neat and clean. It
      was a lively river, colored by the dye shop with the most fanciful of hues
      which contrasted with the black mud beside it.
    

      Then there were the shops: a large grocery with a display of dried fruits
      protected by mesh nets; a shop selling work clothes which had white tunics
      and blue smocks hanging before it with arms that waved at the slightest
      breeze. Cats were purring on the counters of the fruit store and the tripe
      shop. Madame Vigouroux, the coal dealer next door, returned her greetings.
      She was a plump, short woman with bright eyes in a dark face who was
      always joking with the men while standing at her doorway. Her shop was
      decorated in imitation of a rustic chalet. The neighbors on the other side
      were a mother and daughter, the Cudorges. The umbrella sellers kept their
      door closed and never came out to visit.
    

      Gervaise always looked across the road, too, through the wide carriage
      entrance of the windowless wall opposite her, at the blacksmith's forge.
      The courtyard was cluttered with vans and carts. Inscribed on the wall was
      the word "Blacksmith."
    

      At the lower end of the wall between the small shops selling scrap iron
      and fried potatoes was a watchmaker. He wore a frock coat and was always
      very neat. His cuckoo clocks could be heard in chorus against the
      background noise of the street and the blacksmith's rhythmic clanging.
    

      The neighborhood in general thought Gervaise very nice. There was, it is
      true, a good deal of scandal related regarding her; but everyone admired
      her large eyes, small mouth and beautiful white teeth. In short she was a
      pretty blonde, and had it not been for her crippled leg she might have
      ranked amongst the comeliest. She was now in her twenty-eighth year, and
      had grown considerably plumper. Her fine features were becoming puffy, and
      her gestures were assuming a pleasant indolence.
    

      At times she occasionally seemed to forget herself on the edge of a chair,
      whilst she waited for her iron to heat, smiling vaguely and with an
      expression of greedy joy upon her face. She was becoming fond of good
      living, everybody said so; but that was not a very grave fault, but rather
      the contrary. When one earns sufficient to be able to buy good food, one
      would be foolish to eat potato parings. All the more so as she continued
      to work very hard, slaving to please her customers, sitting up late at
      night after the place was closed, whenever there was anything urgent.
    

      She was lucky as all her neighbors said; everything prospered with her.
      She did the washing for all the house—M. Madinier, Mademoiselle
      Remanjou, the Boches. She even secured some of the customers of her old
      employer, Madame Fauconnier, Parisian ladies living in the Rue du
      Faubourg-Poissonniere. As early as the third week she was obliged to
      engage two workwomen, Madame Putois and tall Clemence, the girl who used
      to live on the sixth floor; counting her apprentice, that little
      squint-eyed Augustine, who was as ugly as a beggar's behind, that made
      three persons in her employ. Others would certainly have lost their heads
      at such a piece of good fortune. It was excusable for her to slack a
      little on Monday after drudging all through the week. Besides, it was
      necessary to her. She would have had no courage left, and would have
      expected to see the shirts iron themselves, if she had not been able to
      dress up in some pretty thing.
    

      Gervaise was always so amiable, meek as a lamb, sweet as sugar. There
      wasn't any one she disliked except Madame Lorilleux. While she was
      enjoying a good meal and coffee, she could be indulgent and forgive
      everybody saying: "We have to forgive each other—don't we?—unless
      we want to live like savages." Hadn't all her dreams come true? She
      remembered her old dream: to have a job, enough bread to eat and a corner
      in which to sleep, to bring up her children, not to be beaten, and to die
      in her own bed. She had everything she wanted now and more than she had
      ever expected. She laughed, thinking of delaying dying in her own bed as
      long as possible.
    

      It was to Coupeau especially that Gervaise behaved nicely. Never an angry
      word, never a complaint behind her husband's back. The zinc-worker had at
      length resumed work; and as the job he was engaged on was at the other
      side of Paris, she gave him every morning forty sous for his luncheon, his
      glass of wine and his tobacco. Only, two days out of every six, Coupeau
      would stop on the way, spend the forty sous in drink with a friend, and
      return home to lunch, with some cock-and-bull story. Once even he did not
      take the trouble to go far; he treated himself, My-Boots and three others
      to a regular feast—snails, roast meat, and some sealed bottles of
      wine—at the "Capuchin," on the Barriere de la Chapelle. Then, as his
      forty sous were not sufficient, he had sent the waiter to his wife with
      the bill and the information that he was in pawn. She laughed and shrugged
      her shoulders. Where was the harm if her old man amused himself a bit? You
      must give men a long rein if you want to live peaceably at home. From one
      word to another, one soon arrived at blows. Mon Dieu! It was easy
      to understand. Coupeau still suffered from his leg; besides, he was led
      astray. He was obliged to do as the others did, or else he would be
      thought a cheap skate. And it was really a matter of no consequence. If he
      came home a bit elevated, he went to bed, and two hours afterwards he was
      all right again.
    

      It was now the warm time of the year. One June afternoon, a Saturday when
      there was a lot of work to get through, Gervaise herself had piled the
      coke into the stove, around which ten irons were heating, whilst a
      rumbling sound issued from the chimney. At that hour the sun was shining
      full on the shop front, and the pavement reflected the heat waves, causing
      all sorts of quaint shadows to dance over the ceiling, and that blaze of
      light which assumed a bluish tinge from the color of the paper on the
      shelves and against the window, was almost blinding in the intensity with
      which it shone over the ironing-table, like a golden dust shaken among the
      fine linen. The atmosphere was stifling. The shop door was thrown wide
      open, but not a breath of air entered; the clothes which were hung up on
      brass wires to dry, steamed and became as stiff as shavings in less than
      three quarters of an hour. For some little while past an oppressive
      silence had reigned in that furnace-like heat, interrupted only by the
      smothered sound of the banging down of the irons on the thick blanket
      covered with calico.
    

      "Ah, well!" said Gervaise, "it's enough to melt one! We might have to take
      off our chemises."
    

      She was sitting on the floor, in front of a basin, starching some things.
      Her sleeves were rolled up and her camisole was slipping down her
      shoulders. Little curls of golden hair were stuck to her skin by
      perspiration. She carefully dipped caps, shirt-fronts, entire petticoats,
      and the trimmings of women's drawers into the milky water. Then she rolled
      the things up and placed them at the bottom of a square basket, after
      dipping her hand in a pail and shaking it over the portions of the shirts
      and drawers which she had not starched.
    

      "This basketful's for you, Madame Putois," she said. "Look sharp, now! It
      dries at once, and will want doing all over again in an hour."
    

      Madame Putois, a thin little woman of forty-five, was ironing. Though she
      was buttoned up in an old chestnut-colored dress, there was not a drop of
      perspiration to be seen. She had not even taken her cap off, a black cap
      trimmed with green ribbons turned partly yellow. And she stood perfectly
      upright in front of the ironing-table, which was too high for her,
      sticking out her elbows, and moving her iron with the jerky evolutions of
      a puppet. On a sudden she exclaimed:
    

      "Ah, no! Mademoiselle Clemence, you mustn't take your camisole off. You
      know I don't like such indecencies. Whilst you're about it, you'd better
      show everything. There's already three men over the way stopping to look."
    

      Tall Clemence called her an old beast between her teeth. She was
      suffocating; she might certainly make herself comfortable; everyone was
      not gifted with a skin as dry as touchwood. Besides no one could see
      anything; and she held up her arms, whilst her opulent bosom almost ripped
      her chemise, and her shoulders were bursting through the straps. At the
      rate she was going, Clemence was not likely to have any marrow left in her
      bones long before she was thirty years old. Mornings after big parties she
      was unable to feel the ground she trod upon, and fell asleep over her
      work, whilst her head and her stomach seemed as though stuffed full of
      rags. But she was kept on all the same, for no other workwoman could iron
      a shirt with her style. Shirts were her specialty.
    

      "This is mine, isn't it?" she declared, tapping her bosom. "And it doesn't
      bite; it hurts nobody!"
    

      "Clemence, put your wrapper on again," said Gervaise. "Madame Putois is
      right, it isn't decent. People will begin to take my house for what it
      isn't."
    

      So tall Clemence dressed herself again, grumbling the while. "Mon Dieu!
      There's prudery for you."
    

      And she vented her rage on the apprentice, that squint-eyed Augustine who
      was ironing some stockings and handkerchiefs beside her. She jostled her
      and pushed her with her elbow; but Augustine who was of a surly
      disposition, and slyly spiteful in the way of an animal and a drudge, spat
      on the back of the other's dress just out of revenge, without being seen.
      Gervaise, during this incident, had commenced a cap belonging to Madame
      Boche, which she intended to take great pains with. She had prepared some
      boiled starch to make it look new again. She was gently passing a little
      iron rounded at both ends over the inside of the crown of the cap, when a
      bony-looking woman entered the shop, her face covered with red blotches
      and her skirts sopping wet. It was a washerwoman who employed three
      assistants at the wash-house in the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or.
    

      "You've come too soon, Madame Bijard!" cried Gervaise. "I told you to call
      this evening. I'm too busy to attend to you now!"
    

      But as the washerwoman began lamenting and fearing that she would not be
      able to put all the things to soak that day, she consented to give her the
      dirty clothes at once. They went to fetch the bundles in the left hand
      room where Etienne slept, and returned with enormous armfuls which they
      piled up on the floor at the back of the shop. The sorting lasted a good
      half hour. Gervaise made heaps all round her, throwing the shirts in one,
      the chemises in another, the handkerchiefs, the socks, the dish-cloths in
      others. Whenever she came across anything belonging to a new customer, she
      marked it with a cross in red cotton thread so as to know it again. And
      from all this dirty linen which they were throwing about there issued an
      offensive odor in the warm atmosphere.
    

      "Oh! La, la. What a stench!" said Clemence, holding her nose.
    

      "Of course there is! If it were clean they wouldn't send it to us,"
      quietly explained Gervaise. "It smells as one would expect it to, that's
      all! We said fourteen chemises, didn't we, Madame Bijard? Fifteen,
      sixteen, seventeen—"
    

      And she continued counting aloud. Used to this kind of thing she evinced
      no disgust. She thrust her bare pink arms deep into the piles of laundry:
      shirts yellow with grime, towels stiff from dirty dish water, socks
      threadbare and eaten away by sweat. The strong odor which slapped her in
      the face as she sorted the piles of clothes made her feel drowsy. She
      seemed to be intoxicating herself with this stench of humanity as she sat
      on the edge of a stool, bending far over, smiling vaguely, her eyes
      slightly misty. It was as if her laziness was started by a kind of
      smothering caused by the dirty clothes which poisoned the air in the shop.
      Just as she was shaking out a child's dirty diaper, Coupeau came in.
    

      "By Jove!" he stuttered, "what a sun! It shines full on your head!"
    

      The zinc-worker caught hold of the ironing-table to save himself from
      falling. It was the first time he had been so drunk. Until then he had
      sometimes come home slightly tipsy, but nothing more. This time, however,
      he had a black eye, just a friendly slap he had run up against in a
      playful moment. His curly hair, already streaked with grey, must have
      dusted a corner in some low wineshop, for a cobweb was hanging to one of
      his locks over the back of his neck. He was still as attractive as ever,
      though his features were rather drawn and aged, and his under jaw
      projected more; but he was always lively, as he would sometimes say, with
      a complexion to be envied by a duchess.
    

      "I'll just explain it to you," he resumed, addressing Gervaise.
    

      "It was Celery-Root, you know him, the bloke with a wooden leg. Well, as
      he was going back to his native place, he wanted to treat us. Oh! We were
      all right, if it hadn't been for that devil of a sun. In the street
      everybody looks shaky. Really, all the world's drunk!"
    

      And as tall Clemence laughed at his thinking that the people in the street
      were drunk, he was himself seized with an intense fit of gaiety which
      almost strangled him.
    

      "Look at them! The blessed tipplers! Aren't they funny?" he cried. "But
      it's not their fault. It's the sun that's causing it."
    

      All the shop laughed, even Madame Putois, who did not like drunkards. That
      squint-eyed Augustine was cackling like a hen, suffocating with her mouth
      wide open. Gervaise, however, suspected Coupeau of not having come
      straight home, but of having passed an hour with the Lorilleuxs who were
      always filling his head with unpleasant ideas. When he swore he had not
      been near them she laughed also, full of indulgence and not even
      reproaching him with having wasted another day.
    

      "Mon Dieu! What nonsense he does talk," she murmured. "How does he
      manage to say such stupid things?" Then in a maternal tone of voice she
      added, "Now go to bed, won't you? You see we're busy; you're in our way.
      That makes thirty-two handkerchiefs, Madame Bijard; and two more,
      thirty-four."
    

      But Coupeau was not sleepy. He stood there wagging his body from side to
      side like the pendulum of a clock and chuckling in an obstinate and
      teasing manner. Gervaise, wanting to finish with Madame Bijard, called to
      Clemence to count the laundry while she made the list. Tall Clemence made
      a dirty remark about every item that she touched. She commented on the
      customers' misfortunes and their bedroom adventures. She had a wash-house
      joke for every rip or stain that passed through her hands. Augustine
      pretended that she didn't understand, but her ears were wide open. Madame
      Putois compressed her lips, thinking it a disgrace to say such things in
      front of Coupeau. It's not a man's business to have anything to do with
      dirty linen. It's just not done among decent people.
    

      Gervaise, serious and her mind fully occupied with what she was about, did
      not seem to notice. As she wrote she gave a glance to each article as it
      passed before her, so as to recognize it; and she never made a mistake;
      she guessed the owner's name just by the look or the color. Those napkins
      belonged to the Goujets, that was evident; they had not been used to wipe
      out frying-pans. That pillow-case certainly came from the Boches on
      account of the pomatum with which Madame Boche always smeared her things.
      There was no need to put your nose close to the flannel vests of Monsieur
      Madinier; his skin was so oily that it clogged up his woolens.
    

      She knew many peculiarities, the cleanliness of some, the ragged
      underclothes of neighborhood ladies who appeared on the streets in silk
      dresses; how many items each family soiled weekly; the way some people's
      garments were always torn at the same spot. Oh, she had many tales to
      tell. For instance, the chemises of Mademoiselle Remanjou provided
      material for endless comments: they wore out at the top first because the
      old maid had bony, sharp shoulders; and they were never really dirty,
      proving that you dry up by her age, like a stick of wood out of which it's
      hard to squeeze a drop of anything. It was thus that at every sorting of
      the dirty linen in the shop they undressed the whole neighborhood of the
      Goutte-d'Or.
    

      "Oh, here's something luscious!" cried Clemence, opening another bundle.
    

      Gervaise, suddenly seized with a great repugnance, drew back.
    

      "Madame Gaudron's bundle?" said she. "I'll no longer wash for her, I'll
      find some excuse. No, I'm not more particular than another. I've handled
      some most disgusting linen in my time; but really, that lot I can't
      stomach. What can the woman do to get her things into such a state?"
    

      And she requested Clemence to look sharp. But the girl continued her
      remarks, thrusting the clothes sullenly about her, with complaints on the
      soiled caps she waved like triumphal banners of filth. Meanwhile the heaps
      around Gervaise had grown higher. Still seated on the edge of the stool,
      she was now disappearing between the petticoats and chemises. In front of
      her were the sheets, the table cloths, a veritable mass of dirtiness.
    

      She seemed even rosier and more languid than usual within this spreading
      sea of soiled laundry. She had regained her composure, forgetting Madame
      Gaudron's laundry, stirring the various piles of clothing to make sure
      there had been no mistake in sorting. Squint-eyed Augustine had just
      stuffed the stove so full of coke that its cast-iron sides were bright
      red. The sun was shining obliquely on the window; the shop was in a blaze.
      Then, Coupeau, whom the great heat intoxicated all the more, was seized
      with a sudden fit of tenderness. He advanced towards Gervaise with open
      arms and deeply moved.
    

      "You're a good wife," he stammered. "I must kiss you."
    

      But he caught his foot in the garments which barred the way and nearly
      fell.
    

      "What a nuisance you are!" said Gervaise without getting angry. "Keep
      still, we're nearly done now."
    

      No, he wanted to kiss her. He must do so because he loved her so much.
      Whilst he stuttered he tried to get round the heap of petticoats and
      stumbled against the pile of chemises; then as he obstinately persisted
      his feet caught together and he fell flat, his nose in the midst of the
      dish-cloths. Gervaise, beginning to lose her temper pushed him, saying
      that he was mixing all the things up. But Clemence and even Madame Putois
      maintained that she was wrong. It was very nice of him after all. He
      wanted to kiss her. She might very well let herself be kissed.
    

      "You're lucky, you are, Madame Coupeau," said Madame Bijard, whose
      drunkard of a husband, a locksmith, was nearly beating her to death each
      evening when he came in. "If my old man was like that when he's had a
      drop, it would be a real pleasure!"
    

      Gervaise had calmed down and was already regretting her hastiness. She
      helped Coupeau up on his legs again. Then she offered her cheek with a
      smile. But the zinc-worker, without caring a button for the other people
      being present, seized her bosom.
    

      "It's not for the sake of saying so," he murmured; "but your dirty linen
      stinks tremendously! Still, I love you all the same, you know."
    

      "Leave off, you're tickling me," cried she, laughing the louder. "What a
      great silly you are! How can you be so absurd?"
    

      He had caught hold of her and would not let her go. She gradually
      abandoned herself to him, dizzy from the slight faintness caused by the
      heap of clothes and not minding Coupeau's foul-smelling breath. The long
      kiss they exchanged on each other's mouths in the midst of the filth of
      the laundress's trade was perhaps the first tumble in the slow downfall of
      their life together.
    

      Madame Bijard had meanwhile been tying the laundry up into bundles and
      talking about her daughter, Eulalie, who at two was as smart as a grown
      woman. She could be left by herself; she never cried or played with
      matches. Finally Madame Bijard took the laundry away a bundle at a time,
      her face splotched with purple and her tall form bent under the weight.
    

      "This heat is becoming unbearable, we're roasting," said Gervaise, wiping
      her face before returning to Madame Boche's cap.
    

      They talked of boxing Augustine's ears when they saw that the stove was
      red-hot. The irons, also, were getting in the same condition. She must
      have the very devil in her body! One could not turn one's back a moment
      without her being up to some of her tricks. Now they would have to wait a
      quarter of an hour before they would be able to use their irons. Gervaise
      covered the fire with two shovelfuls of cinders. Then she thought to hang
      some sheets on the brass wires near the ceiling to serve as curtains to
      keep out the sunlight.
    

      Things were now better in the shop. The temperature was still high, but
      you could imagine it was cooler. Footsteps could still be heard outside
      but you were free to make yourself comfortable. Clemence removed her
      camisole again. Coupeau still refused to go to bed, so they allowed him to
      stay, but he had to promise to be quiet in a corner, for they were very
      busy.
    

      "Whatever has that vermin done with my little iron?" murmured Gervaise,
      speaking of Augustine.
    

      They were for ever seeking the little iron, which they found in the most
      out-of-the-way places, where the apprentice, so they said, hid it out of
      spite. Gervaise could now finish Madame Boche's cap. First she roughly
      smoothed the lace, spreading it out with her hand, and then she
      straightened it up by light strokes of the iron. It had a very fancy
      border consisting of narrow puffs alternating with insertions of
      embroidery. She was working on it silently and conscientiously, ironing
      the puffs and insertions.
    

      Silence prevailed for a time. Nothing was to be heard except the soft thud
      of irons on the ironing pad. On both sides of the huge rectangular table
      Gervaise, her two employees, and the apprentice were bending over, slaving
      at their tasks with rounded shoulders, their arms moving incessantly. Each
      had a flat brick blackened by hot irons near her. A soup plate filled with
      clean water was on the middle of the table with a moistening rag and a
      small brush soaking in it.
    

      A bouquet of large white lilies bloomed in what had once been a brandied
      cherry jar. Its cluster of snowy flowers suggested a corner of a royal
      garden. Madame Putois had begun the basket that Gervaise had brought to
      her filled with towels, wrappers, cuffs and underdrawers. Augustine was
      dawdling with the stockings and washcloths, gazing into the air, seemingly
      fascinated by a large fly that was buzzing around. Clemence had done
      thirty-four men's shirts so far that day.
    

      "Always wine, never spirits!" suddenly said the zinc-worker, who felt the
      necessity of making this declaration. "Spirits make me drunk, I'll have
      none of them."
    

      Clemence took an iron from the stove with her leather holder in which a
      piece of sheet iron was inserted, and held it up to her cheek to see how
      hot it was. She rubbed it on her brick, wiped it on a piece of rag hanging
      from her waist-band and started on her thirty-fifth shirt, first of all
      ironing the shoulders and the sleeves.
    

      "Bah! Monsieur Coupeau," said she after a minute or two, "a little glass
      of brandy isn't bad. It sets me going. Besides, the sooner you're merry,
      the jollier it is. Oh! I don't make any mistake; I know that I shan't make
      old bones."
    

      "What a nuisance you are with your funeral ideas!" interrupted Madame
      Putois who did not like hearing people talk of anything sad.
    

      Coupeau had arisen and was becoming angry thinking that he had been
      accused of drinking brandy. He swore on his own head and on the heads of
      his wife and child that there was not a drop of brandy in his veins. And
      he went up to Clemence and blew in her face so that she might smell his
      breath. Then he began to giggle because her bare shoulders were right
      under his nose. He thought maybe he could see more. Clemence, having
      folded over the back of the shirt and ironed it on both sides, was now
      working on the cuffs and collar. However, as he was shoving against her,
      he caused her to make a wrinkle, obliging her to reach for the brush
      soaking in the soup plate to smooth it out.
    

      "Madame," said she, "do make him leave off bothering me."
    

      "Leave her alone; it's stupid of you to go on like that," quietly observed
      Gervaise. "We're in a hurry, do you hear?"
    

      They were in a hurry, well! What? It was not his fault. He was doing no
      harm. He was not touching, he was only looking. Was it no longer allowed
      to look at the beautiful things that God had made? All the same, she had
      precious fine arms, that artful Clemence! She might exhibit herself for
      two sous and nobody would have to regret his money. The girl allowed him
      to go on, laughing at these coarse compliments of a drunken man. And she
      soon commenced joking with him. He chuffed her about the shirts. So she
      was always doing shirts? Why yes, she practically lived in them. Mon
      Dieu! She knew them pretty well. Hundreds and hundreds of them had
      passed through her hands. Just about every man in the neighborhood was
      wearing her handiwork on his body. Her shoulders were shaking with
      laughter through all this, but she managed to continue ironing.
    

      "That's the banter!" said she, laughing harder than ever.
    

      That squint-eyed Augustine almost burst, the joke seemed to her so funny.
      The others bullied her. There was a brat for you who laughed at words she
      ought not to understand! Clemence handed her her iron; the apprentice
      finished up the irons on the stockings and the dish-cloths when they were
      not hot enough for the starched things. But she took hold of this one so
      clumsily that she made herself a cuff in the form of a long burn on the
      wrist. And she sobbed and accused Clemence of having burnt her on purpose.
      The latter who had gone to fetch a very hot iron for the shirt-front
      consoled her at once by threatening to iron her two ears if she did not
      leave off. Then she placed a piece of flannel under the front and slowly
      passed the iron over it giving the starch time to show up and dry. The
      shirt-front became as stiff and as shiny as cardboard.
    

      "By golly!" swore Coupeau, who was treading behind her with the obstinacy
      of a drunkard.
    

      He raised himself up with a shrill laugh that resembled a pulley in want
      of grease. Clemence, leaning heavily over the ironing-table, her wrists
      bent in, her elbows sticking out and wide apart was bending her neck in a
      last effort; and all her muscles swelled, her shoulders rose with the slow
      play of the muscles beating beneath the soft skin, her breasts heaved, wet
      with perspiration in the rosy shadow of the half open chemise. Then
      Coupeau thrust out his hands, trying to touch her bare flesh.
    

      "Madame! Madame!" cried Clemence, "do make him leave off! I shall go away
      if it continues. I won't be intimated."
    

      Gervaise glanced over just as her husband's hands began to explore inside
      the chemise.
    

      "Really, Coupeau, you're too foolish," said she, with a vexed air, as
      though she were scolding a child who persisted in eating his jam without
      bread. "You must go to bed."
    

      "Yes, go to bed, Monsieur Coupeau; it will be far better," exclaimed
      Madame Putois.
    

      "Ah! Well," stuttered he, without ceasing to chuckle, "you're all precious
      particular! So one mustn't amuse oneself now? Women, I know how to handle
      them; I'll only kiss them, no more. One admires a lady, you know, and
      wants to show it. And, besides, when one displays one's goods, it's that
      one may make one's choice, isn't it? Why does the tall blonde show
      everything she's got? It's not decent."
    

      And turning towards Clemence, he added: "You know, my lovely, you're wrong
      to be to very insolent. If it's because there are others here—"
    

      But he was unable to continue. Gervaise very calmly seized hold of him
      with one hand, and placed the other on his mouth. He struggled, just by
      way of a joke, whilst she pushed him to the back of the shop, towards the
      bedroom. He got his mouth free and said that he was willing to go to bed,
      but that the tall blonde must come and warm his feet.
    

      Then Gervaise could be heard taking off his shoes. She removed his clothes
      too, bullying him in a motherly way. He burst out laughing after she had
      removed his trousers and kicked about, pretending that she was tickling
      him. At last she tucked him in carefully like a child. Was he comfortable
      now? But he did not answer; he called to Clemence:
    

      "I say, my lovely, I'm here, and waiting for you!"
    

      When Gervaise went back into the shop, the squint-eyed Augustine was being
      properly chastised by Clemence because of a dirty iron that Madame Putois
      had used and which had caused her to soil a camisole. Clemence, in
      defending herself for not having cleaned her iron, blamed Augustine,
      swearing that it wasn't hers, in spite of the spot of burned starch still
      clinging to the bottom. The apprentice, outraged at the injustice, openly
      spat on the front of Clemence's dress, earning a slap for her boldness.
      Now, as Augustine went about cleaning the iron, she saved up her spit and
      each time she passed Clemence spat on her back and laughed to herself.
    

      Gervaise continued with the lace of Madame Boche's cap. In the sudden calm
      which ensued, one could hear Coupeau's husky voice issuing from the depths
      of the bedroom. He was still jolly, and was laughing to himself as he
      uttered bits of phrases.
    

      "How stupid she is, my wife! How stupid of her to put me to bed! Really,
      it's too absurd, in the middle of the day, when one isn't sleepy."
    

      But, all on a sudden, he snored. Then Gervaise gave a sigh of relief,
      happy in knowing that he was at length quiet, and sleeping off his
      intoxication on two good mattresses. And she spoke out in the silence, in
      a slow and continuous voice, without taking her eyes off her work.
    

      "You see, he hasn't his reason, one can't be angry. Were I to be harsh
      with him, it would be of no use. I prefer to agree with him and get him to
      bed; then, at least, it's over at once and I'm quiet. Besides, he isn't
      ill-natured, he loves me very much. You could see that just a moment ago
      when he was desperate to give me a kiss. That's quite nice of him. There
      are plenty of men, you know, who after drinking a bit don't come straight
      home but stay out chasing women. Oh, he may fool around with the women in
      the shop, but it doesn't lead to anything. Clemence, you mustn't feel
      insulted. You know how it is when a man's had too much to drink. He could
      do anything and not even remember it."
    

      She spoke composedly, not at all angry, being quite used to Coupeau's
      sprees and not holding them against him. A silence settled down for a
      while when she stopped talking. There was a lot of work to get done. They
      figured they would have to keep at it until eleven, working as fast as
      they could. Now that they were undisturbed, all of them were pounding
      away. Bare arms were moving back and forth, showing glimpses of pink among
      the whiteness of the laundry.
    

      More coke had been put into the stove and the sunlight slanted in between
      the sheets onto the stove. You could see the heat rising up through the
      rays of the sun. It became so stifling that Augustine ran out of spit and
      was forced to lick her lips. The room smelled of the heat and of the
      working women. The white lilies in the jar were beginning to fade, yet
      they still exuded a pure and strong perfume. Coupeau's heavy snores were
      heard like the regular ticking of a huge clock, setting the tempo for the
      heavy labor in the shop.
    

      On the morrow of his carouses, the zinc-worker always had a headache, a
      splitting headache which kept him all day with his hair uncombed, his
      breath offensive, and his mouth all swollen and askew. He got up late on
      those days, not shaking the fleas off till about eight o'clock; and he
      would hang about the shop, unable to make up his mind to start off to his
      work. It was another day lost. In the morning he would complain that his
      legs bent like pieces of thread, and would call himself a great fool to
      guzzle to such an extent, as it broke one's constitution. Then, too, there
      were a lot of lazy bums who wouldn't let you go and you'd get to drinking
      more in spite of yourself. No, no, no more for him.
    

      After lunch he would always begin to perk up and deny that he had been
      really drunk the night before. Maybe just a bit lit up. He was rock solid
      and able to drink anything he wanted without even blinking an eye.
    

      When he had thoroughly badgered the workwomen, Gervaise would give him
      twenty sous to clear out. And off he would go to buy his tobacco at the
      "Little Civet," in the Rue des Poissonniers, where he generally took a
      plum in brandy whenever he met a friend. Then, he spent the rest of the
      twenty sous at old Francois's, at the corner of the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or,
      where there was a famous wine, quite young, which tickled your gullet.
      This was an old-fashioned place with a low ceiling. There was a smoky room
      to one side where soup was served. He would stay there until evening
      drinking because there was an understanding that he didn't have to pay
      right away and they would never send the bill to his wife. Besides he was
      a jolly fellow, who would never do the least harm—a chap who loved a
      spree sure enough, and who colored his nose in his turn but in a nice
      manner, full of contempt for those pigs of men who have succumbed to
      alcohol, and whom one never sees sober! He always went home as gay and as
      gallant as a lark.
    

      "Has your lover been?" he would sometimes ask Gervaise by way of teasing
      her. "One never sees him now; I must go and rout him out."
    

      The lover was Goujet. He avoided, in fact, calling too often for fear of
      being in the way, and also of causing people to talk. Yet he frequently
      found a pretext, such as bringing the washing; and he would pass no end of
      time on the pavement in front of the shop. There was a corner right at the
      back in which he liked to sit, without moving for hours, and smoke his
      short pipe. Once every ten days, in the evening after his dinner, he would
      venture there and take up his favorite position. And he was no talker, his
      mouth almost seemed sewn up, as he sat with his eyes fixed on Gervaise,
      and only removed his pipe to laugh at everything she said. When they were
      working late on a Saturday he would stay on, and appeared to amuse himself
      more than if he had gone to a theatre.
    

      Sometimes the women stayed in the shop ironing until three in the morning.
      A lamp hung from the ceiling and spread a brilliant light making the linen
      look like fresh snow. The apprentice would put up the shop shutters, but
      since these July nights were scorching hot, the door would be left open.
      The later the hour the more casual the women became with their clothes
      while trying to be comfortable. The lamplight flecked their rosy skin with
      gold specks, especially Gervaise who was so pleasantly rounded.
    

      On these nights Goujet would be overcome by the heat from the stove and
      the odor of linen steaming under the hot irons. He would drift into a sort
      of giddiness, his thinking slowed and his eyes obsessed by these hurrying
      women as their naked arms moved back and forth, working far into the night
      to have the neighborhood's best clothes ready for Sunday.
    

      Everything around the laundry was slumbering, settled into sleep for the
      night. Midnight rang, then one o'clock, then two o'clock. There were no
      vehicles or pedestrians. In the dark and deserted street, only their shop
      door let out any light. Once in a while, footsteps would be heard and a
      man would pass the shop. As he crossed the path of light he would stretch
      his neck to look in, startled by the sound of the thudding irons, and
      carry with him the quick glimpse of bare-shouldered laundresses immersed
      in a rosy mist.
    

      Goujet, seeing that Gervaise did not know what to do with Etienne, and
      wishing to deliver him from Coupeau's kicks, had engaged him to go and
      blow the bellows at the factory where he worked. The profession of
      bolt-maker, if not one to be proud of on account of the dirt of the forge
      and of the monotony of constantly hammering on pieces of iron of a similar
      kind, was nevertheless a well paid one, at which ten and even twelve
      francs a day could be earned. The youngster, who was then twelve years
      old, would soon be able to go in for it, if the calling was to his liking.
      And Etienne had thus become another link between the laundress and the
      blacksmith. The latter would bring the child home and speak of his good
      conduct. Everyone laughingly said that Goujet was smitten with Gervaise.
      She knew it, and blushed like a young girl, the flush of modesty coloring
      her cheeks with the bright tints of an apple. The poor fellow, he was
      never any trouble! He never made a bold gesture or an indelicate remark.
      You didn't find many men like him. Gervaise didn't want to admit it, but
      she derived a great deal of pleasure from being adored like this. Whenever
      a problem arose she thought immediately of the blacksmith and was
      consoled. There was never any awkward tension when they were alone
      together. They just looked at each other and smiled happily with no need
      to talk. It was a very sensible kind of affection.
    

      Towards the end of the summer, Nana quite upset the household. She was six
      years old and promised to be a thorough good-for-nothing. So as not to
      have her always under her feet her mother took her every morning to a
      little school in the Rue Polonceau kept by Mademoiselle Josse. She
      fastened her playfellows' dresses together behind, she filled the
      school-mistress's snuff-box with ashes, and invented other tricks much
      less decent which could not be mentioned. Twice Mademoiselle Josse
      expelled her and then took her back again so as not to lose the six francs
      a month. Directly lessons were over Nana avenged herself for having been
      kept in by making an infernal noise under the porch and in the courtyard
      where the ironers, whose ears could not stand the racket, sent her to
      play. There she would meet Pauline, the Boches' daughter, and Victor, the
      son of Gervaise's old employer—a big booby of ten who delighted in
      playing with very little girls. Madame Fauconnier who had not quarreled
      with the Coupeaus would herself send her son. In the house, too, there was
      an extraordinary swarm of brats, flights of children who rolled down the
      four staircases at all hours of the day and alighted on the pavement of
      the courtyard like troops of noisy pillaging sparrows. Madame Gaudron was
      responsible for nine of them, all with uncombed hair, runny noses,
      hand-me-down clothes, saggy stockings and ripped jackets. Another woman on
      the sixth floor had seven of them. This hoard that only got their faces
      washed when it rained were in all shapes and sizes, fat, thin, big and
      barely out of the cradle.
    

      Nana reigned supreme over this host of urchins; she ordered about girls
      twice her own size, and only deigned to relinquish a little of her power
      in favor of Pauline and Victor, intimate confidants who enforced her
      commands. This precious chit was for ever wanting to play at being mamma,
      undressing the smallest ones to dress them again, insisting on examining
      the others all over, messing them about and exercising the capricious
      despotism of a grown-up person with a vicious disposition. Under her
      leadership they got up tricks for which they should have been well
      spanked. The troop paddled in the colored water from the dyer's and
      emerged from it with legs stained blue or red as high as the knees; then
      off it flew to the locksmith's where it purloined nails and filings and
      started off again to alight in the midst of the carpenter's shavings,
      enormous heaps of shavings, which delighted it immensely and in which it
      rolled head over heels exposing their behinds.
    

      The courtyard was her kingdom. It echoed with the clatter of little shoes
      as they stampeded back and forth with piercing cries. On some days the
      courtyard was too small for them and the troop would dash down into the
      cellar, race up a staircase, run along a corridor, then dash up another
      staircase and follow another corridor for hours. They never got tired of
      their yelling and clambering.
    

      "Aren't they abominable, those little toads?" cried Madame Boche. "Really,
      people can have but very little to do to have time to get so many brats. And
      yet they complain of having no bread."
    

      Boche said that children pushed up out of poverty like mushrooms out of
      manure. All day long his wife was screaming at them and chasing them with
      her broom. Finally she had to lock the door of the cellar when she learned
      from Pauline that Nana was playing doctor down there in the dark,
      viciously finding pleasure in applying remedies to the others by beating
      them with sticks.
    

      Well, one afternoon there was a frightful scene. It was bound to have come
      sooner or later. Nana had thought of a very funny little game. She had
      stolen one of Madame Boche's wooden shoes from outside the concierge's
      room. She tied a string to it and began dragging it about like a cart.
      Victor on his side had had the idea to fill it with potato parings. Then a
      procession was formed. Nana came first dragging the wooden shoe. Pauline
      and Victor walked on her right and left. Then the entire crowd of urchins
      followed in order, the big ones first, the little ones next, jostling one
      another; a baby in long skirts about as tall as a boot with an old
      tattered bonnet cocked on one side of its head, brought up the rear. And
      the procession chanted something sad with plenty of ohs! and ahs! Nana had
      said that they were going to play at a funeral; the potato parings
      represented the body. When they had gone the round of the courtyard, they
      recommenced. They thought it immensely amusing.
    

      "What can they be up to?" murmured Madame Boche, who emerged from her room
      to see, ever mistrustful and on the alert.
    

      And when she understood: "But it's my shoe!" cried she furiously. "Ah, the
      rogues!"
    

      She distributed some smacks, clouted Nana on both cheeks and administered
      a kick to Pauline, that great goose who allowed the others to steal her
      mother's shoe. It so happened that Gervaise was filling a bucket at the
      tap. When she beheld Nana, her nose bleeding and choking with sobs, she
      almost sprang at the concierge's chignon. It was not right to hit a child
      as though it were an ox. One could have no heart, one must be the lowest
      of the low if one did so. Madame Boche naturally replied in a similar
      strain. When one had a beast of a girl like that one should keep her
      locked up. At length Boche himself appeared in the doorway to call his
      wife to come in and not to enter into so many explanations with a filthy
      thing like her. There was a regular quarrel.
    

      As a matter of fact things had not gone on very pleasantly between the
      Boches and the Coupeaus for a month past. Gervaise, who was of a very
      generous nature, was continually bestowing wine, broth, oranges and slices
      of cake on the Boches. One night she had taken the remains of an endive
      and beetroot salad to the concierge's room, knowing that the latter would
      have done anything for such a treat. But on the morrow she became quite
      pale with rage on hearing Mademoiselle Remanjou relate how Madame Boche
      had thrown the salad away in the presence of several persons with an air
      of disgust and under the pretext that she, thank goodness, was not yet
      reduced to feeding on things which others had messed about. From that time
      Gervaise took no more presents to the Boches—nothing. Now the Boches
      seemed to think that Gervaise was stealing something which was rightfully
      theirs. Gervaise saw that she had made a mistake. If she hadn't catered to
      them so much in the beginning, they wouldn't have gotten into the habit of
      expecting it and might have remained on good terms with her.
    

      Now the concierge began to spread slander about Gervaise. There was a
      great fuss with the landlord, Monsieur Marescot, at the October rental
      period, because Gervaise was a day late with the rent. Madame Boche
      accused her of eating up all her money in fancy dishes. Monsieur Marescot
      charged into the laundry demanding to be paid at once. He didn't even
      bother to remove his hat. The money was ready and was paid to him
      immediately. The Boches had now made up with the Lorilleuxs who now came
      and did their guzzling in the concierge's lodge. They assured each other
      that they never would have fallen out if it hadn't been for Clump-clump.
      She was enough to set mountains to fighting. Ah! the Boches knew her well
      now, they could understand how much the Lorilleuxs must suffer. And
      whenever she passed beneath the doorway they all affected to sneer at her.
    

      One day, Gervaise went up to see the Lorilleuxs in spite of this. It was
      with respect to mother Coupeau who was then sixty-seven years old. Mother
      Coupeau's eyesight was almost completely gone. Her legs too were no longer
      what they used to be. She had been obliged to give up her last cleaning
      job and now threatened to die of hunger if assistance were not
      forthcoming. Gervaise thought it shameful that a woman of her age, having
      three children should be thus abandoned by heaven and earth. And as
      Coupeau refused to speak to the Lorilleuxs on the subject saying that she,
      Gervaise, could very well go and do so, the latter went up in a fit of
      indignation with which her heart was almost bursting.
    

      When she reached their door she entered without knocking. Nothing had been
      changed since the night when the Lorilleuxs, at their first meeting had
      received her so ungraciously. The same strip of faded woolen stuff
      separated the room from the workshop, a lodging like a gun barrel, and
      which looked as though it had been built for an eel. Right at the back
      Lorilleux, leaning over his bench, was squeezing together one by one the
      links of a piece of chain, whilst Madame Lorilleux, standing in front of
      the vise was passing a gold wire through the draw-plate. In the broad
      daylight the little forge had a rosy reflection.
    

      "Yes, it's I!" said Gervaise. "I daresay you're surprised to see me as
      we're at daggers drawn. But I've come neither for you nor myself you may
      be quite sure. It's for mother Coupeau that I've come. Yes, I have come to
      see if we're going to let her beg her bread from the charity of others."
    

      "Ah, well, that's a fine way to burst in upon one!" murmured Madame
      Lorilleux. "One must have a rare cheek."
    

      And she turned her back and resumed drawing her gold wire, affecting to
      ignore her sister-in-law's presence. But Lorilleux raised his pale face
      and cried:
    

      "What's that you say?"
    

      Then, as he had heard perfectly well, he continued:
    

      "More back-bitings, eh? She's nice, mother Coupeau, to go and cry
      starvation everywhere! Yet only the day before yesterday she dined here.
      We do what we can. We haven't got all the gold of Peru. Only if she goes
      about gossiping with others she had better stay with them, for we don't
      like spies."
    

      He took up the piece of chain and turned his back also, adding as though
      with regret:
    

      "When everyone gives five francs a month, we'll give five francs."
    

      Gervaise had calmed down and felt quite chilled by the wooden looking
      faces of the Lorilleux. She had never once set foot in their rooms without
      experiencing a certain uneasiness. With her eyes fixed on the floor,
      staring at the holes of the wooden grating through which the waste gold
      fell she now explained herself in a reasonable manner. Mother Coupeau had
      three children; if each one gave five francs it would only make fifteen
      francs, and really that was not enough, one could not live on it; they
      must at least triple the sum. But Lorilleux cried out. Where did she think
      he could steal fifteen francs a month? It was quite amusing, people
      thought he was rich simply because he had gold in his place. He began then
      to criticize mother Coupeau: she had to have her morning coffee, she took
      a sip of brandy now and then, she was as demanding as if she were rich. Mon
      Dieu! Sure, everyone liked the good things of life. But if you've
      never saved a sou, you had to do what other folks did and do without.
      Besides, mother Coupeau wasn't too old to work. She could see well enough
      when she was trying to pick a choice morsel from the platter. She was just
      an old spendthrift trying to get others to provide her with comforts. Even
      had he had the means, he would have considered it wrong to support any one
      in idleness.
    

      Gervaise remained conciliatory, and peaceably argued against all this bad
      reasoning. She tried to soften the Lorilleuxs. But the husband ended by no
      longer answering her. The wife was now at the forge scouring a piece of
      chain in the little, long-handled brass saucepan full of lye-water. She
      still affectedly turned her back, as though a hundred leagues away. And
      Gervaise continued speaking, watching them pretending to be absorbed in
      their labor in the midst of the black dust of the workshop, their bodies
      distorted, their clothes patched and greasy, both become stupidly hardened
      like old tools in the pursuit of their narrow mechanical task. Then
      suddenly anger again got the better of her and she exclaimed:
    

      "Very well, I'd rather it was so; keep your money! I'll give mother
      Coupeau a home, do you hear? I picked up a cat the other evening, so I can
      at least do the same for your mother. And she shall be in want of nothing;
      she shall have her coffee and her drop of brandy! Good heavens! what a
      vile family!"
    

      At these words Madame Lorilleux turned round. She brandished the saucepan
      as though she was about to throw the lye-water in her sister-in-law's
      face. She stammered with rage:
    

      "Be off, or I shall do you an injury! And don't count on the five francs
      because I won't give a radish! No, not a radish! Ah well, yes, five
      francs! Mother would be your servant and you would enjoy yourself with my
      five francs! If she goes to live with you, tell her this, she may croak, I
      won't even send her a glass of water. Now off you go! Clear out!"
    

      "What a monster of a woman!" said Gervaise violently slamming the door.
    

      On the morrow she brought mother Coupeau to live with her, putting her bed
      in the inner room where Nana slept. The moving did not take long, for all
      the furniture mother Coupeau had was her bed, an ancient walnut wardrobe
      which was put in the dirty-clothes room, a table, and two chairs. They
      sold the table and had the chairs recaned. From the very first the old
      lady took over the sweeping. She washed the dishes and made herself
      useful, happy to have settled her problem.
    

      The Lorilleux were furious enough to explode, especially since Madame
      Lerat was now back on good terms with the Coupeaus. One day the two
      sisters, the flower-maker and the chainmaker came to blows about Gervaise
      because Madame Lerat dared to express approval of the way she was taking
      care of their mother. When she noticed how this upset the other, she went
      on to remark that Gervaise had magnificent eyes, eyes warm enough to set
      paper on fire. The two of them commenced slapping each other and swore
      they never would see each other again. Nowadays Madame Lerat often spent
      her evenings in the shop, laughing to herself at Clemence's spicy remarks.
    

      Three years passed by. There were frequent quarrels and reconciliations.
      Gervaise did not care a straw for the Lorilleux, the Boches and all the
      others who were not of her way of thinking. If they did not like it, they
      could forget it. She earned what she wished, that was her principal
      concern. The people of the neighborhood had ended by greatly esteeming
      her, for one did not find many customers so kind as she was, paying
      punctually, never caviling or higgling. She bought her bread of Madame
      Coudeloup, in the Rue des Poissonniers; her meat of stout Charles, a
      butcher in the Rue Polonceau; her groceries at Lehongre's, in the Rue de
      la Goutte-d'Or, almost opposite her own shop. Francois, the wine merchant
      at the corner of the street, supplied her with wine in baskets of fifty
      bottles. Her neighbor Vigouroux, whose wife's hips must have been black
      and blue, the men pinched her so much, sold coke to her at the same price
      as the gas company. And, in all truth, her tradespeople served her
      faithfully, knowing that there was everything to gain by treating her
      well.
    

      Besides, whenever she went out around the neighborhood, she was greeted
      everywhere. She felt quite at home. Sometimes she put off doing a laundry
      job just to enjoy being outdoors among her good friends. On days when she
      was too rushed to do her own cooking and had to go out to buy something
      already cooked, she would stop to gossip with her arms full of bowls. The
      neighbor she respected the most was still the watchmaker. Often she would
      cross the street to greet him in his tiny cupboard of a shop, taking
      pleasure in the gaiety of the little cuckoo clocks with their pendulums
      ticking away the hours in chorus.
    

      
 
    

      One afternoon in the autumn Gervaise, who had been taking some washing
      home to a customer in the Rue des Portes-Blanches, found herself at the
      bottom of the Rue des Poissonniers just as the day was declining. It had
      rained in the morning, the weather was very mild and an odor rose from the
      greasy pavement; and the laundress, burdened with her big basket, was
      rather out of breath, slow of step, and inclined to take her ease as she
      ascended the street with the vague preoccupation of a longing increased by
      her weariness. She would have liked to have had something to eat. Then, on
      raising her eyes she beheld the name of the Rue Marcadet, and she suddenly
      had the idea of going to see Goujet at his forge. He had no end of times
      told her to look in any day she was curious to see how iron was wrought.
      Besides in the presence of other workmen she would ask for Etienne, and
      make believe that she had merely called for the youngster.
    

      The factory was somewhere on this end of the Rue Marcadet, but she didn't
      know exactly where and street numbers were often lacking on those
      ramshackle buildings separated by vacant lots. She wouldn't have lived on
      this street for all the gold in the world. It was a wide street, but
      dirty, black with soot from factories, with holes in the pavement and deep
      ruts filled with stagnant water. On both sides were rows of sheds,
      workshops with beams and brickwork exposed so that they seemed unfinished,
      a messy collection of masonry. Beside them were dubious lodging houses and
      even more dubious taverns. All she could recall was that the bolt factory
      was next to a yard full of scrap iron and rags, a sort of open sewer
      spread over the ground, storing merchandise worth hundreds of thousands of
      francs, according to Goujet.
    

      The street was filled with a noisy racket. Exhaust pipes on roofs puffed
      out violent jets of steam; an automatic sawmill added a rhythmic
      screeching; a button factory shook the ground with the rumbling of its
      machines. She was looking up toward the Montmartre height, hesitant,
      uncertain whether to continue, when a gust of wind blew down a mass of
      sooty smoke that covered the entire street. She closed her eyes and held
      her breath. At that moment she heard the sound of hammers in cadence.
      Without realizing it, she had arrived directly in front of the bolt
      factory which she now recognized by the vacant lot beside it full of piles
      of scrap iron and old rags.
    

      She still hesitated, not knowing where to enter. A broken fence opened a
      passage which seemed to lead through the heaps of rubbish from some
      buildings recently pulled down. Two planks had been thrown across a large
      puddle of muddy water that barred the way. She ended by venturing along
      them, turned to the left and found herself lost in the depths of a strange
      forest of old carts, standing on end with their shafts in the air, and of
      hovels in ruins, the wood-work of which was still standing. Toward the
      back, stabbing through the half-light of sundown, a flame gleamed red. The
      clamor of the hammers had ceased. She was advancing carefully when a
      workman, his face blackened with coal-dust and wearing a goatee passed
      near her, casting a side-glance with his pale eyes.
    

      "Sir," asked she, "it's here is it not that a boy named Etienne works?
      He's my son."
    

      "Etienne, Etienne," repeated the workman in a hoarse voice as he twisted
      himself about. "Etienne; no I don't know him."
    

      An alcoholic reek like that from old brandy casks issued from his mouth.
      Meeting a woman in this dark corner seemed to be giving the fellow ideas,
      and so Gervaise drew back saying:
    

      "But yet it's here that Monsieur Goujet works, isn't it?"
    

      "Ah! Goujet, yes!" said the workman; "I know Goujet! If you come for
      Goujet, go right to the end."
    

      And turning round he called out at the top of his voice, which had a sound
      of cracked brass:
    

      "I say Golden-Mug, here's a lady wants you!"
    

      But a clanging of iron drowned the cry! Gervaise went to the end. She
      reached a door and stretching out her neck looked in. At first she could
      distinguish nothing. The forge had died down, but there was still a little
      glow which held back the advancing shadows from its corner. Great shadows
      seemed to float in the air. At times black shapes passed before the fire,
      shutting off this last bit of brightness, silhouettes of men so strangely
      magnified that their arms and legs were indistinct. Gervaise, not daring
      to venture in, called from the doorway in a faint voice:
    

      "Monsieur Goujet! Monsieur Goujet!"
    

      Suddenly all became lighted up. Beneath the puff of the bellows a jet of
      white flame had ascended and the whole interior of the shed could be seen,
      walled in by wooden planks, with openings roughly plastered over, and
      brick walls reinforcing the corners. Coal-ash had painted the whole
      expanse a sooty grey. Spider webs hung from the beams like rags hung up to
      dry, heavy with the accumulated dust of years. On shelves along the walls,
      or hanging from nails, or tossed into corners, she saw rusty iron,
      battered implements and huge tools. The white flame flared higher, like an
      explosion of dazzling sunlight revealing the trampled dirt underfoot,
      where the polished steel of four anvils fixed on blocks took on a
      reflection of silver sprinkled with gold.
    

      Then Gervaise recognized Goujet in front of the forge by his beautiful
      yellow beard. Etienne was blowing the bellows. Two other workmen were
      there, but she only beheld Goujet and walked forward and stood before him.
    

      "Why it's Madame Gervaise!" he exclaimed with a bright look on his face.
      "What a pleasant surprise."
    

      But as his comrades appeared to be rather amused, he pushed Etienne
      towards his mother and resumed:
    

      "You've come to see the youngster. He behaves himself well, he's beginning
      to get some strength in his wrists."
    

      "Well!" she said, "it isn't easy to find your way here. I thought I was
      going to the end of the world."
    

      After telling about her journey, she asked why no one in the shop knew
      Etienne's name. Goujet laughed and explained to her that everybody called
      him "Little Zouzou" because he had his hair cut short like that of a
      Zouave. While they were talking together Etienne stopped working the
      bellows and the flame of the forge dwindled to a rosy glow amid the
      gathering darkness. Touched by the presence of this smiling young woman,
      the blacksmith stood gazing at her.
    

      Then, as neither continued speaking, he seemed to recollect and broke the
      silence:
    

      "Excuse me, Madame Gervaise, I've something that has to be finished.
      You'll stay, won't you? You're not in anybody's way."
    

      She remained. Etienne returned to the bellows. The forge was soon ablaze
      again with a cloud of sparks; the more so as the youngster, wanting to
      show his mother what he could do, was making the bellows blow a regular
      hurricane. Goujet, standing up watching a bar of iron heating, was waiting
      with the tongs in his hand. The bright glare illuminated him without a
      shadow—sleeves rolled back, shirt neck open, bare arms and chest.
      When the bar was at white heat he seized it with the tongs and cut it with
      a hammer on the anvil, in pieces of equal length, as though he had been
      gently breaking pieces of glass. Then he put the pieces back into the
      fire, from which he took them one by one to work them into shape. He was
      forging hexagonal rivets. He placed each piece in a tool-hole of the
      anvil, bent down the iron that was to form the head, flattened the six
      sides and threw the finished rivet still red-hot on to the black earth,
      where its bright light gradually died out; and this with a continuous
      hammering, wielding in his right hand a hammer weighing five pounds,
      completing a detail at every blow, turning and working the iron with such
      dexterity that he was able to talk to and look at those about him. The
      anvil had a silvery ring. Without a drop of perspiration, quite at his
      ease, he struck in a good-natured sort of a way, not appearing to exert
      himself more than on the evenings when he cut out pictures at home.
    

      "Oh! these are little rivets of twenty millimetres," said he in reply to
      Gervaise's questions. "A fellow can do his three hundred a day. But it
      requires practice, for one's arm soon grows weary."
    

      And when she asked him if his wrist did not feel stiff at the end of the
      day he laughed aloud. Did she think him a young lady? His wrist had had
      plenty of drudgery for fifteen years past; it was now as strong as the
      iron implements it had been so long in contact with. She was right though;
      a gentleman who had never forged a rivet or a bolt, and who would try to
      show off with his five pound hammer, would find himself precious stiff in
      the course of a couple of hours. It did not seem much, but a few years of
      it often did for some very strong fellows. During this conversation the
      other workmen were also hammering away all together. Their tall shadows
      danced about in the light, the red flashes of the iron that the fire
      traversed, the gloomy recesses, clouds of sparks darted out from beneath
      the hammers and shone like suns on a level with the anvils. And Gervaise,
      feeling happy and interested in the movement round the forge, did not
      think of leaving. She was going a long way round to get nearer to Etienne
      without having her hands burnt, when she saw the dirty and bearded
      workman, whom she had spoken to outside, enter.
    

      "So you've found him, madame?" asked he in his drunken bantering way. "You
      know, Golden-Mug, it's I who told madame where to find you."
    

      He was called Salted-Mouth, otherwise Drink-without-Thirst, the brick of
      bricks, a dab hand at bolt forging, who wetted his iron every day with a
      pint and a half of brandy. He had gone out to have a drop, because he felt
      he wanted greasing to make him last till six o'clock. When he learnt that
      Little Zouzou's real name was Etienne, he thought it very funny; and he
      showed his black teeth as he laughed. Then he recognized Gervaise. Only
      the day before he had had a glass of wine with Coupeau. You could speak to
      Coupeau about Salted-Mouth, otherwise Drink-without-Thirst; he would at
      once say: "He's a jolly dog!" Ah! that joker Coupeau! He was one of the
      right sort; he stood treat oftener than his turn.
    

      "I'm awfully glad to know you're his missus," added he.
    

      "He deserves to have a pretty wife. Eh, Golden-Mug, madame is a fine
      woman, isn't she?"
    

      He was becoming quite gallant, sidling up towards the laundress, who took
      hold of her basket and held it in front of her so as to keep him at a
      distance. Goujet, annoyed and seeing that his comrade was joking because
      of his friendship for Gervaise, called out to him:
    

      "I say, lazybones, what about the forty millimetre bolts? Do you think
      you're equal to them now that you've got your gullet full, you confounded
      guzzler?"
    

      The blacksmith was alluding to an order for big bolts which necessitated
      two beaters at the anvil.
    

      "I'm ready to start at this moment, big baby!" replied Salted-Mouth,
      otherwise Drink-without-Thirst. "It sucks it's thumb and thinks itself a
      man. In spite of your size I'm equal to you!"
    

      "Yes, that's it, at once. Look sharp and off we go!"
    

      "Right you are, my boy!"
    

      They taunted each other, stimulated by Gervaise's presence. Goujet placed
      the pieces of iron that had been cut beforehand in the fire, then he fixed
      a tool-hole of large bore on an anvil. His comrade had taken from against
      the wall two sledge-hammers weighing twenty pounds each, the two big
      sisters of the factory whom the workers called Fifine and Dedele. And he
      continued to brag, talking of a half-gross of rivets which he had forged
      for the Dunkirk lighthouse, regular jewels, things to be put in a museum,
      they were so daintily finished off. Hang it all, no! he did not fear
      competition; before meeting with another chap like him, you might search
      every factory in the capital. They were going to have a laugh; they would
      see what they would see.
    

      "Madame will be judge," said he, turning towards the young woman.
    

      "Enough chattering," cried Goujet. "Now then, Zouzou, show your muscle!
      It's not hot enough, my lad."
    

      But Salted-Mouth, otherwise Drink-without-Thirst, asked: "So we strike
      together?"
    

      "Not a bit of it! each his own bolt, my friend!"
    

      This statement operated as a damper, and Goujet's comrade, on hearing it,
      remained speechless, in spite of his boasting. Bolts of forty millimetres
      fashioned by one man had never before been seen; the more so as the bolts
      were to be round-headed, a work of great difficulty, a real masterpiece to
      achieve.
    

      The three other workmen came over, leaving their jobs, to watch. A tall,
      lean one wagered a bottle of wine that Goujet would be beaten. Meanwhile
      the two blacksmiths had chosen their sledge hammers with eyes closed,
      because Fifine weighed a half pound more than Dedele. Salted-Mouth,
      otherwise Drink-without-Thirst, had the good luck to put his hand on
      Dedele; Fifine fell to Golden-Mug.
    

      While waiting for the iron to get hot enough, Salted-Mouth, otherwise
      Drink-without-Thirst, again showing off, struck a pose before the anvil
      while casting side glances toward Gervaise. He planted himself solidly,
      tapping his feet impatiently like a man ready for a fight, throwing all
      his strength into practice swings with Dedele. Mon Dieu! He was
      good at this; he could have flattened the Vendome column like a pancake.
    

      "Now then, off you go!" said Goujet, placing one of the pieces of iron, as
      thick as a girl's wrist, in the tool-hole.
    

      Salted-Mouth, otherwise Drink-without-Thirst, leant back, and swung Dedele
      round with both hands. Short and lean, with his goatee bristling, and with
      his wolf-like eyes glaring beneath his unkempt hair, he seemed to snap at
      each swing of the hammer, springing up from the ground as though carried
      away by the force he put into the blow. He was a fierce one, who fought
      with the iron, annoyed at finding it so hard, and he even gave a grunt
      whenever he thought he had planted a fierce stroke. Perhaps brandy did
      weaken other people's arms, but he needed brandy in his veins, instead of
      blood. The drop he had taken a little while before had made his carcass as
      warm as a boiler; he felt he had the power of a steam-engine within him.
      And the iron seemed to be afraid of him this time; he flattened it more
      easily than if it had been a quid of tobacco. And it was a sight to see
      how Dedele waltzed! She cut such capers, with her tootsies in the air,
      just like a little dancer at the Elysee Montmartre, who exhibits her fine
      underclothes; for it would never do to dawdle, iron is so deceitful, it
      cools at once, just to spite the hammer. With thirty blows, Salted-Mouth,
      otherwise Drink-without-Thirst, had fashioned the head of his bolt. But he
      panted, his eyes were half out of his head, and got into a great rage as
      he felt his arms growing tired. Then, carried away by wrath, jumping about
      and yelling, he gave two more blows, just out of revenge for his trouble.
      When he took the bolt from the hole, it was deformed, its head being askew
      like a hunchback's.
    

      "Come now! Isn't that quickly beaten into shape?" said he all the same,
      with his self-confidence, as he presented his work to Gervaise.
    

      "I'm no judge, sir," replied the laundress, reservedly.
    

      But she saw plainly enough the marks of Dedele's last two kicks on the
      bolt, and she was very pleased. She bit her lips so as not to laugh, for
      now Goujet had every chance of winning.
    

      It was now Golden-Mug's turn. Before commencing, he gave the laundress a
      look full of confident tenderness. Then he did not hurry himself. He
      measured his distance, and swung the hammer from on high with all his
      might and at regular intervals. He had the classic style, accurate, evenly
      balanced, and supple. Fifine, in his hands, did not cut capers, like at a
      dance-hall, but made steady, certain progress; she rose and fell in
      cadence, like a lady of quality solemnly leading some ancient minuet.
    

      There was no brandy in Golden-Mug's veins, only blood, throbbing
      powerfully even into Fifine and controlling the job. That stalwart fellow!
      What a magnificent man he was at work. The high flame of the forge shone
      full on his face. His whole face seemed golden indeed with his short hair
      curling over his forehead and his splendid yellow beard. His neck was as
      straight as a column and his immense chest was wide enough for a woman to
      sleep across it. His shoulders and sculptured arms seemed to have been
      copied from a giant's statue in some museum. You could see his muscles
      swelling, mountains of flesh rippling and hardening under the skin; his
      shoulders, his chest, his neck expanded; he seemed to shed light about
      him, becoming beautiful and all-powerful like a kindly god.
    

      He had now swung Fifine twenty times, his eyes always fixed on the iron,
      drawing a deep breath with each blow, yet showing only two great drops of
      sweat trickling down from his temples. He counted: "Twenty-one,
      twenty-two, twenty-three—" Calmly Fifine continued, like a noble
      lady dancing.
    

      "What a show-off!" jeeringly murmured Salted-Mouth, otherwise
      Drink-without-Thirst.
    

      Gervaise, standing opposite Goujet, looked at him with an affectionate
      smile. Mon Dieu! What fools men are! Here these two men were,
      pounding on their bolts to pay court to her. She understood it. They were
      battling with hammer blows, like two big red roosters vying for the favors
      of a little white hen. Sometimes the human heart has fantastic ways of
      expressing itself. This thundering of Dedele and Fifine upon the anvil was
      for her, this forge roaring and overflowing was for her. They were forging
      their love before her, battling over her.
    

      To be honest, she rather enjoyed it. All women are happy to receive
      compliments. The mighty blows of Golden-Mug found echoes in her heart;
      they rang within her, a crystal-clear music in time with the throbbing of
      her pulse. She had the feeling that this hammering was driving something
      deep inside of her, something solid, something hard as the iron of the
      bolt.
    

      She had no doubt Goujet would win. Salted-Mouth, otherwise
      Drink-without-Thirst, was much too ugly in his dirty tunic, jumping around
      like a monkey that had escaped from a zoo. She waited, blushing red, happy
      that the heat could explain the blush.
    

      Goujet was still counting.
    

      "And twenty-eight!" cried he at length, laying the hammer on the ground.
      "It's finished; you can look."
    

      The head of the bolt was clean, polished, and without a flaw, regular
      goldsmith's work, with the roundness of a marble cast in a mold. The other
      men looked at it and nodded their heads; there was no denying it was
      lovely enough to be worshipped. Salted-Mouth, otherwise
      Drink-without-Thirst, tried indeed to chuff; but it was no use, and ended
      by returning to his anvil, with his nose put out of joint. Gervaise had
      squeezed up against Goujet, as though to get a better view. Etienne having
      let go the bellows, the forge was once more becoming enveloped in shadow,
      like a brilliant red sunset suddenly giving way to black night. And the
      blacksmith and the laundress experienced a sweet pleasure in feeling this
      gloom surround them in that shed black with soot and filings, and where an
      odor of old iron prevailed. They could not have thought themselves more
      alone in the Bois de Vincennes had they met there in the depths of some
      copse. He took her hand as though he had conquered her.
    

      Outside, they scarcely exchanged a word. All he could find to say was that
      she might have taken Etienne away with her, had it not been that there was
      still another half-hour's work to get through. When she started away he
      called her back, wanting a few more minutes with her.
    

      "Come along. You haven't seen all the place. It's quite interesting."
    

      He led her to another shed where the owner was installing a new machine.
      She hesitated in the doorway, oppressed by an instinctive dread. The great
      hall was vibrating from the machines and black shadows filled the air. He
      reassured her with a smile, swearing that there was nothing to fear, only
      she should be careful not to let her skirts get caught in any of the
      gears. He went first and she followed into the deafening hubbub of
      whistling, amid clouds of steam peopled by human shadows moving busily.
    

      The passages were very narrow and there were obstacles to step over, holes
      to avoid, passing carts to move back from. She couldn't distinguish
      anything clearly or hear what Goujet was saying.
    

      Gervaise looked up and stopped to stare at the leather belts hanging from
      the roof in a gigantic spider web, each strip ceaselessly revolving. The
      steam engine that drove them was hidden behind a low brick wall so that
      the belts seemed to be moving by themselves. She stumbled and almost fell
      while looking up.
    

      Goujet raised his voice with explanations. There were the tapping machines
      operated by women, which put threads on bolts and nuts. Their steel gears
      were shining with oil. She could follow the entire process. She nodded her
      head and smiled.
    

      She was still a little tense, however, feeling uneasy at being so small
      among these rough metalworkers. She jumped back more than once, her blood
      suddenly chilled by the dull thud of a machine.
    

      Goujet had stopped before one of the rivet machines. He stood there
      brooding, his head lowered, his gaze fixed. This machine forged forty
      millimetre rivets with the calm ease of a giant. Nothing could be simpler.
      The stoker took the iron shank from the furnace; the striker put it into
      the socket, where a continuous stream of water cooled it to prevent
      softening of the steel. The press descended and the bolt flew out onto the
      ground, its head as round as though cast in a mold. Every twelve hours
      this machine made hundreds of kilograms of bolts!
    

      Goujet was not a mean person, but there were moments when he wanted to
      take Fifine and smash this machine to bits because he was angry to see
      that its arms were stronger than his own. He reasoned with himself,
      telling himself that human flesh cannot compete with steel. But he was
      still deeply hurt. The day would come when machinery would destroy the
      skilled worker. Their day's pay had already fallen from twelve francs to
      nine francs. There was talk of cutting it again. He stared at it,
      frowning, for three minutes without saying a word. His yellow beard seemed
      to bristle defiantly. Then, gradually an expression of resignation came
      over his face and he turned toward Gervaise who was clinging tightly to
      him and said with a sad smile:
    

      "Well! That machine would certainly win a contest. But perhaps it will be
      for the good of mankind in the long run."
    

      Gervaise didn't care a bit about the welfare of mankind. Smiling, she said
      to Goujet:
    

      "I like yours better, because they show the hand of an artist."
    

      Hearing this gave him great happiness because he had been afraid that she
      might be scornful of him after seeing the machines. Mon Dieu! He
      might be stronger than Salted-Mouth, otherwise Drink-without-Thirst, but
      the machines were stronger yet. When Gervaise finally took her leave,
      Goujet was so happy that he almost crushed her with a hug.
    

      The laundress went every Saturday to the Goujets to deliver their washing.
      They still lived in the little house in the Rue Neuve de la Goutte-d'Or.
      During the first year she had regularly repaid them twenty francs a month;
      so as not to jumble up the accounts, the washing-book was only made up at
      the end of each month, and then she added to the amount whatever sum was
      necessary to make the twenty francs, for the Goujets' washing rarely came
      to more than seven or eight francs during that time. She had therefore
      paid off nearly half the sum owing, when one quarter day, not knowing what
      to do, some of her customers not having kept their promises, she had been
      obliged to go to the Goujets and borrow from them sufficient for her rent.
      On two other occasions she had also applied to them for the money to pay
      her workwomen, so that the debt had increased again to four hundred and
      twenty-five francs. Now, she no longer gave a halfpenny; she worked off
      the amount solely by the washing. It was not that she worked less, or that
      her business was not so prosperous. But something was going wrong in her
      home; the money seemed to melt away, and she was glad when she was able to
      make both ends meet. Mon Dieu! What's the use of complaining as
      long as one gets by. She was putting on weight and this caused her to
      become a bit lazy. She no longer had the energy that she had in the past.
      Oh well, there was always something coming in.
    

      Madame Goujet felt a motherly concern for Gervaise and sometimes
      reprimanded her. This wasn't due to the money owed but because she liked
      her and didn't want to see her get into difficulties. She never mentioned
      the debt. In short, she behaved with the utmost delicacy.
    

      The morrow of Gervaise's visit to the forge happened to be the last
      Saturday of the month. When she reached the Goujets, where she made a
      point of going herself, her basket had so weighed on her arms that she was
      quite two minutes before she could get her breath. One would hardly
      believe how heavy clothes are, especially when there are sheets among
      them.
    

      "Are you sure you've brought everything?" asked Madame Goujet.
    

      She was very strict on that point. She insisted on having her washing
      brought home without a single article being kept back for the sake of
      order, as she said. She also required the laundress always to come on the
      day arranged and at the same hour; in that way there was no time wasted.
    

      "Oh! yes, everything is here," replied Gervaise smiling. "You know I never
      leave anything behind."
    

      "That's true," admitted Madame Goujet; "you've got into many bad habits
      but you're still free of that one."
    

      And while the laundress emptied her basket, laying the linen on the bed,
      the old woman praised her; she never burnt the things nor tore them like
      so many others did, neither did she pull the buttons off with the iron;
      only she used too much blue and made the shirt-fronts too stiff with
      starch.
    

      "Just look, it's like cardboard," continued she, making one crackle
      between her fingers. "My son does not complain, but it cuts his neck.
      To-morrow his neck will be all scratched when we return from Vincennes."
    

      "No, don't say that!" exclaimed Gervaise, quite grieved. "To look nice,
      shirts must be rather stiff, otherwise it's as though one had a rag on
      one's body. You should just see what the gentlemen wear. I do all your
      things myself. The workwomen never touch them and I assure you I take
      great pains. I would, if necessary, do everything over a dozen times,
      because it's for you, you know."
    

      She slightly blushed as she stammered out the last words. She was afraid
      of showing the great pleasure she took in ironing Goujet's shirts. She
      certainly had no wicked thoughts, but she was none the less a little bit
      ashamed.
    

      "Oh! I'm not complaining of your work; I know it's perfection," said
      Madame Goujet. "For instance, you've done this cap splendidly, only you
      could bring out the embroidery like that. And the flutings are all so
      even. Oh! I recognize your hand at once. When you give even a dish-cloth
      to one of your workwomen I detect it at once. In future, use a little less
      starch, that's all! Goujet does not care to look like a stylish
      gentleman."
    

      She had taken out her notebook and was crossing off the various items.
      Everything was in order. She noticed that Gervaise was charging six sous
      for each bonnet. She protested, but had to agree that it was in line with
      present prices. Men's shirts were five sous, women's underdrawers four
      sous, pillow-cases a sou and a half, and aprons one sou. No, the prices
      weren't high. Some laundresses charged a sou more for each item.
    

      Gervaise was now calling out the soiled clothes, as she packed them in her
      basket, for Madame Goujet to list. Then she lingered on, embarrassed by a
      request which she wished to make.
    

      "Madame Goujet," she said at length, "if it does not inconvenience you, I
      would like to take the money for the month's washing."
    

      It so happened that that month was a very heavy one, the account they had
      made up together amounting to ten francs, seven sous. Madame Goujet looked
      at her a moment in a serious manner, then she replied:
    

      "My child, it shall be as you wish. I will not refuse you the money as you
      are in need of it. Only it's scarcely the way to pay off your debt; I say
      that for your sake, you know. Really now, you should be careful."
    

      Gervaise received the lecture with bowed head and stammering excuses. The
      ten francs were to make up the amount of a bill she had given her coke
      merchant. But on hearing the word "bill," Madame Goujet became severer
      still. She gave herself as an example; she had reduced her expenditure
      ever since Goujet's wages had been lowered from twelve to nine francs a
      day. When one was wanting in wisdom whilst young, one dies of hunger in
      one's old age. But she held back and didn't tell Gervaise that she gave
      her their laundry only in order to help her pay off the debt. Before that
      she had done all her own washing, and she would have to do it herself
      again if the laundry continued taking so much cash out of her pocket.
      Gervaise spoke her thanks and left quickly as soon as she had received the
      ten francs seven sous. Outside on the landing she was so relieved she
      wanted to dance. She was becoming used to the annoying, unpleasant
      difficulties caused by a shortage of money and preferred to remember not
      the embarrassment but the joy in escaping from them.
    

      It was also on that Saturday that Gervaise met with a rather strange
      adventure as she descended the Goujets' staircase. She was obliged to
      stand up close against the stair-rail with her basket to make way for a
      tall bare-headed woman who was coming up, carrying in her hand a very
      fresh mackerel, with bloody gills, in a piece of paper. She recognized
      Virginie, the girl whose face she had slapped at the wash-house. They
      looked each other full in the face. Gervaise shut her eyes. She thought
      for a moment that she was going to be hit in the face with the fish. But
      no, Virginie even smiled slightly. Then, as her basket was blocking the
      staircase, the laundress wished to show how polite she, too, could be.
    

      "I beg your pardon," she said.
    

      "You are completely excused," replied the tall brunette.
    

      And they remained conversing together on the stairs, reconciled at once
      without having ventured on a single allusion to the past. Virginie, then
      twenty-nine years old, had become a superb woman of strapping proportions,
      her face, however, looking rather long between her two plaits of jet black
      hair. She at once began to relate her history just to show off. She had a
      husband now; she had married in the spring an ex-journeyman cabinetmaker,
      who recently left the army, and who had applied to be admitted into the
      police, because a post of that kind is more to be depended upon and more
      respectable. She had been out to buy the mackerel for him.
    

      "He adores mackerel," said she. "We must spoil them, those naughty men,
      mustn't we? But come up. You shall see our home. We are standing in a
      draught here."
    

      After Gervaise had told of her own marriage and that she had formerly
      occupied the very apartment Virginie now had, Virginie urged her even more
      strongly to come up since it is always nice to visit a spot where one had
      been happy.
    

      Virginie had lived for five years on the Left Bank at Gros-Caillou. That
      was where she had met her husband while he was still in the army. But she
      got tired of it, and wanted to come back to the Goutte-d'Or neighborhood
      where she knew everyone. She had only been living in the rooms opposite
      the Goujets for two weeks. Oh! everything was still a mess, but they were
      slowly getting it in order.
    

      Then, still on the staircase, they finally told each other their names.
    

      "Madame Coupeau."
    

      "Madame Poisson."
    

      And from that time forth, they called each other on every possible
      occasion Madame Poisson and Madame Coupeau, solely for the pleasure of
      being madame, they who in former days had been acquainted when occupying
      rather questionable positions. However, Gervaise felt rather mistrustful
      at heart. Perhaps the tall brunette had made it up the better to avenge
      herself for the beating at the wash-house by concocting some plan worthy
      of a spiteful hypocritical creature. Gervaise determined to be upon her
      guard. For the time being, as Virginie behaved so nicely, she would be
      nice also.
    

      In the room upstairs, Poisson, the husband, a man of thirty-five, with a
      cadaverous-looking countenance and carroty moustaches and beard, was
      seated working at a table near the window. He was making little boxes. His
      only tools were a knife, a tiny saw the size of a nail file and a pot of
      glue. He was using wood from old cigar boxes, thin boards of unfinished
      mahogany upon which he executed fretwork and embellishments of
      extraordinary delicacy. All year long he worked at making the same size
      boxes, only varying them occasionally by inlay work, new designs for the
      cover, or putting compartments inside. He did not sell his work, he
      distributed it in presents to persons of his acquaintance. It was for his
      own amusement, a way of occupying his time while waiting for his
      appointment to the police force. It was all that remained with him from
      his former occupation of cabinetmaking.
    

      Poisson rose from his seat and politely bowed to Gervaise, when his wife
      introduced her as an old friend. But he was no talker; he at once returned
      to his little saw. From time to time he merely glanced in the direction of
      the mackerel placed on the corner of the chest of drawers. Gervaise was
      very pleased to see her old lodging once more. She told them whereabouts
      her own furniture stood, and pointed out the place on the floor where Nana
      had been born. How strange it was to meet like this again, after so many
      years! They never dreamed of running into each other like this and even
      living in the same rooms.
    

      Virginie added some further details. Her husband had inherited a little
      money from an aunt and he would probably set her up in a shop before long.
      Meanwhile she was still sewing. At length, at the end of a full half hour,
      the laundress took her leave. Poisson scarcely seemed to notice her
      departure. While seeing her to the door, Virginie promised to return the
      visit. And she would have Gervaise do her laundry. While Virginie was
      keeping her in further conversation on the landing, Gervaise had the
      feeling that she wanted to say something about Lantier and her sister
      Adele, and this notion upset her a bit. But not a word was uttered
      respecting those unpleasant things; they parted, wishing each other
      good-bye in a very amiable manner.
    

      "Good-bye, Madame Coupeau."
    

      "Good-bye, Madame Poisson."
    

      That was the starting point of a great friendship. A week later, Virginie
      never passed Gervaise's shop without going in; and she remained there
      gossiping for hours together, to such an extent indeed that Poisson,
      filled with anxiety, fearing she had been run over, would come and seek
      her with his expressionless and death-like countenance. Now that she was
      seeing the dressmaker every day Gervaise became aware of a strange
      obsession. Every time Virginie began to talk Gervaise had the feeling
      Lantier was going to be mentioned. So she had Lantier on her mind
      throughout all of Virginie's visits. This was silly because, in fact, she
      didn't care a bit about Lantier or Adele at this time. She was quite
      certain that she had no curiosity as to what had happened to either of
      them. But this obsession got hold of her in spite of herself. Anyway, she
      didn't hold it against Virginie, it wasn't her fault, surely. She enjoyed
      being with her and looked forward to her visits.
    

      Meanwhile winter had come, the Coupeaus' fourth winter in the Rue de la
      Goutte-d'Or. December and January were particularly cold. It froze hard as
      it well could. After New Year's day the snow remained three weeks without
      melting. It did not interfere with work, but the contrary, for winter is
      the best season for the ironers. It was very pleasant inside the shop!
      There was never any ice on the window-panes like there was at the grocer's
      and the hosier's opposite. The stove was always stuffed with coke and kept
      things as hot as a Turkish bath. With the laundry steaming overhead you
      could almost imagine it was summer. You were quite comfortable with the
      doors closed and so much warmth everywhere that you were tempted to doze
      off with your eyes open. Gervaise laughed and said it reminded her of
      summer in the country. The street traffic made no noise in the snow and
      you could hardly hear the pedestrians who passed by. Only children's
      voices were heard in the silence, especially the noisy band of urchins who
      had made a long slide in the gutter near the blacksmith's shop.
    

      Gervaise would sometimes go over to the door, wipe the moisture from one
      of the panes with her hand, and look out to see what was happening to her
      neighborhood due to this extraordinary cold spell. Not one nose was being
      poked out of the adjacent shops. The entire neighborhood was muffled in
      snow. The only person she was able to exchange nods with was the
      coal-dealer next door, who still walked out bare-headed despite the severe
      freeze.
    

      What was especially enjoyable in this awful weather was to have some nice
      hot coffee in the middle of the day. The workwomen had no cause for
      complaint. The mistress made it very strong and without a grain of
      chicory. It was quite different to Madame Fauconnier's coffee, which was
      like ditch-water. Only whenever mother Coupeau undertook to make it, it
      was always an interminable time before it was ready, because she would
      fall asleep over the kettle. On these occasions, when the workwomen had
      finished their lunch, they would do a little ironing whilst waiting for
      the coffee.
    

      It so happened that on the morrow of Twelfth-day half-past twelve struck
      and still the coffee was not ready. It seemed to persist in declining to
      pass through the strainer. Mother Coupeau tapped against the pot with a
      tea-spoon; and one could hear the drops falling slowly, one by one, and
      without hurrying themselves any the more.
    

      "Leave it alone," said tall Clemence; "you'll make it thick. To-day
      there'll be as much to eat as to drink."
    

      Tall Clemence was working on a man's shirt, the plaits of which she
      separated with her finger-nail. She had caught a cold, her eyes were
      frightfully swollen and her chest was shaken with fits of coughing, which
      doubled her up beside the work-table. With all that she had not even a
      handkerchief round her neck and she was dressed in some cheap flimsy
      woolen stuff in which she shivered. Close by, Madame Putois, wrapped up in
      flannel muffled up to her ears, was ironing a petticoat which she turned
      round the skirt-board, the narrow end of which rested on the back of a
      chair; whilst a sheet laid on the floor prevented the petticoat from
      getting dirty as it trailed along the tiles. Gervaise alone occupied half
      the work-table with some embroidered muslin curtains, over which she
      passed her iron in a straight line with her arms stretched out to avoid
      making any creases. All on a sudden the coffee running through noisily
      caused her to raise her head. It was that squint-eyed Augustine who had
      just given it an outlet by thrusting a spoon through the strainer.
    

      "Leave it alone!" cried Gervaise. "Whatever is the matter with you? It'll
      be like drinking mud now."
    

      Mother Coupeau had placed five glasses on a corner of the work-table that
      was free. The women now left their work. The mistress always poured out
      the coffee herself after putting two lumps of sugar into each glass. It
      was the moment that they all looked forward to. On this occasion, as each
      one took her glass and squatted down on a little stool in front of the
      stove, the shop-door opened. Virginie entered, shivering all over.
    

      "Ah, my children," said she, "it cuts you in two! I can no longer feel my
      ears. The cold is something awful!"
    

      "Why, it's Madame Poisson!" exclaimed Gervaise. "Ah, well! You've come at
      the right time. You must have some coffee with us."
    

      "On my word, I can't say no. One feels the frost in one's bones merely by
      crossing the street."
    

      There was still some coffee left, luckily. Mother Coupeau went and fetched
      a sixth glass, and Gervaise let Virginie help herself to sugar out of
      politeness. The workwomen moved to give Virginie a small space close to
      the stove. Her nose was very red, she shivered a bit, pressing her hands
      which were stiff with cold around the glass to warm them. She had just
      come from the grocery store where you froze to death waiting for a
      quarter-pound of cheese and so she raved about the warmth of the shop. It
      felt so good on one's skin. After warming up, she stretched out her long
      legs and the six of them relaxed together, supping their coffee slowly,
      surround by all the work still to be done. Mother Coupeau and Virginie
      were the only ones on chairs, the others, on low benches, seemed to be
      sitting on the floor. Squint-eyed Augustine had pulled over a corner of
      the cloth below the skirt, stretching herself out on it.
    

      No one spoke at first; all kept their noses in their glasses, enjoying
      their coffee.
    

      "It's not bad, all the same," declared Clemence.
    

      But she was seized with a fit of coughing, and almost choked. She leant
      her head against the wall to cough with more force.
    

      "That's a bad cough you've got," said Virginie. "Wherever did you catch
      it?"
    

      "One never knows!" replied Clemence, wiping her face with her sleeve. "It
      must have been the other night. There were two girls who were flaying each
      other outside the 'Grand-Balcony.' I wanted to see, so I stood there
      whilst the snow was falling. Ah, what a drubbing! It was enough to make
      one die with laughing. One had her nose almost pulled off; the blood
      streamed on the ground. When the other, a great long stick like me, saw
      the blood, she slipped away as quick as she could. And I coughed nearly
      all night. Besides that too, men are so stupid in bed, they don't let you
      have any covers over you half the time."
    

      "Pretty conduct that," murmured Madame Putois. "You're killing yourself,
      my girl."
    

      "And if it pleases me to kill myself! Life isn't so very amusing. Slaving
      all the blessed day long to earn fifty-five sous, cooking one's blood from
      morning to night in front of the stove; no, you know, I've had enough of
      it! All the same though, this cough won't do me the service of making me
      croak. It'll go off the same way it came."
    

      A short silence ensued. The good-for-nothing Clemence, who led riots in
      low dancing establishments, and shrieked like a screech-owl at work,
      always saddened everyone with her thoughts of death. Gervaise knew her
      well, and so merely said:
    

      "You're never very gay the morning after a night of high living."
    

      The truth was that Gervaise did not like this talk about women fighting.
      Because of the flogging at the wash-house it annoyed her whenever anyone
      spoke before her and Virginie of kicks with wooden shoes and of slaps in
      the face. It so happened, too, that Virginie was looking at her and
      smiling.
    

      "By the way," she said quietly, "yesterday I saw some hair-pulling. They
      almost tore each other to pieces."
    

      "Who were they?" Madame Putois inquired.
    

      "The midwife and her maid, you know, a little blonde. What a pest the girl
      is! She was yelling at her employer that she had got rid of a child for
      the fruit woman and that she was going to tell the police if she wasn't
      paid to keep quiet. So the midwife slapped her right in the face and then
      the little blonde jumped on her and started scratching her and pulling her
      hair, really—by the roots. The sausage-man had to grab her to put a
      stop to it."
    

      The workwomen laughed. Then they all took a sip of coffee.
    

      "Do you believe that she really got rid of a child?" Clemence asked.
    

      "Oh, yes! The rumor was all round the neighborhood," Virginie answered. "I
      didn't see it myself, you understand, but it's part of the job. All
      midwives do it."
    

      "Well!" exclaimed Madame Putois. "You have to be pretty stupid to put
      yourself in their hands. No thanks, you could be maimed for life. But
      there's a sure way to do it. Drink a glass of holy water every evening and
      make the sign of the cross three times over your stomach with your thumb.
      Then your troubles will be over."
    

      Everyone thought mother Coupeau was asleep, but she shook her head in
      protest. She knew another way and it was infallible. You had to eat a
      hard-cooked egg every two hours, and put spinach leaves on your loins.
      Squint-eyed Augustine set up a hen-cackling when she heard this. They had
      forgotten about her. Gervaise lifted up the petticoat that was being
      ironed and found her rolling on the floor with laughter. She jerked her
      upright. What was she laughing about? Was it right for her to be
      eavesdropping when older people were talking, the little goose? Anyway it
      was time for her to deliver the laundry to a friend of Madame Lerat at Les
      Batignolles. So Gervaise hung a basket on her arm and pushed her toward
      the door. Augustine went off, sobbing and sniveling, dragging her feet in
      the snow.
    

      Meanwhile mother Coupeau, Madame Putois and Clemence were discussing the
      effectiveness of hard-cooked eggs and spinach leaves. Then Virginie said
      softly:
    

      "Mon Dieu! you have a fight, and then you make it up, if you have a
      generous heart." She leaned toward Gervaise with a smile and added,
      "Really, I don't hold any grudge against you for that business at the
      wash-house. You remember it, don't you?"
    

      This was what Gervaise had been dreading. She guessed that the subject of
      Lantier and Adele would now come up.
    

      Virginie had moved close to Gervaise so as not to be overheard by the
      others. Gervaise, lulled by the excessive heat, felt so limp that she
      couldn't even summon the willpower to change the subject. She foresaw what
      the tall brunette would say and her heart was stirred with an emotion
      which she didn't want to admit to herself.
    

      "I hope I'm not hurting your feelings," Virginie continued. "Often I've
      had it on the tip of my tongue. But since we are now on the subject, word
      of honor, I don't have any grudge against you."
    

      She stirred her remaining coffee and then took a small sip. Gervaise, with
      her heart in her throat, wondered if Virginie had really forgiven her as
      completely as she said, for she seemed to observe sparks in her dark eyes.
    

      "You see," Virginie went on, "you had an excuse. They played a really
      rotten, dirty trick on you. To be fair about it, if it had been me, I'd
      have taken a knife to her."
    

      She drank another small sip, then added rapidly without a pause:
    

      "Anyway, it didn't bring them happiness, mon Dieu! Not a bit of it.
      They went to live over at La Glaciere, in a filthy street that was always
      muddy. I went two days later to have lunch with them. I can tell you, it
      was quite a trip by bus. Well, I found them already fighting. Really, as I
      came in they were boxing each other's ears. Fine pair of love birds! Adele
      isn't worth the rope to hang her. I say that even if she is my own sister.
      It would take too long to relate all the nasty tricks she played on me,
      and anyhow, it's between the two of us. As for Lantier—well, he's no
      good either. He'd beat the hide off you for anything, and with his fist
      closed too. They fought all the time. The police even came once."
    

      Virginie went on about other fights. Oh, she knew of things that would
      make your hair stand up. Gervaise listened in silence, her face pale. It
      was nearly seven years since she had heard a word about Lantier. She
      hadn't realized what a strong curiosity she had as to what had become of
      the poor man, even though he had treated her badly. And she never would
      have believed that just the mention of his name could put such a glowing
      warmth in the pit of her stomach. She certainly had no reason to be
      jealous of Adele any more but she rejoiced to think of her body all
      bruised from the beatings. She could have listened to Virginie all night,
      but she didn't ask any questions, not wanting to appear much interested.
    

      Virginie stopped to sip at her coffee. Gervaise, realizing that she was
      expected to say something, asked, with a pretence of indifference:
    

      "Are they still living at La Glaciere?"
    

      "No!" the other replied. "Didn't I tell you? They separated last week. One
      morning, Adele moved out and Lantier didn't chase after her."
    

      "So they're separated!" Gervaise exclaimed.
    

      "Who are you talking about?" Clemence asked, interrupting her conversation
      with mother Coupeau and Madame Putois.
    

      "Nobody you know," said Virginie.
    

      She was looking at Gervaise carefully and could see that she was upset.
      She moved still closer, maliciously finding pleasure in bringing up these
      old stories. Of a sudden she asked Gervaise what she would do if Lantier
      came round here. Men were really such strange creatures, he might decide
      to return to his first love. This caused Gervaise to sit up very straight
      and dignified. She was a married woman; she would send Lantier off
      immediately. There was no possibility of anything further between them,
      not even a handshake. She would not even want to look that man in the
      face.
    

      "I know that Etienne is his son, and that's a relationship that remains,"
      she said. "If Lantier wants to see his son, I'll send the boy to him
      because you can't stop a father from seeing his child. But as for myself,
      I don't want him to touch me even with the tip of his finger. That is all
      finished."
    

      Desiring to break off this conversation, she seemed to awake with a start
      and called out to the women:
    

      "You ladies! Do you think all these clothes are going to iron themselves?
      Get to work!"
    

      The workwomen, slow from the heat and general laziness, didn't hurry
      themselves, but went right on talking, gossiping about other people they
      had known.
    

      Gervaise shook herself and got to her feet. Couldn't earn money by sitting
      all day. She was the first to return to the ironing, but found that her
      curtains had been spotted by the coffee and she had to rub out the stains
      with a damp cloth. The other women were now stretching and getting ready
      to begin ironing.
    

      Clemence had a terrible attack of coughing as soon as she moved. Finally
      she was able to return to the shirt she had been doing. Madame Putois
      began to work on the petticoat again.
    

      "Well, good-bye," said Virginie. "I only came out for a quarter-pound of
      Swiss cheese. Poisson must think I've frozen to death on the way."
    

      She had only just stepped outside when she turned back to say that
      Augustine was at the end of the street, sliding on the ice with some
      urchins. The squint-eyed imp rushed in all red-faced and out of breath
      with snow all in her hair. She didn't mind the scolding she received,
      merely saying that she hadn't been able to walk fast because of the ice
      and then some brats threw snow at her.
    

      The afternoons were all the same these winter days. The laundry was the
      refuge for anyone in the neighborhood who was cold. There was an endless
      procession of gossiping women. Gervaise took pride in the comforting
      warmth of her shop and welcomed those who came in, "holding a salon," as
      the Lorilleuxs and the Boches remarked meanly.
    

      Gervaise was always thoughtful and generous. Sometimes she even invited
      poor people in if she saw them shivering outside. A friendship sprang up
      with an elderly house-painter who was seventy. He lived in an attic room
      and was slowly dying of cold and hunger. His three sons had been killed in
      the war. He survived the best he could, but it had been two years since he
      had been able to hold a paint-brush in his hand. Whenever Gervaise saw
      Pere Bru walking outside, she would call him in and arrange a place for
      him close to the stove. Often she gave him some bread and cheese. Pere
      Bru's face was as wrinkled as a withered apple. He would sit there, with
      his stooping shoulders and his white beard, without saying a word, just
      listening to the coke sputtering in the stove. Maybe he was thinking of
      his fifty years of hard work on high ladders, his fifty years spent
      painting doors and whitewashing ceilings in every corner of Paris.
    

      "Well, Pere Bru," Gervaise would say, "what are you thinking of now?"
    

      "Nothing much. All sorts of things," he would answer quietly.
    

      The workwomen tried to joke with him to cheer him up, saying he was
      worrying over his love affairs, but he scarcely listened to them before he
      fell back into his habitual attitude of meditative melancholy.
    

      Virginie now frequently spoke to Gervaise of Lantier. She seemed to find
      amusement in filling her mind with ideas of her old lover just for the
      pleasure of embarrassing her by making suggestions. One day she related
      that she had met him; then, as the laundress took no notice, she said
      nothing further, and it was only on the morrow that she added he had
      spoken about her for a long time, and with a great show of affection.
      Gervaise was much upset by these reports whispered in her ear in a corner
      of the shop. The mention of Lantier's name always caused a worried
      sensation in the pit of her stomach. She certainly thought herself strong;
      she wished to lead the life of an industrious woman, because labor is the
      half of happiness. So she never considered Coupeau in this matter, having
      nothing to reproach herself with as regarded her husband, not even in her
      thoughts. But with a hesitating and suffering heart, she would think of
      the blacksmith. It seemed to her that the memory of Lantier—that
      slow possession which she was resuming—rendered her unfaithful to
      Goujet, to their unavowed love, sweet as friendship. She passed sad days
      whenever she felt herself guilty towards her good friend. She would have
      liked to have had no affection for anyone but him outside of her family.
      It was a feeling far above all carnal thoughts, for the signs of which
      upon her burning face Virginie was ever on the watch.
    

      As soon as spring came Gervaise often went and sought refuge with Goujet.
      She could no longer sit musing on a chair without immediately thinking of
      her first lover; she pictured him leaving Adele, packing his clothes in
      the bottom of their old trunk, and returning to her in a cab. The days
      when she went out, she was seized with the most foolish fears in the
      street; she was ever thinking she heard Lantier's footsteps behind her.
      She did not dare turn round, but tremblingly fancied she felt his hands
      seizing her round the waist. He was, no doubt, spying upon her; he would
      appear before her some afternoon; and the bare idea threw her into a cold
      perspiration, because he would to a certainty kiss her on the ear, as he
      used to do in former days solely to tease her. It was this kiss which
      frightened her; it rendered her deaf beforehand; it filled her with a
      buzzing amidst which she could only distinguish the sound of her heart
      beating violently. So, as soon as these fears seized upon her, the forge
      was her only shelter; there, under Goujet's protection, she once more
      became easy and smiling, as his sonorous hammer drove away her
      disagreeable reflections.
    

      What a happy time! The laundress took particular pains with the washing of
      her customer in the Rue des Portes-Blanches; she always took it home
      herself because that errand, every Friday, was a ready excuse for passing
      through the Rue Marcadet and looking in at the forge. The moment she
      turned the corner of the street she felt light and gay, as though in the
      midst of those plots of waste land surrounded by grey factories, she were
      out in the country; the roadway black with coal-dust, the plumage of steam
      over the roofs, amused her as much as a moss-covered path leading through
      masses of green foliage in a wood in the environs; and she loved the dull
      horizon, streaked by the tall factory-chimneys, the Montmartre heights,
      which hid the heavens from view, the chalky white houses pierced with the
      uniform openings of their windows. She would slacken her steps as she drew
      near, jumping over the pools of water, and finding a pleasure in
      traversing the deserted ins and outs of the yard full of old building
      materials. Right at the further end the forge shone with a brilliant
      light, even at mid-day. Her heart leapt with the dance of the hammers.
      When she entered, her face turned quite red, the little fair hairs at the
      nape of her neck flew about like those of a woman arriving at some lovers'
      meeting. Goujet was expecting her, his arms and chest bare, whilst he
      hammered harder on the anvil on those days so as to make himself heard at
      a distance. He divined her presence, and greeted her with a good silent
      laugh in his yellow beard. But she would not let him leave off his work;
      she begged him to take up his hammer again, because she loved him the more
      when he wielded it with his big arms swollen with muscles. She would go
      and give Etienne a gentle tap on the cheek, as he hung on to the bellows,
      and then remain for an hour watching the rivets.
    

      The two did not exchange a dozen words. They could not have more
      completely satisfied their love if alone in a room with the door
      double-locked. The snickering of Salted-Mouth, otherwise
      Drink-without-Thirst, did not bother them in the least, for they no longer
      even heard him. At the end of a quarter of an hour she would begin to feel
      slightly oppressed; the heat, the powerful smell, the ascending smoke,
      made her dizzy, whilst the dull thuds of the hammers shook her from the
      crown of her head to the soles of her feet. Then she desired nothing more;
      it was her pleasure. Had Goujet pressed her in his arms it would not have
      procured her so sweet an emotion. She drew close to him that she might
      feel the wind raised by his hammer beat upon her cheek, and become, as it
      were, a part of the blow he struck. When the sparks made her soft hands
      smart, she did not withdraw them; on the contrary, she enjoyed the rain of
      fire which stung her skin. He for certain, divined the happiness which she
      tasted there; he always kept the most difficult work for the Fridays, so
      as to pay his court to her with all his strength and all his skill; he no
      longer spared himself at the risk of splitting the anvils in two, as he
      panted and his loins vibrated with the joy he was procuring her. All one
      spring-time their love thus filled Goujet with the rumbling of a storm. It
      was an idyll amongst giant-like labor in the midst of the glare of the
      coal fire, and of the shaking of the shed, the cracking carcass of which
      was black with soot. All that beaten iron, kneaded like red wax, preserved
      the rough marks of their love. When on the Fridays the laundress parted
      from Golden-Mug, she slowly reascended the Rue des Poissonniers, contented
      and tired, her mind and her body alike tranquil.
    

      Little by little, her fear of Lantier diminished; her good sense got the
      better of her. At that time she would still have led a happy life, had it
      not been for Coupeau, who was decidedly going to the bad. One day she just
      happened to be returning from the forge, when she fancied she recognized
      Coupeau inside Pere Colombe's l'Assommoir, in the act of treating himself
      to a round of vitriol in the company of My-Boots, Bibi-the-Smoker, and
      Salted-Mouth, otherwise Drink-without-Thirst. She passed quickly by, so as
      not to seem to be spying on them. But she glanced back; it was indeed
      Coupeau who was tossing his little glass of bad brandy down his throat
      with a gesture already familiar. He lied then; so he went in for brandy
      now! She returned home in despair; all her old dread of brandy took
      possession of her. She forgave the wine, because wine nourishes the
      workman; all kinds of spirit, on the contrary, were filth, poisons which
      destroyed in the workman the taste for bread. Ah! the government ought to
      prevent the manufacture of such horrid stuff!
    

      On arriving at the Rue de la Goutte-d'Or, she found the whole house upset.
      Her workwomen had left the shop, and were in the courtyard looking up
      above. She questioned Clemence.
    

      "It's old Bijard who's giving his wife a hiding," replied the ironer. "He
      was in the doorway, as drunk as a trooper, watching for her return from
      the wash-house. He whacked her up the stairs, and now he's finishing her
      off up there in their room. Listen, can't you hear her shrieks?"
    

      Gervaise hastened to the spot. She felt some friendship for her
      washer-woman, Madame Bijard, who was a very courageous woman. She had
      hoped to put a stop to what was going on. Upstairs, on the sixth floor the
      door of the room was wide open, some lodgers were shouting on the landing,
      whilst Madame Boche, standing in front of the door, was calling out:
    

      "Will you leave off? I shall send for the police; do you hear?"
    

      No one dared to venture inside the room, because it was known that Bijard
      was like a brute beast when he was drunk. As a matter of fact, he was
      scarcely ever sober. The rare days on which he worked, he placed a bottle
      of brandy beside his blacksmith's vise, gulping some of it down every half
      hour. He could not keep himself going any other way. He would have blazed
      away like a torch if anyone had placed a lighted match close to his mouth.
    

      "But we mustn't let her be murdered!" said Gervaise, all in a tremble.
    

      And she entered. The room, an attic, and very clean, was bare and cold,
      almost emptied by the drunken habits of the man, who took the very sheets
      from the bed to turn them into liquor. During the struggle the table had
      rolled away to the window, the two chairs, knocked over, had fallen with
      their legs in the air. In the middle of the room, on the tile floor, lay
      Madame Bijard, all bloody, her skirts, still soaked with the water of the
      wash-house, clinging to her thighs, her hair straggling in disorder. She
      was breathing heavily, with a rattle in her throat, as she muttered
      prolonged ohs! each time she received a blow from the heel of Bijard's
      boot. He had knocked her down with his fists, and now he stamped upon her.
    

      "Ah, strumpet! Ah, strumpet! Ah strumpet!" grunted he in a choking voice,
      accompanying each blow with the word, taking a delight in repeating it,
      and striking all the harder the more he found his voice failing him.
    

      Then when he could no longer speak, he madly continued to kick with a dull
      sound, rigid in his ragged blue blouse and overalls, his face turned
      purple beneath his dirty beard, and his bald forehead streaked with big
      red blotches. The neighbors on the landing related that he was beating her
      because she had refused him twenty sous that morning. Boche's voice was
      heard at the foot of the staircase. He was calling Madame Boche, saying:
    

      "Come down; let them kill each other, it'll be so much scum the less."
    

      Meanwhile, Pere Bru had followed Gervaise into the room. Between them they
      were trying to get him towards the door. But he turned round, speechless
      and foaming at the lips, and in his pale eyes the alcohol was blazing with
      a murderous glare. The laundress had her wrist injured; the old workman
      was knocked against the table. On the floor, Madame Bijard was breathing
      with greater difficulty, her mouth wide open, her eyes closed. Now Bijard
      kept missing her. He had madly returned to the attack, but blinded by
      rage, his blows fell on either side, and at times he almost fell when his
      kicks went into space. And during all this onslaught, Gervaise beheld in a
      corner of the room little Lalie, then four years old, watching her father
      murdering her mother. The child held in her arms, as though to protect
      her, her sister Henriette, only recently weaned. She was standing up, her
      head covered with a cotton cap, her face very pale and grave. Her large
      black eyes gazed with a fixedness full of thought and were without a tear.
    

      When at length Bijard, running against a chair, stumbled onto the tiled
      floor, where they left him snoring, Pere Bru helped Gervaise to raise
      Madame Bijard. The latter was now sobbing bitterly; and Lalie, drawing
      near, watched her crying, being used to such sights and already resigned
      to them. As the laundress descended the stairs, in the silence of the now
      quieted house, she kept seeing before her that look of this child of four,
      as grave and courageous as that of a woman.
    

      "Monsieur Coupeau is on the other side of the street," called out Clemence
      as soon as she caught sight of her. "He looks awfully drunk."
    

      Coupeau was just then crossing the street. He almost smashed a pane of
      glass with his shoulder as he missed the door. He was in a state of
      complete drunkenness, with his teeth clinched and his nose inflamed. And
      Gervaise at once recognized the vitriol of l'Assommoir in the poisoned
      blood which paled his skin. She tried to joke and get him to bed, the same
      as on the days when the wine had made him merry; but he pushed her aside
      without opening his lips, and raised his fist in passing as he went to bed
      of his own accord. He made Gervaise think of the other—the drunkard
      who was snoring upstairs, tired out by the blows he had struck. A cold
      shiver passed over her. She thought of the men she knew—of her
      husband, of Goujet, of Lantier—her heart breaking, despairing of
      ever being happy.
    

      
 
    

      Gervaise's saint's day fell on the 19th of June. On such occasions, the
      Coupeaus always made a grand display; they feasted till they were as round
      as balls, and their stomachs were filled for the rest of the week. There
      was a complete clear out of all the money they had. The moment there were
      a few sous in the house they went in gorging. They invented saints for
      those days which the almanac had not provided with any, just for the sake
      of giving themselves a pretext for gormandizing. Virginie highly commended
      Gervaise for stuffing herself with all sorts of savory dishes. When one
      has a husband who turns all he can lay hands on into drink, it's good to
      line one's stomach well, and not to let everything go off in liquids.
      Since the money would disappear anyway, surely it was better to pay it to
      the butcher. Gervaise used that excuse to justify overeating, saying it
      was Coupeau's fault if they could no longer save a sou. She had grown
      considerably fatter, and she limped more than before because her leg, now
      swollen with fat, seemed to be getting gradually shorter.
    

      That year they talked about her saint's day a good month beforehand. They
      thought of dishes and smacked their lips in advance. All the shop had a
      confounded longing to junket. They wanted a merry-making of the right sort—something
      out of the ordinary and highly successful. One does not have so many
      opportunities for enjoyment. What most troubled the laundress was to
      decide whom to invite; she wished to have twelve persons at table, no
      more, no less. She, her husband, mother Coupeau, and Madame Lerat, already
      made four members of the family. She would also have the Goujets and the
      Poissons. Originally, she had decided not to invite her workwomen, Madame
      Putois and Clemence, so as not to make them too familiar; but as the
      projected feast was being constantly spoken of in their presence, and
      their mouths watered, she ended by telling them to come. Four and four,
      eight, and two are ten. Then, wishing particularly to have twelve, she
      became reconciled with the Lorilleuxs, who for some time past had been
      hovering around her; at least it was agreed that the Lorilleuxs should
      come to dinner, and that peace should be made with glasses in hand. You
      really shouldn't keep family quarrels going forever. When the Boches heard
      that a reconciliation was planned, they also sought to make up with
      Gervaise, and so they had to be invited to the dinner too. That would make
      fourteen, not counting the children. Never before had she given such a
      large dinner and the thought frightened and excited her at the same time.
    

      The saint's day happened to fall on a Monday. It was a piece of luck.
      Gervaise counted on the Sunday afternoon to begin the cooking. On the
      Saturday, whilst the workwomen hurried with their work, there was a long
      discussion in the shop with the view of finally deciding upon what the
      feast should consist of. For three weeks past one thing alone had been
      chosen—a fat roast goose. There was a gluttonous look on every face
      whenever it was mentioned. The goose was even already bought. Mother
      Coupeau went and fetched it to let Clemence and Madame Putois feel its
      weight. And they uttered all kinds of exclamations; it looked such an
      enormous bird, with its rough skin all swelled out with yellow fat.
    

      "Before that there will be the pot-au-feu," said Gervaise, "the soup and
      just a small piece of boiled beef, it's always good. Then we must have
      something in the way of a stew."
    

      Tall Clemence suggested rabbit, but they were always having that, everyone
      was sick of it. Gervaise wanted something more distinguished. Madame
      Putois having spoken of stewed veal, they looked at one another with broad
      smiles. It was a real idea, nothing would make a better impression than a
      veal stew.
    

      "And after that," resumed Gervaise, "we must have some other dish with a
      sauce."
    

      Mother Coupeau proposed fish. But the others made a grimace, as they
      banged down their irons. None of them liked fish; it was not a bit
      satisfying; and besides that it was full of bones. Squint-eyed Augustine,
      having dared to observe that she liked skate, Clemence shut her mouth for
      her with a good sound clout. At length the mistress thought of stewed
      pig's back and potatoes, which restored the smiles to every countenance.
      Then Virginie entered like a puff of wind, with a strange look on her
      face.
    

      "You've come just at the right time!" exclaimed Gervaise. "Mother Coupeau,
      do show her the bird."
    

      And mother Coupeau went a second time and fetched the goose, which
      Virginie had to take in her hands. She uttered no end of exclamations. By
      Jove! It was heavy! But she soon laid it down on the work-table, between a
      petticoat and a bundle of shirts. Her thoughts were elsewhere. She dragged
      Gervaise into the back-room.
    

      "I say, little one," murmured she rapidly, "I've come to warn you. You'll
      never guess who I just met at the corner of the street. Lantier, my dear!
      He's hovering about on the watch; so I hastened here at once. It
      frightened me on your account, you know."
    

      The laundress turned quite pale. What could the wretched man want with
      her? Coming, too, like that, just in the midst of the preparations for the
      feast. She had never had any luck; she could not even be allowed to enjoy
      herself quietly. But Virginie replied that she was very foolish to put
      herself out about it like that. Why! If Lantier dared to follow her about,
      all she had to do was to call a policeman and have him locked up. In the
      month since her husband had been appointed a policeman, Virginie had
      assumed rather lordly manners and talked of arresting everybody. She began
      to raise her voice, saying that she wished some passer-by would pinch her
      bottom so that she could take the fresh fellow to the police station
      herself and turn him over to her husband. Gervaise signaled her to be
      quiet since the workwomen were listening and led the way back into the
      shop, reopening the discussion about the dinner.
    

      "Now, don't we need a vegetable?"
    

      "Why not peas with bacon?" said Virginie. "I like nothing better."
    

      "Yes, peas with bacon." The others approved. Augustine was so enthusiastic
      that she jabbed the poker into the stove harder than ever.
    

      By three o'clock on the morrow, Sunday, mother Coupeau had lighted their
      two stoves and also a third one of earthenware which they had borrowed
      from the Boches. At half-past three the pot-au-feu was boiling away in an
      enormous earthenware pot lent by the eating-house keeper next door, the
      family pot having been found too small. They had decided to cook the veal
      and the pig's back the night before, since both of those dishes are better
      when reheated. But the cream sauce for the veal would not be prepared
      until just before sitting down for the feast.
    

      There was still plenty of work left for Monday: the soup, the peas with
      bacon, the roast goose. The inner room was lit by three fires. Butter was
      sizzling in the pans and emitting a sharp odor of burnt flour.
    

      Mother Coupeau and Gervaise, with white aprons tied on, were bustling all
      around, cleaning parsley, dashing for salt and pepper, turning the meat.
      They had sent Coupeau away so as not to have him underfoot, but they still
      had plenty of people looking in throughout the afternoon. The luscious
      smells from the kitchen had spread through the entire building so that
      neighboring ladies came into the shop on various pretexts, very curious to
      see what was being cooked.
    

      Virginie put in an appearance towards five o'clock. She had again seen
      Lantier; really, it was impossible to go down the street now without
      meeting him. Madame Boche also had just caught sight of him standing at
      the corner of the pavement with his head thrust forward in an uncommonly
      sly manner. Then Gervaise who had at that moment intended going for a
      sou's worth of burnt onions for the pot-au-feu, began to tremble from head
      to foot and did not dare leave the house; the more so, as the concierge
      and the dressmaker put her into a terrible fright by relating horrible
      stories of men waiting for women with knives and pistols hidden beneath
      their overcoats. Well, yes! one reads of such things every day in the
      newspapers. When one of those scoundrels gets his monkey up on discovering
      an old love leading a happy life he becomes capable of everything.
      Virginie obligingly offered to run and fetch the burnt onions. Women
      should always help one another, they could not let that little thing be
      murdered. When she returned she said that Lantier was no longer there; he
      had probably gone off on finding he was discovered. In spite of that
      thought, he was the subject of conversation around the saucepans until
      night-time. When Madame Boche advised her to inform Coupeau, Gervaise
      became really terrified, and implored her not to say a word about it. Oh,
      yes, wouldn't that be a nice situation! Her husband must have become
      suspicious already because for the last few days, at night, he would swear
      to himself and bang the wall with his fists. The mere thought that the two
      men might destroy each other because of her made her shudder. She knew
      that Coupeau was jealous enough to attack Lantier with his shears.
    

      While the four of them had been deep in contemplating this drama, the
      saucepans on the banked coals of the stoves had been quietly simmering.
      When mother Coupeau lifted the lids, the veal and the pig's back were
      discreetly bubbling. The pot-au-feu was steadily steaming with snore-like
      sounds. Eventually each of them dipped a piece of bread into the soup to
      taste the bouillon.
    

      At length Monday arrived. Now that Gervaise was going to have fourteen
      persons at table, she began to fear that she would not be able to find
      room for them all. She decided that they should dine in the shop; and the
      first thing in the morning she took measurements so as to settle which way
      she should place the table. After that they had to remove all the clothes
      and take the ironing-table to pieces; the top of this laid on to some
      shorter trestles was to be the dining-table. But just in the midst of all
      this moving a customer appeared and made a scene because she had been
      waiting for her washing ever since the Friday; they were humbugging her,
      she would have her things at once. Then Gervaise tried to excuse herself
      and lied boldly; it was not her fault, she was cleaning out her shop, the
      workmen would not be there till the morrow; and she pacified her customer
      and got rid of her by promising to busy herself with her things at the
      earliest possible moment. Then, as soon as the woman had left, she showed
      her temper. Really, if you listened to all your customers, you'd never
      have time to eat. You could work yourself to death like a dog on a leash!
      Well! No matter who came in to-day, even if they offered one hundred
      thousand francs, she wouldn't touch an iron on this Monday, because it was
      her turn to enjoy herself.
    

      The entire morning was spent in completing the purchases. Three times
      Gervaise went out and returned laden like a mule. But just as she was
      going to order wine she noticed that she had not sufficient money left.
      She could easily have got it on credit; only she could not be without
      money in the house, on account of the thousand little expenses that one is
      liable to forget. And mother Coupeau and she had lamented together in the
      back-room as they reckoned that they required at least twenty francs. How
      could they obtain them, those four pieces of a hundred sous each? Mother
      Coupeau who had at one time done the charring for a little actress of the
      Theatre des Batignolles, was the first to suggest the pawn-shop. Gervaise
      laughed with relief. How stupid she was not to have thought of it! She
      quickly folded her black silk dress upon a towel which she then pinned
      together. Then she hid the bundle under mother Coupeau's apron, telling
      her to keep it very flat against her stomach, on account of the neighbors
      who had no need to know; and she went and watched at the door to see that
      the old woman was not followed. But the latter had only gone as far as the
      charcoal dealer's when she called her back.
    

      "Mamma! Mamma!"
    

      She made her return to the shop, and taking her wedding-ring off her
      finger said:
    

      "Here, put this with it. We shall get all the more."
    

      When mother Coupeau brought her twenty-five francs, she danced for joy.
      She would order an extra six bottles of wine, sealed wine to drink with
      the roast. The Lorilleuxs would be crushed.
    

      For a fortnight past it had been the Coupeaus' dream to crush the
      Lorilleuxs. Was it not true that those sly ones, the man and his wife, a
      truly pretty couple, shut themselves up whenever they had anything nice to
      eat as though they had stolen it? Yes, they covered up the window with a
      blanket to hide the light and make believe that they were already asleep
      in bed. This stopped anyone from coming up, and so the Lorilleuxs could
      stuff everything down, just the two of them. They were even careful the
      next day not to throw the bones into the garbage so that no one would know
      what they had eaten. Madame Lorilleux would walk to the end of the street
      to toss them into a sewer opening. One morning Gervaise surprised her
      emptying a basket of oyster shells there. Oh, those penny-pinchers were
      never open-handed, and all their mean contrivances came from their desire
      to appear to be poor. Well, we'd show them, we'd prove to them that we
      weren't mean.
    

      Gervaise would have laid her table in the street, had she been able to,
      just for the sake of inviting each passer-by. Money was not invented that
      it should be allowed to grow moldy, was it? It is pretty when it shines
      all new in the sunshine. She resembled them so little now, that on the
      days when she had twenty sous she arranged things to let people think that
      she had forty.
    

      Mother Coupeau and Gervaise talked of the Lorilleuxs whilst they laid the
      cloth about three o'clock. They had hung some big curtains at the windows;
      but as it was very warm the door was left open and the whole street passed
      in front of the little table. The two women did not place a decanter, or a
      bottle, or a salt-cellar, without trying to arrange them in such a way as
      to annoy the Lorilleuxs. They had arranged their seats so as to give them
      a full view of the superbly laid cloth, and they had reserved the best
      crockery for them, well knowing that the porcelain plates would create a
      great effect.
    

      "No, no, mamma," cried Gervaise; "don't give them those napkins! I've two
      damask ones."
    

      "Ah, good!" murmured the old woman; "that'll break their hearts, that's
      certain."
    

      And they smiled to each other as they stood up on either side of that big
      white table on which the fourteen knives and forks, placed all round,
      caused them to swell with pride. It had the appearance of the altar of
      some chapel in the middle of the shop.
    

      "That's because they're so stingy themselves!" resumed Gervaise. "You know
      they lied last month when the woman went about everywhere saying that she
      had lost a piece of gold chain as she was taking the work home. The idea!
      There's no fear of her ever losing anything! It was simply a way of making
      themselves out very poor and of not giving you your five francs."
    

      "As yet I've only seen my five francs twice," said mother Coupeau.
    

      "I'll bet next month they'll concoct some other story. That explains why
      they cover their window up when they have a rabbit to eat. Don't you see?
      One would have the right to say to them: 'As you can afford a rabbit you
      can certainly give five francs to your mother!' Oh! they're just rotten!
      What would have become of you if I hadn't taken you to live with us?"
    

      Mother Coupeau slowly shook her head. That day she was all against the
      Lorilleuxs, because of the great feast the Coupeaus were giving. She loved
      cooking, the little gossipings round the saucepans, the place turned
      topsy-turvy by the revels of saints' days. Besides she generally got on
      pretty well with Gervaise. On other days when they plagued one another as
      happens in all families, the old woman grumbled saying she was wretchedly
      unfortunate in thus being at her daughter-in-law's mercy. In point of fact
      she probably had some affection for Madame Lorilleux who after all was her
      daughter.
    

      "Ah!" continued Gervaise, "you wouldn't be so fat, would you, if you were
      living with them? And no coffee, no snuff, no little luxuries of any sort!
      Tell me, would they have given you two mattresses to your bed?"
    

      "No, that's very certain," replied mother Coupeau. "When they arrive I
      shall place myself so as to have a good view of the door to see the faces
      they'll make."
    

      Thinking of the faces they would make gave them pleasure ahead of time.
      However, they couldn't remain standing there admiring the table. The