# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2015
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Israel Zangwill, The Master; a Novel
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/49795/49795-h/49795-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

“Let’s go there,” said Matt, who was now quite faint with hunger, and
who had a lurking wish that Herbert would stand a supper—one of the
olden heroic suppers that he had not tasted for half a year—a wild riot
of a supper, with real meat and wholesome vegetables and goodly
sauces—nay, even red wine, and a crowning cup of coffee made of real
beans, not the charred crust of over-baked loaves, out of which he had
been making his own lately; getting the burned bread cheaper with a
double economy; a supper fit for well-fed gods, which a starving man
having eaten might be well content to die. But Herbert, unaware of what
was going on in Matt’s inner man, replied, cruelly, “No, it’s too late
to look for her at the restaurant. I know her address, but she won’t be
there yet. Besides, I ought to show up at the club.”
So they strolled back to the bleak building (Matt suddenly bethinking
himself that even here supper might lie in wait), and passing through a
dark hall, mounted a stone corkscrew staircase that led to a hubbub of
voices and a piano jingling music-hall tunes. The doorway of the first
room was congested by black backs over-circled with clouds of smoke.
Herbert and Matt peered in unseen for a few moments. The little room,
decorated only by a few sketches from the hands of members, and
separated from the second room by the primitive partition of a screen,
was crowded with young men in evening dress sitting round on chairs or
knees or coal-scuttles, with glasses in their hands and cigars in their
mouths, and new men were squeezing in from the inner room, the advent of
each being greeted by facetious cheers. Plaudits more genuine in their
ring welcomed Flinders, who, it was understood, had been in the final
running. He came in, trying to make his naturally long face look short,
and exclaiming with punctilious carelessness, “Where’s my whiskey?”
Rands, who, it was whispered, had lost by only a few votes, was not
present; he had, apparently, gone home to the heart-broken gentility at
Dalston. Matt caught sight of Cornpepper on the right of the doorway,
and his heart rejoiced as at the sight of a laid supper. The little
painter was clutching the middle of his chair with his most owl-like
expression. His single eye-glass glittered in the gaslight.
“Why, there’s Cornpepper!” Matt whispered, in awed accents.
“Oh, has he come in?” yawned Herbert. “I saw him marching Greme about
among the Daniels, and giving them hell in emulation of Clinch—looking
round after every swear, as if half hoping the ladies hadn’t heard him,
and half hoping they had.” But Matt had only half heard Herbert. He was
listening to the oracles of Cornpepper. But listeners rarely hear any
good of themselves.
“Strang’s not in it with you,” Cornpepper was saying to Flinders.
“There’s no blooming style in his technique. It might have been done by
an R.A.”
“They do say the result would have been very different if more R.A.’s
had come down,” said the semi-consoled Flinders, somewhat illogically.
“But Barbauld had the gout, and Platt is in Morocco, and—”
At this point shouts of “Strang!” made the cousins start, but it was
only the playfulness of the room greeting a new-comer as the victor. The
youth acquiesced humorously in the make-believe, slouching round the
room with a comical shuffle and a bow to each chair. Then a man got up
and began a burlesque lecture on Ecclesiastical Art “to my young
architectural friends.” Every reference to apses, groins, or gargoyles
was received with yells of delight, a demoniac shriek being reserved for
Albrecht Dürer.
“I’m awfully glad I escaped it,” said a youth in front of Matt. “I got
there five minutes late, and the man wouldn’t let me in. At least he
said, ‘I’m not supposed to let you in after nine-fifteen.’ But I didn’t
take the tip—or give it.”
In the middle of the address on Art, Gurney, coming up the staircase in
the wake of a student friend (to whom he had been descanting on the
absurdities of Cornpepperism, from which he had now revolted), perceived
Herbert, and pushed him boisterously into the room, which straightway
became a pandemonium; the pianist banging “See, the Conquering Hero
Comes,” the boys stamping, singing, huzzahing, rattling their glasses,
and shouting, “Cigars!” “Drinks!” “Strang!”
Herbert beamingly ordered boxes of Havanas and “soda-and-whiskies,” and
soon Matt, still in his overcoat, found himself drinking and smoking and
shouting with the rest, exalted by the whiskey into forgetfulness of his
clothes and his fortunes, and partaking in all the rollicking humors of
the evening, in all the devil-may-care gayety of the eternal
undergraduate, roaring with his boon companions over the improper
stories of the ascetic-looking young man with the poetic head, bawling
street choruses, dancing madly in grotesque congested waltzes, wherein
he had the felicity to secure Cornpepper for a partner, and
distinguishing himself in the high-kicking pas seul, not departing
till the final “Auld Lang Syne” had been sung with joined hands in a
wildly whirling ring. Herbert had left some time before.
“Good-night, Matt; I want to get away. I don’t often get such an excuse
for being out late. There’s no need for you to go yet, you lucky
beggar,” he whispered, confidentially, as he sallied forth, radiantly
sober, weaving joyous dreams of his travelling studentship future.
When the party broke up in the small hours, Matt Strang, saturated with
whiskey and empty of victual, staggered along the frosty pavements,
singing to the stars, that reeled round, blinking and winking like the
buttons on Herbert’s boots.
His own boots preoccupied Matt’s attention ere the New Year dawned. Had
“Four-toes” continued going to Grainger’s, instead of letting his
subscription lapse perforce with the Christmas quarter, he might have
convinced the class that his toes were normal, for they had begun to
peep out despite all his efforts to botch up the seams. The state of his
wardrobe prevented him from looking up Herbert at his club, especially
as he was doubtful whether the travelling studentship had not already
carried his cousin off; and thus that mad night, which was a hot shame
to sober memory, grew to seem an unreal nightmare, and Herbert as
distant as ever.
A vagrant atom of the scum of the city, he tasted all the bitterness of
a million-peopled solitude. His quest for work was the more hopeless the
shabbier his appearance grew. In optimistic after-dinner moods he had
thought the spectacle of the streets sufficient, and to feast one’s eyes
on the pageant of life a cloyless ecstasy; and, indeed, in the first
days of his wanderings, the merest artistic touch in the wintry streets
could still give him a pleasurable sensation that was a temporary
anodyne—the yellow sand scattered on slippery days along the tram
lines, and showing like a spilth of summer sunshine; the warm front of a
public-house, making the only spot of color in the long suburban
street; strange faces seen for an instant in fog and lost forever;
snow-flakes tumbling over one another in their haste, or fluttering
lingeringly to earth; red suns, gray-ringed, like school-boys’
taws—but, as the slow days unfolded their sordid unchanging coils, he
found himself shrinking more and more into himself. He sought warmth and
refuge from reality in the National Gallery or the British Museum,
dreaming away the hours before the more imaginative pictures or the
Elgin marbles. But even these failed him at last, their beauty an
intolerable irony. Sometimes he realized with a miserable start the real
tragedy of being “out of work,” how it narrowed the horizon down to the
prospect of meals, so that the great movement of the world from which he
was shut out left him equally exclusive, and the announcements on the
newspaper posters—wars and international football and the opening of
parks and new plays and the deaths of great men and the rise of
ministries—struck no responsive chord in his imagination, were all
shadowy emanations from some unreal mockery of a universe. The real
universe had his own navel for centre. Sometimes a faint perception of
the humor of the position distorted his lips in a melancholy smile; he
wondered how he would come out under Jimmy Raven’s pencil. At other
times he lay huddled up in his bed, his fading clothes heaped over the
one blanket, passing the day in an apathetic trance, interrupted only by
the intermittent working of his imagination, or by observation of
optical effects that accidentally arrested his gaze; and the next day,
in remorse for lost possibilities, he would rise before dawn, and
recommence his search for employment.
From such a long day’s tramp he was shuffling homeward late one dark,
dismal night, when, pausing to warm his feet and hands at the
cellar-grating of a baker’s shop, he was accosted by William Gregson,
striding along with a frown on his forehead and a brown-paper parcel in
his hand.
“Hullo, Fourt—Strang!” he cried, pausing. “Don’t see you any more.”
“No,” said Matt, wishing Gregson wouldn’t see him now, and edging a
little away from a street-lamp.
“You don’t want any boots?”
“No,” said Matt, sticking his toes downward to hide the gaps as far as
possible.
“You won’t forget I am at your service whatever you want,” said the
little stooping old man, with shining enthusiastic eyes. “It is a
pleasure to work for a man with feet like yours. I was only thinkin’ of
you to-night at the studio—a scurvy wretch has been servin’ me a shabby
trick, and I was thinkin’ to myself: Ah, Four—ah, Strang, there’s a
difference now! Strang’s a man and a brother artist. This bloke’s a
’artless biped.”
“Why, what did he do?”
“There’s no need to go into details,” said William Gregson,
pathetically. “Suffice it to say he refuses the boots. And here they
are. A beautiful pair! Left on my hands! After I sat up half the night
to finish ’em for him, trade’s so brisk just now.”
He unwrapped the package to expose their perfections.
“And what will you do with them?” said Matt.
“I’d like to put ’em on and kick him with ’em,” replied Gregson,
gloomily. “Only they’re too small.” Gregson’s own feet were decidedly
not beautiful.
“Yes, they seem more my size,” agreed Matt.
“Will you have them?” cried the old man, eagerly. “Name your own price!
Don’t be afraid. I sha’n’t ask more than last time.”
But Matt shook his head. “I’m hard up,” he confessed, blushing in the
lamplight.
“I’ll trust you,” was the fervid response.
“I’d never pay you,” Matt protested, “unless I could do something for
you in return. If you want,” he hesitated, “your shop painted, or any
wall-papering, or—or I could build you a counter, or—”
But the shoemaker was shaking his head. “I don’t want my shop
painted—but ’ow if you painted me?” he cried, with an inspiration.
“I’ve often tried to do it myself, but some’ow an angelic expression
gets into it, and the missus don’t recognize it. Have you ever tried
doin’ your own portrait, Strang?”
“No—not seriously,” said Matt.
“Well, you try, and see if you don’t find it as I say. It’s a curious
thing how that angelic expression will creep in when a man’s paintin’
his own portrait. Besides, you can paint better than me; I don’t say it
behind your back, but—”
“Then it’s a bargain?” interrupted Matt, anxiously.
“Yes; I can give you an hour every mornin’. Trade’s so slack,
unfortunately.”
“May I take the boots with me?” inquired Matt.
“Yes, the moment the portrait’s done,” said Gregson, in generous
accents.
“Are you afraid I’ll walk off in ’em?” Matt cried, angrily. “And suppose
they don’t fit?”
“Ah, well; you may try them on,” conceded Gregson. And, with a curious
repetition of a former episode, Matt slipped off his boot under a
street-lamp. The boots were a little tight, especially after the yawning
laxness of the old; but it was heavenly to stamp on the wet pavement and
to feel a solid sole under one’s foot, even though an oozy, sloppy
stocking intervened.
Gregson perceived the ruin of the vacant boot, and his face grew stern.
“Keep it on, keep it on,” he said, harshly. “You’re an old customer.”
“Oh, thank you!” ejaculated Matt.
“You can give me the old pair,” he rejoined, gruffly.
“Oh, but they’re past mending,” said Matt.
“But they can help to mend other boots. They’re like clergymen,” said
the little shoemaker, laughing grimly. “Nothing is ever wasted in this
world.”
Matt was thinking so too, though from a different point of view. He was
grateful to the economical order of the universe.
The boots reinvigorated the pilgrim on his way to the ever-receding
Mecca of employment, and each day he sallied forth further refreshed by
the bread and butter and tea which William Gregson’s spouse dispensed
after the sittings. All over London he tramped. One day he wandered in
hopes of a job among the docks of Rotherhithe, feeling a vague romance
in the great gray perspectives of towering wood-stacks with their
far-away flavor of exotic forests, and in the sombre canals and locks
along which men with cordwain faces were tugging discolored barges. The
desolation of the scene and of the district was akin to his mood—his
eyes were full of delicious hopeless tears; he rambled on, forgetting to
ask for the job, through the forlorn streets, all ship-chandler shops
and one-story cottages, and threading a narrow passage strewn with
lounging louts, found himself on a little floating pier on the bank of
the river, and lost himself again in contemplating the grimy picturesque
traffic, the bleak wharves and warehouses.
“You see that air barge with the brick-dust sails?”
Matt started; an aged gentleman with a rusty silk hat was addressing
him.
“Well, t’other day I see one just like that capsize in calm weather
under my very eyes. I come here every day after dinner to watch the
water, and I do get something worth seein’ sometimes. The pier-master he
told me it was loaded with road-slop, and road-slop’s alive—shifts the
weight on the lurchin’ side, you see, and that’s ’ow it occurred. There
was two men drowned—oh! it’s worth while coming here sometimes, I can
tell you. You see that green flag off the buoy?—that’s where she lays,
right in the fairway of the river.”
Here the aged gentleman snuffed himself with tremulous fingers that
spilled half, and offered Matt the box. The young man took a pinch for
exhilaration.
A strayed sparrow hopped dolefully amid the grains of snuff on the
floating platform in futile quest of seeds.
“It would be ’appier stuffed,” the aged gentleman declared. “I mean with
tow, not toke.” And he laughed wheezingly.
Matt contesting this, the aged gentleman maintained, with an air of deep
philosophy, that all birds would be ’appier stuffed—that their life in
a state of nature was a harrowing competition for crumbs and worms,
while to keep them alive in cages was the climax of cruelty.
It subsequently transpired that he was a retired bird-stuffer, and the
conversation ended in Matt’s accompanying him home to learn the process,
as the bird-stuffer’s son and heir in far-off Stepney was in need of a
trustworthy hand in the shop.
“There isn’t a honest ’art in the trade,” he said, gloomily, “and the
boys are wuss than the men. They ought to be stuffed. What I like about
you is that you’ve got no character. The better the character the wuss
the man. They takes advantage of it.”
Arrived at his house—which was more pretentious than most of its
one-story neighbors—for it had a basement sublet to a blind woman whose
insignia read, “Chairs neatly cained on reasonable terms,” and its
parlor window was gay with wax fruits and stuffed birds—the aged
gentleman, who gave the name of Ground, discovered that he had no skin
to operate on, and, being spent from the walk, directed Matt to buy a
dead canary for sixpence from a bird-fancier “in the Eye Road.”
“There’s the tanner,” he said. “Now if you don’t come back with the bird
you may stuff me for a old goose.”
Matt came back with the bird, but the aged gentleman put it to his nose
and contorted his aged snuff-colored nostrils.
“I want a bird, not manure,” he said. “A bird fresh from this wale of
tears. Why, if I began to skin this the feathers ’ould drop out. You’ve
been took in, but you haven’t took me in, so here’s another tanner.”
In great anxiety Matt stood outside the bird-fancier’s shop-window,
staring wistfully at the frowsy-looking birds roosting in the cages, and
hoping that some kindly canary would drop off to eternal sleep under his
very nose so that he might be sure of its freshness. But the poor little
creatures all clung to existence and their perches. Suddenly he began to
laugh. There was an owl in a cage, and it looked like Cornpepper. On its
head was an erectile tuft like Cornpepper’s hair after argument, and,
though devoid of an eye-glass, the creature regarded him from its great
feather-fringed eyes with the same large, profound gaze.
“Give me style,” he heard it saying, “give me style.”
And then he thought of Cornpepper’s theories, of which he had heard more
on that glad mad night when the juvenile celebrity had been his partner
in the waltz.
“Erle-Smith is all wrong,” Cornpepper had pronounced, testily. “But I
don’t want to talk shop to-night. Imagination is shown in treatment, not
in subject. There may be more imagination in the painting of a
dressing-gown than of an allegory. Painters are called poets when they
can’t paint. And the Saturday Spectator is quite at sea when it claims
me as the champion of modern subject against ancient, mediæval, or
imaginary. Subject, indeed! What I demand is modern treatment. I do
wish O’Brien would leave off interpreting me.”
And Matt Strang fell into a reverie, wondering what he should paint for
the Academy, and gazing into the owl’s eyes. What if he were destined to
waltz to fame in company with Cornpepper! And then he remembered
Gurney’s enthusiastic talk during the pauses of the wild waltz in
denunciation of the “real moments” of Cornpepperism, and in acclamation
of the simpler harmonies of Outamaro, the great Japanese master, from
whose work Cornpepper’s was a rotten retrogression rather than a
legitimate evolution. Matt speculatively surrendered his fancy to
Japanese images. A gallery of beautiful dream-pictures passed before his
eyes like a panorama. A brusque tap on the shoulder roused him from his
day-dream, and turning, he saw the animated face of the aged gentleman
beneath the rusty silk hat.
“Where’s the bloomin’ bird?” cried Mr. Ground, relieved to find Matt not
run off, for during the suspense of waiting it had struck him that even
the first bird might have been picked up in the gutter.
“The bird,” Matt murmured, dazedly. “Oh! Ah! I was waiting for one to
die. I wanted to be sure it was—new.”
“With my little eye, I sore ’im die,” quoted the aged gentleman,
mockingly. “ ‘Ere, give us the cash—you’re a juggins. But I suppose
folks can’t be honest and clever too.”
He took the sixpence and went inside, and re-emerged with what he called
a “new-laid” linnet, and returning to his parlor, skinned it, and
smeared the skin with arsenical soap, which he manufactured on the spot
out of common yellow soap beaten up into a batter with water, white
arsenic, and some drops of toothache mixture he had in a vial. He
stuffed the skin with the cotton-wool in which the vial was embedded,
and ran a wire right through from mouth to tail, with half a hair-pin
for each leg and each wing.
“I’m out of eyes,” he said, pausing. “But in them sockets you sticks
glass eyes—they’re so much a dozen, according to size. See?”
Matt’s aptitude as a pupil regained him the aged gentleman’s esteem, and
a day or so after the oddly assorted couple sailed down the Thames on a
penny steamboat, and walked from Blackwall to Stepney, where Matt was
introduced to the bird-stuffer’s son, a fat, greasy, hilarious man, who
told his father that he was “a old innercent,” and facetiously argued
out the probabilities of Matt’s honesty in Matt’s presence. Ultimately,
Ground Junior took the young man on a week’s trial. The trial going in
Matt’s favor, he was installed permanently in the establishment at
eighteen shillings a week, fulfilling miscellaneous functions, the most
troublesome of which was the superintendence of a snub-nosed errand-boy,
who played excruciatingly on a penny whistle. This boy, whose name was
Tommy, and who reminded Matt queerly of his ancient Indian chum by his
dishonesty as well as by his name, would calmly return with bare
pedestals where there had been birds and shades, and assert that he had
smashed the glass, and that thieves in the crowd had torn off the birds.
He did not flinch from smashing whole nests of glass shades, two dozen
inside one another, a veritable Napoleon among errand-boys. Sometimes,
when he had been out with the barrow delivering orders, he would wheel
it home laden with mysterious coats and boots, which he vainly offered
Matt on easy terms. At irregular intervals, too, he fell ill, a note
from his mother arriving in his handwriting differently sloped, and then
Matt was reduced to trundling the barrow himself, while the fat
facetious man, summoned from the workroom over the shop, or from his
other establishment in the New Cut, where his wiry vixen of a wife had
her headquarters, replaced him behind the counter. Matt had also spells
of mechanical occupation in the workshop. He not only stuffed the skins
(which came from abroad), but arranged baskets of wax-fruit (which were
bought ready-made) and paper flowers and cases of shells with moss and
sea-weeds and pyramids of pebbles. And he made mock red coral out of
balls of brown paper, dipped into a hot composition of beeswax and
rosin, and stuck it on wooden stands with many-hued shells variegating
it, and preserved insects creeping prettily over it; likewise he
manufactured wax-flowers to replace breakages; hollow frauds, mere wax
shells pounced with dry colors, or mixed originally with coloring
matter, yellow ochre making apples, and lake lending transparency to
cherries, or uniting with Prussian blue to furnish the florid richness
of purple grapes.
But though—as ever—his taskwork hovered oddly about the purlieus of
Art, or the vaults of its Temple, and though his eighteen shillings a
week enabled him to send nine shillings a week home, in monthly
instalments, to Abner Preep, still he was not happy. The difficulties
with the errand-boy; the fat facetiousness of Ground Junior; the menial
trundling of the barrow, with the dread of some day meeting “Bubbles,”
or other fellows from Grainger’s, to say nothing of Cornpepper, Gurney,
Rapper, or the Old Gentleman; the retail trade over the counter, the
biweekly task of cleaning all the shades with a chamois leather—all
this, combined with the sense of wasted months, galled and fretted him.
He was working at his Academy picture now—in accordance with his
promise to Herbert—but his hours being from eight to eight, Sunday was
his only leisure time, and he was paradoxically grateful for the ancient
Oriental ordinance which made the godless British bird-stuffer close his
shop once a week and thus enable him to work. He was able to do some of
the preliminary sketching-out in the early morning and at night; but
there was no light for the real work, nor was there much light in his
back bedroom, even at noon on Sundays.
He had not changed his address, though he had to walk three miles to and
from his work; kept to his old lodging by habit and the trust that his
landlady—an artist’s mother—would not hastily throw him upon the
streets. The subject of his picture had grown upon him from his daily
occupation; the simulated bird-life around him moved him at moments to
thoughts of the joyous winged creatures butchered to make a parlor
ornament. He could not agree with Ground Senior that they were happier
stuffed. And then, too, the pathos of prisoned birds would overwhelm
him, exiled from their natural woodland home, and set to peck endlessly
at wires. His own lot and theirs became subtly interlinked, and his
imagination, turning from the sordid prose of the actual world in which
he found himself, brooded on visions of poetry and idyllic happiness,
and so, instead of selecting from reality that which was beautiful in
it, instead of following Cornpepper’s theories, or his own theories, or
anybody’s theories, he found himself irresistibly and instinctively
seized and possessed by a subject and a mode of treatment
uncompromisingly imaginative—“The Paradise of the Birds,” a beautiful
wood, suffused with a magic sunlight, in which freed birds of many
species should flutter blithely around a divine female figure with a
wondrous radiance of love and joy upon her welcoming face, and at her
feet a beautiful boy playing upon an oaten pipe. There should be an
undertone of tender pathos—the pathos of birds—but light and joy were
to be the essence of this harmony of lovely forms and colors; all the
painter’s semi-unconscious yearning for happiness, all his revolt
against his narrow, squalid lot, his secret, resentful sense of the high
place denied him at the banquet of life, reflecting themselves,
inverted, in the mirror of his art. And though the sunlight and
atmosphere should be real enough to satisfy the Cornpepper faction, yet
over all he would put something of Erle-Smith’s glamour:—
For the paradise Matt drew on his recollections and old sketches of
Acadia, supplemented by a few water-color studies made in Epping Forest,
which was within difficult walking distance of the bird-shop, from
which, of course, he got his birds; the divine female figure was based
upon his first study from the nude at Grainger’s, which he still
possessed, though he now gave the woman the normal allowance of toes;
while by the aid of coppers he bribed the snub-nosed apprentice with his
penny whistle to sit for the cherub with the oaten reed. And thus was
Nature transfigured to Art. But as Eden to Epping, so was Matt’s mental
conception of the picture to the real picture.
From dawn to sunset Matt painted tirelessly, and with many patient
effacements and substitutions of passages, during his one working-day,
convinced that the Academy was now his only avenue to recognition; and
as sending-in day drew nearer, and the precious light was born earlier,
he was able to snatch an hour or two every morning before setting out
for Stepney. Towards the end the need of time drove him to the omnibus.
Nor was it only the need of time. Of late a strange languor had grown
upon him, against which he was incessantly battling. The image in his
strip of glass frightened him; his face was white, his once sturdy frame
thin, and so feeble was he become that the three-mile walk, which had
been rather a pleasure than an inconvenience, was now a weary, endless
drag. He had bilious headaches. But he toiled on at his picture, finding
in the fairyland of imagination consolation for existence, and in the
anxieties and agonies of artistic travail an antidote to the agonies and
anxieties of the daily grind. “The Paradise of the Birds,” though he was
conscious it did not equal his conception, still seemed to him far
superior to the ordinary Academy picture; it could not fail to redeem
him from his own Inferno, reveal him to the world, make him an honored
guest in artistic coteries, and give him all the day for Art. Through
the sordid life of Stepney and Whitechapel he moved, sustained by an
inner vision of beauty and victory, and it was not till he had
surreptitiously wheeled his picture to Burlington House in the
bird-stuffer’s barrow, at the price of a reprimand for idling about,
that his will-power gave way, and he realized that he was but a limp
shadow. Hope kept him on his feet a little longer, but the terrifying
symptoms developed rapidly, and at last even Ground Junior perceived his
condition, and allowed him a morning’s leave to attend a hospital. For
two hours and a half he waited on one of the bare benches of a
cheerless, dim-lit anteroom amid a grimy crowd of invalids, ranging from
decrepit, bandaged old men to wan-faced children, all coughing and
groaning and conversing fatuously, and ostentatiously comparing
complaints, and finally fading away tediously two by two into the
presence of the physician. At last his own turn came, announced by the
sharp ting of a hand-bell; and, preceded by a rheumy-eyed stone-mason,
he passed through the polished, awe-inspiring portal, and found himself
in the presence of an austere gentleman with frosty side-whiskers.
“What’s the matter with you, my man?” the doctor inquired in low tones
of the stone-mason.
“All outer sorts,” replied the stone-mason.
“Ah! Any special pain anywhere?” he went on, in the same dulcet accents.
“Eh?” asked the stone-mason, hearing imperfectly in his fluster.
The doctor shouted in a mighty yell: “Any special pain anywhere?”
The appalled stone-mason admitted to a stitch in the side, and the
doctor continued his interrogative thunders. He had only two
conversational methods—the piano and the fortissimo.
Matt, trembling, awaited his succession to the criminal dock, and,
straining his ears when the trying moment came, was fortunate enough to
secure the piano treatment.
“Your blood is poisoned,” was the great man’s verdict. “This is the
third case I have had from bird-stuffing establishments. When you clean
the glass shades and breathe on the insides you imbibe the arsenical and
other foul gases that are given off by the skins and collect inside the
air-tight glasses. You will take the medicine three times a day, but it
won’t do you any good if you go on living in that atmosphere. You want
sea-air. You ought to try and get into the country, and have a little
holiday.”
And Matt Strang, dazed, but smiling grimly, crawled down into the
dispensary and handed in his prescription, and tottered back to the
bird-shop with a big bottle of yellow fluid in his hand. He would not
let himself think; there was only one point of light—his Academy
picture—and he kept his eyes fixed on that as on a star.
A few days later the notice of rejection arrived, and the thin, sickly
faced young man, being out with orders, surreptitiously wheeled “The
Paradise of the Birds” home on his barrow, and discounted the renewed
wrath of his employer by giving a week’s notice. He did his work as
usual that afternoon, smiling in uneasy defiance at the oddly intrusive
thought that the Cobequid folks would have said it was all through his
painting on Sundays, yet not without a shred of their superstition. But
when he got home he fell helplessly on his little iron bed, and wept
like a child.
He was beaten, broken, shattered in body and soul. He had fought and
lost.
And as an ailing child turns yearningly to its mother, so his heart
yearned to his native land in a great surge of homesickness. Here the
narrow labyrinthine streets were muddy with spring rains, but there the
snow would still be on the fields and forests, white and pure and
beautiful under the dazzling blue sky. Oh, the keen, tingling cold, the
large embrace of the salt breezes, the joy of skating over the frozen
flats! His poor poisoned blood glowed at the thought. Here he was ill
and lonely, there he would be among loving faces. Poor Billy! How the
boy must long for him! It would be humiliating to return a failure, but
there would be none to reproach him, and his own pride was gone,
vanished with his physical strength. But how to get back? He was too ill
to go before the mast, too impoverished to command even the steerage. He
had unfortunately sent thirty-six shillings home just before the
rejection of his picture, and he was again in arrears of rent, through
the extra expense of the canvas and the compulsory gilt frame. Mrs.
Lipchild was induced by the splendor of the frame to take “The Paradise
of the Birds” in payment for the three weeks (lunar), and the “carver
and gilder, over-mantel and picture-frame maker” in Red Lion Street, who
had made the frame, purchased all his remaining pictures and
school-studies for a sovereign down.
There was nothing for it but to borrow. So feeble was his whole being
that the first suggestion of this ignominy carried no sting. He thought
first of Herbert, and brushing his garments to a threadbare
specklessness, inquired of his club door-keeper, who informed him curtly
that Mr. Strang was abroad. This was as he expected, but he was
disappointed. Tarmigan was his only other friend, but him he had lost
sight of since Christmas, and though he had in these hours of weakness
abandoned the hope of Art, he had still a vague paradoxical aversion
from applying to a man whose artistic ideas he did not share, and who
might hereafter have a sort of right to resent his departure from them.
Besides, Tarmigan was poor, was unsuccessful. In his desperation he
thought of Madame Strang, and though, in the course of their chat that
night at the Students’ Club, Herbert had told him the Old Gentleman had
given her an awful wigging, and she had renewed her promise to close her
door in the culprit’s face, yet Matt nerved himself to risk insult. So,
spying the shop from a sheltered doorway across the street, he hung
about till the Vandyke beard and the velvet jacket had issued and
disappeared round a corner, then he rang the bell of the side door, and
to his joy Madame herself opened it.
“My poor boy! What is the matter with you?” she cried.
The unexpected sympathy of her words clouded the lonely young man’s gaze
with hot tears; he staggered into the passage, and Madame, growing pale
herself, took him by the arm and helped him into the sitting-room, and
in her agitation poured him out a whole tumblerful of brandy, which
fortunately he only sipped.
A little recovered, he explained—improving his pallid complexion with
blushes when he came to the point—that he was returning to Nova Scotia,
as the doctor had ordered him a sea-voyage, and he wanted four or five
pounds till he got to the other side, when he would easily be able to
repay the loan.
“Certainly, my poor boy, certainly,” said Madame. “The idea of clever
people having no money, and people like me having plenty.”
She ran up-stairs, and returned with ten of the sovereigns, that she
hoarded—literally—in her stocking.
But Matt would not take more than five. He felt it foolish to burden
himself with superfluous temptations.
“I knew you weren’t a rogue,” cried Madame, in thoughtless triumph. The
sentiment reminding her of the interrogative eyebrows, she added,
hastily, “Of course, you won’t tell my husband. Not that he would mind,
of course, for I am helping you to leave the country. But oh, how I wish
you had come to me instead of to Herbert! The dear boy has such hard
work and so few pleasures, and his allowance is so small that his father
was naturally annoyed to think of your making the poor boy stint
himself. Of course, I made it up to Herbert unbeknown to his father, who
would only return him a little of the money you had borrowed. Promise me
you will not apply to Herbert again. You know it is so expensive living
in Paris!”
“I promise,” Matt murmured, hardly conscious of what Madame was saying,
his soul already in Nova Scotia, and dissolved in tenderness and
gratitude. The prospect of leaving London was as delightful as the
prospect of coming to it had been not fifteen months ago.
Ere he bade her farewell Madame made him promise to come and see her
when he was back in London again, hoped the voyage would do him good,
and scolded him for never having shown her his pictures.
“I am sure you will be a great artist,” she said, smiling winsomely.
“You have the artistic hand. God bless you.”
The young man listened unmoved; he was hoping the ice would bear till he
arrived in Cobequid Village.
And so, with all his worldly goods, including the unsaleable “Angelus,”
packed in the smallest of satchels, Matt Strang sailed back across the
Atlantic, the blood clogged in his veins, an unregarded unit of the
countless myriads that London has allured and scorched.
But the prodigal son was not fated to see any of his relatives
immediately upon his return to his native land except his mother, and
this was scarcely his mother, this pale creature with eyes vacant of all
save tears, who babbled to him, with heart-rending verbal repetitions,
of Revelation and the Beast, not even mistaking him for his dead father.
She had survived her life.
From Halifax Matt did not proceed forthwith to Cobequid Village,
joining, instead, a crew of mackerel-fishers, in the hope of earning
enough to repay Madame Strang immediately; for his soul, reinvigorated
by the sea-breezes of the voyage and the skies of his childhood, had
returned to its healthy repugnance to debt, and was ashamed of its
lapse.
It was a mixed company that he sailed away with—the bulk decent Nova
Scotians, of old fisher stock, but some rougher and more casual, and a
few—though these were harmless enough—despised “Portigees.” The
fishing was not devoid of danger. The men had to row out from the
schooner in twos or threes to tend the nets spread on the mackerel
banks, and sometimes a fog would come on and ingulf the ship, and the
fishers with their mocking freight would row for hours and hours, and at
times for days and days, on the ghostly sea in search of their floating
home. And sometimes they, too, would be swallowed up in the mystery of
sea and fog, and wives and mothers, running anxiously to the wharf to
meet them, would learn that an older fisher had netted his prey.
To Matt the hard work and the peril were alike welcome; the very mists
were poetry after the yellow charnel-house vapors of London, which now
lay behind him like a nightmare, and with it his dream of Art. His soul
had swung round violently. In the strain of hauling up the nets in the
misty moonlight, in the silence of sea and sky and night, he found
repose from his morbid craving to reproduce this mighty Nature, which
stretched away all around him in large, sane serenity, as indifferent to
the puny images of Art as the waste of waters to the little dory rocking
on its bosom. And the rugged simplicity of his briny, horny-handed mates
was equally restful after the garish brilliance of the young artists
about town; after all, his heart was with homely folk, went out to
sea-folk; he was his father’s son and the brother of all those who go
down to the sea in ships and do business in the great waters. How like a
child’s cackle Cornpepper’s epigrams sounded across the silence of the
lonely deep! Under the hushed stars, touching the infinite spaces with
awful beauty, all these feverish figures of the smoking-room showed
like fretful midges.
When the cruise was over, and the spoil had been unloaded and sold on
the fishy wharf, or steeped in brine and packed in the vats, Matt was
able to send ten dollars to England, besides keeping up his usual
allowance to Cobequid Village and maintaining himself—a triple task
which weighed heavily upon his brain, and gave him frequent moments of
corroding, nervous apprehension. For his health was only partially
re-established, and his correspondence with Cobequid Village was not
reassuring. His brothers and sisters were growing up without finding
much to do; Billy moped a great deal, and though he thanked his brother
for the engraving of the “Angelus,” which Matt sent him, he intimated
that he would have been better pleased had Matt spent his money on books
of travel and adventure for him. And Abner wrote, with pathetic
facetiousness, that he was “tolerable pleased” that his brother-in-law
had not come home, as they would have been “mighty squeezed” to put him
up, for, what with the increase of Abner’s own progeny and the growth of
the Strangs, even the best room with the cane chairs had long since been
turned into a bedroom, though it could still be restored to its pristine
magnificence on state occasions.
From the neighboring fishing-ground Matt gravitated back to Halifax. His
thoughts, divorced from Art, centred on money. His artistic fibre was
coarser now than in those days of almost religious enthusiasm for Art.
He had an idea of opening a drawing-school and becoming the local
“Grainger,” but the initial funds were to seek. He got a few
drawing-lessons, but the stupidity of his pupils was maddening, and his
communion with their parents fretted him after the larger mind of
London. He feared he would have to take to the road again in search of
sitters, and the prospect of weary tramps in quest of patronizing
store-keepers and farmers was not alluring, even though that fine
squeamish horror at the idea of Art to order had been knocked out of
him. He was saved from the tramping by becoming assistant in a
photographic caravan, which toured the country, leaving in each village
a trail of attitudinizing inhabitants mounted and framed; in the course
of which campaign, by a pleasanter stroke of fortune, he painted the
portraits of a minister of fisheries and of the cook he had married, and
so gained enough money to quit the caravan and start a carriage-painting
shop in the village where the happy couple had their country home. As
the poorest inhabitants were carriage-folk—for horses and oats and hay
were cheap, and carriage taxes unknown—Matt Strang, with a commercial
instinct sharpened and an artistic interest blunted by miseries,
calculated to do well. His sign-board, executed by his own hand, ran:
The shop was a success. Ere the summer waned many of the villagers had
their idle sleighs brilliantly illumined, and when winter came their
faded carriages were handed over to Matt to be berouged or otherwise
beautified. Each man had his equipage decorated after his own taste or
whim, though he always began by leaving it entirely to the artist. One
would order lemon-yellow underworks, with vermilion stripes and an
olive-green body, for another the ideal of beauty lay in lake and
russet-and-green, while the fancy of a third would turn lightly to
Prussian blue and gold stripes; and Matt, devoid now of artistic
interest and thus of artistic irritability, faithfully obeyed the
behests of his employers, and filled the leafy streets with a riotous
motley of perambulating color. The little village was pranked and
rejuvenated. It wore a sempiternally festive air. The sign-boards were
spick-and-span, the house fronts fresh and bright, the vehicles gayly
a-glitter, the glass windows of the stores black with self-laudatory
lettering by day, while at night the buff store-blinds repeated the
brag; and over all the village was a sense of “wet paint.” Thus did the
artist throw a glamour over life, and touch the sleeping souls of his
fellows to livelier issues, though his own interest in Art was numb.
But prices were small, and paid mainly in kind, and when once the place
was transmogrified there was nothing further to be done, the latter
items of his sign-board evoking no response. So Matt shifted his ensign
to Starsborough, a ship-building village on the coast, where he found
new scope for his versatile craftsmanship, as witness two new items
added to his painted prospectus:—

Figure-heads Carved.
Ship Decorating.

He got leave to set up in the ship-yard, speculated in a set of
carving-tools, and supplied the prows of the ships with those
picturesque wooden persons whose uselessness is of the essence of Art.
He occupied a corner in the calker’s shop, reeking with tarry odors, and
worked hemmed in by the oakum-pickers, who relieved the tedium of toil
by smoking and singing lewd songs. One of his works, a Turkish lady
eight feet high, to get which done in time cost him much sweat and
sacrifice of other work, pleased the ship-builder so vastly that he gave
Matt the contract—in preference to all the other candidates who sent in
estimates—for painting his next ship within and without. The delighted
young man saw his way to speedy competence, the long-torpid thought of
Art began to stir drowsily, only it was Paris that now gleamed fitfully
in the background of his day-dreams. He talked over the decorations with
the ship-builder, and agreed to pay the men from week to week, and to
supply the tools, paints, and gold-leaf till the job was completed, when
his employer undertook to pay him the sum agreed upon in actual coin. As
Matt was able to get the materials from a store on three months’ credit,
and to pay his men with orders on the same all-embracing store on the
same terms, and the job would be finished in less than three months, the
arrangement promised to be very profitable. Alas! it proved the crash
and break-down of all his new prosperity. In the middle of the work the
ship-builder failed heavily, and Matt found himself on the point of
bankruptcy too, for, though he sent in his claim against the estate,
there seemed scant chance of his obtaining anything. Even the Turkish
woman had not been paid for, Matt having consented to receive her price
with the rest of the money, for the sake of getting silver in lieu of
goods. His account with the store-keeper had run up to $250. He could
not see how to meet his bills; the weeks without other work had
exhausted his savings; there was even about a fourth of his debt still
to be sent to Madame Strang. He got other little jobs, but the great
shipwright’s failure had reduced Starsborough to stagnation. The time of
payment drew nigh. After sleepless nights of anguish he went to the
store-keeper and told him he could not pay. The man received him
sympathetically, said he had been expecting the confession, and
consented to give him a little time; so Matt broke up his establishment,
and journeyed by train and packet to another village nearer Halifax, and
set up his sign-board afresh. A job took him to the capital, and in the
streets he ran across his Starsborough creditor, who was come up to
order hardware, and who, apparently delighted to see him, invited him to
breakfast with him at his hotel next morning. Always glad to save a
meal, and rejoiced to find his creditor so genial and debonair, Matt
tramped into town the first thing in the morning and repaired to the
hotel. But there was no breakfast for him. A sheriff’s officer awaited
him instead, and arrested him for debt. He had been the victim of a
subterfuge, his creditor fearing from his migratory movements that he
was about to run off to the States.
And so Matt was clapped into the prison to await his trial, and became
one of the broken-down band that inhabited its spacious ward, promenaded
the long whitewashed corridor on which the lavatory gave, and slept on
the iron beds ranged against the wall. Every morning the bedclothes were
stripped off and piled in the empty cells to give the ward a more
habitable air. In this dreary bed and sitting room Matt spent days of
mental agony, though physically he fared better than under his own
parsimonious régime. But the sense of degradation outweighed all else.
He felt he could never look his fellow-men in the face again. His
character was gone; his ambitions had received their death-blow—nay,
his very business career in his native land was at an end. The stigma
would always soil his future. All the long travail and aspiration had
ended at what a goal! He could not understand the careless merriment of
his fellow-prisoners, who fleeted the time with cards, which they played
for love. There was a negro among them who was the whetstone of their
wit, and a Frenchman who varied his tearful narrative of the misfortune
that had brought him low, with ventriloquial performances and anecdotes
of self-made Yankee millionaires. In this gesticulating little man Matt
recognized with surprise and shamefacedness his ancient fractious
subordinate in the Halifax furniture shop, who had taken him to his
bosom after due alcohol, but he was glad to find his unconscious fellow
made no advances. At moments he forced himself to look for the comic
Bohemian side of the situation, to imagine Cornpepper’s superiority to a
debtors’ prison, the artist sublime amid the ruins of his credit,
snorting disdain for the absurd institutions of the bourgeois; but
neither this nor philosophy availed to shake his sense of shame. He
summoned the infinite to his aid, saw himself again rocking on the
little dory between sea and sky, and asked himself what anything
mattered in this vast of space and time. But these excursions of the
intellect left instinct unmoved; from childhood the word “jail” had been
fraught with shuddering associations; they could not be argued away.
Strang’s aloofness from his companions, even when an outside friend had
sent in liquor or dainties to one of them, attracted the notice of the
jailer, a kindly man in a cutaway coat, with only an official cap to
mark his calling. He talked to the sullen, brooding prisoner, conceived
a liking for him, and commissioned him to paint his portrait for ten
dollars, supplying the materials himself and providing a temporary
easel. The darkness that had threatened Matt’s reason, if not his life,
fled before this kindness; the days before the trial flew by almost
joyously, and the nights were rendered more tolerable by being passed
alone on a plank bed in one of the criminal cells, whose stout doors,
studded with iron nails and furnished with little gratings, rarely held
anybody, so that the painter easily persuaded his patron to allow him to
occupy it.
He had scarcely set up his easel when his companions clustered round,
and the Frenchman burst into tears of emotion, and professed that he,
too—he who spoke to you—was an artist. If only some one could see the
creditor who had thrown him into prison, and explain to him that his
victim was guiltless of all save genius. As Matt had heard all this
before, he pursued his work unmoved, affording a new distraction to his
mates, so that the negro’s life became endurable, and less love was lost
at cards. But ere the second sitting was over the Frenchman, who had
studied alternately the artist’s face and his canvas, uttered an
exclamation of joyous recollection and fell upon his neck, crying that
he had at last found again the comrade of his soul. When Matt had shaken
him off, he drew a romantic picture of their early affection and
collaboration for the edification of the salon, and henceforth took a
proud fraternal interest in the progress of the portrait.
The picture turned out better than Matt had expected; to his own
surprise he found himself painting more vigorously than ever; his hand,
instead of having lost its cunning, seemed to have gained by the rest.
The jailer was well content, and promised two and a half dollars over
and above the price; but as Matt had expressed his intention of sending
the money to his creditor, his new friend held over the surplus till he
should need it for himself. When at the end of the third week the trial
came on, and Matt “swore out,” solemnly asserting absolute
impecuniosity, his creditor, mollified by the ten dollars, and further
assuaged by the sale of Matt’s effects, from his tools to his
sign-board, did not press the counter-proof of competency, and so the
prisoner was set at liberty. Sundry other bankrupts “swore out” at the
same time, one or two, who had boasted privily of their means, perjuring
themselves back to freedom and prosperity.
Before Matt Strang bade farewell to the jail, the Frenchman broke off a
ventriloquial performance to beseech him with tears in the name of the
camaraderie of Art, and for the sake of their ancient affection, now
that he was going forth into the free sunshine, to expostulate with that
cruel creditor and plead for unhappy genius. The persecutor—Coble by
name—would not listen to his own appeals; but if a brother-artist would
speak for him, Coble’s better nature—and every man had a better
nature—might be touched, and the skylark might soar freely again
towards the blue empyrean. He was quite honest—oh, Heaven, yes! He did
not really possess two hundred dollars, as Coble imagined, but he could
not account for them before the court—one would see why—though
privately he could account for them in a way that would satisfy every
honest man. Some emissary of Satan had put a bill into his hand which
said, “For a hundred dollars we will give you a thousand dollars of our
goods.” He had hankered, as any man might, after those thousand dollars,
and sought out the coiners (for all the world knew that was their
formula), and paid his hundred dollars. But the bag of coin they had
given him was snatched from him on his road back by one of their agents.
Determined not to be outwitted, he had gone again and invested another
hundred dollars, and posted the parcel to himself at a neighboring
post-office, but when it arrived he had found only a brick-bat inside.
He had been afraid to “swear out” lest Coble should maintain he had the
money, and thus get him indicted for perjury.
If the friend of his youth would lay these facts before the cruel Coble,
he would no longer languish in a dungeon. Would not the great artist
promise him?
The story seemed too strange to be false, and Matt promised, at the risk
of a kiss, to recount it to the cruel Coble, though he failed to see how
it proved the Frenchman’s honesty. He was, indeed, not sorry to have
something definite to do, for with the completion of the jailer’s
portrait had come a reaction, and he had lapsed, if not into his first
agony, into a listless apathy that was worse—the nerveless, purposeless
inertia of a crushed spirit. He had been in jail! Not even a miracle
could erase that blot upon his name. How could he take up the burden of
life afresh? Unless, perhaps, temporarily, with the sole object of
wiping off the debt which he owed morally, though no longer legally.
Anyway, he would see this Mr. Coble; the Frenchman seemed—curiously
enough—to attach value to life, and if a little bit of his own life
could be of any use to the poor weak creature, it was at his disposal.
Mr. Coble, too, must be a strange person to derive any satisfaction from
keeping the pygmy in prison in revenge for the loss of a few hundred
dollars.
Money! Money! Money! How it had cramped and crippled and defiled his
life!
He washed himself in the lavatory before leaving, and brushed his
clothes, which were in a very fair condition. He was startled to find
how many gray hairs streaked the curly locks he combed. “It won’t be a
monochrome much longer,” he thought, surveying his mane with bitter
merriment.
Outside it was May, but he was not brightened by the great blue sky that
roofed him once more. The bustle of life sounded pleasantly about him,
but he slunk through the busy quarters of the town with hanging head, as
if every passer-by could read his shame in his face. The horrible
thought struck him suddenly that Coble would know whence he came, but on
top of it came the happy idea of explaining he had only gone to the jail
to paint the portrait of an official.
The journey was not very long, though the road was muddy and steep. Mr.
Coble lived beyond Citadel Hill, amid whose grassy expanse a path wound
towards the more scattered portions of the town. The ice was quite off
the sunny fields, except in the shaded parts under the fences, and men
were ploughing with yokes of oxen, though here and there heaped-up piles
of snow still bordered the route, which they flooded with slush in their
gradual deliquescence. Mr. Coble’s suburban residence was a detached,
double-fronted wooden cottage, barred from the road by a neat,
white-painted picket-fence. There were attics in the roof, which, like
its neighbors, was pitched, with broad eaves, for the sliding down of
the snow. The front garden had been newly dug up and laid out to receive
seed; there was a dirty line round the house, showing where the winter
embanking had recently been removed.
Matt pushed open the white picket garden-gate and walked up the gravel
path towards the pillared porch; three wooden steps led to the little
platform, and then the door was raised one step higher to prevent snow
drifting in from without.
Matt knocked. He heard the inner door open, the patter of light
footsteps; then the outer door swung back, and a girl—passably
pretty—appeared in the little entry between the doors, which were thus
duplicated against the frost.
Matt lifted his hat and inquired for Mr. Coble. He had reverted to the
drawling accents of the colony, though not altogether to its locutions.
“Oh, pa’s down at the store,” answered the girl, staring at the visitor.
“When will he be in?” Matt asked, disappointed.
“Oh, not for hours,” said Miss Coble. “Is it anything I can tell him?”
“No, no; I don’t think so,” Matt replied, hesitatingly. “I had better
call again this evening.”
The girl lingered silently without closing the door. There was a
perceptible pause.
“Yes,” she answered, at last. “I guess you had.”
He raised his hat again and went down the gravel path. At the
garden-gate it struck him that he ought to have inquired the address of
the store in town, and so saved a second journey. He turned his head,
and saw the girl still at the door looking after him. Then it seemed
funny to go back.
He shut the gate hastily and pursued his way to town down the muddy
road, wondering what he would do next, and how he could cope with life.
The thought of the Frenchman brought up the memory of that furniture
warehouse in which they had worked together in the days of his boyish
dreams. He bent his steps towards it with a vague thought of seeking
work there again, but found it had been converted into an emporium for
sewing-machines. As he sauntered aimlessly down the street, his eye was
caught by a lurid picture in a store window. It represented a shark
snapping savagely at a diver upon the bed of the ocean. He smiled at the
crude composition, which reminded him of his own early works; then, as
he perceived its relation to the stock-in-trade, his smile became
broader. Sponge was the staple, and a gigantic delicate sponge, with
ornamental spout-holes and fragments of rock adhering realistically to
it, was a conspicuous object amid dandy-brushes and spoke-brushes and
chamois-leather and glass cases covering rock-work. There were little
sponges on a card, and Matt started violently as he read, “Coble’s
five-cent sponges.” The mountain had come to Mahomet!
He walked in, crunching over a débris of shells, grit, and sand, and
inhaling a pungent saline odor. A veritable mountain of a man towered
over him with beetling brows and snowy hair and beard. His paunch
protruded imposingly, and his eyes glittered.
“Mr. Coble?” said Matt, inquiringly.
“That’s me,” cried the mountain of flesh, in fierce accents, as if
defying contradiction.
Matt felt the business would not be easy.
“I’ve taken the liberty of coming to you—on behalf of—”
“Not that tarnation Frenchman?” shrieked Mr. Coble.
Matt reddened uncomfortably.
“That’s the fifth man he’s sent me. When did you come out of prison?”
“I’ve been painting the jailer’s portrait,” Matt stammered, with burning
cheeks. “And I used to know the poor little man years ago, and he
says—”
“I can’t listen now. Does he think I’ve no business to attend to?”
“He didn’t send me here, he sent me to your house.”
“Ho, that’s a new dodge. But I reckon he told you the old things,
eh?—that I’m a stony-hearted cuss, that I’d sneak the coppers off a
corpse’s eyes or squeeze a cent till the eagle squeaked.”
“No, really, he didn’t tell me that,” said Matt.
“Oh, you needn’t spare the old man’s feelings. I know what a man says
when he finds you won’t be swindled. He’s the everlastingest old dodger
that ever drummed for me. His tricks ’ould puzzle a Philadelphia lawyer.
The only honest bit of work he ever did in his life was that thar
pictur’ of a shark. That’s stunnin’, I admit, and I’d willingly let the
poor devil out of the cage if my darter warn’t so bitter agen him.
There, that’s the truth. I never told it to any of the other fellows,
they all looked such moulty jail-birds. Say now, you said you were a
painter, ain’t that a good pictur’?”
Although Mr. Coble’s words were now more amiable, his accent was still
fierce, and it required some courage on Matt’s part to reply that the
picture was pretty good in a manner that betokened that it was pretty
bad.
“Ho, two of a trade!” quoth the mountain of a man.
“The shark couldn’t be like that,” Matt explained, mildly. “He has to
turn on his back before biting. It isn’t true to life.”
“Waal,” said Mr. Coble, in irate tones, “as the shark’s got nothing at
all to do with the sponge business, and the divers ain’t in no sort o’
danger whatever from it, I don’t see where truth to life comes in,
anyhow.”
“Oh, but the less lies you tell in Art the better,” urged Matt. “I’ll do
you another if you like.”
“Ho, that’s your dodge, is it?”
“I’m not asking anything for it,” the young man retorted, indignantly.
“It ’ll be a return for your listening to my appeal.”
Mr. Coble was startled.
“Thunderation!” he cried, sharply. “You’re a Christian. Step outside,
and we’ll liquor up.”
The invitation was uttered so fiercely that it sounded like a command,
especially as the Titan stamped three times with his foot—only his way
of signalling to his subordinate, Matt found. In the nearest bar, which
happened to be an illicit one, approached through a porch at the back of
a temperance hotel for the convenience of avowed teetotalers, the
man-mountain imparted to Matt the information that it was the
Frenchman’s amorous advances that had imbittered his daughter. “For my
part,” he said, “so far from wantin’ to keep him in there in clover, I’d
like to lift him out on the point of my toe, and I’d make him vamoose
from the town that smart you couldn’t see his heels for the dust. I’ll
mention it to Rosina that you’ve been putting in a good word for the
skunk, but I don’t think she’ll listen, that’s a fact.”
“Oh, but I’m sure she will,” said Matt. “She looks a kindhearted young
lady.”
“You haven’t seen her!” exclaimed Mr. Coble, fiercely.
“Yes; I saw her this afternoon,” said Matt.
“Then you’ve seen the purtiest gal you’ll see this year. Set ’em up
again. This old rye’s whopping good. Always rely on a temperance hotel
for good whiskey. And as my gal has a goodish bit of money,” pursued
the old man, smacking his lips and growing communicative without losing
any of the sternness of his accent, “you can understand what made the
wretched little froggy roll his eyes and twist his mustache at her. How
he found it out will be a mystery to my dyin’ day, for I’m careful never
to breathe a whisper of it to a single soul, but he ferreted out somehow
or t’other that when she’s twenty-one my Rosie will step into an income
of eight hundred dollars.”
He shouted the statement so loudly that the whole bar pricked up its
ears. Matt quite believed that Coble was incapable of whispering
anything to anybody. He had a vague envy of the fortunate girl.
“Not to mention three thousand dollars I’ve put aside myself to hand her
on her wedding-day,” continued Coble. “Young folks are lucky nowadays.
When I married I had to lend my father-in-law ten dollars to rig himself
up respectable for church.”
Before they parted the mountain of flesh had consented thunderously to
Matt’s supplying another picture of the dangers of sponge-fishing, but
would not bind himself, although in his third glass, to do more in
return than lay the matter before his daughter. Once alone in the
streets again, Matt felt he had made a bad bargain. The two and a half
dollars the jailer had given him were all his funds, and even the few
nickels that would have to be expended on common water-colors and the
double-royal card-board were a consideration. But he loyally executed
the work in the bedroom he had ventured to take, finding rather a relief
in this further postponement of the problem of his future. By the
following afternoon he was back at Coble’s with a brilliant sketch far
more arrestive than the Frenchman’s. The shark was more formidable, the
nude diver more graceful, his netted bag more accurate, and the
ocean-bed was a veritable fairy-land of sea-lichens and polyps. Coble
glared long at the sketch as Matt held it up, but he said nothing.
“What do you think of it?” asked Matt, apprehensively, at last.
“What do I think of it?” roared old Coble, and rushing to the window he
grabbed the old, inaccurate shark, tore it savagely in two, snatched
the new picture from the hands of the astonished Matt, filled up the
vacancy with it, dashed outside to survey it from the sidewalk, and
reappearing at the door, bellowed, “Step this way, young man,” and
stamped three times on the threshold.
Over the old rye he reported to the artist that he had found his Rosie
more placable than usual; that she was even willing to listen to the
young man’s plea, though she seemed to want to hear it from his own
mouth before deciding. Matt gladly consented to sup that evening with
the mountain and his daughter. Free drinks never surprised him, but a
free square meal was like having larks flying into one’s mouth ready
roasted.
It was the happiest evening he had spent for many a long day. There was
a spotless cloth on the round table, and the food was good, if solid.
Miss Coble made herself agreeable, and if she was not so pretty as her
father saw her, her plump cheek was sufficiently rosy and her figure
sufficiently comely and her frock sufficiently nice to be grateful to
the eye of an artist and a young man just emerged from prison society,
and starving for the amenities of life. Her light-blue eyes lit up
pleasantly when he addressed her, or when she helped him to more
griddle-cakes. Some stuffed birds over a low bookcase that contained a
few brightly bound volumes reminded him pleasurably of past miseries.
The stentorian voice of old Coble almost monopolized the conversation.
He had much to say that was not worth listening to—on the bad crops of
the year before last, the scarcity of helps, and the failure of the
colony to go ahead, which was apparently connected with the
uncleanliness of the inhabitants, as manifest from the small sales of
bath-sponges. After dinner the mountain smoked, and after smoking the
volcano slept.
“I’m afraid you think pa’s got a bad temper,” said Miss Coble, abruptly.
She had hastily cleared away the supper dishes, and had seated herself,
half recumbent amid a litter of sewing, upon a couch opposite the
easy-chair which Matt now occupied. The young man instinctively glanced
towards her trumpeting parent.
“Oh, he’s sound enough; can’t you hear?” she said, laughing gayly. “I
only hope he doesn’t disturb you. I’m used to it.”
“I only hope I sha’n’t disturb him,” answered Matt.
“I guess he’s making more noise than us,” laughed Miss Coble. “He can’t
even be quiet when he’s asleep. I was going to explain to you that he
can’t help it; there’s something wrong with his throat. It happened when
his voice broke in his boyhood, and it always sounds as if he was
angry—it always frightens off strangers, but he is really the
best-tempered papa in the township.”
Matt smiled. “I did think he was rather a fire-eater at first,” he
admitted. “But I’ve found him real jolly, and couldn’t quite make it out
all this time.” He continued to smile at the drollness of Coble’s
disability, and the girl’s eyes met his in an answering gleam of
merriment.
“Pa says you’re a powerful painter, Mr. Strang,” she said after a
silence, filled up by ruttling sounds from pa’s larynx.
“Oh, your pa’s only seen a rough thing I did for him,” he protested,
diffidently.
“Never mind.” She shook her head sagely. “I’m going down town to see it
to-morrow,” and she flashed a sunny smile at him that showed her teeth
were white.
Matt murmured, uneasily: “Oh, it’s not worth the trouble.”
“It’ll do me good, anyway. I’m getting fat, pa says. Wouldn’t it be
awful if I was to take after him? You know he lives away from town so as
to have exercise up and down Citadel Hill, but he might as well have
lived over the store.” And she giggled, not unmusically.
“You can’t tell what he would have been,” Matt reminded her with a
smile.
“Gracious! you frighten me. He might have come through the walls! Do you
think there is really any danger of my growing like him? Do tell!”
“There’s no danger of your losing your good looks,” replied Matt,
gallantly.
“You mean I never had any,” she said, with a roguish gleam that made the
plump face piquant.
“Oh, you know what I mean,” he protested, lamely.
Miss Coble meditatively picked up a piece of tape from the litter of
sewing and put it round her waist. Then she measured her bust.
“Is that the proper proportion?” she said, holding it up. “Artists are
supposed to know, aren’t they?”
“The figure couldn’t be better,” said Matt.
The girl shook her head in laughing reproof.
“I guess I’d better measure you and prove it, then,” said Matt, rising.
“My, how that lamp flares!” cried Miss Coble, rushing towards the table,
and carefully fumbling with the regulator. Matt resumed his seat,
feeling rather foolish; but soon, when the girl turned the talk on
himself, the reserved, solitary young man found himself telling her of
adventures by sea and land, which he had not told anybody, perhaps
because nobody had ever asked him. He gave Halifax prison a wide berth,
warding off her casual questions about his position and prospects by
general statements about his artistic aspirations. Concerning aspects of
London life Miss Coble’s curiosity was at its keenest, her own
experience of existence having been limited, she said, to Halifax and
its environs, with faint, childish reminiscences of Greencastle,
Pennsylvania, where her mother had died thirteen years before, when she
was six years old.
“Oh, but I didn’t mean to tell you my age,” she said, pouting. “In ten
years’ time you will know I am nearly thirty.”
Matt was about to reassure her by declaring that in ten years’ time he
would have forgotten all about her, when the fall of the sleeper’s pipe
checked the unchivalrous statement.
He rose to go as soon as the mountain awoke, for he had a goodish tramp
before him.
Miss Coble accompanied him to the outer door. His eye was caught by the
beauty of the moon, gleaming irregularly from a lurid rack of clouds. He
stood in charmed silence gazing upward.
“What are you staring at? Aren’t you going to say good-night?” asked
Miss Coble, rather tartly.
His spirit returned to earth.
“Oh, good-night,” he said, holding out his hand.
She put her fingers—rougher, but warmer—into his for the first time.
“Good-night,” she said, softly.
He did not let her hand go immediately. At the last instant he was
invaded by an indefinite conviction that something—he knew not
what—had still to be done or said. He stood silent on the little
platform.
As if echoing his thought, “Haven’t you forgot something?” she asked.
His heart leaped violently with a thrilling suggestion. He looked into
her quizzing eyes. They were on a level with his own, her shorter figure
having the advantage of the raised threshold.
“I thought you came to speak to me about a Frenchman?” she went on.
He was relieved and disappointed.
“Of course; what a fool I am! I haven’t said a word about him.”
“Well, it’s too late now. I can’t stand talking here; the neighbors
might see us.”
“I’m so sorry,” said Matt, in a woe-begone tone.
“Well, you’ll have to come again to-morrow evening, then, if you want to
go on with it, that’s certain. Good-night again.”
“Till to-morrow, then,” said Matt, raising his hat.
He walked briskly down the gravel-path, glowing with the pleasure of the
evening, and looking forward to another pleasant free meal on the
morrow. Then his eye sought the moon again, but the cloud-rack had
covered it up entirely.
Lying awake next morning after a night of troubled dreams, it flashed
upon him that he ought scarcely to go and see Miss Coble again upon the
mere impulsive invitation given on the door-step without her father’s
knowledge. He was angry with

himself for having so curiously let himself drift away from the very
purpose of his visit. He concluded he had best call on old Coble again
at the store, and walked thither with hangdog mien, unable even now to
shake off the jail. Old Coble was sorting out a bale of sponge into
three baskets—one for bests, one for seconds, and one for thirds.
“Hello, young man!” he roared. Matt felt a momentary trepidation before
he remembered that the old man meant his tones to be inviting. He
crunched his way towards the mountain over the gritty débris, sniffing
in the pungent aroma of the place. The old giant straightened himself,
brushed the sand off each hand with the other, and, running his fingers
through his white beard by way of combing that, held out his hairy paw
to Matt. He gripped the young man’s long fingers heartily, then waved
him to a seat on an empty inverted sponge-box.
“I hope I’m not interrupting you,” said Matt.
“Not at all,” said Coble, in angry accents.
There was a pause.
“I made a fool of myself last night,” Matt commenced, abruptly.
Coble looked down inquiringly at him.
“I didn’t say one word to your daughter about the Frenchman,” he
continued, ruefully.
The mountain shook with explosive laughter.
“Ho, I suppose you were too taken up sayin’ ’em about yourself.”
Matt reddened uncomfortably, but was silent.
“The gal seems to know a powerful deal about you, anyway,” said old
Coble, with a Homeric chuckle.
“We had to talk about something,” Matt explained, apologetically.
“Well, Rosie doesn’t ’pear to want to talk about anything else, that’s a
fact. I reckon she was glad enough not to be reminded of the snivellin’
Frenchy.”
“Oh, but I’ve got to tell her,” the young man urged, uneasily.
“Oh yes, she knows you’ve got to tell her. You’re coming to-night,
aren’t you?”
“I thought of it,” Matt stammered, taken aback, “if I might!”
“Ho, don’t you be afraid of us; we don’t bite. We ain’t sharks.” He spat
out. “This gritty atmosphere makes one powerful dry.”
Matt had an instant of intense mental conflict, impecuniosity contending
with his instinct of what was due to the situation and Coble’s past
hospitalities.
“Will you liquor with me?” he said.
“I was just about to ask you that,” and the mountain stamped his foot
three times.
The moment the two glasses were set on the counter of the little secret
bar Matt threw down a ringing dollar with careless magnificence. Coble
put his paw on it and pushed it back to him, throwing down a rival
dollar. There was a playful scuffle of shoving fingers, accompanied by
expostulatory murmurs. Then Matt, rejoicing in defeat, resignedly
pocketed his vanquished piece.
“What do you make out of that there paintin’ business?” suddenly asked
Coble, as he set down his half-emptied glass and lounged reposefully
against the counter.
Matt took another sip of whiskey. “Oh, there are ups and downs,” he
said.
“Well, what’s the uppiest up?”
“It depends,” said Matt, vaguely. “If I could succeed in London there’s
no end to the money I might make. It isn’t unusual to get three or four
thousand dollars for a picture.”
“Three or four thousand dollars!” roared the Titan. “Where do you think
I was raised?”
“Why, my uncle in London has often paid five thousand dollars for a
picture. Yes, and even ten, though that’s usually after the painter’s
dead.”
“Then why don’t you go to London?”
“I can’t afford it,” said Matt, frankly. “I’ve been there, but it’s a
great job to get on without money, so I had to come back.”
“But couldn’t your uncle buy your pictures?”
“They weren’t good enough yet,” Matt explained, anxious to defend the
family honor. “I want to study a lot more yet.”
“Nonsense! what do you want to study for? Why, that thar shark of yours
licks creation.”
Matt shook his head. “I’ve got to go to Paris,” he said, “and to Italy,
and see all the great pictures. That’s the only way a man can learn
after a certain point.” He added, proudly, “My cousin was sent to Paris
by the Royal Academy of London. He won the Gold Medal.”
“Why doesn’t your uncle send you there, then? He ’pears to have made his
pile.”
Matt had to take another sip of whiskey before he could reply. “He knows
I wouldn’t take anything from anybody.”
“Don’t be a goney. I began life with high notions. Them thar sponges
you saw me sortin’ out just now—they’re Florida cup grasses, but the
fine-shaped ones in the first basket are goin’ to be Levantine sponges
soon as they are bleached with permanganate. Time was when I’d ’a
thought that dishonest; now I see it’s only the outsides o’ things that
the world wants. When you’re a boss painter nobody ’ll ask who bleached
you.”
“I hope I can get on without bleaching,” Matt retorted.
“Ho, don’t get mad! I don’t mean to insinuate you’re not genuine. But
the world ain’t a soft place to get on in. They don’t bath you with
rose-water and Turkey firsts. I kinder fancy,” he added, with a roguish
twinkle, “you must have found that out of late. Now, what you want, Mr.
Strang, is to marry a purty, level-headed, healthy gal, with two or
three thousand dollars to tide over the time till you can make your five
thousand a pictur.”
Matt shot a startled glance at Coble’s beaming face. What he read there
supplemented the sensational suggestion of the Titan’s words. A nervous
thrill ran through all his body. The thought was like a lightning-flash,
at once swift, dazzling, and terrifying. But without waiting to analyze
his state of mind, he felt immediately that there was one thing which at
the outset rendered the idea impossible. Honesty required that he should
instantly put a stop to the parent’s overtures, by informing him that he
was a dishonored man—that he had been in prison. But still he shrank
from self-exposure. The union was so impossible that it seemed
superfluous to humiliate himself.
“Maybe,” he replied; “but five thousand’s only the uppiest up, as you
call it. If I didn’t get there, I might be thought a humbug.”
“Oh! any smart man who saw that shark would take the risk of that; and,
even if you didn’t get to the uppiest up, there ’d be no fear of your
coming down again to the downiest down.”
Matt turned his eyes away, and his fingers tattooed nervously on the
stem of his glass.
“That Frenchy friend of yours now, he had the sense and the sarse to
want my gal, but, of course, no proper parent would trust his darter to
a man like that. So there he lays in the downiest down—good name for
jail, eh? Ho! ho!”
Matt wished his companion could moderate his accents; he did not relish
this thunderous talk of jail.
“Well, I must be going now,” he said.
“I’m with you; I’m with you,” genially thundered Coble, sauntering after
him into the sunny street. “You just think that pointer o’ mine over; it
lets you keep your independence and your high notions, and you ain’t
indebted to anybody. All you’ve got to do is to find a purty gal who’s
got money and who won’t fool it away, a gal who’s been raised simply and
can do her own cookin’ and make her own dresses, and don’t play the
pianner; you find a gal like that, with a sensible father that don’t
think wuss of a young man because he’s been in the downiest down.”
“You know?” Matt faltered. He came to a halt.
“Of course I know. Warn’t it in the paper?”
“But I did paint the portrait of the jailer,” he protested, his cheeks
fiery.
“I knew you’d been in chokey all the same.” Coble clapped his paw on the
last button of his waistcoat. “A stomach that size warn’t born
yesterday. But I’ve kept it from Rosie; she don’t understand business,
nor how credit’s a fair wind to-day, and to-morrow a tornado tearin’
around and layin’ everything low. You find a good father,” pursued
Coble, in accents as impersonal as they were angry, so that Matt fancied
he had mistaken the Titan’s import, “and convince him your folks are
respectable, and there’s no wife foolin’ around in London or New York
City, and,” here he resumed his walk, “if he don’t jump at
you—I’ll—waal, I’m blamed if I don’t give you my own darter. There!”
What he would have replied to this wager Matt never knew, for with a
sudden cry of “Thunderation! The shark’s stolen,” the mountain bounded
forward with incredible alacrity and dashed into the store.
But it was his own child who was the temporary thief. Matt, following
Mr. Coble back into the store to see if his picture had been really paid
the compliment of appropriation, found father and daughter bending
admiringly over it as it stood on the counter, propped up against some
large coarse grass-sponges. His heart beat faster with surprise and
excitement.
“Hullo! You here?” said Rosina, raising a face that seemed radiant amid
the dull browns and grays of the store.
“I didn’t know you would be here,” he answered, awkwardly, not knowing
what to reply.
“Why, didn’t I tell you yesterday I was coming?”
She looked roguishly at him from beneath the broad brim of her
flower-wreathed hat, whose narrow black-velvet strings were tied
coquettishly under her left ear.
“So you did. I forgot,” he said.
“You seem to forget everything,” she responded, pertly.
“Yes, he’s lost his head altogether,” roared old Coble.
“Thank you for reminding me,” said Matt, eagerly. “Now you are here I
can tell you what the Frenchman says.”
“Bother the Frenchman!” said Miss Coble, pouting.
“Yes, but he’s languishing in prison this fine, bright day—”
“Mr. Strang painted the jailer’s portrait. That’s how he met the rogue,”
old Coble interrupted.
“And he often cries,” went on Matt.
Miss Coble laughed.
“Gracious, you make me feel like a princess, keeping men in dungeons.”
“Well, that’s how you ought to feel,” said Matt.
“Then I guess I’ll take the privilege of a princess,” said Miss Coble.
“I’ll let him out on my wedding-morn.”
Coble roared with laughter.
“There, that’s a fair offer for you, my boy.”
Matt felt very embarrassed, but he ventured to hope, “for the poor
devil’s sake,” that Miss Coble would get married soon.
“I hope not,” said Coble, to Matt’s relief. “You’re forgettin’ this
poor devil. What am I to do without my Rosie?”
“Oh, you’ll get along all right,” said Miss Coble, with a playful tug at
his drooping white beard. “You can send for Aunt Clara.”
“I wish you’d be serious about the poor man in the prison,” Matt
pleaded.
“I am serious,” Miss Coble insisted, indignantly.
“Oh yes, she’s serious,” interposed the parent. “She’s solid, is Rosie.
You can’t squeeze her like this ’ere sponge. ’Pears to me the only way
to help your man is to hurry on the marriage.”
The advent of a customer here removed him, chuckling, from the
conversation; and while he was talking angrily to the new-comer, Matt,
who had been itching to slip away, found himself compelled to linger on
and entertain the young lady, a task which he ended by finding pleasant
enough. When she at last said she must go about her marketing, he even
asked if there was anything he could carry for her.
“Gracious, no! we get the things sent. But you can walk along, if you
have nothing better to do.”
So Matt threaded his way with her among the busy stores, feeling her a
part of the sunny freshness of the day, to which he was now alive again;
and walking with head erect, for he felt himself rehabilitated by the
companionship of so genteel a member of society. He was amused by the
keen bargains she drove, and acquired a new interest in prices.
Evidently Coble was right—she would make a provident house-keeper. But
she would only let him see her part of the way home, though she told him
papa expected him to join their evening meal.
“He’s taken quite a fancy to you,” she said. “I don’t know why, I’m
sure.”
“I don’t know why, either,” said Matt, simply.
“Perhaps that’s why,” Miss Coble answered, enigmatically.
Then she lent him her gloved fingers for a moment, and gave him a
pleasant smile, and tripped away, and he went back and down to the
water-side, and lounged about aimlessly in the sun, sky and sea and
shipping and the glimpses of hill and forest across the harbor and the
white sea-gulls and the bronzed Scandinavian sailors thrilling him with
the old sense of the beauty and romance of life. But the open air gave
him an appetite, too, and the appetite brought him back to the
sordidness of things, to his nigh-bare pockets and the insistent sphinx
of his future. He laid out a few cents to stave off hunger till evening
should bring better fare at Coble’s; then, in the stronger mood induced
by even this minimum of nutriment, a tiresome inner voice began asking
by what right he meditated foisting himself upon strangers. He had no
longer the excuse of the Frenchman. He had heard Miss Coble’s ultimatum
on that matter. And the tiresome voice persisted in dragging up other
troublesome thoughts from the depths of consciousness. As he walked
about the lively quays it kept repeating Mr. Coble’s observations,
though less loudly. Despite some dubious remarks, despite the à priori
improbability and unexpectedness of the whole thing, was it possible for
Matt to doubt that the old man would be willing to give him his
daughter? With whatever timidity he shrank from facing the possibility,
wilfully closing his eyes as before a great glare, he could not but feel
that Coble’s idea was both rash and generous. Of course his future would
justify the old man’s trust and repay it a hundred-fold, but such
confidence was none the less touching. Coble did not know—the sun and
sea had made the young man drunk again—that he was entertaining a
genius. And Miss Coble, too; how kind of her to be so nice to a
penniless young man! Her pleasant smiles had been medicinal sunshine to
his despairing apathy. If he had not met the Cobles, what would have
become of him? But was the girl quite of her father’s mind towards him?
Her attitude was certainly not repellent. He allowed himself to dally
undisguisedly with the idea, and it made him giddy. The hope of Art
flamed again so fiercely that he wondered how it could have lain
smouldering so long in his bosom. He was like a pedestrian toiling
foot-sore and heart-broken towards a great light that shone celestially
on the verge of the horizon. For years he had followed the sacred gleam,
over lonely deserts and waste places, with hunger and thirst and pain;
and now as, with bleeding feet that could drag along no longer, he was
fain to drop down on the way-side, lo! a sound of wheels and a sudden
carriage at his side, and he had but to step in to be driven luxuriously
to the long-tantalizing goal.
And in this fairy carriage, moreover, sat a pretty maiden, on whose ripe
breast he could pillow his tired head, and in whose arms he could find
consolation for the blank years. Oh! it was bewildering, dazzling,
intoxicating. But did he love the maiden of this enchanting vision?
Well, what was love? It would certainly be sweet to hold her warm hand
in his, to see her blue eyes soften with tenderness as they gazed into
his own. It was so long since a woman had kissed him—such weary,
crawling, barren years! That ancient episode with Priscilla came up, as
it had not seldom done before, transfigured by the haze of time and the
after-glamour of romance; he had long since forgotten how little the
girl had really appealed to him in the flesh, and to remember that he
had spurned her caresses did not always give him a glow of moral
satisfaction. In the delicious sunshine that danced to-day in a myriad
gleams on the green waters, and made the air like wine, lurked a subtle
appeal to his mere manhood. Were not all women equally lovable for their
sex? In the novels and poems he had read love was glorified and woman
was a spirit; in his own soul lay divine conceptions of womanhood that
inspired his art and sanctified his dreams: a womanhood whose bodily
incarnation—imagined now in this gracious shape, now in that—was the
outer symbol of an inner loveliness of thought and emotion. But he had
not met this Ideal Womanhood; nor did he even expect to meet it in the
crude common day. Once or twice in his London life, as in his boyhood in
this very city of Halifax, when he had worshipped the beautiful
horsewoman, he had seemed to catch a glimpse of it, but it was always
far off—as far as the star from the moth. And so, whether seen or
divined, it belonged almost equally to that world of imagination in
which his true life had been lived, in which he had always taken refuge
from the real. He had scarcely known before a girl so refined as Miss
Coble, unless, perhaps, it was the adolescent Ruth Hailey, whose shy
stateliness had made her so alien from the little girl he dimly
remembered taking for a sweetheart in those days of childish mimicry
when one drives broomsticks for horses. Why should he not marry this
pleasant, plump young woman, if she would condescend to him? Though her
position was so much better than his, he did not feel her too remote
from him for comfortable companionship, especially as she would never
know that he had been in jail. If he did not love her, in the vague
transcendental sense, at least he did not love any other woman, and was
never likely to. He was not as other men: his life was not in their
world; it was centred on Art, it was occupied with visions, its goal was
not happiness or a home. But if these offered themselves to him by the
way, even while they made his real goal possible, it were mere insane
self-martyrdom to refuse them. A wife would save him from his lower
self, and in his moments of artistic despair she would always be there
to comfort and console. Nay—and he smiled at the consideration—even in
his moments of artistic achievement, she could be there as a model.
Models ran away with a great deal of money, and for an artist a wife was
really an economy. And if in his artistic aspiration she could have no
share, neither could any one else, woman or man. An artist could not
really have a mate—at most a mistress or a house-keeper. His Art was a
holy of holies, in which he must ever be the sole priest, and in this
holy of holies Ideal Womanhood could still have its place as before.
Such are the pitfalls of the artistic temperament, moving amid
unrealities, spinning its own cosmos.
Three thousand dollars down! He could pay off the store-keeper and
cleanse away the prison stain. He could send Madame Strang her little
balance, and, best of all—and the thought moved him almost to
tears—his poor brothers and sisters would henceforth be certain of
their allowance. For himself the prospects were equally tempting—a
honey-moon in Europe, in the cities of romantic dream, amid the
masterpieces of Art. And then when, after a couple of years of study and
work, his own masterpiece should be completed, a settled income of
eight hundred dollars—bread and cheese always sure, putting him for
life beyond the vulgar necessity of pandering to the market, rescuing
him from that sordid internal conflict which imbittered even when it
failed to degrade. Oh, the rapture of a life so consecrated to Art!
But would Miss Coble or her parent consent to this expenditure of the
money? Of course it would all have to be distinctly understood ere he
could agree to marry the girl. He flushed, finding how mercenary motive
predominated in his reverie. Mr. Coble had indeed hinted acquiescence in
some such scheme. But an instinct kept the young man from concluding to
acquiesce in it himself. A vague shame and repugnance struggled with his
sense of the advantages of the match; waxing so strong in the reaction
that followed the glow of temptation that he determined not to go to the
Cobles’ that evening. This visit, he felt, would be fatal.
He went home to his little room in the central slums, determined not to
stir out. He had meant to go to bed, broad day though it was, and sleep
away the temptation. But he only threw himself upon the pallet, in his
clothes, and was more conscious of hunger than of the heaviness
necessary for sleep. Yet he would not break into his last two dollars
to-day. He tried to divert his mind from Miss Coble’s dowry by
alternative projects for continuing his life, but they only served to
show the length of the bleak, arid, solitary road that lay before his
bruised feet if he let the carriage go by. Money! Money! Money! What had
he not suffered from the struggle for it? Degrading to live on another
person’s money? It was life without money that was degrading,
humiliating, full of petty considerations, consumed in irrelevant
labors. In the novels that made such a fuss about love troubles, the
fine-sounding sorrows seemed to him infinitely smaller than the carks
and worries of prosaic existence.
He dozed a little and dreamed of his mother. He was back in childhood,
standing with bare feet in an icy passage, and she was screaming at
Harriet for refusing to marry Mr. Coble. He went through all the old
agony of these frequent domestic tragedies. But he did not feel cold so
much as hungry, and breakfast was being delayed by the squabble. He
heard Daisy, equally aggrieved, lowing in the barn. In the face of the
advantages of the Coble marriage it did seem unreasonable of Harriet to
stick to Bully Preep, who would probably beat her. He awoke with a
sensation of relief, which was instantly exchanged for a new worry.
Ought he to tell the Cobles about his mother, supposing he really
thought of—But no; he did not think of—And, in any case, there was no
use in raking up unpleasant matters. He had not inherited her dementia;
it was not in her blood; it had grown up gradually from the sad, narrow
circumstances of her lot; it was his father that he took after. He was
not mad; he was more likely to go mad if he continued his terrible
solitary struggle. Unless, indeed—and here came a sudden vision of a
scene that had lain forgotten for long years—unless, indeed, Mad Peggy
had been right! Mad Matt! Oh no, it was madness to attach any meaning to
the Water-Drinker’s words. Never had he felt so sane. He got up and
looked into the dusty glass on the wash-stand. That was not the face of
a madman. She had prophesied he would never be happy—never, never! He
would thirst and thirst for happiness, but never would he quench his
thirst. Ah, the crazy creature was right there, anyhow. He watched with
curious interest the tears rolling down the face in the mirror. Well, be
it so! He was strong, he could dispense with happiness. He would not go
to the Cobles’ that evening. To-morrow he would leave Halifax, and join
his folks in Cobequid at last. They would all live out their lives
together—poor victims of a common destiny. He would work on the farm,
he would rent more land, he would make it pay. His uncle had been right
all along. Why had he not taken his advice and stayed on at Cattermole’s
farm? Ah, well, his dream of Art was over now. He was getting on in
years; the energy had been buffeted out of him. One could not always be
young and ambitious. He would never be famous now; he would toil
obscurely like his brothers and sisters, and his bones would lie with
theirs in the little lonesome church-yard among the pines. It did not
matter; nothing mattered. Death would shovel them all away soon enough.
He lay down on the bed again. Near it stood a wash-stand with a piece of
ragged sponge upon it. His eye noted a patch of light on the sponge, and
he wondered how the sunshine had got there. Then he perceived the yellow
patch was only a reflection from the water-bottle, and his thoughts
turned to the problem of painting sunlight by optical illusion. He
thought of Cornpepper and the fellows and all the happy discussions he
had had in London. The afternoon waned into evening; the patch of mock
sunshine faded; the shadows gathered, shrouding the walls with mystery.
He grew faint with hunger; in the dusk there opened out a picture of a
lamp-lit room with a snowy cloth on its round table, and a plump figure
with soft blue eyes presiding over the savory dishes.
The vision drew him. He rose, washed himself carefully, and went out.
 
A month later, a week before his marriage, Matt Strang journeyed to
Cobequid to see his folks, and bid them farewell before leaving for his
artistic honey-moon in Europe. He had written the news home, but they
could not afford to come to Halifax for the wedding, and so he had
promised to run down before starting on his second voyage in search of
Art. He alighted from the coach at Cobequid Village overwhelmed with
emotion, resolved to walk the rest of the way towards the joyous reunion
with his brothers and sisters; he wished to note each familiar
landmark—the fields, the farms, the stores, the little meeting-house,
all the beloved features of the spacious, scattered wooden metropolis of
his childhood. It was almost noon, and the landscape, seen through the
waves of hot air rising from the soil, quivered in the heat. The white
farmhouses glittered; the paint of the verandas bulged out; the wooden
spire of the meeting-house pointed piously to a heaven of stainless
blue. In the farm-yards the fowls lolled prostrate on their sides with
open mouths and drooping wings, their tongues protruding, their eyes
closed, their legs every now and then uneasily stirring up the dust
under their wings; the cattle and horses stood deep in pools under the
trees. The bumblebees droned sleepily about the wild roses of the
way-side, or buzzed among the white-weed and yellow buttercups and
dandelions that mottled the hay-fields. The red squirrels chattered on
the spruces as they sat shelling cones, their tails curved over their
backs; the woodpeckers tapped on the hollow stubs, the blue-jays
screamed among the branches; a hawk circled tranquilly upward to a
speck, then sailed softly downward with motionless wings outspread. In
the fields men were hoeing potatoes, following the slow oxen that
dragged the ploughs between the furrows, and heaping up the earth with
leisurely, monotonous movements; belated sowers of buckwheat were
scattering the triangular grains with a slow, measured, hypnotic motion.
In the sultry stores there was nothing doing; now and then a
store-keeper in his shirt-sleeves spat solemnly or drawled a lazy
monosyllable. Behind a casement a slumbrous old crone snuffed herself. A
wagon rumbled dustily beneath the overarching trees. The far-stretching
village drowsed in the sun.
High noon. The conches began sounding to call the farm-hands to dinner,
and every sign of labor melted away. The languor crept over the young
pedestrian. A perception of the futility of ambition flooded his soul
like a wave of summer sea, soft and warm and bitter. To pass through
life tranquil and obscure, amid the simplicities and sanctities of
childish custom, with work and rest, with feast-day and Sunday; to walk
in foot-worn ways amid the same fragrant wild-flowers, to the music of
the same birds, hand in hand with a daughter of the same soil, to whom
every hoar usage and green meadow should be similarly dear; to carry on
the chain of the quiet generations, and so pass lingeringly towards a
forgotten grave amid humble kinsfolk—were not this sweeter than the
trump and glare of Fame, and the ache of ambition, and the loneliness of
untrodden footways? He seemed to hear Mad Peggy’s mocking laughter in
the distance.
He moved curiously in the direction of the sounds, skirting a new
barn-like building which blocked his view, and which he saw from a
notice was a Baptist meeting-house, such as his mother had always
yearned for; McTavit’s school-house met his gaze, still standing in its
field, and in the foreground a mob of boys and girls shouting and
laughing with the exuberance of school-children just let out. After a
moment he perceived that they were jeering and hooting somebody; then he
caught a glimpse of the ungainly figure of a young man in the centre of
derision, with a dozen hands playfully pulling and pushing him. The poor
butt fell down, and there was a great outburst of hilarious delight.
Matt’s blood boiled; he ran quickly forward towards the booing juvenile
crowd, which scattered a little at the sight of his flaming countenance.
“You pesky little ——!” he cried. Then his voice failed. With a flash of
horror he recognized his brother Billy.
“Boo!” recommenced one of the bigger louts. “Rot-gut rum!”
Matt seized the crutch which lay at the side of the prostrate drunken
cripple, and described a threatening circle with it; the pack of
children broke up and made off, hooting from a safer distance.
“Billy!” he said, hoarsely, clutching the wretched young fellow by the
coat-collar, half to raise him, half in instinctive anger.
Returning intelligence struggled with the look of maudlin pathos on
Billy’s white face. The shock of the sight of his brother sobered him.
He suffered himself to be lifted to his feet, then he took his crutch
and moved forward, refusing further help.
“I kin walk,” he said, sullenly.
The tone and accent grated on Matt’s ear. But a pang of self-reproach
mixed with his wrath and disgust. It was his part to have looked after
Billy better.
“I didn’t expect we should meet like this, Billy,” he said, softly.
“You should hev come sooner,” Billy retorted, “ ‘stead of gaddin’ about
all the world over enjoyin’ yourself, and never comin’ nigh us, not even
when you were tourin’ in the Province with your portraits an’ your
photographers.”
“I never was near enough, and I always had to move on,” he explained,
gently, as he flicked the dust of the road off Billy’s coat.
“Never mind my clothes; they won’t spoil, they’re not so fine as yours.
If you’re ’shamed to walk with me—”
“Don’t talk like that, Billy. I’m only glad to see how well you can
walk.”
The brothers passed defiantly through the straggling remnants of the
juvenile crowd.
“I’ve walked to the village,” said Billy. “I’m strong enough to go
anywhere a’most.”
A few hoots recommenced in the rear.
“I wish you hadn’t gone to the village to-day,” sighed Matt.
“And why shouldn’t I?” cried Billy, pricked to savagery again. “What is
there for me but gittin’ drunk? I got drunk when you wrote the news—so
I did. Thet was the first time. We all drank your health an’ your
bride’s, an’ I got drunk, an’ I’m glad I found out the joy of it. Why
shouldn’t I hev some pleasure too? I’ll never hev a bride of my
own—thet’s certain. What girl would take me? Do you deny it? Why, even
when Ruth Hailey was here she on’y pitied me.”
“Hadn’t we better get a lift?” said Matt, gently, for a carriage was
rumbling behind them.
“I’ve been twice to the rum-hole since the money came,” pursued Billy,
in dogged defiance. “It’s the on’y way to forgit everythin’.”
He stumped on sturdily. Beads of perspiration glistened on his white,
bloodless face.
“What money came?” Matt asked, puzzled.
“The two hundred and fifty dollars you sent a couple of days after you
got engaged.”
“I never sent two hundred and fifty dollars,” he cried.
“Didn’t you?” Billy opened his large, pathetic eyes wider. “Well, now,
that’s funny. We wondered why you did it so curiously, and why the
postmark was Maine. We thought you were up to some fun, now you had so
much money, but we allowed we’d wait till you came.”
But Matt could not solve the mystery. The notes had been addressed to
“The Strangs,” and were accompanied by a slip of paper: “The same amount
of the money due to you will be forwarded next year.”
That was all the message. Matt exhausted himself in guesses. His
thoughts even went back to the owners of the Sally Bell, imagining
some tardy conscience-money in repayment of arrears due to the dead
captain. At last he concluded the remittance must have come from Madame
Strang, acting through some American agent. She had discovered Herbert
owed him money, and was sending him double and quadruple by way of
remorse for the mistake she and her husband had made. To prevent him
from returning it, she had sent it to his family, and anonymously.
Abner Preep contended that there was no occasion for Matt to help his
brothers and sisters further for the present. The subsidy was ample;
more would only lead to unnecessary extravagance. Matt was not entirely
pleased to find his family had no immediate need to profit by his
marriage. Indeed, he almost wished the money had not come. It was
perturbing to feel in himself a yearning—now that his burdens were
lightened—to make one last desperate effort to take the kingdom of Art
by his own unaided assault; it was even more perturbing to feel himself
solicited by that other self, which had spoken out on that sultry summer
afternoon, to abandon Art altogether for the simple restfulness of a
life in his own village at one with Nature. The life that had cramped
him once seemed curiously soothing now; his old fretful sense of
superiority to this Philistine environment was gone. But most perturbing
of all was the thought of Rosina. In neither of these suggested
alternatives—to have another try alone, or to settle down in
Cobequid—did she play any part, and he always came back with a shock to
the recollection of his relation to her, that made both of these futures
impossible. He would not allow himself to dwell for a moment on the
thought of backing out of his engagement—honor forbade that. And was he
even certain that he did not care for her? How piquant she had looked
now and then when she had accidentally got into one or other of the two
postures that became her best, as on the night when, smiling, she had
thrown back her head a little to the left, with the somewhat plebeian
nose refined by foreshortening, and the warm carmines and ivory of the
face and throat showing in the lamplight against the loosened hair. And
then how simple and unpretentious she was, how charmingly candid her
chafferings with the store-keepers! But it eased his mind somewhat to
find Billy selfishly laying claim to the mysterious money, persisting he
would travel with it—he would see the world. Matt persuaded Harriet to
acquiescence in the idea, relieved to find his immediate
responsibilities to the smaller children restored to him. But, unknown
to Billy, Matt had already decided he must, if possible, take charge of
the poor fellow and keep him from drink. He wrote to ask Rosina’s
permission to let his crippled brother travel with him, as his health
needed a sea voyage. He waited anxiously for the reply.
“I can reffuse my darling nothing,” Rosina responded, with more
promptitude than orthography.
“God bless you,” murmured Matt, kissing the letter. “I believe I shall
love you, after all.”
Foresight is insight. It was due to Matthew Strang’s ignorance of life
and of himself that his marriage in no way turned out as he had
calculated. Oh, the fatal mistake of it, perceived as soon as it was too
late, though he shrank weakly from the perception, afraid to face the
chill, blank truth, hoping against hope that love would be the child of
marriage. Oh, the ghastliness of being chained to a loving woman he did
not love, bound by law and honor to simulate a responsive affection, and
to hide the deadly apathy which her caresses could not overcome. He
tried hard to love her, calling his own attention to her youth, her
freshness, her prettiness, her flashes of expression, making the most of
every hint of charm, seeing her through a wilful glamour, even
attempting to persuade himself that she was the woman of his dreams; all
the while his leaden heart coldly refusing itself to the hollow
pretence. Before the marriage he had almost felt on the point of love;
but it was only, he knew later, the self-disguise of cupidity and
mercenariness, though no doubt a measure of gratitude had helped to
becloud his vision. In his bachelor days he could never have imagined
such indifference to any woman. Sometimes he wondered if this was all
marriage meant to any man, but a wistful incredulity denied him the
consolation of acquiescence in a common lot. The testimony of mankind
was quite other, and his own yearning instinct refused to look upon his
union as typical. If only she had been a little more intellectual, less
limited to gossip about servants and prices! How he had deceived
himself, taking the sprightliness of a young girl in love, the
coquettish gayety, the evanescent brilliancy of a bird in the pairing
season, for the output of perennial intellect and good-humor! He had
lived so much alone with his dreams that he had fallen out of touch with
humanity, and particularly with feminine humanity. He had had no
standard of comparison by which to gauge her, and once united to her,
the habitual recluse could not accommodate himself to her constant
companionship.
What an irony their honey-moon in Paris, in Florence, the ardors of
artistic renascence yoked with the blankness of boredom! Despite
Rosina’s affectionate clinging to him, and her almost pathetic endeavor
to admire old churches and dingy picture-galleries, it was a relief to
both when she at last acquiesced in his happy idea of regarding his
rounds as “work,” and, under the convoy of Billy, beguiled the
expectation of fonder reunion by the more exhilarating spectacle of the
streets and the endless glories of the Bon Marché. And very soon she
wearied altogether of foreign places, clamoring to be settled in London,
where the language was not gibberish, and one could go a-marketing
without being bamboozled and cut off from bargaining. For after the
first fervors of the honey-moon she had developed that instinct for
petty economy which had amused and charmed him when he had gone shopping
with her in Halifax, but which now fretted him, seeming like a daily
reproach for all those great sums her acquisition of him had cost her.
He was glad that the due arrival of the second mysterious instalment
promised to the Nova-Scotian household relieved him of the painful
necessity of applying to her on its behalf. Unexpectedly enough this sum
was supplemented by a dividend of a hundred and fifteen dollars paid to
him, after he had forgotten all about the matter, by the trustee in
Halifax in settlement of his claim against the estate of the
Starsborough ship-builder.
In vain he tried to interest his wife in books, in the poems and essays,
in the study of French and German, into which he now threw himself with
a feverish desire for culture. In vain he tried to impart to her his
vision of nature, to get her to observe scenery and sunsets. Colors and
shades were only interesting to her as they occurred in dress materials.
Once when they stood by a sea-beach on a December afternoon under a
cold, gray sky, and Rosina complained of the dreariness of the
seascape, he had attempted to show her how beautiful it really was, how
much more interesting to the artistic eye than a crude sunlight effect;
how nearest the horizon it was grayish steel-blue, and then a still
amber, and then emerald green, and how just before the final fringe of
both there shone a band of sparkling amber, grayed by cloud-reflections.
But Rosina shivered, and refused to see anything but a chill green
waste.
She would not even allow him to arrange her furniture, and a pair of
colossal pink vases, garishly hand-painted with pastoral figures (picked
up “a bargain”), were a permanent pain to him, spoiling for him the
drawing-room of the little North London house with the rude whitewashed
studio, in which they had settled down after the birth of their first
child. The temporary lull that attended their installation in British
domesticity was succeeded by graver frictions when Rosina had finished
furnishing. They had no society; neither of the couple knew anybody in
London, and the husband shrank from making friends, constrained,
moreover, by his art to a solitary way of living. Rosina, who before her
child demanded her care had sat to him out of pure desire to be with
him, began to be jealous of the models who replaced her, declaring that
she had had no conception such goings-on were a part of art or she would
never have married him.
The only alleviation of his numb misery was his ability to paint without
pecuniary under-thought the picture with which he was to storm the
Academy, to throw all his individuality into it. The very seclusion of
his life favored this devotion to his ideals.
And these ideals were only partially those of his celibate. He had been
swaying to and fro under the opposite solicitations of Idealism and
Realism; now in a violent upheaval, his sympathy with modern subjects
and even with modern methods had been submerged.
On the Continent for the first time he came into contact with the Old
World. London had been to him as modern as America, repeating its ideas
and ideals, but in France, and more especially in Italy, the mere
variation of tongues helped to draw him into an earlier world,
co-operated with the appeal of ancient churches and streets and palaces,
and the countless treasure of ancient Art. The modern world grew
hateful to him, and he absorbed by affinity the ancient and the
mediæval. At bottom it was not so much the modern that repelled him as
real life, and it was not so much the past towards which he yearned as
towards that timeless realm wherein ideal beauty dwells. The past was at
least less real than the present. Real life was horrible, and marriage
had put the coping-stone on his dissatisfaction with it. From birth to
death it was embased by a sordid series of physical processes. Even the
much-vaunted love was hideous at root. Beauty itself was never really
perfect, and was transient at best, while the beautiful idea that lurked
in nearly every human face and figure had for the most part been left
embryonic. Only in Art could the imperfections of Nature be
corrected—and this was the Artist’s mission, not to imitate Nature, but
to transcend her; from her faulty individuals, frail and perishable, to
draw types of perfection, flawless, immortal, like that Venus de Milo,
which stood at the end of the Louvre passage, beautiful from every
standpoint, fixing in its pensive sweetness of spiritualized form his
dream of Ideal Womanhood; or like that mighty torso of winged Victory
that had achieved the last victory over its own mutilation. Real life
was Deacon Hailey and his mad mother and Billy and Rosina and his uncle
and the grimy denizens of the London slums and the blackguardly crowd at
the Fleet Street public-house and the lewd workmen in the Starsborough
ship-yard. But Art was Rosalind and Imogen, Hamlet and Ariel, Don
Quixote and Beatrix Esmond, and the love in Shelley’s lyrics, and the
music of Beethoven, and the pictures of Botticelli, and the cold white
statues of the Greeks—that imaginary world which man’s soul had called
into being to redress the balance of the Real. It was Art against Nature
throughout—the immortal shadows against the ephemeral realities.
And so for the “real atmosphere” of Cornpepper he no longer cared: what
mattered the realities of space more than those of time to the soul,
emperor of its own fantasy? All this scientific precision after which he
had been hankering—was it not irrelevant to Art? The Beautiful was the
Ideal; to create the Ideal, the Real must be passed through the crucible
of the Artist’s soul. The Artist was the true creator. In him Nature’s
yearning to beget the Beautiful became conscious. She herself had
infinite failures—ugly moods, fogs, glooms, skies of iron, seas of tin.
And feeling all this instinctively rather than by a lucid excogitation,
he was now for the ideal, for the romantic, for the religious even, for
anything that was not real, that shut out the unbeautiful necessity, as
those glorious stained windows of cathedrals, blazing with saints, shut
out the crude daylight and the raw air of reality, filtering the garish
sunlight to that dim religious light in which the soul could see best.
Ah, how wisely the poor human soul had fenced itself in against the
bleak realities—even as the body had housed itself against the
inhospitalities of Nature—painting its windows with beautiful dreams,
with an incarnate Love that ruled the world, and an image of immaculate
Motherhood. And in a strange hybrid, hazy blend of Catholicism and
Hellenism, possible only to an artist who sees things by their sensuous
outsides, the Venus de Milo and the Madonna of the Italian masters were
to him more akin by beauty than divorced by dogma. In a sense they were
one—the highest types of Beauty conceivable by the Pagan and Christian
ages, so akin that when Botticelli came to draw Venus, as in his
“Nascita di Venere,” his brush fashioned a meek Miltonic Eve,
prefiguring the Virgin Mother, while Andrea del Sarto, in his
Annunziazone in the “Pitti,” had given the Virgin Mother almost the
brooding serenity of a Greek goddess. Ideal Womanhood, Ideal Womanhood,
this was what poor Matthew Strang seemed to find in either—ay, and even
in Perugino’s “Magdalen,” and the saying of Keats, “Beauty is Truth,
Truth Beauty,” seemed to him to be indeed all that mortals needed to
know.
But that Pagan serenity which had produced Greek art could not be his.
For him as for the ages the first sensuous joy in beauty was over. And
what appealed even more than the Greek marbles to the artist who had set
out from his native village with quick blood, worshipper of a beautiful
world, was that subtler art which expressed rather the inadequacy than
the perfection of life; the wistfulness of a Botticelli Madonna, the
unfathomable smile of a Leonardo portrait, the pensive melancholy of
Lorenzo di Credi’s “Unknown Youth” in the Uffizi, or the mystic
aspiration of the monk in that famous “Concerto di Musica,” and
inversely Raphael’s lovelier line than Nature’s, and Michael Angelo’s
with its more majestic sweep. He longed with that yearning, with which
the boy had looked up to the stars in the midnight forest, for God, for
Christ, for Apollo, for some dream of whiteness and beauty, for
something that persisted beneath all the purposeless generations of
which the Louvre held record in those cumbrous relics of vanished
civilization—Egyptian, Phœnician, Syrian, Babylonian, Persian,
Chaldean—those broken shafts of pillars that had upheld barbaric
temples, those friezes that had adorned the façades of palaces, those
blurred monuments perpetuating the victories of forgotten dust, those
faded bass-reliefs that had pleased the lustful eyes of nameless kings,
enthroned in their gigantic halls, those uncouth torsos of bulls and
sphinxes, emblems of a vaster, crueller life. Amid the flux of the
centuries the visibles of Art, the invisibles of Religion—were not
these the only true Realities?
Such had been Matthew Strang’s thoughts, as in a deep silence he walked
through the Louvre with Rosina, a silence that was at its deepest when
he responded to her chatter. She hated the slippery parquet and the dull
oil-colors under the glazed skylight, preferring the fresh coloring of
the copies, though she made fun of the copyists who sat so patiently on
their stools. What queer men, what funny, frumpy girls, what strange old
ladies! And, look! there was a young woman in widows’ weeds, painting
such a cute picture, and—gracious! there was quite a young girl copying
a naked man—weren’t they horrid, the French? She liked the attendants’
cocked hats with a dash of gilt, and enjoyed the desultory crowd of
perambulating spectators, that ranged from old gentlemen hobbling along
on sticks to artisans in red blouses and clayey boots. And wouldn’t Matt
come back into the jewelry and china departments, which were really
interesting? And wasn’t the heat unbearable? It was her restlessness
that made her husband quit this Paris which fascinated him, this
beautiful city, with whose artistic activity, divined from the mere
architecture of the École des Beaux Arts, he had had no opportunity to
get into intimate touch; for he could not even come across Herbert, whom
he had rather hoped to find still there, a cicerone to initiate him into
the art-coteries of Paris. In Florence, where they went for the winter,
Rosina was even more restless. The towered palaces, the Duomo, and the
gracious Campaniles, the gardens, the enchanting environs, and all the
stock wonders of the place, had none but a superficial interest for her;
they were exhausted at first sight; amid the marble calm of colonnades
she even regretted the liveliness of the Boulevards. And the climate,
too, was worse than that of Paris; her grumblings were perpetual. To
pass from the warm piazza or promenade to the biting wind of the narrow
streets was not only uncomfortable, but made it a problem how to dress.
And, indeed, Matt himself suffered keenly from the cold; though there
was a small brass heating apparatus in the centre of the gallery, it
scarcely did more than keep his colors from congealing. For he was
copying Botticelli’s “Virgin with the Child and Angels.” Yes, Botticelli
had become his master—Botticelli, whom at first sight in the National
Gallery he had rejected for insufficient draughtsmanship, but all of
whose naïve exaggerations, of hands or feet or necks, he now credited to
artistic intention, prepared to maintain from loving study of his
delicately luminous canvases and his blond ethereal frescos that the
Master’s drawing had only repudiated the bonds of the Real in quest of a
higher beauty, a more gracious harmony of curves, even as his coloring
had refined away that oleaginous quality which a Rubens found in human
flesh. To brood over a Madonna of Botticelli or of Filippo Lippi,
Matthew Strang would turn from the women of Rubens or the young men of
Titian or the children of Velasquez or Rembrandt’s old men. Though at
the sight of “Les Glaneurs” of Millet he felt a lurking sympathy in his
submerged self, he preferred that morning landscape of Corot, in which
bodiceless beauties dance round trees as half-dressed women never did in
any period of French history. He found a winter scene of Van Ostade’s
none the less charming because the figures were not enveloped, and the
lights were untruly set off by bituminous shadows. He was in the mood in
which even the gilded rose-nudity of the eighteenth century seemed
precious. Amid the infinitude of Art that surrounded him now,
Cornpepper’s cocksureness seemed to him as futile as it had already
appeared amid the infinity of Nature. And all the Masters were so akin
that evolution by revolution seemed less credible than in the smoky
atmosphere of Azure Art studios. Modern subject? Had they not all done
the contemporary, had the Dutch done anything else? Impressionism? In so
far as it meant a free brush-work, was not Rembrandt an Impressionist?
Was not Velasquez in his later manner?
His first picture, then, need not be revolutionary in technique, but it
must be more imaginative than the bulk of English work in the Academy of
his day, more emotional. Photography had reduced realism to absurdity,
had proved that Art lay in the transfusion of Nature through the
artist’s soul. And the essence of all art was emotion, feeling. The work
of Art was but the medium by which the artist passed on his emotion to
the spectator, his joy in beauty, his feeling for nature, his sadness,
his aspiration, even his view of life. Because emotion could be conveyed
by literature and music, there was no reason why these should have the
preference in cases where painting was equal to conveying it, too.
Without emotion a picture was null and void; technique by itself could
give works of craft, never works of Art. On the other hand, to have the
artistic emotion without the technique necessary to pass it on to the
spectator was to be artistic, but not an artist.
The choice of a subject gave him much harassing hesitation; it brought
delicious peace merely to make his final decision amid all the whirl of
ideas that pressed upon him. He would found his picture on those
beautiful lines in Matthew Arnold’s “Forsaken Merman.”
The subject seemed to him made to his hand. It would enable him to
fulfil his young ambitious dream of reconciling the decorative with the
idea-picture; the composition should weave a beautiful pattern, and the
coloring a scheme of harmony, and yet the picture should make a distinct
emotional appeal. A woman, with a soul, throned amid a lower race, yet
yearning for the higher spiritual fervors—that was an idea which lent
itself beautifully to pictorial expression: a literary idea doubtless,
but yet a visual, too, so that there was no need even to label it with
the poet’s lines which had suggested it; it should be self-explanatory.
And what sensuous glow in the accessories—the clear, green sea-depths,
the red-gold throne, the child’s flowing hair! The thought of them was
like wine in his veins. He set to work eagerly on a large scale,
informed by his contemplation of the Old Masters with big ambitions—to
do, not the little lyrics that satisfied contemporary cocksureness, but
a great sustained poem.
What pleasures and pains the work brought him! The thrill of conception
was deadened by inadequacy of execution, to revive when some charm of
color and line flowered under happy accident. He had great joy in doing
the heart of the sea with its “deep, divine, dark dayshine”—it was his
sympathy with this marine fairy-land that had partly inspired his
readiness to do old Coble’s misleading ensign of the shark and the
sponge-diver. Around the red-gold throne of the Merman’s bride that
stood on the sand-strewn sea-bed the submarine flora bloomed in strange,
fantastic arabesques and subtle shades of amber and gray and white and
crimson, and through the green translucent water, spent sunbeams
quivered and gleamed, and vague tropical fish shot lovely notes of
color, and a sea-snake coiled its glittering mail; and there were
strange pied amorphous creatures and moss-like corallines and
red-branching madrepores and gleaming shells, and mother-o’-pearl
touched with purple and azure, yet all strictly subordinated to the two
central figures of the composition—the throned woman with her youngest
on her knee, which, despite the nudity and the strange accessories, took
on a curious likeness to the Madonna and Child. The canvas indeed showed
the influence upon him of those wistful Madonnas he had pored over so
wistfully; the cold, strange eyes of the golden-haired child were in the
imaginative vein of the poem, the form of the throned woman was inspired
by merely Pagan ideals of beauty; and yet the yearning in her uplifted
eyes for the world of prayer whose sound floated mystically down to her
was the same that showed in the eyes of the Holy Mother. But this
analogy was not consciously in the artist’s design, though it had
doubtless influenced his choice of subject, nor, though he had certainly
had in mind to suggest through her the yearning of humanity for a higher
world, did he connect his work with the school of Symbolists which was
just arising across the Channel, and which was capable of finding in the
dominant green of his sea the color-symbol of Resurrection. Even the
dead face which he had placed in a corner in the foreground, though it
might well seem symbolic of the tragedy lurking amid this sensuous
beauty, was in truth only the dead face of his father, and he had put it
in less for its symbolic significance or its realistic appositeness than
from an uncontrollable desire to have it there, as though thus to
dispossess his mind of that ancient haunting image which the continuous
thought of the sea had inevitably brought up again. He told himself it
was but natural some drowned face should bob ghastly in this submarine
paradise, but in reality he felt a morbid craving to put it there, to
have something in his picture for himself alone, that no one else in the
great wide world could possibly understand to the full.
For the rest the picture cost him infinite trouble, for his genius was
an incapacity for not taking infinite pains. The poetry of paint is
achieved by the prose of work, and as despite his Romanticism his
hankerings for the Real persisted, his ambitious conception entailed
much preliminary study, and the setting up in his studio of a little
sea-water aquarium, in the construction of which his ancient experience
at the Stepney bird-stuffing establishment in making cases of shells
with mosses and sea-weeds and coral came in unexpectedly useful. But he
could not get a satisfactory model for his principal figure, and
curiously enough her left hand gave him more vexation than anything else
in this complex composition. He could not settle its pose, scraped out
finger after finger with an old sailor’s knife, relic of his
mackerel-fishing voyage, specially ground down, painted out the whole
hand fourteen times, and at last in despair weakly solved the problem by
hiding the hand altogether. Two days later, working on the scales of the
sea-snake that basked sinuously at the woman’s feet, he suddenly had a
last furious dash at the refractory hand. This time it came right and
brought rejoicing. Sometimes he seemed at the mercy of these haphazard
inspirations; what came, came, quite irrespective of conscious will and
training. “Als ixh Xan” (as I can), the old Flemish motto which Van Eyck
put to his work, seemed to him apt for any painter.
When he began “The Merman’s Bride” he was already much more exigent
towards himself than in his younger days; self-criticism had checked
that fearless execution; by the time he had finished his picture, those
very months of steady work, rigorously revised, had raised his ideal
higher, so that though the actual picture pretty well corresponded with
his first conception, it was still far removed from his later standard.
The expression of the woman’s face seemed especially inadequate, and as
great actresses do not sit as models, and the artist has to imagine
emotional expression, he felt again, despite his Romanticism, that he
had missed the subtleties of reality. But every genus of art has to
sacrifice something, and sending-in day was drawing swiftly nigh, and he
had to lay down his brushes at last, and through his frame-maker
despatch the canvas to Burlington House, and await with what composure
he could the verdict that should bring him the recognition he had
struggled for during such long tedious years. Now that the absorbing
task was over, he had time to think of its reward, to dwell on the
thought of recognition, of Fame, the one thing on earth that still
loomed before him, enshrouded in vague, misty splendors. In a world of
illusions, this was the solid happiness it might yet be his to grasp.
This last illusion was not destined to be dissipated yet awhile. He was
sitting at the breakfast-table when he received a blue card inviting him
to take back his picture. Burning with revolt and despair, he had to
strive to appear calm, what time Rosina was unfolding a tale of woe
concerning the maid-of-all-work, whom she had detected throwing away
half-burned coals into the dust-hole. That, she reiterated monotonously,
explained the mysteriously rapid disappearance of the coals—over a ton
since quarter-day. An investigation of the dust-hole had revealed a
veritable coal-mine. It was one of the most curious characteristics of
Rosina that, with all her hardness, she flinched mentally before her
servants, pouring out her grievances against them when they were out of
ear-shot, so that her husband suffered vicariously for their sins of
omission or commission. Usually he listened to her silently with the
courteous deference he would have shown a guest, never provoked to an
angry retort save by her absurd objections to his models. He had
abandoned as hopeless the effort to unite their souls. But to-day he had
no option but to cap her tragic narrative by telling her of his
disappointment. The news excited her not to sympathy with his aspersed
art, but to reproachful alarm for his pecuniary future.
This was the last straw. He might have stood out against the Academy,
exhibiting elsewhere, and gradually building up an outside reputation;
but the pecuniary independence to enable him to do this, which had been
the main motive of his marriage, was the very thing that he now saw he
must abandon. In his secret paroxysms of resentment—more against
himself than against her—it became increasingly plain to him that he
could not live on her money; that were intolerable to his reawakened
manhood. He must make a financial success on his own account; he must
become independent of her at any cost to Art. His entire preconception
of his future had broken down, his marriage a failure from the financial
point of view as from every other. Instead of having emancipated himself
from the necessity of a monetary success, he had made life impossible
without it. Well, he would compromise; he would recoil to leap the
better; he would do what the public wanted, and then, having secured its
attention, he would do what he wanted.
He went to the Academy and to the Grosvenor Gallery, he studied the most
popular pictures of his day, and in a couple of large canvases—one
domestic, the other Biblical—set himself to outdo them in anecdotage
and obviousness of technique.
In a passion of irony he half parodied his own picture of “The Merman’s
Bride” in an idyllic interior called “Motherhood,” representing a mother
holding up a little girl, who in her turn nursed a doll. Rosina sat for
this to save expense, her own little girl being now weaned. The other
picture was a “Vashti,” and for the repudiated queen did Rosina pose
likewise, and with unwonted interest in her husband’s work.
Both pictures were cleverly painted, for Matthew Strang strove to atone
for his lack of interest in his subjects by painful impeccability of
technique, and to Rosina’s joy both won acceptance from the Hanging
Committee, though at the eleventh hour—on the Saturday night before
Varnishing Day—husband and wife were alike disappointed to receive an
intimation that, through lack of space, only the
smaller—“Motherhood”—could be hung.
Despite all his contempt for his picture and for the Academy, it was a
tingling sensation to move amid the crowd of artists on Varnishing Day,
and to see some whose serious faces he remembered noting on the platform
on that memorable “Gold Medal Night” pause before his picture in
admiration of the vigorous brush-work. This was a sign of success he was
destined to experience in far greater measure the following year, but
the keenness of the thrill could never be matched again.
And when “Motherhood” was mentioned in the papers, and in the early days
of the Exhibition he watched fashionably clad ladies gather in front of
it to commend the “sweetly pretty” child and its touching foreshadowing
of maternity, Matthew Strang found himself insensibly beginning to
partake in the general admiration; and with that strain of weakness
which London had exposed in him from the first, he was tickled by the
praise of these pretty women with their rustle of silks and their
atmosphere of scent and culture, and his American birth subtly lent
added spice to his sensation, in the thought of conquering with his rude
home-born genius these votaries of an elegant civilization. He was
quite annoyed when he heard of Morrison’s mot, that the doll was hit
off to the life, but the other two figures were wooden. But it was not
till “Motherhood” sold for two hundred pounds that the process of
corruption really began to set in.
The buyer—a provincial cotton-spinner in town for his holiday—wished
to sit for his portrait. The painter did not like to ask him to the
whitewashed studio. He told Rosina they must move to a better
neighborhood. The economical Rosina would not consent to quit a quarter
where rates and provisions were low, and where she had by this time
acquired several cronies equally martyred by their maids-of-all-work, so
ultimately he took a larger studio in a more fashionable district, going
to his work every day, like a clerk to his office, relieved from his
wife’s overpowering proximity, and from her personal vision of his
models coming and going, though her morbid suspicion was always ready to
flare up. Thus the estrangement had begun. People sent him cards, not
knowing he was married; after some embarrassed refusals he weakly
accepted, without explanation, an invitation to dinner—unable to
decline it gracefully, and knowing Rosina unsuited to the company—and
his reticence made subsequent explanation more and more difficult. After
a still greater success in the next Academy, with an only less
conventional picture, he was caught in a fashionable whirl of work and
social engagements, finding commission after commission thrust upon him,
driven to hasty production of imposing compositions to preserve his
place in the rapidly recurrent Academy and other Exhibitions, and always
postponing the time when he would start upon the real artistic work of
his life, when he should have accumulated enough money to give him a
couple of years of freedom for independent Art, for that fearless
expression of his own individuality which alone makes Art, which alone
adds aught to the world’s treasure of Beauty by contributing a new
individual vision of the Beautiful, and which, so far from being
demanded by the paying public, must be a revelation of unknown riches.
A plethora of portrait commissions was not conducive to personal Art;
people were much more clamorous for the likeness than in the days of
Sir Joshua before photography had been invented, and every artist’s best
portraits were always those unpaid, unchallenged portraits of his
parents and friends—unflattered, yet touched with the higher beauty of
truth. And portraits stood in the way of more complex work, though they
got one a cheap reputation as a stylist. But there was a great run on
Matthew Strang for portraits; almost as much as on one of his
fellow-sufferers for marbles. The public would scarcely have anything
else, and the voice of the public is the voice of the purse.
By fits and snatches he made attempts to express himself, but he never
had time to find out what “himself” was. Sometimes, in a reversion to
one of his earlier manners, he thought he wanted to express sensation,
to transfer to the spectator of his landscape the sensation the original
had given him, and from his country visits he would come back with
studies of strange blue moonlight effects on cliffs, or weird dark seas,
destined never to be worked up. He began a realistic picture of a winter
view from Primrose Hill, with brownish trees in the foreground and gray
in the background, and a white misty townlet to the left; but,
fluctuating again, he abandoned it for an attempt to do the lyric of the
brush, to express, as in balanced metres, harmonies of tree and sky and
water, and this, again, was thrown aside for the picture of “Ideal
Womanhood,” which, under the influence of a beautiful woman’s rebuke, he
had felt was the real “himself” it behooved him to express. But the
beautiful woman’s passage across his horizon had been momentary, and so
even this piece of imaginative art had been finished hurriedly under the
pressure of other work. And thus the years flew by like months, with
incredible velocity. He could not escape from the net-work of
engagements he had helped to weave, nor did he always desire to. There
was a circumlapping consolation about the applause of the public, though
it did not warm him. He found a bitter satisfaction, as of revenge, in
the smiles of society dames, though he did not court them. He took no
pleasure in the personal paragraphs and the notices of his work, though
he knew they were necessary to his prices, and though he had no more
liking for the severe estimates of the few who would have none of him.
The breach with his wife widened imperceptibly, half involuntarily,
though he was passively glad when she was not with him to complicate his
life with her bourgeois ways, with her vulgar outlook.
He was driven to a more pretentious studio, which had sometimes to be
the scene of responsive hospitalities, and which raised his prices. He
fell into a semi-bachelor life. Late evening parties, early morning
rides in the Park, visits for pleasure or portrait-painting or
decoration to country houses (where his early familiarity with rod and
gun gave him a valuable air of autochthonic aristocracy), excursions to
Goodwood, to Henley, sketching tours, all tended to separate him from
his wife, till at last an almost complete separation had grown up, so
gradually that, except for her spasms of jealousy, Rosina seemed almost
to have become reconciled to it in view of the popular success, the
inflow of money, and the eternal economy of Camden Town, and instead of
resenting his absence, to have come to welcoming his presence. When, on
rare gala occasions, he took her out, the places she loved were those
which no fashionable foot ever trod; and as the couple wandered—an
obscure matrimonial molecule among the holiday masses—he was not sorry
that his juvenile idea of fame as a blazoning vade mecum was only one
of the many illusions of youth. And so none of the scented chattering
crowd that gathered on Show Sunday before his pictures or his
refreshments had any inkling of the more legitimate ménage in the less
fashionable quarter. He absolved his occasional qualms of conscience by
lavishing his earnings on her, which she hoarded—though he knew it
not—partly from instinct, partly from a superstitious dread of a
catastrophe when his hand should fail or her shares fall to zero. Too
late he comprehended the hardness in money matters that had been at the
root of her resentment against the defalcating Frenchman, and it was to
spare her feelings, as well as to preserve peace, that he said never a
word to her about the great sums with which he gladdened the
Nova-Scotian household.
Not that Rosina knew much of his other affairs. In truth, she knew very
little of her husband’s life, nor by how vast a sweep it circumscribed
her own. She knew he had to be away from her a very great deal, that he
had to stay in the country to paint great people; she was vaguely aware
that the necessities of his profession made a wide sociality profitable.
She had been once or twice to peep at his studio, horrified by the
grandeur, and only consoled by the demonstration that its cost was
repaid in the prices, like the luxurious fittings of the shops in the
Holloway Road. But her imagination lacked the materials to construct a
vision of the whirlpool which had sucked him away from her; her reading
was limited to a weekly newspaper in which his name seldom appeared. And
he, in his mental isolation from her, found scant self-reproach for his
silence; reserve seemed more natural than communicativeness. She could
never know the doings of his soul, his thoughts were not her thoughts,
he had given up the attempt at communion, the effort to teach her to
know his real self; why should he be less reticent concerning his
outward movements, his superficial self? He was aloof from her
spiritually; beside this, his material separation from her was
insignificant. The children—a girl of seven and a boy of nearly
four—were no bonds of union. The elder, christened Clara, after
Rosina’s aunt, was sharp and lively enough, but given to passionate
sulking; the younger—called after his grandfather, David—was a
lymphatic, colorless youngster, sickly and rather slow-witted, with
something of Billy’s pathos in his large gray eyes. Their father had
tried hard to love them, as he had tried to love their mother, and had
taken a certain proprietary interest in their infantile graces, and in
the engaging ways of early childhood, but the claims of his Art left
them in the mother’s hands, and the older they grew the less he grew to
feel them his. Neither Clara nor David had as yet displayed any
scintilla of artistic instinct. When he went home he usually had
something for them in his pocket, as he would have had for the children
of an acquaintance, but they gave him no parental thrill.
The studio bell had tinkled so often that afternoon that Mr. Matthew
Strang refused to budge from the comfortable arm-chair in which he sat
smoking his cigarette and reading the Nineteenth Century after the
labors of the day. The model had sipped her tea, taken her silver, and
was gone to resume her well-earned place among the clothed classes, and
the hard-working artist was in no mood to open his door to the latest
bell-ringer.
Probably it was only another model to inquire if he had any work, or to
apprise him of a change of address or of wardrobe; or else it was a
soi-disant decayed artist, who had tramped all the way from
Camberwell, ignorant that his old patron had moved from the studio a
year ago; or mayhap it was a child. He had been much worried by children
lately, since he had picked up a couple in the gutter and placed them on
the “throne.” The dingy court where the fortunate twain resided had been
agitated from attic to cellar; the entire juvenile population had pulled
his bell in quest of easy riches; mothers had quarrelled with one
another over the chances of their young ones; the whole court had been
torn with intestine war.
Ting-a-ting—ting-a-ting—ting—ting—ting—
The person had rung again, more ferociously. Ah, it must be that
interminable Mrs. Filbert back again. Well, let her ring on, the old
jade. Rather an hour of tintinnabulation than ten minutes of her tongue.
Had his man been in, he might himself have been “out,” but he could
scarcely appear at the door and deny himself. Her shrill falsetto voice
resurged in the ear of memory, offering nude photos from Paris at
exorbitant prices, or lists of models full of inaccurate addresses, or
rare costumes, most of which could be picked up at any old clo’ shop. He
smiled, recalling one of these costumes—something like a fishing-net
with holes about an inch across. “This is Greek, and shows the figure.”
Certainly it showed the figure, he thought, smiling more broadly. And
now he remembered—she had threatened to bring her younger sister. “And
I have also a little sister. I don’t know if you paint pretty girls,”
here his memory inserted a giggle. “She sits for modern dress or the
head. Not for the figure. Of course she doesn’t mind a light costume,
something diaphanous. Though I’m not quite sure she has any time left.
She is always with Mr. Rapper, who does those pastels for the Goupil Art
Gallery. He is so very sweet to her. She goes to the theatre and dines
with him. I sit myself sometimes, though you mightn’t think so”
(giggle). “So of course she can’t sit in the evening, in case you want
her for black and white.” (“Just like a woman,” he reflected, cynically,
“too careless to take the trouble to discover that I am far too eminent
for black and white.”) “I know I’m dressed carelessly just now, I really
must be more careful” (giggle). “I have an Empire gown to sit in, very
sweet. I will bring it you to look at.”
Ting-a-ting-ting-a-ting-ting-ting-ting-ting-ting.
Yes, it was the sweet Empire gown she was bringing him if it was not her
sweeter sister. His experienced eye foresaw the Empire gown—something
cut by herself out of muslin, with an old yellow silk sash. He let the
last vibration of the bell-wire die away; the creature would know now he
was not in. The smoke curled in a blue-gray cloud about his head, as,
looking up from the page of the magazine, he gazed dreamily at his
half-finished picture, standing on the easel at the other extremity of
the great luxurious room, where the westering sun of June sent down a
flood of light that brightened the gleam of the gold frames of hanging
pictures, touched up rough sketches and preliminary studies standing
about, and lay in a splash of brilliancy among the sheets of music and
the dainty volumes of poetry and belles-lettres on the grand piano.
Suddenly, as his gaze rested with a suspicion of wistfulness on this
doubly artistic interior, in which the pictures were only pleasant spots
of color in a larger harmony, a harmony of rugs and flowers and tapestry
and picturesque properties and bric-à-brac, there shot up in his mind an
image of an ancient episode. He saw himself, a shy, homely figure,
standing in despairing bitterness on the threshold of an elegant
studio—though not so elegant nor so commodious as this—the studio of
the brilliant cousin whose life had intersected his own so many years
ago. His face changed, a sad smile hovered about the corners of his
mouth. Perhaps some unhappy young man was now outside his own less
hospitable door, growing hopeless as the echoes alone answered him. He
started up hastily, and hurrying into the passage drew back the handle
of the door. A slim, fashionably attired gentleman, who was just walking
off down the gravel pathway, turned, hearing the sound of the open door,
his handsome, clean-shaven, bronzed face radiating joyous amusement.
“You duffer!” he exclaimed.
The famous painter turned pale. His cigarette fell from his mouth, so
startled was he. That he should have just been thinking of Herbert
Strang seemed almost supernatural. But the nervous feeling was submerged
in a wave of happiness; to have Herbert again was an incredible bliss.
How lucky he had opened the door!
“Herbert!” he cried, seizing his cousin’s delicately gloved hands with
an affectionate impulsiveness worthy of Herbert’s mother.
Herbert surveyed him roguishly. “You’re a nice old pal to make me ring
three times. What’s going on inside?”
“Nothing at all,” laughed the painter, in effusive happiness. “Only tea,
and that’s cold. But come in.”
“You’re sure I’m not disturbing you,” said Herbert, mischievously.
“No, I’m all by myself.”
“It must be awfully convenient to have a back door,” murmured Herbert.
The painter shook his head. “You haven’t changed one bit,” he said, in
laughing reproach, as they moved within.
“Oh, but you have,” said Herbert, pausing in the doorway to take him by
the shoulders, and looking affectionately into his face. “Why, there’s
quite a dash of gray in your hair. You must have been killing yourself
with work.”
And, indeed, there were lines of premature age on the handsome face,
too, though the rather tall, sturdy figure was still alert and unbent.
The dark eyes had lost something of their old softness, the light of
dream was rarer in them, but the little tangle of locks on his forehead
still co-operated with the dark brown mustache and the smoothness of the
firm chin to suggest the artist behind the practical man of the world.
“You forget I’m getting old,” he replied, only half jocosely.
“What nonsense! Why, I’m several years older than you.”
“No, are you?”
“Of course I am. Don’t you remember I was your senior, instructing you
in the ways of this wicked world?”
“Well, you’re still looking a boy, anyhow,” said Mr. Strang.
“That’s what I want to look,” said Herbert, laughing. “It makes pretty
women pet you and hold your hand. Why, in Italy I was the envy of all
the cavaliers. Per Dio, this is a change!” he exclaimed, as he entered
the fashionable studio. “Do you remember the time you came to me and
wanted to borrow tenpence, or something? Ha, ha, ha! Not that I’m
surprised, old boy, not a bit. I’ve heard your name come up quite half a
dozen times in the few days I’ve been back in stony old London. No,
thanks, I’ll sit on the couch. It’s cooler there. And I won’t have any
cold tea in this frightfully hot weather. I’m still faithful to
soda-and-whiskey, if you’ve got any.”
“Lots,” said Mr. Strang. “A cigar?”
“Not before dinner, thanks. I don’t mind a cigarette. But I’m not
interrupting your work?”
“Don’t be ridiculous, old fellow. The idea of my turning you away!”
“Well, considering you nearly did it! But you’re a celebrity now. Your
time’s valuable.”
“Oh, but I’ve struck work for to-day.”
“What, with all this light left? This is indeed a change from the
tenpenny days.”
“Yes, I suppose one gets tired,” the painter sighed. “Do you like
Turkish or Egyptians?”
“In cigarettes Turkish, in women Egyptians,” he answered, laconically.
“But what a joke to find you tired of painting! You’re beginning to feel
like I felt, eh? That it’s one demnition grind. And I’m tired of
travelling, and wouldn’t mind doing a little painting now, ha, ha, ha!
How funnily things do turn out, to be sure. Why, you’ve changed inside
almost as much as outside,” he said, looking up languidly into his
host’s face, as he selected a cigarette from the box. “I wonder if I
should have recognized you if I had met you in the streets instead of
tracking the lion to his own den. I shouldn’t have thought half a dozen
years would have made such a difference.”
“Half a dozen years! It’s nearer ten since we met.”
“Nearer ten? Is it possible? Let me see. It must be quite seven years
since the governor died, poor old chap. We haven’t met since then, have
we?”
“No,” said the painter.
“No, of course; I’ve been careering about the world ever since. You know
he died in Egypt?”
“No, I didn’t know that,” said Mr. Strang. “I only heard of his death
from the dealer who took over the connection.”
“Yes, he had to go there pretty sharp for his lungs, and I was compelled
to leave Paris in my second year to go with him and the mater. But he
died happy. That blessed gold medal of mine made him sure the name of
Strang would be immortal in the history of Art. I always said there was
a certain pathos about the poor old gentleman. But perhaps his assurance
wasn’t so wrong after all, because you are going to make the name
glorious, aren’t you, you lucky beggar! And his own name, too; which
ought to make him happy, even in heaven.”
The great man smiled sadly, but he only said, “And your mother—how is
she? I’ve often wished to see her again.”
“Oh, she’s living now at Lyons with some distant relatives of hers. Of
course, she soon tired of gadding about with me. She sent me a cutting
about you once from a French paper. So you see how your fame has spread!
I’ve often been meaning to write to you, but you know how it is, always
moving about, and I always intended to look you up when I came to
London. I was here two years ago on a flying visit, but some paper said
you were in Rome. Yes, and I saw a colored reproduction of a picture of
yours, ‘Motherhood,’ decorating a miner’s cabin in the Rockies—the
Christmas supplement of the Illustrated London News, if I remember
aright. It was a mother nursing a little girl, while the kid herself
nursed a doll.”
The painter turned away and struck a match.
“And then there were a couple of years before your father died,” he
said. “The last time we met was at the Students’ Club in Seven Dials on
Gold Medal Night.”
“Yes, by Jove, you’re right,” said Herbert, thoughtfully. “If I didn’t
wish to avoid a platitude I should say that time flies. It’s been a
jolly good time, though, for me, with nothing to do except spend the
poor old governor’s savings, and a jolly big hole I’ve knocked in them,
too. And you haven’t come out of it so badly, eh? That’s a stunning
thing of yours in the Academy. Aren’t you glad I made you promise to
send a picture to it in those tenpenny times? I’ve just come from there.
Got your address from the catalogue. I congratulate you heartily. It’s
not the sort of thing I expected from you; but it’s well put in, and I
suppose it pays. It is astonishing,” he went on, after pausing to sip
from his glass, “how paltry English art looks to me after all these
years and seeing everything everywhere. The picture of the year is
exactly like the lid of a bon-bon box. There aren’t half a dozen things
in to-day’s show that I’d care to look at again. You’re in the
running, don’t look so glum, ha, ha, ha! Frankly, old man, your ‘Triumph
of Bacchus’ is jolly good work. You know I never cared much for subject,
but the modelling is A 1, and that sunlight effect is ripping! And what
a crowd there was before it! Phew! I nearly got suffocated trying to see
it, and I had to retire to the Architectural Room to cool. I don’t like
Cornpepper’s picture one bit, though he is an A.R.A.”
“You mean because he is,” said Matthew Strang, with melancholy
facetiousness.
“No, nothing of the kind; that rather prejudices me in his favor. You
mustn’t forget I prophesied it. You don’t mean to say you admire his
‘Ariadne in Naxos’? ‘Poached lady on greens,’ I marked it in my
catalogue. Do laugh! You look as dull and faded as an Old Master. I
think I shall have to restore you. Here, have some whiskey yourself.
You’re damned unsociable.”
“I rarely drink,” the host said, feebly.
“You used to drink my whiskey,” Herbert reminded him, and as he poured
himself out a little in deference to his brilliant cousin, he thought
how queerly things had inverted themselves.
“The Triumph of Bacchus,” said Herbert, laughing. “Now I’ve put in the
good spirit, I’ll exorcise the bad, as David did to Saul.” And crossing
over to the piano he played a lively air.
“I picked up that from a Spanish gypsy,” he said. “Not George Eliot’s.
But I’m sinking to puns. It’s the English climate. You’ve got no wit
here, and there isn’t even a word for esprit. Let’s examine your
pictures. Ha! Hum! I see you’ve got quite a number on your hands. I
suppose they must be the good ones. Ah! What do you call that thing—the
lady in blue and the harp?”
“ ‘Ideal Womanhood,’ ” answered the painter, adding, hastily: “It’s just
been returned from Australia. I lent it to an international exhibition.
They beguiled me with the prospect it would be bought by the
Government.”
“Ideal moonshine, I should call it,” laughed Herbert. “There never was
such moonlight on sea or land. And does the ideal woman play the harp on
snowy mountain-tops at midnight without a chaperon?”
“It’s supposed to be symbolic, you know, of her inspiring man to nobler
heights,” explained the artist, with an embarrassed air.
He wondered vaguely what had become of that beautiful woman—what was
her name?—whose casual words at a garden-party had driven him back for
a time into what he thought was the true path of his Art.
“Dear me. There’s quite a mystic feeling about it. Isn’t that the right
phrase? Do you know, I’m seriously thinking of becoming an art critic.
Yes, really! As I told you, I’ve had my fill of travelling, and now I’m
going to try and settle down here, and I rather like getting a
reputation for something or other. It makes real woman more interested
in one. The only thing I’m afraid of is, I know too much about the
subject, and have actually handled the brush. I’m going to paint, too,
but I’ve neglected to keep my hand in, so I’ve not much hopes of that.
Unless I came out as a stylist, who sees the world as he fails to paint
it. You’ve got several new men like that, I hear. There’s money in
myopia and diseases of the eye generally. And per Dio! how photography
has come along since I was one of the pioneers of its use in art!”
Matthew Strang shrugged his shoulders.
“What does it matter?” he said, wearily. “The whole thing’s a farce.”
“Here, I say, must I play another gypsy dance? I came here expecting to
find you a harmony in gold, and lo! you’re a discord in the blues.
What’s the matter with you? You’re jealous of Cornpepper. How is it they
haven’t made you an A.R.A. yet? Don’t you go out enough?”
The painter’s lips essayed a melancholy smile.
“I go out all I want to.”
“There are enough cards stuck over your mantel.”
“Yes, I have to go out a good deal in the season. It doesn’t pay to
offend patrons.”
“Or Ideal Womanhood. I reckon you’ll be making a fine marriage one of
these days when you’re an A.R.A., as you must be. Lady Bettina Modish,
or something of that sort, eh?”
“Won’t you have another cigarette?” said the painter, jerkily.
“Thanks. Oh, by-the-way, ha, ha, ha! What’s become of that woman, you
rogue?”
“What woman?”
“Real womanhood. The woman you were living with in Paris. Ha, ha, ha!
You didn’t think I knew that. But I met Cornpepper there on my return
from Egypt, and he told me he’d seen you going about with her. How we
laughed over our Methodist parson, who wanted art to be moral! What’s
the matter?”
The painter’s face had grown white and agitated.
“I’m sorry if I’ve said anything to annoy you,” Herbert protested.
“Perhaps I oughtn’t to have given Cornpepper away. But the affair is so
ancient. I didn’t know you’d mind a reference to it now.”
“The woman I was living with in Paris,” said Matthew Strang, hoarsely,
“was my wife.”
“Non—sense,” said Herbert, in low, long-drawn incredulity. But his
cousin’s face was only too convincing.
“She’s not alive now?” he asked.
The painter nodded his head hopelessly.
Herbert sprang to his feet.
“Good God!” he said. “You don’t mean to say you were such an ass as to
marry! No wonder you’re in the blues.”
Matthew Strang was silent. There was a painful pause.
“But you’ve kept it pretty dark,” Herbert said, at last. “Everybody
seems to look upon you as a bachelor.”
“I know,” replied the painter. “I’ve always lived a lonely life, and I
don’t speak about my affairs.”
“I’m sorry I touched upon them, then.”
“No. I can talk with you.”
“Thanks, old man.” And Herbert took his friend’s hand and pressed it
sympathetically. “You’re not living with her, anyhow, and that’s
something.”
“Oh, but I am living with her—at least, I go home sometimes. It’s not
quite my fault—it’s grown up gradually. She lives in Camden Town.”
“Alone?”
“Oh no! There’s Billy—that’s my young brother—to keep her company. And
then there’s the children.”
“What! kids as well?”
“Only two.”
Herbert looked glum. “I suppose she’s an impossible person,” he said.
“Do you mean to live with?”
“No, to be seen with.”
“We’ve never been out together in London,” replied the painter, simply.
“We drifted apart before I was asked out. Oh, but it’s no use going into
it—it’s all too sordid.”
“Poor chap!” said Herbert. “Well, you may rely on my respecting your
confidence. I suppose it is a secret?”
“It seems to be. I make none of it, except negatively. You will find
Mrs. Strang in the directory as a householder in Camden Town; she took
the house, as it happened. She has a little money of her own.”
Herbert smiled sadly. “That’s what I always say. The safest secret in
the world is the open secret. If you had hidden her away in Patagonia,
or tried to put her into a lunatic asylum, it would have been the talk
of the town. As you simply let her live quietly in the heart of London,
nobody’s provoked into inquisitiveness, and if anybody knows—as no
doubt an odd person does here and there—he doesn’t tell anybody else
because he doesn’t know it’s a secret. I shouldn’t be surprised to hear
the marriage was duly advertised in the first column of the Times.”
Mr. Matthew Strang’s smile faintly reflected his cousin’s. “No, we were
married in Nova Scotia,” he replied. “But what are you doing to-night?”
“How improbable life is,” mused Herbert. “Only yesterday I heard that
Jackson, the Cabinet Minister, has been secretly married these last
twenty years. What am I doing to-night? Oh, nothing particular. I
thought of dropping into a music-hall. I can’t stand the English
theatre. It’s so unintellectual.”
“Well, why not dine with me at the Limners’?”
“Sure you haven’t got any other engagement?” And Herbert peered
curiously at the large chalked-over engagement slate hung on the wall.
“Oh, I said I would dine en famille at Lady Conisbrooke’s, but I can
easily send a wire. As it isn’t a formal dinner-party, and as I’m rather
a privileged person with her, I dare say she’ll forgive me.”
“It’s awfully naughty of you,” said Herbert. “But then, there, you’re a
genius! And it would be jolly to dine together as in the days of auld
lang syne. I’ve got an awful lot to yarn about, and so have you. I’ll
rush to my rooms and dress.”
“Oh, why bother to dress? Though I must, if you don’t mind. I’ve got
to go on to one or two places. If you don’t mind waiting a few minutes
while I wash my brushes and put on my war-paint, we can go at once.
Unless you’re too fashionable to dine prematurely.”
“No, but I think I’d rather dress. It’s cooler in this frightful
weather. Shall I come back or meet you at the club?”
“As you like.”
“Well, you go on to the club, and I’ll be there just as quick as I can.
Oh, by-the-way, write out that wire, and I’ll send it for you.”
“Thanks; perhaps you had better, though I expect my man back in a few
minutes. He’s seeing about the delivery of a picture to the London
agents of the Liverpool Autumn Exhibition.”
When Herbert was gone Matthew Strang did not at once mount to his
dressing-room. The advent of this visitor from the past had stirred up
all its muddy depths, and the knowledge that he had a little time to
spare kept him brooding over it all, recalling the episodes of their
camaraderie; and blended with them, as faded scents with old letters,
he caught faint, elusive whiffs of that freshness of feeling and
aspiration which had impregnated them in those dear, divine days of
youth, when even his darkest hours were tinged with a rose-light of
dawn. Never again would he feel that glow, that fervor, those strange
stirrings of romance, that delicious sadness sweeter than all mirth,
when a perfect blue day could bring tears to the eyes, and the
melancholy patter of rain at twilight was like a dying fall of music,
and something strange and far away subtly interfused itself with the
loveliness of nature, with flowers and sunsets and summer nights, a
haunting grace, intangible, inexpressible, hinting somehow of divine
archetypes of beauty in some celestial universe.
No; even his spasmodic strivings to escape from the rut of false Art
were becoming fewer and farther between. Perhaps he was not a genius,
after all, he had begun to think. Why should he vex himself? That
sentiment of Constable at which he had winced when he first came across
it, “People may say what they like of my art, what I know is that it is
my art,” was losing its power to sting. The stirrings of his astral
self were subsiding. He felt himself hardening steadily into a mere
unit of the Club world of tired and successful men, who, having blunted
their emotions by heavy feeding of all their appetites, could no longer
feel the primal things, taking even their vices with the joyless
sobriety of virtue. And though he himself was temperate enough and had
not been unfaithful to Rosina, but only to the spirit of the marriage
contract, yet this same drought of feeling, this furred tongue of the
emotional being, was becoming unpleasantly familiar.
As he sat now moodily reviewing the situation he burst into a spasmodic,
bitter laugh. It had struck him for the first time that his life had
come to be not unlike his father’s—a life apart from his wife’s, with a
rare stay under the domestic roof, the wife the more amiable for his
absences. A sudden intuition seemed a flash-light on his father’s past.
He felt drawn to the dead sailor with a new sympathy. He rose in
agitation, extending his arms towards a visionary form.
“Father, father!” he cried aloud. “Did you suffer like me?”
“Did you call, sir?” And Claydon, his man-servant, who had come in
quietly through the back door, descended from the bedroom, where he had
been laying out his master’s things.
“Yes,” said his master. “Is my shaving-water ready? I’m going out a
little earlier than usual.”
“Yes, sir.” And the painter, recalled to reality, hastened to perform
his toilet. But his mind still ran in the grooves of the past, remote
from all the new interests and distractions of a brilliant career.
When he sprang from the hansom and walked through the door of the
Limners’ Club, he remembered that this was the very club he had come to
on his first day in London—nay, that the gray-headed, deferential
door-keeper was the very man whose majesty had chilled him. He wondered
now whether the old fellow ever connected the popular painter with the
homely, diffident youth who had inquired for Mr. Matthew Strang.
“Gentleman waiting for you, sir.”
Curious! Now it was Herbert that was waiting for Mr. Matthew Strang.
But the thought of the whirligig of time gave him no pleasure. In his
early struggles in London, when no one would buy his work, he had
gloated in anticipation over the humility of the dealers when he should
have made his position; now he had long since forgotten and forgiven
their contempt; how could they know he was worth taking up? There was
nothing but the palest shadow of satisfaction in the thought that they
would scour London in search of those despised pictures if they only
knew. He wondered sometimes if those early things of his would ever come
up into the light, whether the daughter of his ancient landlady still
treasured her mother’s wedding-present, and what had become of “The
Paradise of the Birds.”
A bluff graybeard in the hall shook his hand heartily. It was
Erle-Smith. Matthew Strang knew now that Erle-Smith, whom he had
imagined to pass his days encamped before the beatific vision, was a
jolly good fellow with sheaves of amusing anecdotes. But he remembered
the first time Erle-Smith had spoken to him—at a City banquet in the
beginnings of his fame.
“We oldsters will have to be looking to our laurels,” he had said,
placing his hand on the young man’s shoulder. After the banquet
Erle-Smith had given him a lift in his open carriage, and as they rolled
through the busy, flashing London night a voice in Matt’s breast kept
crying out, “This is Erle-Smith! Look! This is the great Erle-Smith I am
driving with. Why don’t you look, you stupid multitudes? Do you not know
this is Erle-Smith—Erle-Smith himself?” Oh, why did not some of the
people who knew Matthew Strang come along and see him driving with
Erle-Smith? Perhaps they did—there must surely be one acquaintance, at
least, among all those crowds, and he would tell the others. He had
scarcely been able to reply rationally to Erle-Smith’s conversation, so
intoxicated was he by the great man’s proximity. And now he himself was
a popular celebrity—shown with the finger—on the eve of Academic
honors; had he not, of all the younger men among the guests, been called
upon (with disconcerting unexpectedness) to respond to a toast at the
Academy Greenwich Dinner only last month? Was he not already on the
Council of minor artistic societies? Yes; doubtless he himself was
already the cause of like foolish flutterings in the breasts of youthful
hero-worshippers—he whose heart could no longer flutter, not even when
the youthful hero-worshipper was a woman and beautiful.
He dined with Herbert at a little table. His burst of communicativeness
had exhausted itself, and he was glad to let the returned traveller do
the bulk of the talking as well as of the dining. He himself ate little,
though the cuisine was excellent, and the cellar took high rank. Over
dinner Herbert bubbled over in endless reminiscences of the rare dishes
and vintages he had consumed, the operas and symphonies he had heard,
the women who had loved him—a veritable rhapsody of wine, woman, and
song. In an access of unmalicious bitterness, like that which had
overcome him on the threshold of Herbert’s studio, Matthew Strang felt
that Herbert was the real Master—the Master of life.
In the smoking-room other men gathered round. There was Grose, whose
colossal canvases were exhibited at a shilling a head with explanatory
pamphlets by high ecclesiastical authorities, and there was Thornbury,
who succeeded him in the same gallery with colossal nudes that needed no
explanation from ecclesiastical authorities.
Matthew introduced Herbert to Trapp, the realistic novelist, and Herbert
introduced Matthew to Sir Frederick Boyd, the composer, who related with
gusto a story of how he had exposed a cheat at Monte Carlo. A Scotch
landscape-painter asked Matthew to recommend him a model. Two Associates
joined the group. One was a vigorous painter who painted everything à
premier coup, the other was Cornpepper, externally unchanged, save for
a round beard.
He had long since cut himself adrift from the Azure Art Club, though he
still counted his disciples, whose experimental fumblings in development
of his methods he boasted of observing in sapient passivity. “Try it on
the dog,” he used to chuckle to his familiars. “I’ve done searching—let
my imitators search, and risk the bogs and the blind-alleys. If they do
strike a path, I’m on the spot instantly to lead them along it. That’s
the only way one can learn from one’s followers.” He used to tell with
glee how one of them had ruined a picture by putting it out in the rain
to mellow it. “Some of those modern

stylists who are trying to discount Old Mastership will survive their
pictures,” was Cornpepper’s commentary on a phase of the newer art.
“They will leave masterpieces of invisibility.”
A good many changes had taken place in the Art world since Matthew
Strang had first had the felicity of drinking whiskey in Cornpepper’s
studio. The flowing tide was now with the decorative artists, of whom
the “Mack” of that evening had proved a pioneer; the Fishtown school of
photographic realism had lived long enough to be orthodox; the Azure Art
Club itself was half absorbed by the Academy, and a new formula of
revolt was momently expected on the horizon; some said it was to be
Primitive, others mysteriously whispered “spots”; to-night Herbert, with
mock seriousness, announced that he himself was about to lead a
movement, the originality of which consisted in seeing Nature through
stained glass. What weird magic a landscape gained when observed through
a green or pink window! But he found the men not so willing to talk of
principles as in the days of Cornpepper’s Bohemian parties, when Carrie
with the whiskey bottle stood for the sober club attendant with his tray
of liqueur brandies. The conversation was rigidly concrete, except for a
moment when Cornpepper nearly came to hot words with the photographic
painter who insisted that Nature was always beautiful. The little man,
glaring through his monocle and rasping the plush arm-chair with his
nails, insisted that this was sheer cant, one had only to look in the
glass to see how ugly Nature could sometimes be! Selection was the only
excuse for Art. Random transcripts from Nature were as foolish as the
excesses of the Neo-Japanese school, into which the Azure Art Gallery
had degenerated. But this lapse of Cornpepper’s into his early manner
was brief. Recovering himself, he told a malicious anecdote about an
artist who was taking to etching because his eyesight was failing, and
he explained the domesticity of British Art by the objection of artists’
wives to all models except babies. Everybody knew, he said, why
Carruthers had been driven to landscape and Christmas supplements.
“Depend upon it,” dogmatized the little man with his most owlish air of
wisdom, “the man who marries his model is lost. She will never tolerate
a model on the premises again.”
His fellow-Associate told a story of a stock-broker who had got himself
invited to the Greenwich dinner last year, and had asked Erle-Smith to
give him the sketch of passing barges which the great man had pencilled
on his sketch-book after dinner. “Erle-Smith good-naturedly gave it to
him. This year he was there again, and said with proud respect to
Erle-Smith, ‘I’ve still got that sketch.’ And produced it crumpled up
from his waistcoat pocket!”
“Yes, but did you hear Vanbrugh’s mot?” asked Trapp. “He said,
‘Naturally; being a financier he doubled it.’ ”
“Why, I said that!” cried Cornpepper, angrily.
“No doubt,” said Herbert. “It’s a well-known chestnut.”
“Then I pulled it out of the fire,” screamed Cornpepper.
Somebody exhibited another sketch, grotesquely indecorous, by a popular
painter of religious masterpieces, and the latest epigram on the divorce
case of the hour was repeated and enjoyed. But Matthew Strang’s laughter
held no merriment.
“Shall you be at the Academy soirée?” he asked Trapp, to turn the
conversation.
“No, I don’t care for crowds,” replied the realistic novelist.
The conversation rambled on. The composer drifted away, and a
full-fledged Academician took his place—an elderly, dandified figure
with a languid drawl, an aristocratic manner caught from his sitters,
and a shoulder-shrugging contempt for Continental Art; in despite of
which Matthew Strang protested mildly against the bad hanging at
Burlington House of a portrait by an eminent Frenchman. Cornpepper
talked of a sale at Christie’s at which most of the pictures had fetched
lower prices than was given for them by their last owners.
“It’s all a spec’,” said Herbert; “there’s no such thing as a fixed
value in a work of art. Everything depends on the artist’s pose. The
more the buyer gives for a picture the more he likes it. It’s a game of
brag. Set up a fine establishment—the dealer will pay. My old governor
was a good deal taken in by pretentious humbugs with pals in the press.”
As the Academician’s own establishment was notoriously finer than his
pictures—a fact of which the wandering Herbert was ignorant—Matthew
Strang hastened to speak of Tarmigan, who had been recalled to memory
by the catalogue of the aforesaid sale. “I’m afraid he’s gone under,
poor fellow,” he said. “I’ve tried to come across him, but he was always
a mysterious person.”
But Cornpepper continued to talk of the sale, of the fluctuations of
prices; of the impoverished condition of the market, so menacing to
young artists who had set up fashionable establishments on the strength
of their first sales; of the potentialities of America, that yet
undiscovered continent, till all the tide of secret bitterness welled up
in a flood from the depths of Matthew Strang’s soul. Money! Money!
Money! He had never really escaped from it. What a mirage Art was! Even
success only brought the same preoccupations with prices, it was all the
old sordidness over again on a higher plane. The ring of the gold was
the eternal undertone, bringing discord into every harmony. With a
public ignorant of what Art meant, conceiving it as something rigid like
science, not as the expression of the temperament, technique, and vision
of individual genius; with a public craving for pictorial platitudes;
Art could not be, and was not, produced, save by a martyr here and
there. Everywhere the counting of pieces and the shuffling of
bank-notes! The complacent Academician irritated him; he was tired of
reading of his marble halls, the vassals and serfs at his side, his
garden parties, his Belgravian palace erected on the ruins of a
forgotten bankruptcy. The fumes of expensive wines and cigars gave him a
momentary vertigo.
“For God’s sake, stop talking shop!” he burst out suddenly.
The astonished Cornpepper let his eye-glass fall.
“Have you gone crazy, Strang?” he asked, witheringly. “What do you join
an artists’ club for, if you don’t want to talk shop? Strikes me you’d
better get yourself put up for the Commercial Travellers’ Union.”
“That’s what we are,” retorted Matthew Strang.
The Scotch landscape-painter pacified them by proposing a game of
“shell-out,” and Herbert eagerly seconding the proposal it was carried
nem. con., and the group mounted to the billiard-room, where Matthew
Strang won half a crown before he went off to his nocturnal parties,
leaving his cousin still renewing with zest his olden experience of the
lighter side of British Art.
As a matter of habit Mr. Matthew Strang went, some weeks later, to the
Academy Soirée to add his handshake to the many suffered by the
presidential image of patience at the top of the stairs, and to help
appease the insatiable appetite of the crowd of Christians to whom lions
are thrown. It was part of his success to move through fluttering
drawing-rooms, and it imbittered him to feel that the average admirer
conceives the artist as living in a world of beautiful dreams, sweet
with the incense of perpetually swung censers, and knows nothing of the
artist’s agonies, or the craftsman’s sweatings, that go to the making of
beautiful things; sees always the completed design, and never the
workman scraping the paint or wetting the back of the canvas or tossing
sleeplessly under the weight of a ruined picture.
To-night, in the restless dissatisfaction that had grown upon him since
the reappearance of Herbert had undammed a flood of ancient memories,
this feeling possessed him more strongly than ever, inspiring a morbid
resentment of the chattering crew divided between hero-worship and
champagne-cup. There was almost a suspicion of a leonine snarl in the
stereotyped answer, “You are very kind to say so,” which he gave to the
grimacing persons who buttonholed him to bask in the radiance of his
success or to effuse honest admiration. Everybody seemed to him
ill-dressed, ill-mannered, and in ill-health. He thought he had never
seen so many cadaverous complexions, snag teeth, powder-tipped noses,
scraggy shoulders, glazed eyes (with pince-nez, monocle, or spectacles),
ungainly figures (squat or slim), queer costumes, bald heads, or
top-heavy hair-dressings; how horrible gentlefolk were, more uncouth
even than the denizens of the slums! Those one could imagine to be a
very different breed, cleaned and properly clothed, but these had had
every chance. How poorly humanity compared with cows and horses; what a
price man had paid for soul—and without always getting it. Surely, none
but custom-blinded eyes could gaze unblinking, unsmiling, at the
grotesque show of mankind, the quaint crania, the unsightly bodies; the
crowd struck him as the inventions of a comic draughtsman in a malicious
mood, the men in black and white, the ladies in color. And, indeed,
though he was not thinking of himself, his stalwart, well-proportioned
figure and his handsome head stood out notably from a serried batch of
degenerate physiques.
“So you are determined to cut me, Mr. Strang?”
The painter started violently as the laughing syllables, sounding far
more musical than the faint far-away strains of the band in the
Sculpture Room, vibrated above the endless buzz of the crowd that hemmed
him in.
He looked up. His moody fit vanished before the radiant apparition of a
beautiful woman in a shimmering amber gown from which her shoulders rose
dazzling. A jewelled butterfly fluttered at her breast. In the twinkling
of an eye—and that eye hers—he recanted his contempt for the Creator’s
draughtsmanship.
“I have bowed to you three times,” she said, and the twinkling of her
eye—large and gray and lambent—was supplemented by the smile that
hovered about the corners of her wide sweet mouth. “But you won’t take
any notice of me.”
“I beg your pardon,” he said, in flushed embarrassment, “I must have
been lost in thought.”
She shook her head bewitchingly.
“You don’t remember me. Celebrities never do remember people, though
people always remember celebrities.”
“I do remember you,” he protested, chords of memory vibrating
tremulously and melodiously. “I had the pleasure of meeting you at a
garden-party some years ago.”
“But you don’t remember my name?”
“I don’t think I caught it then,” he said, simply. “But I remember you
scolded me because my pictures were only beautiful.”
She laughed gayly.
“Ah, then I ought to apologize to you. I have changed my mind.”
“Now you don’t think they’re even that!”
“Far from it! What I mean is that I have come to think less of useful
things. You know I was a Socialist then. But let me introduce my friend
to you.”
“You have to introduce yourself first, Nor,” said a younger lady whom he
then perceived at her side.
He smiled.
“You are irrepressible, Olive,” said her friend. “Mr. Strang, let me
introduce myself then—Mrs. Wyndwood.”
He bowed, still smiling.
“Eleanor Wyndwood,” she added, “to explain my friend’s abbreviation,
which always puzzles strangers.”
“Everybody knows Nor stands for Eleanor,” remonstrated her friend. “Do
they suppose your name is Norval?”
Mrs. Wyndwood’s smile met the painter’s.
“And now, if my punctilious friend is satisfied, let me introduce Miss
Regan.”
Miss Regan gave him her hand cordially.
“Where are your pictures to be found, Mr. Strang?” she asked. “We
haven’t been to the Academy before, and we should so like to save the
shilling.”
“Oh, they’re not worth looking at,” he said, uncomfortably. He suddenly
felt ashamed of them. It was thus that he had felt more than two years
ago, when, over her strawberries and cream, Mrs. Wyndwood had lectured
him for artistic aloofness from the travail of the time, insisting that
it was the mission of all forms of Art to express the aspiration of the
century towards a higher and juster social life, towards the coming of
God’s kingdom on earth, and that it would be honester for him to plough
the land than to paint decorative pictures for the dining-rooms of
capitalists. He had scarcely taken in her point of view, more persuaded
by her presence than by her words, by some intangible radiation of
earnestness and goodness from the lovely face and the soulful gray
eyes, and less ashamed of the sinfulness of his own artistic standpoint
than of the often meretricious quality of his performance. She had been
the first woman to speak slightingly of his rôle in the world, and her
dispraise, co-operating, as it did, with his own discontent, had
impressed him more than all the praise, just as one unfavorable
newspaper critique rankled, while a hundred eulogies passed across
consciousness, scarcely ruffling its waves.
When the flux of the garden-party had drifted her off in the wake of
Gerard Brode, the handsome young Socialist, he had felt that he, too,
might have become a Socialist or a ploughboy, or even an honest painter,
under the inspiration of her enthusiastic eyes. He had thought of her
for several months, almost as a creature of dream, so swift and shadowy
had been her flitting across his horizon, and she had easily lent
herself to that conception of Ideal Womanhood which the world had not
yet destroyed, because the world had not created it. It was under the
impulsion of the eloquent play of light across her face that he had
conceived and painted that allegory of woman’s inspiration which
Herbert, unable to read in it the pathetic expression of the painter’s
dissatisfaction at once with real womanhood and his own work, had found
so amusing, and he was startled now to see how nearly he had reproduced
her traits in his conception of the figure on the mountain-top; not so
much, perhaps, in the features, in which the slight upward tilt of the
nose was omitted and the size of the ears diminished, as in the
clustering chestnut hair, with gold lights in it, and in the poise of
the head, the long, thin Botticelli hands, the small feet, and the
graceful curves of the rather tall form, and, above all, in the
expression that seemed to suffuse her face with spiritual effluence. The
first impression renewed itself in all its depth; he asked himself with
amazement how he could have let the waves of life wash it away so
completely that even Herbert’s inquiry about the picture had not
recalled her clearly to his memory.
“Oh, but I want to see your pictures,” she said. “There’s a ‘Triumph of
Bacchus,’ I hear. I saw the fresco—by Caracci, wasn’t it?—in the
Farnese Palace, in Rome, on our homeward journey. We’ve been in Russia,
Miss Regan and I, with Monsieur and Madame Dolkovitch, to see Podnieff
in his dairy-farm. Oh! he’s so charming—so simple and saintly. He
enables one to construct St. Francis of Assisi.”
“He makes very bad butter,” said Miss Regan.
“He is the greatest spiritual force in Russia,” Mrs. Wyndwood said,
sweetly. “And Dolkovitch is doing much to extend his influence in
England. I wish you knew Dolkovitch, Mr. Strang.”
“Why, would he make me do better pictures?” he asked, playfully,
struggling a little against the obsession of her sweet seriousness.
“I will reserve my opinion till I have seen your latest manner. Though I
confess I don’t find the title, ‘The Triumph of Bacchus,’ a hopeful
augury of noble work. But do tell me where it is—or must I consult the
catalogue? Miss Regan made me bring one.”
“It is in this very room.”
“Really?”
“Yes, it’s rather a compliment. The Academicians generally reserve the
big room—or at least the line—for their own works. But it is cruel of
you to leave me so soon.”
“How subtle, Nor,” said Miss Regan. “Of course he cannot be seen looking
at his own picture.”
“Do let us go where the crowd is thinner,” he pleaded.
“Than round your picture?” queried Miss Regan, naïvely.
“For shame, Olive,” laughed Mrs. Wyndwood. “I shall punish you by not
letting you see it. We are at your service, Mr. Strang. Show us what you
please.”
“May I not get you any refreshment?” he said, as they passed into the
smaller room, and into a perceptibly cooler atmosphere.
“No, thank you; this is refreshing enough,” said Mrs. Wyndwood, with a
sigh of relief.
“Mrs. Wyndwood means that she lives on air,” said her friend.
“Oh, Olive, I eat quite as much as you.”
“You used to before you developed this Dolkovitch phase, and began
understudying an angel.”
Matthew saw the opportunity for a commonplace compliment, but he did
not take it. The plane on which Mrs. Wyndwood existed demanded
reverential originality. Every word she said sounded magically musical,
and delightfully wise and witty. Olive’s remarks one merely smiled at,
though she, too, had a low voice, “that excellent thing in woman,” and
was considered handsome by those she did not annoy. She reminded the
painter of a Caryatid as she stood there, rather more sturdy than her
friend, and shorter, with stronger features and a firmer chin, but to
the full as graciously proportioned. She had dark hair and eyes, and a
warm coloring that reached its most vivid tint in the intense red of the
lips. Her dress was of a soft green-blue, cut high, with yellow roses at
the throat, and but for the painter’s preoccupation with her friend,
would have challenged his eye by subtle harmonies.
“There goes William Lodge, the poet,” cried Mrs. Wyndwood, suddenly.
“Impossible!” said Olive.
“But it is the poet,” insisted Mrs. Wyndwood.
“Impossible,” repeated Olive. “No man can be a poet with mutton-chop
whiskers.”
“What has the man’s appearance to do with his poetry?”
“Everything. Mutton chops and lyrics don’t rhyme—they’re like that
woman’s emeralds against her turquoise bodice. A poet’s publisher should
keep him out of sight—he damages sales. Look at the hook-nosed creature
there with the goggles and the green gown—who would believe that is
Mrs. Ashman Watford, who writes those dainty essays, and who, realizing
it, could ever help reading her between the lines?”
“Or who,” retorted Mrs. Wyndwood, “reading the essays, could help seeing
the beautiful soul behind the goggles?”
A tremor of sympathy traversed the painter’s form.
“I stand unreproved, Nor. You can afford to be magnanimous. But I
contend that beautiful souls have no right to get mixed up with hooked
noses. We ought to judge a soul by the body it keeps. If this country
ever becomes a republic, it will be due, not to democracy, but to
photography. You will agree with me, I know, Mr. Strang.”
He started, wondering what he was called upon to agree with.
“Beauty is truth, truth beauty,” he quoted, vaguely.
“But you never put truly ugly persons into pictures,” Miss Regan
persisted.
“No,” he admitted, “unless in portraits.”
“And not even then,” the girl retorted. “I’d far rather these portraits
came out of their frames and walked about, than promenade among the
originals as we are doing now.”
“Why, I don’t suppose there’s one original present,” Mrs. Wyndwood
remonstrated.
“Isn’t there?” queried Olive, in innocent accents. “I thought there were
a lot, judging by the want of resemblance.”
“You are not up to date,” said Matthew Strang, smilingly. “Likeness is
the last thing a portrait-painter goes for. Values, spots, passages,
color schemes, all sorts of things take precedence of the likeness in
their importance for art. The likeness is irrelevant to art. It concerns
only the sitter—art concerns the world. A friend of mine, who edits an
illustrated paper, which is the first to publish portraits of everybody
who becomes anybody, contends that the number of persons who know any
one man’s features is a negligible quantity. ‘All the public demands,’
he says, ‘is portraits.’ So you see your criticism leaves our withers
unwrung.”
“Oh, do produce your catalogue, Nor,” said Miss Regan, flying off at a
tangent for want of an answer. “I am dying to see the name of that
thing, stuck right up there on the ceiling.” Mrs. Wyndwood, after
protesting that nobody else was consulting a catalogue, which only made
Olive more eager, fished out the booklet from some obscure pocket, and
Olive turned the pages impatiently.
“It’s just like Miss Regan to want to look at the skied pictures,” her
friend murmured to the painter.
“Oh, the poor man!” cried Miss Regan. “Listen, this is what the picture
is called:
“Oh, the poor man! Fancy the indignity of having a long quotation
skied!”
“What lovely lines!” exclaimed Mrs. Wyndwood, ignoring the humorous
aspect which appealed to her companion. “Do they not express the idea
perfectly, Mr. Strang?”
“I am afraid I did not quite catch their significance,” he said,
flushing. The confession was not so candid as it sounded, for he had
been less intent on the quotation than on studying the sweetness of her
face, and watching the emotional heaving of the jewelled butterfly on
her beautiful bosom.
Olive Regan politely offered him the catalogue, and his flush grew
deeper as he seemed to read his personal tragedy in the poet’s images.
What ironical Providence had sent him the words just then?
Perhaps it was that which made his life so unreal to him, which
explained its hollowness. He had never loved.
In a strange flash of imaginative insight, it seemed to him that the
room was full of lovers. Love was in the air; delicate rumors and
whispers of divine delight, of holy pain, fluttered tremulously. On all
sides couples moved, heart-bound, their beauty spiritualized, their very
ugliness transfigured. Love redeemed the creation.
He remembered that in the days when he had trodden the lonely London
pavements, hungry and heart-sick, jostled by hurrying crowds, he had yet
seemed to himself the only solid figure amid a throng of shadows
flitting to death and oblivion. In this tense instant he felt it was he
that had always been the shadow; the one shadow amid a world of
substantialities and solidities, a world that lived while he was
recording the forms and colors of life.
And even if he should ever love—and the thought set his heart
fluttering as he had imagined it could never flutter again—even if Love
should ever make existence real for him, was he not predestined to a
doom more terrible even than the apathy of loveless life?
Mrs. Wyndwood! She, too, was married. And in that thought he knew that
Love had begun for him. The unrest into which the first vision of her
had plunged him, and which time had stilled, had at last come to
understand itself. He loved, and his love was vain. They had come to
him, both at once—
He returned the catalogue mechanically to Miss Regan.
“They’re Rossetti’s—fine, are they not?” said Mrs. Wyndwood.
The question dragged him up from abysses of dream. But even though he
felt he must be answering it, he lingered in luxurious agony over the
music of the question, its vibrations prolonging themselves in his ear.
“They are indeed exquisite,” he said, slowly, at last. “But do you think
there would be any ‘hope tempestuous’?”
“There is always hope,” said Mrs. Wyndwood, gently.
There seemed a sweet assurance in the unconscious words: he heard a
chime of golden bells floating up from some sea-buried city. Perhaps it
was only from the band in the Sculpture Room. But he felt he must not
attach himself further to the fascinating twain; his solicitude would be
too marked, and he was aware of many eyes drawn by their beauty.
But before he could speak, Mrs. Wyndwood went on, musingly:
“And after all, hope is better than fulfilment. There are blue hills on
the horizon which the child longs to go beyond; but happiness always
lies on the hither side, with the blue hills still beckoning.” Her eyes
filled with dreamy light. “It is as George Herbert so beautifully says:
How exquisitely she spoke the melancholy lines that seemed fraught with
all the pathos of the human destiny, her words rippling through the buzz
of platitudinarian trivialities he heard vaguely all around him, like a
silver stream through an unlovely country. She had suffered too. She,
too, had found life and its pleasures hollow; he saw that in the quiver
of the beautiful lip, in the wistful brightness of the eye. Straightway
his heart was full of tears for her. He longed to comfort her, to
sacrifice himself for her. Why could she not be happy?
He had a sense of jar when Miss Regan said:
“That’s rather a strange quotation for you, Nor.”
“Indeed?”
“ ‘Foolish night-fires, women’s and children’s wishes.’ He had a true
notion of our futility, that gentle old poet.”
“I am in no fighting mood to-night, Olive,” replied Mrs. Wyndwood,
gently.
“You don’t stand up for your sex?” the painter asked Miss Regan, in
surprise. She had that resourceful, self-sufficient air which he
associated with pioneers of female movements.
Olive shrugged her shapely shoulders. “Heaven forbid that I should be
the advocatus diaboli.”
The tossing of the crowd threw up a long-haired, long-bearded man with a
handsome leonine cast of features, who greeted the two ladies with an
air of camaraderie.
“Ah, nous voilà encore,” he cried, joyously, adding in good English,
though with a Russian accent, “Oh, Mrs. Wyndwood, you must see the
little picture of the Christ-child by a young follower of our
Nicolovitch. He is exiled three years already, and has established
himself on your hospitable shores. Ah, how it makes a spiritual ray
among your English platitudes! You will come too, Miss Regan?”
Olive, who had cast a droll glance towards the painter at the Russian’s
awkward allusion to British banality, shook her head. “No, thank you. I
hate children, and I am tired. You will find me here, Nor,” and she let
herself sink into a lounge.
Mrs. Wyndwood hesitated, as if about to introduce the two men, but the
leonine Dolkovitch swept her off, and she had only time to leave a
bewitching smile behind her.
“Won’t you go and see the child, Mr. Strang?” Olive asked.
He hesitated in his turn. But she would come back if he waited.
“I would rather stay with you if I may,” he replied, gallantly.
Olive looked sideways along the lounge.
“There is room,” she reported.
“Thank you.” He seated himself at her side, and stolidly regarded the
crowd and the opposite pictures.
Olive fanned herself silently at great length. The painter, stealing a
sudden glance at her, found her observing the human spectacle with an
air of infinite sadness.
“Do you like dogs?” she asked, unexpectedly.
“Yes,” he replied, startled, and with a vision of Sprat. “But I haven’t
kept one since I was a boy. But why?”
“I don’t know. That woman there made me think of them—that creature
they’re crowding round. Don’t you see that pasty-faced hag with the
false hair and the real diamonds? That’s Miss Craven St. Clair.”
“Well, what has she to do with dogs?”
“Oh, she’s a leading lady. Plays those erotic parts.”
He looked at her a little surprised by the adjective, and still
unenlightened.
“And what then?”
“Don’t you know all leading ladies keep dogs—to get extra paragraphs? I
hope you hate leading ladies. I do. They’re so virtuous, and you know
virtue is such a feeble vice. Nor has a dog, though she’s not a leading
lady. But rather a led lady. L—E—D, you know.”
“Do you mean led by the dog?”
“Yes, whenever she’s blind and the dog is sly,” she said, mysteriously,
adding quickly, “Nor’s dog isn’t all hers—it’s mine on alternate days.
He’s such a snob, is Roy—he’ll never go out with her if she’s frumpy.
He insists on swell dresses, dear old Roy.”
“Can she be frumpy?” he asked.
She flashed a quick look at him.
“No, she is very sweet and amusing,” she answered, gravely. “She is the
only woman I have ever been able to live with.”
“Do you live with her?”
“Of course—I chaperon her.”
Matthew smiled.
“What, don’t you think I’m old enough to chaperon a young widow?”
His heart leaped.
“I didn’t know she was a young widow.”
“Yes, she’s quite an old widow.”
“Have you lived together long?”
“Æons; we disagree so much.”
“In what way?”
“Our complexions go well with each other’s.”
“I should call that harmony, not disagreement.”
“Perhaps—in your technical nomenclature. But I call it disagreement.
Besides, we haven’t a thought in common. I am a—well, how shall I
define myself?” she looked up quizzingly, her fan to her lips. “I belong
to that class of women whose sex is a misfit. And she is—”
“And she is”—he repeated, in some suspense.
“She is the sort of woman who won’t renew the velvet edging on her
walking-dresses.”
“Now you puzzle me.”
“It is evident you know nothing of women, or have only observed
Englishwomen who mostly put up with braid. Velvet edging, which is an
American notion, saves frayed skirts, and wears out quicker than the
stuff. Look at her gown to-night—it trails; mine fits. She retains the
infantile habit of long clothes; I am ‘growd up’ and in short frocks.”
“I didn’t notice her gown.”
“Men never do. That’s why we wear so little of them.”
He was puzzled by a curious bitterness in her tone, as well as by a
perplexity as to her exact meaning. Her own frock was certainly
prudishly high.
“I don’t quite follow your definition, anyhow,” he said.
“No? I’ll try another. There are only two classes of women—those who
ought to have been born men, and those who ought never to have been born
at all. I am of the first, Nor’s of the second.”
He shook his head laughingly.
“Oh! but I won’t believe that of either.”
“If I expected to be believed I should have more hesitation in telling
the truth,” she replied, gravely. “We are both mistakes, but Nor is an
incorrigible one. You heard her say she’s dropped Socialism. She didn’t
tell you she’s dropped a power of money, too, in subscriptions to the
Cause. She probably thought equality would come about in three months,
and that she was merely disgorging in advance.”
“Is that why she looks so sad?”
“Dear me, no; money doesn’t trouble her.”
“What’s the matter, then?”
“She’s been married.”
“You mean she grieves?”
“Quite the contrary. But marriage brands.”
“You speak bitterly—yet you have no personal experience.”
“No, I was never tempted.”
Her frank brusquerie made him feel an old acquaintance.
“I cannot believe it,” he said, with a smile.
“Oh, if you call a proposal a temptation! I call it a bare hook.”
“You’re a man-hater, I see.”
“A woman-hater, if you will. Man I adore.”
“I don’t understand you,” he confessed again.
“Really? I am a very simple person. Omne ignotum pro magnifico. Women
I know and detest. Men I don’t know and admire. If I married one, I
should know him.”
“But you might find him better than you expected.”
“If I didn’t expect to find him better than I expected, I shouldn’t
marry him; so I should still be disappointed. You see I know just enough
about men to know that they are better left unknown. I quite agree with
Nor about the blue hills. It is better to keep one’s illusions. At
present I am happy in the thought that somewhere in the universe there
exists a fine man. Even the average man is less petty than the average
woman, so that the one fine man must be a Bayard indeed.”
He laughed.
“Then, if he came along and made you an offer of marriage—”
“I should close with it at once.”
“You are a droll girl,” he could not help saying. “You are the first of
your sex who has ever admitted to me that men are better than women.”
“Didn’t I tell you how sly we were? A man has one or two big sins, a
woman a bundle of little ones.”
“Ah, well,” he said, smiling. “Two of a trade, as a friend of mine
says.”
“Now I don’t understand you—or rather, your friend,” she said, flushing
a little.
“Oh, he’s rather brutal. He takes the Darwinian view of things, you
know. He says all women are in the same trade—man-hunting—so they run
one another down.”
“But I’m not running one another down. I’m running us down en bloc.
And, besides, that isn’t the Darwinian view at all. It’s the males who
always seek the females and develop the lively colors to attract them.
Don’t you remember Tennyson?—
“Yes, but that’s only in the lower creation,” argued Matthew Strang.
“Do you make a distinction? But I am ready to agree with your
friend—since he isn’t here. We are man-hunters. What a pity, though,
that civilization has so reversed the order of natural selection that
the human female has to be picked instead of picking the male. See the
result!”
“I see what you mean. Man has degenerated physically.”
“And woman morally. We adore the beauties of your purse instead of your
person.”
“And so we develop brain to get purses with. Really, the effect is not
so bad.”
“Brains are cheap to-day; and they don’t improve the appearance, anyhow.
If people wore their brains outside—but who is this brutal friend of
yours who gauges my sex so well? Do I know him?”
“I shouldn’t think so. He’s just back from strange places.”
“So am I. What’s his name?”
“Herbert—Herbert Strang.”
“A brother?”
“A cousin.”
“He’s not an artist?”
He hesitated: “Yes—and no,” he said.
“Ah, two of a trade,” she said, slyly.
He smiled. “Oh, he’s gone out of the business. He’s become a critic.”
“Wise man!”
He glanced furtively every now and then to see if Mrs. Wyndwood was
returning. He was conducting the conversation with only the untroubled
surface of his mind, interested enough in his piquant companion, but
feeling her entirely as an interlude. Miss Regan perceived his
perturbation at last.
“Oh, don’t let me monopolize you, Mr. Strang. I am quite safe here till
Nor returns. There are so many people thirsting for you.”
“Oh, I’d rather stay with you,” he averred, disingenuously.
“Don’t be a mere man,” she returned, raising her dark eyebrows. “Even
your admirers think you more than that. It’s not fair for me to keep you
from them.”
He was rather in a quandary. He could not tell her he was waiting for
her friend.
To his relief, “Ah, I see them coming,” she said. “You’ll be off duty in
a moment. I must introduce you to Dolkovitch. He’s great fun. He will
invite you to his spiritual Sunday afternoons. Do you judge people by
their hat-racks?”
He stared at her.
“I mean when they’ve got company. Dolk’s hat-rack when he’s ‘at home’ is
lovely; I’d go miles to see it. Such curious curly, dusty, many-hued,
amorphous things on the pegs—a cosmopolitan congress, only the
chimney-pot unrepresented. Nor goes to meet the earnest people, but I go
to see their hats. Oh, M. Dolkovitch, do let me introduce Mr. Strang. He
is dying to know you.”
“De-lighted,” said Dolkovitch. “But I do not like this word ‘dying,’
Miss Regan.”
“Oh, I beg your pardon—I forgot,” said Olive. “Mr. Strang is living to
know you. M. Dolkovitch, like the ancient Greeks, Mr. Strang, doesn’t
like to think of death.”
“I can’t let you misrepresent him to a stranger, Olive,” said Mrs.
Wyndwood. “M. Dolkovitch is wide as the poles asunder from Pagan
thought, Mr. Strang. His teaching simply is that, as there is no death,
but merely upward evolution, the sooner the word is banished from our
vocabulary the better.”
Her voice raised the discussion to celestial heights.
“Never say die!” cried Miss Regan, enthusiastically. “Every dictionary
should be without it.”
“Just so,” said M. Dolkovitch, gravely. “Our European customs, Mr.
Strang, with regard to death are all in direct contradiction to our
creed. The spirit rises into more blessed states, and instead of
rejoicing in festive attire, we mourn for it, we put on black, and our
looks are black, and our hearses are black, and the horses they are of
black also.”
“I think it’s very proper,” said Miss Regan, decisively. “I love black
funerals. Colored funerals would make me feel sad.” She rose. “We are
going soon, Nor, aren’t we? You look tired.”
“Yes, we are going at once,” Mrs. Wyndwood breathed.
The Russian gave the painter his card, and hoped he would come and hear
more of the new gospel. Next Sunday afternoon spiritual people came from
four to seven.
Mr. Strang made a movement to accompany the ladies, but Mrs. Wyndwood
begged him not to trouble—M. Dolkovitch would see them to the carriage.
“Good-bye, then,” she said with an enchanting smile. “It was so good of
you to talk to us.”
Words failed him in reply. Fortunately, a little white-haired gentleman
bowed to her at that moment and distracted her attention.
“That was General Dale, Olive,” she said. “What a fine, soldierly walk!”
“Varied by ducking for bullets every moment,” remarked Miss Regan. “He
oughtn’t to know so many people. Not that I admire the military bearing.
It’s so unnatural and stiff. One sees the drill behind. Even those
little wooden soldiers I never liked. Good-bye, Mr. Strang.”
“Au revoir, I hope,” he said. Her, at least, he could answer.
He went to the “Sunday afternoon” at five o’clock, the earliest hour one
could decently go to a reception commencing at four. In the meantime he
had reread a great deal of Shelley, who seemed to have written a great
deal about Eleanor, as she became to her lover’s secret thought, though
her full name he learned was the Honorable Mrs. Wyndwood, and she was
the daughter-in-law of a Viscount, and connected by blood or marriage
with several pages of Debrett. In the hopelessness of his love these
ties were no separation; he did not think of anything but the blissful
pain of seeing her again. He had ridden every morning in the Row, but
neither of the friends had shown herself.
The reception was held in a flat half way up a bleak stone staircase in
the West Central district. He was so agitated that he forgot to note the
hat-rack, and his first glance at the company appalled him with the
sense of a cosmopolitan chaos, without form and void, over which no
light of Mrs. Wyndwood brooded. There were mystic oil-paintings on the
walls of the narrow room, and on the gray marble mantel-piece stood a
glass of water, in which floated vaguely the white of an egg.
The host introduced him to his wife—a tall, haggard, giraffe-necked
woman—who gave him a cup of tea, and passed him on to a nervously
peering Herr Grundau, who spoke to him of the revival of religion among
the University Burschen, and passed him on to Mademoiselle Brinskaïa,
a little yellow Polishwoman, with eyes like live coals, who had been
speaking every European language in turn with equal fluency, as she
knitted colored wools into some occult pattern.
“I have heard your name,” she told him in English that sounded almost
native, as he seated himself next to her in the cushioned window-seat.
“It is so good of you to say so,” he murmured, automatically, not
without the astonishment which from the first had pervaded him when
strangers professed knowledge of him, and which had never quite worn
off. He thought his peculiar name accounted for his notoriety.
“You’re not a spiritual artist,” she said, half interrogatively.
“An artist can only be artistic,” he replied, in vague self-defence.
“That’s all my eye and Betty Martin,” said Mademoiselle, knitting
indefatigably. Then she smiled. “You see I know your idioms.”
A gradual silence fell among the jabbering, gesticulating crowd. All
eyes were directed alternately towards the glass on the mantel-piece and
Mademoiselle Brinskaïa.
“It is settled,” Dolkovitch declared.
The Polish old maid rose solemnly, marched towards the fireplace, and
inspected the glass curiously, noting the shape which the egg-white had
taken.
“It is a porte-cochère,” she announced. “That means riches.”
There was a buzz of satisfaction and a little hand-clapping, the
blinking octogenarian who had broken the egg being cheerfully
complimented on his prospects.
The sibyl did not return to Matthew Strang’s side, and the vacant niche
was taken by a stout, elderly, motherly lady, who was introduced to him
as the Countess de Villiers, and who, regardless of the fact that his
eyes perpetually wandered towards the door, published her autobiography
to him, from her babyhood in Brazil to her maturity in Gibraltar. There
could be no close to her story, she volunteered, for she could never
die.
This drew Matthew’s attention even from the door.
“Do you mean metaphorically?” he said.
“No, literally. You could not kill me if you tried.”
“What! Not with a knife?”
“Neither with fire nor sword.”
“You know I wouldn’t try,” he said.
“If you are going to treat me facetiously I will not pursue the
subject,” she declared, the red blood mantling in her sallow cheek.
“I am quite serious,” he said, deprecatingly.
“A woman who can live without eating cannot die,” pursued the Countess,
mollified. “I was an invalid, and in my convalescence gradually worked
my way to the Truth, and by means of it I have lived fourteen weeks
without food. I worked down from five ounces a day to nothing, dropping
an ounce a day. And I didn’t lose a pound of flesh.”
“I have fasted, too,” he said, grimly. “But I never found any Truth
through it.” He reflected bitterly on the anxious competition of people
to give him food, now that he had plenty of his own. Was this the London
which he had tramped for work, famished and rebellious?
“You must be patient,” she answered, earnestly. “You must kill the man
in you; then you will have got rid of the mortal part. You will be pure
spirit, part of God. Existence is only God’s thoughts; everything good
is a God-idea, everything evil a man-idea. Jesus was the first
discoverer of the Truth, and only the man-idea in Him was crucified, the
mortal part. Only the evil part of us is mortal. I have suppressed the
man-idea in myself, therefore I cannot die.”
“But do you mean to say you will always live on?”
“Yes, though not necessarily on earth.”
“But what will happen—will you disappear?”
She frowned. “Oh, I know you are making fun of me; but I assure you many
eminent men have sat at my feet. Even Dolkovitch says I have a greater
grip of the Truth—the glorious Truth of immortality—than any other
woman in Europe, except Mademoiselle Brinskaïa and the clairvoyant
Princess Stevanovna. There is nothing miraculous. I don’t keep away from
society, I dance and paint, but throughout all I am struggling against
the bad-self.”
“What sort of things do you paint?” he asked, feeling for firmer ground.
“My vision!” she said, in rapt tones. “My assurance that the universe is
all living spirit.”
And all of a sudden a conviction came to him that she was right, that
there was no death, no room for death. Eleanor Wyndwood had arrived, and
in the light of her face the noisy, motley throng took meaning and
music. He rose eagerly, but she did not see him in his niche, and he sat
down again awkwardly. The Countess talked on, but he had forgotten even
to feign the listener. He could only see the gleam of a creamy dress in
rifts of the crowd, which thickened momently. Presently he was aware of
Miss Regan, who gave him an abrupt bow, and then crossing over to him
said, in vexed accents:
“I am very angry with you. How are you, Countess? Young as ever, I see.”
“What have I done?” inquired Matthew Strang.
“You’ve spoiled my hat-rack. There’s a chimney-pot on it. Life has so
few pleasures one can’t afford to be robbed.”
“Oh, please forgive me,” he said, half seriously.
“I sha’n’t—you’re too respectable.”
“Tell me something Bohemian, and I’ll do it,” he pleaded.
“Well, come to tea with me some five o’clock—with me and Nor, that is.”
“Is that very Bohemian?”
“No, I’m afraid not,” said Olive, glumly. Then, brightening up. “But
that’s only a beginning. And you haven’t got time to come, either. That
makes it a pleasure.”
“I shall be delighted to find time,” he said, looking his words. While
they were discussing dates, the Countess rose and stalked away.
“She looks offended,” he said.
“Poor old Countess!” said Olive, “she’s breaking up fast.”
“But she’s going to live forever.”
“I know. How sad! We came across her at Rome—the eternal lady in the
eternal city. She’s much grayer since then. Earthly immortality seems
almost as horrible as heavenly. Fancy living for ever and ever and ever.
No rest for the righteous! Oh, I do hope religion isn’t true. How’s your
friend?”
“Which friend?”
“The brutal friend!”
“You’re a queer girl,” he said, laughing in spite of himself.
“That’s tautology. All girls are queer. Did you ever know a woman
absolutely sane?”
He winced a little—shadows of his mother and his wife flashed past. She
answered herself, triumphantly.
“Of course not. We’ve all got bees in our bonnets. Men haven’t even got
bonnets. Except Highlanders. And they don’t wear the breeches. I beg
pardon, I should have said ‘unmentionables’ to a member of the
chimney-potted classes. But that always seems silly. It’s like spelling
‘damn’ in books with a ‘d’ and a blank. I have a lovely private swear.
Would you like to hear it?”
He laughed assent.
“Damakakaparatanasuta! The pink lady, who always forgets her bodice,
is looking shocked. She doesn’t know it’s Sanscrit, or something, and
means: ‘The foundation of the kingdom of righteousness.’ Don’t laugh, it
really does. There is a cousin of the Guicowar of Baroda over there—you
can ask him. Why, I have even got Nor to swear to swear it. It’s like
temperance champagne.”
“Ah! I’d better go over to her,” he said, snapping at the opportunity.
“Or else she’ll accuse me of cutting her again.”
He pushed a whit rudely through the teacup-balancing throng. But to his
horror he found Eleanor distributing farewells.
She smiled faintly at him, as her magnetic fingers touched his for a
moment.
“What wicked things have you been saying to Mademoiselle Brinskaïa?”
He looked at her in astonishment. “I’ve hardly said a word to her.”
She shook her head and passed towards the door. He spent some wretched
days, wondering if he had offended her, and what the little yellow woman
had been saying about him. He put the question as soon as he was seated
at the tea-table in the dainty drawing-room of the tiny Mayfair house
which the oddly assorted couple had taken for the season. Mrs. Wyndwood
would not say, but Miss Regan cried out:
“Don’t make such a mystery, Nor; you’ll make the man think he’s accused
of murder, or drinking his tea out of a saucer. The Polish priestess
says she doesn’t like your auras—voilà tout!”
“What are auras?” he asked, relieved and puzzled.
“The Latin for airs, of course,” laughed Olive. “It’s her mystical way
of saying you give yourself airs. Yes, you do. You’re disapproving of
our furniture now. But it’s through Nor’s objecting to furniture that
suited my complexion and vice versa. We compromised by getting furniture
in discord with both our complexions. The beautiful photos you see all
about you are mine—I mean my collection. They are actresses. I adore
beautiful women. After what you told me about the unimportance of the
likeness I shall consider them works of art. I have always thought that
actresses’ photographs are intended as a protection against the
curiosity of the public. But for them, actresses would be liable to be
recognized and mobbed in the streets. Great Heavens! I’ve forgotten the
scones.” And with this unexpected exclamation, Olive rushed out of the
room.
“She would insist on baking scones herself,” Mrs. Wyndwood explained
with an affectionate smile.
“She is deliciously odd,” he replied, laughing.
“Do you find her so? I’ve got used to her. There’s a monotony in the
variety. Behind it all I see always this one fact—she’s the noblest
creature in the world.”
He was touched by the enthusiastic tribute, so different from Olive’s
amused estimate of her friend.
“You must find it very pleasant to live with her,” he said.
“Yes, especially after”—But she shuddered, and did not complete the
sentence. He read in her face the tragedy of an unhappy marriage. His
eyes grew moist with pity; he felt a mad, fighting passion against the
inevitable past.
“Olive is so good,” she said, brokenly, “she was of my husband’s
family—an Irish branch—but she quarrelled with them all—her father,
her sisters—and came to live with me. Fortunately she is immensely rich
in her own right, and independent of them all.”
“Done to a turn!” cried Miss Regan, rushing in with the scones. “And I
feared I was King Alfred!”
At tea they talked Art.
It was an exquisite sensation to have these charming ladies treat him as
Sir Oracle. He was surprised to learn that in her girlhood Miss Regan
had displayed considerable talent for sculpture, but had “washed her
hands of the clay” on seeing the torso of Victory in the Louvre. He
remonstrated with her, insisting that technical skill came slowly, with
infinite labor. There were things he himself wanted to do—all sorts of
new things that he had never yet done. One day he would try to do
them—when he had time. Mrs. Wyndwood spoke contemptuously of technical
skill in comparison with soul, but here Olive mischievously took up the
cudgels for craftsmanship, and led the rather reluctant painter into an
eloquent exposition of the joys of technical mastery; of doing what you
would with your material. Mrs. Wyndwood at last caught the fire of his
enthusiasm, and astonished him by expressing his sense of the joy of Art
better than himself. Under the passion of her words he wondered that he
could ever have wasted his time on portraits for mere money, or on
scamped pictures for Exhibitions, when all these interesting problems
were waiting to be wrought out. Ah, but Miss Regan was wrong, he felt,
in thinking these problems the be-all and end-all of Art; it was soul
that was the essence of Art; Art had no raison d’être except as the
expression of soul, of the upward aspiration of the Spirit towards the
Good and the Beautiful and the True, a trinity that was mysteriously
one.
The sands of the season were running out, but Matthew Strang sifted them
for every grain of the gold of meetings with Eleanor Wyndwood. He was
shy of formal visits to the house, he did not venture on the
conventional course of asking her to sit to him, for he would not
consciously feed the flame of a passion that must be hopeless. But with
that curious illogicality which distinguishes man from the brute, he
called in accident to arrange their rendezvous, pursuing possibility
with a perseverance that made it probability.
He could not follow Eleanor to all her fashionable fastnesses as easily
as to the shrines of spirituality, for to be born well is still a
necessity of life in some circles; but they met often enough amid the
monotonous glitter which was the woman’s birthright and second nature to
the man. His eye perpetually sought her; in chattering drawing-rooms, in
cool gardens, on congested staircases, in whirling ballrooms; finding
every place dark and empty till she filled and illumined the scene. She
gleamed upon him as unreal and insubstantial as the figures he had once
noted in one of these ballrooms, completely girdled by electric lights,
which, robbing the dancers of shadows, made them fairy-like and
phantasmal. But he did not follow out the analogy or suspect it might be
his own love which was surrounding her with this spiritualizing electric
illumination. Each time he saw her he resolved never to see her again.
He could never tell her what was in his heart, never insult her
exquisite purity with the avowal of his love, even though that love were
clarified to unimagined ethereality by her stainless radiance of soul.
And each time the possibility of seeing her drew nigh again, he told
himself that he needed her for his Art—that she was drawing him up from
the slough of banality, that now for the first time his soul was really
opening out to the appeal of the higher beauty. Not that he had as yet
begun to express the higher beauty; he had simply abandoned the old. He
was too restless to work, to concentrate himself; he flitted between the
unfinished and the projected, painting in and painting out; he took long
rides in the middle of the day, to the amazement of his faithful
body-servant; he read emotional literature. Once an unconscious hostess
gave him Eleanor’s company at dinner. Mrs. Wyndwood was in stately
black, with a bunch of violets at her bosom. It was an enchanted meal.
They talked of poetry, and he seemed to be dining off poetry too. The
wines where special brands of nectar, laid down by the gods in the
golden age, the meats were ambrosia, the sweets honey-dew. A beauty as
of Hebe transfigured the faces of the neat-handed waiting-men. It seemed
only natural that the beautiful stately creature at his side should
overflow with quotations from religious poetry—was she not herself a
religious poem? His recent feverish readings had branded lines on his
own heart; he was able to answer her in lyric antiphony. His other
neighbor he simply forgot, though she was a bishop’s consort and a
patroness of the arts, with printed views on the genuineness of Old
Masters. There was an old picture of his own on the opposite wall, and
the fear lest Eleanor should raise her eyes to it was all the serpent in
his Paradise. His subconsciousness noted with pleasure, however, that
the painting had mellowed—a proof that his theory of colors was right.
He watched with furtive fascination the play of Eleanor’s beautiful
Botticelli hands, plying her knife and fork, as she explained how under
the influence of Dolkovitch she had drifted away from Socialism, whose
professors always laid too much stress on the needs of the body. But she
apologized for having spoken rudely of his “Triumph of Bacchus” from a
mere knowledge of its title; he had made her understand now that the
appeal of painting must always be sensuous, and that subject was only an
excuse for draughtsmanship and coloring, and she startled him by saying
she liked that picture of his on the opposite wall, which he had been
hoping had escaped her eye. It became at once glorified to his own.
After the ladies had retired, the gentlemen talked about a newly
invented torpedo, the finances of India, and the prospects of the
Conservatives; the conversation sounded almost indecent, and he was glad
Eleanor was not there to hear it. He took no part in the fatuous
discussion, contenting himself with watching Eleanor’s face amid the
wreaths of his cigar-smoke; even in the flesh the face had for him
something of this vaporous, elusive incorporeality.
In the drawing-room the inevitable Miss Regan claimed his attention.
Eleanor was playing Mendelssohn, and he would have liked to listen, but
Olive was less original.
“You have never honored our five-o’clocks again,” she said,
reproachfully.
He murmured that he was busy.
“That was the charm of your coming,” she reminded him. “One had the
sensation of beguiling you to play truant. But I suppose the tea was
bad. Nor would make it.”
“The tea was beautiful,” he said, smiling. “But aren’t we disturbing the
music?”
“On the contrary. Nor is giving us ‘Lieder ohne Wörte,’ and we have to
supply the words. I wonder what makes her play such old-fashioned
school-girl things. Then it must have been the scones.”
He shook his head and pursed his lips, and the music flowed on like a
lovely moonlit stream. He was drifting on the stream with Eleanor, as,
in those far-off days of young romance, he had dreamed of lovers
drifting. A mystic silver haze was shed from the moon that sailed softly
through the lambent starry sky, the whisper of the wind among the trees
and the quiet lapping of the water made a dulcet stillness that was
punctuated by the passionate “jug-jug” of the nightingale; mysterious
palaces of night glided along the banks behind dim gardens wafting
drowsy odors. The thought shook him that the world held such
lovers—lovers who were not brought together for a moment and hurled
apart in the accidental whirl of society atoms, lovers whose lips were
not eternally sundered, but lovers who were each other’s sunshine and
moonlight and music, daily, nightly, perennially. He alone was doomed to
eternal loneliness—nay, to that aggravated form of loneliness which is
shared with a life-long partner.
“I came across your cynical friend the other day.”
He started, becoming conscious that his eyes were full of sweet,
hopeless tears.
“Indeed,” he murmured automatically.
“Yes, the cousin you told me of.”
“Did I tell you of him?”
“Don’t you remember you told me he said all women are in the same trade?
Well, he is veritably a cynic of cynics, for he candidly informed me,
after I had been bantering and mystifying him with my foreknowledge of
him, that he had simply quoted Schopenhauer.”
“Where did you meet him?” he asked, a little interested.
“At the Dudley-Heatons’s reception a fortnight ago. I call him the
Minister of the Interior, he’s such an epicure—the politician, I mean,
not your cousin. There was Lord Fashborough there, the man who’s just
been appointed president of the Cruelty to Children Commission, and who
glittered with stars and orders like a comic-opera Begum. He it was
introduced your cousin—at my request, of course. Your cousin told me
the Begum and he had travelled together in Spain, when the Begum’s
appetite for bull-fights and cock-fights was insatiable. I have never
been in Spain, and two of my favorite illusions were destroyed at one
fell blow. It seems that they simply push reluctant, decrepit old horses
on to the horns of the bulls. And then the Spanish women! Your cousin
describes them as ugly and unwashed.”
He shuddered. Why would Miss Regan perversely obtrude the prose of life
upon his consciousness? He would not answer her—he tried to drift again
with the magic stream, but the spell was broken. He knew it was
Eleanor’s music that made the pictures, and that the odors came from the
flowers at Olive’s throat.
“He is painting Nor’s portrait,” she went on, indifferently.
He had to answer her now—in a stifled interrogative, masking a sudden
sharp agony and foreboding.
“What, Herbert?”
“Yes; he asked her to give him some sittings. He hasn’t altogether
become a critic, you see.”
“Who introduced him to her?”
“I did, of course.”
“But his request was rather hasty, wasn’t it?”
“Oh, it wasn’t the first time. We met him again at the Russian Embassy.”
“And how does Mrs. Wyndwood know he can paint?”
Olive laughed quietly. “Oh, he said so. He usually tells the truth, I
fancy. But he is an artist, isn’t he?”
“He was a Gold Medallist of the Royal Academy,” he answered, with
unaccustomed bitterness. A mad envy was consuming him. Why had he not
asked Mrs. Wyndwood to sit to him, seeing that her consent was so
facile? Was he always to stand by while the best of life was seized and
carried off by the bolder, the more reckless, nay, by the more unworthy?
The remembrance that Herbert had the right, and he had not, did not
dilute his bitterness, though it brought a hot flush to his cheek. Who
was he to see profanation in the juxtaposition of Eleanor with a man
like Herbert? However ignoble Herbert’s conception of womanhood, had not
he himself always found him lovable?
“Aren’t you friends?” Olive asked, divining alienation in his tone.
He felt remorseful. “Oh, we are great friends,” he answered, with
cordial warmth. “He was very kind to me when I first came to London.”
“He asked me to sit as well,” Olive pursued, satisfied.
Matthew Strang felt the tension in his brain relax.
“And are you going to?”
“No. I hate flattery. So I sacrificed Nor instead. Of course I shall go
and sit by her, though not with her. Curious, the subtleties of
language.”
“Then you will still chaperon her,” he said, with a joyous smile.
“I never neglect a pleasant duty,” she answered, placidly. “But we can
only give him a few sittings.”
“Ah!” he interrupted, with an involuntary exclamation of relief.
“We’re leaving town.”
He looked blank now. “Are you, indeed?”
“Of course. Why are you surprised? Didn’t you think we were proper? Nor
wanted the eternal Homburg or Switzerland, but I’m resolved to show her
England. Like most travelled cockneys, she thinks England’s the capital
of London, and I want to teach her geography, so we’re off to
Devonshire.”
“She will enjoy Devonshire scenery.”
“Yes, especially the Creamery. That’s what I’ve christened the little
God-forsaken village I discovered. So you know, if you ever want a cup
of tea, we shall have five-o’clocks going on there also. Patronize the
Creamery.”
“I will,” he said, with an instant resolution to take tea both in
Mayfair and in Devonshire.
“That’s right. We’ll send a coach-and-four to meet you. At least, you’ll
find it waiting at the station for passengers. Do you know whom I should
like to meet most of all men living?”
“Wagner? The Pope? The Czar?”
“Don’t be absurd. The Rev. Septimus Wheercastle. A local guide-book
says, ‘The Rev. Septimus Wheercastle speaks in very favorable terms of
the Undercliff.’ Isn’t it delicious? Imagine a gentleman in a white tie
patronizing an Undercliff! But, then, the clergy are always patronizing
the Almighty, so why not His works?”
“Hush,” he said, indicating the proximity of the Bishop.
“Isn’t he beautiful?” she asked, in an awed whisper. “What a privilege
never to be mistaken for a waiter! I am so proud of the bishops in my
family. We have a pair, with gaiters to match, both High Church
atheists; they are the joys of my life, they and the dowager duchess,
who wears kiss-curls and raves for blood. ‘Give me blood!’ she cries, as
she denounces modern society, stabbing her potato with her fork à la
Sarah Siddons.”
To Matthew Strang, who still had a vague reverence for duchesses, it was
troubling to see them through the eyes of relatives for whom they were
common clay. But this had always been his disappointment, the further he
penetrated into the arcana of aristocracy and into the ranks of the
distinguished—nobody ever seemed quite so imposing as his or her name
in the paper. Taken in the mass, aristocracy of birth or brain was
dazzling, overwhelming; but the individual was always amiably imperfect,
with the exception, of course, of the one perfect being in the universe,
Eleanor Wyndwood.
“You don’t think much of your family, Miss Regan,” he said, smiling.
“No, and they return the compliment. They don’t realize how near
Doomsday is for us aristocrats. We must disappear. We have played our
part.”
“What part?”
“Oh, I don’t know. I suppose the upper classes, the people of leisure,
existed to evolve culture. That can now be grafted on to the artisan,
and both the upper and the lower classes can disappear. We want the
amalgam now—culture without its vices, and work without its vulgarity.”
“Shall we ever get what we want?”
She smiled with ineffable sadness and weariness. “I sometimes think that
that makes life worth living. That and bishops. This is the only world
in which bishops could happen. There is some consolation, too, in Royal
Drawing-rooms and kangaroos. Do you think there is any other planet in
which ladies walk backward or animals hop? I wonder. When one feels
weary of the burden of existence, one thinks of the humor of Creation
and stays on. It is a delicious world.”
“Do you mean that you enjoy the imperfections of life?”
“I don’t know what I mean. I hate to see ill-fed people, and I hate to
see well-fed people. Unhappy people pain me and happy people irritate
me. What do I mean? Oh, I think I see it at last. It is the
unintelligent people that I hate to see unhappy, and the intelligent
people that I hate to see happy. People who have brains and are happy
can’t have souls. The fools ought to have creature comforts because they
are fools enough to value them before all else. How I envy my maid’s
capacity for envying me! Thank you, Mr. Strang, you have enabled me to
understand myself.”
The music stopped, but the player was at once monopolized by the bishop.
Fragments of their conversation reached the ears of the couple.
“She’s trying to convert him to Christianity,” Olive observed, gravely;
“didn’t I tell you she was the most unpractical creature? She’s always
leading forlorn hopes.”
“How is Herbert—my cousin—painting her?” he asked.
“Oh! he’s only had one sitting. She’s to be done à l’ordinaire, but
she had her hair dressed specially—such a waste of time—and was
manicured, and the man took as long manicuring her as if she had been
Briareus.”
“I mean, what will she wear?”
“Oh! a sentimental expression—the sort of look you see in a girl’s
face when she’s sitting on the stairs with her hand in a man’s.”
A shudder traversed her shoulders, crinkling the blue bodice that
covered them. “For the rest, she will be clothed in one of those creamy
low-necked gowns that become her so well.”
Before the evening was over Olive was induced to sing. Matthew Strang
was startled to find her choosing a love-song, and he was as astonished
by the passionate intensity of her vocalization as by the beauty of her
rich contralto voice.
“Ninon, Ninon,” she sang. “Que fais-tu de la vie—toi qui n’as pas
d’amour?” And the notes melted exquisitely in pity. The tears returned
to his eyes. It was his tragedy, it was Eleanor’s tragedy, it was
everybody’s tragedy. “Ninon, Ninon, que fais-tu de la vie?”
Very few days went by before he rang Mrs. Wyndwood’s bell. The mental
image of Eleanor sitting to Herbert was the motor that drove him to
call. He had only seen his volatile cousin once or twice since they had
dined together at the Limners’—Herbert Strang’s curious facility for
taking up and dropping people had persisted unchanged. But the couple
were destined to meet now, for victorias and hansoms hovered outside
Mrs. Wyndwood’s house, and Matthew Strang found that he had stumbled
upon a formal “At Home,” at which Herbert was fetching and carrying
strawberry-ices to perspiring beauty. The popular painter noted with a
novel thrill of alarm the boyish good looks of his friend, whose spruce,
smiling figure was so visibly the cynosure of feminine eyes. Happily for
his peace of mind, Eleanor was too busy welcoming her miscellaneous
visitors to allot much attention to Herbert, who seemed, indeed, amply
content with engaging the interest of half a dozen fair women, not
counting an occasional interlude of Miss Regan. Matthew Strang slowly
ploughed his way to the hostess, a cool-looking angel in white, through
the block of bonneted ladies, amid which an occasional man stood out
unpicturesque.
“You seem surprised to see me,” he said, in low tones, into which he
infused an intimate note.
“Yes, indeed,” said Eleanor, with a little frank laugh. “How did you
know it was my day?”
He smiled mysteriously, wondering the while if she could hear his heart
beat above the feminine babble.
“You ought not to have come,” pursued Eleanor, with a little pout that
made her face adorable. “We pay you the compliment of not asking you to
our tea-fights, and this is how you appreciate it.”
“Forgive me,” he said, intoxicatingly flattered. “I do appreciate it. I
didn’t know. I came for a cup of tea, with no idea of fighting for it.”
“Then let me give it you. Do you take sugar?”
And she handed him the cup, which he took with a hand that trembled.
Then a press of fresh people cut him off from her, and she made no
effort to keep him by her side. Gloom invaded his breast again. He had
to speak to some of the crowd, and he did his duty with ill grace. He
feared it would be too presumptuous to outstay the intrusive crew, so he
resolved to escape as soon as possible. But Herbert captured him with a
hearty hand-shake, and introduced him—with a certain proprietary
pride—to his bevy of dames, and he was perforce added to the applausive
circle in the centre of which Herbert quizzed the rest of the company
and the universe at large.
“Isn’t that Lily O’Reilly talking with Mrs. Wyndwood?” he said, catching
Olive’s passing eye.
“Sure, and it is that,” answered Olive, permitting the eye an unwonted
roguish twinkle. “She is talking about her new novel.”
“Wonderful woman,” soliloquized Herbert for the benefit of his galaxy.
“She is more read by the superfine critics than any other lady novelist
in London.”
“Oh, Mr. Strang,” protested Lady William Dallox, a petite, elegant
creature with an air of having stepped off a decorative panel, “why, the
critics all slate her awfully.”
“I know. But that’s her revenge—to threaten her reviewers with libel
actions, so that they have to read her to see if she deserved their
slatings.”
“You’re a saucy cynic, sir,” said Olive, laughingly.
“What is a cynic?” airily retorted Herbert. “An accurate observer of
life.”
“Beyond that definition cynicism cannot go,” said Olive, ceasing to
smile.
“What a pity!” said Herbert. “At any rate, it is true as far as it goes.
To call Miss O’Reilly’s hair chameleon-colored would be considered
cynical. Yet it is but accurate observation. The inaccurate observer of
life would call it auburn, not seeing that it is only auburn pro tem.,
and that it goes through as many editions as her books. Similarly, to
call her complexion hand-painted—”
“Would be rudeness,” interrupted Olive, more severely, “especially as I
heard her asking Mrs. Wyndwood to introduce to her the young man who
looked so much like the hero of one of her novels.”
“Ah, that puts another complexion on the matter,” said Herbert, lightly.
Under cover of the confusion of feminine compliment that greeted the
quick sally, Matthew Strang slipped away, leaden-hearted, from the sight
of the smiles and the sound of the laughter. Even had he been free, what
chance would he have had, pitted against his brilliant cousin? He knew
himself a silent man, scarcely speaking, unless abnormally moved, much
less scintillating. He had only one talent—one poor talent for
expressing the Beautiful to one sense—and this one talent he had
prostituted. Everything grew black to his morbid mood. The dying
afternoon, cool, sun-glinted, had no beauty for him; the speckless
grooms outside the door irritated him; the shining carriages dashing
along the great arteries of the West End, bearing their lolling
occupants to dress and dinner, stirred him to something of the same
revolt that he had felt when he had walked the metropolis of wealth and
fashion in broken boots. After all, he had never really entered this
circle of pleasure, it had always been a fairy-ring he could not step
into. Beautiful as his boots were externally, there had always been a
nail, a pebble inside; that adverse atom which, according to the
philosopher, suffices to destroy happiness. His had always been a life
of labor, of misery. He was still of the down-trodden classes, of those
whom fate, if not man, grinds down, whose lives slip by in a vain
yearning for the sun, who see happiness as a phantasm that is only solid
for others, and love as the mocking mirage of a beauty that is far
away. He was angry—so unreasonably angry that the unreason seemed a
reason for fresh anger with himself. And he was angry, not only with
himself, but with Herbert, with the world, aye, with Eleanor Wyndwood
and her idle, hare-brained visitors, reeking of the toilet-table,
chattering of poems, pictures, and symphonies.
The thought of his mother came up from dim recesses of memory—still
babbling in the asylum that was her haven of refuge after a life of
storm and stress and sorrow and weary watchings for a vagrant mate—and
he was jealous of Eleanor for her sake, jealous of her beauty, her
breeding, her wealth, her fine dresses, her carriage, her fashionable
visitors; jealous of all that made her different from his mother, of all
that made her life fuller, freer, higher, richer—of all, in fine, that
made him love her! Ah, God, how he loved her! He could scarcely keep
back the hysteric sobs that swelled at his throat. But they had always
been shut out from the sunshine, his mother and he. Happiness! oh, to
clasp it, to hold it tight! Nothing counted except happiness—ambition,
success, art, money, alike vain gauds, shadows. He walked past his
turning, and far beyond. Lights began to twinkle in the great tired
city; the summer evening brooded, fresh and cool, over the vast
stretches of dusty stone. When at last he reached his studio the sun had
set. He saw the pale rose-glow, mystically tender, at the end of the
long suburban avenue of green trees and yellow street-lamps; it spoke to
him of peace and rest and resignation, and some secret beauty behind
all.
Not many days later his restless feet took him again to the Mayfair
house. He would speak out—at some opportunity which the shrewd, kindly
Olive would not fail to afford him—he would tell Eleanor all she meant
to him, how she was becoming the pivot of his thought, how she and she
alone might inspire his art to higher purpose. He would not ask for
love, only for a noble friendship; he needed an understanding soul to
sympathize with his inmost self, his aspirations, his agonies. He had
always been hedged in by thick barriers of ice, through which no human
soul had ever pierced. No one knew what tinder for divine fires lay
awaiting the spark within, nor how cold and lonely he felt in his
glacial isolation.
But at first his visit threatened to be even more disappointing than the
last. Another man was taking tea—or rather, eating nougat with Mrs.
Wyndwood and Miss Regan—young and fascinating of feature, but with a
fatal air of the minor poet. And a poet, indeed, he proved to be: a poet
of considerable pretensions, who might win the bays if only he could get
over his unfortunate appearance, which seemed to tie him down to sugared
prettiness and elegant concetti. Matthew Strang had read one of his
dainty, gilt-edged volumes, wherein dapper lyrics posed in the centre of
broad-margined pages, and he wondered resentfully why Mrs. Wyndwood did
not lecture him into spirituality instead of feeding him with nougat,
which his poetry already resembled. But though Harold Lavender was
accommodating enough to go soon, Matthew Strang profited little by his
retirement from the field, for Eleanor seemed to be in a freakish mood,
as if the contagion of Olive had infected her, or the nougat had made
her terrestrial, and she played a lively second to her vivacious friend
in recapitulating the charms of their dog, Roy, a slumbrous Scotch
collie, that he had barely noted before, but which now became the climax
of creation.
“We’ve only hired him,” Mrs. Wyndwood explained. “Lady Arthur, to whom
the house belongs, asked us to take charge of him, so he’s in the
inventory. His father was a pedigree dog, and won five hundred guineas.”
“Yes, her ladyship had him catalogued completely, lest we should lose a
bit of him,” said Olive, rolling the animal over, and digging her
fingers affectionately into his fur and pulling his ears and his paws
and his tail to illustrate her recital of his perfections.
“Brown-and-white coat—the brown of an autumn filbert, with a collar and
shirt-front of white fur over skin as pink as rosebuds—look at
it—black gums and palate, with the whitest of teeth, canines, I
believe; a tail of russet and black and white that waves like a
palm-tree. Observe the little black ring; we identified him once by it,
though we had never noticed it before, had we, my beauty?”
Mrs. Wyndwood took up the ball. “He was lost, stolen, or strayed, and
information was lodged at a police-station that a collie with a black
ring round his tail had been found. We told the superintendent ours had
no such ring.”
“The inaccurate observation of life, you see, Mr. Strang,” broke in
Olive, “which, according to your cousin, delivers one from cynicism.”
“But cynicism has something to do with dogs, hasn’t it?” observed Mrs.
Wyndwood, smilingly.
“Yes,” said Olive. “We must get Mr. Strang to define cynicism as the
accurate observation of dogs. Don’t forget to tell him, Nor, when you
sit to him to-morrow.”
Matthew Strang moved uncomfortably on his seat, raging inwardly, and
scarcely knowing whether he was more jealous of Herbert or of Roy.
“Well, that superintendent must have been a cynic,” Mrs. Wyndwood went
on, “for he recommended us to go and look at the dog all the same. It
was a wild expedition—nearly eleven o’clock at night—we routed out a
nest of costers who lived over a stable, and were invaded by means of a
ladder. I felt like a robber Viking, all heart-beat and adventure. It
was glorious!”
“Yes; and Roy came bounding out and nearly toppled you over. And all the
little costers came crowding out of bed in their night-dresses, and you
gave Mrs. Coster a sovereign for them in mistake for a shilling.”
Mrs. Wyndwood went into a fit of mirth over the recollection. For once
her melodious laugh grated upon his ears. What in the world was there to
laugh about? It seemed all the most puerile nonsense. He could have
cried more easily.
“Remark his lively air,” said Olive. “His intuitive sympathy is
wonderful. He is sad when you weep, and merry when you frivol.”
The painter merely heard the dog panting like an impatient steam-engine.
“He wants a run, I think,” he observed, ungraciously.
“Aye, you should see him run!” cried Mrs. Wyndwood. “It makes one feel
young again to see him scampering up hill and down dale. Even a mudhill
delights him; it reminds him of his native moors, doesn’t it, Roy,
dear?”
Roy stared at her with large, unblinking eyes.
“But we are not dressed well enough to go out with him now,” said Olive.
“I told you what a snob he was, Mr. Strang. Shake paws with the
gentleman, dear. He’s smart enough even for your tastes. See how he
likes you, Mr. Strang. If he didn’t, the skin over his dear old nose
would snarl up into gathers and puckers and frills. There! That’s his
favorite attitude—on his hind-legs, with his fore-paws placably on a
beloved lap. Now he is happy. How simple life is for him! Lucky dog!”
“Ah, you forget that he, too, has his ideal, his unachieved aspiration,”
said Mrs. Wyndwood. “The disappointment of his life is that he can’t
catch birds. He snaps at everything that soars in air—even insects; it
exasperates him to find things hovering mockingly overhead in defiance
of gravity. He sits on his haunches and wails over the emptiness of
life.”
Matthew Strang gave Roy a kindlier pat. But the creature was still
stretched on the tapis of conversation, and Olive proceeded to a
whimsical account of the partition of Roy between Eleanor and herself,
as joint house-keepers. Since they could not bisect the collie, he
belonged to each on alternate days, so that if he were lost again, the
onus would rest on the mistress for the day.
By this time the painter could hardly refrain from kicking the dog, and
when Mrs. Wyndwood added that Roy was only eighteen months old, he rose
to go.
Mrs. Wyndwood’s expression changed.
“You’re not running away yet?” she said.
“I must,” he murmured, his ill-humor abating under the sweet seriousness
of her face.
“Why, you haven’t talked to us at all—we want to hear more about
technique.”
“Technique can’t be talked,” he said, still surly.
“We haven’t any materials for practical demonstrations,” said Olive,
“not even a black-board.”
“I should love to be an artist,” cried Mrs. Wyndwood. “To feel beauty
growing under one’s hand—what a sense of creative divinity. I never sit
to an artist without thinking what a privilege is his—— Now what
are you laughing at, Olive?”
“Nothing, except your subtle way of complimenting yourself on your good
looks. Now, if Mr. Strang will be good, and waste a little more valuable
time on two foolish women, I will pay him a compliment.”
He sat down, his curiosity stimulated, and Olive, producing a box of
Turkish cigarettes, asked if he objected to her smoking. Permission
being obtained, she got him to apply a light to her cigarette, and then
bade him smoke one himself. He was relieved to find Mrs. Wyndwood an
abstainer.
“There,” said Olive, puffing out a thin cloud, “that is the highest
compliment I can pay a man—to expose myself in all my horror. I smoke
neither for toothache nor neuralgia, but for sheer viciousness. See the
result of our visit to Podnieff—Nor picked up ideals, and I, smoke.
Perhaps they are the same thing in the long-run.”
Matthew Strang dissented vehemently. “Ideals are the only realities.”
“Nonsense, they are the only things that change,” retorted Miss Regan.
“The ideal woman of to-morrow will smoke shag and birdseye in long clay
pipes.”
Eleanor Wyndwood came to his assistance, and together they did battle
with Olive, who took up the most perverse Philistine positions and
fought as if for life, eluding, shuffling, dodging, equivocating,
turning, twisting, doubling upon herself with the most daring defiance
of consistency, and the most bizarre flashes of wit and argument. She
would snatch a victory by specious logic that could only hold for a
moment, and stand in as serenely mocking triumph upon a crumbling
sand-heap as if she knew herself upon a rock, and was not about to bound
off to the next sand-heap the instant the tide of reason swept this one
hopelessly away. The painter found a celestial knitting of soul in thus
fighting side by side with Eleanor; he did not blench even when she
quoted a quatrain from Harold Lavender to enforce her point. But the
shades of earth returned when she referred to Herbert Strang.
“Here is an example of a man who has absolutely nothing to gain from
Art—who doesn’t need it, who has means—to whose sceptical spirit the
applause of the world is indifferent. And yet the other morning—when
the sunshine called one to the joys of the dolce far niente—he sat
for hours toiling painfully at his Art, and fretting because he had
allowed his right hand to lose its cunning. He had neglected the Ideal,
but now his soul thirsts for it again, and the Ideal is avenged.”
Matthew Strang felt a malicious satisfaction in the thought that Herbert
was not getting on very well with the portrait. He had a sudden
curiosity to see it.
“You are really too simple, Nor,” said Olive, plaintively. “Can’t you
see the man’s only trying to spread out the sittings so as to have you
come there? I dare say he can paint as well as the present Mr. Strang.”
Eleanor flushed, hotly. “Oh, there’s no deception about his limitations.
I am almost sorry I consented.”
Matthew Strang’s heart leaped exultant. “He did let his gifts rust,” he
said, magnanimously. “But I dare say his old talent will come back after
a little practice. He had a fine color-sense in the old days.”
His magnanimity seemed to please both ladies, especially Olive, and the
discussion wound up suddenly in a congruity as unexpected as any of her
arguments.
“You were great chums then, weren’t you?” she asked.
“Yes; he was my cicerone in artistic society. I might almost say in
civilized society. I owe him a good deal.” He had no shame in hinting at
his humble origin to these two unconventional gentlewomen.
“Where is his studio?” he asked.
They told him; but Miss Regan seemed to be suddenly uneasy. A little
clock on the mantel-piece struck six silvery notes. He thought his
hostesses might want to dress elaborately for some dinner-party or the
theatre, so he tore himself away, and, jumping into a hansom, drove, on
the impulse of the moment, to Herbert’s studio.
Olive sighed wearily, and leaned her head upon her elbows, which were
planted on the tea-table. Eleanor stooped and kissed her.
“Lie down, dear, till dinner. The heat has been too much for you. You
look tired to death.”
“Heigho! I wish I was really. What’s the use of living, Nor, darling?”
“Oh, life is so beautiful!” exclaimed Eleanor, with shining eyes. “Think
of Art, think of Nature! Cheer up, Olive. The horrid season will soon be
over, and then hey for Devonshire!”
“And the Creamery,” added the girl, in hollow accents. “But let’s get
away at once, dear.”
“We must stay for a few things yet—we promised,” Mrs. Wyndwood reminded
her sweetly. “There’s the dance at Lady Surbiton’s, and the reception
of—”
Olive interrupted her with a burst of laughter that sounded hysterical
to her friend’s anxious ears. “Oh, it’s a mad, bad world! But there are
Lady Surbiton’s tea-gowns!”
“Do lie down, dear.”
“Why aren’t there convents for unbelievers, Nor? It’s an oversight. I’d
get me into a nunnery, but I should be suspected of piety. The hospitals
are overrun. They are as impossible as Ramsgate; and your nurse is
suspected of being a heroine. When will people understand that altruism
is a passion, and that nobody wants to be patted on the back for
gratifying instinct? When I did that month’s hard in the Dublin
Hospital—but that was before I knew you, dear—half my family thought
me mad, and the other half a saint. But I was only incapable, Nor,
dearest. I couldn’t dress ugly wounds as if I wasn’t feeling the pain of
them. No, I’m a failure. There’s nothing for it save suicide.”
“Or marriage,” said Mrs. Wyndwood, softly, laying her cheek to her
friend’s.
Olive moved her head away, shuddering violently. “I’d breed dogs
rather.” She rose to her feet and stretched her arms. “They are happy,
aren’t you, Roy?” She leaned down and pulled the collie’s jaws apart.
“Eating and sleeping, sleeping and eating. Why didn’t Evolution stop
with you, instead of going further and faring worse? But still there are
those birds, Roy. And on our side there’s Art and there’s Nature,
Eleanor Wyndwood says. Which Art is it going to be, by-the-way, Eleanor
Wyndwood—Poetry or Painting? But it’s two to one on Painting.”
“You’re feverish, darling,” said Eleanor, troubled. “Don’t talk at
random.”
“I’m talking straight, dear. Two Strangs to one Lavender. And what has
become of Spirit, dearest? That used to come before Art and Nature!”
“And who said it doesn’t still?” Eleanor answered, deprecatingly. Then,
with a passionate cry that set her beautiful bosom heaving, “My God,
Olive, why do you misjudge me? Can’t you understand earnest seeking?”
Tears came into her eyes and trickled down her face.
Olive kissed them away. “I’m a brute, Eleanor. The heat’s too much for
both of us. Good-night!”
“Going to lie down, dearest?”
“No; going to bed.”
 
Matthew Strang had rung several times before he could gain admittance to
his cousin’s studio. Herbert appeared in his shirt-sleeves, grinning and
yawning.
“Tit for tat,” he said. “But I’m awfully glad you came, old man. I was
just dreaming of you. By Jove, isn’t it hot?”
When Herbert said “old man,” in his caressing voice, Matthew became as
clay in the hands of the potter. It seemed so good to have the
friendship of this sunny being. He answered affectionately that it was
hot.
“You haven’t seen this den before?” said Herbert. “Not so swell as
yours. But then I’m hard up.”
Matthew smiled incredulously, for the studio was charming.
“You’re doing a portrait of Mrs. Wyndwood, I hear.”
“Who told you?”
“I was there this afternoon.”
“Yes? Did you see her friend Miss Regan?”
“She is always there.”
“I know. Isn’t she a jolly little girl?”
“She’s very odd,” said Matthew.
“Odd? You Philistine! She’s the most amusing girl in London. And so
unaffected! You can say anything to her—talk about anything. No beastly
prudishness. That’s what I like in a woman. The other day she was
complaining gravely that a woman couldn’t be a burglar because it would
land her in compromising situations. Therefore there never could be
thorough equality of the sexes, she maintained. Wasn’t it quaint? She
sits here smoking cigarettes while I paint that saintly friend of hers,
and all the while rattles on in the most delightful fashion. What a flow
of spirits! And, by Jove! the clever, biting things she says make your
hair curl. I’m not in it with her, though I try hard. I draw her out to
talk about her relations—it’s better than Thackeray. She’s no end of a
swell, you know.”
“I know.”
“And disgustingly rich. In short, she’d be intolerable if she wasn’t
herself. What an enviable lot! All the B’s—Beauty, Bullion, Blue Blood,
and Brilliancy. No wonder she’s light-hearted! They say she had an
eccentric dad, which accounts for her—a man who wasted one of his
fortunes on socialistic experiments! But she knows better than that.
Eccentricity in the parent is epigram in the child.”
“Which is an epigram,” said Matthew, laughing, and considerably relieved
by this outburst on his cousin’s part. “But your parents were not
eccentric.”
“Indeed? Don’t you see any eccentricity in the poor old governor’s
trying to make an artist out of me?”
“Where is that portrait?” asked Matthew, amused.
“Here it is, you duffer, staring you in the face on the easel all the
time. Don’t say you didn’t recognize it. Please don’t.”
“Now that I know who it is,” began Matthew, laughing.
“It is ghastly, old man, isn’t it? But that girl distracts me with her
talk.”
“What made you attempt it?” asked Matthew, candidly.
“I wanted to hear her talk.”
“Whom?”
“Miss Regan.”
Matthew felt a great wave of affection for his cousin.
“But why don’t you paint her?”
“She wouldn’t sit. I had to ask her friend, knowing she’d accompany her.
But I’m half sorry I undertook it now.”
“You’re certainly not doing her justice!”
There was still plenty of light. He took up the brush, and within a
quarter of an hour Mrs. Wyndwood’s sweetly spiritual face gleamed
unmistakably upon the canvas. Herbert watched with admiration those
sure, swift strokes, behind which lay so arduous a training, so
irrepressible an instinct.
“You seem to have her face by heart,” he said at last, with a suspicious
twinkle. “But don’t let me interrupt you.” And lighting a cigarette, he
threw himself on a lounge in an attitude that curiously recalled old
times to the painter.
Matthew Strang painted on lovingly till he could no longer see his
palette, then Herbert took him to his new club—the Epicurean—and gave
him a delightful dinner for his pains, and over the kümmel and the
coffee borrowed a hundred pounds from him so as not to sell out a stock
that was depreciated for the moment.
Herbert Strang had gone down to Devonshire to finish his portrait of
Mrs. Wyndwood, whose dress was still unrecognizable, and who was so
agreeably surprised by the face that she graciously consented to
continue the sittings at the “Creamery.” Matthew had arranged to join
him—on the excellent pretext of keeping his old friend company—but
before he left town for his holiday, Conscience began working hard,
ominously presageful of the complications that might spring up in the
solitudes of hills and waters. The inner voice whispered strenuously to
him to profit by Eleanor’s absence to fight down his impossible passion,
not intensify it unendurably by following in her train. Thoughts of his
wife began to haunt him—thoughts which, while he was only an absentee
husband, had been but pale shadows of remorse, dogging his few
unoccupied moments, but which, now that another woman had at last
enthroned herself in the vacant temple of his soul, assumed shapes more
solid and insistent. Home plucked at his heart, subtly transformed to
something more than an unpleasant recollection. In a spasm of
compunction and foreboding, he resolved to pay a visit to his wife to
strengthen himself against temptation. The idea, once conceived, drove
him to instant execution. Ere the train had drawn up at Camden Town he
had determined to elude temptation altogether by accompanying his own
family on its annual jaunt.
The visit began inauspiciously. When he had passed the ivy-clad turreted
church, which was the one picturesque object on the road from the
station, he was back in the old familiar mesh of gray streets, any one
like any other, with rows of shabby semi-genteel stone-fronted houses,
exactly alike, broken at corners by baker-shops and green-grocers. The
August afternoon was depressed, with misty, sputtering rain. A few
tradesmen’s carts rattled forlornly down the drab avenues of apathetic
houses. A diminutive barrel-organ wheezed a lively air. Never had his
street seemed so hopeless. His ardor grew chill.
He paused before the door of the little studio where he had painted his
first success—“Motherhood.” The discolored wood—set in the blankness
of a long brick wall—was scrawled over with chalk inscriptions and
sketches by the urchins of the neighborhood. The house was round the
corner, and, after a melancholy moment, he walked listlessly towards the
front gate, swung it on its creaking hinges, and mounted the chipped
stone steps, washed ashen-gray by the drippings of rain.
There was a new face, heavy and smudged, under the ill-adjusted cap of
the maid-of-all-work who opened the door, and as he entered the narrow
hall the sickly smell of boiled cabbage saluted his nostrils, and
justified him to himself. But he was grimly embarrassed at having to
explain himself to the girl.
“Is your mistress in?” he asked.
“Yes, sir. Will you wait in the drorin’-room, sir? What name, sir?”
He felt mortified and a whit ashamed. The servant’s ignorance was an
unconscious rebuke that counterbalanced the boiled cabbage.
“Oh, tell her Matthew,” he said, flushing. “She’ll know.”
“Yes, sir.” And the girl’s cap, stuck on askew for the edification of
unexpected company, disappeared down the kitchen stairs.
He would have liked to brush majestically past her, but delicacy
prevented so abrupt an intrusion upon his wife in the recesses of
domesticity. His coming was already sufficient surprise. A few hours ago
he himself had not foreseen that a swamping wave of moral emotion would
sweep him homeward. He walked about the room, morbidly fascinated by the
flashy vases with the hand-painted shepherds, and wondering what Rosina
would say if he made away with them, as decency demanded. To his bitter
amusement he heard her voice from the passage remonstrating with
Billy—in a very audible whisper—for the servant’s indiscretion in
admitting to the drawing-room a stranger who might do havoc among her
cherished possessions.
“Goodness knows what he may not pocket,” she grumbled, uneasily, as she
approached the door.
“It’s all right, Rosina,” he called out, coming into the passage. “It’s
only me.”
“Gracious!” ejaculated Mrs. Matthew Strang, angrily, putting her hand to
her heart. “What a turn you gave me! So you’re the Mr. Matthews! I
really do wish you wouldn’t come sneaking in and prying and ferreting
and frightening a body out of her wits.”
She stood there—no more pleasing than the vases—the features, that had
once threatened to be pretty, sharpened shrewishly, though the figure
had grown plumper except where the breasts had fallen. She did not look
her youth. The face was weary, the pale blue eyes had lost their
softness. She had hastily donned a cheap black cashmere dress trimmed
with jet. The painter was glad the usual effusion of affection was
wanting. Notwithstanding the pitch of reaction to which he was wrought
up, all his being shrank from the desecrating embrace of the woman he
did not love. Nevertheless he was conscious of an undercurrent of
astonishment. Longer intervals than this last had parted them, yet she
had never failed to exhibit amorous emotion, even though it took the
shape of jealous reproach. This afternoon there was a suggestion of
resentment in her greeting—for the first time he felt unwelcome. He was
puzzled, albeit relieved. But the secret of her mood did not leak out
yet; and in the meantime there was Billy, sulkily awaiting his famous
brother’s recognition. The young man looked whiter and thinner than on
Matthew’s last visit to the house.
“How glad he’ll be to come for a holiday with me,” thought the painter,
with a pang of joyful repentance. “He oughtn’t to live in London at all.
We’ll all go down to some pretty little village where I can paint if
necessary, and we’ll stay till the winter.” The cripple churlishly took
the hand which his brother extended. His palm burned.
“All right, Billy?” questioned Matthew, cheerfully.
“It doesn’t matter how I am,” snapped the younger man. “It’s months
since you’ve been nigh us.”
Rosina turned upon Billy. “Don’t you take my part—I can speak for
myself. You can’t expect to see your brother in the summer when all the
fashionable folks come up to London to be painted.”
Billy murmured something inarticulate, and looked doggedly at Matthew,
leaning on his crutch.
“I suppose I must ask you to walk in and take a chair, since you are
such a stranger,” said Mrs. Matthew Strang.
Her husband meekly retreated into the drawing-room, and sat down with
his back to the vases that adorned the mantel-piece. But now a new
horror caught his eye—nothing less than a framed oleograph of
“Motherhood,” which had found its way into the house in the days when
its wide popularity still gave him a certain interest in it not far
removed from pride. On his soul, tensely strung by Eleanor’s hand for
the high notes of imagination, this cheap domesticity now jarred
abominably. The picture glared at him, it loomed suddenly symbolic. It
was representative of Rosina and her influence. This was her height of
poetry, the top measure of her soul—the mother carrying the little girl
who carried the doll. The work he wanted to do—nay, the work he had
always wanted to do—that was what Eleanor stood for—the rare, the
fine, the ethereal. Years of insincere work had blunted and torpified
him—Eleanor had recreated his soul, had given him freshness of
feeling, and something of the early ardor of aspiration.
This passed through his mind before Billy had stumped in and taken a
chair opposite him. Rosina remained standing at the open door in an
attitude expressive of household duties plucking at her skirts.
The painter shifted nervously on his chair. There was a dead silence. It
permitted the tootling of a tin whistle to become audible, and gave the
painter the happy thought of asking after the children.
“Clara’s at school,” replied Rosina, ungraciously. “She’s the second
girl in her class, and could be top if she wasn’t so sulky.”
“And Davie?”
“Can’t you hear for yourself? He’s only too quiet as a rule, but since
you brought him that whistle he’s been unbearable. It’s the only thing
that rouses him. It was stopped up for a fortnight, and he went about
like a little ghost till Billy put it right. If he only had a notion of
music! Billy tried to teach him to play on it, but he’s got no head for
anything. There! did you ever hear such a squeal?”
“Oh! he’s such a baby yet,” said her husband, deprecatingly.
Then the conversation languished again, and Davie’s lugubrious whistle
held the field.
Billy drew vague designs on the carpet with his crutch. Matthew fidgeted
and at last got up. He was meditating how to turn the conversation into
a tenderer channel, and broach the holiday in common. Rosina maintained
her inconclusive attitude in the doorway.
“You’ve still got those vases,” Matthew said. There being no other
thought in the way, this thought escaped.
“Yes,” she rejoined; “but I don’t wonder at your asking; any day may see
the end of them, servants are growing that careless. Even as it is, they
only dust their outsides. If I didn’t wash them myself with tea-leaves
they’d be choked up in a month.”
She walked to the mantel-piece, and ran her forefinger down one of
them. The finger grew black as with anger; her brow darkened.
“Why, Amy is worse than Jane!” she cried, harshly. “I won’t stand any
more of her nonsense. Do you know what she did last week?” Here she
walked back to the door and shut it tightly, lest her words should reach
the kitchen. “She washed the colored things in the same water as the
whites. And then, after the wash, I missed a pair of Billy’s red socks,
and I hunted high and low for them, and made a fuss. The next day Billy
found them mysteriously mixed up with his flannels. I am convinced she
stole them, not knowing she had a sharp eye to deal with. I know they’ll
worry me into the grave, these servants. This morning I particularly
said to her, ‘Have you dusted the drawing-room?’ and she said, bold as
brass, ‘Yes, mum.’ And this is what she calls dusting.” She held up her
gloomy forefinger. Then, lowering her voice as if it might penetrate
even through the closed door, she hissed menacingly at the
brothers—“I’ll give her a piece of my mind, that I will. If she don’t
know when she’s got a good place, the great hulking brute, she shall
pack herself off this very afternoon. A charwoman I give her every
Monday to help her; two shillings I have to pay and her beer money, to
say nothing of the work I do with my own hands. Often and often I make
the beds myself, for there isn’t a girl in creation you can trust to
shake out the bedding, they leave it all lumpy. And what is the reward
for all my kindness? I hate them all; I wish their necks were screwed.”
“I wish they were,” said Billy, impatiently. “I’m sick of hearing about
them.”
Rosina turned upon him again. “And who asks you to stay here? I’m sure
I’m sick of hearing you grumbling and whining about the house.”
Billy’s eyes blazed. A red spot burned in each white cheek.
“Won’t you give me a cup of tea, Rosina?” interposed Matthew, gently.
“I dare say Amy has let the fire go out,” she snapped. “Ring the bell,
you’re nearest it.”
Matthew rang the bell, and Amy appeared.
“Can you make some tea, Amy?” Rosina inquired, in sweet, seductive
accents.
“Yes, mum.”
“My husband has just come from abroad,” she explained, deferentially and
apologetically, “and we sha’n’t be wanting any more at tea-time. We’ll
have tea a little earlier, and you can keep the water hot for Miss
Clara.”
“Yes, mum.” Amy disappeared.
“Did you see the smudge on her cheek?” asked Rosina, despairingly. “She
can’t even dust her face.”
While Rosina was speaking, her husband fretted under her conversation;
the awkward silence that ensued when she ceased made him wish she would
go on talking.
“How is business?” she asked, finding him dumb.
He suppressed a grimace. “Pretty fair. You know I’ve always got as much
to do as I care for.”
“You know what I’ve been thinking?” Rosina replied, in a softened and
more confidential tone. “You ought to make enough to be able to retire
one day. Why should you always live away from me?—it’s as bad as
marrying a drummer. At No. 49 there’s one—a commercial traveller they
call them in England—and his wife tells me—it’s the house with the
striped linen blinds—she doesn’t see him half a dozen times a year, and
you’re getting almost as scarce, particularly this year.” She dropped
into a chair, finally dismissing her tentative attitude.
This seemed a favorable opening at last, so her husband plunged into it.
“You haven’t been out of town yet?” he began.
Rosina bounded wrathfully from her chair.
“There! I knew that that was what you came to spy out. Isn’t it enough
that you’ve left your brother here to be a spy on all my comings and
goings? It’s rather me that ought to be setting a spy on you, God knows,
what with your studios and your models and your fashionable,
false-hearted women. Well, there he is to witness, anyhow. We have had
our fortnight at the sea-side. Haven’t we, Billy?”
Billy nodded.
“There! There’s your own brother to witness. We went last month, and
all to save you money, though I know you think I’m making a stocking.
They charged us so much last year for lodgings at Margate in August that
I made up my mind I wouldn’t be swindled any more, and so we went in
July. And we did save—it’s no use my denying it, with that spy of yours
ever at my tail—but I’ve had to spend twice as much in London, with
everything gone up in price. They’re asking a shilling a peck for
peas—you can go round and ask Delton, the green-grocer, if you don’t
believe me—it’s enough to ruin anybody. And then there was the rise in
coals in the spring on account of the strike—something frightful, and
such a lot of slag. And then poor Clara has been so poorly; I sent for
the doctor once, and then he would keep on coming to see her every
day—there was no getting rid of him, and that brother of yours hadn’t
the spunk to tell him straight out not to come any more. Goodness knows
what his bill has run up to. They’re simply blood-squeezers, these
doctors. So there! If you think you’ve caught me out, coming down on me
like a detective in my sea-side week, you’re nicely mistaken, Mr.
Slyboots. What are you glaring at me for? Looking for the brown? I’d
have given myself a coat of paint if I had known you were coming, though
I don’t pretend to be so clever at it as you, or your fine ladies
either, for the matter of that.”
As Rosina stood over him, breathlessly pouring forth her impassioned
defence of the position she took up in financial matters, Matthew Strang
felt he understood why men sometimes kill women. He had long since given
up attempting to make her understand that her thoughts were not his
thoughts, that, despite his hard training in the value of money, details
of expenditure had ceased to occupy his consciousness the moment the
pinch of need was become a thing of the past. He was inured to her
financial apologetics, her tedious justifications of what he (in his
ignorance that she was indeed hoarding money secretly, and, like all
women, saving on her house-keeping) never called into question. He had
steeled himself to a simulation of attention when she elaborately
accounted for every farthing he had given her, and, habituated to money
perpetually passing from his hands, he had never even reflected that her
style of living could not possibly exhaust the sums with which he
supplemented her own income; to his heedless mind a growing family
vaguely explained everything. But to-day the prosaic minutiæ, though
painfully familiar, set up an inward fume that, intensified by her
misconstruction of his visit and by her digs at Billy, approached
insanity. He controlled himself with a great effort.
“It is you that are mistaken, Rosina,” he rejoined, clinching his palms.
“I came merely to propose that you should take your holiday now. I
thought we might go somewhere together.”
“Well, then, you’re a bit too late,” she replied, with no diminution of
ill-temper. “And what’s come over you that you want my company all of a
sudden? I thought you couldn’t spare me a week ever. I reckon the truth
is that work’s got slack.”
“Nonsense, I told you my hands were full,” he said, losing his
self-control.
“That’s no reason why you should waste money on me. I can’t go twice to
the sea-side.”
“I didn’t want you to go twice. I didn’t know you had been.”
“I explained to you why I went,” she retorted, hotly. “They wanted three
guineas last year for a sitting-room and two poky bedrooms, and there
was no key to the chiffonier, and I’m sure the landlady nibbled at our
provisions.”
“But I would have gladly let you have a little extra if you wanted to go
in August.”
“I’d much rather you spent the money on the children. Clara wears out
her shoes frightfully—the expense turns my hair gray.”
“Then you wouldn’t care to go with me?”
“No; it would be sinful extravagance to go twice. Give me the money if
you’re so anxious to get rid of it.”
“Do be reasonable, Rosina. I dare say the children will enjoy another
week of—”
tallow. But perhaps Sprat is only lazy, for he will not vacate his
uncomfortable snuggery under the stove, though he has to shift his
carcass incessantly to escape the jets of tobacco-juice constantly
squirted in his direction. It serves him right, thinks his young master,
for persisting in coming, though, for the matter of that, the creature,
having superintended the mud-hauling, has more right to be present than
Bully Preep. “Wonder why sister Harriet lets him dance with her so
of’n!” the panorama of his thought proceeds. “What kin she see in the
skunk, fur lan’ sakes? I told her ’bout the way he bully-ragged me when
he was boss o’ the school and I was a teeny shaver. But she don’t seem
to care a snap. Girls are queer critters, thet’s a fact. He used to put
a chip on my shoulder, an’ egg the fellers on to flick it off. But,
gosh! didn’t I hit him a lick when he pulled little Ruth’s hair? He’d a
black eye, thet’s a fact, though he giv’ me two, an’ mother an’ teacher
’ud a giv’ me one more apiece, but there warn’t no more left. I took it
out in picters though, I guess. My! didn’t ole McTavit’s face jest look
reedic’lous when he discovered Bully Preep in the fly-leaf of every
readin’-book. Thet’s jest how mother is glarin’ at Harriet this moment.
Pop! pop! pop! What a lot o’ ginger-beer an’ spruce-beer Deacon Hailey
is openin’! Pop! pop! pop! He don’t seem to notice them thar black
bottles o’ rum. He’s ’tarnal cute, is ole Hey. Seems like he’s talkin’
to mother. Wonder how she kin understand him. He allus talks as if his
mouth was full o’ words—but it’s on’y tobacco, I reckon. Pop! pop! pop!
Thet’s what I allus hear him say, windin’ up with a ‘Hey’—an’ it does
rile me some to refuse pumpkin-pie, not knowin’ he’s invitin’ me to
anythin’ but hay. I ’spect mother’s heerd him talk considerable, just es
I’ve heerd the jays an’ the woodpeckers; though she kin’t tell one from
t’other, I vow, through bein’ raised at Halifax. Thunderation! thet’s
never her dancin’ with ole Hey! My stars, what’ll her elders say? Well,
I wow! She is backslidin’. Ah, she recollecks! She pulls up, her face is
like a beet. Ole Hey is argufyin’, but she hangs back in her traces. I
reckon she kinder thinks she’s kicked over the dashboard this time. Ah,
he’s gone and taken Harriet for a pardner instead; he’ll like sister
better, I guess. By gum! He’s kickin’ up his heels like a colt when it
fust feels the crupper. I do declare Marm Hailey is lookin’ pesky ugly
’bout it. She’s a mighty handsome critter, anyways. Pity she kin’t wear
her hat with the black feather indoors—she does look jest spliffin’
when she drives her horses through the snow. Whoop! Keep it up! Sling it
out, ole Jupe! More rosin. Yankee doodle, keep it up, Yankee doodle
dandy! Go it, you cripples; I’ll hold your crutches! Why, there’s Billy
dancin’ with the crutch I made him!” he tells himself as his vision
merges in dream. “Pop! pop! pop! How his crutch thumps the floor! Poor
Billy! Fancy hevin’ to hop through life on thet thar crutch, like a
robin on one leg! Or shall I hev to make him a longer one when he’s
growed up? Mebbe he won’t grow up—mebbe he’ll allus be the identical
same size; and when he’s an ole man he’ll be the right size again, an’
the crutch’ll on’y be a sorter stick. I wish I hed a stick to make this
durned cow keep quiet—I kin’t milk her! So! so! Daisy! Ole Jupe’s music
ain’t for four-legged critters to dance to! My! what’s thet nonsense
’bout a cow? Why, I’m dreamin’. Whoa, there! Give her a tickler in the
ribs, Billy. Hullo! look out! here’s father come back from sea! Quick,
Billy, chuck your crutch in the hay-mow. Kin’t you stand straighter nor
that? Unkink your leg, or father’ll never take you out to be a pirate.
Fancy a pirate on a crutch! It was my fault, father, for fixin’ up thet
thar fandango, but mother’s lambasted me a’ready, an’ she wanted to
shoot herself. But it don’t matter to you, father—you’re allus away
a’most, an’ Billy’s crutch kin’t get into your eye like it does into