# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2017
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    Paul Zipperer, The Manufacture of Chocolate and other Cacao Preparations
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/55584/55584-h/55584-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

    The manufacturer can only protect himself against possible
prosecution for contravening or neglecting the articles of this act by
obtaining a written guarantee as to the quality of the tin-plate supplied.
The rooms where chocolate wares are stored should not be
too warm, and it is indispensable that they be kept dry, for heat
accelerates the volatilisation of their aroma and also the rancidity to
which cacao is liable, whilst moisture spoils the general appearance
of the chocolate and promotes the growth of mould. This
development of mould, which is first noticeable after long storage in
damp, dark warehouses, is principally due to the growth of a fungus
which Royer has named “Cacao-oïdium134
As the numerous wrappings (in tin-foil, paper, etc.) are at present
only effected by hand labour, they mean an appreciable increase
in the price of the goods. This is of less moment for the chocolate
tablets as the small napolitains and the like. Therefore attempts
have often been made to effect this wrapping by means of machines135,
and I have seen among others two models for napolitains, one on a
large and the other on a small scale, the property of a Hamburg chocolate
factory, and constructed by the firm of A. Savy & Co., Paris, which
same machines were said to effect the wrapping in tin-foil, folding and
additional packing in paper, as also the final closing, automatically
and well; but just as I requested to be shown the machines, I was
told that they were for the time being not in working order. Since
then I have heard no more of the matter, and regret that the firm of
Savy & Co., who have a branch in Dresden, have not been able to
answer several letters which I sent them inquiring for further
particulars. It must be that the machines have failed to answer their
purpose, for otherwise they would have been assured of a hearty
reception, no matter how dear they might have been. So for
the nonce our chocolate packing must depend on hand labour.
229
Quite a different arrangement obtains in respect to cocoa
powder, which was also originally packed up in paper bags by hand.
This operation is to-day despatched in machines, as also in the case
of other powder substances, like tooth-powder, dyes, patent foods,
soap powder, etc., and this even in the smallest of factories. It is true
that the machine built a decade ago by L. Wagner in Heilbronn and
at that time described by Zipperer in our second edition, which was
to wrap up a dozen packets simultaneously, seems to have failed,
for it is no longer constructed; yet its place has been taken by a
succession of other machines which have stood the tests of many
years. The principle has been altered, many packets at one time
not being filled, but always one only, and the advantage lies in the
fact that the machine fills more exactly and with a higher degree of
uniformity as regards the weights of the several packets.
Apart from the “Machines for packing en masse” Co., Ltd.
Berlin, who put out several automatic fillers, special mention may
here be made of the firm of Fritz Kilian, whose automatic filler and
packer “Ideal” (fig. 92) for quantities of from 25-2500 grammes, and
“Triumph” (fig. 93), for quantities of from 1-100 grammes, have both
long established their right to a place in every factory, their excellence
being predominant.
230
Chocolate is a mixture of cacao mass with sugar, to which
usually spices and even cacao butter are also added. The sugar
generally amounts to rather more than one half (60 percent) of the
total mixture. Spices such as cinnamon, vanilla, cloves, nutmeg,
mace, cardamoms, as well as cacao butter, or perfumes like peruvian
balsam, are only added in small quantity so as to improve or alter
the flavour as required. Recently, the ethereal oils of the spices have
been used for this purpose as well as artificially prepared aromatic
substances, such as vanillin, for example. Flour and starch136, although
the latter is seldom used, are permissible ingredients in cheaper
kinds of chocolate but only when the fact of the addition is plainly
stated. The kinds of flour usually employed are wheat and potato
flours, rice-starch and arrowroot, dextrin and, less frequently, oat,
barley, acorn, chestnut, or rye flour. In certain forms of dietetic
chocolate, sugar being injurious to invalids, it is replaced by saccharin;
another material, such as a leguminous flour from beans, peas
or lentils, must be employed in its place.137 In some kinds of fancy
chocolate, harmless colours, tincture of benzoin etc. are used.
231
Both cane and beetroot sugar are employed in the manufacture
of chocolate. As this naturally possesses a brownish colour, brownish
white as well as white sugar is used for mixing with the cacao mass.
The kinds of sugar used are:
1. Sugar dust, a white crystallisable and very fine powder.
2. Crystal or granulated sugar, consisting of loose, plain
crystals, and suitable for almost all purposes in the manufacture.
3. Sugar flour I, II, and III which is a difficultly crystallisable
sugar containing an amount of molasses increasing with the
number, and it is of a more or less brown colour.
232
The chocolate manufacturer nevertheless requires the sugar to
answer to certain characters. It must dissolve in half its weight of
warm water forming a sweet syrup. The syrup must have no action
on either red or brown litmus paper i. e. have neither acid nor alkaline
reaction, and on no account coagulate boiling milk.
The sugar is usually added to the cacao mass in the form of
a very fine powder and sometimes in a coarser condition, though that
is not to be recommended. By using finely powdered sugar, the rolling
of the cacao mass is considerably facilitated and the manufacture
is accelerated. The sugar must be perfectly dry, as damp sugar
yields a dull chocolate which readily crumbles.
For grinding the sugar, the so called edge-runner mill as shown
in figure 94 was formerly employed.
It is like the melangeur constructed of a firmly fixed bed-stone
and two cylindrical runners.
The pulverised material issuing from such an apparatus must
then be passed through one of the various kinds of sifting
machines, where the finer parts fall through the meshes of a silken
sieve, whilst the rougher are discharged at the end of the arrangement:
for small factories such machines as the drum sifters illustrated
in fig. 95, and for the larger those centrifugal sifters which have
already been fully described.
The constructions for grinding have of late been considerably233
perfected. The most practical arrangements for pulverising all kinds
of granulated sugar and so-called lump sugar, are those combined
grinding and sifting installations such as are executed by the firm of
J. M. Lehmann in Dresden. The grinding is here effected by disintegrators
(revolving arms, etc.) similar to those used in the pulverising
of cocoa powder as described on page 212. The output of these disintegrators138
is extraordinarily large, and the harder and drier the ground
sugar is, the finer the pulverised material resulting. We annex a
diagram of the machine in fig. 96.
234
The granulated or lump sugar is filled into the hopper and
thence lead along a conveyor to be ground in another part of the
machine, and can be controlled as regards quantity. The blades,
which pass through about 3000 revolutions a minute, seize the sugar
and swing it against the ribbed walls of the mantle, after which it
falls in smaller fragments on a grater fitted in the under part of the
apparatus. The sugar which passes through the grating is now conducted
by conveyor and elevator to the sifting arrangement, whilst
the rougher material is again whirled round by the blades. This
sifting arrangement consists of a cylindrical sieve, on the interior of
which there occur revolving arms which provide for the despatch of
material through the various sieves. The rougher stuff which remains
is removed by hand or some other mechanical means and transported
to the hopper once more. A chamber placed above the machine and
connected with the grinding apparatus by means of pipes provides
for the protection of the machine against dust.
Such installations are constructed in various sizes and fashions,
and possess immense outputs (up to even 5000 kilogrammes daily).
That they must be built in special shops is clear from the fact that
so large a quantity of dusty sugar sacks need transporting after the
processes are completed. It is further to be noted that the fineness of
the sugar corresponds to the mesh-work of the sieves, which as we
have previously stated, can be chosen with any size of hole desired,
yet this naturally influences the machine, and recently a very high
standard of fineness has been generally dropped, and rougher siftings
are now made, as when the sugar is too fine.—e. g. in the case of the
cheaper qualities—it absorbs too much of the fatty contents, and so
necessitates the addition of cacao butter, whilst on the other hand,
when the chocolate is of a finer quality, the sugar is sufficiently
reduced in the trituration to which the mixed material is subjected.
Apart from the sugar, which is such an important factor in
the chocolate manufacture, mention must also be made of another
sweetening material, formerly frequently used as a substitute for
sugar, but now only to be obtained at the apothecary’s on exhibition
of a medical order, in consequence of certain legal restrictions which
have recently come in force. It is called Fahlberg saccharin, and
again zuckerin, sykorin, crystallose, “Süßstoss Höchst” and sykose.
Saccharin is not like sugar a carbohydrate naturally produced235
by plants, but a derivative of the aromatic compounds which the
chemist has artificially constructed from the products of the distillation
of coal.
Saccharin is benzoyl-sulphonimide, and it has the chemical
formula
It is a white, crystalline powder, so exceedingly sweet
that its taste can be perceived in a dilution of 1 in 70000. It
is only slightly soluble in cold water (1: 400) but more easily so in
hot water (1: 28). The material known as easily soluble saccharin
is its sodium salt. It contains 90 percent of saccharin and is the most
easily digested compound of saccharin.
For technical, domestic and medicinal purposes the soluble
saccharin which is only from 300-450 times as sweet as sugar is
employed. Besides being unfermentable saccharin has very slight
antiseptic properties; according to L. Nencki139 the digestibility of
albumin is less affected by it, in the proportion usually added to
articles of food, than by Rhine wine, or by a sugar solution of equal
sweetness. Saccharin is entirely unaltered in the human organism,
hence it forms a welcome sweetening material for invalids suffering
from diabetes, corpulence or diseases of the stomach to whom
ordinary sugar is injurious. The substances known as dulcin and
glucin are analogous to saccharin in sweetening property, the first
being phenetol-carbamid and the latter a monosulphonate of amido-triazine.
The latest substance of this class is termed “sucramin” and
consists of the ammonium salt of saccharin. It is readily soluble
in water, less so in alcohol and is 700 times sweeter than sugar. It
can be obtained either in the pure form or mixed (20 percent) with
sugar.
In chocolate making, saccharin is at present of little importance,
owing to the relatively small volume required as compared with
sugar. Recently it has again been recommended to the extent of
0·76 percent as a sweetening material for cocoa powder. It would
certainly be of value in cocoa powders to be consumed by invalids
and persons not able to take sugar, although it will never come into
general use. The detection of saccharin has acquired increased236
importance in Germany since the passing of the acts of October
1st 1898 and July 7th 1902, regulating the trade in artificial sweetening
materials. According to Zipperer’s experiments, it may be detected in
the following manner: A mixture of 5 grammes of the finely powdered
substance with 100 ccm of water is allowed to stand for 2 hours,
occasionally stirred and afterwards filtered. The filtrate is acidulated
with three drops of hydrochloric acid and evaporated to 20 ccm, then
shaken140 with 50 ccm of ether in a separator and left standing for a
day to separate into two layers. The ether solution is separated and
evaporated to dryness in a beaker, the residue being mixed with
0·1 gramme of resorcin and 4-5 drops of concentrated sulphuric
acid141 (Börnsteins test). The mixture is then heated over a small
Bunsen flame and the melted material saturated with normal sodium
hydrate. The appearance of a strong fluorescence indicates the presence
of saccharin. Saccharin can also be easily recognised by the
sweet taste of the ether residue.
The chief kinds of starch used in chocolate making are rice
starch, arrowroot, potato starch and wheat starch, occasionally also
small quantities of dextrine.
Potato starch is a white or faintly yellowish powder in which
single, glistening granules can be seen by the naked eye. Under
the microscope the granules appear mostly single with evident
striae, usually with pointed ends containing the nucleus; they are also
eccentric in structure. This starch rarely contains fragments of tissue.
It is prepared by first treating finely divided pared potatoes with
1 percent dilute sulphuric acid, then washing, drying and grinding
the starch.
Wheat starch can be obtained either from crushed wheat or
from wheaten flour by treatment with water after the nitrogenous
constituent, gluten, has been separated by kneading. It amounts to
about 60-70 percent of the grain. Under the microscope the granules
appear to differ considerably in size. They are distinguished from
potato starch by the nearly central hilum, surrounded by faintly237
marked concentric striae, and again by the granules being more
frequently adherent. Wheat flour rather than the starch is generally
used in chocolate making.
When starch is heated to between 200° and 210° C. it is converted
chiefly into dextrin or starch gum with a little sugar. Dextrin
is a white to yellowish and tasteless powder with a peculiar smell;
it differs from starch in being readily soluble in water. It gives a
reddish colour with an aqueous solution of iodine. Fehling’s solution
is unaffected by dextrin in the cold, but on long continued heating it is
reduced to red cuprous oxide.
Rice starch is obtained from inferior kinds of rice and from
rice waste by treatment with water. It appears under the microscope
as small granules or oval bodies of various sizes. According to their
position the granules always seem to be polygons,142 formed by
coalescence. It is thus easily distinguished from the previously
mentioned starches.
Several kinds of starch, obtained from the tubers of various
species of plants are commercially known under this name.
1. West Indian arrowroot, from Maranta arundinacea, is a fine
and almost white powder. Under the microscope it always appears
to consist of pear or spindle-shaped granules with eccentric hilum.
2. East Indian arrowroot is obtained from various species of
ginger plants. It is a fine white powder and is seen under the microscope
as single granules with well marked eccentric hilum and closely
stratified at the spindle-shaped ends. It much resembles Guiana
arrowroot, which is obtained from varieties of Yam.
3. Queensland arrowroots from species of Cycas and Canna,
appear as flat, coarse and mostly single granules. They can be
easily distinguished from other kinds of starch by the large size of
the granules.
4. Brazil arrowroot, from the Manihot plants which belong to
the order of Euphorbiaceae. Under the microscope the granules
appear compound, the parts being of a drum or sugar loaf shape with
many concentric striae.
238
Chestnut or maron meal also comes under consideration in
the chocolate industry. The appearance of the starch granules is
most characteristic. They are partly single and partly composed
of two individual granules. The single granules, according to J. F.
Hanausek143, appear in such a variety of forms as to defy a summarised
description. Frequently they occur oval, spindle, club, or flat kidney
shaped, resembling those of the leguminous family; but especially to
be noticed is the triangular contour of some granules, as well as
some with projecting points. The central nucleus and its cavity are
generally distinct, but the stratification is very slight or quite
unrecognisable.
Of the leguminous meals that of beans is chiefly used as an
adjunct in cocoa powders and chocolate, sweetened with saccharin,
on account of its relatively large proportion of albuminous substance
and small amount of starch. The meal is generally obtained from
the seed of the common white bean. (Phaseolus vulgaris.) The
starch granules under the microscope appear oval or long kidney
shaped, with distinct nucleus cavities and furrows, as well as a
distinctly marked stratification. Their length averages from 0·033 to
0·05 mm. The meal has a disagreeable leguminous taste when cooked,
but that disappears when the meal is slightly roasted.
Salep which is now very seldom used as an admixture to
chocolate (Rakahout of the Arabs)144 is an amylaceous powder prepared
from the tubers of various kinds of orchids. Under the
microscope salep appears as fairly large translucent masses which
consist of an agglomeration of very delicate walled cells giving the
starch reaction with iodine.
We cannot too strongly recommend the manufacturer to pulverise
the spices, e. g. cinnamon, cloves and the like, himself, for such239
as are bought ready pulverised have frequently been adulterated with
admixtures of wood, flour or bark. This is the more essential as
sometimes pulverised cinnamon is distilled with steam to obtain
an extract of its ethyl oil, and then the residue, which is of considerably
inferior value as regards aroma, sold as genuine cinnamon
powder. Such adulteration can neither be demonstrated under the
microscope nor chemically, so that it is impossible to protect oneself
against them.
The edge runner mill and sieving apparatus described in connection
with the pulverising of sugar also adapt themselves to reducing
spices, although generally other machines are used for this purpose,
either the well-known ball mills145 consisting of a hollow spherical ball
revolving round its axle, inside which the spices are shaken, crushed
and completely pulverised by the action of a number of heavy metal240
balls, or in other cases pulverising mills and stamping arrangements
proper.
The following stamp arrangement, shown in fig. 97, is very practical in
the pulverisation of all manner of spices, and is driven by a force of 1·5 H.P.
The strong frame, which is walled in with iron, is dust-proof. Whilst the stamper
is being raised, the pots are revolved round their axles, and so the substances
to be pulverised are mixed together. Other machines much used in pulverising
are seen in fig. 94. Another smaller pulverising mill is pictured in fig. 98. This
machine is adapted for a middle sized production. The grinding arrangement in
which the pulverising takes place is conically built and is made completely of
granite; the regulation is effected by means of a working beam, the batting arm
of which is fitted on to the upper part of the apparatus. A sieving of the
material to be pulverised does not generally take place in this machine. For
small production for example for confectioners who manufacture chocolate also
incidentally, one can also use the machines pictured in the figs. 95 & 99, the
method of working of which may be at once understood. The different degrees
of fineness of the material to be pulverised are reached by passing the powder
through drum sieves of different widths of mesh and all the sieves are set in
motion at the same time by the machines.
241
Only the most important features of the spice so valuable in
chocolate making will be noticed, since the characteristic aroma of
the true vanilla has been to a large extent supplanted in practice by
artificially prepared vanillin.
Vanilla is the fruit capsule of an orchid, Vanilla planifolia,
which is generally cultivated with the cacao tree, as the same
climate and soil suit them equally. According to Möller, the shoots
of the vanilla are fastened to the cacao tree, on the bark of which they
soon strike root. The aerial roots and tendrils then put forth fleshy
leaves, in the axils of which arise large odourless and dull coloured
flowers which yield after a lapse of two years long thin capsules.
The capsules are filled with a transparent balsam, in which the black
seeds are imbedded. It is in the balsam that the vanillin, which gives
vanilla its unequalled aroma, is produced. The fresh gathered vanilla
fruit (see the investigations of W. Busse146 contains no free vanillin
or merely an infinitesimal quantity.
It is rather developed by subsequent treatment in which heat
appears to be necessary. Vanillin, like cocoa-red and theobromine,242
is formed by the splitting up of a glucoside by fermentative action.
In some kinds of vanilla, piperonal, an aromatic body, which occurs
in larger quantities in Heliotropium europaeum and
peruvianum, has also been observed.
The commercial kinds of vanilla come from Mexico, Tahiti,
Réunion, Mauritius, Mayotte, Seychelles, Ceylon and Java, which in
1891 produced respectively:
The best commercial kinds of vanilla come from Mexico, Bourbon,
and Mauritius, and command a higher price than the other kinds.
The quantity is gauged by the length (10-24 cm), and plumpness of
the pods. Fine quality is fatty and dark coloured, inferior quality is
dry and reddish. The outside of the pods in the Bourbon vanilla, contains
highly esteemed vanillin crystals, which are wanting in the
Mexican variety. Vanilla flowers in October and November, is gathered
in the following months of May, June, and July, and is prepared
in October and November. At the beginning of November the
first instalment of the new harvest arrives in Marseilles, which is
the chief commercial place for vanilla. The most important operation,
in preparing vanilla is to attain the proper degree of dryness. This
is arrived at nowadays by the use of calcium chloride. The pods are
first placed in a metallic box lined with wool which is placed in warm
water so as to superficially dry them; they are then transferred to
a suitable constructed drying closet containing calcium chloride and
allowed to remain there for 20-30 days. 100 pounds of vanilla are
reckoned to require 40 pounds of calcium chloride. The great advantage
of this process is that the fruit, so dried, better retains its
aroma.147 Insufficiently dried vanilla does not keep, but soon becomes
mouldy, whilst overheated vanilla keeps well, but is brittle, breaks
easily and consequently has little commercial value. Vanilla covered
with mould (Aspergillus repens and Mucor circinelloides)
is sought to be improved in various ways and is sold
as of inferior quality.148 It is worth observing that those persons who243
in the course of business handle vanilla show characteristic symptoms
of poisoning. It affects the eyes and nervous system and produces
eruptions on the skin. The complaint, however, is not of a dangerous
nature, for the workmen quickly become accustomed to vanilla so
that, after recovering from the first attack, they can resume work
without risk to health.149
On account of its high price, vanilla is much subjected to adulteration;
either by an admixture of the more cumarin-smelling vanillin
(Pompona or La Guayra Vanilla [Vanilla Pompona Schieder]) or
other less valuable vanilla fruit; sometimes pods that have been deprived
of vanillin by extraction with alcohol are used for that purpose;
their colour and appearance being restored by immersion in
tincture of benzoin and coating with crystals of benzoic acid, powdered
glass etc. In doubtful cases of adulteration the vanillin must be
quantitatively determined.
That can be done by W. Busse’s method150, in which the vanilla
is extracted with ether in a Soxhlet’s apparatus. The extract is shaken
with a solution of sodium bisulphite, the vanillin then set free with
sulphuric acid and the disengaged sulphurous acid removed by a
stream of carbon dioxide. The vanillin is then shaken out with ether
and on evaporating off the ether, vanillin is left in a pure condition.
Busse found by this method in East African vanilla 2·10 percent of
vanillin, in the Ceylon 1·48 percent, and in the Tahiti variety from
1·55 to 2·02 percent. In America the so-called vanilla extract,
instead of vanilla, is used and it lends itself to adulteration much
more easily than natural vanilla. William Hesse has given methods
and results obtained in the investigation of the extract.151
5. Vanillin.
Vanilla in the chocolate industry has recently been almost
entirely superseded by the use of artificially prepared vanillin, which
serves as a complete substitute for the essential and valuable constituent
of vanilla. In comparing vanillin with vanilla, regard must be
had to the amount of vanillin in the latter, which may vary to the
extent of 50 percent according to whether the vanilla was damp,
dry, fresh or stored. The finest kinds of vanilla seldom contain more244
than 2 percent of vanillin and in many kinds it varies between 0·5 and
2·5 percent. It may also happen that vanilla with 0·5 to 1·0 percent
may be equally as fine in appearance as one of high percentage,
hence the aroma value must be taken into consideration. In addition
to possessing a uniform and permanent perfume vanillin is cheaper
in price.
Vanillin occurs naturally not only in vanilla but also in very
small amount in certain kinds of raw sugar, in potato skins and in
Siam benzoin; it can be produced artificially from coniferin which is
obtained from pine wood, or by the oxidation of eugenol, a substance
contained in oil of cloves, from both of which Tiemann and W. Haarmann152
first prepared it in 1872. In the course of the last ten years a
number of processes have been discovered whereby vanillin can be
artificially produced. The reader who is interested in this subject will
find it fully discussed in a paper by J. Altschul in No. 51 of the Pharmazeutische
Centralhalle 1895.
The competition which arose through the processes of Haarmann
and Reimer of Holzminden and G. de Laire of Paris, whose
products owing to patent rights had controlled the market from the
commencement, produced a steady decrease in the price of vanillin.
The following table drawn up by J. Rouché153 shows the revolution
in price which has occurred in this article and how, in the course
of time, a small business with large profits has been transformed into
a large business with small profits.
The variation in the price of vanillin:

Marks per Kilo.
The chemical formula of vanillin is C6H3(OCH3) (OH)CHO;
it melts between 82-83 ° C. and sublimes at 120 ° C. The colourless
four-sided crystals have a strong vanilla odour and taste, are difficultly
soluble in cold water, easily in hot water and very readily
soluble in alcohol.
Vanillin is much adulterated. Cumarin, the aromatic principle
of the melitot (meliotus officinalis) and of tonquin beans etc.,245
can be prepared cheaply and it is fraudulently used in large or small
quantity to imitate the vanillin aroma. A sample of vanillin bought
in Switzerland was found by Hefelmann154 to contain 26 percent
of antifebrin. The American “vanilla crystals” consist of a mixture
of vanillin and antifebrin, or vanillin, cumarin and benzoic acid; latterly
that article is stated to consist only of cumarin, antifebrin and sugar.
The melting point of genuine vanillin is a characteristic indication.
Admixtures of vanillic acid and antifebrin cause depression
of the melting point (4-8 ° C. according to the amount and character
of the two substances [Welmans])155. For the quantitative determination
of vanillin in mixtures, Welmans takes advantage of its behaviour
towards caustic alkalis, with which, like phenol, it forms compounds
that are easily soluble in water, but sparingly so in alcohol.
The process is as follows: 1 gramme of the substance is placed in a
cylinder of 200 ccm capacity with 25 ccm of alcohol, 25 ccm of
approximately semi-normal alcoholic potash and 2 or 3 drops of
phenolphthalein solution and agitated until completely dissolved. The
excess of alkali is then titrated with semi-normal hydrochloric acid,
and, at the same time, the strength of the alcoholic potash after
adding 25 ccm of alcohol is ascertained. The number of cubic centimetres
consumed is multiplied by 0·076, the semifactor for vanillin. In
the case of vanilla sugar, 10 grammes are treated with 50 ccm of
water to dissolve the sugar, then the alcoholic potash is added and
the operation carried out as before described.
1 gramme of vanillin requires 6: 58 ccm of normal potash
(= 0·36842 g KOH).
If cumarin is suspected to have been added to the vanillin it
can be detected and separated, according to Zipperer’s experiments,
by the method of W. H. Hess and A. B. Prescott.156
The substance is dissolved in ether and the solution shaken up
with a weak solution of ammonia. The vanillin will be found in the
aqueous layer in the form of an ammonium compound, whilst the
cumarin will be dissolved by the ether. The vanillin can be identified
by the sandal-wood oil reaction as described by Bonnema,157 and the
cumarin can be determined by direct weighing.
246
The financial advantage in using vanillin in place of vanilla is
apparent. The average price of vanilla is now 45 to 50 shillings per
kilo. But as 25 grammes of vanillin are equal in perfume to 1 kilo of
vanilla and, at the rate of 35 shillings per kilo, that quantity costs
only 10½ vanilla is nearly sixty times dearer than vanillin. The
consumption of vanillin has increased to an enormous extent, and in
the United States Henning has estimated the consumption during
1897-1898 at over 100000 ounces. The same author points out the
remarkable fact that this enormous consumption of vanillin has
scarcely any effect on the demand for vanilla pods, the market value
of which is not only maintained but has a tendency to increase.
In order to have it in a finely divided condition, as required
for the factory, it is recommended to rub the vanillin down with
sugar, in the proportion of 100 grammes of vanillin to 2 kilos of
sugar, in the following manner; 100 grammes of vanillin are
dissolved in 500 grammes of hot alcohol and this solution
added to 2 kilos of finely powdered sugar; then the whole is
placed in a rotatory comfit boiler and dried by a blast of warm air
at 40 ° C. Whilst vanilla must be very carefully packed that it may
not become mildewed and deteriorate, vanillin on the other hand keeps
very well in such mixtures so long as they are kept from damp, which
might cause the sugar to ferment and thus gradually decompose the
vanillin.
There are three commercial kinds of cinnamon in Europe.
1. Ceylon cinnamon, which represents the finest kind, is the
bark of Cinnamomum ceylanicum, a native of the island
of Ceylon. The bark is very light and brittle, seldom more than
0·5 mm thick, externally yellowish brown with long stripes, whilst
it is somewhat darker on the inside. Its fracture is short and fibrous,
and a traverse section shows externally a sharply defined light colour
with a darker inside zone.
2. Cassia or Chinese cinnamon is from Cinnamomum
Cassia, a tree which grows wild in the forests of Southern China.
The bark is thicker than that previously described, often 2 mm thick.
It is in single tubes, harder and thicker than the Ceylon kind, with
frequently adherent fragmentary tissues of the corky layer. The
colour is a greyish brown, the fracture even, with a light zone
in the section.
247
3. Malabar or wood cinnamon consists of the less valuable
kinds and is derived from different varieties of cinnamon trees which
have been planted in the Sunda and Phillipine islands. In appearance
it resembles the Chinese more than the Ceylon cinnamon.
The aromatic taste of cinnamon is due to the ethereal cinnamon
oil which, in Ceylon cinnamon, amounts to 1 percent; the ash
should not exceed 4·5 percent. An ethereal oil is also present (about
1·8 percent) in the leaves of the Ceylon cinnamon tree, but it is
quite different from the bark oil, resembling in its properties more the
oils of cloves and pimento. On account of its penetrating odour and
pungent taste its employment in chocolate making is little to be recommended.
It cannot be too much insisted on that with spices like cinnamon,
cloves, etc. the manufacturer should grind them himself and not
purchase them in fine powder, as the latter is frequently adulterated
with admixtures of wood, meal bark, etc. This is more to be recommended
as ground cinnamon has frequently been deprived of the
ethereal oil by distillation with steam and the bark then flavoured
with a small amount of cinnamon oil and sold as powdered cinnamon.
Such an adulteration can be detected neither chemically nor
microscopically.
Cloves are the incompletely developed flowers of the clove
tree, Caryophyllusaromaticus of the Myrtaceae. The most
important commercial kinds are the Zanzibar, Amboyna, and Penang
cloves. The aromatic principle of cloves is an ethereal oil which they
contain to the extent of 18 percent. The adulteration of cloves is
much the same as in the case of cinnamon. Genuine cloves should
not give more than 6 percent of ash.
Nutmeg is the seed kernel of the fruit of Myristica
moschata known as the nutmeg tree, which is indigenous to
Malacca. In the thick pericarp of the fruit, resembling the apricot, is
found the brown seed surrounded by a deep red reticular mantle.
This last is the seed mantle or arillus and when separated from the
kernel is known commercially as mace.
The furrows on the surface of the nutty seeds are filled with
a white mass which consists of lime, in which the nuts have been laid
after drying in order to protect them from the attack of insects. The248
aromatic constituent of nutmeg and of mace is also an ethereal oil.
The seeds contain 8-15 percent of ethereal oil with 25 percent of
a fatty oil; mace contains 4-15 percent of ethereal oil and 18 percent
of fatty oil. As both spices occur in commerce in whole pieces, adulteration
is not to be feared.
Of these there are two kinds on the market:

1. The small or Malabar cardamoms.
2. The long or Ceylon cardamoms.

Both are the fruit, although very different in form, of a species
of the ginger plants which is indigenous to Ceylon and Malabar.
The Malabar cardamom is three cornered oblong and about
1 cm in size. In the fine brown pericarps are enclosed, adhering
together, 6-8 angular seeds, 3 mm in size, having a pungent aromatic
taste.
The Ceylon cardamom is four times larger than the Malabar
kind. The grey brown pericarp encloses about 20 dark greyish brown
seeds about 6 mm large. The aroma of the Ceylon cardamom is due
to an ethereal oil which it contains in quantities sometimes reaching
6 percent. Madras and Malabar cardamoms contain 4-8 percent
of ethereal oil. As the Ceylon cardamoms are cheaper than the
Malabar kind a confusion of the two seeds might possibly be to the
disadvantage of the buyer, but the above description of their relative
size would suffice to distinguish them.
Exact accounts of the characteristic properties, the chemical
and microscopical investigation as well as of the impurities and adulterations
of the materials previously mentioned as being used in cacao
preparations are to be found in volume II of the “Vereinbarungen zur
einheitlichen Untersuchung und Beurteilung von Nahrungs-und Genußmittel
sowie Gebrauchsgegenständen für das Deutsche Reich”158
to which those who desire further to investigate this subject are
referred.
As previously remarked in the case of vanillin, it is becoming
more and more the custom to substitute perfume substances for
powdered spices. This practice is quite justified since the entire per249fume
of a spice is made use of and the worthless woody and indigestible
fibre is thus excluded from the finished preparation.
The following are the ether oils used in practice:
The amount of ether oil that should be used in place of the
corresponding spice is a matter of taste. The maximum percentage
of the oil in the respective spice might serve as a standard, as for
example in the case of cinnamon oil, which is contained in the bark
to the extent of 1 percent, about the hundredth part of the oil would
be required to correspond with the prescribed weight of the bark.
But as the yield of oil from one and the same kind of spice varies to a
considerable extent according to season and locality, the percentage
value can only be used as a general guide, and the final decision must
be always regulated by the taste.
The ethereal oils can be incorporated in the cacao preparations
(mass, powder etc.) either in a spirit solution or ground down with
sugar. The latter method is naturally only used when sugar is to be
added to cacao preparations. To prepare the alcoholic solution
10 parts of the ethereal oil are dissolved in 90 parts of strong alcohol.
The mixture of oil with sugar can be made by triturating 2·5 parts of
the ethereal oil with 100 parts of sugar in a porcelain mortar and
grinding down with the pestle until the sugar and oil are intimately
mixed. Of the alcoholic solution it is necessary to take 10 parts, and
of the oil-sugar 40 parts to one part of ethereal oil.
Peru balsam is at present very much used as a perfume in
chocolate making. It is obtained from the Papilionaceous
Myroxylon Pereira which is indigenous to the western part
of Central America. It is a thick, brownish black, liquid balsam which
in thin layers appears transparent and has a peculiar smell and
burning taste; it is almost completely soluble in alcohol, chloroform,
and acetic ether. The aromatic substance of this balsam is cinnameïn,
which consists essentially of the esters of benzoic and cinnamic
acids and benzyl alcohol together with an alcoholic body “Peruviol”,
which has the smell of honey. In addition to cinnameïn (71-77 per
cent) the balsam also contains a resin ester (13-17 percent). According
to K. Dieterich, Peru balsam is the better for containing more250
cinnameïn and less resin ester. Peru balsam is adulterated with
fatty oils, copaiva, gurjun-balsam, storax, colophony, turpentine, and
tolu balsam. In regard to the chemical investigation of this balsam
the work of K. Dieterich159 may be consulted.
The Sumatra benzoin is the most important of the commercial
kinds for chocolate making. It is obtained from one of the Styracae,
Styrax benzoin, and is a reddish grey mass in which separate tiers
of resin are embedded. Benzoic acid and vanillin are the most important
constituents. It is adulterated with Palembang benzoin, colophony,
dammer, storax, and turpentine. Respecting the chemical investigation
of commercial benzoin the above-mentioned work of K.
Dieterich may also be referred to.
Benzoin is almost exclusively used for the preparation of chocolate
varnish and sweets laquer, which are prepared by dissolving
from 25 to 45 grammes of the laquer body in 100 grammes of strong
spirit. The laquer body may contain varying quantities of benzoin and
bleached shellac. The decorations of chocolate are painted with this
laquer in order to give them a glistening appearance and greater
durability.
The following colouring materials are permitted by the German
law of the 14th May 1879 to be used for sugar goods and consequently
also for chocolate and cacao preparations.
In the meantime a number of comparatively harmless aniline
colours have been permitted in Austria for colouring sugar goods and
liqueurs, and eventually also for cacao preparations.160 As in the
author’s opinion there is no ground for objecting to their use in other251
countries, a list of them is given under their commercial and scientific
designations.
The above, as well as the following colours: (blue) amaranth,
brilliant blue and indigosulfone, (red) erythrosin, also acid yellow S,
orange L and light green S F, have in the meantime been accepted252
by the American Foods Act as perfectly harmless for colouring any
and all articles of food.161
For some time past E. Merck of Darmstadt has supplied a
perfectly harmless green colouring material under the name of
chlorophyll, in alcoholic and in water solutions, as well as technical
chlorophyll, for colouring oils and fats, which is the unaltered leaf
green and is the best green colouring agent for articles of food and
therefore for cacao preparations.
The chlorophyll which is soluble in fat has also been recommended
like some of the aniline colours which are soluble in fat, as
for example: Indulin 6 B (blue), Sudan yellow G, Sudan III (red), and
Gallocyanin (violet) for colouring cacao butter; but in regard at least
to the aniline colours mentioned, no authoritative sanction for their
use has yet been given.
253
The following observations will serve as an introduction to the
chemical and microscopical examination of cacao preparations calculated
to be of special value to the food chemist, corresponding as
they do to the state of scientific progress at the present day and
special attention being paid to the critical treatment of the methods
of analysis etc. adopted.
This is a point of great importance, inasmuch as it directly
influences the result of the analysis of cacao goods. This is especially
the case when dealing with cocoa powders, as the test is liable
to vary considerably according to the amount of moisture contained
in the preparation and the degree of fineness of the powder. In the
case of cocoa powders, the sample should be taken repeatedly from
a large supply, and from all parts of the material to ensure getting
an average sample. The samples taken should be of uniform volume
and should, before proceeding to apply the test, be closely mixed
together, being, if possible, first passed through a fine sieve. The
material ready for the following experiments should then be placed in
tin, or better still, glass receptacles with well-fitting corks or stoppers.
Paper wrappings or cardboard-boxes are not to be recommended,
as the powder is apt to become drier or moister according to the
state of the atmosphere to which the packets are exposed.
The most suitable quantity for experimental purposes is, in
the case of both chocolate and cocoa powder, as well as butter and254
covering material, 100 kilogrammes. When determining the amount of
foreign fat in cacao preparations, however, as well as estimating the
ash content of powder, up to 250 kilogrammes of sample material
can be used. In Germany the regulations of the Commercial Agencies
of the government public food chemists obtain when sampling and
analysing cacao preparations.162
The analyses of all cacao preparations from a chemical point
of view are conducted, almost without exception, with the object of
determining the values for moisture—mineral matter
(estimation of the amount of the carbonic acid alkalis and the silicic
acid)—fat (estimation of foreign fat)—theobromine and
coffeine—sugar—starch (foreign starches)—albuminous
matter and raw fibre. The last regulation may also be
extended to the estimation of the quantity of shell present.
1. Estimation of moisture. 5 grammes of material
(i. e. fine-crushed chocolate mass) are left to dry (if possible in a
double-walled glycerine drying chamber) for about 6 hours at a temperature
of 105 Deg. C., the loss of weight of the material being
estimated as moisture. The drying should not be continued longer
than 6 hours, as fatty material is liable after the expiration of this time
to recover some of its weight, owing to the oxygen of the air entering
into chemical combination with the fat which rises to the surface or
detaches itself from the material. When analysing chocolate, great
care should be taken to prevent the mass from melting down and
running together at one point. If this occurs, the following treatment
must be adopted: A shallow watch-glass is filled with about 10 grammes
of sand, well washed and dried, a very fine sand such as so-called
sea-sand being preferable to others, the glass then transferred to the
drying closet, cooled, and finally 5 grammes of the fine-crushed chocolate
added. The mixture is then deposited for a period of 6 hours
in the drying chamber, at a temperature of 105 Deg. as indicated
above and the weight of the sand deducted when finally calculating
the value of the moisture.
If as low a quantity as 5 percent of gelatine has been added
to the chocolate, as much as 10 percent of water can be added
without in any way affecting the appearance of the material, although
such a proceeding is exceedingly detrimental to the taste and dura255bility
of the preparation. Such chocolates usually have a dull surface
and, if stored in a warm place, are apt to break up and become paler
in colour; this result can, however, be prevented by an extra addition
of fat. Too high a163 fat content points in any case of additions of gelatine.
P. Onfroy164 determines the addition of gelatine by boiling 5 grammes
of chocolate chips in 50 cubic centimetres of water, adding 5
cubic centimetres of a solution containing 10 percent of lead acetate,
and then filtering the whole. If gelatine is present in the chocolate,
the liquid, on a few drops of saturated picric acid being added, leaves
a yellow, amorphous sediment. If the addition of gelatine is very
trifling, the gelatine is held in check or neutralised by the tannic acid.
The defatting is then effected by ether and the chocolate stirred up
with 100 cubic centimetres of hot water. 5-10 cubic centimetres
of a solution of lye containing 10 percent of alkali and about 10 cubic
centimetres of the above-mentioned lead acetate solution are added.
The compound of gelatine and tannic acid is soluble in the hydrate
of the alkali, and is afterwards re-deposited by the action of the lead
acetate, so that it can easily be detected by means of picric acid in
the neutralised filtrate. As picric acid is incapable of effecting the
deposition of the theobromine, the deposition observed can only be
caused by the presence of gelatine.
Like gelatine and glue, the addition of a quantity of adraganth
has the power of binding the moisture and saving the fat. A method
of estimating the quality of this vegetable gum, of which at the most 2
percent should be present, has recently been described by Welmans;
this method is explained on page ... in the microscopic section.
2. Estimation of ash165: 5 grammes of material are
heated in a platinum vessel, pan or flat tray, the latter or other similar
shallow receptacle being the most suitable, holding from 25 to 30
cubic centimetres. Care should be taken when heating that the extremity
of the Bunsen flame only touches the bottom of the vessel.
The resulting gases are then ignited, and the completely charred
mass pressed or stirred to a powder by means of a platinum wire or
rod hammered flat at the end; the pan should be frequently made to
revolve and its contents continually stirred during heating, care being
taken, too, to hold it slanting the whole time. The pan should be
held in this way over a moderate flame until the ash assumes almost
a white colour. As soon as this occurs, the pan should be cooled256
down and the ash uniformly saturated with a concentrated watery
solution of carbonate of ammonia, whereon the vessel is placed in
the drying chamber and dried at a temperature of 100 Deg. C. The
contents of the pan are then heated again very cautiously over the
Bunsen flame, care being taken that the bottom of the vessel is only
allowed to become red-hot very gradually and to remain so for a
very short time; the pan is then covered up and transferred to the
dessicator to be cooled, and, on the completion of this process, its
weight determined.
After repeating the saturating process with the solution of carbonate
of ammonia, drying and heating for a short time as previously
described, the accuracy of the weight first obtained is again tested.
3. Estimation of silicic acid in the ash: When
examining cocoa powders and chocolate mass, the determination of
the silicic acid content of the ash is sometimes a necessity, as this
facilitates the detection of any shells which may have been added.166
The ash of the cacao bean contains only between 0·25
and 1·0 percent of silicic acid, while that of the shell
shows on analysis as much as 9 percent; it must, however,
be taken into consideration that an unusually high value for
silicic acid in the finished powder might be caused by impurities
in the chemical or other agents used to effect the disintegration
of the cacao. The signs of the presence of an extraordinary
quantity of silicic acid are, according to C. R. Fresenius
(Introduction to quantitative analysis)167 a higher percentage of the
ash itself than usual, and the quantity of ash used for the test should
not be too small; it should further be remembered that certain cacao
preparations, such as, for instance, the Dutch cocoa powders, contain
large quantities of carbonic mineral matter, and the special treatment
explained by Fresenius when dealing with such preparations separately
should be applied.
4. Estimation of alkalis remaining in cocoa
powders. The ash obtained from 5 grammes of cocoa powder is
washed out of the platinum pan into an ordinary water glass or
tumbler, distilled water only being used for this purpose, afterwards
finely crushed with a glass rod and heated to boiling point. The liquid is
then allowed to settle, filtered and re-washed. At this stage 5 cubic centimetres
of n/1 sulphurous acid are added, the liquid again heated to257
boiling point and titrated with 2/n or n/4 alkaline lye. In this way the
quantity of added carbonic mineral matter is determined, in addition
to the amount of carbonate present in ordinary cocoa powders, which
is formed from the organic acid minerals when the ash is produced.
Welmans has determined these values in the commonest varieties of
beans and placed the results obtained at our disposal for the second
edition of this book. These results are as follows:
a) Unshelled roasted beans
b) Shelled, roasted beans:
These tables show that:
1. The ash of cocoa powder (containing 33-1/3 percent of fat)
is never more than 5·5 percent.
2. The maximum amount of alkali (calculated as potash) is 1·2
percent.
3. The ash soluble in water is always less than that insoluble
in water. A reverse proportion shows a larger amount of alkali, that
is, alkali has been added.
In addition to the importance of determining the amount of
alkali in cocoa powder, it is very desirable that analytical chemists
should agree as to the methods to be adopted, since the determina258tions
of alkali seldom agree and may differ as much as 0·3 percent.168
The method of calculating the results should also be defined, that is
to say, an agreement should be arrived at as to whether the alkali
should be expressed as K2O, K2CO3 or Na2CO3.169
Cacao which has been rendered miscible by means of ammonia,
sometimes contains a small amount of ammonia, probably in combination
with an organic acid. To detect it, the Cocoa powder should
be distilled with water, which gives an alkaline distillate, as the
ammonia salt would be decomposed at the temperature of boiling
water. The ammonia can be volumetrically determined in the
distillate with sulphuric acid.170
5. Determination of the Fatty Contents. In this
operation 5 grammes of the finest powdered bean i. e. the finest cocoa
powder (in the case of chocolate, which must be finely flaked, 10
grammes) should be mixed with an equal quantity of evenly grained
quartz sand in a warmed mortar, and then transferred per filter to
a Soxhlet’s apparatus, wherein it can be extracted with ether for
from 10 to 12 hours at a stretch. The previously weighed carboy,
which now contains the fatty contents in solution, is placed on a
water bath, and the ether extracted as far as possible, after which
the fatty residue remaining is dried by first introducing the vessel
in a water oven and afterwards allowing it to stand for 2 hours in a
dessicator. The increase of weight in the flask is due to ether extract,
consisting almost exclusively of fat. It is true that small proportions
of theobromine will have been simultaneously dissolved (perhaps
about 0·1 g.) but no special significance need be attached to them. If
it should seem advisable to avoid even this slight drawback, petroleum
ether with a boiling point of 50° C. should be employed instead
of the ordinary variety.
Welmans171 has further described a quick and practical method
for determining fat in cacao and its preparations, which is not only
of value as a check on the extraction method, but also serves as a
determination of the constituents soluble in water. It is carried out
as follows:
5 grammes of Cocoa powder or cacao mass, which need not
be very fine, or 10 grammes of chocolate are stirred for some259
minutes in a separator or cylinder with 100 ccm of ether (saturated
with water) until coherent particles are no more visible, that is to
say, until the factory degree of fineness has been attained. In two
minutes all will have gone to powder even if the chocolate has not
been rubbed down but is in pieces; 100 ccm of water (saturated with
ether) are then added, and the mixture agitated until a complete
emulsion takes place. With powdered cacao, especially those kinds
rich in fat, that occurs in ½ to 1 minute, and with chocolate in 2
minutes. It is then allowed to rest until the emulsion separates, which
at the ordinary temperature of 15-20° C. usually occurs in 6-12
hours in the case of chocolate, and 12-24 hours with cacao. The
greater part of the water separates first and, usually, amounts to
90-98 ccm with chocolate and 70-86 ccm with cocoa. The powdery
portion of the cocoa or chocolate floats on the surface of the aqueous
layer at the bottom of the ether layer. Only husk, sand, particles of
cacao beans, added starch, etc. accumulate at the bottom of the
separator and are to be removed with the aqueous layer, which in
the case of chocolate contains the sugar, but usually no trace of
fat. The ether layer, which freely separates from the emulsion in the
time mentioned, is quite clear and from 25 to 50 ccm can generally
be pipetted off and an aliquot part poured into a measuring cylinder or
graduated tube, or into a 25 or 50 ccm flask. If the ether solution
of fat is not sufficient in quantity, the separation can be effected
after removing the aqueous liquid by twirling round the separator.
The turbidity soon disappears and the non-fatty particles quickly
sink to the bottom. The ether solution of fat can also be examined
aräometrically, as with milk fat, by Soxhlet’s aräometric method,
after forcing it by means of an india rubber ball, into a pipette or
burette, but the constants to be used in that case have not been ascertained.
After the ether has been distilled off, in the normal manner,
the weight obtained must be calculated for 100 ccm and a small
correction made. For example, if 50 ccm of the ether solution of fat
give a residue of 0·8 gramme, then 100 ccm represents 1·6 gramme.
But this 1·6 gramme has not been obtained from 100 ccm of the original
(water saturated) ether, but from 100-x ccm, x representing the
number of cubic centimetres corresponding to 1·6 gramme of cacao
butter and, as the specific gravity of cacao butter is nearly = 1;
the equation becomes (100-1·6): 100 = 1·6: x; x = 160/98·4
= 1·627 gramme; so that the 5 grammes of substance would contain
1·627 gramme of fat or 32·54 percent.
260
The remaining aqueous solution contains the whole of the constituents
of cacao or chocolate which are soluble in water. It is
measured into a graduated cylinder and its volume ascertained. Then,
after the entire amount has been evaporated to dryness, the residue
is calculated on a percentage basis. The following procedure,
however, is preferable. 10 ccm of the liquid are evaporated and the
residue well dried in a vacuum before it is weighed. Multiplying the
ascertained weight by 10, we obtain the amount of cacao or chocolate
soluble in water and present in 5 and 10 grammes of either substance
respectively. The amount of sugar in the aqueous extract can be
determined in the following manner. 50 ccm of the extract are heated
in a water bath and thus separated from ether; afterwards 2 ccm of
lead acetate are added and the whole immediately transferred to a
special kind of filter paper. The solution is now polarised in the
usual way and the number of grammes of sugar thus ascertained converted
into ccm by division (1·55 being the unit) and then the result
subtracted from 100, which gives the volume of water present in
100 ccm of sugar solution, and so by further division until the percentage
of sugar in chocolate is finally obtained. If the polarisation
yields more sugar than the weight of the total residue, it is an indication
that dextrine is present as an adulteration. The quantitative
determination of dextrine, which is sometimes added to cocoa powder
as well as to chocolate, for like gelatine and tragacanth it holds water
together and so ensures a saving of fat, is best carried out in P. Welman’s
polarising method.172
As the amount of fat obtained from 5 grammes of a cacao
preparation does not suffice for tests of purity, a larger quantity must
be extracted in order to carry out the following investigations. This
has reference to
The following process is usually adopted in the determination
of the melting point of cacao fat:
The melted fat is sucked up a glass capillary tube, the internal
diameter of which does not exceed 2 mm (fluctuating between 1·8
mm and that measurement) to somewhat above the part of the tube
which is graduated into tenths, and then so much of the capillary tube
cut off as suffices to make the fat column there half the height of
the bulb of the mercury thermometer used in the experiment.
As fresh molten fat has a very variable melting point, it is
absolutely essential that the fat in this experiment be allowed
to cool about a week in some dark chamber, and, because only after
the expiration of this period can the melting point be designated as a
constant, not to proceed with the further determination until this
necessary stage has been reached.
To carry out this determination the capillary tube is attached
to the bulb of the mercury thermometer by means of a rubber
ring in such a manner that the column of fat occurs directly in the
middle.
The whole apparatus is now hung in a test tube of 2½ cm
internal diameter, which is just so far filled with water that this can
only penetrate to the fat in the capillary tube which is open at both
ends from the under side. To regulate the flow of heat, this test tube
is further introduced into a beaker also filled with water, which is
heated first. As soon as the fat is melted, the water penetrates to
the capillary tube and pushes along the fat column.
The reading is now taken at once the degree registered, the
thermometer showing the melting point of the fat.
We need not here launch on an exact description of the above
mentioned determination, but will only stay to point out the oft-mentioned
book of R. Benedikt’s, entitled “Analyses of Kinds of Fat
and Wax”, as enlarged and issued by F. Ulzer after the death of the
author (Berlin edition, J. Springer).
Should a doubt arise in comparing the results given by these
six tests, which may happen with some kinds of ordinary cacao butter,
the employment of Björklund’s empirical ether test176 or Filsinge262r’s
alcohol-ether test is to be recommended, which latter is carried out
as follows.177
3 grammes of cacao butter are dissolved in 6 grammes of ether
at 10° C. Should the resulting solution be clear, this is an indication
that no wax is present. The solution is then introduced in its test tube
into water at 0° C. and the length of the time which transpires before
it begins to become cloudy or to deposit flocculent matter, observed,
also the temperature when the solution again becomes clear.
If the solution becomes turbid before ten minutes have elapsed
the cacao butter is not quite pure. Pure cacao butter becomes turbid
in from 10 to 15 minutes at 0° C. and clear again at from 19-20° C.;
an admixture of 5 percent of tallow renders the solution turbid at
19-20° C. in 8 minutes and it becomes clear again at 22° C.; 15 per
cent of tallow give a turbid solution in from 4-5 minutes at 0° C. that
becomes clear again at 22·5-28·5 ° C. Filsinger178 has suggested a
modification of Björklund’s test. In his method 2 grammes of the fat
are dissolved in a graduated tube in a mixture of 4 parts of ether (S. G.
0·725)) and 1 part of alcohol (S. G. 0·810). Pure cacao butter should
remain clear after some lapse of time, whereas foreign fats and more
especially tallow preparations cause a separation. But Lewkowitsch179
maintains that this test is not be relied on, as genuine kinds of cacao
butter will crystallise out from the ether alcohol solution at 9° C. and
some at 12° C.
Yet we are nevertheless of the opinion that liquid fats are of
no great moment at the present time, for they always involve a considerable
lowering of the melting point and so greatly impair the
fracture of the chocolate. Fats such as tallow, or the like, must be
used, and these are detected both by their flavour and by Björklund’s
test. Adulteration is therefore very rarely met with in the German
chocolate industry, thanks to these facts and the rigid self-control
practised by the Association of German Chocolate Manufactures and
the sharp supervision exercised by the inspectors of articles of consumption
in that country. The only regularly occurring adulterations
are connected with the preparation of Cocoa powder and consist in
substitutions of finely ground cacao husk; the detection of which still
remains most difficult and uncertain; and even here it is rather the
Dutch firms which are culpable; and generally speaking it is a trick263
of smaller manufacturers, who consider such an admixture as quite
the normal procedure.
6. Determination of Theobromine and Caffeine.
Methods for the ascertainment of the quantity of theobromine are so
numerous that it would be impossible here to enter into the detail
of their advantages and disadvantages. Of the different processes
adopted in the determination of the cacao diureide perhaps only
Eminger’s is worthy of consideration at present, and this is described
fully in the following paragraphs, as best corresponding to our present
knowledge of the subject and its requirements, and most deserving
recommendation to chemists and food analysts on account of its
reliability.
For the practical testing of cacao preparations the splitting up
of the diureide has no special advantage and so we can at once proceed
to treat of the compound particle, though rather inclined to
maintain that the diureide has very little importance on the whole,
for it establishes no basis from which we can judge of the quality
of the various products.
The procedure in Eminger’s process is as follows:
10 grammes of powdered bean of cacao preparation are placed
in a weighed glass flask, then stirred up with 100 grammes of petroleum
ether and allowed to settle. The petroleum ether is next carefully
poured off, without disturbing the sediment, and the treatment repeated
several times. After the last decantation, the residue is well
drained, then dried in the flask and weighed. The difference in weight
of the residue and the former figure represents the amount of fat. An
aliquot portion of the residue (about 5 grammes) is then boiled with 100
grammes of a 3-4 percent strong sulphuric acid in a flask connected
with a reflux condenser, until cacao red is given as a resultant, a
task which occupies three quarters of an hour. The contents of the
flask are then poured into a beaker, and neutralised, whilst hot, with
barium hydroxide. The whole is then mixed with sand in a basin and
evaporated to dryness; afterwards the dry residue is introduced
into a Soxhlet apparatus on a paper cone, and there extracted for
5 hours with 150 grammes of chloroform. The latter is carefully
distilled off and the residue dried for a period of one hour at 100° C.
As previously stated, the separation of the two diureides is not necessary
and in commercial analyses it is sufficient to state the amount
of each separate substance after the removal of fat by means of some
suitable solvent. But should the splitting up be desired, then Eminger’s
method should be adopted, which depends on the solubility264
of caffeine in carbon tetrachloride.180 With that object, the mixture
of fat, theobromine and caffeine is treated in the flask with 100 grammes
of carbon tetrachloride and repeatedly agitated for one hour.
After filtration, the carbon tetrachloride, which now contains fat and
caffeine, is distilled off. The theobromine left undissolved in the
flask and the filter used to filter the carbon tetrachloride solution
are then extracted with boiling water, the solution is filtered
and evaporated to dryness, the residue representing theobromine.
The separation of caffeine and theobromine can also be effected by
cautious treatment with caustic soda, so dissolving the theobromine
and leaving the caffeine untouched in its entirety.181 (Cf. Riederer.)
7. Determination of Starch. This can only be of
importance in rarer instances, as the starch naturally present in
raw cacao generally varies between 9 and 10 percent, and there is
no chemical method of separating foreign matter from cacao starch.
But should the necessity arise, a determination can be carried out as
follows.
In order to render the starch more easily gelatinisable, the fat
is first removed by treating 5 grammes of cocoa powder or 10 grammes
of a cacao preparation with ether and then with an 80%
solution of alcohol to separate any sugar, theobromine and cacao
red. The residue is then mixed with water and subjected to a steam
pressure of from three to four atmospheres, which converts the
starch into a soluble body known as amylo-dextrine. This operation
is generally carried out in an autoclave or strong copper vessel182
provided with an air-tight and removable cover, the open flask, containing
the sample to be gelatinised (1 part of cacao and 20 parts of
water) being placed in the vessel half immersed in water.
After screwing on the lid, the temperature of the interior of
the vessel is raised to 133-144° C. corresponding to a pressure265
of 4 atmospheres, and maintained at that pressure for three or four
hours in order to allow the action to proceed on the mass for
gelatinisation of the starch. The flask is then removed from the
apparatus and the contents allowed to settle for a few minutes;
the liquid is filtered hot, the filtrate amounting to about 250 or
300 ccm after the filter has been washed a few times with hot
water. Only the cell fibre remains on the filter, whilst the starch
is dissolved in the filtrate. This is now heated with 20 ccm of
hydrochloric acid in a flask connected with a reflux condenser,
whereby the starch is converted into dextrose. The sugar solution
is neutralised with sodium carbonate, clarified with basic lead acetate,
any excess of the latter being removed with sodium sulphate,
finally filtered, and the whole made up to 500 ccm. The sugar is
determined in this solution by titration with alkaline copper sulphate
solution and from the number of cubic centimetres required for the
precipitation of the red cuprous oxide, the quantity of sugar can be
ascertained. As 99 parts of starch are equal to 108 parts of dextrose
or grape sugar, the following calculation must be made.
In the determination of sugar with copper sulphate it is more
advantageous to follow up F. Allihin’s183 method, in which the cuprous
oxide is reduced by hydrogen gas to metallic copper, weighed as
such, and so the sugar calculated, or the cuprous oxide can be collected
on an asbestos filter and weighed in that condition. The
cuprous oxide must be previously washed with hot water, alcohol
and ether, which must be completely removed by subsequent drying
in the air bath, since an error of even 1 milligramme would seriously
affect the final result. Then again, the amount of sugar may be determined
by polarisation, a process which has also its own particular
advantages.
The chemical determination of starch is only in a limited degree
effectual in a recognition of an admixture of foreign starch in cacao
preparations. If more than 10-15 percent of starch, as calculated on
the crude bean, has been found, it must certainly be assumed
that there is an admixture of foreign starch, but chemistry affords
no assistance by which foreign starch may be separated from the
genuine starch of the cacao bean. For that purpose the foreign starch
must be observed under the microscope, which not only serves to266
detect its presence but affords a means of estimating the amount
present to an approximate degree, and its characteristics. Great
care should be exercised, or the result may be easily exaggerated.
Standard preparations, i. e. which have a known percentage of starch
constituent, prove very serviceable when comparing.
If Welman’s agitation method has been used for determining
the fat, the starch will be found in the sediment. The amount of
foreign starch can also be determined by Posetto’s184 method, which
depends on the intensity and permanency of the iodine reaction. In
the latter test 2 grammes of the powdered or finely divided cacao
preparation are boiled with 20 ccm water in a test tube for
2 minutes, cooled, and without disturbing the liquid, 20 ccm
of water and 5 ccm of iodine solution (5 grammes of iodide and
10 grammes of potassium iodide in 100 ccm of water) are added. The
liquid from genuine cacao, according to the variety used, turns
brownish or light blue, changing in a short time (12 minutes at the
most) to brown and red. On the other hand, chocolate or a cacao
preparation adulterated with not more than 10% wheaten or potato
starch, chestnut, maize or commercial dextrine, will give a blue
coloration lasting for 24 hours. It must be noted that the result
in Posetto’s test is influenced by the amount of alkali, so that with
disintegrated cacao, for instance, a considerable quantity of iodine
has to be added before the blue coloration takes place, and this more
especially if the potassium carbonate employed contained caustic
alkali. Such preparations finally become coloured, but generally
show a mixed colour (blue and yellow): green to greenish brown.
8. Determination of crude Fibre. This can be
carried out in two ways; either by König’s new process as employed
by Filsinger for cacao or by the older method of Weender’s185 as
follows:
3 grammes of the defatted and atmospherically dried substance
are boiled for ½ hour with 200 ccm of a 1·24 percent solution
of sulphuric acid. It is allowed to settle, then decanted, and the residue
boiled twice with the same volume of water. The decanted liquids
are allowed to settle in cylinders and the sediment added to the rest
of the substance, which is then boiled half an hour with 200 ccm of
a 1·25 percent solution of caustic potash, filtered through a weighed267
filter and the residue twice boiled with 200 ccm of water. The
cellulose-like substance collected on the filter is washed first with
hot water, then with cold, afterwards with alcohol, and finally with
ether.
After being dried and weighed, it is incinerated and the necessary
corrections made for ash.
The process worked out by Henneberg is the one usually
adopted for the determination of crude fibre in vegetable matter.
Recently H. Suringer and B. Tollens186 and more particularly König187
have pointed out that in Weender’s process the so-called pentosan
(sugar derivative) of the composition C5 H10 O5, which comprises a
not inconsiderable portion of crude fibre, would undergo a disproportionate
alteration, so that the analytical results thus obtained
would not represent the amount of cellulose correctly. The crude
fibre must therefore be treated in such a manner as to eliminate the
pentosan. König attains that result by treating 3 grammes of the
defatted substance with 200 ccm of glycerine (1·23 sp. gr.) containing
per litre 20 grammes of concentrated sulphuric acid, under a pressure
of three atmospheres, for one hour. It is then filtered through an
asbestos filter whilst hot, and after being successively washed with
hot water, alcohol and ether, it is weighed, incinerated and the ash
weighed. The difference between the two weighings expresses the
amount of ash-free crude fibre.
Filsinger has determined by König’s method the amount of
crude fibre in a series of different varieties of bean, the results of
which have already been given on page 72. Which process is the
better has yet to be established, and in issuing results as data the
method employed has always to be indicated owing to the many
variations which arise.
9. The determination of cacao husk, which will
be for the most part a matter of ascertaining the amount of raw or
crude fibre, could formerly only be effected by means of the microscope.
In 1899 Filsinger188 proposed a method of levigation which
according to P. Welman’s189 gives trustworthy results. Manifold treatises
have been devoted to the subject, and it would be advisable268
to turn a few of these up and compare the details of the accounts.190
In this method, which works best with the modifications suggested
by Drawe (see below) 5 grammes of cocoa or chocolate are defatted
with ether and dried, then ground in a mortar after a little water
has been added, and levigated with about 100 ccm of water in a
cylinder. The liquid is allowed to rest for some time and the suspended
matter poured off almost to the sediment, which is again shaken
up with fresh water, allowed to settle, and the operation repeated
until all the fine particles have been floated off and the water over
the sediment no longer becomes cloudy, but remains clear after the
coarse and heavy particles have settled down.
The powdery sediment is collected on a watch glass, dried
in the water bath, and after being cooled down in a desiccator, weighed.
The weighed residue is then softened with caustic soda and
glycerine and examined under the microscope. The presence of
any cotyledon particles must be carefully observed, such as have
escaped separation in the grinding and levigation, and whether particles
of husk or epidermis or germ preponderate. With proper
levigation only traces of cacao substance, especially here recognisable
by the cacao starch, should be present. The sand, which
always adheres to the shells in the fermenting and drying operations,
is also easily recognised and many indications as to the nature of
the article under investigation can be noted by the use of a simple
magnifying glass applied to the washed residue on the watch glass
before drying.
Examined in that way, a sample of so-called Cocoas from
unshelled beans gave from 6 to 8 percent of husk; usually good
cacao powder shows a maximum of 2·5% husk. It is true
that from this Filsinger-Drawe procedure the correct percentage of
shell can only be estimated in very rare instances, for when it is
necessary to be absolutely fair to all concerned in the manufacture,
the cacao must be so often washed until no grains of cacao starch
are visible under the microscope; and so the result is often too small,
more especially in the case of the finer qualities. But when all
particles of starch have been removed, the finer particles of shell
have often been taken along with them. Yet when the residue certainly
exceeds the standard percentage of shell, it may be taken for269
granted that adulteration with husks has been carried to excess,
or that the cleansing processes have not been effectively carried
out. There is no other method which yields the same degree of
certainty.
The result obtained by the levigation method can be controlled
by the previously mentioned methods of Weender or Filsinger,
as well as by the determination of any silica in the ash (page 256).
Latterly the admixture of cacao husk with the cheaper kinds
of cocoa powder has largely increased, therefore the determination
of the amount of husk in cacao preparations has become of special
importance.
10. Determination of sugar. There are three
methods for the quick determination of sugar, two of them polarimetric
and the third consisting of taking the specific gravity of the
solution obtained by shaking up the cacao with water. It is as well
to note that in all these methods the result includes the normal
amount of sugar in cacao, which Welmans191 gives at 0·75-2 in cocoa
and 0·4-1·0 percent in chocolate. That source of error is of no
special significance, for, as Welmans has shown, it is compensated
for in the course of the succeeding operations, so that these methods
are of service.
For official investigations under this head the statutes of May
31st 1891 and May 27th 1896 respectively together with the instructions
issued by the council concerning the carrying out of the process
(Berlin, July 9th 1896, and Nov. 8th 1897, E) constitute a standard.
They read as follows: “Half the normal weight (13·024 g) of
chocolate is damped with alcohol and then warmed for 15 minutes
with 30 ccm of water on the water bath. While still hot, it is
poured on to a wet filter, the residue again treated with hot water,
and until the filtrate nearly amounts to 100 ccm. The filtrate is to be
mixed with 5 ccm of basic lead acetate solution, allowed to stand
for a quarter of an hour, then clarified with alum and a little alumina,
made up to a definite volume (110 ccm) and polarised.” But it is
to be noted that these instructions are not exhaustive enough, and
prove particularly deficient as regards the employment of water, also
through their non-observation of the errors which can arise in using
basic lead acetate, though it is true that these are only of a minor
character.
The Berlin chemist Jeserich (ex officio) had a rather hot
dispute with the official over the matter, who declared that his270
results were false in spite of all protest, until he finally proved that
it was not these results but the process advised by law which
lacked correctness. He described the rencontre in very lucid if
drastic detail to an assembly of official chemists.
Something similar happened to the present editor, who in his
office of sworn chemist was called upon to determine the amount
of sugar and starch present in certain crumb chocolates on the one
hand, and the amount of cacao material on the other. As the official
inspectors insist on their prescriptions being carried out with scrupulous
exactitude, he found it necessary to give a double result, the one
in accordance with these prescriptions, and the other when double
the amount of water was used, taking care to explain the whole
matter at length. But it occasioned some surprise, and finally the
task of investigating and testing was withdrawn and given to
another.
Another polarimetric method, recommended by Woy192, is carried
out as follows. Two portions of half the normal weight (13·024
grammes) of rasped or shaved chocolate are placed in 100 ccm and
200 ccm flasks respectively, moistened with alcohol, then treated
with hot water and stirred up till the sugar is dissolved. 4 ccm of basic
lead acetate solution are added to each flask, by which means the
chocolate in suspension loses its viscosity. After being cooled, the
solutions are made up to the marks, well mixed and filtered. Two
quickly filtering liquids are thus obtained, which are then polarised
in 200 mm tubes. With chocolate containing meal, the temperature
must not exceed 50° C. From the two polarisations, the following
equation results: a (100-x) = b(200-x), in which a and b are the
results of polarising, and x the volume of the insoluble substances,
including the lead precipitate, contained in the half normal weight.
The product of the equation gives the amount of sugar present.
Woy’s method has the great advantage of avoiding the error due to
the volume of the undissolved cacao and lead precipitate.
The third method, as adopted by Zipperer193, is as follows:
50 grammes of chocolate, finely divided with an iron grater or rasp,
are treated with exactly 200 ccm of cold water, frequently stirred
for 4 hours, then poured on to a previously moistened and well wrung
pointed bag. The specific gravity of the filtrate is taken in an araeometer,
specially constructed for the purpose by Greiner of Munich
on lines suggested by Zipperer himself. On the scale of the271
araeometer is given the percentage amount of sugar in the chocolate,
from 5 to 5 percent, with subdivisions of one percent, so that the
reading can be quickly taken, without correction.
In the determination of sugar by weight, the chocolate is first
defatted with ether, the sugar extracted with alcohol, then inverted,
the inverted solution treated with Fehling’s solution and the copper
precipitate weighed. The process has little to recommend it, being
troublesome and admitting of a large margin of errors.
Here again much has been written of late194 concerning the two
former methods, their liabilities to error and the avoidance of these,
yet without bringing to light anything which calls for a specially
detailed treatment in this book.
11. Determination of Albuminates. The determination
of albumin is frequently required in the analysis of cacao
powder and is necessary to the ascertainment of its nutritive value.
The determination of nitrogen is determined by mixing 0·5 grammes
of finely powdered bean with soda lime and burning the mixture in
a tube. (This determination of nitrogen is a necessary part of the
process.) Thus ammonia is formed, which is passed through a known
quantity of sulphuric acid. When the combustion is finished, the
acid solution is titrated with a standard solution of barium hydroxide,
and from the quantity consumed the percentage of nitrogen is calculated.
But as the diureides also contain nitrogen (31·1 % of the
theobromine and caffeine present) the nitrogen corresponding to this
amount must be deducted from the total quantity of nitrogen yielded
by combustion and the remainder multiplied by 6·25 will indicate the
amount of albumen present as a constituent.
Another and better method of determining the nitrogen is by
Kjeldahl’s195 process. It has been frequently subjected to modifications,
but was originally carried out as follows. 0·25 grammes of the nitrogenous
substance (cacao preparation) is heated on the sand bath
together with 20 ccm of concentrated sulphuric acid and a little
quicksilver, till the solution becomes colourless or only of a very
pale yellow. After diluting with about 200 ccm of water, it is made272
alkaline by the addition of soda lye (which must of course be entirely
free from nitrogen, the same remark applying to the sulphuric acid
used) and, potassium or sodium sulphide being added, it is then distilled,
and the ammonia given off collected and determined as above
described. As this method also determines the total amount of nitrogen,
an allowance must be made for the nitrogen in the theobromine
and caffeine before multiplying the result by 6·25. This modification
is still to be recommended as the best and most reliable.
In rare cases an excessive amount of albumen may be due to
the admixture of earth-nut cake or gelatine. As to the detection of
the latter adulteration, see page 254. Bileryst196 says that earth-nut
cake can be recognised by its high percentage of albumen content,
amounting to between 45 and 47 percent.
12. Investigation of Milk and Cream Chocolate.
The tests bearing on these products really constitute a chapter
in themselves, which has acquired special importance owing to
the great popularity they enjoy and the consequently greatly increased
production. According to the unanimous opinion of the Association
of German Chocolate Manufacturers and the Free Union of
German Food Chemists, expressed when considering the respective
claims of such chocolates, it is chiefly if not exclusively a matter of
determining the percentage of milk or cream, which ought not to be
below 12·5 or 10%, always supposing the milk or cream to be a
substitute for sugar, and this means therefore that the quantity of
cacao material in the chocolate product should on no account sink
below 32%. (Cf. p. 283 No. 3. Abs. 5.) The method employed in the
investigation is generally the same as that suggested by Laxa in
his treatise on “Milk Chocolates”197 although it has been considerably
improved by Baier and his colleagues.198 It is here a matter of
working backwards from the determination of the fatty and nitrogenous
components (or caseine) to the amount of milk or cream in the
chocolate. This presents a certain amount of difficultly as it is not
only necessary to determine the milk, but also to establish that
neither skimmed or whipped material (either in part or entirely) has
been employed. Yet it is possible here to proceed with absolute certainty,
as Baier199 convincingly demonstrates, by taking into consideration
the relative proportion of milk fat, called caseum or caseine.
273
If it is desired finally to characterise the respective chocolates,
determinations of the quantity of milk fat present and the
amount of milk product used become essential. Baier gives both as
calculable (cf. footnote 1)200, the Reichert-Meissl number of the total
fat being ascertained, and from this, subtracting the R.-M. number of
the cacao fat present201 the quantity of milk fat, finally the
amount of caseine, milk sugar, mineral matter and other factors.
No details of this somewhat extensive calculation are proved in the
original.202 We give the following regulations (Laxa-Baier) for
carrying out the determination of the caseine, together with the
necessary formula.
20 grammes of fine divided chocolate are loosely introduced into
a Soxhlet’s extracting apparatus, and there extracted with ether for
a period of 16 hours. Of the residue, 10 grammes are used for
testing in connection with caseine, and this after the ether has evaporated.
These are mixed up in mortar with gradual and even addition
of a 1% solution of sodium oxalate, so that no lump formations occur,
and then brought into a marked carboy of 250 ccm capacity, until
200 ccm of the sodium oxalate solution have been used. The carboy
is then provided with an asbestos net, and heated by means of a
flame from the under side, until its contents are brought to boil. The
mouth of the carboy is covered with a small funnel which has been
hermetically sealed at its narrower end. Then boiling oxalate solution
is poured into the vessel up the bend, and it is then allowed to stand
over till another day, shaking however being often repeated, then
filled with sodium oxalate solution up to the mark, agitated with a
regular motion, and then filtered through an ordinary filter. To
100 ccm of this solution 5 ccm of an uranous acetate solution (5%
strong) and drop by drop and with repeated stirring a 30% solution
of acetic are added until there is a deposit. (This will require
from 30 to 120 drops, according to the amount of caseine present.)
Then an extra 5 drops of acetic acid can be added. This causes the
deposit to stand out clearly from the liquid matter and it can be
readily separated by centrifugalising. Afterwards it can be washed274
out with 100 ccm of solution, of which 5 ccm are uranous acetate and
3 ccm acetic acid 3 % strong, until the sodium oxalate can no longer be
seen on adding calcium chloride (i. e. after about three repeated centrifugalisations).
The contents of the tube are then rinsed on to the
small filter by means of the wash fluid, stirred in a Kjeldahl carboy
with concentrated sulphuric acid and copper oxide, and the quantity
of nitrogen found converted into caseine by multiplying with the
factor k = 6·37.—Bearing in mind the quantity of fat, the percentage
of caseine in the original chocolate is calculated.203
In the following:

b = signifies the total of fatty content of the chocolate204,
a = the Reichert-Meissl number of the total fat,
and K = the amount of caseine as established by the Laxa-Baier method
(nitrogen contents times 6·37).
275
c. Microscopic-botanical investigation.
A. Parenchyma of the
cotyledon after removal
of fat and treatment
with Iodine chloral
hydrate, a: parenchyma
cells with
starch, b: with cacao
red.
B. Aleuron particles with
globois (Molisch) from
parenchyma cells.
A. Mitscherlich particles.
B. Seed cells, above with
starch bodies, underneath
with violet colouring
matter (cacao
red) lying in chloral.
C. Series of yeast germs.
D. Threads of extraneous
growth.
E. Epidermis and layer
of cells occurring on
the outer shell (enlarged
340 times).
Cacao is to no great extent particularly characterised anatomically.
The parenchyma cells fig. 100 are chiefly to be noticed, containing
either fat, albumin (protoplasm) aleuron granules, pigment, or
cacao starch. The starch, as already remarked, consists of
especially small globular granules, mostly separate, but also two or
three adherent. It is somewhat more difficult to gelatinise than other
kinds of starch, and it is coloured blue by iodine somewhat more
slowly than many other starch granules, especially in the preparations
containing fat. Cacao preparations which have been disintegrated by
fixed alcalis, differ in this respect; according to Welmans, iodine
first forms colourless iodine compounds, and not until the alkali has
been saturated, is the blue colour developed. In such cases, care must
be taken, that an excess of iodine is present. In estimating the amount
of foreign starch, great care must be taken that the conspicuous
bluish-black granules of the foreign starch, which immediately strike276
the eye, are not over estimated, which may easily occur. For control
observations, mixtures containing various known amounts of starch
should be tried comparatively. The pigment cells and the epidermis
with the Mitscherlich’s particles (figs 101 and 102) should be noticed
as well as the characteristic globoids, which occur in the ash of the
cotyledon tissues (compare page 67). The outside shell, more
or less woody according to the origin of the bean, consists of four
layers of cells; this is best recognised by the large cells of the principal
tissue, which are distinguished by their form as well as by their
thickened side walls from the tissue of the cotyledon. Another
characteristic of this layer consists of the large number of
coarse spiral vessels, which exceed those of the seed lobes in size,
and finally, the inner elements of the stone cell layer, which, however,
on account of their limited development are seldom to be
discovered. The smooth, fine brown coloured, and light refracting
fragments, which frequently appear quite structureless and have their
fibrous character made perceptible only after treatment with caustic
alkali, must be regarded as characteristic of the inner part of the
husk or the seed membrane. The best observing medium is a solution
of chloral hydrate or almond oil, as well as dilute sulphuric acid and
glycerine.205 The substance is always to be defatted with ether,
before the microscopical examination. A complete extraction of the
fat, according to Welmans, can occur only with exceedingly thin
cuttings, in which every cell of the section would be operated on,
or in powdered preparations, when the cells have been completely277
torn asunder by mechanical pulverisation. The fat is not extracted
by solvents from intact cells, as the cell walls are impermeable by
them.206
The detection of foreign starch is possible only by use
of the microscope; by means of standard preparations an approximate
estimate may be made as to the amount and kind of meal added.207
The examination of starch is especially facilitated by H. Leffmann
and W. Beam’s208 centrifugal method: the sample suspended in water
is subjected to rotation for a short time in the centrifugal apparatus.
The presence of foreign starch is shown by a white layer in the
resulting sediment. This layer can be collected and microscopically
examined for foreign starch and husk. In the case of cacao preparations,
it is always well to distinguish between unimportant traces
and quantities that justify objection.209
A. Silver membrane with the
hairs (Mitscherlich particles)
tr, and the crystals f and K.
B. Cocoa powder: c Cotyledon
tissue with cells of fat and
colouring matter, p shell parenchyma,
sp speriods, d layer
of dry cells.
A means of detecting tragacanth in cacao preparations,
has lately been described by Welmans210. 5 grammes of the cacao
preparation are to be mixed with sufficient dilute sulphuric acid (1: 3)
to form a thick pulp, then with 10 drops of solution of iodine (in278
potassium iodide) and some glycerine. A portion of the mixture is
examined under the microscope (enlarged 160 times). The entire
field of view now appears to be thickly sown with countless blue
dots, some globular, others irregular, among which are especially to
be noticed the large tragacanth cells, resembling potato starch, which
are not seen in cocoa powder that is free from tragacanth, when
similarly prepared as an object; the small blue dots, due to cacao
starch, are visible only in the densely occupied portions.
An admixture of the carob, which has been seldom observed,
can be easily recognised under the microscope by the characteristic
reddish wrinkled tubes of the fruit pulp, which are also coloured
violet by treatment with a warm solution of caustic potash.
The presence of earth-nut or earth-nut cake can
be detected by the aid of the microscope on treatment with chloral
hydrate, by the characteristic saw toothed epidermis cells of the
husk of arachis seed.
Hazelnut and walnut pulp, so far as they are to be
met with in cacao preparations, can be distinguished under the
microscope by shreds of the tissue of the seed husks, in which broad
streaks of spiral vessels, lying close on one another, are distinctly
prominent. If in addition the woody fruit shell be admixed, it can be
detected by the great number of cells.
279
The following formulae have been compiled by the Association
of German Chocolate Manufacturers for the purpose of fixing the
definition of cacao, and we may say that we agree with same in the
main, as they satisfy all just claims, and keep pace with the progress
made in consequence of the introduction of the modern machinery
now in use, both from a scientific and practical point of view. Only
in a few points are we of different opinion, and have referred to such
clearly in their place.
1. Cacao mass is the product obtained by simply grinding and
moulding roasted and shelled cacao beans and no substance
handled under this name may contain any admixtures of foreign
matter.
2. Disintegrated cacao mass is cacao which has been treated
either with alkalis, alkaline earth, or steam.
3. Cocoa powder, freed of oil (also soluble, disintegrated cacao)
is the resulting product when the cacao bean is decorticated,
roasted and more or less freed from its oil or also disintegrated
in powder form. Cocoa powder, cacao from which oil has
been extracted, disintegrated and soluble cacao may on no
account contain foreign ingredient other than an addition of
roots and spices.
In the case of cacaos disintegrated with alkalis or alkali
earths, not more than 3 % of alkali or alkali earth may be used
in the process; they may not contain more than 8 % of ash,
reckoned on cacao material with 56 % of cacao butter.
4. Chocolate. The designation “Chocolate” may only be
applied to those confections which are prepared by the addition280
of cacao butter, vanilla, vanillin, cinnamon, cloves or other
spices to roasted and shelled beans or to a disintegrated mixture
of cacao and sugar.
The percentage amount of sugar may not exceed 70,
and the occasional addition of other substances (medicinal,
meals, and the like) is admissible, but the total percentage of
these and the sugar may not exceed 70.211
5. Food chocolates, chocolates for immediate
consumption, and dessert chocolates. For these
confections the same principles hold good, with the exception
that here additions of nuts, almonds and milk stuffs are
permissible, up to a percentage not exceeding 5 in total, without
any declaration of the goods being necessary.
6. Chocolate powder is a mixture of cacao material which
may be disintegrated and more or less freed from oil, with an
amount of sugar not exceeding 70% at the most. Spices as in
the case of chocolate.211
7. Cacao butter is the fat obtained from the decorticated bean
or cacao material.
The following are especially to be regarded as adulterations of
the goods mentioned under I. from 1 to 7.
1. Foreign fats;
2. Shells and other waste cacao products (dust or seed);
3. Meal, though this is not expressly given;
4. Colouring matter; the colouring of the surface of figures is
permissible;
5. So-called fat economisers, such as adraganth, gelatine, and
dextrine.
An addition of substances for medicinal or dietetic purposes is
permissible, though in such cases the goods must be declared. The
addition of any fats other than cacao butter (i. e. of any foreign fat)
or of shells or waste products to cacao or chocolate or to cacao or
chocolate goods is also not permissible even when these are designated
in such a manner that the words chocolate and cacao do not occur
in their description.
281
The declaration must be transcribed in legible script and form,
as e. g. “Meal” so as to be readily understood by all, and composed
in German.
The declaration must occur together with the description of
contents and as part of the same on despatching original packages in
retail transactions.
In wholesale trade the declaration must occur on all offers,
quotations, bills and all boxes, etc. provided with description of
contents.
When offered for sale or exhibited in an unpacked condition,
every box etc. containing the goods must have such a declaration
introduced so as to be visible to every buyer in the premises, where
possible; or the declaration shall be placed on the goods themselves.
1. Skimmed milk chocolates must be literally described as such,
and must be manufactured with at least 10 % of skimmed milk
powder or the corresponding quantity of skimmed milk proper.
Addition of ordinary milk or its powder is permissible and need
not be declared;
2. Milk chocolate must be manufactured with ordinary milk containing at
least 3 % of fat, and in such a manner that at least
10 % of milk powder or the corresponding quantity of milk
proper are employed;
3. Cream chocolate must be prepared from cream containing at
least 10 % of fat, and in such a manner that at least 10 % of
a cream powder or the corresponding amount of cream, in
each case containing 50 % of milk fat, are employed. It may be
varied to taste with milk proper or its powder, without any
further declaration being necessary.
These percentages represent a minimum. It remains at the
manufacturer’s choice whether he shall employ larger quantities of
cream or milk.
The associated firms are further recommended to annex the
following guarantees:
a) that the powder of milk proper contain at least 26 % of fat
and be prepared from a milk guaranteed as pure;
b) that the cream powder contain at least 40 % of milk or be
prepared from cream containing at least 10% of fat.
282
It is especially emphasised that these quantities are minimums,
and every manufacturer is free to add as much cream or milk
as he pleases.
We particularly recommend the procuring of a guarantee from
the milk purveyor as to its purity for every delivery in order to be
covered against fines in case the product should prove to contain
an insufficient amount of fat. Analytical testings of trial samples are
also to be recommended.
By way of comparison we refer to the “Principles for Estimating
Cacao Products and their Food Value” determined by the Free
Union of German Food Chemists in their 8th annual assembly at
Heidelberg (1909) and finally established in their 10th held at Dresden
(1911), which are said to have found general acceptance from the
1st July, 1912.
Cacao mass is the product which is purely and simply
obtained from the roasted and shelled cacao bean by grinding and
moulding.
Cacao mass may not contain any kind of foreign substance.
Traces of shell may only be present in minor quantity. The waste
product falling in the cleansing of the bean must not be added to the
cacao mass, nor may it be worked up into cacao material
separate and apart from other cacao.
Cacao mass shows 2·5-5% of ash and contains 52-58 % of fat.
Disintegrated cacao is such material as is treated with alkalis
or alkaline earths, ammonia or its salts, under pressure of steam.
Cocoa powder, cacao that has been pressed and its oil
removed, soluble Cocoa and disintegrated cacao are synonyms for
cacao mass which has been reduced to powder form after they have
been partially separated from fat by expression under heat; and
generally treatment with alkalis or their carbonates, alkaline earths,
ammonia, and ammonia salts under a strong steam pressure are
presupposed.
Cocoa powder containing under 20% of fat, as well as that
treated with spices (aromatised or scented) must be declared
accordingly.
283
Cocoa powder may not contain any kind of foreign substance.
Traces of shell may only be present in minor quantity. The waste
product falling in the cleansing of the bean may neither be added to
the cocoa powder nor itself worked up into such a powder.
The added alkali or alkaline earths may not exceed 3 % of the
raw material.
Only powdered cacao and cocoa powder which has been
treated with ammonia and its salts under strong steam pressure shows
from 3 to 5 % of ash on cacao mass containing 55 % of fat.
Cocoa powders disintegrated with alkalis and alkaline earths
must not show more than 8 % of ash on cacao containing 55 % of fat.
The percentage of water must not rise above 9.
Chocolate is a mixture of cacao material with beetroot or
cane sugar and a proportionate admixture of spices (vanilla, vanillin,
cinnamon, cloves and so forth). Many chocolates contain apart from
that an addition of cacao butter.
The percentage of sugar may not amount to more than 68.
Addition of substances for dietetic and medicinal purposes is
permissible, and then the total of sugar and such addition must not
exceed 68% of the whole.
Apart from the addition of spices no other vegetable admixtures
are permissible. Nor may chocolate contain any foreign fat or
foreign mineral constituents. Cacao shells may only be present in
faint traces. The waste product falling in the cleansing of the bean
must not be added to the cacao mass, nor may it be worked up into
cacao material itself.
Chocolates which contain meal, almonds, walnuts, hazelnuts
and milk stuffs must be provided with a declaration indicating such
addition precisely, and here again the total addition of foreign ingredients
shall not exceed 68 %.212
The percentage of ash constituent shall not exceed 2.5.
Covering or coating material must satisfy the requirements
holding good for chocolate even when the coated goods
bear declarations in which the words cacao or chocolate do not expressly
occur, although admixtures of nuts, almonds and milk stuffs
not exceeding a total of 5% may be made without declaration.
Chocolate powder may not contain more than 68 % of sugar.
284
Cacao butter is the fat obtained from the hulled bean or
cacao mass.
Milk and Cream Chocolates.
1. Cream, milk and skimmed milk-chocolates are products
which are manufactured with addition of cream, milk (skimmed or
unskimmed) in a natural, thickened or dry form. They must be declared
as cream, milk or skimmed milk chocolates.
2. The fat content of full milk should amount to at least 3 per
cent., and that of cream itself 10 percent. If the full milk or cream
is added in a condensed or dried state, these ingredients must be in
corresponding proportions. As it is at present not possible to produce
a cream powder containing at least 55 percent of fat, the normal
preparation of this class is, for the time being, represented by a production
containing 5.5 percent of milk fat in the form of cream
and milk.
3. Milk chocolate prepared from skimmed milk must contain
at least 12.5 percent of dried milk or skim-milk, and “Cream”
chocolates not less than 10 percent of cream or full-cream powder.
4. The percentage of the milk or cream preparation added must
in all chocolates be deducted only from the percentage of the sugar,
i. e. the cacao content of all chocolates containing these ingredients
must be the same as in the case of the commoner varieties.
Special notice. In the case of butter chocolates, in which
the cream is replaced by pure cacao fat, the same regulations naturally
obtain; thus the amount of butter added must be not less than
5.5 percent of the whole, and the butter should be used in place of
the sugar only.
(Regulations relating to the manner of examining chocolates as
to the presence of the prescribed quantities of the above ingredients
will probably be issued in the course of a year or two.)
The Assembly of Microscopical and Food Chemists in Vienna,
held on the 12th-13th October 1897, the object of which was to fix
a “Codex Alimentarius Austriacus”, also arrived at some just and
appreciable definitions, which are well worthy of repetition here:213
1. Chocolate should consist of a mixture of cacao, Austrian
sugar capable of fermentation, further an addition of spices (cinnamon,285
cloves, vanilla or vanillin) amounting to as much as 1 percent of
the whole.
2. Cacao mass should consist of the roasted and shelled cacao
bean, ground and moulded, only.
3. Cocoa Powder should be a preparation obtained from cacao
mass only by the partial expression of the 50 percent of fat which
the latter contains and frequently treated with alkalis. The alkalis
may reach 2 percent of the whole, and the object of the treatment
with them is to effect the disintegration of the tissues of cacao or to
render the cacao “soluble
An International Congress of Chocolate and Cocoa Manufacturers
was finally held in Berne on August 21st-23rd 1911, which,
unlike the meeting held by the White Cross in Geneva (1908), the
object of which was the prevention of food adulterations, was really
international and attended by numerous manufacturers from Belgium,
Germany, England, France, Holland, Italy, Mexico, Austria, Hungary,
Russia and Switzerland, the total number of visitors amounting
to 250.214
§ 1. Cacao mass is obtained by roasting or drying215 cacao
beans which have previously been well cleaned and freed from the
shells and dust. Cacao mass can either be disintegrated, i. e. “soluble”
or untreated with disintegrating agents, i. e. “insoluble
Cacao which has been treated according to § 5 is in the real
and business sense of the term to be regarded as a pure article of
food, seeing that the treatment with alkaline carbonates or pure
alkali is a purely chemical, or technical, operation. Such cacao may
therefore be justly termed “pure
§ 2. Cacao mass may contain a quantity of added cacao butter
proportionate to the prescribed, or suitable, fat content of the cacao
preparation to be made.
§ 3. Cocoa powder should consist of defatted, or fatty, pulverised
cacao mass.
§ 4. Cocoa powder which has been opened up by means of
alkalis or otherwise is termed “soluble” or disintegrated cacao.
286
Disintegrated cacao which has been treated as described under
§ 5 may in the real and business sense of the word be regarded as a
“pure” article of food, as the treatment with alkaline carbonates or
pure alkalis is a purely chemical, or technical, operation. Such cacao
may, therefore, be justly termed “pure
§ 5. The quantity of alkali used to effect the treatment described
should not exceed 5·75216 grammes of potash or the equivalent
of another alkaline carbonate, to 100 grammes of dry defatted cacao.
§ 6. Cacao butter consists of the fat obtained from either
untreated or disintegrated cacao.
§ 7. Chocolate is a mixture of cacao mass and sugar, with or
without the addition of cacao butter. On pulverising chocolate,
chocolate powder is obtained.
§ 8. Both chocolate and chocolate powder may, if the methods
of manufacture require it, be prepared from partially defatted
cacao mass.
§ 9. The amount of cacao mass and cacao butter contained in
chocolates and chocolate powders should be at least 32 percent217
of the whole.
§ 10. Milk chocolate should consist of a mixture of cacao mass,
cacao butter, sugar and milk or milk powder. The quantity of cacao
mass and cacao butter contained in such preparations should amount
together to at least 25 percent218 of the whole.
§ 11. All chocolates which are brought on to the market under
the name of milk chocolate, must contain at least 12·5 percent of
milk or milk powder.
§ 12. No milk used for the preparation of milk chocolate may
contain any preserving agent.
§ 13. The definitions of chocolate proper apply also to covering
material.
287
§ 14. Covering chocolate may, without special designation,
contain up to 5 percent of its weight as sold of almonds, nuts, milk
or milk powder. All other additions must be clearly declared on the
packages in which the covering material is sold, or in the invoices
referring to it.
§ 15. All material (spices etc.) used for flavouring cacao preparations
must be harmless.288219
289
Cacao preparations are subject to manifold and various kinds
of adulteration. The following table gives a list of proved adulterating
agents, and contains in the last column but one hints as to how
such foreign additions can be detected, which hints are given in
more detail on various pages in this edition, the numbers of which
are annexed in the last column.
Bases for the judgment of cacao preparations appear on the
one hand in the definitions and formulas previously given, and on the
other in the rougher and finer adulterations which we had the
opportunity of detecting. We give these bases once more, at least
such as we deem necessary to a proper estimation of the purity of
cacao goods, and in general rather incline to the principles which
Filsinger has worked out for the Imperial Health Office (Germany)
and which received a hearty reception at the hands of the various
unions connected with the trade.
Chocolate, Cacao material, and cocoa powder
(defatted and disintegrated cacao) may on no account contain any
kind of foreign vegetable mixtures like starch, meal, peanut cake,
hazel nut and walnut admixtures, nor cacao shells nor yet waste
products, neither may it contain any mineral stuffs or foreign fats.
Chocolates with meal addition must contain on the wrapper a concise
and definite declaration of such addition on the wrapper. The presence
of cacao shells is detrimental to the nutritious value of the cacao
preparation, being little suited for human consumption, as they contain
a large quantity of woody substance, and apart from this, always
occur with adhering sand and earth. The removal of such shells is
since the perfecting of the cleaning machinery intended for the
purpose, become a very easy matter, and so none but very inferior290
quantities are permissible. Any additional shells (even when declared,
and very fine ground) are illegal. The addition of spices or their
corresponding ethereal oils are allowed, and as such may be considered
almonds and nuts, more especially in the case of coating
material and so forth, although they are subject to compulsory
declaration.
The same conditions prevail in the case of chocolate
enamelling and coating material as for ordinary chocolate,
and in particular they must be free from all kind of foreign fats and
cacao shells.
The use of dyes (earth-and tar-colouring matter) which are
intended as substitutes for a percentage of cacao, and not merely as
ornamental, is not permissible; and such dyes as are objectionable
from a hygienical standpoint are impossible, even when they are
used for decorating purposes. Cacao material contains on an average
from 3-4 % of ash and from 50-55 % of fat.
Admixtures of glue, tragacanth or dextrine are not permissible,
when they are intended to conceal an addition of water or to save
the use of expensive cacao fat.
Cocoa powder contains arbitrary quantities of fat, and
shows accordingly a varying quantity of ash to correspond with the
amount of fat expressed. It is therefore necessary to declare the
quantity of fat contained in quite a general manner and something in
the following grade: skimmed milk cacao under 25 % of fat, cacao
freed from oil, fatty and ordinary milk chocolate up to a percentage
not exceeding 35.220 For the same reason it is necessary to convert the
established ash contents, possibly of cacao material with 50% of fat,
or none at all. It is most to the purpose to convert in the case of dry
material which has been freed of fat, as occasionally considerable
amounts of moisture remain over from the processes of preparation.
Cocoa powder which has been disintegrated without the use of
potassium, sodium or magnesia agents (carbonic acid) will therefore
show the same ash contents as the corresponding material freed from
oil, whilst that of cacao disintegrated by means of the fixed alkalis
will be greater. The ash contents of powder freed of oil may
nevertheless not exceed 3 %, corresponding to a total 7 %. The mixture
of cocoa powder and sugar is not permissible.
Chocolates, chocolate fondants and coating mass contain
variable quantities of sugar and fat; accordingly no limits can be
assigned to the ash contents of these preparations.
291
A unanimity of opinion as to the least possible amount of
cacao for the chemical estimation of chocolate has become an urgent
necessity. Hereby it should be established that in good chocolate the
fatty contents, apart from the sugar,221 exceed a definite percentage.222
A minimum percentage of 35% of cacao mass in chocolate destined for
export, which must possibly be covered, has been fixed by the council
of commerce.
As percentage of chocolate in cacao the double quantity of non-fatty
cacao material must be taken, on the supposition that raw cacao
contains on an average 50% of fat.
So far traffic in cacao has only been brought under legal control
in three European countries, namely Belgium, Roumania, and Switzerland.
We annex in the following pages a resumé of the legal prescriptions
appertaining thereto, as being of especial importance to
exporting manufacturers.
The Belgian royal decree of the 18th November 1894
established on the basis of the law for articles of consumption, August
4th 1890, and article 454 to 457, 500 to 503, and 561 of the penal
code book runs (according to the “Moniteur Belge” of the 3rd and
4th December, 1894, as follows:
Art. 1. It is illegal to sell, expose or hold in possession for
sale, or to transmit, any other product as “all cocoa” than the fruit
of the cacao tree, raw and prepared by roasting, hulling and grinding
with or without addition of spices, and finally moulded into tablets
or reduced to powder form.
It is permissible to sell, expose or have in possession for sale,
or to transmit such cacao as has suffered a loss of butter by expressing,
provided that the amount of this ingredient is not diminished
by more than 20 % of the whole, under the designation “cocoa or cocoa
powder”; and again under the designation “alkalinised cacao” (cacao292
alcalinisé) such as has had its alkali content increased in special treatment
by not more than 3% of the total weight. The declaration
“alkalinised” is not, if a matter of mere possession or transmittance
in export, to be considered as necessary.
Cacao which has been prepared other than as above described
may only be sold, exposed or held in possession for sale, or transmitted,
under a special label which declares this special manner of
preparation next to the word “cacao” or under a label that does not
contain the word “cacao” at all.
The word “alkalinised” or any other words which indicate
alterations or additions in the natural composition of the cacao must
be introduced on the label in distinct and similar type to the word
“cacao
Cacao in which the proportion of alkali amounts to more than
3% is regarded as injurious, and the sale, having and holding in
possession or despatch of same for sale is illegal.
Art. 2. It is illegal to sell, have in possession or expose for
sale, or to transmit any product whatever, under the designation
“chocolate”, that is not manufactured exclusively from shelled cacao,
and that in a minimum proportion of 35%, and ordinary sugar, with
or without admixture of spices.
Products which though containing the requisite 35% of shelled
cacao are also made of other substances than those above signified
may only be sold, held in possession, exposed or transmitted for sale
under a label that clearly describes the nature of such ingredients
next to the word “chocolate” and in the same type, or under a label
that does not contain the word “Chocolate” at all. In the case indicated
by impressing them on each separate tablet.
Products which contain less than 35% of cacao may only be
sold, held in possession, exposed, or transmitted for sale under the
designation “cacao bonbons” or some similar description, from which
the word chocolate has been rigidly excluded.
Art. 3. Entries of the labels prescribed for the products of
irregular composition in articles 1 and 2 must be made on the invoices
despatched with the goods.
Art. 4. The box, case or wrapper etc. containing cacao or
chocolate which is sold, exposed, held in possession or transmitted
for sale must bear the name and address of the manufacturer or
seller, or at least some regular and authorised trade mark.
Art. 5. The articles of this decree, as far as they refer to
chocolate, are only applicable to ordinary chocolates in tablet, block,293
spherical or powder form, not however to cream and various sugar
confections in chocolates (such as pralinés, pastilles etc.).
Art. 6. Any infringement of the articles of this decree will
incur a fine in accordance with the code of fines issued on Aug. 4th
1890, over and above the ordinary penalties.
Art. 7. Our Board of Trade and Agriculture is hereby entrusted
with the carrying out of this decree, which shall come into force on
April 1st 1895.
The royal enactment of this land respecting the health supervision
of foods and drinks and the trade in foods and drinks, articles
154, 155, 156 and 157 of the Health act of the 11th September, 1895,
says the “Buletinul directiunei generale a serviciului sanitar” 1895,
No. 18 and 19, pages 277 et seq.
No. XIII, Article 137.
No product may be sold, exposed or held in possession or
transmitted for sale, under the designation cacao, other than the seed
of the fruit obtained from the tree “Theobroma Cacao It may be
brought on the market raw, roasted, or powdered after roasting.
Under the designation “Cocoa powder, defatted”, such may be
sold as has suffered loss of butter by extraction, provided that there
still remains a minimum 22% of cacao butter in the product. As
disintegrated cacao may be sold such powder as does not contain
more than a maximum 2% of sodium or potassium carbonate.
Art. 138. It is illegal to sell or expose for sale artificially dyed
and pulverised cacao, and also such as has been mixed with starch
meals, foreign fats or any other foreign ingredients. It is in like
manner illegal to mix cocoa powder with shells, and the former may
not contain more than a maximum 15% of powdered shell.223
Art. 139. Under the designation “Chocolate”, only the foodstuff
prepared from a mixture of roasted and powdered bean and sugar,
with or without admixture of aromatic ingredients, as vanilla,
cinnamon and the like substances, may be sold and exposed for sale.
Art. 140. The manufacture and sale, as also the exposure for
sale of chocolate from cacao that does not answer the several
demands of this decree, articles 137 and 138, as well as of chocolate
that is mixed with starch, meals, mineral and artificially coloured
substance, is illegal.
294
The association of analytic chemists in this country have
issued a book entitled “The Swiss Book of Nutritious Stuffs and
Articles of Sustenance”, where the methods and standards prevailing
in research work connected with such substances are finally established
for Switzerland. This work served as a guide as regards articles
of sustenance up to the time when the Swiss food act came into force,
and we accordingly annex a few extracts from it, dealing with our
subject, cacao preparations.
Definitions.
1. Cacao mass is obtained by grinding and moulding the shelled
and roasted cacao bean, without any admixture whatever, or extraction
of butter.
2. Cacao freed of oil is cacao that has been reduced by
from 20% to 35% as regards its butter contents by means of pressure
under heat.
3. Disintegrated cacao. The roasted beans are treated
with carbonic acid alkalis (generally potassium) subjected to pressure
under ammonia or steam, and so the cellular tissue of the albuminous
substance disintegrated or broken up and converted into a soluble
modification (peptone and alkalinous albuminate).224 The so treated
beans are next dried, reduced, defatted and pulverised.
4. Chocolate is the description of a mixture of cacao and
sugar which comes into commerce either moulded or in powder form.
The percentage of sugar amounts to between 40 and 70%. Admixture
of other substances than cacao, sugar and the usual spices must be
regarded as adulterations.225
5. Chocolate and cacao (powdered or moulded) may be
aromatised with the following substances: vanilla, benjamin gum,
tolu and peru balsam, cinnamon, cloves and nutmeg.
6. Chocolate fondants are chocolates with an unusually
large proportion of sugar and fatty contents.
7. Milk chocolate is a preparation prepared from milk,
sugar and cacao. It may not contain the preserving materials
dis-allowed for milk, such as boracic acid, borax, formic aldehyde and295
derivatives of the aromatic series. It comes into commerce in
powder form.
8. Covering or coating material is a mixture of cacao,
sugar, spices, with almonds and hazel nuts. This preparation is almost
exclusively employed for bonbon confectionery.
9. Medicinal Chocolate is a chocolate or cacao preparation
containing additions of medicaments.
Tests and Definitions always to be applied.
Tests and Definitions eventually necessary.
Guide to Classification:
Unripe, badly fermented cacao beans and those which have
been attacked by insects or mould or have suffered during transport
from the influence of salt-water, should never be used for manufacturing
purposes.
Goods prepared from such beans have an unpleasant taste,
which it is impossible to get rid of by the various operations in the
course of manufacture. The use of all such beans is to be regarded
as adulteration. The tests to be applied for determining them are
tasting, microscopical examination and perhaps the estimation of the
common salt contained in them.
All good chocolates are of a fine brown colour. Grey-coloured
or spotted chocolate are objectionable. Spots or the grey colour
alluded to may be caused either by damp or heat. At an ordinary
temperature the fracture of the chocolate is hard, glassy and even.
The quality of the fracture constitutes an excellent basis in judging
of the manner and methods employed in working up the raw material.
Cacao and chocolate that become thick and pulpy on boiling
are in all probability adulterated with meal, starch, dextrine or resin.
296
The following are to be considered as adulterations:
1. Admixtures of cacao or other shells, and sawdust.
2. Admixtures of foreign starch, meals, castania and resin.
3. Admixtures of mineral substances like ochre, clay and sand.
4. The substitution of cheaper fats, such as beef and pork
dripping, almond, poppy seed, cocoa-nut and vaseline oils.
Limitations.
1. For cacao material.
2. For cacao fat. Melting point 29 to 33·5° C.; freezing point
24 to 25° C.; refraction at 40° C., 46 to 49226; iodine value 34 to 37;
point of saponification, 192 to 202.
3. Disintegrated cacao: the amount of added alkali
is not to exceed 3%. In no case shall the ash content be more than
8%. This figure is not inconsistent with the above stated maximum
ash content, as disintegrated or soluble cacao is manufactured from
a mixture of several sorts of cacao, in each of which (although they
have been defatted) there is not more than 5% of ash.
4. Chocolate: although at the present time there are no
limits fixed for cacao and sugar, it may nevertheless be safely
assumed that the fat and sugar together may not exceed 80 to 85%,
and that the rest shall be pure non-fatty cacao material, in the proportion
of from 15-20%. The ash in a good chocolate does not
exceed 3·5%.
5. Milk chocolate: here the separate ingredients require
a thorough drying. If the percentage of moisture amounts to as much
as five percent, the whole preparation is objectionable and liable
to lose its hard consistency.
6. Chocolate à la noisette, oat, meat and medicinal
chocolates. The testing of these takes two chief directions:
1. It must be established that the ingredients given on the
label are of good quality, and
2. that only the ingredients there mentioned occur in the
packet.
297
The constituents and their proportions shall be declared on
the wrappers in the case of medicinal chocolate.
On the 1st July then, in the year 1909, the act passed in connection
with foods and articles of consumption December 5th, 1905
came into force in Switzerland. Thereby the whole of Swiss trade
in such foodstuffs and articles of consumption is systematically controlled.
Of the 268 articles which are generally representative, we
annex here those concerning cacao, powder and chocolate, namely,
nos 146 to 149.
Art. 146. Under the designation cacao or cacao powder
only the pure, unaltered or only partially defatted natural product
may be brought into commerce.
A cacao powder may only be described as soluble when it
has been treated with carbonic acid alkalis or disintegrated with
steam.
Soluble cacao may only contain 3% added alkalis on the
outside.
Art. 147. Under the designation chocolate, only a mixture
of cacao and sugar with or without addition of cacao butter
and spices is to be understood, and no other may be brought on the
market as such.
The percentage of sugar in chocolate may not exceed 68.227
Art. 148. Cacao and chocolate may not contain starch, meal,
foreign fat, mineral substances, colouring matter and so-called fat
economisers (dextrine, gelatine, resin and tragacanth) and only traces
of cacao shell. They may not be gritty nor foul smelling nor
otherwise spoilt.
Art. 149. Special products of cacao and chocolate with addition
of oats, milk, acorns and hazel nuts must be declared accordingly
(as oat cacao, milk chocolate etc.). Fancy confections fall also under
this obligation.
Cacaos and chocolates which are put on the market in packets,
boxes and packages must contain the name of the firm on the
wrapper, or some mark of the manufacturer or salesman which is
recognised in Switzerland.
If saccharine, dulcine or other artificial sweetstuffs are added
to chocolate, such admixture must be declared on the wrapper.298228
Legal control of the traffic in cacao preparations in this
country may be expected in the near future.
Austria is indeed already in possession of a law (dated
January 19th, 1896) concerning the traffic in articles of consumption,
although the special determinations have hitherto not reached perfection,
and the treatment of the separate detailed articles must
proceed gradually. As in Switzerland, the Association of Food
Chemists and Analysts here have worked out designs for a “Codex
alimentarius austriacus The work of this code commission is of a
purely private nature and accordingly no official importance accrues
to it, but it is none the less recognised by all Austrian chemists and
has indirectly (and even in law courts) about the same weight as
the opinion of an expert, especially as the single articles of consumption
are almost exclusively limited to specialists in this country.
We therefore introduce the most important points of this code which
bear on our subject, although various alterations must be made in
these as they succeed to legal recognition, for since the appearance
of the code many changes have developed as regards the methods of
research.
I. Cacao Mass.
Definition. Under cacao mass is to be understood the
material constituting a regular and uniform dough when warmed,
which has been exclusively prepared and manufactured from the
shelled cacao bean.
Ingredients. Cacao material contains the same ingredients
chemically as the shelled bean.
Microscopical investigation should only reveal the presence of
seed kernel, and not particles of root, which should be removed in
the course of preparation.
The ash may not exceed 3·5%229, the fibre 3%229, and the
starch 10·5%. The amount of fat figures at between 48 and 52
percent.
II. Cocoa powder.
(Pulverised cacao, defatted, and disintegrated.)
Definition. Hereby is understood the steamed prepara299tions
or the powder obtained by expressing at least half the total fat
from ordinary cacao material and further grinding and sifting.
Characteristics. The cocoa powder shall on boiling
with 20 to 30 times its volume of water yield a suspension, in which
there are no traces of lumpy formation, and which does not show
a sediment after the expiration of a few minutes.230 Should there
be any such sediment, it shall be examined under the microscope.
Cocoa powder shall be sifted and ground free from meal, and
may not, on sifting through a miller gauze (No. 12) show more than
5% of material on the sieve.
The chemical composition of cocoa powder is modified according
to the degree of defatting. If 30 parts out of 100 are defatted,
which is the usual procedure. If 30 parts fat are expressed from
100 parts cacao material, which usually happens, then the cocoa
powder contains
30% fat, 5% ash231, 3·5% fibre, and 13%.
The amount of moisture shall not exceed 6%.
The fat shall be pure cacao butter.
Addition of alkalis is not allowed.
Microscopical investigation as under I.
III. Chocolate.
Definition. Chocolate is the cacao material evenly and
regularly worked up with cane sugar (refined, ordinary or coarse).
The completely uniform pasty mass, when warmed, is allowed
to set in moulds and then forms pieces of fatty appearance, finely
granular or close fracture (tablets, blocks).
Good chocolate consists of 40 to 50 percent of cacao mass and
50 to 60 percent of sugar.
It may also contain a small amount of harmless aromatic substances.
Should the sum of the cacao fat and sugar in chocolate amount
to over 85 percent, it is termed “Sweetmeat chocolate”, and should
the sum of those ingredients be more than 90 percent, the chocolate
is to be declared as “Very sweet
All the ingredients in chocolate, after deducting the sugar,300
shall be present in the same relative proportion and in the same
condition as in pure cacao mass (compare I).
Sweetened chocolate is an exception, in so far as it has had
in its preparation an addition of cacao butter. Fine kinds are also
prepared with an addition of defatted cacao.
Unmoulded chocolate or chocolate powder shall answer
to the same requirements.
IV. Cacao surrogate and chocolate surrogate.
Definition. Cacao preparations containing admixtures
of meal are to be described as surrogates.
The addition of other substances than meal is inadmissible.
Absence of cacao husk is also required as in I, II, III.
Mixtures of cacao powder, sugar and meal are also to be
regarded as surrogates.
The extent of the addition of meal is to be distinctly noted by
the seller on the article sold.
V. Couverture (coating mass).
Definition. This includes various preparations of pure
cacao butter and chocolate (or mixtures of chocolate with cacao
butter and cacao mass), which form a thin liquid, when warmed,
and are used for coating or pouring over confectionery. All other
substances (roasted hazel nuts or almonds and the like) shall be
declared.
Investigation.
To be carried out without exception with all
cacao preparations:
1. Determination of fat. The fat is extracted from
the dry substance which has been mixed with an indifferent body
(sand) by pure and absolutely dry ether (distilled over sodium) or
by petroleum ether. Cacao mass and chocolate must first be shaved
or rasped.
2. Jesting of the fat.
a) Determination of the melting point in a capillary tube (three
days after the fat has been melted into the tube).232 Pure cacao
butter usually melts at 33° C.
b) Determination of the iodine value; usually 35·0 with pure
cacao fat.
It is further recommended to make a refractometric determination,
which in a Zeiss butter-refractometer must be 46·5° at 40° C.
301
3. The microscopic test of the substance, from which
the fat and the sugar have been removed.
The following are also essential:
I. With cacao mass.
The determination of fibre and ash.
II. Cacao powder.
Determination of moisture at 100° C., of the fibre and ash and
examination of the ash (quantitative determination of phosphoric acid
and potash).
III. Chocolate.
Determination of the sugar by polarisation of the aqueous
solution.
IV. Surrogates.
Determination of the starch.
If it is considered necessary to proceed further, then:
1. Determination of theobromine by a modification of Wolfram’s
method, the method employed is to be exactly stated.233
2. In the determination of starch, the gelatinisation is to be
carried out under steam pressure and the inverted sugar gravimetrically
determined with Fehling’s solution.
An opinion of the quality of the preparation can be formed
from the taste, smell and colour of the sample on boiling with water.
In Germany, unfortunately, there is at present no law,
which regulates the trade in cacao goods. It is true that there exists
the decree of the 14th May, 1879 respecting the trade in food, alimentary
substances and comestibles, which contains the usual penal
enactments in regard to adulteration of food materials offered for
sale. The enactments are supplemented with data relating to the
administration of the law, among which a definition of chocolate, as
well as the means of judging as to the quality or its adulteration, are
treated of. But those data do not in all respects apply to existing
conditions, nor do they deal fully with the question as to what admixtures
are to be permitted or prohibited, for in the introduction to
the appendix A, there is the following statement:
302
“Like the former provision, the present one is not intended
to be an exhaustive description of all subjects of the kind referred
to, but a compilation of those examples which appear to be especially
calculated to serve as an illustration of legislative requirements.”
The data referred to have not an officially authoritative significance,
and they cannot be regarded as having established validity
in connection with the administration of the law by the police or
by legal authorities. (See: Commentary by Meyer-Finkenburg,
page 116.)
Even the complete publication of the “Vereinbarungen zur einheitlichen
Untersuchung von Nahrungs-und Genußmitteln sowie Gebrauchsgegenständen
für das Deutsche Reich”, collected at the instance
of the national health department, will not have the effect of
giving certainty in the law relating to the manufacture of chocolate.
That section of the “Vereinbarungen”, which deals with cacao products,
was published in Book III (Berlin, Julius Springer 1912) pages
68-81, but the conditions in Germany are at present only similar to
those existing in Switzerland and in Austria. The “Vereinbarungen”
are nothing more, than a valuable semiofficial guide for the valuation
and examination of food and comestibles, the provisions of which,
not being obligationary, have no legal effect. They have long been
in need of a thorough revision, as recent scientifical results testify,
and indeed “The Voluntary association of German Food Chemists”
have for years been engaged in such revision.
The consequence is, that the prosecution of various manipulation
which certainly deserve to be objected to, such as the preparation
of cacao or chocolate from undecorticated beans, would be
difficult to carry out. The Association of German Chocolate Manufacturers
has protested against that unsuitable state of affairs, and
since a remedy is to be looked for only from the enactment of a law
regulating the trade in cacao products, that association prepared a
draft act, at its XVII. annual meeting at Leipsic on the 15th January
1893, and has submitted it to the government health department.
That draft is in accordance with the provisions printed on
pages 231 and 232 a-e. The provisions of the association in reference
to the trade in cacao products also contain the following paragraphs:
§ 2.
It is not to be considered adulteration or counterfeit, within
the meaning of the law (§ 10) relating to trade in food materials,
comestibles or articles of consumption (of 14th May 1879, Reichsgesetzblatt
page 145):
1. When the productions referred to under a, b, c are mixed with
meal or other substances for medicinal purposes, provided, they are303
of a character by which they are distinctly recognisable, or are
kept in stock or offered for sale under a designation distinguishing
them from chocolate, cacao mass, or cacao powder.
2. When covering or coating material, or sweetmeat chocolate
is mixed with burnt almonds or hazel nuts to the extent of 5 %.
§ 3.
Adulteration within the meaning of the law dated May 14th
1879, § 10 (Reichsgesetzblatt, page 145) comprises:
1. The addition of foreign fat to chocolate, cacao mass or
cacao butter.
2. The addition to chocolate, cacao material or cocoa powder
of cacao husk, meal or other substances, except in the cases
mentioned on page 279, § 2, pos. 1 and 2.234
3. The addition of colouring materials to chocolate.
4. The addition to chocolate or chocolate surrogates of any but
cane sugars (beetroot sugar).
§ 4.
As already pointed out, the terms of this proposed legislative
step naturally command approval and we should be the first to
welcome the appearance of a “Deutsches Lebensmittelbuch” or some
similar work235, intended to serve as an authoritative regulation of
the trade in cacao preparations and as a protection of honest manufacturers
against the uncertainty now attending legal proceedings.
In that case, other civilised countries might be expected to follow.
304
In constructing a new factory and fixing the situation of the
buildings, the first thing to be considered is their convenient arrangement.
It is therefore advisable to rely upon an experienced person
for the plan to be adopted, and then to leave the proper construction
of the works in the hands of the architect. Small operations can be
carried on in any building, but in the case of larger works a well
devised arrangement of the machines and appliances must be decided
upon before hand, that will admit of rational and, to some extent,
automatic working. In case of erecting small works which will
require only one manager, the best plan would be to have the whole
manufacture carried out on one story, or at the most two stories, to
facilitate supervision.
The case is different with large works, in which the different
departments are controlled by especially qualified persons.
Tables I and II236 represent, in section, a chocolate factory
and a cacao powder factory. As both plans represent only a model
section, they serve only to show the most convenient arrangement
of the machines with each other. In reality there would be more
or less machines of the same kind placed together. Such arrangements
might, with modifications, serve for medium sized works, as
well as for larger ones. In that sense the following explanations
of the two plans are to be understood.
Longitudinal Section of a model Chocolate Factory

For explanation of figures see text.

Zipperer, Manufacture of Chocolate etc. 3rd edition.
Verlag M. Krayn, Berlin W. 10.
Click on the images to see a larger version.
Longitudinal Section of a model Cocoa Factory

For explanation of figures see text.

Zipperer, Manufacture of Chocolate etc. 3rd edition.
Verlag M. Krayn, Berlin W. 10.
305
By means of the lift (1) all the raw materials, sugar, cacao,
packing materials, etc. are carried up to the store rooms (2). In
these occur the machines for cleansing and picking the raw cacao
beans. The raw cacao is fed into the elevator boxes (3), above
the cleansing machine (4) where it is freed from dust; it passes to the
continuous band (5) where it is picked and then falls into the movable
boxes (6). It is then transferred to the hoppers (7) and is fed, by
opening a slide in the hoppers, into the roasting machine (8). The
capacity of the hoppers is sufficiently large for holding the quantity
of beans for charging the roasting machine. After the roasting is
completed, the cacao is emptied into the trucks (9) and carried to
the exhaust arrangement (10) where the beans are cooled down and
the vapour given off is passed out into the open air. At the same
time, the roasting chamber is sucked out through the funnel shaped
tube fitted to the cover of the chamber. The roasted cacao is then
passed to the boxes (11) to be conveyed by the elevator to the
crushing and cleansing machine (12). After being cleansed, the cacao
is carried in trucks (13) to the hoppers (14) by which they are fed into
the mills (15) in the lower floor. The sugar mill and the sifting
apparatus (27) placed near the crushing and cleansing machines are
also fed by a hopper from above. The dust sugar, there produced,
is carried by the lift (1) to the machine room on the first floor. Cacao
and sugar are there supplied to the incorporator (16) to be worked
together, before being passed to the rolling mill (17), where the final
rubbing is effected. After passing once or oftener through the mill,
the finished chocolate mass is then taken to the hot room (18) where
it remains in boxes until further treated and it is then taken to the
moulding room. In the incorporator (19) the mass acquires the consistence
necessary for moulding and also the requisite temperature.
The mass is then taken in lumps to the dividing machine (20) and
cut into pieces of the desired size and weight. On the table (21) the
moulds, lying upon boards, are filled with the pieces of chocolate
and they are then taken to the shaking table (22).
From this they succeed to the cooling arrangement, which
consists of an endless chain provided with travelling stages at definite
and regular intervals. The latter moves slowly through the
artificially cooled room and finally brings the moulds to the outlet
(25) where the chocolate is removed. It is then transferred on the
lift to the packing and despatching apartments specially reserved for
these operations, but not distinctly noticeable on our section.
306
The course of manufacture of cacao powder is the same as
in the manufacture of chocolate, up to the point where the cacao has
passed through the crushing and cleansing machines (12). The
broken beans are then taken by the elevator (27) to the machine for
separating the radicles (28) and thence through the hopper (14) to
the mills (15). The liquid cacao mass, passing from these mills, runs
into the pans (29) from which as much required for charging the
hydraulic presses as is can be drawn up by cocks. The accumulator
(31) supplies all the presses with water. The pressed cakes are first
put into the boxes of the frame (32). In an adjoining room is the
automatic cacao pulverizing apparatus. It is fed through the preliminary
crusher (34) from which the cacao is taken by the worm and
elevator (35) to the pulveriser (36). The powdered cacao is then
taken by a worm and elevator to the sifting machine (38).
The sifted powder falls into the tub (39) while the coarser
portion is carried back again to the pulveriser (36). The arrangements
for treating and the disintegrating cacao powder can be
provided in the manner already described.
In both plans, the boiler and engine house are to be understood
as placed in an adjoining building.
Containing an account of the methods of preparation and the composition
of some Commercial dietetic and other Cacao preparations.
The following statements and recipes have no pretension to
be complete; they are only introduced to serve as a brief summary
of those commercial cacao preparations, now in commerce, which are
mixtures of various kinds of substances with cacao or chocolate and
are largely used for dietetic purposes. Notwithstanding its necessary
incompleteness, the following account, which has been collected from
various sources, will satisfy practical requirement, since the manufacturer,
as well as the food chemist, frequently desires to obtain
information at once, that even a complete technical library is not
always able to supply. Medicinal chocolates have not been considered
in the following list, since they belong to the province of
pharmacy.
Acorn-cacao Michaelis’ contains according to an analysis by R.
Fresenius: Total nitrogen 2·29 percent, albumin 8·13 percent,
sugar 25·17 percent, starch 23·39 percent, fat 14·42 percent,307
tannin, expressed as gallotannic acid 1·96 percent, cellulose
1·88 percent.
Acorn-cacao of Hartwig & Vogel of Dresden contains water 7·5
percent, ash 3·88 percent, fat 16·54 percent, albumin 11·25
percent, carbohydrates 38·76 percent, tannin 2·50 percent.237
Acorn-cacao of Th. Timpe of Magdeburg contains in the dry substance:
albumin 13·88 percent, tannin and cacao-red 5·37
percent, carbohydrates etc. 66·41 percent, fat 10·62 percent,
ash 3·73 percent.238
Acorn-cacao can be prepared by mixing 10 parts of pure
cacao mass, 20 parts defatted cacao powder, 5 parts roasted
barley meal, 35 parts of the meal from shelled and roasted acorns
(or 10 parts of an aqueous extract of roasted acorns), 30 parts
powdered sugar, and 2 parts pure calcium phosphate.
Acorn-chocolate is a mixture of 100 parts shelled and roasted acorns
with 500 parts sugar and 400 parts cacao mass in addition to
spices.
Acorn-malt-cacao (Dieterich) is prepared by mixing 1 kilo of acorn
malt extract (Dieterich-Helfenberg) with 6 kilos of sugar (dust),
and 3 kilos defatted cacao.
Acorn-malt-chocolate (Dieterich) is prepared by accurately mixing
2 kilos acorn malt extract (Dieterich-Helfenberg) with 3½ kilos
of powdered sugar and 4½ kilos of cacao mass.
Albuminous chocolate and cacao. Riquet & Co. of Leipsic have protected
a process by various patents239 for “The production of
a tasty and genuine chocolate or cocoa powder240 rich in
albuminous constituents.” The kernels of the thoroughly roasted
bean are worked up with a mixture (?) of water and dry albumen,
allowed to stand for some time, the water evaporating, and then
the beans are worked up once more. Instead of water an aqueous
sugar solution may also be employed, and further the addition of
albumen may occur at any stage241 and in particular when sugar
solution is first taken, then the albumen and sugar necessary
for the chocolate mixed up, and finally the cacao material (with
additions of cacao oil) added. Still better (than the sugar solution)
would it be, if the albumen were incorporated in the choco308late
or cocoa material in the form of a mixture with some
emulsion (!), especially a mixture with milk.
Barley-chocolate is prepared by mixing 1 kilo of prepared barley
meal242 4½ kilos powdered sugar and 4½ kilos cacao mass. The
moulded chocolate is to be coated with varnish.
Cacao and chocolate preparations containing milk are prepared
according to A. Denayer, Brussels (German patent No. 112220,
4 February 1899) by evaporating, in the open air, a mixture of
milk and sugar to the consistency of cream, and to the hot mass,
defatted or not defatted cacao is added in the form of powder.
The resulting mixture is spread out in thin layers and exposed
to the influence of a temperature of 80-100°C. in a rarefied
atmosphere, then finally completely dried at a lower or ordinary
temperature under the same conditions.
Cacao-egg-cream (so called African punch) is thus prepared: 10 yolks
of eggs are beaten up with 300 grammes of syrup (1 part sugar to
2 parts water) and, whilst being continually whisked up, 500
grammes of cacao essence (see next paragraph) are added. The
whole is to be iced before being consumed.
Cacao-essence is prepared by macerating 125 grammes of defatted
cacao, 2 grammes vanilla, 2 grammes cinnamon, 0·75 gramme
cloves, 0·3 gramme mace and 0·10 gramme of ginger with
750 grammes of proof spirit and 250 grammes of water for 8
days, and then filtering into hot syrup, which is prepared with
550 grammes of sugar and 750 grammes water.
Cacao-liqueur. A well tested recipe for the preparation of this liqueur
is to the following effect: Defatted cacao 200 grammes, cinnamon
powder 5 grammes, vanillin 0·2 gramme, are digested for 6 days
with 1500 grammes of water and 1700 grammes of alcohol (90%)
and then mixed with 2600 grammes syrup (1400 parts sugar and
1200 parts of water) and filtered.
Cacaol, 70 parts cocoa powder, 10 parts oatmeal, 17·5 parts sugar,
2·5 parts common salt.
Cacao-malt is a mixture of 200 parts defatted cacao, 500 parts sugar
with an aqueous extract of 300 parts of kiln dried malt.
309
Cacaophen Sieberts (Cassel) is a mixture of cacao powder with flour,
sugar and milk albumin. It shows the following numbers on
analysis: fat 13·23 percent, water 7·7 percent, albumin 24·25
percent, soluble carbohydrates 17·95 percent, insoluble carbohydrates
(starch) 26·66 percent, woody fibre 2·27 percent,
ash 5·5 percent (calcium oxide 0·82 percent, phosphoric acid
(P3O5) 0·54 percent).
Children’s-Nährpulver (Lehmann-Berlin) is a mixture of meat extract,
cacao powder, salep, sugar and specially treated oyster
shells.
Chocleau, (Reichardt) a glucose chocolate material in tin tubes.
Chocolate-cream-syrup (for aërated waters): 125 grammes of rasped
chocolate, 62 grammes cacao powder and 325 grammes of water
are well mixed and to this add 148 grammes infusion of quillaia
(1·8). After standing some time add the contents of a pot of
condensed milk with 7·5 grammes of boric acid and make up
with 3·8 litres of sugar syrup (american recipe).
Chocolat digestif (Vichy chocolate) is a mixture of chocolate with
about 5 percent of sodium bicarbonate.
Chocolate-health-beer, J. Scholz (German patent No. 28819). An
extract is prepared from 10 kilos of cacao beans, which have
been kiln-dried at 75° C., shelled, broken in small pieces and
digested for half an hour with twice their weight of distilled
water at 62° C., then boiled for another half an hour and finally
allowed to stand for 48 hours at a temperature of 75° C., with
an addition of a solution of 10 kilos of sugar in distilled water,
then once more boiled until one half of the water, originally
added, has been evaporated. It is filtered, in as warm a condition
as possible, in order to separate pieces of cacao and fat,
and the extract is ready for use. The brewing process is similar
to that of brewing Bavarian beer. After the finished wort
obtained in that process has been boiled for 3 hours, 100 litres
are taken, for which 35 kilos of pale kiln-dried barley meal have
been used, and to this are added 200 grammes of the best
Bavarian hops and 12 kilos of cacao extract. The whole is once
more boiled and the subsequent operation then carried out as
usual. The fermentation (at 7·5° C.) occupies 7-8 days and the
storage in the fining vats 3-4 weeks.
Chocolat rétablière, a Vienna speciality, contains reduced metallic
iron, dried meat, pea and wheat flour, sugar and cacao in uncertain
proportions.
310
Chocolate-syrup (for soda and seltzer water). 250 grammes of defatted
cacao powder are rubbed down with 2½ litres of boiling
water in a porcelain basin on a steam bath, until it is in the
condition of an uniformly thick mass and then 1 kilo pot of condensed
milk and 2·5 kilos of powdered sugar are added, and
when the sugar is dissolved the vessel is cooled. After cooling,
the fatty particles on the surface are carefully removed, and
then 30 grammes of commercial vanilla extract and 30 grammes
of mucilage (from gummi arabicum) are added, and the whole
filtered through a stout cotton cloth (american recipe).
Chocolate-tincture (cacao-tincture) is prepared by macerating 1½
kilos of defatted cacao powder with 10 kilos of dilute alcohol
for 8 days and then filtering.
Corn-cacao contains according to Notnagel243: water 6·10 percent,
fat 16·96 percent, albuminoids 19·81 percent, theobromine 0·68
percent, fibre 3·30 percent, non-nitrogenous extractives
48·69 percent, ash 4·46 percent. The preparation under the
microscope is shown to contain, in addition to the constituents
of cacao, a large amount of oat starch, and it may be regarded
as corresponding to a mixture of equal parts of defatted cacao
and oat meal, based on the above analysis and König’s mean
value.
Covering or coating materials have the following composition: 50%
sugar, 30-35% fat and 20-15% cacao material free from fat,
whereby (especially in Belgium, e. g. Brussels) it is in part
supplanted by almonds, nuts etc. In such cases the iodine value
of the fat is equal to 41-42.
Diabetic chocolate has the following composition.244 Nitrogenous
substance 10·07 percent, fat 25·47 percent, levulose 19·38 per
cent, starch and cellulose 25·19 percent, besides non nitrogenous
substances 14·54 percent, saccharin 0·5 percent, mineral constituents
2·15 percent.
In this formula there is a disproportionately high percentage
of starch and cellulose and, in that respect, the composition
appears to be irrational, since the introduction of carbohydrates
into food for diabetics should be avoided as much as possible.
A more rational preparation would be a simple mixture of:

50 parts levulose | 50 parts cacao mass,
and 0·25 parts vanillin.
311
Aufrecht’s recipe for diabetic cacao is as follows:
In this recipe, also, the substitution of levulose for wheat
meal is to be recommended.
Diabetic cacao can be prepared according to J. Apt of Berlin by the
following patented process (German patent No. 116 173, 30. 1.
1900). The starch is first gelatinised by long boiling of the
coarsely powdered cacao, the mass then dried in a vacuum and
heated, or roasted at 130 to 140° C. in order to caramelise the
gelatinised starch (!). Before being boiled, it is recommended
to de-fat the cacao (with petroleum ether, for example!). Instead
of caramelising the gelatinised starch by heat direct, it can be
first converted into sugar by means of acid, then heated to
caramelisation and as much cacao fat added as may be desirable.
In order to increase its capability of emulsifying, dried albumin
is to be added.245
Dictamnia of Groult and Boutron-Russel is composed of cacao, prepared
wheat flour, starch, sugar and vanilla.
v. Donat’s albumin chocolate (German patent No. 82 434) is prepared
by mixing dried albumin in powder or in pieces with chocolate
or cacao mass, damped with a liquid medium, which does not
dissolve albumin, such as benzol, petroleum ether, ether, acetone,
methyl or ethyl alcohol. The mass is further treated in the mixer
and finally after being completely mixed, the added liquid is
allowed to evaporate.
Eucasin-chocolate and cacao are preparations containing 20 percent
of eucasin (ammonium caseinate). Eucasin is prepared by
Majert & Ebers of Grünau-Berlin.
312
Galactogen-Cacao, Thiele & Holzhause-Barleben near Magdeburg,
contains 30-32 percent of galactogen, an easily soluble and
natural preparation of milk albumin, which is prepared from
skimmed milk and contains 70 percent albumin, 3·5-4 percent
fat as well as 1·5-1·79 percent phosphoric acid. Galactogen-amylaceous
cacao, contains wheaten flour in
addition to 20-22 percent galactogen. Galactogen-Speise-Schokolade
(eating chocolate with 30 percent galactogen and
Galactogen-Koch-Schokolade (cooking chocolate) are also prepared.
Plasmon, Jropon, Somatose and lacto-egg-powder are similar
products to galactogen, and are met with in commerce combined
with cacao mass and chocolate (see plasmon cacao).
Gaugau is a children’s tea (Vienna) and consists of cacao husk.
Haema chocolate: 25-30 parts cocoa powder, 25-20 parts meal
(potato starch), 45 parts sugar, 5 parts haemoglobin and common
salt.
Hansa-Saccharin-Cacao is defatted cacao, which contains about 0·5
percent saccharin (270 times as sweet as sugar), 30 percent
fat and 20 percent albuminoids (Hahn-Holfert).
Hardidalik, an Asiatic chocolate, is composed according to Chevallier
of 42 parts cacao, 180 parts sugar, 112 parts starch flour, 64 parts
rice flour and 3 parts vanilla.
Hensel’s Nähr-Cacao, is a mixture of defatted cacao-powder with
various inorganic salts, such as calcium carbonate and phosphate;
the ash of this preparation was found to contain a larger
amount of sulphuric acid, soda and iron, than is present in normal
cacao. The fat amounted to only 5·3 percent.
Homeopathic-Chocolate of E. Kreplin, Lehrte, consists of 35 percent
pure cacao mass, 20 percent slightly roasted wheat flour and
45 percent sugar (Hager).
Husson’s Mixture contains the following materials: Arrow root 500,
oat meal 500, powdered sugar 500, powdered sago 400, cacao 50,
calcium phosphate 50, vanilla 1.
Hygiama resembles cacao in appearance and flavour and was
introduced into commerce by Dr. Theinhardt’s Nahrungsmittel-Gesellschaft
of Cannstatt (Wurtemberg). It is prepared from
condensed milk with the addition of a specially prepared cereal
and defatted cacao. It contains 22·8 percent of albumin, 6·6 per
cent. fat, 52·8 percent soluble carbohydrates, 10·5 percent313
insoluble carbohydrates, 2·5 percent food salts, 4 percent
moisture.
Iceland-moss-chocolate contains 10 percent of iceland moss gelatine.
Kaïffa (Fécule orientale) is a mixture of 500 parts cacao mass, 1250
parts rice flour, 250 parts groats, 250 parts Iceland moss gelatine,
2300 parts starch, 750 parts salep, 1000 parts sago, 6000 parts
sugar and 50 parts vanilla.
Kola-Chocolate is prepared by mixing 400 grammes of cacao mass,
450 grammes sugar, 100 grammes kola seeds in powder, 40 grammes
cacao fat and 5 grammes vanillin sugar (3 percent).
Kraft-Chocolate (Mering’s). This is a trade preparation in which
cacao butter is converted into an emulsion, probably by means of
oleic acid, and is thus rendered more digestible. Kraft-chocolate
should contain 21 percent of easily digestible fat.
Lipanin-Chocolate contains 42·38 percent fat, albumin 8·07 percent,
starch 2·7 percent, sugar 31·44 percent, in addition to non-nitrogenous
substances 18·19 percent, ash 0·68 percent, as well
as some vanillin and Peruvian balsam (Aufrecht).
Malt-cacao according to Franz Abels (German patent No. 96 318,
9. May 1896) is prepared in the following manner: The cacao
mass after being mixed with malt meal is defatted by strong
hydraulic pressure in order that the malt may be permeated with
cacao fat. It is then pulverized.
Malt-cacao-syrup or malted chocolate is prepared by mixing 240
grammes malt extract and 24 ccm vanilla extract with about
950 grammes of chocolate syrup. Vanillin or essence of cinnamon
may be used instead of vanilla extract. This preparation serves
for the making of american effervescing lemonade.
Malt-chocolate. 2 kilos of finely powdered malt and 3½ kilos
powdered sugar, both well dried, are mixed in small quantities
with 4½ kilos cacao mass in the mixing machine. The tablets
are to be coated with varnish to preserve them. (E. Dieterich.)
Malt-extract-chocolate. 4½ kilos of the finely rubbed down cacao
mass, contained in the mixing machine, are intimately mixed
with 1 kilo dried malt extract and 4½ kilos powdered sugar.
The finished tablets are to be coated with varnish. (E. Dieterich.)
Malto-leguminose-cacao gives the following numbers on analysis:
water 7·38 percent, nitrogenous substance 19·71 percent (18·26
percent digestible), theobromine 0·71 percent, maltose 1·88 per
cent., dextrin etc. 3·53 percent, starch 27·82 percent, besides non314-nitrogenous
extractives 13·8 percent, fibre 2·36 percent, ash
4·94 percent potash 1·74 percent, phosphoric acid 1·51 percent.
Meat-extract-chocolate is prepared by placing 500 grammes of meat
extract (Cibil’s or Liebig’s) in a porcelain basin and evaporating
as much as possible on the water bath: 4·7 kilos of powdered
sugar are then added and the whole rubbed down with the pestle
until the extract is homogeneous. 5 kilos of cacao mass are added
and the chocolate finished in the mixer. The moulded tablets
must be coated with varnish (Dieterich).
Milk-cacao is prepared with 1 kilo of condensed milk (prepared in
a vacuum with the addition of 10 percent of milk-sugar246 500
grammes milk sugar and sufficient powdered arrowroot to
produce a paste, which is then rolled out, broken up and lightly
baked. This milk biscuit is ground and passed through a fine
hair sieve. 750 grammes of the pulverized milk biscuit are then
carefully mixed with 250 grammes of defatted cacao and 10
grammes of an aromatic mixture and the preparation finally
preserved in metallic boxes.
A more bitter milk-cacao can also be prepared with 50 kilos cacao
powder and 50 kilos pure milk powder. This proportion may
also be varied, so that more milk powder may be used, as for
example 40 kilos cacao powder and 60 kilos pure milk powder
or 30 kilos cacao powder and 70 kilos pure milk powder.
A sweet-milk-cacao can be obtained thus:
Milk-chocolate is prepared with 28 kilos of cacao mass, 36 kilos of
powdered cane sugar, 24 kilos of milk powder and 12 kilos of
cacao butter. The material is very finely rolled at 60-70°C.
in the grinding machine described on page 000, and the finished
mass not allowed to remain in the hot closet, but almost immediately
moulded and packed. The mild kinds of cacao (Ariba,
Caracas, Ceylon, Java) are the most suitable for making milk
chocolate.
In the manufacture of pure milk cacao, the cacao315
powder is worked up for some time in the warmed mixing
machine, the sugar and the milk powder being added successively.
Cacao preparations, which are only used as beverages with
water, should have at least two parts of pure milk powder to one
part of cacao powder in order to yield a suitable preparation.
Mutase-cacao with 20 percent mutase: contains water 5·66 percent,
fat 25·24 percent247, albumin 28·31 percent, fibre 3·81 percent,
theobromine 1·67 percent, non-nitrogenous extractives 30·72 per
cent., ash 6·26 percent.
Mutase-chocolate (with 20 percent mutase) contains 16-17 percent
of albumin. Mutase is an albumin preparation obtained, without
the use of chemical reagents, from nutritive plants, also containing
the nutritive salts of the plant (10 percent). Mutase
contains 60 percent of albumin.
Nährsalz-cacao (Lahmann), i. e. “Food-salt cacao It contains water
8 percent, nitrogenous substance 17·5 percent, theobromine
1·78 percent, fat 28·26 percent, starch 11·09 percent, non-nitrogenous
extractives 26·24 percent, fibre 4·21 percent, ash
4·7 percent (potash 1·66 percent, phosphoric acid 1·56 percent).
Nährsalz-cacao or chocolate is prepared by mixing
a vegetable extract (from leguminous plants) with cacao or
chocolate. The analysis of Lahmann’s Nährsalz-chocolate
gave the following numbers: fat 24·5 percent, ash
1·36 percent, water 1·08 percent, albumin 6·25 percent, phosphoric
acid (P2O5) 0·44 percent.
Nähr-und Heilpulver. (Food and health-powder) of Dr. Koeben
contains sugar, cacao, pollards and acorn coffee. (Hager’s Handbuch
der Pharmaceutischen Praxis.).
Natur-cocoa and natur-chocolate (natural cacao etc.) Spindler, Stuttgart
(German patent No. 47226) are obtained by mixing cacao
mass with hot honey. This effects a defatting of the cacao mass
by spontaneous separation of the fat. The defatting can be suitably
carried further by pressing. Instead of using honey, the defatting
can be carried out with syrups, malt extract, condensed
milk, fruit juices or plant mucilage (extracts from pulse).248
Nuco-cocoa is a mixture of cacao with “nuco”, which is a highly
praised preparation of albumin. The analysis of nuco cacao316
gave ash 4·06 percent, moisture 6 percent, fat 15·23 percent,
albumin 47 percent, the iodine value of the fat is = 86. The
fragments of tissue under the microscope appear completely
analogous to that of earth nut (arachis hypogaea). Nuco-cacao
is consequently nothing more than a mixture of defatted cacao
with defatted earth nut (earth nut cake).
Oat-cocoa, Hallenser (half and half) contains 6·5 percent moisture,
4·1 percent mineral constituents, 89·4 percent organic substances
(containing 4·3 percent nitrogenous matter) digestible albumin
14·7 percent, fat 17·2 percent, theobromine 0·77 percent, starch
and other non-nitrogenous extractives 48·93 percent, cellulose
3·5 percent. This is evidently a mixture of equal parts of oat
meal and cacao powder as the name implies.
Oat-cacao Kasseler (Hansen & Co.) is prepared according to the
German patent No. 93500, 28th June 1896, by mixing oat meal
with cacao. This mixture is moulded, pressed and, after being
wrapped in perforated tin foil, defatted by ether. It contains 7·2
percent moisture, 3·5 percent mineral substances, 89·3 percent
organic substances, which are composed of nitrogenous substance
3·9 percent digestible albumin 18·8 percent, fat 18·3 percent,
theobromine 0·46 percent, starch and other non-nitrogenous
extractives 44·94 percent, cellulose 2·9 percent.249 It is likewise
a mixture of 50 percent of oat meat with 50 percent of cacao.
Oat-cocoa can be simply prepared by mixing cacao powder with an
equal part of prepared oat meal, such as is produced by Hohenlohe’s
Präservefabrik, by Knorr of Heilbronn and by the Quaker
Oats Company. In order to cover the taste of the oat meal
1-2 percent of sodium chloride is to be added.
J. Berlit, German patent No. 72449, describes the following method
for the preparation of oat-cacao, Oats are cleaned, bruised,
slightly roasted and ground. The powder is wetted and by means
of a kneading machine worked up to a paste which is dried in a
vacuum, finally ground and mixed with defatted cacao in the
required proportions.
Palamoud des Turcs consists of cacao mass, rice-meal, starch and
sandal wood.
Peptone-cocoa contains: water 4·08 percent, nitrogenous substance
20·56 percent, albumose 8·25 percent, peptone 4·41 percent,
theobromine 1·03 percent, sugar 49·51 percent, besides non317-nitrogenous
constituents 9·37 percent, woody fibre 1·43 percent,
mineral substance 4·17 percent (potash 1·97 percent, phosphoric
acid 1·21 percent).
Peptone-powder-cocoa (20 percent) is prepared by mixing 20 parts
of Koch’s meat peptone in the form of extract with 50 parts of
sugar and 40 parts cacao powder.
Peptone-chocolate contains 10 percent of dry peptone.
Plasmon-chocolate and cocoa contains 20 percent plasmon250 (Siebold).
Racahout des Arabes see page 00, note.
Raspberry chocolate (Sarotti), German patent 181760 and 204603,
prepared with addition of the juice of the raspberry.
Saccharin-cocoa gives the following results on analysis: water 7·26
percent, nitrogenous substance 20·5 percent, theobromine 2·09
percent, fat 32·25 percent, saccharin 0·4 percent, starch 13·02
percent, non-nitrogenous extractives 13·51 percent, woody fibre
5·27 percent, ash 5·93 percent, (potash 2·16 percent, phosphoric
acid 1·69 percent). See also Hansa-Saccharin-cacao on page. 00.
Somatose-cocoa with sugar and somatose-chocolate contains about
10 percent somatose251; the first preparation contains 20·71 per
cent total nitrogenous substance, and the latter 10·24 percent,
of which about 1/3 consists of soluble nitrogenous compounds.
(Mansfeld.) The first preparation could be readily prepared by
mixing 10 parts of somatose (Farbwerke Bayer &. Cie., Elberfeld)
with 50 parts of sugar and 40 parts of cocoa powder.
Theobromade (theobromine) is a dry extract from cacao husks.
Dr. Thesen’s Proviant comes into commerce in the form of chocolate
and is chocolate with an addition of albumin. Its analysis gives
the following results: Albumin 20·5 percent, theobromine 0·56
percent, fat 39·79 percent, carbohydrates a) (soluble) 26·95 per
cent, b) (insoluble) 5·66 percent, ash 2·25 percent, water 1·57
percent. A similar product to Thesen’s Proviant results from
mixing: albumin 12·5 parts, fat (cacao butter) 10 parts, fat (cocoa
nut butter 7·5 parts, sugar 25 parts, cacao 45 parts.
Tropon-cocoa is a varying mixture of tropon, 15-33-1/3 percent,
with cacao powder. A tropon cocoa containing 20 percent of318
tropon gave on analysis: water 5·75 percent, albumin 38·49 per
cent., fat 27·77 percent, fibre 3·76 percent, ash 4·51 percent,
theobromine 1·6 percent, extractives 22·78 percent.
Tropon-chocolate is a chocolate containing 25 percent tropon.252
Tropon-Oat-cocoa contains 20 percent of tropon, 30 percent of oat
meal and 50 percent of cocoa powder.
Wacaca des Indes consists of 60 parts cacao powder, 165 parts sugar,
8 parts cinnamon, 2 parts vanilla and some tincture of ambergris.
White chocolate contains sugar 3000 parts, rice meal 860 parts, potato
flour 250 parts, cacao butter 250 parts, gum arabic 125 parts and
vanilla tincture 15 parts.253
319
In the following list are specified in chronological order only
those works and memoirs which refer to the culture of cacao and
the manufacture of cacao preparations. The remaining literature on
the subject, so far as it refers to the scientific side, has already been
mentioned in the form of footnotes.
a) Cultivation.
Jumelle Henry, Le Cacaoyer, sa culture et son exploitation dans tous
les pays de production, Paris 1900.
J. Hinchley Hart, F. L. S., Cacao, A treatise on the cultivation and
curing of cacao. II. Edition. Trinidad 1900.
b) Technology.
Dictionnaire technologique ou nouveau Dictionnaire
universel des arts et métiers et de l’économie industrielle par une
société de savans et d’artistes. Paris 1823 et 1824. Tomes 4 et 5.
J. J. R. von Prechtl’s Technologische Encyclopädie, Stuttgart
Bd. III und Supplement-Bd. II. Stuttgart 1859.
Mitscherlich, A., Der Kakao und die Schokolade. Berlin 1859.
Zipperer, P., Die Neuerungen in der Fabrikation von Schokoladen
und diesen verwandten diätetischen Produkten. Chemiker-Zeitung
1892 No. 58; 1893 No. 54; 1895 No. 21.
Gordian, A., Die deutsche Schokoladen-und Zuckerwaren-Industrie.
Hamburg 1895.
Gordian, Zeitschrift für die Kakao-, Schokoladen und Zuckerwaren-Industrie
etc., Hamburg, seit 1896.
De Belfort de la Roque, L., Guide practique de la Fabrication
du chocolat. Paris 1895.
Filsinger, F., Fortschritte in der Fabrikation von Schokolade
und ihr verwandten diätetischen Präparaten in den Jahren
1895-1899, Chemiker-Zeitung 1897, No. 22 des Jahres 1897; ibid.
1898, No. 42 des Jahres 1898; des Jahres 1899, ibid. 1899, No. 48.
320
Spamer’s, O., Buch der Erfindungen, Gewerbe und Industrieen.
Leipzig 1897, Band IV.
Muspratt’s Theoretische, praktische und analytische Chemie in
Anwendung auf Künste und Gewerbe, begonnen von F. Stohmann
und B. Kerl, herausgegeben von H. Bunte. Braunschweig
1898, Bd. VI.
Villon, A. M., Dictionnaire de Chimie industrielle, contenant les
applications de la chimie à l’industrie, à la metallurgie, à l’agriculture,
à la pharmacie, à la pyrotechnie et aux arts et métiers.
Paris 1898, Tome premier.
Luegers, O., Lexikon der gesamten Technik und ihrer Hilfswissenschaften.
Stuttgart und Leipzig 1899.
Ettling, Der Kakao, seine Kultur und Bereitung, Berlin 1903.
Kindt, Die Kultur des Kakaobaues und seine Schädlinge. Hamburg
1904.
Faber, Dr. F. C. von, Die Krankheiten und Parasiten des Kakaobaums.
Berlin 1909. (Arb. aus der Kais. Biolog. Anstalt f. Landund
Forstwissenschaft).
321
327
335
351
1
Of which the Central Province has 32,003 acres: North Western Province
3689 acres, North Central Province 25 acres, Province of Uva 2153 acres
and Province of Sabaragamura 1918 acres. (From information kindly furnished
in a letter of W. Freudenberg jun. German Consul at Colombo.)
2
See references at the end of this book.
3
Pronounced Chocolatl.
4
Revue des sciences pures et appliquées 1899, No. 4, page 127.
5
Vol. 7, Part 2: Diseases and Parasites of the Cacao Tree. With special
reference to the conditions obtaining in the colonies belonging to Germany. By
Dr. F. C. Faber, Berlin 1909, Parey & Springer.
6
Recently so-called fermenting-houses, as recommended by L. Kindt.
(Cf. Kultur d. Kakaobaues und seine Schädlinge, Hambourg 1904), have answered
very well. Yet the chemismus of fermentation is by no means sufficiently explained,
and quantitatively and qualitatively, there is a lack of completeness in
the analyses bearing on the process.
7
Special ovens (System Mayfarth) are also used, and sometimes complete
heating and drying installations.
8
This had already been noticed by J. Hinchley Hart; Cacao (Trinidad
1892). It is therefore scarcely conceivable that the “Germination” theory should
have held the field so long.
9
According to Schweizer (Pharmazeut. Ztg. 1898, page 389) these substances
would be represented by the chemical formula C60H86O15N4, corresponding
to 1 molecule cacao red, 6 molecules grape sugar, and 1 molecule
Theobromin.
10
Cf. Hilger, Apotheker-Ztg. 1892, p. 469.
11
Cf. Tropenpflanzer V. 4, 1901, April-Number.
12
Loc. cit. page 167.
13
The leaves of the tobacco plant must also be fermented, before they
acquire their rich brown colour and peculiar aroma.
14
Reports of the German Pharmaceutical Society 1900, Vol. 5, page 115.
15
J. F. Hanousek, Die Nahrungs-und Genußmittel aus dem Pflanzenreiche.
p. 437.
16
Anleitung zur mikroskopischen Untersuchung der Nahrungs-und Genußmittel.
Jena 1886.
17
Grundriß einer Histochemie der pflanzlichen Genussmittel.
18
See page 16 loc. cit.
19
Cf. Dr. Stollwerck. The Cacao and Chocolate Industries.
20
Mitscherlich, p. 57.
21
Cacao and its Preparation; a few Experiments.
22
Ridenour, M. American Journal of Pharmacy, 1895. Vol. 67, p. 207.
23
Filsinger, Chemical Journal, 1887, p. 202.
24
Z. U. N. G., 1906. Vol. 12, p. 88 et seq.
25
The husks contain no fat when in a fresh condition but absorb fat from
the bean when the cacao is fermented and dried; especially so also in the later
process of roasting, when they become saturated with it.
26
Klimont, Ber. d. Dtsch. chem. Ges. 34, 2636; Monatssch. f. Chem. 1902
(23) 51; 1904 (25) 929; 1905 (26) 536.
27
Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry 1899, p. 556.
28
Chevalier & Baudrimont, Dictionnaire des alterations.
29
Achiv de Pharmacie 1888, Vol. 26, p. 830.
30
See previous reference.
31
Schmidt, Ztschr. analyt. Chem. 1898, vol. 301 p. 301; cf. also P. Welmans,
Pharm. Ztg. 1894, p. 776.
32
Pharm. Zeitung 1898 No. 10.
33
Cor. Assoc. Germ. Choc. Man. 1889, Vol. 5, p. 65.
34
The Brit. and Colon. Druggist 1897 No. 21.
35
Zeitschr. anal. Chemie.
36
The Reichert-Meissl number (to be discussed later), according to a communication
from P. Welmans, reaches 1 Burstyn in the expressed fat and amounts
to 1·66 cc. in the extracted fat (no. of cc. of normal potash solution to 100
grammes of fat).
37
Dingler, Polytechnical Journal, Vol. 253, p. 281. For details of the method
compare also P. Welmans Zeitschrift für öffentl. Chemie, 1900, No. 5.
38
Zeitschrift für anal. Chemie 1896, p. 519.
39
Zeitschrift für öffentl. Chemie 1900, p. 95.
40
Though Strohl Zeit. Analyt. Ch. 1896. Vol. 35. p. 166. has obtained
with a Bahia fat an iodine value of 41·7, possibly exception due to some
over-roasting of the beans or to their fat having been extracted by a petroleum
ether of very high boiling point. Cf. also table 12.
41
Zeitschr. Analyt. Chem. B. 21. p. 394.
42
Correspondence of the Association of German Chocolate Manufacturers.
43
Zeitschrift für angew. Chem. 1898, p. 116.
44
We are indebted for this table to the kindness of Dr. Fritsche, Superintendent
Meat Inspector at Cleves (Cf. also table of experiments of Matthes &
Müller, loc. cit p.—et seq.).
45
Benedikt-Ulzer, Analyse der Fett-und Wachsarten. 5th. edition. 1908.
p. 840. also Literature.
46
These high percentages of acid may also be caused by the high percentage
of benzine used in the production.
47
A. Ruffin, Pharmaceutische Rundschau 1899, No. 51, p. 820.
48
Therapeutische Monatshefte. 1895. p. 345 and following pages.
49
Compt. rendus de l’aced. des sciences de Paris, Vol. 123, p. 587.
50
Apotheker-Zeitung 1892, p. 469 and Deutsche Vierteljahrsschrift für
öffentl. Gesundheitspflege 1893, No. 3.
51
Pharmaceut. Zeitung 1898, p. 389.
52
Hilger and Lazarus, Compare also Schweitzer, Pharmaceut. Zeitg. 1898,
p. 389.
53
Ann. d. Chem. and Pharm. 1841, Vol. 41, p. 125.
54
Ibid. Bd. 118, pag. 151.
55
Berliner Chemische Berichte 1897, pag. 1839.
56
Archiv f. experiment. Pathol. u. Pharmacol. 1895, Vol. 35, pag. 449.
57
Ibid. 1896, Vol. 30, pag. 53.
58
Ibid. 1896, Vol. 36, pag. 66.
59
Ibid. 1888, Vol. 24, p. 101.
60
Therapeut. Monatshefte 1890, p. 10.
61
Semaine médicale 1893, p. 366.
62
Pharmaceut. Centralhalle 1898, p. 901.
63
Dekker (Swiss Weekly Journal, Chem. a. Pharm.) 40, p. 436, 441, 451
u. 463 gives the following figures at 15 ° C.: Water 1800 parts, spirits 1600, pure
alcohol 3570, chloroform 3845, ether 25000, acetic unit 3845, benzol 100000
and amylic alcohol 1250.
64
See before.
65
Journal de Pharmacie et de Chimie 1898, p. 176.
66
Ibidem 1897, p. 329.
67
Zeitschrift für analytische Chemie, Vol. 18, p. 346.
68
Aleuron granules were first microscopically observed by H. Molisch
(Grundriß einer Histochemie d. pflanzl. Genßmittel in the cellular tissue
of the cacao bean. They are very similar to the starch granules of the bean and
contain within them a relatively large globoid lime and magnesium phosphates
associated with an organic substance (sugar) which becomes visible in the form
of globules when a section is incinerated.
69
Zeitschrift für physiologische Chemie, Vol. 11, p. 207-232.
70
Hygienische Rundschau. 1900. p. 314 & 315.
71
E. S. Bastin, American Journal of Pharmacy 1894, p. 369.
72
Chemischer technischer Centralanzeiger 1886, No. 53, p. 777.
73
Contributions to the establishment of a rational feeding of ruminants.
So-called Weender’sche Beiträge, 1864 Number, p. 48 and also Landwirtsch.
Versuchsstationen, Vol. 6, p. 497.
74
Zeitschrift für angewandte Chemie 1896, p. 712 und 749.
75
Zeitschrift für Untersuchung von Nahrungs-und Genußmittel. 1898. p. 3.
76
Zeitschrift für öffentliche Chemie 1900, p. 223.
77
Pharmaceutische Zeitung 1898, p. 390.
78
Archiv der Pharmacie 1860, Vol. 153, p. 59.
79
Beitrag zur pharmak. und chem. Kenntnis des Cacaos. Inaug.-Dissertation
Dorpat 1875.
80
Untersuchungen über Kakao und dessen Präparate, 1887.
81
Jahresbericht über die Fortschritte der Pharmacognosie etc. 1883, p. 314.
82
Archive der Pharmacie 1893, Vol. 231, p. 694.
83
Zeitschrift des allgem. öster. Apoth.-Vereins 1898, p. 434.
84
Repert. f. anal. Chemie 1885, Vol. 5, p. 178; cf. also the investigations of
Mathes & Müller.
85
Grundriß einer Histochemie der pflanzl. Genußmittel, p. 22.
86
Bulletin de la société chimique Paris 1872, p. 33.
87
Pharmaceut. Zeitung Vol. 24, p. 243.
88
Journ. de Pharm. et de Chim. 1883, Ser. V, Vol. 7, p. 506.
89
König, Die menschlichen Nahrungs-und Genußmittel, Vol. 1, p. 261.
90
Zipperer, Untersuchungen über Cacao und dessen Präparate, p. 55.
91
Zeitschr. für Untersuchung von Nahrungs-u. Genußmitteln 1898, No.
92
Repertorium der analyt. Chemie 1885, Vol. 5, p. 178.
93
Compare Matthes & Müller, Z. U. N. 1906, Vol. 12, p. 90 et seq.
94
Almost a tenth part of the ash of the shells consists of silica.
95
cf. Moeller Mikroskopie der Nahrungs-und Genußmittel. Berlin. 1905.
II part Springer p. 412.
96
Ztschr. öffentl. Ch. 1899, p. 27.
97
German patent No. 71, 373, 8th. January 1873.
98
Engl. Patent No. 14624, June 16th. 1897.
99
Pharm. Rundschau 1898, p. 781.
100
Ztschr. für chemische Industrie 1878, p. 303, German Patent No. 2112,
Sept. 24th. 1878.
101
Annales de Chimie et de Physique, Vol. 183, p. 423.
102
Zeitschrift für Pferdekunde und Pferdezucht 1888, No. 7. Nowadays
cacao shells are often added to fodder.
103
Quoted by Filsinger Zeitschr. f. öffentl. Chemie 1899, p. 27.
104
Communication from the Assoc. German Choc. Manufacturers,
19th. year, No. 7.
105
See Mitscherlich, page 111.
106
Practical Guide to Chocolate Manufacture (no date given).
107
Comptes rendus de l’Exposition, quoted by B. de la Roque.
108
Gordian, A., German Chocolate and Sugar Industries, Vol. 1, p. 22.
109
Correspondence of the Association of German Chocolate Manufacturers
1878, p. 17.
110
Correspondence of Ass. German Chocolate Manufacturers 1891, No. 5.
111
Ibid 1891, No. 7.
112
Zeitschrift für öffentliche Chemie 1898, p. 810.
113
The determining of the fibre is reached by the Weender method.
114
For that purpose boxes with handles and having a capacity of from
10½ to 60 litres are employed, as well as the portable troughs previously mentioned.
The transport of the chocolate mass also takes place in boxes made of
compressed steel plates (Siemens-Martin), galvanised or otherwise, e. g. as manufactured
by the Stamp and Press Works at Brackwede near Bielefeld. The firm
of A. Reiche and others also make similar boxes.
115
Muspratt Encyclop. Handbuch der techn. Chemie. Vol. IV, p. 190, 1902.
116
This description is taken from Muspratt, Encycl. Handb. d. Techn.
Chemie, Vol. IV, p. 1808 and Mitscherlich: Der Kakao u. die Schokolade p. 115.
117
Constructed by A. Reiche, Sheet Iron Works in Dresden-Plauen.
118
German patent No. 62784.
119
Villon-Guichard, Dictionnaire de Chimie industrielle, Vol. 1 Chocolat.
120
Should such rooms eventually be insulated, the best material for this
operation are “Corkstone Plates”, as manufactured by various firms (e. g. Korkstein-Werke
Coswig i. Sa., etc.).
121
This extensive employment of cacao butter in the preparation of covering
material on the one hand, and on the other the consequently increased cost of
chocolates rich in fat, have hitherto proved the chief objection to the preparation
of cocoa powder deficient in fatty contents, which we shall discuss later.
122
D.R.P. No. 66606.
123
D.R.P. 74260 of Sept. 3rd. 1893.
124
D.R.P. No. 178897, of July 15th, 1904 (reg. 15th Nov. 1908).
125
This however, is true only to a certain degree, comp. Neumann, The
Use of Cacao as a Food Preparation, Munich & Berlin 1906, pag. 97 ff.
126
cf. Z.U.N.G. 1900, vol. 18 p. 171.
127
See enactments of the 16.9.1907 and 10.11.1909 (Coburg): Notices of
the Association of German Chocolate Makers XXX, No. 1 21.9.1909, pag. 1.
128
Cf. Z.U.N.G., Bd. 18 Nos. 1 and 2 (1909) p. 178.
129
Eng. Patent No. 20436, 24. 11. 1891.
130
The potash now generally in use is prepared from the carbon of residuary
molasses, and is technically considered, very pure. It is supplied by
Dr. Hensel & Co., Blumenthal (Hanover).
131
The special model of the Universal Mixer and Kneader has for this
purpose (apart from the metal lid shutting down air-tight) a steam drain pipe,
which is fitted with a ventilator and led into the open, so that the vapours and
chemical exhalations can escape without causing any damage.
132
German Patent No. 30 894. See also Chemiker-Zeitung 1886, p. 1431.
133
Cf. R. O. Neumann, loc. cit. page 98 and following pages.
134
Beckurts Pharmac. Jahresbericht 1883-84, p. 990.
135
The “Machines for packing en masse” Co. Ltd. Berlin, have recently
strongly recommended their “wrapping machines, for centres of any shape or
consistency, which work automatically, that is to say, it is only necessary to heap
the centres in continuous succession in the machine, when they are urged forward
and wrapped in paper or other materials, being finally despatched out of the
machine automatically. The wrappers may be simple or double, loose, or tight
fitting.” Their employment in the packing of chocolate tablets is especially recommended.—And
so the problem would be solved! Unfortunately I am in
want of personal guidance, never yet having seen the machines in working order,
and so not being able to submit any opinion as to their efficiency. Even if
they are really able to deal with larger tablets, yet the more critical problem
regards the smaller goods, especially in connection with the wrapping in tin-foil.
136
Flour can be more easily blended than starch with the cacao mass, as
the granules of starch are only with difficulty crushed.
137
Recently in some inferior kinds of cocoa powder a quantity of oatmeal
has often been added (up to 5 percent), causing the preparation to thicken when
it is boiled with water.
138
Still better, as less productive of dust, there being a less rapid circulation
of air, and also not so wasteful, are the dismembrators as built by
Paul Franke & Co.
139
Chemiker-Zeitung 1899. Repert. No. 38, p. 372.
140
Chemiker-Zeitung 1889, p. 408.
141
Beckurts Annual Report of Pharmaceutical Progress etc. 1888, p. 307.
142
See Möller p. 114.
143
Die Nahrungs-und Genußmittel aus dem Pflanzenreiche p. 140.
144
This consists of 15 parts of defatted cacao, 200 parts of arrowroot
50 parts of salep and fifty parts of vanilla-sugar.
145
Krupps Iron Works supply the latest constructions, strongly to be recommended.
146
Arbeiten des kaiserl. Gesundheitsamtes Vol. 15 p. 1-113 and Zeits. f. d.
Untersuch. von Nahrungs-und Genußmitteln Vol. 3 21.-25. January.
147
Der Tropenpflanzer 1898, p. 24.
148
Journal of the Society of Arts 1897, Vol. 46, p. 39-40.
149
Compare Gieseler, Vanillevergiftungen, Bonn 1896; Arning (Deutsch.
med. Wochenschrift 1897, pag. 435) and Guerin (Annales d’occulistique, 1895
4. October).
150
Arbeiten aus dem Kaiserl. Gesundheitsamte 1899.
151
Journal of the American Chem. Society 1899, Vol. 21, p. 719 and Chem.
Ztg. Rep. 1899, p. 275.
152
Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft Vol. VII, p. 698 and
Friedländer, Fortsch. der Theefarbenfabrikation, Berlin 1888, p. 583 and elsewhere.
153
L’état actuel de l’industrie de la parfumerie en France. Revue Générale
des sciences pures et appliquées, Paris 1897, p. 663.
154
Chem. Zeit. Repert. 1898, p. 181.
155
Pharm. Zeit. 1888, p. 634 and Pharm. Centralhalle 1898, p. 673.
156
Zeitschr. für angewandte Chemie 1899, p. 428.
157
Pharmaceutische Centralhalle 1898, p. 357.
158
Berlin 1899, Jul. Sprenger, page 53 et seq.
159
K. Dieterich, Die Analyse der Harze, Balsame und Gummiharze,
Berlin 1900, page 76.
160
Regulation of 22 and January 1896.
161
See also Farbenzeitung 1909, vol. XV, pages 301, 348, 392 and 436.
162
Ztschr. öffentl. Ch. 1900, page 324, 325.
163
Ztschr. öffentl. Ch. 1900, p. 478.
164
Journ. de Pharm. et Chim. 1898, Vol. 2, page 7.
165
See also Farnsteiner Z. U. N. & G., vol. 23 (1907), page 308.
166
See Farnsteiner’s method, Z.U.N. & G., Vol. 13 (1907), page 308.
167
6th. edition, 2nd vol., page 644.
168
Compare: Froehner & Lührig, Z.U.N. & G. IX (1903), p. 257 and Lührig
ibid. IX p. 263.
169
cf. the methods of Farnsteiner Z.U.N. & G. XIII, 1907 p. 308.
170
cf. also Farnsteiner Z.U.N. & G. XVI 1908, p. 642 yet according to information
from Dr. Böhme from the laboratory of Stollwerk Bros, bluing from
red or violet litmus paper should also take place in the case of cacao prepared
with potash, and on the contrary the Kurkuma brown not result.
171
Ztschr. für öffentl. Chemie 1900, page 304.
172
Ztschr. für öffentl. Chemie 1900, page 481.
173
Ibid. 1900, pages 86 et seq.
174
Arbeiten aus dem Kaiserl. Gesundh.-Amt 1904, page 20.
175
Ztschr. f. öffentl. Chemie 1907, page 308.
176
Forschungsberichte über Lebensmittel etc. 1896, III page 275, also Beckurt’s
Jahresbericht der Pharmazie 1896, page 746.
177
Ztschr. f. anal. Ch. vol. 3, page 233.
178
Ztschr. f. anal. Ch., vol. 19, page 246.
179
Journal of Society for Chem. Research 1899, page 556.
180
The solubility of caffeine in carbon tetrachloride is said by Eminger to
be 1:100, but Scherr maintains that a much larger quantity is required.
181
Merck’s Catalogue of Reacting Agents (2nd. Edition, page 88) gives a
convenient method of determining the presence of theobromine and caffeine
(Gerard’s reaction). We annex an extract.


Gerard’s Reaction on Theobromine.


A mixture of 0·05 g of theobromine, 3 ccm of water and ccm of soda
wash is decomposed with 1 ccm of a silver nitrate solution 10 percent strong,
heated to 60 C. and the solution so obtained cooled down. It then gelatinises
very perceptibly. Caffeine does not give this reaction.


Cf. Pharmaceutical and Chemical Journal 1906, p. 476. Apoth.-Ztg. 1906,
p. 432. Pharm. Ztg. 1906, p. 512. Chemical Leaflet 1906 II, p. 167 among others.
182
Soxhlet’s so-called steam digester, as constructed by Esser of Munich.
183
Ztschr. f. anal. Ch. 1882, Vol. 22, page 448.
184
Giornale di Farmacia, di Chimica etc. 1898.
185
Lectures for the Establishment of Rational Feeding of Animals (Weender,
Lectures), vol. 1864, p. 48. Cf. also “Landwirtschaftl. Versuchsstationen”, vol. 4,
page 497.
186
Journal of Applied Chemistry 1896, p. 712 & 749.
187
A new process for the determination of crude fibre in food stuffs.
Z.U.N. u. G. 1898, p. 3.
188
Ztschr. öff. Chemie 1899, vol. 2, p. 29.
189
Ibid. 1899, vol. 32, p. 479.
190


B. Fischer & Grünhagen, Z. U. N. u. G. 1902, V, p. 83.
P. Drawe, Ztschr. öff. Ch. 1903, IX, p. 161.
G. Lagerheim, Z. U. N. u. G. 1902, V, p. 83.
J. Decker, Schweiz. Wchschr. f. Chem. u. Pharm. 1908, 40, p. 463.
H. Lührig, Bericht d. chem. Unters.-Amtes Chemnitz 1905.
191
Pharmaceutische Zeitung 1889, p. 847.
192
Ztschr. f. öffentl. Chem. 1898, vol. IV, p. 224 u. 225.
193
Untersuchungen über Kakao und dessen Präparate, page 48.
194


See A. Leys, Journ. Pharm. et Chim. 1902 (6), 16, p. 471.
A. Steimann, Ztschr. öffentl. Ch. 1903, 9, p. 239 u. 261.
P. Welmanns, ibid. 1903, 9, p. 93 u. 115.
R. Woy, Schweiz. Wochenschr. f. Chem. u. Pharm. 1903, 41, p. 27.
A. Steimann, ibid. 1903, 41, p. 65.
Fr. David Söhne, Ztschr. öffentl. Ch. 1904, 10, p. 7.
H. Lührig, Bericht d. chem. Unters.-Amtes zu Chemnitz, 1905, p. 43.
F. Bordas & Touplain, Compt. rendues 1905, 140, p. 1098.
195
Ztschr. f. analyt. Chemie, vol. 22, p. 366.
196
Journal de Pharmacie et Chémie 1877, page 29.
197
Z.U.N. u. G. 1904, 7, p. 471.
198
Ibid. 1909, 18, p. 16 et seq.
199
Ibid. p. 17.
200
Z. U. N. and G. 1909, XVIII p. 19.
201
A word about the R.-M. number seems not out of place here. Baier
indeed gives it as an average 1·0 but it varies considerably, as his own investigations
show (8 tests of pressed or extracted fats), where there are fluctuations
of 1·65—2·37. Information kindly volunteered by Prof. Härtel and our own
experience convinces us that such fluctuations proceed generally from the Glycerine
employed, which has itself a R.-M. number, sometimes even amounting
to 1·0. It is therefore necessary to fix the standard of Glycerine used in the
experiment, only too much neglected in professional investigations.
202
Loc. cit. p. 21.
203
As starting point it may be taken for granted that the R. M. number
for milk chocolate is at a minimum 3·75, for cream chocolate 5·5 assuming that
10% cream possesses the R. M. number 3·0 and 20% that between 5·9-6.
Various roundabout calculations are so avoided, when the percentages of cream
are thus immediately converted into the R. M. number, and the method is quite
adequate for estimating purposes.
204
Method of Laxa-Baier, compare Z. U. N. and G. 1909, XVIII p. 18 and 19.
205
Compare: Welmans Zeitschrift für öffentl. Chemie 1900, page 480.
206
The reader who would further consider the form elements of cacao is
referred to the excellent paper by Py in the Journal de Pharm. et Chimie 1895.
Vol. 1, page 593.
207
Compare: E. Guenez, Revue internationale des falsifications des denrées
alimentaires 1895. Vol. 9, pages 83-84.
208
Chemiker-Zeitung 1890. Vol. 14, Rep. page 48.
209
Zeitschrift für öffentliche Chemie 1900, page 480.
210
Cf. Beytheon, Pharm. Central-Halle 47, page 749.
211
Compare page 283 and the remarks there.
212
There may be, however, an enormous difference.
213
Report and stenogr. prot. publ. by the periodical Nahrungsmittel-Untersuchung
u. Hygiene; Pertes, Wien, page 60.
214
Comp. Dr. Böhme, The Chocolate and Confectionery Industries, VI
1911, No. 37. The assembly came to an agreement on all points discussed, and
it would be well to repeat the resolutions here.
215
Dissimilar to all other existing definitions and adapted to the new
method with slightly roasted beans only.
216
I. e. about 2·3-2·5 kilos of potash to 100 kilos of cacao mass.
217
Thus satisfying the demands of the Free Association of German Food
Chemists.
218
Would thus be too little according to the regulations under II.
219
Cocoa powder may thus, according to international custom, also be
flavoured with spices.
220
Cf. in this connection page 204 and tables 19 & 20.
221
According to recent resolutions of the Free Union (cf. page 282) the
percentage of sugar in chocolate (together with additions for medicinal and
dietetic purposes) may not exceed a total 68%; but there is no fixed standard
for the fatty contents, except in the case of milk chocolates etc.
222
The excessive use of cacao butter as an admixture has lately assumed
large proportions. In commerce there are to be found many preparations designated
as “pure cacao and sugar” which contain only 15 or 20% of cacao
with 50% of fat, which are said to met a need of the public, but the maintenance
will scarcely hold water.
223
The Roumanian law admits of the sale of a cacao prepared from the
unshelled bean and only precludes secondary admixtures of shell.
224
Better albumose, or still better not included at all, as this conversion of
the albumen is by no means proved.
225
Accordingly an addition of cacao butter would be objectionable. But
with 70% of sugar, admixture of cacao butter is unconditionally necessary,
where by the pure cacao material sinks to between 10% and 20%.
226
Editor’s note: These figures are subject to correction, as they do not
tally with the majority of accepted results.
227
Cf. note on page 294 under 2.
228
Whilst in Germany such admixture is not permissible at all.
229
Editor’s note: These values would seem to require some revision, as
generally only the very inferior cacaos, like St. Thomé, Domingo, Cuba and
Haiti, show a lower ash percentage than 3·5%; Ariba, Porto Cabello, Caracas
and Guayaquil cacaos show a higher percentage the same remark applies also to
the fibre content.
230
This also requires revision, as on boiling 7·5 grammes cacao with 250
grammes water there will always be a sediment after the solution has stood for
some minutes.
231
Requiring revision. Cf. remarks on previous page and also the values
of raw fibre found by Filsinger. Editor’s note.
232
Requires revision, compare page 261. Editor’s note.
233
We would prefer Eminger’s method.—Editor’s note.
234
Cf. above, § 2, 1 and 2.
235
The “Deutsche Nahrungsmittelbuch” issued by the Association of Manufacturers
and Dealers Trading in Articles of Consumption has unfortunately
only complexed matters as it was a private undertaking and has endeavoured to
sanction various usages, better termed misusages, such as the use of forbidden
preserving and conserving agents, artificial colouring stuffs etc. It is true that
the part connected with cacao preparations constitutes a glorious exception, and
also that there are recent indications of an agitation to reform the whole code.
236
Both are designs of the firm J. M. Lehmann, by whom they have been
obligingly placed at our disposal.
237
Hahn-Holfert, Spezialitäten und Geheimmittel, page 300.
238
Pharmazeutische Zeitung 1888, page 512.
239
German patent No. 182747 (Jan. 4th 1905) 182748 (May 4th 1906).
240
German patent No. 189733 (26th February 1906), 189734 (Dec. 11th 1906).
241
Which would seem to be the only proper employment of the total
patent claim.
242
According to Dieterich (Neues Pharmazeutisches Manual, 7. edition
page 191) prepared barley meal is obtained as follows: 1 kilo barley flour is
firmly pressed into a suitable metallic (tin) vessel, so that it is about 2/3 full and
then heated on a water bath for 30 hours in all. After the lapse of 10 hours
the powder is removed and ground in a mixer them again placed in the vessel
and re-heated for 10 hours. After twice repeating this manipulation, about 900
grammes of a reddish mass will be obtained which is prepared barley meal.
243
Apotheker-Zeitung 1900, page 181.
244
Compare Aufrecht, Pharm. Zeitung 1910, page 558.
245
The absurdity of this process is too evident to need remark; would it
not have been better, if the process had not had the sanction of the patent mark?
The treatment, which the cacao here undergoes, is so barbarous, that the product
must always be spoiled. The only point attained is the complete gelatinisation
of the starch, which by further heating is to some extent converted into dextrin.
Caramelizing cannot and will not take place by heating gelatinised starch in
mixtures with a dry substance, as it occurs in cacao. But in addition, the claim
is weak that cacao so mistreated would be especially suitable for diabetics, since
cacao serves that purpose a great deal better. The addition of albumin every
properly disintegrated is not at all new, for mixtures of albumin and cacao have
existed for a very long time.—Editor’s note.
246
Instead of which pure milk powder may also be used.
247
All cacao preparations, to which albumin is added, require a large
amount of cacao butter as the albuminoids largely absorb the fat.
248
The composition of the preparation must be stated on the wrapper as
such terms as “Natur-cacao” and “Natur-chocolate” are liable to lead the purchaser
astray.—Editor’s note.
249
Alfr. Beddies, Ueber Kakaoernährung, Berlin 1897.
250
Plasmon is an albuminoid preparation from milk, to which a little
sodium bicarbonate is added to effect complete solution.
251
Somatose is a nutritive preparation made from meat and contains the
nitrogenous constituents of the muscle flesh exclusively in the form of an easily
soluble albumose.
252
Tropon is a mixture of 2 parts flesh albumin (from muscle flesh and
fish) and one part plant albumin.
253
The preparation must also bear on the wrapper a statement of its composition
in order not to mislead the purchaser.
German Text to Fig 5.
Ausgestellt vom Verband deutscher Chocoladefabrikanten.
Sitz Dresden

Verbrauch von Rohkakao
1896-1901

in Frankreich. Grossbrittanien. Holland
den Verein. Staaten v. N-A. und Deutschland
in 1000 Dz. (100 kg).

Einfuhr von Rohkakao über die Deutsche Zollgrenze
1883-1901
in Doppelzentnern.

Prozentuale-Steigerung
des durchschnittl. Verbrauchs
von Kakao (in Bohnen) Kaffee u. Tee
in Deutschland verglichen mit dem
Stande von 1840.


ANTONREICHE A. G.
:DRESDEN:
Manufacturer of Chocolate Moulds, decorated tin Boxes etc.
ESTABLISHED 1870
Chocolate Moulds of every description latest are
“Plattinol” Moulds which impart a rich lustre
and finish to the chocolate
Chocolate Drop Presses for Paste Chocolate for hand
and for liquid chocolate, Automatic Power
Chocolate Covering Apparatus
Machine for granulated Chocolate (Streussel-Machine)
Decorated Tin Boxes
WRITE FOR CATALOGUES AND PRICES
About 2000 employees
353

J. M. LEHMANN ∘ DRESDEN
Founded 1834
Oldest and largest Engineering Works for the construction of modern Machines for
the Manufacture of Cocoa and Chocolate
PARIS, 1, Passage St. Pierre Amelot.
NEW YORK, 13/15, Laight Street.
Sole Agents for Great Britain: Bramigk & Co., London E, 5, Aldgate
Hydraulic Cocoa Presses
Total Pressure over
1000 Tons
Pressure on the Cocoa over 4 Tons per square inch.
Strongest Press in the market for the Extraction
of Cocoa Butter
Automatically working Pulverising Plants for the
Manufacture of Pure and Soluble Cocoa
Execution of complete installations. Alterations in existing systems carried
out after the most approved methods.
Plans and Estimates at request.
354

J. M. LEHMANN ∘ DRESDEN
Founded 1834
Oldest and largest Engineering Works for the construction of modern Machines for
the Manufacture of Cocoa and Chocolate
PARIS, 1, Passage St. Pierre Amelot.
NEW YORK, 13/15, Laight Street.
Sole Agents for Great Britain>: Bramigk & Co., London E, 5, Aldgate
Melangeurs of latest construction
Capacities from ½ to 6 Cwt.
With automatic discharge, saving Time and Labour.
Easy handling and economical working
Refining Machines
with 3, 4, 5, 6 and 9 rollers of granite or chilled metal (steel)
with water-cooling
Very large output, great saving of space and driving power.
Extraordinary Fineness of the finished material
355
J. M. LEHMANN ∘ DRESDEN
Founded 1834
Oldest and largest Engineering Works for the construction of modern Machines for
the Manufacture of Cocoa and Chocolate
PARIS, 1, Passage St. Pierre Amelot.
NEW YORK, 13/15, Laight Street.
Sole Agents for Great Britain: Bramigk & Co., London E, 5, Aldgate
Chocolate Cooling Plants
improved construction
Mechanical Cooling Plant in conjunction with Tempering and
Moulding Machines
Melting Pan, automatic Tempering Machine, one
or more Moulding Machines, Shaking Tables
and continuously working Cooling Chamber with
forced air circulation
Largest output. Great Saving of time and
Labour. Automatic conveyance of the full moulds
over the shaking table and through the cooling
chamber to the packing room, and conveyance of
the empty moulds back to the moulding machine
356
Kunstanstalt vorm.

ETZOLD & KIESSLING A.-G.
CRIMMITSCHAU, SAXONY
The Chromolithographic Institute
Patent Folding & Fancy Paper Boxes of all kinds, for commercial
and other purposes, Showcards, Labels, Wrappers etc., Calendars,
Catalogue Covers, Reproduction of articles of merchandise
in actual colours, Insets and Advertising Novelties
Specialists in Chocolate Wrappers and
Boxes
All machines for the manufacture of Chocolate, Cocoa and
Confectionery
Paul Franke & Co.
Engineering Works
Leipzig-Böhlitz-Ehrenberg
Catalogues and Estimates on demand
M. KRAYN, Verlagsbuchhandlung, BERLIN W. 10
In meinem Verlage erschienen:
Die Chemie in industrie, Handwerk und Gewerbe von Joseph
Spennrath, weil. Direktor der gewerblichen Schulen der Stadt Aachen.
Fünfte vermehrte und verbesserte Auflage, bearbeitet von Dr. L. Sender.
Ein Lehrbuch zum Gebrauch an Schulen, sowie zum Selbstunterricht.
Preis brosch. Mk. 3.60, kart. Mk. 3.90.
Die Bedienung und Wartung elektrischer Anlagen und
Maschinen von Joseph Spennrath, weil. Direktor der städt. gewerbl.
Schulen und der Kgl. Baugewerbeschule in Aachen. Zweite, vollständig
neu bearbeitete u. bedeutend erweiterte Auflage v. Dipl.-Ing. Franz Menge.
I. Einführung in die Grundlagen der Elektrotechnik. Mit
207 Abbildungen und 1 Tafel. II. Einführung in den Bau und
die Wirkungsweise der Stromerzeuger. Mit 210 Abbildungen.
Preis pro Band brosch. Mk. 2.80, kart. Mk. 3.25. Preis komplett I./II.
brosch. Mk. 5.50, kart. Mk. 6.—.
Temperaturmeßmethoden. Handbuch zum Gebrauch bei praktischen
Temperaturmessungen von Bruno Thieme. 35 Figuren im Text. Preis
brosch. Mk. 4.—[, geb. Mk. 5.—.
Rechenhilfsbuch. Berechnungstabellen für Handel und Industrie,
insbesondere für jede Lohn-und Akkordberechnung, nach langjähriger
Erfahrung herausgegeben von G. Schuchardt. D. R. G. M.
Dritte verbesserte Auflage. Preis geb. Mk. 5.—. Für größere Betriebe
unentbehrlich! Durch eine ganz neuartige, geschützte
Register-Anordnung vermittelt das Schuchardt’sche Rechen-Hilfsbuch
schnellste Auffindung der gewünschten Zahlen.
Der Praktische Lohnrechner. Handbuch für jede Lohnberechnung
von G. Schuchardt. Preis geb. Mk. 2.—. Es sind in diesem Buche
die Lohnsätze von 7½-75 Pf. in Intervallen von 2½ Pf. aufgenommen,
ferner auch die häufig üblichen Lohnsätze von 18, 22, 28, 32 Pf. Die
Stundeneinteilung ergibt die Uebersicht von ¼ bis 99¾ Stunden.
Für kleinere und mittlere Betriebe unentbehrlich!
Die Kontrolle industrieller Betriebe. Praktische Anleitung zur
Durchführung einer modernen Betriebskontrolle von G. Schuchardt.
Preis brosch. Mk. 1.60.
Der praktische Maschinenwärter. Anleitung für Maschinisten und
Heizer sowie zum Unterricht in technischen Schulen von Paul Brauser,
Oberingenieur des Dampfkessel-Revisions-Vereins für den Regierungsbezirk
Aachen und Joseph Spennrath, weil. Direktor der gewerblichen
Schulen der Stadt Aachen. Vierte verbesserte und vermehrte Auflage.
Mit 42 Holzschnitten. Preis kart. Mk. 1.50.
Der praktische Heizer und Kesselwärter von Paul Brauser, Oberingenieur
des Dampfkessel-Revisions-Vereins für den Regierungsbezirk
Aachen und Joseph Spennrath, weil. Direktor der gewerblichen Schulen
der Stadt Aachen. Siebente verbesserte Auflage mit 60 Holzschnitten.
Preis kart. Mk. 1.80.
Zu beziehen durch jede Buchhandlung oder direkt vom Verlag
359
M. KRAYN, Verlagsbuchhandlung, BERLIN W. 10
Für alle Kalkulationsbüros!
Rechen-Resultate
Tabellen zum Ablesen der Resultate von Multiplikationen und Divisionen
(in Bruchteilen und ganzen Zahlen)
von 1 bis 1000
Zum praktischen Gebrauch für Stückzahl-, Lohn-und Prozentberechnungen,
sowie für jede Art Kalkulation
Preis gebunden 10 Mark
Herausgegeben von
F. TRIEBEL,     Kaiserlicher Revisor der Reichsdruckerei

Die Papierverarbeitung

von MAX SCHUBERT

weiland Fabrikdirektor a. D., Prof. a. d. Königl. techn. Hochschule zu Dresden
I. Band:
Die Kartonnagen-Industrie
Praktisches Handbuch
für Techniker, Kartonnagen-Fabrikanten und Buchbinder
Mit 479 Illustrationen und 2 Musterbeilagen
Preis broschiert 10.—Mark, gebunden 11.50 Mark
II. Band:
Die Buntpapier-, Tapeten-, Briefumschlag-,
Düten-oder Papiersack-, Papierwäsche-und
photographische Papier-Fabrikation
Praktisches Handbuch für
Techniker, Buntpapier-, Tapeten-und Dütenfabrikanten-Direktoren
Mit 278 Illustrationen
Preis broschiert 10.—Mark, gebunden 11.50 Mark
I. u. II. Band, zusammen bezog., brosch. 18.—M., geb. 20—M.
Ausführlicher Prospekt gratis
Zu beziehen durch jede Buchhandlung oder direkt vom Verlag
Obvious typographical errors have been silently corrected. Variations
in hyphenation have been standardised but all other spelling and
punctuation remains unchanged.
Page 61. “cacao-red, which latter is represented by the formula
C17H12(OH)10.” The first digit in the {10} is illegible in the
original, 1 is a best guess.
Page 134 “For this reason the 6, 9 or even 12 roller mills have been
more discarded since the last grinding process has been perform granite
rollers (cold process).” corrected to performed by.
Page 159. “By a special arrangement, the number of revolutions in
relation to the number of the elevations of the slab is reduced by one
fourth, viz., from 760 to 190.” by corrected to “to”.
Part III section headings added.
Page 259. “For example, if 50 ccm of the ether solution of fat give a
residue of 8·8 gramme, then 100 ccm represents 1·6 gramme. But this ·6
gramme...” corrected to 0.8 gramme and 1.6 gramme respectively.
Page 309. “with 3·8 litres of withe sugar syrup (american recipe).”
withe removed.
In order to fit within width constraints and for the sake of clarity many of the larger tables have
been split and layout altered.
Arctic and Artic, Arctic used.

by-product and bye-product. by-product used.

percent, percent., per cent, per cent., and per-cent. percent used.

BY
Dr. PAUL ZIPPERER.
Third Edition
REARRANGED, THOROUGHLY REVISED, AND LARGELY REWRITTEN.
EDITOR

DR. PHIL. HERM. SCHAEFFER
FOOD CHEMIST AND MANAGING DIRECTOR.
WITH 132 ILLUSTRATIONS, 21 TABLES AND 3 PLATES.

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.

Rosenthal & Co., Berlin NW.21, Alt-Moabit 105
It is now a decade since the appearance of the last edition, and
owing to continual delays in the compiling of the present volume, the
book has been out of print for several years. These delays ensued
because the editor wished to take into account the most recent determinations
and decrees of the guilds and various legislative factors
connected with the industry; but he was at length forced to the
conclusion that notwithstanding the excellent organisation and lofty
standing of the branch under consideration, it was useless to wait
for anything final and absolute in such a field. Suggestions of possible
improvements and indications of blemishes are therefore earnestly
invited, in order that they may be duly allowed for in the event of
a new edition.—The plan followed by Zipperer has been adopted
in the main; a tribute due to its previous success. Yet on the other
hand, the arrangement of the book has undergone some alteration,
and is, at least in the editor’s opinion, a perceptible improvement.—All
scientific, industrial and technical progress has been treated as
fully as possible, the economic part in particular having been
diligently recast.
It would, of course, have been impossible for the editor to
write all these chapters without external aid, his knowledge of the
respective branches being by no means exhaustive enough. He may
therefore be allowed to express here his obligation and thanks to
all his fellow-workers; and in particular, to the Association of
German Chocolate Manufacturers, Dresden; its managing
director, Herr Greiert; the director of the Cocoa Purchase
Co., Hamburg, Herr Rittscher, who contributed the whole of the
chapter headed; Commercial Varieties of Cacao Beans;
further to Prof. Dr. Härtel, Chief Inspector of the Royal Research
Institute, Leipsic; Dr. R. Böhme, Managing Director of Messrs. Stollwerck
Bros. Chemical Laboratory, Cologne; and to Superintendent
Engineer Schneider, of the firm J. M. Lehman, Dresden, among many
others. Mention must also be made of the manufacturers who so
kindly placed material at the editor’s disposal. Let us hope that
the work will meet with a success corresponding to the pains taken
by the editor and publishers, and prove a really serviceable Handbook
to the Chocolate Industry.

Dr. Schaeffer.
The object of this work is to furnish a source of information
and advice for those who are interested in the branch of industry
to which it relates.
The author of this treatise has therefore endeavoured not only
to describe the manufacturing processes; but he has also devoted
special attention to the raw materials employed, and endeavoured
to make them generally familiar by reference to the literature on the
subject, as well as by providing a precise account of the chemical
constituents of these substances and discussing the consequently
necessary procedure to be observed in the course of manufacture.
The art of chocolate making is no longer what it was a few decades
ago; it has for the most part passed from small operators into the
hands of large manufacturers. A short historical resumé will serve
as a sketch of this development and a cursory description of some
forms of apparatus which have now merely historical interest will
serve to show how improvement in the industry has been effected.
Chocolate is a favourite and most important article of food,
and in that sense it is subject to legal regulations for which allowances
must be made, as well as for the most suitable analytical methods
by means of which a manufacturer can ascertain the presence of
unlawful mixtures in competing products, so that knowing the regulations
in force, he may avoid any infringement of the same.
Within the ten years that have elapsed since the first edition
of this work appeared, the manufacture of chocolate has undergone
considerable expansion. Not only has the modus operandi been
simplified and improved by the introduction of a number of new
mechanical appliances, but the technique of the subject has been so
extended, both from chemical and mechanical points of view, as partly
to furnish a new standard in estimating and determining cacao constituents
and preparations. The author has endeavoured to take
due account of all these advances, and made a point of collecting
the material scattered through the various professional journals,
sifting or supplementing where necessary, in order that all engaged
in the industry, the manufacturer as well as the food
analyst and the engineer, may be in a position to derive a
vivid impression of existing conditions in the chocolate manufacture,
from the present volume.
In consideration of the importance which several branches
of the industry have recently acquired, such as the preparation
of cocoa powder, soluble cocoa, cacao butter, pralinés
and chocolate creams, space has been given to descriptions
of the respective details. On the other hand no attempt has been
made to introduce calculations as to the cost of manufacture, since
statements to that effect would possibly be rather detrimental than
otherwise.
Costs of production as regards cacao preparations is subject
to great variation, according to the scale on which they are carried
out, so that estimates made on the basis of large operations might
eventually lead to the conclusion that a small factory might be profitable,
and with no better result than that of creating undue competition
in prices and occasioning eventual failure. Moreover, the
fluctuations in the market price of cacao and sugar are so frequent,
and there is such possibility of new sources of expense, that calculations
can only apply to the time when they are made; they soon
become out of date, and then afford no trustworthy indication of
probable profit and loss.
The section treating of legislative regulations relating to the
trade in cacao preparations has undergone complete revision to
adapt it to existing conditions.
To render the book more useful, an appendix has been added
in which the production and composition of a few cacao preparations
are treated of, providing valuable data for reference.

Dr. Paul Zipperer.
1
The cacao tree with its clusters of red blossom and golden
yellow fruits is conspicuous even in tropical vegetation. Of considerable
diameter at the base, it often attains a height of eight
metres. Its wood is porous and light; the bark is cinnamon coloured,
the simply alternating leaves are from 30 to 40 cm. in length and from
10 to 12 cm. broad, growing on stalks about 3 cm. long. The upper
surface of these leaves is bright green, and the other one of a duller
colour, and slightly hairy.
The flowers, which are often covered with hairs, occur either
singly or united in bunches not only on the thicker branches but also
all along the trunk from the root upwards. (Fig. 1 A.)
The formation of the fruit takes place only from the flowers
of the stem or thicker branches, and for a thousand flowers there is
only one ripe fruit.
The flowers (fig. 1 B & C) are very small and of a reddish
white colour. Calyx and corolla are five partite, the ten filaments
are united at their base (fig. 1 G) and only half of them are developed
to fruitful organs, such as bear pollen (fig. 1 J) in their four separate
anther compartments (fig. 1 H).
The pistil is formed of five united carpels and bears in each of
its five compartments eight ovules. (Fig. 1 E & F).
The fruit is at first green, and afterwards turns yellow, but
with streaks and tints of red occurring; many varieties also are
entirely crimson. Resembling our cucumber in size, shape and
appearance (see fig. 2 A & B), it has a length of about 25 cm. and a
diameter of 10 cm., and the thickness of its shell is from 15 to 20 mm.2
This shell is of rather softer consistency than that of the gourd, and
has five deep longitudinal channels, with five others of less depth
between them.
The shell encloses a soft, sweetish pulp, within which from
twenty-five to forty almond shaped seeds are ranged in five longitudinal
rows, close to each other. The white colour of these seeds3
is frequently tinged with yellow, crimson, or violet (Sec. Fig. 2
C. D. & G).
4
The fruits ripen throughout the whole year, though but slowly
during the dry season; and the time needed for its full development
is about four months. It may be gathered at all times of the year,
although there are regular gathering seasons, determined and
modified by the respective climatic conditions. So, for example, we
find that in Brazil the principal gathering takes place in February
and July, whilst in Mexico it is in March and April. In the primeval
Amazonian forests the fruit of the cacao tree is gathered and brought
to market at all times of the year, wherever Indian tribes obtain.
The cacao tree flourishes in a warm, moist climate. It is therefore
indigenous to tropical America, from 23° north to 15° or 20°
south latitude.
Consequently the area in which it grows comprises the Central
American republic of Mexico down to the Isthmus of Panama; Guatemala,
the Greater and Lesser Antilles, Martinique, Trinidad, St. Lucia,
Granada, Cuba, Haiti, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, Guadeloupe, and San
Domingo; in South America, the republics of Venezuela, Columbia,
Guiana, Ecuador, Peru and the northern parts of Brazil, especially
the districts lying along the middle Amazon.
In all other countries where the cacao tree now flourishes, it
has been naturalised, either by colonists, or with government aid, as
in Asia, where the Philippine Islands, Java, Celebes, Amboyna and
Ceylon in particular are deserving of mention; and in Cameroon
(Bibundi, Victoria and Buea), Bourbon, San Thomé and the Canary
Islands in Africa, where the tree is sometimes found growing at an
elevation of about 980 ft. above sea level. Ceylon offers an instructive
illustration of the zeal with which the cultivation is carried
on in some districts. According to information furnished by Mr.
Ph. Freudenburg, late German Consul at Colombo, cacao had been
planted in a few instances during the time Ceylon was in possession
of the Dutch, but only since 1819 has seed been distributed out of
the botanical gardens at Kalatura, and it was still later before planters
could obtain it from those established at Peradenija. Systematic
cultivation for commercial purposes was commenced in 1872 or 1873.
The principal seats of cacao plantations are Dumbara, Kurunegalla,5
Kegalla and Polgahawella, together with North, East and West Matala,
Urah and Panwila.1 According to statistical records, the relation
between the growth and export of cacao is shown by the following
table, which also shows the development of its cultivation:
Like all other articles of human food, cacao has a history of
some interest, the most essential points of which are here summarised
from the excellent work of A. Mitscherlich.2
A knowledge of the cacao tree was first brought to Europe in
1519 by Fernando Cortez and his troops. He found in Mexico a very
extensive cultivation of cacao, which had been carried on for several
centuries. In the first letter addressed by Cortez to Charles the
Fifth, he described cacao beans as being used in place of money. Cortez
applied to the cacao tree the name of “Cacap”, a word derived
from the old Mexican designation “Cacava-quahitl”. The Mexicans
called the fruit “Cacavacentli”, the beans “Cacahoatl” and the beverage
prepared from them “Chocolatl”3, said to be derived from the
root “Cacava” and “Atl”, water. This term was adopted by the
Spaniards, and it gave rise in the course of time to the word “Chocolate”,
which is now universal.
The botanical definition of the typical form of the cacao tree,
which belongs to the family BUTTNERIACEAE, is referable to Linnaeus,
who gave it the name “Theobroma Cacao” (food of the gods,
from “Theos”, God, and “Broma”, food). Probably chocolate was a
favourite beverage with Linnaeus, who may have been acquainted6
with the work of the Paris physician Buchat, published in 1684, in
which chocolate is alluded to as an invention more worthy of being
called food of the gods than nectar or ambrosia. Clusius first described
the cacao tree in his “Plantae exoticae”. The taste for chocolate
soon spread throughout Spain after the return of Cortez’ expedition
from the New World, not, however, without encountering
some opposition, especially on the part of the clergy, who raised the
question whether it were lawful to partake of chocolate on fast days,
as it was known to possess nutritive properties. However, it found
an advocate in Cardinal Brancatio, who described it as an article
belonging, like wine, to the necessaries of life, and he therefore held
that its use in moderation could not be prohibited. In 1624 Franciscus
Rauch published a work at Vienna, in which he condemned the use
of chocolate and suggested that the monks should be prevented from
partaking of it, as a means of preventing excesses. About the commencement
of the 17th century, the use of chocolate spread from
Spain to Italy, where it was brought to the notice of the public by the
Florentine Antonio Carletti (1606), who had lived for some time in the
Antilles. The method of converting cacao beans into chocolate was
also made known in Europe by Carletti, while the Spaniards had
kept it a secret. Under Theresa of Austria, wife of Louis XIV, the
habit of taking chocolate appears to have become very common in
France after the partial introduction of cacao by importation from
Spain. The first cacao imported from the French colony of Martinique
arrived in Brest in 1679 in “Le Triomphant”, the flagship of
admiral d’Estrées. Opinion in France as to chocolate was then divided:
Madame Sévigné, once an admirer of chocolate, afterwards
wrote to her daughter: “il vous flatte pour un temps et puis il vous
allume tout d’un coup fièvre continue qui vous conduit à la mort”, a
theory which nowadays must necessarily be regarded as ridiculous.
Chocolate was in general use in England about the middle of
the 17th century. Chocolate houses, similar to the coffee houses of
Germany, were opened in London. Bontekoë, physician to
the Elector Wilhelm of Brandenburg, published in 1679 a work
entitled “Tractat van Kruyd, Thee, Coffe, Chocolate,” in which
he spoke very strongly in favour of chocolate and contributed very
sensibly to the increase of its consumption in Germany. The first
chocolate factory in Germany is said to have been erected by Prince
Wilhelm von der Lippe about the year 1756 at Steinhude. This prince
brought over Portuguese specially versed in the art of chocolate
making.
7
The first information regarding the cultivation of the cacao tree
in Mexico is that obtained on the invasion of the country by the Spaniards.
Prior to that time there is a total absence of anything definite.
The tree flourishes best in situations where the mean temperature
is between 24° and 28° C. The farther the place of cultivation
from the equator the poorer is the product. The other most
essential conditions are long continued moisture of the soil and a soft,
loose texture with abundance of humus, and above all, shelter from
the direct rays of the sun. For these reasons, planters select for their
cacao areas ground the virgin soil of which has not been exhausted by
the cultivation of other plants. The plants are either raised in a
nursery until they reach the most suitable age for transplanting, or
the seeds are sown on the ground selected for the plantation. The
transport of live seed for new plantations is attended with some
difficulty, since the seeds very quickly lose their vitality. C. Chalot4
recommends that this vitality be preserved by gathering the fruit
before it is perfectly ripe, immersing it in melted paraffin oil, and then
wrapping it in paper; on which the fruit may be transported without
losing any of its nutritive qualities.
In the sheltered valleys of tropical countries, where the soft
soil, rich in humus, is kept constantly moist by large rivers, the cacao
tree blossoms throughout the whole year. When growing wild it is
generally isolated under the shadow of larger trees; when cultivated,
the young plant is placed under the shelter of banana trees, and at a
later period of its growth shelter is provided by the coral (called
Erythrina corallodendron or Erythrina indica), further known as
“Coffie-mama” among the Surinam Dutch and madre del cacao among
the Spaniards. Yet this tree, like the Maniok, is said not to enjoy
so long a life as the cacao plant, which sometimes reaches an age of
forty years. On this account the Castilloa or also Caesalpina
dashyracis have recently been recommended as a more lasting protection.
The fact that it does not lose its leaves during the dry
season (e. g. on Java, during the East Monsoon) is an additional
advantage.
A cacao plantation requires a considerable area, in the proportion
of 50 hectares for 20,000 trees. The quantity of fruit to be
obtained from that number of trees, as an annual crop, would be8
worth from £ 1,200-1,300. In planting the seeds, they are set in rows
that are from 8 to 10 m. apart, four or five seeds being planted within
from 1 to 2 m, the shading trees being planted between the rows.
Of each five seeds planted the greater number often fail to germinate,
either in consequence of unfavourable weather or as the result of
attacks by insects etc.; but if more than one plant grows, the weaker
ones are pulled up. Until the plants are two or three years old,
they are protected by a shed open at one side, and they are transplanted
after they have attained a height of 3 ft. The chief enemies
of tropical cultivation—weeds, aerial roots, insects, bacterial infection—have
to be provided against continually, so as to prevent damage;
accordingly if the ground be not moist enough, it should be systematically
watered, and so drained if marshy, for the tree requires most
careful nursing if it is to develop into a prolific fruit-bearing specimen.
The seed germinates about fourteen days after being planted; but
flowers are not produced till after 3 or 5 years. After the tree has
once born fruit, which may occur at the end of the fourth year it
often continues to do so for fifty years. The tree is most prolific
when from twelve to thirty years old.
As in the case of all cultivated plants and domestic animals,
the existence of which does not depend on the principal of natural
selection, and among which life is not a continuous development of
endurance in the face of adverse elements, the cacao tree has its
peculiar diseases. Indeed, it would seem as though it were beset by
all vermin extant. The reader may obtain some idea of the extent of
the damage done to cacao plantations by such noxious agents, if he
turns up the clear and exhaustive account published by the Imperial
Biological Institute for Agriculture and Forestry (Germany).5
Unfortunately we have not space here to mention more than a few
of the most frequently occurring and important diseases, such as the
GUM DISEASE, which is especially destructive, gum formations in
the wood tissue and bark of the tree eventually killing it. Next
to be dreaded are the various fungus growths, cancers and cancer-like
incrustations (“Krulloten”) and broom formations. It often
happens that specii of beetle attack the tree, causing decay and rot
to set in; such e. g. are the wood-borer, bark bug, and woodbeetle.
Other parasites, again, do not destroy the whole tree, but are
equally detrimental, as they also preclude all prospects of a harvest.9
Fruit rot and its like, fruit cancer, and cacao moths, are notorious
in this connection. There are also several larger creatures which
betray a preference for the nutritious fruit of the cacao tree, various
species of rat, and the squirrel, which unite to make the planter’s
life a burden.
The gathering of the fruit is effected by means of long rods,
at the end of which is a semi-circular knife for cutting through the
stalk. The fruits are then split in two, the beans separated from
the surrounding pulp and spread out on screens to dry, or exposed to
the sun on bamboo floors. Beans so prepared are described as
unfermented.
In most lands where cacao is cultivated, another process is
adopted, calculated to heighten the flavour of the fruit and develop
its nutritious constituents. The newly gathered beans are first
partially freed from the fruity substances always adhering, then
piled up into heaps and covered with banana skins or cocoa-nut
matting, in order that they may be shut off as far as possible from
all atmospheric influence, and so left for some time, while the
chemical processes of warming and fermentation are gradually
consummating. This procedure is alternated with repeated exposures
to the sun, according to the maturity and species of the cacao bean,
and the prevailing weather conditions; though details as to the
length of time and number of repetitions necessary to the production
of a marketable article still await determination.6 It may be taken as
a general rule that fermentation should proceed till the bean, or
rather the cotyledon, has acquired the light brown colour characteristic
of chocolate. This principle is nevertheless often violated,
especially as loss of weight in the bean is often intimately connected
with complete fermentation. Unsufficiently fermented varieties, but
which were fully ripe when gathered, develop a violet colour during
this process; it is possible for them to pass through what is known
as “After fermentation” before reaching the factory. This is not
so in the case of beans developing from unripe fruit, for obviously
the valuable constituents of the cotyledon are here not prominent,10
and scarcely calculated to ferment properly. Such can be recognised
by their betraying a bluish grey colour in the drying processes, and
the soft and smooth structure which they then acquire. A normal
progress of fermentation is indicated where the interior of the mass
of beans registers, on the first morning after gathering, a temperature
not exceeding 30-33° C, 35-38° on the second day, and on the
third morning a temperature not exceeding 43° C. If the outer shells
are marked, the heating has been too severe. In countries where the
harvest season suffers from the periodical rains, drying over wooden
fires7 is often resorted to. The value of many specimens is hereby
greatly diminished when the roasting is carelessly managed, for the
smoke must on no account be allowed to come into contact with the
bean. Yet “Smoky” lots among the St. Thomas, Accra, and Kameroon
sorts were formerly much more frequent in commerce than now, for
the planter has learned to avoid this evil. After they have been
fermented, the beans are washed, or trodden with the naked foot, in
some countries, and so cleansed from the pulp remains still adhering.
They are then allowed to dry in the open air, and packed into sacks;
contact with metal or stone is strictly to be avoided, which as good
conductors of heat and rapid cooling agents are most disadvantageous.
Instead of piling the beans up in loose heaps, they may be
fermented in “Tanks” made of wood, and where possible, provided
with partitions. According to Kindt, cedar wood has been proved
best for this purpose, because of its enormous resisting capacity. It
used to be thought that in fermentation ensued a germination of the
seed,8 as in the preparation of malt; but this idea has been proved
erroneous. The contrary is rather the case, for the process almost
kills the seed; and when the sensitiveness of the latter is taken into
consideration, and also the fact that it only develops under the most
favourable conditions, it must be allowed that the statement contains
an obvious truth. Yet chemical change does take place in the fermentation
of the seed; but as to its precise nature, owing to the
lack of scientific research on the scene of operations, we are still
unable to dogmatise. It would therefore be useless to discuss the
manifold theories and speculations bearing on this point, and waste of
time to discuss the various kinds of fermentation and the chemical
processes therein involved. Yet it may almost be taken for granted,11
that the fresh-plucked bean contains a so-called glycoside9 which
decomposes into grape sugar, into an equally amyloids colour stuff
(the so-called cacao-red), and the nitrogeneous alkaloids Theobromine
and Kaffein; a change probably incidental to the fermentation.10 The
sugar might further split up into Alcohol and Carbonic Acid Gas,
although this is by no means established.
Whilst we have lost our bearings as far as the chemical aspect
of this process is concerned, we are much more firm in respect to
the biological, thanks to researches which Dr. v. Preyers has conducted
on the spot in Ceylon. Preyer’s11 experiments leave absolutely no
room for objection, and it can safely be accepted that there are no
bacteria present in fermentation, but a fungus-like growth rich in
life, a kind of yeast by him called Saccharomyces Theobromae, and
described in passing;12 facts which constitute the gist of his findings.
He further establishes that the presence of bacteria often noticed
is absolutely undesirable, and that better results are obtained when
all life is energetically combated, and especially these bacteria. We
should, then, be confronted with the same phenomenon in the preparation
of cacao as are already met with in beer brewing, and the
pressing of wine and which are still waited for in the preparing of
tea and tobacco.
The kernel of the fresh bean, “Nips”, is white and has a bitter
taste and alternates in colour between whitish yellow, rose and violet;
the mere influence of solar heat is sufficient to produce the brown
cacao pigment, but drying is not so effective as fermentation in
removing the harsh bitter taste and hence fermented beans are
always to be preferred. These have often acquired a darker colour
in the process, their weight is considerably diminished, and their
flavour modified to an oily sweetness, without losing an atom of the
original aroma13.
Commercially and for manufacturing purposes only the seeds of
the cacao tree are of importance. The root bark is said by Herr
Loyer of Manila to be of medicinal value as a remedy for certain
common female complaints and is employed by the natives of the12
Philippine Islands as an abortifacient. According to Peckoldt14 the fruit
shell contains a considerable amount of material that yields mucilage
and might therefore be utilised as a substitute for linseed.
The varieties of the cacao tree which yield the beans at the
present time occurring in commerce are.
Theobroma cacao, Linné the true cacao, spread over the
widest area, and almost exclusively cultivated on plantations,
with many varieties (Crillo, Forastero etc.) and Theobroma
bicolor, a party-coloured cacao tree the seeds of which
are mixed with Brazilian and Caracas beans.
Theobroma speciosum Wildenow, which yields, like Theobroma
cacao, Brazilian beans (magnificent tree).
Theobroma quayanense, yielding Guiana beans.
Theobroma silvestre or forest cacao.
Theobroma subincanum, white-leaved-cacao, and
Theobroma microcarpum, small-fruited cacao, are met
with as admixtures in Brazilian beans.
Theobroma glaucum, grey cacao, fruits of which variety are
found among Caracas beans.
Theobroma angustifolium the narrow-leaved and
Theobroma ovatifolium, oval leaf, may be regarded as characteristic
of Mexican cacao.
Before describing the commercial kinds of cacao, a knowledge
of which is of first importance to manufacturers, it is desirable to
consider the beans in regard to external form and microscopial
structure, in order that the use of some indispensable scientific expressions
in the subsequent description of particular commercial kinds
of cacao may be intelligible.
The bean, page 3 Fig. 2 C-G, consists, according to Hanousek15,
of a seed-shell, a seed-skin and the embryo or kernel with the radicle.
The oval-shaped seed is generally from 16 to 28 mm. long, 10 to
15 mm. broad and from 4 to 7 mm. thick. At the lower end of the
bean there is a depressed, flattened and frequently circular hilum
visible, from which a moderately marked line extends up to the apex
of the bean where it forms the centre of radiating longitudinal ribs13—
vascular bundles-extending to the middle of the bean through the
outer seed-coating back to the hilum.
The outer seed shell (cf. Fig. 3) is of the thickness of paper,
brittle, scaly externally and reddish brown, lined with a colourless
translucent membrane peeling to the so-called silver membrane (previously
but falsely known as seed envelope) and penetrating into the
convolutions of the kernel in irregularly divided folds. The shells of
some of the better sorts of beans, such as Caracas, are frequently
covered with a firmly adherent, dense, reddish-brown powder, consisting
of ferruginous loam originating from the soil on which the
beans have been dried and serving as a protection against the attacks
of insects. But opinions are divided as to, the utility of this process.
The fermented kernel consists of two large cotyledons
occupying the whole bean; it is of fatty lustre, reddish grey or brown
colour and often present a superficial violet tinge; and under gentle
pressure readily breaks up into numerous angular fragments the
surfaces of which are generally bordered by the silver membrane.
The fragments can be easily recognised when laid in water. At
the contact of the lobes there is an angular middle rib and two lateral
ribs are connected with the radicle at the broader end of the bean.
The ripe fresh-gathered cacao-kernel is undoubtedly white and the
reddish brown or violet pigment is formed during the fermenting of the
bean. But there is also a white cacao, though seldom met with.
According to information furnished by Dr. C. Rimper of Ecuador,
it is of rare occurrence and is not cultivated to any great extent.
In Trinidad also a perfectly white seeded cacao, producing large
fruit and fine kernels, was introduced from Central America by the
curator of the Botanic Gardens in 1893.
The microscopic structure of the shell, Fig. III., presents no
remarkable peculiarity that requires to be noticed here.
The delicate inner membrane (fig. 3) coating the cotyledons
and penetrating into their folds consists of several layers. Connected
with it are club-shaped glandular structures, fig. 4, consisting of
several dark coloured cells that are known as the Mitscherlich
particles. According to A. F. W. Schimper16 they are hairs fallen
from the epidermis (fig. 4) of the cotyledon and do not originate, as
was formerly supposed, in the inner silver membrane.
These structures, named after their discoverer, were formerly
supposed to be algae, or cells of the embryo sac, unconnected with
the tissues of the seed cells. They are, however, as true epidermoid
structures, similar to the hairs of other plants.14
15
These Mitscherlich particles are not only characteristic
of the seed membrane, but also of the entire seed as well
as the preparations made from it. Wherever cacao is mixed
with other materials, its presence may be ascertained by
microscopical detection of these structures, which are peculiar
to cacao.
In the large elongated, hexagonal cells of the seed membrane
there are two other structures to be seen with the aid of high power
(250 fold), one appearing as large crystalline druses, while the other
consists of extremely fine needles united in bundles.
By addition of petroleum spirit the former, consisting of fat
acid crystals, are dissolved, the latter, remaining unaltered, are considered
by Mitscherlich to be theobromine crystals, since their
crystalline form closely resembles that of theobromine. A more
scientific explanation has not been forthcoming.
The cotyledons are seen under the microscope to consist of
a tissue of thin walled cells, without cavities, lying close together,
and here and there distributed through the tissue, cells with brownish
yellow, reddish brown, or violet coloured contents. These latter
are the pigment cells which contain the substance known as cacao16-red
and analogous to tannin; it, together with theobromine, gives rise
to the delicate taste and aroma of cacao. The other cells of the tissue
are filled with extremely small starch granules the size of which
rarely exceeds 0.005 mm.; with them are associated fat, in the form
of spear-shaped crystals, and albuminoid substances.
In order to discriminate between these substances they must
be stained by various reagents. According to Molisch17, theobromine
may be recognised, in sections of the seed, by adding a drop of hydrochloric
acid and after some time an equal drop of auric chloride
solution (3 %) After some of the liquid has evaporated, bunches of
long yellow crystals of theobromine aurochloride make their
appearance. On addition of osmic acid the fat is coloured greyish
brown. On addition to the microscopic section a drop of iodine
solution, or better iodozine chloride, the starch becomes blue, while
albuminous substances are coloured yellow. Cacao starch granules
are very small and cannot well be mistaken for other kinds, except
the starch of some spices such as pimento or that of Guarana,
prepared from the seeds of Paulinna sorbilis. According to Möller
the blue iodine colouration of cacao starch takes place very slowly
and it is probably retarded by the large amount of fat present; but
the point has been contested by Zipperer and later investigators.
In order to make the starch granules of cacao and the cells
containing cacao-red distinctly visible under the microscope, it is
advisable to immerse the section in a drop of almond oil, because
the addition of water renders the object indistinct in consequence of
the large amount of fat present. Another excellent medium for the
microscopic observation of cacao is the solution of 8 parts of chloral
hydrate in 5 parts of water, as recommended by Schimper.18
By these means it may easily be seen that the pigment or
cacao red in different sorts of cacao varies more or less in colour.
To complete the account of the microscopic characters of the
cacao cotyledon, mention must be made of the small vascular
bundles, generally spiral, that are distributed throughout the
tissues of the cotyledons and are readily made visible by adding a
drop of oil or a drop of chloral hydrate solution.
Mindful of Goethe’s dictum: Friend, the paths of
theory are uncertain, and hid in gloom, we propose17
to devote this chapter to an exclusively practical discussion of the
commercial value of raw cacao, and from the merchant’s point
of view.
Such differences of opinion prevail in manufacturing circles as
to the possible uses of each separate sort, that for this reason alone
any other than a purely geographical classification would scarcely
be feasible. But apart from this, varying as it does with the protective
duties imposed, the commercial value of cacao can by no means
remain a universal constant; and it must be noted that variations in
the national taste serve to heighten its instability.
This latter circumstance also causes a deviation from the
nearly related principal that the Motherland becomes chief consumer
of the varieties grown in her colonies. The cacao sorts of the English
Gold-Coast running under the collective name of Accra, have taken
complete possession of the German market; Trinidad cacao enjoys
immense popularity in France, and the Dutch pass on the larger part
of their Java importations to other consuming nations. As regards
this latter sort, however, the fact they are chiefly employed as
colouring and covering stuffs for other cacaos must be taken into
consideration.
In most cases either the producing country or a principal
shipping port gives its name to the different sorts. Yet paradoxical
exceptions will at once occur to the reader. The inferior and mediocre
Venezuelan varieties of the Barlovento district shipped from La
Guayra are generally denominated as Caracas, notwithstanding
the fact that the capital of the republic Venezuela, situated as it is
1000 metres above sea level (being about 3300 feet), and therefore
quite outside the cacao zone, has practically no connection with the
cacao trade. The collective name, Samana still holds good for the
cacaos of the Dominican republic, at least in Germany, although this
outlet of a tiny mountainous peninsular has long ceased to export
any but very insignificant quantities. Consequently, and rightly,
the French merchant specifies these sorts as Sanchez, adopting
the name of the principal cacao exporting port of the republic. Arriba,
the choicest product of Ecuador (port, Guayaquil) takes its name
from the Spanish word arriba, above, the plantations being situated
along the upper sources of the Rio Guayas (to wit, the rivers Daule,
Vinces, and Zapotal). Other Guayaquil cacaos are named after the
rivers (Balao, Naranjal) and districts (e. g. Machala) where they are
most cultivated.
18
As in the case of so many other cultivated plants, distinguishing
characteristics of the various sorts are not only determined by the
different species of tree, but are rather and principally dependant on
the combined effect of physical and climatic conditions. So whether
the seedling Criollo, the splendid Creole bean native to Venezuela,
belongs also to the more fruitful Forastero species (spanish forastero,
foreign), a variety less sensitive and consequently commoner, is a
problem which can only claim secondary consideration.
Apart from the geographical influences mentioned, method
and nicety of procedure are of prime importance in the preparation
of the cacao sorts. Yet technically perfect implements do not always
prove the best means to an attainment of this end; it being a fact
recorded by experience that the chemical constituents of the cacao
bean reach their fullest developement in such simple and primitive
processes as, e. g. are still patronised in Ecuador and Venezuela. It
is scarcely necessary to observe that these simple and primitive
methods postulate nicety and carefulness, which failing, there will be
no lack of defects in the cacao prepared. On the Haiti/Domingo
island, e. g. a variety of cacao is harvested which is in itself very
profitable, as stray specimens finding their way to the market
testify, but which as an article of commerce proves most unreliable,
being generally brought on the market in such an unprepared state,
that fermentation first takes place on the sea voyage, and then of
course only in insufficient measure. During this period appear those
disagreeable and accompanying symptoms technically known as
“Vice propre” and the beans, which were not completely ripe in
the first place, do not develop further, and greenish breakings in
the skin become pronounced, and remain a source of terror to the
manufacturing world. All attempts made in European interests to
bring about an alteration in this deplorable state of affairs have
hitherto been lost on the indolence of the native planters. Indeed,
until the political and economical conditions prevalent among the
mixed Negro population of Haiti/Domingo are thoroughly reformed,
no perceptible improvement can be expected in the qualities of the
Samana and Haiti cacaos, for which reason, with rapidly disappearing
exceptions, there are scarcely any well organised plantations in
these parts.
Turning to the Old World, we find in the West African Gold
Coast a typical example of the possibilities of cultivation on a small
scale, under proper and competent guidance, and with primitive
processes; for not only as far as quantitative progress is concerned,19
but also in respect to quality, the varieties produced by the natives of
this English colony improve from year to year. Kameroon, a
district which like the Gold Coast has only taken to the cultivation of
cacao of late years, provides us with an exactly opposite instance.
Here the plantation system has been in force right from the commencement
of the industry, with all its technically perfected implements,
yet nevertheless the perfecting of the cacao proceeds very
slowly, and it will be a long time before the produce of this land can
lay any serious claim to specification as a variety for consumption.
Its large proportion of acid ingredient has been above all detrimental,
almost completely precluding its use as any other but a mixing sort,
although some plantations have been yielding comparatively mild
cacaos now for several years. We cannot stay to discuss the problem
of causes in this instance, and whether the fact that the Forastero
species has been exclusively planted prejudices the developement of
the cacao, or the climatic conditions, must remain an open question.
Let it be noted in passing that the Forastero Bean has taken universal
possession of Africa, as well in Kameroon, as in the Gold Coast, on
the island of St. Thomas and also in the Congo Free State. The Bahia
cacao, again, owes its origin to the Forastero seedling.
We will refrain from any further elaboration of this introduction,
however, so as not to anticipate the following review of the
various commercial sorts of cacao.
A. Central America.
We begin with
Mexico, the classical cacao land, scarcely of importance to
the general trade, as the greater part of its entire produce, comprising
about three thousand tons yearly, is consumed in its native country.
Of the other Central American states, next to
Nicaragua, whose large Venezuelan-like beans find their
way to the Hamburg market from time to time,
Costa Rica is above all worthy of mention. This state
began to export its home produce in 1912, averaging for that year
about 60 tons; and in 1909, the export had already increased to
350 tons, mostly to England and North America, through the shipping
port called Port Limon.
B. South America.
Columbia. From this republic come two distinct sorts; the
rare, rounded, and native
20
Cauca bean, which is nearly related to the Maracaibo variety,
and which cultivated along the Magdalena river is in the main
shipped from Baranquille, on the Caribbean sea, occasionally also from
Bueneventura on the Pacific coast; and then the
Tumaco Cacao, so named from the small shipping port
on the Ecuador border, which resembles the inferior sorts of the
Ecuador coast.
Cauca-and Tumaco-cacaos are only seldom free from defective
beans and worm-eatings, probably less caused by the primitive
processes of preparation than the difficult means of communication
in this country. Then also considerable quantities are retained for
home consumption.
Ecuador is the home of the cacao richest in aroma, the
country which first developed the plantation system on a large and
well organised scale, and which was still at the head of cacao-harvesting
lands a few years ago, with a yearly produce of about
32,000 tons. Yet although it had increased this amount to 40,000 tons
in the year 1911, Ecuador can only take second rank among cultivating
lands, the Gold Coast coming first. The following and most valuable
varieties are embraced under the name of the chief shipping
port.
GUAYAQUIL. They are:
1. Arriba, i. e. above, these cacaos coming from the upper
tributaries of the rio Guaya (the rivers Daule, Vinces, Publoviejo, and
Zapatol). The Arribas, like the Guayaquil cacaos generally, are
chiefly used in the preparation of cacao powders. They form e. g.
the principal constituents of the Dutch cacao powders, especially the
so-called superior Summer-Arriba, harvested from the month of April
to July. All that is gathered in other seasons falls into the general
class “Arriba superior de la época
The cacaos of the months immediately following on Summer,
the rebuscos, after crop, are as a rule the most inferior varieties
of arriba, whilst the Christmas harvest of the months of January and
February (cosecha de Navidad) often yields quite excellent sorts.
2. Machála, second in importance among the Guayaquil
sorts, rather more fatty than the ariba, and differing from this again
in Aroma and the colour of its kernel, which is of a rather darker
brown. Chief cultivation occurs in the low lying land bordering on
Peru and lying opposite the island of Jambeli, where the prevailing
climatic conditions are quite different from those in the arriba districts,
although these are not far removed. August and September are the21
harvest months for Machala. Ten years ago this sort was shipped in
large measure from the then newly created harbour Puerto Bolivar.
But since large ocean going steamers no longer call there, it now takes
the more roundabout route via Guayaquil.
3. Baláo. This variety can be described as a mean between
Machala and Arriba. It has some of the characteristics of both, the
bean being somewhat rounder.
4. Naranjal and Tenguél are likewise subdivisions of the
foregoing, except that the bean is here much larger and flatter. As
the production of all three sorts, and especially of Balao, is substantially
greater than what finds its way to the market, we may reasonably
assume that a large proportion is used for mixing purposes,
and sails on commercial seas, as it were, under false colours. Cultivating
district: the Machala district situated along the Jambeli canal,
and the stretch of coast watered by the rivers Balao and Naranjal.
5. Pegados (i. e. stuck together) or Pelatos (balls) is the description
of the cacaos comprised of series of 4-10 beans rolled together,
generally developing from overripe fruit. They experience
a particular kind of fermentation, apparently the result of the fruity
substances still evident, which gives the light coloured kernels a soft
aromatic flavour. For several years these sorts have rarely been
seen on the European market, they being generally reserved for home
consumption.
6. Oscuros, i. e. dark coloured, a refuse sort rightly viewed
with suspicion in manufacturing circles—Pelotas soaked in water, or
beans left in the clefts and fissures of the drying chamber floors.—The
black shell of the bean encloses a brownish and dirty-looking
kernel, the colour sometimes approaching black: the whole bean
giving a disagreeable impression, as it is often disfigured with mould,
and possessed of a disagreeable odour. For several years this variety
served the “crooks” of the commercial world as mixing material
for the so-called “flavouring” of Machala, but it now again appears
as a distinct sort.
The shipping port for all these cacao sorts is Guayaquil; though
other harbours also handle valuable varieties. Such, for example, are
a) Bahia de Caraquéz, and the small haven of Manta lying
south of this town, which deals in a sort resembling a blended
Machala-Balao, though occasionally light brown in appearance
and of aromatic flavour. This cacao is generally labelled as
Caraquéz for short, and is to be distinguished from Caraque,
the French term for Caracas cacao.
22
The chief harvesting months are June and July; the
April-May arrivals, however, are usually better, as the setting-in
of the rainy season increases the difficulties of drying. The
harvest in 1909 reached 3,000 tons, and is normally from
2000 to 5,000 tons yearly.
b) Esmeraldas, similar to the foregoing, but of perceptibly
inferior output, possesses only a very insignificant yield (about
150 tons a year), and this in spite of the cultivating capacities
of the interior.
Peru, the most southerly producing land on the west coast
can likewise only boast of a very insignificant yield, chiefly destined
for home consumption.
Brazil, with its two great sorts for consumption, Bahia and
Para cacao, and a yearly production of round 33,000 tons, has from
the years 1906-1909 far outrun all other harvesting lands. Yet although
it was able to increase this to 36,250 tons in 1911 it must
nevertheless take second place among cultivating lands, the Gold
Coast and Ecuador preceding.
A most important factor on the market is included under the
specification Bahia-cacao. Here again the shipping port has given
its name to the cacao sort. It is harvested in three southerly situated
districts, Ilheos, Belmonte, and Canavieiras, and is despatched to
Bahia from harbours of the same name, in sailing vessel which sometimes
ship a thousand sacks.
Ilheos despatches the inferior of the two principal varieties
“Fair fermented” and “Superior fermented” that is, the first-named,
and so furnishes two-thirds of the Bahia crop. The cacao areas
in the district of Ilheos are situated on rather high and mountainous
ground, where arresting atmospheric conditions often predominate.
Also the absence of any waterway whatever renders it a necessity
to despatch the cacao to Bahia on beasts of burden, which during
the rainy season can scarcely find a footing on the beaten tracks.
It is, then, the unfavourable atmospheric conditions, combined with
a certain carelessness on the part of the planter in the preparing processes,
which prejudices the otherwise excellent quality of the Bahia
bean, and more especially in the months of June, July and August.
At this period it is no rarity to find from 10 to 20 percent of
waste beans, and in general only the December-February months
offer anything approaching a guarantee as to quality. But here no
hard and fast rule can be adduced.
23
Belmonte and Canavieiras are the districts of the “Superior fermented”
cacaos. The lower lay of the land is responsible for other
climatic conditions, and in addition, both harbours here are situated
at the mouths of rivers which afford an easy and sure means of
transport. So the cacao, which is also better roasted,—a few
planters even drying in ovens—reaches the market in a much better
condition, and fetches at least from 3-4 sh. a cwt. more than the
“Fair Fermented” variety.
In all three districts, the beans are prepared in wooden boxes,
covered with banana skin, in which the Ilheos variety is allowed to
ferment from 2-3 days, and the superior from 2-5 days: this after
they have been well shaken up. In Belmonte considerable drying
takes place on the sand there deposited by the river in large
quantities.
The harvesting is generally reckoned from April 1st. to March
31st. In June and July is the intermediate harvest, whilst the months
from October to February supply the bulkiest crops.
The Bahia district yields yearly about 33,500 tons, a fourth part
of which is devoted to the consumption of the United States, the remainder
chiefly going to Germany, France and Switzerland. The
return is still on the increase, and large stretches of land await
cultivation.
Para cacao is the denomination of all those sorts shipped
from the tracts of land lying along the banks of the Amazon and its
mighty tributaries, more especially from Manaos and Itacoatiara,
through Para, a port situated on the eastern arm of the delta. These
varieties may be classed as intermediary between Bahia and good
Sumana. The yearly yield (harvest months June-August) amounts
to about 5,000 tons, a comparatively small figure in view of the
enormous expanses capable of planting, where the cacao tree at present
grows wild, or at least uncultivated. It is true that the returns
for 1891 reached 6,500; only to be diminished by half in 1908. France
is by far the chief country consuming Para cacao; the sort not meeting
with especial favour in other states.
Guiana. Of the three colonies belonging to France, Holland,
and Great Britain respectively, which go under this name, only the
intermediate one, Dutch Guiana, is of importance in the world’s
cacao trade. It comes into consideration under the name of
Surinam cacao. The yield, which should in normal years
amount to about 3,000 tons (1899 providing the record with approximately
4,000 tons), has been considerably impaired by tree diseases24
and parasites. The return for 1904 only amounted to 850 tons, for
example. But meanwhile Holland had hit upon excellent measures to
battle against the enemies of the tree, and the years 1909 and 1910
had in consequence already improved this to 2,000 tons. The bean
has some resemblance to the Trinidad bean, as far as quality is concerned.
Venezuela, one of the earliest cultivating lands, is the
home of the Criollo bean, and of the most splendid specimens of
bean in general, sorts which play a prominent part in the Chocolate
Manufacture. The Venezuelan bean is rather long and round, and
its kernel of a beautiful light brown, with a mild sweet flavour. Unfortunately
the plantations have recently been interspersed with Forastero
or Trinidad-Criollo trees—called in Venezuela “Trinitarios
because brought over from Trinidad, a species which requires less
attention and bears more fruit, but which just on that account supplies
commoner and mediocre beans, slowly fermenting, and often
developing a violet hue. The preparation is here of the simplest; the
beans e. g. are dried on clay-covered floors, and in rainy weather
earthy fragments often adhere to them. Yet such “Patios” or “Then-dales”,
(clay floors) are only in use on the small “haciendas” (plantations).
The colouring of the Venezuelan bean with an ocre-like
earth constitutes an especial peculiarity. It is adopted in particular
for the medium and finer sorts. The earth is mostly sent from the
neighbourhood of Choroni to the two large shipping ports Puerto Cabello
and La Guayra, where the colouring or “Earthification” of the
cacaos to be exported ensues. The earth, varying in colour from
a dirty yellow to brick-red, is mixed to a thin paste with sea-water,
and afterwards placed in the sun on large sieves, or spread over
cement floors. Where the colouring takes place immediately on the
plantation, the yellowish brown earth everywhere available is utilised;
and where sea-water cannot be obtained, as on the Rio Tuy,
for example, there the beans are coloured with a mixture prepared
from crushed and almost liquid cacao fruits and this same yellowish
brown earth, as the use of fresh water is thought to afford but inferior
protection against mould growths. Such juice-coloured cacaos,
and occasionally also the Ocumare sorts, are often covered with a
rather thick earthy crust. Professional opinion concerning the utility
of this colouring varies greatly. In France, the principal country
consuming Venezuelan cacao, it is still maintained that the thin earthy
crust not only enables the bean to resist the penetration of mildew,
but also admits of a kind of after-fermentation, together with develo25pement
and preservation of the most valuable constituents of the
cacao bean. Colouring is then the rule for the finer Caracas sorts,
and all varieties shipped through Puerto Cabello; it is also in use
at Carupano, for export to Spain.
The Venezuelan cacaos are divided as follows, and with one
exception take their names from the chief shipping ports, to which
they are brought in small sailing vessels tapping the villages dotted
along the coast.
1. Maracaibo cacao, the noble, large, and always uncoloured
bean found on the shore of Sea of Maracaibo.
2. Puerto Cabello, quite the finest of all cacao sorts,
with the following sub-classes, each named after tiny harbours
in the vicinity: Chuáo, Borburato, Chichiriviche, San Felipe
(coloured with its own peculiar light brown earth) Ocumare,
Choroni.
3. Caracas cacao, exceptionally so-called, although quite a
small proportion, namely that brought over the mountains from
the Rio Tuy district in donkey caravans, now touches the republican
capital. La Guayra, rather, is the shipping port for
the so-called Caracas sorts, to which belong all the cacaos
from the fertile Barlavento district east of La Guayra, a region
watered by two rivers, Rio Tuy and Rio Chico, and with the
following outlets; Rio Chico (which gives its name to the most
ordinary of sorts), Higuerote, and Capaya. The plantations
hard on the mountainous coastal slopes produce a very fine
bean, of equal value with the Puerto Cabello.
4. Carupano cacao, a sound Venezuelan medium sort, generally
coming into use uncoloured; the arrivals from the easterly
harbour Rio Caribe also belong to this sort, and also the
cacaos of Irapa, Guiria, and Cano Colorado, often shipped from
the port of Trinidad lying opposite.
From Angostura (Ciudad Bolivar) on the Orinoco
and San Fernando on the Apure, only very insignificant quantities
arrive.
They speak of a Christmas and a Summer (June 21st)
harvest in Venezuela; but the first four months of the year
are generally the most productive. The total produce of Venezuela
amounts to about 16,000 tons, of which as export
there fall to
C. The Antilles.
Trinidad produces a cacao which on many plantations, or
estates, as they are called, receives preparation at the hands of experts,
and is very highly esteemed in commerce, and especially in
England and France. The best and generally slightly coloured sorts
are specified as “Plantation”, the medium “Estates”, after the English
name, and the inferior “Fair Trinidad shipping cacao The bean
“Trinidad criollo” is oval, yet not so rounded as the Venezuelan; its
kernel is for the most part dark-coloured, still brown in the better
varieties, but inky black among the inferior. It is customary in Trinidad
to trade the cacaos as prime specimens and to assign to them the
name of a species which not infrequently furnishes no true indication
of their origin. “Soconusco” and “San Antonio” are particularly high-sounding;
mention can further be made of “Montserrat”, “La Gloria”,
“Maraval”, “Belle Fleur”, “El Reposo” etc. Chief harvest, December
to February inclusive, by-harvest May to August.
The total export from Trinidad amounts to about 22,500 tons
yearly. The substantially smaller island of Grenada, also British,
contributes about 6,000 tons a year to the world’s supply. Owing to
the prevalence of like climatic and geological conditions, the yield and
quality are here the same as on the neighbouring island of Trinidad.
The chief consumer of the Grenada cacaos is the Motherland,
and the same holds good for the small British islands of St.
Vincent, St. Lucia and Dominique, all of little import in the general
trade of the world.
Martinique-and Guadeloupe-cacaos, hailing from the French
islands so named, with a yearly production varying from 5,000 to
7,500 tons, only come into consideration for the consumption of the
Motherland, which affords them an abatement of 50 percent in connection
with the tariffs. San Domingo, the larger and eastern part of
the Haiti island, already contributes about 20,000 tons yearly to the
universal harvest. Especially in the last ten years has the cacao cultivation
here received considerable expansion (yield 1894 2,000 tons,
1904 13,500 tons) and as vast suitable tracts of land are to hand,
this country would justify the highest expectations, if the general
political and economical relations of the double republic and a certain
indolence of the planters, all small farmers, had not to be allowed for.
27
A methodical preparation only seldom takes place. Processes
are limited to a very necessary drying, as a rule, so that the cacao,
excellent in itself, takes rank among the lowest as a commercial
quality. The chief gatherings occur in the months of May, June
and July. The shipping ports are Puerta Plata on the north-coast,
Sanchez and Sumana on the Bight of Samana, and La Romana, San
Pedro de Macoris and Santo Domingo (the capital) on the south coast.
Tiny Samana, situated on a small tongue of land, and so outlet for
no extensive region, has given its name to Domingo cacao as a
commercial sort, as from here the first shipments were dispatched.
Sanchez cacao, so named because Sanchez, where the
transports come from the fruitful district of Cibao as far as La Vega,
is the chief exporting harbour of the republic. From the same district,
starting at Santiago, there is yet another line, this time running
northwards to Puerto Plata on the coast. The cacao of this
northerly province of Cibao is generally held in higher esteem than
that coming from the southern harbours.
The United States, which have recently developed an interest
in the land for political reasons, have been promoted to first place
among its customers during the last few years; and then follow
France and Germany. It can only be hoped that this influence grows,
in view of the thereby doubtlessly accelerated improvements in
the preparation processes. Up to the present, varieties free from
blame are conspicuously rare. Uniformity as regards the weight
of the sacks has not been possible, owing to the diversity of the means
of transport. Districts lying along the railways, or close to the harbours,
make use of 80-100 kg. sacks (about 176-220 lbs.) But
where transport must be made on beasts of burden, sacks of from
65-70 kilos (143-154 lbs.) are the rule.
Haiti cacao, coming from the Negro republic of the same
name, is the most inferior of all commercial sorts, chiefly on account
of the incredibly neglective preparation which it undergoes, for exceptions
prove that the bean is capable of being developed into a very
serviceable cacao. Beans covered with a thick gray coloured earthy
crust, often even mixed with small pebbles and having a gritty, and
where healthy, black-brown beaking kernel. The “Liberty and Equality”
of the Negros and Mulattos in this corrupted republic are mirrored
in its plantation system, the land being cultivated but little,
and running almost wild. To effect a change in this state of affairs,
that island law must first of all be abolished, whereby every stranger
is prevented from acquiring landed estate in Haiti.
28
The yield, about 2,500 tons, is chiefly exported from Jérémic,
then also from the harbours Cap Haitien, Port de Paix, Petit Goave,
and Port au Prince. France and the United States are the principal
customers. The neighbouring island of
Cuba also delivers the greater part of its cacao produce to
the United States, amounting to between 1,000 and 3,000 tons, a fact
explained by geographical, political and freight considerations.
Thanks to its careful preparation, this bean, which resembles
the Domingo in many respects, is preferred, and fetches a correspondingly
higher price. The shipping port is Santiago de Cuba, situated
in the south-eastern portion of the island.
Jamaica, with its yearly harvest of about 2,500 tons, principally
attends to the wants of the Mother Country.
Cacao cultivation in Africa is of comparatively recent date.
The plantations found on the three islands San Thomé and
Principe (Portuguese), and Fernando Po (Spanish), lying in the
Gulf of Guinea, are the oldest. To the first-named island may be
traced much of the impulse given to cacao plantation in other
African districts, so rapid has been its success here, under the
energetic guidance of the skilful Portuguese planter, and the yet
more effective propitious climatic influences and favourable industrial
conditions.
Rare sorts are nowhere to be met with, for the Forastero
bean has conquered the whole of Africa. The sorts produced are
accordingly rather adapted for general consumption. St. Thomas
and the Gold Coast provide a third of the world’s present-day cacao
supply, and in the English colony especially, the geological and
climatic conditions are of such a kind, that the
Gold Coast might very well become to the raw cacao
market of the future what the Brazilian province, San Paulo, is now
to the coffee trade.
In the middle of the “Eighties”, the Swiss Missionary Society
planted in the vicinity of their station, and so started the cultivation
of the cacao tree now flourishing throughout the land. The first
fruits came to Europe in 1891, and in 1894 already totalled 20 tons.
In 1901 it was 1,000 tons, 1906 approaching 10,000 tons, and the
year 1911 provided the record with about 40,000 tons. It is true
that complaints were long and rightly lodged concerning the inferior
quality, due to carelessness on the part of the natives in conducting29
the processes of preparation. But since the year 1909, there have
appeared on the market side by side with the inferior and so-called
current qualities, which still retains more or less of the defects
of the earlier produce, another and properly fermented cacao, in no
mean quantities; it is very popular in all cacao-consuming lands, and
fetches from 2 to 3 shillings per cwt. more than the current qualities.
All this has been achieved through intelligent and sympathetic guidance
and control of the small native planter on the government’s
part, without resource to any large organised plantation system.
Accra cacao, then, as the sorts of the African Gold Coast
are collectively named, also promises to be the cacao of the future,
if it can maintain its quantitative and qualitative excellence. There is
indeed no want of soil and adequate labour strength in that province.
Apart from Accra, Addah, Axim, Cape Coast Castle, Prampram,
Winebah, Saltpond, Secondi must be mentioned above all. The chief
harvest is from October to February.
Togo, the small German colony adjoining the British Gold
Coast, has till now had only a yearly yield of 250 tons in a variety
resembling Accra. The excellent beans prepared on the plantations
fetch several shillings a cwt. more than Accra, whilst the deliveries
of the natives rank below the current specimens of this sort. Its
port is Lome.
Lagos, the British Colony bordering on Dahomey and east
of the Gold Coast, is watered by the Niger and possesses cacao exporting
ports in Lagos, Bonni and Old Calabar, and exports about
4,000 tons of a sort resembling Accra, but nevertheless not so well
prepared and so of inferior value.
The cacao plantations of the Lagos colony,—more properly
known as Southern Nigeria—lie on either side of the great Niger
delta, in low lying land where the climatic and geological conditions
are quite different from those in the neighbouring German
possession of
Kameroon, in which country steep slopes and the narrow
coastal strip at the foot of the Kameroon range, lofty mountains,
perhaps 13,000 ft. high, constitute the cacao cultivating region. Consequently
the same variety of seed, the Forastero, here produces a
different kind of fruit. The Kameroon bean has its own peculiar
characteristics; although there is some resemblance to that produced
on the opposite islands of Fernando Po, Principe, and St. Thomas;
and the milder sorts from the “Victoria” and “Moliwa” plantations
often do duty as a substitute for the latter variety. There is no other30
bean which contains so much acid as the Kameroon, and although
this statement must be modified in view of improvements in recent
years, the fact prevents the largest of German colonial sorts from
serving as any other than a mixing variety.
Cultivation is the rule throughout Kameroon, with the exception
of Doula, and the produce of the separate plantations, such as
Victoria, Bibundi, and Moliwe, Bimbia, Debundscha and so forth, all
of which belong to large Berlin and Hamburg companies, is
influenced and differentiated by variations in the technique of preparation.
There are smooth beans with blackish-brown shells, and others
of a red-brown hue and shrivelled, some with traces of fruit pulp,
and others again quite light-coloured, with occasional black specks
resulting from a too thorough drying.
The chief gathering begins in September and ends in January.
Exportation began in the year 1899 with 5 cwts. The produce in 1898
figured at 200 tons and it had in the year 1910 grown to 3,500 tons.
Germany is of course the principal consumer, although England has
since 1909 bought very much Kameroon cacao as St. Thomas.
Kongo is a bean resembling the finer St. Thomas, but smaller
and often smoky. It comes on the market via Antwerp. Up to
the present French Congo has only produced a few thousand
hundredweights yearly, but the Belgian Congo Free State has
managed to achieve an annual output of 900 tons towards the close
of the last decade; and when this country takes the Gold Coast as
model, perhaps Congo cacao will one day play an important rôle in
the world of commerce.
St. Thomas, the small Portuguese island lying in the Gulf
of Guinea, and almost on the Equator, produces a sort which enjoys
immense popularity, and especially in Germany, which traces a fourth
part of its consumption back to this island. The export figures are
These are estimates which make the Portuguese planter worthy
of all respect. It is true that “Black ivory” has been utilised on a
large scale, the exploiting of black labour having resulted in a
boycotting of these St. Thomas sorts on the part of some English
manufacturers, but less on account of harsh treatment on the plantations
themselves as the manner of recruiting in Angola.
31
Fine Thomas is the description of those sorts which have been
used in an unmixed condition owing to their indigestibility, but
properly gathered and fermented. The inferior and slightly damaged
cacaos picked out from these are called by the Portuguese planter
“Escolas”, or assorted. Yet they do not come into commerce under
this designation, being mostly used for making up sample collections
which illustrate the difference between these and Fine Thomas.
The latter is traded through Lisbon “On Approval of Sample
All the St. Thomas cacao trade passes through Lisbon; for the
tariff regulations of the Portuguese government make direct connection
between the island and the consuming land practically impossible.
France indeed chooses the route via Madeira, unloading and reloading,
to avoid the additional duties. The cacao is at Lisbon stored in the
two great Custom-houses there, and prepared for despatch to the
respective lands. Fine St. Thomas is reshipped in the original sacks.
The samples are offered under various marks, either the initials
of the planter or the name of a plantation. We mention a few of
the best known; U. B., D. V., R. O., “M. Valle Flor”, “Boa Entrada”,
“Monte Café”, “Santa Catarina”, “Pinheira”, “Agua Izé”, “Colonia
Acoriana”, “Queluz”, “Gue Gue”, “Rosema”, “Pedroma”, “Monte
Macaco
The beans vary, as far as shell and kernel are concerned,
according to the mode of preparation on the plantations and the structure
of the soil from which they spring. Many which were formerly
universally esteemed are now no longer preferred because the soil in
the meantime has been worked out; and many are now described
under different marks. Yet particular characteristics still continue;
there are mild and strong sorts, smooth and shrivelled varieties which
look as though they have been washed, and others black like the
Cameroon bean. All are offered as Fine Thomas, and enjoy an immense
popularity.
Good medium Thomas is the commercial designation of
those cacaos hailing from small plantations which have undergone
a scarcely sufficient preparation owing to the lack of proper apparatus,
and which are always interspersed with black or sham beans.
In so far as these are delivered from large plantations, they generally
owe their origin to overripe fruit, probably overlooked in the gathering
season; or fruits bitten by the rats which infest this island may also
contribute such beans. Almost all these inferior cacaos are sorted
in the Lisbon custom-houses, and thinned down to the quality “Medium
Thomas” free from objection or “Good Medium Thomas The two32
months of the Summer harvest, July and August, supply a
somewhat better variety of cacao, known in commerce as “Pajol”,
i. e. literally, “Hailing from the country”, which generally fetches a
rather higher price. During the Winter harvest from November to
February the medium St. Thomas varieties come on the market, but
not before the beginning of the year, as previous to that point of time
only the regular harvest of Fine St. Thomas comes into consideration.
All attempts on the part of consumers to effect an improvement
in the quality of the medium varieties have unfortunately
hitherto proved abortive, for they are regarded as by-produce on
the larger estates, and the small ones do not possess the apparatus
necessary for a thorough preparation. Then again it is seen that these
inferior sorts are taken off the market at very reasonable prices.
Fernando Po, a mountainous island, situated immediately off
Cameroon, may be regarded as a source of supply for the Motherland,
Spain, and only as such, for its yearly output of 2500 tons need fear
no competition, thanks to the excessive tariffs laid on the produce of
other lands here. The qualities here are inferior to those from St.
Thomas and Cameroon, chiefly because most plantation are in the
hands of blacks and consequently not well managed.
German East Africa, Madagascar, Mayotta
(Comoren) and Réunion with their dwarfish yield are only worthy
of passing mention.
The only cacao plantations deserving the name on the continent
of Asia are those occurring on the two islands of Ceylon and
Java, both producing a sort differing entirely from the Africans, the
predominant seedling here planted being the Trinidad-Criollo. The
Ceylon-Java bean is, like the genuine Criollo, oval shaped, inclining
to a sphere; its kernel is light brown and among the finer sorts even
whitish. So both varieties are principally used for colouring and
covering the cacao mass, for neither has a very pronounced flavour.
The shell is light brown or reddish brown after washing, and
appears free from all traces of pulp. It sits loosely on the kernel, at
least in the case of the Java bean, and is consequently often met
with broken.
Ceylon, with the shipping port of Colombo, produces in a
good year from 3,500 to 4,000 tons, about two-thirds of which are
traded through London. Direct shipments to Germany have recently33
been more and more frequent; Australia also claims consideration as
a consuming land.
The different sorts, or rather, qualities, for a very careful
preparation ensures the excellence of the goods, go under the description
fine, or medium, or ordinary, and occasionally are utilised
as typical examples. The better sorts come exclusively from
plantations, and the ordinary are the result of native enterprise.
Java also produces a large quantity, the cacao here being
chiefly planted on the north side of this long, narrow island. More
than a half is exported from the port of Samarang, then follow
Batavia, Soerabaja and a few minor places, with a total output of
about 2,500 tons. The larger proportion of this cacao is sold in the
markets of Amsterdam and Rotterdam to Dutch merchants, who
pass it on to other consuming countries. England, North America,
Australia, China and the Philippines are the chief customers.
Those sorts coming from the neighbouring islands of Celebes,
Timor, Bali, Amboina and Lombok may also be considered as sub-classes
of the Java; but they do not total more than 75 tons.
Cacao plantation in Australia is still in its early stages. Most
progressive is
Samoa, which has increased its 1900 export of 30 cwt. to
200 tons at the present time, among which right excellent qualities
occur, culled from Criollo trees. The deteriorated Forastero has also
recently been planted, which we must allow to be more fruitful and
less dependent on careful nursing. The Samoa Criollo bean resembles
the large fine Ceylon variety, except that it has a more pronounced
flavour.
New Guinea and Bismarck-Archipelagoes can
only claim casual mention as experimentally interested in cacao cultivation.
Although cacao and cacao products have always been held
in the highest esteem, ever since they first became known in Europe,
yet price considerations long prevented them from enjoying the same
widespread popularity among the lower classes as tea and coffee.
Thanks, however, to the improved means of transport established in34
the course of the last fifty years, which has cheapened all exotic
produce, the demand for these wares has of late been more frequent
and urgent, and is reflected in the constantly increasing influx of cacao
on the European markets and the systematic opening out of new
regions to the raw material, just as corresponding extensions in the
factory world contribute towards a reduction in the cost of the
products. Hence cacao may now be described as a luxury within
the reach of everyman. Its diffusion among all grades of the population
may be regarded as a great blessing, for in it has arisen a new
[Transcriber’s Note: a line is missing here]
merely a stimulant, like tea or coffee, but a beverage in the proper
sense of the term, analytically so established.
It will accordingly prove of interest to glance through the
returns in connection with the trade in these goods, their importation
and exportation, commercial values of the same, and the relative consumption
of cacao, tea and coffee.
Such figures are always at hand. The surprisingly rapid
growth of the cacao cultivation, and the manufacture of cacao
products, is e. g. at once apparent in statistics furnished by the
French government. In 1857 the number of 5,304,207 kilos of beans
were consumed there. The importations of the year 1895, on the
other hand, amounted to 32,814,724 kilos, having in the space of
38 years increased more than sixfold. Of this quantity, almost the
half, comprising about 15,234,163 kilos, is disposed of retail.
Turning to the trade in Germany, the cacao industry here and
its consumption,19 we are again greeted with cheery prospects.
According to the official inquiry, German trade in Cacao products
for the years 1907-1910 is shown in the following table:
35
Table 1.
36
The year 1910 brought a total import of 878,413 cwts. of raw
cacao, thus overtopping the figures of the previous year, which had
created a record with 814,496 cwts., by 64,330 cwts.
Coming to the geographical distribution, we find that they were
imported into Germany in the following proportions, namely:
These figures, which we quote from the Thirty First Year’s
Report of the Association of German Chocolate Makers, speak
volumes for the recent development of the cacao trade. It is
interesting, in view of recent occurrences, to note the quantities
despatched from the various places. The importations from St. Thomas,
for instance, show a striking increase. They stand at the head
of the raw cacao products coming into Germany, with 239,756 cwts.,
and have pushed Accras down to second place, this variety having
failed to maintain its 1909 lead, for 1910 did not add more than
6,496 cwts. to its previous total of 199,686 cwts. Bahias came third,
then as now, with 128,760 cwts. This order has not always remained
constant, but has suffered considerable deviations in progressive
years. We give below a table showing the chief cacao producing
lands and their imports into Germany between 1900 and 1908.
37
Table 2. Imports in Germany in tons.
The consumption of cacao in other civilised countries shows a
corresponding increase, although with occasional divergencies and
astounding relapses. We give the following table (3) to indicate its
progress between the years 1901 and 1908, and to facilitate comparison.
It must be borne in mind, when making use of this table (specially
in connection with Germany) that the falling off in the years
1907-8 is to be attributed to the abnormally bad harvests and consequent
increase in prices.
38
Table 3. Import or Consumption in the Various Lands in tons.
The relative consumption of coffee, tea and cacao has also
inclined in favour of the latter as far as Germany is concerned.
According to the 19th. Report of the Association of German Chocolate39
Makers, No. 7, the imports which passed through the custom-houses
of that country, and intended for consumption, figured at the following
in tons; though in this connection it is as well to remember that the
German ton is about 50 lbs. less than the English.
From the above columns it will be seen that the importation
of coffee has only increased 24 percent, that of tea 125 percent, but
that of cacao at the surprising rate of 330 percent. A comparison of
the totals for coffee, tea and cacao in the years 1886, 1898 & 1906 will
make the proportions still more evident.
So that whilst in the year 1886 thirty-five times as much coffee
as cacao found its way into Germany, the imports for 1898 were
ten, and in 1906 only five and a half times greater in the case of the
first named article. It follows that there has been a corresponding
increase as regards cacao consumption in Germany. A momentary
survey of the graphs in Fig. 5, which we owe to the kindness of
Herr Greiert, Managing Director of the Association of German Chocolate
Manufacturers, will make this clear to the reader; and the
diagram there illustrates the relative growth of cacao consumption
in Germany, when compared with other countries. On calculating
the quantity of cacao consumed per head of the population, we get
a graph (fig. 6) which puts the rapid increases in this direction at
a glance.
40
42
The curve for the last ten years represents enormous advances,
and contrasts with the more even line developed in earlier years.
According to official reports, the average consumption of cacao per
head between the years 1861-5 amounted to 0·03 kg. (tea 0·02 kg. and
coffee 1·87 kg.) but had in 1910 risen to an average of 0·53 kg. per head.
43
Just as the beans of the cacao fruit are included under the
botanical concept “Seed”, so also their chemical constituents closely
resemble those common to every other seed. There are the usual
reserve stuffs inherited from the mother plant, which serve as
sustenance for the yet undeveloped organs, and compare with albumen
in the feathered world. Apart from the constituents incidental to
all plant life at this stage, such as albumin, starch, water, fat, sugar,
cellulose and mineral stuffs such as ash, the cacao seed has two other
components peculiar to itself; Theobromine and Cacao-red.
We adjoin a succession of chemical determinations respecting the
quantitative proportions of these substances in the seed, and think
further that we may be allowed to cite the results of fore-time
investigators in this sphere, especially as their work has formed the
basis for all future operations, and again, in view of the doubt which
still prevails in scientific circles as to the “Normal” composition
of the cacao bean.
Table 4.

Percentage Composition of the Hulled Bean.
44
Table 5.
The analyses carried out by Zipperer in the year 1886 yielded
the following results21:
Table 6.

A) Analysis of the Raw Shelled Bean (Kernel).
In addition to these, there is an exhaustive succession of
analyses conducted by Ridenour,22 which we accordingly submit as
Table 8. Following Filsinger,23 we cannot regard these analyses as45
an absolutely trustworthy representation of the “Normal” composition
of the cacao bean, the values in starch, albumin and ash considerably
deviating from all that have been established up to the present time.
Among more recent researches, we cite those carried out by Matthes
and Fritz Müller.24
Table 7.
B) Analysis of the Raw Shelled Bean (Kernel).
Table 8. Ridenour.
46
Table 9.
Table 10. Commoner Varieties.

Key to Column Headings
48
Table 11. Analysis of Cacao.

Dry product, defatted and free from alkali.

Key to Column Headings
1) See Table 9 A and Table 10.
49
The foregoing tables provide us with a general idea of the
chemical constituents of the cacao bean, but their distinctive properties,
both chemical and physical, still remain to be defined, with
which we accordingly proceed, as such data will on the one hand
enable us to grasp how loss may be avoided in the manufacture of
cacao and chocolate wares, and at the same time render intelligible
familiar processes connected therewith.
As we have seen, the following substances occur in cacao in
varying amounts:
Like the majority of plants and plant products, the cacao bean
consists of vesicles or cells, closed on all sides and arranged in a
series of layers. They are constructed of cellular tissue or cellulose,
and contain fat, albumen, water, starch, theobromine, cacao pigment,
besides sugar and salts in inferior quantities.
There is present in the bean from 6 to 8 percent of water,
a factor which bodes well for the proper germination of the seed, as
when this latter is deprived of moisture, e. g. in the course of a too
thorough drying, it speedily decays. Water is still evident in small
quantities even in the largest and almost withered beans, as will be
seen on comparison of the foregoing analyses.
As a constituent at the expense of which respiration is effected,
fat remains one of the most important resources of plant. It has a
twofold excellence in this connection, and firstly as a highly
calorifacient and carboniferous substance, and again because such
a reserve enables the living organism to oxidise with particular ease,
wherefore it is found accumulated in somewhat significant measure
in the majority of seeds. When seen under the microscope it appears
either as round coherent masses, or as crystalline aggregates clearly50
distinguishable from the rest of the cell contents on treatment with
a solution of osmic acid. The fat in the cacao bean usually amounts
to from 50-56 percent, or one half of the total weight of the shelled
beans; the shell also contains from 4 to 5 percent of fat.25 The
unfermented bean has frequently, in addition to its bitter taste, a most
unpleasant flavour, attributable to the rancidity of its fatty contents.
The raw bean contains rather more fat than the roasted bean,
for whilst the one averages from 50 to 55 percent, there is seldom
more than 48-52 percent in the other. The cause of this phenomenon
may be connected with the enrichment of the shells in fat, and in some
instances, as when the beans are over-roasted, is to be ascribed to
the chemical change which the play of burning heat on fatty bodies
involves, when a destructive decomposition of the whole ensues,
with formations of acroleine. Chemically considered, cacao butter
consists of a mixture of so-called esters, or compounds connected
with ether, such as the glycerides of fatty acids, and contains, in
addition to stearine, palmatine, and laurine26, the glyceride of arachidic
acid. It was also formerly supposed that formic, acetic and butyric
acids were among the constituents of this ingredient, but the view
has been proved erroneous by Lewkowitsch27; similarly, the presence
of theobromic acid alleged by Kingzett28 has been called into question
by Graf.29
Cacao butter is a fairly firm fat of pleasant taste and smell,
which varies in colour between yellowish white and yellow.
When freshly expressed, it has frequently a brownish shade, passing
after a short time into a pale yellow, and turning almost white on
long keeping. The brown colour is due to pigment in suspension,
which becomes sediment in the course of melting, when the butter
asumes a normal colour, referrible to pigment dissolved in the butter
oils, and secondarily to a dissolution of the products of roasting in
these liquids, rather than to any matter in suspension. The pleasant
smell and taste of cacao butter is probably closely allied to the
dissolved substances mentioned.
The fat extracted from cacao by solvents differs essentially
from that obtained by hydraulic pressure, a fact overlooked in some51
of even the most recent experiments, and which therefore cannot
be too strongly emphasised. Extracted fat is yellowish white, sometimes
approximating to grey, and after having been kept a long time,
the whole becomes tinged with an actual whiteness, which first
attacks the outer surface, and then rapidly progresses towards the
centre in concentric paths, and which is a sign of rancidity. Its fracture
is partly granular, the smell is not so pronounced as that of
expressed fat, being even unpleasant at times, as in the case of
faulty wares (but compare page), and it has a keen taste. Cacao
butter does not, as is generally supposed, keep better than other
vegetable fats, but is equally liable to become rancid, as Lewkowitsch30
demonstrates. By rancidity is denoted that state of offensive
taste and smell acquired by fatty substances on longer or shorter
keeping and especially when they are not properly stored. What
chemical re-arrangements of the respective constituents this state
presupposes is very questionable; though it appears from the experiments
of Lewkowitsch30 and others31 that the formation of acids
does not play as prominent a part as the experimenter is inclined to
think, nothwithstanding the marked increase in quantity which may
occur. The primary cause of rancidity will rather be found in the
oxidation products of the glycerine contained in all fats.
The specific gravity of cacao butter varies considerably,
according as it has been expressed or extracted by means of solvents.
White32 asserts that it can only be determined when the liquefied oil has
been solidified several days. According to Rammsberger the specific
gravity of expressed butter is 0·85; that of butter extracted by treatment
with ether figures at 0·958. Hager gives the normal specific
gravity of fresh cacao butter at 15° C. as from 0·95 to 0·952; stale
butter 0·945 to 0·946, and the same figures have been confirmed by
other investigations, though Dietricht gives 0·98 to 0·981 at 100° C.
The melting point is generally regarded as 33° C.; there is in this
respect, however, a great difference between the two descriptions of
fat. Expressed fat which has been kept for some length of time
melts between 34° C. and 35° C., and these figures remain constant,
so that it is advisable to read the melting point of fat which has52
been in store some time rather than that of the fresh pressed product,
and take this as a standard. All other fat shows a lower melting point.
As the melting point of freshly melted cacao butter shows considerable
fluctuation, the liquid fat must be kept in darkness and
cooled with ice for about a week, and the reading should not be
taken before the expiration of this time, as only then is it possible to
obtain any definite and final result.
Experiments on the melting point of cacao butter as carried
out by Zipperer under special conditions yielded the following values;
cf. also Table 12.
White and Oldham33 give the following melting points:
Filsinger and Henking found34:
These results vary somewhat, but the differences are to be
ascribed to the methods employed and to the manner in which the
observations of different experimenters are carried out. Generally
it may be taken that the melting point should not be under 3° or over
35°C. The fat solidifies between 21·5° and 23° C. (solidifying point).
The fatty acids from the fat melt at 48°-52° C.; they begin to
solidify at 45° C., the solidifying ending generally at 51°-52° C. (see
table 12).
53
Adulteration of cacao fat, as many experiments have shown,
cannot be detected simply by deflections in the melting point.
Björklund’s ether test,35 which is very suitable for the detection of
an admixture of extraneous substances like tallow, wax and paraffin,
is carried out as described in paragraph....
Cacao fat, like all other fats, is saponified by alkalis, that is
to say, forms a soap or a chemical compound of the fatty acids with
alkalis such as potash, soda, ammonia etc. On the addition of a
mineral acid to the soap a salt of the mineral acid and alkali is
formed, with the separation of the fatty acid. The fatty acids are
of two kinds:
1. The volatile acids or those which are volatile at
100°-110° C. or more easily with steam than other vapours. These
usually exist only in very small quantity in cacao fat but may considerably
increase in amount in the fat obtained from imperfectly fermented
beans.36
2. The solid fatty acids are such as are fixed, and do not act
in the manner above mentioned: cacao butter consists chiefly of the
glycerides of these acids.
Björklund’s tests will only detect, as has been stated, admixtures
of wax, paraffin, tallow and bodies of a relatively high melting
point. Another method must therefore be adopted to detect fat of
low melting points, as cocoa-nut fat, or liquid oils like cotton seed
and sesame oils. The methods in use in connection with cacao butter
are the determination of the iodine, saponification
and acid values, finding the melting point of the fatty
acids, the Reichert-Meissl number, and by means of
Zeiss’ butyro-refractometer, its refractive index.
The iodine value indicates the amount of iodine percent
absorbed by the fat, and is accordingly a measure of the unsaturated
fatty acids. As these latter differ in amount in vegetable and animal
fats, though constant for each separate kind, it is possible by means
of this iodine value to recognise a genuine cacao fat and to detect
adulteration. The determination of the iodine value is carried out
by Hulbl’s37 method, and according to Filsinger,38 it is advisable to54
let the iodine solution act on the fat for from ten to twelve hours
in diffused daylight. Before determining the iodine value in cacao
fat, says Welmans39 this substance should be dried at from
100-105°C. to expel the acroleine produced by too high roasting, at
the same time avoiding too high a temperature, as acroleine can
then be very easily reproduced. Filsinger has determined the iodine
value of many varieties of cacao butter with the following results:
Genuine cacao butter shows an average iodine value of from
33-37·5.40
The saponification value or Köttstorfer’s number41
expresses the number of milligrammes of potassium hydrate
required for the complete saponification of 1 gramme of fat, or in
other words, the amount of potassium hydrate necessary to the
saponification of the fat in thents percent. Filsinger42 gives the amount
as between 192 and 202 in genuine cacao butter, although it usually
fluctuates between 194 and 195. Its determination is the means of
detecting adulterations with cocoa-nut butter and its preparations.
The determination of the acid value has lately become of
importance, especially since the introduction of the so-called Dutch
Ha cacao or shell butter, which is obtained from cacao refuse and
is often rancid. This value or number expresses the amount of
potassium hydrate necessary to neutralise the free fatty acids in
1 gramme of fat, and it is therefore a measure of the amount of free
fatty acid. As this constant has been variously stated, according to
the methods adopted (Burstyn, Merz), the fact must be taken into
account when comparing the literature on the subject. As the constants
have been determined by two different methods (Merz,
Burstyn), this must be taken into consideration when comparing the55
various data on the acid value of fats. Whilst the “Vereinbarungen”
(No. 1, 1897) in a chapter on “Food Fats and Oils” still recognise two
distinct methods in the determination of free fatty acids, as well as
two different ways of recording the results (degree of acidity and
free acid, calculated on the oily acids) there occurs in the supplement
to the recent margarine code for Germany issued by the Chancellor
on April 1st. 1898, entitled “Instructions for chemical research in fats
and cheeses” under c) a dictum that there is only one absolute and
precise procedure in the “Determination of free fatty acids (degree
of acidity) These calculations are based on the Burstyn method,
which we accordingly annex, more especially as it is now in universal
use. It should be observed that the method of preparation and the
age of the beans, as well as that of the fat all tend to increase the
acid value.
The Reichert Meissl value expresses the percentage value of
the volatile fatty acids present in the fat; as already mentioned, they
amount to 1·6 ccm, in cacao fat extracted by solvents. Milk chocolate,
says Welmans, yields a fat having a Reichert-Meissl value
of 2·5, but compare page....
The determination of the refractive index in Zeiss
butyrorofractometer is of value for ascertaining the purity of cacao
butter, and it serves as a control on the iodine value, for according
to Roques43 the refractive index and the iodine value stand in equal
relation, so that fat having a high refractive index gives a high iodine
value and vice versa. The refractive index of cacao butter ranges
between 1·4565-1·4578 at 40°C. corresponding to 46-47·8 on the
scala of the Zeiss butyro-refractometer. The use of the latter is
recommended by Filsinger as a preliminary test for cacao butter,
since with a normal refraction it is not necessary to proceed further
and determine the iodine, saponification and acid values, nor the
melting point. In conclusion we annex table 12, where the respective
constants for different varieties of cacao butter will be found
tabulated.44
For further information on all these methods, the reader is
referred to the excellent work of R. Benedict, entitled “Analysis of
Fats and Waxes”: VII. Edition, Berlin.
56
Table 12.

Physical and Chemical Analyses of the Various Kinds of Pressed Stollwerck Cacao Butter.
Remarks
1) Exact point of liquefaction difficult to observe; therefore the
average of several readings must be taken.
2) Work from the Imperial Office of Health 1907, 26, 444-463.
3) Work out of the Imperial Office of Health 1904, 20, 545-558.
4) Central Journal for Germany 1908, 36, 100.
5) Journal for Popular Chemistry 1907, 16, 308.
6) Obtained at the expiration of a four weeks’ treatment as recommended
by Erlenmeyer.
7) Non-volatile fatty acids, insoluble in water, from the determination
of the Reichert-Meissl number.
8) Obtained as under a). Freezing Point in various cases, 1 to 8 equals
47·8—Melting Point minus Freezing Point: 52·3-47·8 4·5.
57
We have already stated that there is also cacao fat in the
shells, and though it only amounts to some four or five percent,
it has long been the care of experimenters to recover and realise that
little as fully as possible. It is commercially known as Dutch IIa or
artificial cacao butter, and cannot be obtained like the fat of the kernel
by mechanical means, but is obtained by some cheap solvent like
benzene. The traces of benzene are very difficult to hide, and consequently
this shell butter has little commercial value and its manufacture
is unremunerative.
Filsinger45 gives the iodine value of shell butter as higher than
that of kernel butter, and fixes it between 39 and 40: its acid value,
especially if the fat is rancid, can reach 50-60° Burstyn, i. e. 50 to
60 ccm. normal alkali for 100 grammes of fat.46 If the free acid of shell
butter be counteracted with sodium or magnesium carbonate, the
neutral fat then has the normal iodine value of pure cacao butter,
namely 36·5. In a sample giving an abnormally high iodine value it
is always necessary to determine the acid value, and if the latter
be too high, the fatty acids must be removed, when if the sample be
unadulterated, the normal iodine value will be obtained. It may be
noted in passing that the high acid values occurring in shell butter
may be due in part to the acidity of the benzene employed as a
solvent.
Cacao butter has a considerable commercial value, and is
consequently liable to adulteration with many inferior fats of vegetable
origin. Among these are especially beef and mutton tallow, the
purified fatty acids of palm-nut oil, wax, paraffin, stearic acid, dicka
fat (nucoa butter, possibly) and cocoa-nut fat, as well as the numerous
preparations of the last named, variously known in commerce as
Mannheim cocoa-nut butter, vegetaline, lactine, finest plant butter,
chocolate butter, laureol vegetable butter, palmin, kunerol etc. Other
but less commoner are the sesame cotton-seed, arachidic, margarine
and hazelnut oils.
For the detection of these and similar adulterates, the reactions
and analytical methods described are all-sufficient. Benedict47 discovers
that the presence of wax and paraffin considerably
diminishes the saponification value, cocoa, nut fat increases it and
lowers the iodine value, whereas stearic acid raises the acid value.
58
59
The presence of cocoa-nut fat can also be shown by the etherification
of the fatty acids with alcohol and sulphuric acid, when the characteristic
odour of the ester of cocoa-nut acid occurs. Vegetable
oils, such as almond, cotton-seed, arachidic, sesame and hazelnut
oils, lower the melting point of the fatty acids and raise the iodine
value. Sesame oil is easily detected by Baudouin’s reaction, yielding
a raspberry coloration whilst pure cacao butter keeps a fine yellow
or dark brown. It is possible to detect the presence of so minute a
quantity as 1% of sesame oil, by means of Baudouin’s reaction.
The following table, containing the analytical determinations
of all fatty substances which can possibly be employed in the
adulteration of cacao butter, will serve to facilitate reference to this
subject.
In addition to its use in the manufacture of certain cacao preparations
and for lubricating parts of machinery which come into
contact with the cacao etc. cacao fat is also used in perfumery and
especially in pharmacy for making suppositaries, ointments, etc., but
it is of no importance in soap making. As an edible fat, in the true sense
of the word, like ordinary butter or lard, cacao butter is not used. It
has been maintained by Benedikt48 that when in the form of chocolate
it is as easily digestible in the human organism as milk fat, which is
generally regarded as offering most favourable conditions for absorbtion
in the intestinal canal. The digestibility of both fats varies
from 92·3 to 95·38 percent, and both, in this respect, stand very near
to cocoa-nut fat from which the solid glycerides have been removed,
and to ordinary butter, the former according to Bourot and Jean.49
being digestible to the extent of 98 and the latter 95·8 percent.
Cacao butter is obtained as a by-product in the preparation of
cocoa powder and in every country where cocoa powder is produced
there is always a large trade in the former article. That is, apart
from Germany, especially the case in Holland, where the monthly
supply to the Amsterdam market is so large that during 1899 one
firm alone—Van Houten—had 855 tons for sale. The average
price of late years has considerably increased, and is now about
64-73 cents per kilogramme.
The majority of investigators interested in the cacao bean have
assigned its peculiar aroma and taste to the cacao-red which it60
develops. As previously pointed out, the young fresh bean is
colourless, the pigment forming later, as can be observed in many
vegetable colouring materials, such as oakand cinchona-red, madder,
indigo and kola-nut red (from Sterculia acuminata). As the later
investigations of Hilger50 have shown, the fresh colourless cacao bean
contains a diastasic ferment, as well as a glucoside body, which C.
Schweitzer51 has termed glocoside or cacaonin. The term glucoside
may be noted in passing as including those bodies, the greater
number of which occur in plants, and which by treatment with alkalis,
acids or ferments are split up into an indifferent body and a sugar,
generally glucose. These bodies may be chemically regarded as
ethyl derivatives of the respective sugars. When the ripe, white
seeds are dried, the cacao-glycoside is partly decomposed by the
agency of the above-mentioned diastasic ferment and formations of
grape sugar, pure non-nitrogenous cacao-red, together with theobromine
and coffeine ensue. These substances, and likewise a certain
amount of undecomposed cacao glycoside, can all be detected in the
seed, which has by this time acquired a brownish to violet colour.
The unfermented bean, according to Schweitzer, has as much
as 0·6% unaltered glucoside. Fermentation produces the same effect
as drying, as here again the glycerine is not completely split up,
for the cacao-red, isolated in the ordinary way, consists according
to Hilger of a mixture of pure non-nitrogenous cacao-red and some
glycoside.
The complete decomposition of the cacao glycoside can only
be effected in a chemical manner, by boiling the finely divided and
defatted seeds with dilute acids, a method which has made it possible
to effect an exact determination of the diureides, as the treatment
with acid sets free the totality of their theobromine and coffeine.
Schweitzer regards the molecule of cacao glycoside as an ester
comprised of one molecule of non-nitrogenous cacao-red, six molecules
of starch-sugar and one molecule of theobromine with double-sided
attachment and having the hypothetrical formula C60H86O15N4.
Before the appearance of Hilger’s researches, all statements of
a chemical nature respecting cacao-red related to a mixture of a
pure non-nitrogenous pigment and the glycoside, which must in all
cases be preliminarily obtained, before the pure pigment can be61
prepared. That can be done52 by treating the roasted beans with
petroleum ether, which removes the fat and part of the free
theobromine then with water, to extract the remaining theobromine,
coffeine, sugar and salts, and finally with alcohol, to extract the
cacao-red. The alcoholic residue is then quickly dried on porous
plates. The material thus obtained is a reddish brown amorphous
bitter powder, which is scarcely soluble in water, easily so in alcohol
or in dilute alkali, and is reprecipitated by acid from its alkaline
solution. It gives a sublimate of theobromine when heated. When
the substance is distilled with 5 percent of sulphuric
acid, the added glycoside is completely
decomposed into sugar, theobromine and
the real cacao-red, which latter is represented by the formula
C17H12(OH)10. It appears to stand in near relation to tannin, which
it resembles in yielding formic acid, acetic acid, and pyrocatechin
by the action of caustic alkalis. The pure non-nitrogenous cacao-red,
at present, is of exclusively scientific interest; for practical purposes
only the crude cacao-red, cacao-red glycoside, as naturally existing
in the bean, is of importance. The better and the more effectual the
manner in which the beans have been prepared by fermentation, the
more intense is the formation of the cacao red, especially its localisation
in the cells and cell tissues. This is the reason that the variations
in colour of different kinds of bean and the aqueous extracts which
they yield are so distinct.
Especially is this noticeable in carelessly dried beans, in which
the cotyledon tissue is of a dirty brown or yellow colour instead
of being brown or violet; the pigment here is not restricted to separate
cells but has the appearance of having penetrated into the contiguous
albuminous cells. The bean contains 2·6-5 percent of the crude
cacao-red; it is soluble in alcohol and in ether and partly so in hot
water, and is completely extracted from the bean by weak
acetic acid.
The crude cacao-red can be determined quantitatively by
precipitating its solution with lead acetate, decomposing the lead
precipitate with sulphuretted hydrogen and evaporating the filtrate
containing the cacao-red to dryness.
The aqueous extract of the beans, which contains the cacao-red,
is coloured greenish brown by alkalis, red by acids; acetates
give a grey to yellowish colour; tincture of iodine, stannous chloride62
and mercurous nitrate give a rose to brown precipitate. Iron and
copper salts produce grey precipitates which gradually become brown
to black. Gelatine solution, containing alum, and albumin give copious
yellow precipitates.
Stains produced on linen by the colouring matter of cacao-red
can be removed by treatment with hot water and finally bleaching
with a solution of sulphurous acid.
