# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2014
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Sir Joshua Reynolds, Discourses
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/47610/47610-h/47610-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

But I cannot give a better instance of this practice than
a picture which I have of Rubens; it is a representation
of a Moonlight. Rubens has not only diffused more light
over the picture than is in nature, but has bestowed on it
those warm glowing colours by which his works are so much
distinguished. It is so unlike what any other painters
have given us of Moonlight, that it might be easily
mistaken, if he had not likewise added stars, for a fainter
setting sun. Rubens thought the eye ought to be satisfied
in this case, above all other considerations; he might,
indeed, have made it more natural, but it would have been
at the expense of what he thought of much greater consequence—the
harmony proceeding from the contrast and
variety of colours.
This same picture will furnish us with another instance,
where we must depart from nature for a greater advantage.
The Moon in this picture does not preserve so great a
superiority in regard to its lightness over the subject
which it illumines as it does in nature; this is likewise an
intended deviation, and for the same reason. If Rubens
had preserved the same scale of gradation of light between
the Moon and the objects which is found in nature, the
picture must have consisted of one small spot of light only,
and at a little distance from the picture nothing but this
spot would have been seen. It may be said, indeed, that
this being the case, it is a subject that ought not to be
painted; but then, for the same reason, neither armour,
 [Pg 149]
nor anything shining, ought ever to be painted; for though
pure white is used in order to represent the greatest light
of shining objects, it will not in the picture preserve the
same superiority over flesh as it has in nature, without
keeping that flesh colour of a very low tint. Rembrandt,
who thought it of more consequence to paint light than the
objects that are seen by it, has done this in a picture of
Achilles which I have. The head is kept down to a very
low tint, in order to preserve this due gradation and
distinction between the armour and the face; the consequence
of which is, that, upon the whole, the picture is
too black. Surely too much is sacrificed here to this
narrow conception of nature; allowing the contrary conduct
a fault, yet it must be acknowledged a less fault than
making a picture so dark that it cannot be seen without a
peculiar light, and then with difficulty. The merit or
demerit of the different conduct of Rubens and Rembrandt
in those instances which I have given, is not to be determined
by the narrow principles of nature, separated from
its effect on the human mind. Reason and common-sense
tell us, that before, and above all other considerations, it is
necessary that the work should be seen, not only without
difficulty or inconvenience, but with pleasure and satisfaction;
and every obstacle which stands in the way of this
pleasure and convenience must be removed.
The tendency of this Discourse, with the instances which
have been given, is not so much to place the Artist above
rules, as to teach him their reason; to prevent him from
entertaining a narrow, confined conception of Art; to clear
his mind from a perplexed variety of rules and their
exceptions, by directing his attention to an intimate
acquaintance with the passions and affections of the mind,
from which all rules arise, and to which they are all
 [Pg 150]
referable. Art effects its purpose by their means; an
accurate knowledge, therefore, of those passions and dispositions
of the mind is necessary to him who desires to
affect them upon sure and solid principles.
A complete essay or inquiry into the connection between
the rules of Art and the eternal and immutable dispositions
of our passions would be indeed going at once to the
foundation of criticism;
[10] but I am too well convinced what
extensive knowledge, what subtle and penetrating judgment,
would be required to engage in such an undertaking; it is
enough for me if, in the language of painters, I have produced
a slight sketch of a part of this vast composition, but
that sufficiently distinct to show the usefulness of such a
theory, and its practicability.
Before I conclude, I cannot avoid making one observation
on the pictures now before us. I have observed, that
every candidate has copied the celebrated invention of
Timanthes in hiding the face of Agamemnon in his mantle;
indeed, such lavish encomiums have been bestowed on this
thought, and that too by men of the highest character in
critical knowledge—Cicero, Quintilian, Valerius, Maximus,
and Pliny—and have been since re-echoed by almost every
modern that has written on the Arts, that your adopting it
can neither be wondered at nor blamed. It appears now
to be so much connected with the subject, that the spectator
would perhaps be disappointed in not finding united in the
picture what he always united in his mind, and considered
as indispensably belonging to the subject. But it may be
observed, that those who praise this circumstance were not
painters. They use it as an illustration only of their own
art; it served their purpose, and it was certainly not their
 [Pg 151]
business to enter into the objections that lie against it in
another Art. I fear we have but very scanty means of
exciting those powers over the imagination which make so
very considerable and refined a part of poetry. It is a
doubt with me, whether we should even make the attempt.
The chief, if not the only occasion, which the painter has
for this artifice, is, when the subject is improper, to be more
fully represented, either for the sake of decency, or to avoid
what would be disagreeable to be seen; and this is not to
raise or increase the passions, which is the reason that is
given for this practice, but, on the contrary, to diminish
their effect.
It is true, sketches, or such drawings as painters
generally make for their works, give this pleasure of
imagination to a high degree. From a slight, undetermined
drawing, where the ideas of the composition and character
are, as I may say, only just touched upon, the imagination
supplies more than the painter himself, probably, could
produce; and we accordingly often find that the finished
work disappoints the expectation that was raised from the
sketch; and this power of the imagination is one of the
causes of the great pleasure we have in viewing a collection
of drawings by great painters. These general ideas,
which are expressed in sketches, correspond very well to the
art often used in Poetry. A great part of the beauty of
the celebrated description of Eve in Milton's "Paradise
Lost" consists in using only general indistinct expressions,
every reader making out the detail according to his own
particular imagination,—his own idea of beauty, grace,
expression, dignity, or loveliness: but a painter, when he
represents Eve on a canvas, is obliged to give a determined
form, and his own idea of beauty distinctly expressed.
We cannot on this occasion, nor indeed on any other,
 [Pg 152]
recommend an undeterminate manner or vague ideas of
any kind, in a complete and finished picture. This notion,
therefore, of leaving anything to the imagination, opposes a
very fixed and indispensable rule in our art—that everything
shall be carefully and distinctly expressed, as if the
painter knew, with correctness and precision, the exact
form and character of whatever is introduced into the
picture. This is what with us is called Science and
Learning: which must not be sacrificed and given up for
an uncertain and doubtful beauty, which, not naturally
belonging to our Art, will probably be sought for without
success.
Mr. Falconet has observed, in a note on this passage in
his translation of Pliny, that the circumstance of covering
the face of Agamemnon was probably not in consequence
of any fine imagination of the painter—which he considers
as a discovery of the critics—but merely copied from the
description of the sacrifice, as it is found in Euripides.
The words from which the picture is supposed to be
taken are these: Agamemnon saw Iphigenia advance
towards the fatal altar; he groaned, he turned aside his
head, he shed tears, and covered his face with his robe.
Falconet does not at all acquiesce in the praise that is
bestowed on Timanthes; not only because it is not his
invention, but because he thinks meanly of this trick of
concealing, except in instances of blood, where the objects
would be too horrible to be seen; but, says he, "in an
afflicted Father, in a King, in Agamemnon, you, who are a
painter, conceal from me the most interesting circumstance,
and then put me off with sophistry and a veil. You are
(he adds) a feeble Painter, without resource: you do not
know even those of your Art: I care not what veil it is,
whether closed hands, arms raised, or any other action that
 [Pg 153]
conceals from me the countenance of the Hero. You think
of veiling Agamemnon; you have unveiled your own
ignorance. A Painter who represents Agamemnon veiled
is as ridiculous as a Poet would be, who, in a pathetic
situation, in order to satisfy my expectations, and rid
himself of the business, should say, that the sentiments of
his hero are so far above whatever can be said on the
occasion, that he shall say nothing."
To what Falconet has said, we may add, that supposing
this method of leaving the expression of grief to the
imagination to be, as it was thought to be, the invention
of the painter, and that it deserves all the praise that has
been given it, still it is a trick that will serve but
once: whoever does it a second time will not only want
novelty, but be justly suspected of using artifice to evade
difficulties. If difficulties overcome make a great part of
the merit of Art, difficulties evaded can deserve but little
commendation.
[Pg 154]
Delivered at the Opening of the Royal Academy, in Somerset Place,
October 16, 1780.
ON THE REMOVAL OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY TO SOMERSET PLACE.—THE
ADVANTAGES TO SOCIETY FROM CULTIVATING
INTELLECTUAL PLEASURE.
The honour which the Arts acquire by being permitted to
take possession of this noble habitation is one of the most
considerable of the many instances we have received of
His Majesty's protection; and the strongest proof of his
desire to make the Academy respectable.
Nothing has been left undone that might contribute
to excite our pursuit or to reward our attainments. We
have already the happiness of seeing the Arts in a state to
which they never before arrived in this nation. This Building,
in which we are now assembled, will remain to many
future ages an illustrious specimen of the Architect's
 
[11]
abilities. It is our duty to endeavour that those who gaze
with wonder at the structure may not be disappointed
when they visit the apartments. It will be no small addition
to the glory which this nation has already acquired from having
given birth to eminent men in every part of science, if
it should be enabled to produce, in consequence of this
institution, a School of English Artists. The estimation in
which we stand in respect to our neighbours, will be in
proportion to the degree in which we excel or are inferior
 [Pg 155]
to them in the acquisition of intellectual excellence, of
which Trade and its consequential riches must be acknowledged
to give the means; but a people whose whole
attention is absorbed in those means, and who forget the
end, can aspire but little above the rank of a barbarous
nation. Every establishment that tends to the cultivation
of the pleasures of the mind, as distinct from those of
sense, may be considered as an inferior school of morality,
where the mind is polished and prepared for higher
attainments.
Let us for a moment take a short survey of the progress
of the mind towards what is, or ought to be, its true object
of attention. Man, in his lowest state, has no pleasures
but those of sense, and no wants but those of appetite;
afterwards, when society is divided into different ranks, and
some are appointed to labour for the support of others,
those whom their superiority sets free from labour begin to
look for intellectual entertainments. Thus, whilst the
shepherds were attending their flocks, their masters made
the first astronomical observations; so music is said to have
had its origin from a man at leisure listening to the strokes
of a hammer.
As the senses, in the lowest state of nature, are necessary
to direct us to our support, when that support is once
secure there is danger in following them further; to him
who has no rule of action but the gratification of the senses,
plenty is always dangerous: it is therefore necessary to the
happiness of individuals, and still more necessary to the
security of society, that the mind should be elevated to the
idea of general beauty, and the contemplation of general
truth; by this pursuit the mind is always carried forward in
search of something more excellent than it finds, and
obtains its proper superiority over the common senses of
 [Pg 156]
life, by learning to feel itself capable of higher aims and
nobler enjoyments. In this gradual exaltation of human
nature, every art contributes its contingent towards the
general supply of mental pleasure. Whatever abstracts the
thoughts from sensual gratifications, whatever teaches us to
look for happiness within ourselves, must advance in some
measure the dignity of our nature.
Perhaps there is no higher proof of the excellency of
man than this—that to a mind properly cultivated, whatever
is bounded is little. The mind is continually labouring to
advance, step by step, through successive gradations of
excellence, towards perfection, which is dimly seen, at a
great, though not hopeless, distance, and which we must
always follow, because we never can attain; but the pursuit
rewards itself; one truth teaches another, and our store is
always increasing, though nature can never be exhausted.
Our art, like all arts which address the imagination, is
applied to a somewhat lower faculty of the mind, which
approaches nearer to sensuality: but through sense and
fancy it must make its way to reason; for such is the
progress of thought, that we perceive by sense, we combine
by fancy, and distinguish by reason: and without carrying
our art out of its natural and true character, the more we
purify it from everything that is gross in sense, in that proportion
we advance its use and dignity; and in proportion
as we lower it to mere sensuality, we pervert its nature, and
degrade it from the rank of a liberal art; and this is what
every artist ought well to remember. Let him remember
also, that he deserves just so much encouragement in the
state as he makes himself a member of it virtuously useful,
and contributes in his sphere to the general purpose and
perfection of society.
The Art which we profess has beauty for its object; this
 [Pg 157]
it is our business to discover and to express; the beauty of
which we are in quest is general and intellectual; it is an
idea that subsists only in the mind; the sight never beheld
it, nor has the hand expressed it; it is an idea residing in
the breast of the artist, which he is always labouring to
impart, and which he dies at last without imparting; but
which he is yet so far able to communicate, as to raise the
thoughts and extend the views of the spectator; and which,
by a succession of art, may be so far diffused, that its effects
may extend themselves imperceptibly into public benefits,
and be among the means of bestowing on whole nations
refinement of taste: which, if it does not lead directly to
purity of manners, obviates at least their greatest depravation,
by disentangling the mind from appetite, and conducting
the thoughts through successive stages of excellence,
till that contemplation of universal rectitude and harmony,
which, began by Taste, may, as it is exalted and refined,
conclude in Virtue.
[Pg 158]
Delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy, on the Distribution of
the Prizes, December 11, 1780.
SCULPTURE:—HAS BUT ONE STYLE.—ITS OBJECTS, FORM, AND
CHARACTER.—INEFFECTUAL ATTEMPTS OF THE MODERN SCULPTORS
TO IMPROVE THE ART.—ILL EFFECTS OF MODERN DRESS
IN SCULPTURE.
I shall now, as it has been customary on this day, and on
this occasion, communicate to you such observations as
have occurred to me on the Theory of Art.
If these observations have hitherto referred principally to
Painting, let it be remembered that this Art is much more
extensive and complicated than Sculpture, and affords therefore
a more ample field for criticism; and as the greater
includes the less, the leading principles of Sculpture are
comprised in those of Painting.
However, I wish now to make some remarks with
particular relation to Sculpture; to consider wherein, or in
what manner, its principles and those of Painting agree or
differ; what is within its power of performing, and what it
is vain or improper to attempt; that it may be clearly and
distinctly known what ought to be the great purpose of the
Sculptor's labours.
Sculpture is an art of much more simplicity and
uniformity than painting; it cannot with propriety, and
the best effect, be applied to many subjects. The object of
its pursuit may be comprised in two words—Form and
Character; and those qualities are presented to us but in
 [Pg 159]
one manner, or in one style only; whereas the powers of
Painting, as they are more various and extensive, so they
are exhibited in as great a variety of manners. The
Roman, Lombard, Florentine, Venetian, and Flemish
Schools all pursue the same end by different means. But
Sculpture having but one style, can only to one style of
Painting have any relation; and to this (which is indeed
the highest and most dignified that Painting can boast), it
has a relation so close, that it may be said to be almost the
same art operating upon different materials. The Sculptors
of the last age, from not attending sufficiently to this discrimination
of the different styles of Painting, have been led
into many errors. Though they well knew that they were
allowed to imitate, or take ideas for the improvement of
their own Art from the grand style of Painting, they were
not aware that it was not permitted to borrow in the same
manner from the ornamental. When they endeavour to
copy the picturesque effects, contrasts, or petty excellencies
of whatever kind, which not improperly find a place in the
inferior branches of Painting, they doubtless imagine themselves
improving and extending the boundaries of their art
by this imitation; but they are in reality violating its
essential character, by giving a different direction to its
operations, and proposing to themselves either what is unattainable,
or at best a meaner object of pursuit. The
grave and austere character of Sculpture requires the utmost
degree of formality in composition; picturesque contrasts
have here no place; everything is carefully weighed and
measured, one side making almost an exact equipoise to
the other: a child is not a proper balance to a full grown
figure, nor is a figure sitting or stooping a companion to an
upright figure.
The excellence of every art must consist in the complete
 [Pg 160]
accomplishment of its purpose; and if by a false imitation
of nature, or mean ambition of producing a picturesque
effect or illusion of any kind, all the grandeur of ideas
which this art endeavours to excite, be degraded or
destroyed, we may boldly oppose ourselves to any such
innovation. If the producing of a deception is the summit
of this art, let us at once give to statues the addition of
colour; which will contribute more towards accomplishing
this end than all those artifices which have been introduced
and professedly defended, on no other principle but that
of rendering the work more natural. But as colour is
universally rejected, every practice liable to the same
objection must fall with it. If the business of Sculpture
were to administer pleasure to ignorance, or a mere entertainment
to the senses, the Venus or Medicis might certainly
receive much improvement by colour; but the character of
Sculpture makes it her duty to afford delight of a different,
and, perhaps, of a higher kind; the delight resulting from
the contemplation of perfect beauty: and this, which is in
truth an intellectual pleasure, is in many respects incompatible
with what is merely addressed to the senses, such as
that with which ignorance and levity contemplate elegance
of form.
The Sculptor may be safely allowed to practise every
means within the power of his art to produce a deception,
provided this practice does not interfere with or destroy
higher excellencies; on these conditions he will be forced,
however loth, to acknowledge that the boundaries of his art
have long been fixed, and that all endeavours will be vain
that hope to pass beyond the best works which remain of
ancient Sculpture.
Imitation is the means, and not the end of art: it is
employed by the Sculptor as the language by which his
 [Pg 161]
ideas are presented to the mind of the spectator. Poetry
and elocution of every sort make use of signs, but those
signs are arbitrary and conventional. The sculptor employs
the representation of the thing itself; but still as a means
to a higher end—as a gradual ascent, always advancing
towards faultless form and perfect beauty. It may be
thought at the first view, that even this form, however
perfectly represented, is to be valued and take its rank only
for the sake of a still higher object, that of conveying
sentiment and character, as they are exhibited by attitude
and expression of the passions. But we are sure from
experience, that the beauty of form alone, without the
assistance of any other quality, makes of itself a great work,
and justly claims our esteem and admiration. As a proof
of the high value we set on the mere excellence of form, we
may produce the greatest part of the works of Michel
Angelo, both in painting and sculpture; as well as most of
the antique statues, which are justly esteemed in a very
high degree, though no very marked or striking character
or expression of any kind is represented.
But, as a stronger instance that this excellence alone
inspires sentiment, what artist ever looked at the Torso
without feeling a warmth of enthusiasm, as from the highest
efforts of poetry? From whence does this proceed? What
is there in this fragment that produces this effect, but the
perfection of this science of abstract form?
A mind elevated to the contemplation of excellence,
perceives in this defaced and shattered fragment, disjecta
membra poetæ, the traces of superlative genius, the reliques
of a work on which succeeding ages can only gaze with
inadequate admiration.
It may be said that this pleasure is reserved only to those
who have spent their whole life in the study and contemplation
 [Pg 162]
of this art; but the truth is, that all would feel its
effects, if they could divest themselves of the expectation
of deception, and look only for what it really is—a partial
representation of nature. The only impediment of their
judgment must then proceed from their being uncertain to
what rank, or rather kind of excellence, it aspires; and to
what sort of approbation it has a right. This state of darkness
is, without doubt, irksome to every mind; but by
attention to works of this kind the knowledge of what is
aimed at comes of itself, without being taught, and almost
without being perceived.
The Sculptor's art is limited in comparison of others, but
it has its variety and intricacy within its proper bounds.
Its essence is correctness: and when to correct and perfect
form is added the ornament of grace, dignity of character,
and appropriated expression, as in the Apollo, the Venus,
the Laocoon, the Moses of Michael Angelo, and many
others, this art may be said to have accomplished its
purpose.
What Grace is, how it is to be acquired or conceived, are
in speculation difficult questions; but causa latet, res est
notissima: without any perplexing inquiry, the effect is
hourly perceived. I shall only observe that its natural
foundation is correctness of design; and though grace may
be sometimes united with incorrectness, it cannot proceed
from it.
But to come nearer to our present subject. It has been
said that the grace of the Apollo depends on a certain
degree of incorrectness: that the head is not anatomically
placed between the shoulders; and that the lower half of
the figure is longer than just proportion allows.
I know that Correggio and Parmegiano are often produced
as authorities to support this opinion; but very little
 [Pg 163]
attention will convince us that the incorrectness of some
parts which we find in their works does not contribute to
grace, but rather tends to destroy it. The Madonna, with
the sleeping Infant, and beautiful group of Angels, by
Parmegiano, in the Palazzo Piti, would not have lost any of
its excellence if the neck, fingers, and, indeed, the whole
figure of the Virgin, instead of being so very long and
incorrect, had preserved their due proportion.
In opposition to the first of these remarks, I have the
authority of a very able Sculptor of this Academy, who has
copied that figure, consequently measured and carefully
examined it, to declare that the criticism is not true. In
regard to the last, it must be remembered that Apollo is
here in the exertion of one of his peculiar powers, which is
swiftness; he has therefore that proportion which is best
adapted to that character. This is no more incorrectness
than when there is given to an Hercules an extraordinary
swelling and strength of muscles.
The art of discovering and expressing grace is difficult
enough of itself, without perplexing ourselves with what is
incomprehensible. A supposition of such a monster as
Grace, begot by Deformity, is poison to the mind of a young
Artist, and may make him neglect what is essential to his
art—correctness of Design—in order to pursue a phantom,
which has no existence but in the imagination of affected
and refined speculators.
I cannot quit the Apollo without making one observation
on the character of this figure. He is supposed to have
just discharged his arrow at the Python; and, by the head
retreating a little towards the right shoulder, he appears
attentive to its effect. What I would remark is the difference
of this attention from that of the Discobolus, who is
engaged in the same purpose, watching the effect of his
 [Pg 164]
Discus. The graceful, negligent, though animated air of
the one, and the vulgar eagerness of the other, furnish a
signal instance of the judgment of the ancient sculptors in
their nice discrimination of character. They are both
equally true to nature, and equally admirable.
It may be remarked that Grace, Character, and Expression,
though words of different sense and meaning, and so
understood when applied to the works of Painters, are
indiscriminately used when we speak of Sculpture. This
indecision we may suspect to proceed from the undetermined
effects of the Art itself; those qualities are exhibited
in Sculpture rather by form and attitude than by the
features, and can therefore be expressed but in a very
general manner.
Though the Laocoon and his two sons have more expression
in the countenance than perhaps any other antique
statues, yet it is only the general expression of pain; and
this passion is still more strongly expressed by the writhing
and contortion of the body than by the features.
It has been observed in a late publication, that if the
attention of the Father in this group had been occupied
more by the distress of his children than by his own
sufferings, it would have raised a much greater interest in
the spectator. Though this observation comes from a
person whose opinion, in everything relating to the Arts,
carries with it the highest authority, yet I cannot but
suspect that such refined expression is scarce within the
province of this Art; and in attempting it, the Artist will
run great risk of enfeebling expression, and making it less
intelligible to the spectator.
As the general figure presents itself in a more conspicuous
manner than the features, it is there we must principally
look for expression or character; patuit in corpore vultus;
 [Pg 165]
and, in this respect, the Sculptor's art is not unlike that of
Dancing, where the attention of the spectator is principally
engaged by the attitude and action of the performer, and it
is there he must look for whatever expression that art is
capable of exhibiting. The Dancers themselves acknowledge
this, by often wearing masks, with little diminution in
the expression. The face bears so very inconsiderable a
proportion to the effect of the whole figure, that the
ancient Sculptors neglected to animate the features, even
with the general expression of the passions. Of this the
group of the Boxers is a remarkable instance; they are
engaged in the most animated action with the greatest
serenity of countenance. This is not recommended for
imitation (for there can be no reason why the countenance
should not correspond with the attitude and expression of
the figure), but is mentioned in order to infer from hence,
that this frequent deficiency in ancient Sculpture could
proceed from nothing but a habit of inattention to what was
considered as comparatively immaterial.
Those who think Sculpture can express more than we
have allowed, may ask, by what means we discover, at the
first glance, the character that is represented in a Bust,
Cameo, or Intaglio? I suspect it will be found, on close
examination, by him who is resolved not to see more than
he really does see, that the figures are distinguished by
their insignia more than by any variety of form or beauty.
Take from Apollo his Lyre, from Bacchus his Thyrsus and
Vine-leaves, and Meleager the Boar's Head, and there will
remain little or no difference in their characters. In a
Juno, Minerva, or Flora, the idea of the artist seems to
have gone no further than representing perfect beauty, and
afterwards adding the proper attributes, with a total indifference
to which they gave them. Thus John de Bologna,
 [Pg 166]
after he had finished a group of a young man holding up a
young woman in his arms, with an old man at his feet,
called his friends together, to tell him what name he should
give it, and it was agreed to call it The Rape of the
Sabines; and this is the celebrated group which now stands
before the old Palace at Florence.
[12] The figures have the
same general expression which is to be found in most of
the antique Sculpture; and yet it would be no wonder if
future critics should find out delicacy of expression which
was never intended; and go so far as to see, in the old
man's countenance, the exact relation which he bore to the
woman who appears to be taken from him.
Though Painting and Sculpture are, like many other arts,
governed by the same general principles, yet in the detail,
or what may be called the by-laws of each art, there seems
to be no longer any connection between them. The
different materials upon which those two arts exert their
powers must infallibly create a proportional difference in
their practice. There are many petty excellencies which
the Painter attains with ease, but which are impracticable
in Sculpture; and which, even if it could accomplish
them, would add nothing to the true value and dignity of
the work.
Of the ineffectual attempts which the modern Sculptors
have made by way of improvement, these seem to be the
principal; The practice of detaching drapery from the
figure, in order to give the appearance of flying in the
air;—
Of making different plans in the same bas-relievos;—
Of attempting to represent the effects of perspective;—
To these we may add the ill effect of figures clothed in a
modern dress.
[Pg 167]
 The folly of attempting to make stone sport and flutter
in the air is so apparent, that it carries with it its own
reprehension; and yet to accomplish this seemed to be
the great ambition of many modern Sculptors, particularly
Bernini: his art was so much set on overcoming this difficulty,
that he was forever attempting it, though by that
attempt he risked everything that was valuable in the art.
Bernini stands in the first class of modern Sculptors, and
therefore it is the business of criticism to prevent the ill
effects of so powerful an example.
From his very early work of Apollo and Daphne, the
world justly expected he would rival the best productions
of ancient Greece; but he soon strayed from the right path.
And though there is in his works something which always
distinguishes him from the common herd, yet he appears
in his latter performances to have lost his way. Instead of
pursuing the study of that ideal beauty with which he had
so successfully begun, he turned his mind to an injudicious
quest of novelty, attempted what was not within the province
of the art, and endeavoured to overcome the hardness
and obstinacy of his materials; which even supposing he
had accomplished, so far as to make this species of drapery
appear natural, the ill effect and confusion occasioned by
its being detached from the figure to which it belongs
ought to have been alone a sufficient reason to have
deterred him from that practice.
We have not, I think, in our Academy, any of Bernini's
works, except a cast of the head of his Neptune; this will
be sufficient to serve us for an example of the mischief produced
by this attempt of representing the effects of the
wind. The locks of the hair are flying abroad in all directions,
insomuch that it is not a superficial view that can
discover what the object is which is represented, or
 [Pg 168]
distinguish those flying locks from the features, as they are
all of the same colour, of equal solidity, and consequently
project with equal force.
The same entangled confusion which is here occasioned
by the hair is produced by drapery flying off; which the
eye must, for the same reason, inevitably mingle and
confound with the principal parts of the figure.
It is a general rule, equally true in both Arts, that the
form and attitude of the figure should be seen clearly, and
without any ambiguity at the first glance of the eye. This
the Painter can easily do by colour, by losing parts in the
ground, or keeping them so obscure as to prevent them
from interfering with the more principal objects. The
sculptor has no other means of preventing this confusion
than by attaching the drapery for the greater part close to
the figure; the folds of which, following the order of the
limbs, whenever the drapery is seen, the eye is led to trace
the form and attitude of the figure at the same time.
The drapery of the Apollo, though it makes a large mass,
and is separated from the figure, does not affect the present
question, from the very circumstance of its being so completely
separated; and from the regularity and simplicity of
its form, it does not in the least interfere with a distinct
view of the figure. In reality, it is no more a part of it
than a pedestal, a trunk of a tree, or an animal, which we
often see joined to statues.
The principal use of those appendages is to strengthen
and preserve the statue from accidents; and many are of
opinion that the mantle which falls from the Apollo's arm
is for the same end; but surely it answers a much greater
purpose, by preventing that dryness of effect which would
inevitably attend a naked arm, extended almost at full
length, to which we may add the disagreeable effect which
 [Pg 169]
would proceed from the body and arm making a right
angle.
The Apostles, in the church of St. John Lateran, appear
to me to fall under the censure of an injudicious imitation
of the manner of the painters. The drapery of those
figures, from being disposed in large masses, gives undoubtedly
that air of grandeur which magnitude or quantity is
sure to produce. But though it should be acknowledged
that it is managed with great skill and intelligence, and
contrived to appear as light as the materials will allow,
yet the weight and solidity of stone was not to be overcome.
Those figures are much in the style of Carlo Maratti, and
such as we may imagine he would have made if he had
attempted Sculpture; and when we know he had the
superintendence of that work, and was an intimate friend of
one of the principal Sculptors, we may suspect that his
taste had some influence, if he did not even give the
designs. No man can look at those figures without recognising
the manner of Carlo Maratti. They have the same
defect which his works so often have, of being overlaid with
drapery, and that too artificially disposed. I cannot but
believe that if Ruscono, Le Gros, Monot, and the rest of
the Sculptors employed in that work, had taken for their
guide the simple dress, such as we see in the antique
statues of the philosophers, it would have given more real
grandeur to their figures, and would certainly have been
more suitable to the characters of the Apostles.
Though there is no remedy for the ill effect of those
solid projections which flying drapery in stone must always
produce in statues, yet in bas-relievos it is totally different;
those detached parts of drapery the Sculptor has here as
much power over as the Painter, by uniting and losing it in
 [Pg 170]
the ground, so that it shall not in the least entangle and
confuse the figure.
But here again the Sculptor, not content with this successful
imitation, if it may be so called, proceeds to
represent figures, or groups of figures, on different plans;
that is, some on the foreground, and some at a greater distance,
in the manner of Painters in historical compositions.
To do this he has no other means than by making the distant
figures of less dimensions, and relieving them in a less
degree from the surface; but this is not adequate to the
end; they will still appear only as figures on a less scale,
but equally near the eye with those in the front of the
piece.
Nor does the mischief of this attempt, which never accomplishes
its intention, rest here: by this division of the work
into many minute parts, the grandeur of its general effect is
inevitably destroyed.
Perhaps the only circumstance in which the Modern
have excelled the Ancient Sculptors is the management of
a single group in basso-relievo; the art of gradually raising
the group from the flat surface, till it imperceptibly emerges
into alto-relievo. Of this there is no ancient example remaining
that discovers any approach to the skill which Le
Gros has shown in an Altar in the Jesuits' Church at Rome.
Different plans or degrees of relief in the same group have,
as we see in this instance, a good effect, though the contrary
happens when the groups are separated, and are at some
distance behind each other.
This improvement in the art of composing a group in
basso-relievo was probably first suggested by the practice of
the modern Painters, who relieve their figures, or groups of
figures, from their ground, by the same gentle gradation;
and it is accomplished in every respect by the same general
 [Pg 171]
principles; but as the marble has no colour, it is the composition
itself that must give its light and shadow. The
ancient Sculptors could not borrow this advantage from their
Painters, for this was an art with which they appear to have
been entirely unacquainted: and in the bas-relievos of
Lorenzo Ghiberti, the casts of which we have in the
Academy, this art is no more attempted than it was by the
Painters of his age.
The next imaginary improvement of the moderns is the
representing the effects of Perspective in bas-relief. Of this
little need be said; all must recollect how ineffectual has
been the attempt of modern Sculptors to turn the buildings
which they have introduced as seen from their angle, with a
view to make them appear to recede from the eye in perspective.
This, though it may show indeed their eager
desire to encounter difficulties, shows at the same time how
inadequate their materials are even to this their humble
ambition.
The Ancients, with great judgment, represented only the
elevation of whatever architecture they introduced into their
bas-reliefs, which is composed of little more than horizontal
or perpendicular lines; whereas the interruption of crossed
lines, or whatever causes a multiplicity of subordinate parts,
destroys that regularity and firmness of effect on which
grandeur of style so much depends.
We come now to the last consideration; in what manner
Statues are to be dressed, which are made in honour of
men, either now living, or lately departed.
This is a question which might employ a long discourse
of itself; I shall at present only observe, that he who
wishes not to obstruct the Artist, and prevent his exhibiting
his abilities to their greatest advantage, will certainly not
desire a modern dress.
[Pg 172]
 The desire of transmitting to posterity the shape of
modern dress must be acknowledged to be purchased at a
prodigious price, even the price of everything that is
valuable in art.
Working in stone is a very serious business; and it
seems to be scarce worth while to employ such durable
materials in conveying to posterity a fashion of which the
longest existence scarce exceeds a year.
However agreeable it may be to the Antiquary's principles
of equity and gratitude, that as he has received great
pleasure from the contemplation of the fashions of dress of
former ages, he wishes to give the same satisfaction to
future Antiquaries; yet, methinks, pictures of an inferior
style, or prints, may be considered as quite sufficient,
without prostituting this great art to such mean purposes.
In this town may be seen an Equestrian Statue in a
modern dress, which may be sufficient to deter future artists
from any such attempt: even supposing no other objection,
the familiarity of the modern dress by no means agrees
with the dignity and gravity of Sculpture.
Sculpture is formal, regular, and austere; disdains all
familiar objects, as incompatible with its dignity; and is an
enemy to every species of affectation, or appearance of
academical art. All contrast, therefore, of one figure to
another, or of the limbs of a single figure, or even in the
folds of the drapery, must be sparingly employed. In
short, whatever partakes of fancy or caprice, or goes under
the denomination of Picturesque (however to be admired
in its proper place), is incompatible with that sobriety and
gravity which is peculiarly the characteristic of this art.
There is no circumstance which more distinguishes a
well-regulated and sound taste, than a settled uniformity of
design, where all the parts are compact, and fitted to each
 [Pg 173]
other, everything being of a piece. This principle extends
itself to all habits of life, as well as to all works of art.
Upon this general ground therefore we may safely venture
to pronounce, that the uniformity and simplicity of the
materials on which the Sculptor labours (which are only
white marble), prescribes bounds to his art, and teaches
him to confine himself to a proportionable simplicity of
design.
[Pg 174]
Delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy, on the Distribution of
the Prizes, December 10, 1782.
GENIUS.—CONSISTS PRINCIPALLY IN THE COMPREHENSION OF A
WHOLE; IN TAKING GENERAL IDEAS ONLY.
The highest ambition of every Artist is to be thought
a man of Genius. As long as this flattering quality is
joined to his name, he can bear with patience the imputation
of carelessness, incorrectness, or defects of whatever
kind.
So far, indeed, is the presence of Genius from implying an
absence of faults, that they are considered by many as its
inseparable companions. Some go such lengths as to take
indication from them, and not only excuse faults on
account of Genius, but presume Genius from the existence
of certain faults.
It is certainly true, that a work may justly claim the
character of Genius, though full of errors; and it is equally
true, that it may be faultless, and yet not exhibit the least
spark of Genius. This naturally suggests an inquiry, a
desire, at least, of inquiring, what qualities of a work and of
a workman may justly entitle a Painter to that character.
I have in a former discourse
[13] endeavoured to impress
you with a fixed opinion, that a comprehensive and critical
knowledge of the works of nature is the only source of
beauty and grandeur. But when we speak to Painters, we
 [Pg 175]
must always consider this rule, and all rules, with a reference
to the mechanical practice of their own particular Art.
It is not properly in the learning, the taste, and the dignity
of the ideas, that Genius appears as belonging to a Painter.
There is a Genius particular appropriated to his own trade,
(as I may call it) distinguished from all others. For that
power, which enables the Artist to conceive his subject
with dignity, may be said to belong to general education;
and is as much the Genius of a Poet, or the professor of
any other liberal Art, or even a good critic in any of those
arts, as of a Painter. Whatever sublime ideas may fill his
mind, he is a Painter, only as he can put in practice what
he knows, and communicate those ideas by visible
representation.
If my expression can convey my idea, I wish to distinguish
excellence of this kind by calling it the Genius of
mechanical performance. This Genius consists, I conceive,
in the power of expressing that which employs your pencil,
whatever it may be, as a whole; so that the general effect
and power of the whole may take possession of the
mind, and for a while suspend the consideration of the
subordinate and particular beauties or defects.
The advantage of this method of considering objects is
what I wish now more particularly to enforce. At the
same time I do not forget, that a Painter must have the
power of contracting as well as dilating his sight; because,
he that does not at all express particulars, expresses nothing;
yet it is certain, that a nice discrimination of minute circumstances,
and a punctilious delineation of them, whatever excellence
it may have (and I do not mean to detract from
it) never did confer on the Artist the character of Genius.
Beside those minute differences in things which are
frequently not observed at all, and when they are, made
 [Pg 176]
little impression, there are in all considerable objects great
characteristic distinctions, which press strongly on the
senses, and therefore fix the imagination. These are by no
means, as some persons think, an aggregate of all the small
discriminating particulars: nor will such an accumulation
of particulars ever express them. These answer to what I
have heard great lawyers call the leading points in a case,
or the leading cases relative to those points.
The detail of particulars, which does not assist the
expression of the main characteristic, is worse than useless,
it is mischievous, as it dissipates the attention, and draws it
from the principal point. It may be remarked, that the
impression which is left on our mind even of things which
are familiar to us, is seldom more than their general effect;
beyond which we do not look in recognising such objects.
To express this in Painting, is to express what is congenial
and natural to the mind of man, and what gives him by
reflection his own mode of conceiving. The other presupposes
nicety and research, which are only the business of
the curious and attentive, and therefore does not speak to
the general sense of the whole species; in which common,
and, as I may so call it, mother tongue, everything grand
and comprehensive must be uttered.
I do not mean to prescribe what degree of attention
ought to be paid to the minute parts; this it is hard to
settle. We are sure that it is expressing the general effect
of the whole, which alone can give to objects their true and
touching character; and wherever this is observed, whatever
else may be neglected, we acknowledge the hand of a
Master. We may even go further, and observe, that when
the general effect only is presented to us by a skilful hand,
it appears to express the object represented in a more lively
manner than the minutest resemblance would do.
[Pg 177]
 These observations may lead to very deep questions,
which I do not mean here to discuss; among others, it may
lead to an inquiry, Why we are not always pleased with
the most absolute possible resemblance of an imitation to
its original object? Cases may exist in which such a
resemblance may be even disagreeable. I shall only
observe that the effect of figures in waxwork, though
certainly a more exact representation than can be given by
Painting or Sculpture, is a sufficient proof that the pleasure
we receive from imitation is not increased merely in proportion
as it approaches to minute and detailed reality; we
are pleased, on the contrary, by seeing ends accomplished
by seemingly inadequate means.
To express protuberance by actual relief—to express the
softness of flesh by the softness of wax, seems rude and
inartificial, and creates no grateful surprise. But to express
distances on a plain surface, softness by hard bodies, and
particular colouring by materials which are not singly of that
colour, produces that magic which is the prize and triumph
of art.
Carry this principle a step further. Suppose the effect of
imitation to be fully compassed by means still more inadequate;
let the power of a few well-chosen strokes, which
supersede labour by judgment and direction, produce a
complete impression of all that the mind demands in an
object; we are charmed with such an unexpected happiness
of execution, and begin to be tired with the superfluous
diligence, which in vain solicits an appetite already satiated.
The properties of all objects, as far as a Painter is
concerned with them, are, the outline or drawing, the
colour, and the light and shade. The drawing gives the
form, the colour its visible quality, and the light and shade
its solidity.
[Pg 178]
 Excellence in any one of these parts of art will never be
acquired by an artist, unless he has the habit of looking
upon objects at large, and observing the effect which they
have on the eye when it is dilated, and employed upon the
whole, without seeing any one of the parts distinctly. It is
by this that we obtain the ruling characteristic, and that we
learn to imitate it by short and dexterous methods. I do
not mean by dexterity a trick or mechanical habit, formed
by guess, and established by custom; but that science,
which, by a profound knowledge of ends and means,
discovers the shortest and surest way to its own purpose.
If we examine with a critical view the manner of those
painters whom we consider as patterns, we shall find that
their great fame does not proceed from their works being
more highly finished than those of other artists, or from a
more minute attention to details, but from that enlarged
comprehension which sees the whole object at once, and
that energy of art which gives its characteristic effect by
adequate expression.
Raffaelle and Titian are two names which stand the
highest in our art; one for Drawing, the other for Painting.
The most considerable and the most esteemed works of
Raffaelle are the Cartoons, and his Fresco works in the
Vatican; those, as we all know, are far from being minutely
finished: his principal care and attention seems to have
been fixed upon the adjustment of the whole, whether it
was the general composition, or the composition of each
individual figure; for every figure may be said to be a lesser
whole, though, in regard to the general work to which it
belongs, it is but a part; the same may be said of the head,
of the hands, and feet. Though he possessed this art of
seeing and comprehending the whole, as far as form is concerned,
he did not exert the same faculty in regard to the
 [Pg 179]
general effect, which is presented to the eye by colour, and
light and shade. Of this the deficiency of his oil pictures,
where this excellence is more expected than in Fresco, is a
sufficient proof.
It is to Titian we must turn our eyes to find excellence
with regard to colour, and light and shade, in the highest
degree. He was both the first and the greatest master of
this art. By a few strokes he knew how to mark the
general image and character of whatever object he attempted;
and produced, by this alone, a truer representation than his
master Giovanni Bellino, or any of his predecessors, who
finished every hair. His great care was to express the
general colour, to preserve the masses of light and shade,
and to give by opposition the idea of that solidity which is
inseparable from natural objects. When those are preserved,
though the work should possess no other merit, it
will have in a proper place its complete effect; but where
any of these are wanting, however minutely laboured the
picture may be in the detail, the whole will have a false and
even an unfinished appearance, at whatever distance, or in
whatever light, it can be shown.
It is in vain to attend to the variation of tints, if, in that
attention, the general hue of flesh is lost; or to finish ever
so minutely the parts, if the masses are not observed, or the
whole not well put together.
Vasari seems to have had no great disposition to favour
the Venetian Painters, yet he everywhere justly commends
il modo di fare, la maniera, la bella practica; that is, the
admirable manner and practice of that school. On Titian,
in particular, he bestows the epithets of giudicioso, bello, e
stupendo.
This manner was then new to the world, but that unshaken
truth on which it is founded has fixed it as a
 [Pg 180]
model to all succeeding Painters; and those who will examine
into the artifice will find it to consist in the power
of generalising, and in the shortness and simplicity of the
means employed.
Many artists, as Vasari likewise observes, have ignorantly
imagined they are imitating the manner of Titian when they
leave their colours rough, and neglect the detail; but, not
possessing the principles on which he wrought, they have
produced what he calls goffe pitture, absurd, foolish pictures;
for such will always be the consequence of affecting dexterity
without science, without selection, and without fixed
principles.
Raffaelle and Titian seem to have looked at nature for
different purposes; they both had the power of extending
their view to the whole; but one looked only for the general
effect as produced by form, the other as produced by
colour.
We cannot entirely refuse to Titian the merit of attending
to the general form of his object, as well as colour; but his
deficiency lay, a deficiency, at least, when he is compared
with Raffaelle, in not possessing the power like him of
correcting the form of his model by any general idea of
beauty in his own mind. Of this his St. Sebastian is a particular
instance. This figure appears to be a most exact
representation both of the form and the colour of the model,
which he then happened to have before him; it has all the
force of nature, and the colouring is flesh itself; but, unluckily,
the model was of a bad form, especially the legs.
Titian has with as much care preserved these defects, as he
has imitated the beauty and brilliancy of the colouring. In
his colouring he was large and general, as in his design he
was minute and partial: in the one he was a genius, in the
other not much above a copier. I do not, however, speak
 [Pg 181]
now of all his pictures: instances enough may be produced
in his works, where those observations on his defects could
not with any propriety be applied; but it is in the manner
or language, as it may be called, in which Titian and others
of that school express themselves, that their chief excellence
lies. This manner is in reality, in painting, what language
is in poetry; we are all sensible how differently the imagination
is affected by the same sentiment expressed in different
words, and how mean or how grand the same object appears
when presented to us by different Painters. Whether it is
the human figure, an animal, or even inanimate objects,
there is nothing, however unpromising in appearance, but
may be raised into dignity, convey sentiment and produce
emotion, in the hands of a Painter of genius. What was
said of Virgil, that he threw even the dung about the
ground with an air of dignity, may be applied to Titian:
whatever he touched, however naturally mean and habitually
familiar, by a kind of magic he invested with grandeur
and importance.
I must here observe, that I am not recommending a
neglect of the detail; indeed, it would be difficult, if not impossible,
to prescribe certain bounds, and tell how far, or
when, it is to be observed or neglected; much must, at
last, be left to the taste and judgment of the artist. I am
well aware that a judicious detail will sometimes give the
force of truth to the work, and consequently interest the
spectator. I only wish to impress on your minds the true
distinction between essential and subordinate powers; and
to show what qualities in the art claim your chief attention,
and what may, with the least injury to your reputation, be
neglected. Something, perhaps, always must be neglected;
the lesser ought then to give way to the greater; and since
every work can have but a limited time allotted to it (for
 [Pg 182]
even supposing a whole life to be employed about one
picture, it is still limited), it appears more reasonable to employ
that time to the best advantage, in contriving various
methods of composing the work,—in trying different effects
of light and shadow,—and employing the labour of correction
in heightening, by a judicious adjustment of the parts,
the effects of the whole,—than that the time should be
taken up in minutely finishing those parts.
But there is another kind of high finishing, which may
safely be condemned, as it seems to counteract its own
purpose; that is, when the artist, to avoid that hardness
which proceeds from the outline cutting against the ground,
softens and blends the colours to excess; this is what the
ignorant call high finishing, but which tends to destroy the
brilliancy of colour, and the true effect of representation;
which consists very much in preserving the same proportion
of sharpness and bluntness that is found in natural objects.
This extreme softening, instead of producing the effect of
softness, gives the appearance of ivory, or some other hard
substance, highly polished.
The portraits of Cornelius Jansen appear to have this
defect, and consequently want that suppleness which is the
characteristic of flesh; whereas, in the works of Vandyke
we find the true mixture of softness and hardness perfectly
observed. The same defect may be found in the manner
of Vanderwerf, in opposition to that of Teniers; and such
also, we may add, is the manner of Raffaelle in his oil
pictures, in comparison with that of Titian.
The name which Raffaelle has so justly maintained as
the first of Painters, we may venture to say was not acquired
by this laborious attention. His apology may be made by
saying that it was the manner of his country; but if he had
expressed his ideas with the facility and eloquence, as it
 [Pg 183]
may be called, of Titian, his works would certainly not
have been less excellent; and that praise, which ages and
nations have poured out upon him, for possessing Genius in
the higher attainments of art, would have been extended to
them all.
Those who are not conversant in works of art, are often
surprised at the high value set by connoisseurs on drawings
which appear careless, and in every respect unfinished;
but they are truly valuable; and their value arises from this,
that they give the idea of an whole; and this whole is often
expressed by a dexterous facility which indicates the true
power of a Painter, even though roughly exerted; whether
it consists in the general composition, or the general form
of each figure, or the turn of the attitude which bestows
grace and elegance. All this we may see fully exemplified
in the very skilful drawings of Parmegiano and Correggio.
On whatever account we value these drawings, it is certainly
not for high finishing, or a minute attention to particulars.
Excellence in every part, and in every province of our
art, from the highest style of history down to the resemblances
of still-life, will depend on this power of extending
the attention at once to the whole, without which the
greatest diligence is vain.
I wish you to bear in mind, that when I speak of an
whole, I do not mean simply an whole as belonging to composition,
but an whole with respect to the general style of
colouring; an whole with regard to the light and shade; an
whole of everything which may separately become the main
object of a Painter.
I remember a Landscape-painter in Rome, who was
known by the name of Studio, from his patience in high
finishing, in which he thought the whole excellence of art
consisted; so that he once endeavoured, as he said, to
 [Pg 184]
represent every individual leaf on a tree. This picture I
never saw; but I am very sure that an artist who looked
only at the general character of the species, the order of the
branches, and the masses of the foliage, would in a few
minutes produce a more true resemblance of trees than
this Painter in as many months.
A Landscape-painter certainly ought to study anatomically
(if I may use the expression) all the objects which he
paints; but when he is to turn his studies to use, his skill,
as a man of genius, will be displayed in showing the general
effect, preserving the same degree of hardness and softness
which the objects have in nature; for he applies himself to
the imagination, not to the curiosity, and works not for the
Virtuoso or the Naturalist, but for the common observer of
life and nature. When he knows his subject, he will know
not only what to describe, but what to omit: and this skill
in leaving out is, in all things, a great part of knowledge
and wisdom.
The same excellence of manner which Titian displayed
in History or Portrait-painting is equally conspicuous in
his Landscapes, whether they are professedly such, or serve
only as backgrounds. One of the most eminent of this
latter kind is to be found in the picture of St. Pietro
Martire. The large trees, which are here introduced, are
plainly distinguished from each other by the different
manner with which the branches shoot from their trunks, as
well as by their different foliage; and the weeds in the
foreground are varied in the same manner, just as much as
variety requires, and no more. When Algarotii, speaking
of this picture, praises it for the minute discriminations of
the leaves and plants, even, as he says, to excite the
admiration of a Botanist, his intention was undoubtedly to
give praise even at the expense of truth; for he must have
 [Pg 185]
known that this is not the character of the picture; but
connoisseurs will always find in pictures what they think
they ought to find: he was not aware that he was giving a
description injurious to the reputation of Titian.
Such accounts may be very hurtful to young artists, who
never have had an opportunity of seeing the work described;
and they may possibly conclude that this great Artist
acquired the name of the Divine Titian from his eminent
attention to such trifling circumstances, which in reality
would not raise him above the level of the most ordinary
Painter.
We may extend these observations even to what seems to
have but a single, and that an individual object. The
excellence of Portrait-painting, and, we may add, even the
likeness, the character, and countenance, as I have observed
in another place, depend more upon the general effect
produced by the Painter than on the exact expression of
the peculiarities, or minute discrimination of the parts.
The chief attention of the artist is therefore employed in
planting the features in their proper places, which so much
contributes to giving the effect and true impression of the
whole. The very peculiarities may be reduced to classes
and general descriptions; and there are therefore large
ideas to be found even in this contracted subject. He may
afterwards labour single features to what degree he thinks
proper, but let him not forget continually to examine,
whether in finishing the parts he is not destroying the
general effect.
It is certainly a thing to be wished, that all excellence
were applied to illustrate subjects that are interesting and
worthy of being commemorated; whereas, of half the
pictures that are in the world, the subject can be valued
only as an occasion which set the artist to work; and yet,
 [Pg 186]
our high estimation of such pictures, without considering, or
perhaps without knowing the subject, shows how much our
attention is engaged by the art alone.
Perhaps nothing that we can say will so clearly show the
advantage and excellence of this faculty, as that it confers
the character of Genius on works that pretend to no other
merit; in which is neither expression, character, or dignity,
and where none are interested in the subject. We cannot
refuse the character of Genius to the marriage of Paolo
Veronese without opposing the general sense of mankind
(great authorities have called it the triumph of Painting), or
to the altar of St. Augustine at Antwerp, by Rubens,
which equally deserves that title, and for the same reason.
Neither of those pictures have any interesting story to
support them. That of Paolo Veronese is only a representation
of a great concourse of people at a dinner; and
the subject of Rubens, if it may be called a subject where
nothing is doing, is an assembly of various Saints that
lived in different ages. The whole excellence of those
pictures consists in mechanical dexterity, working, however,
under the influence of that comprehensive faculty which I
have so often mentioned.
It is by this, and this alone, that the mechanical power is
ennobled, and raised much above its natural rank. And it
appears to me, that with propriety it acquires this character,
as an instance of that superiority with which mind predominates
over matter, by contracting into one whole what
nature has made multifarious.
The great advantage of this idea of a whole is, that a
greater quantity of truth may be said to be contained and
expressed in a few lines or touches than in the most
laborious finishing of the parts where this is not regarded.
It is upon this foundation that it stands; and the justness
 [Pg 187]
of the observation would be confirmed by the ignorant in
art, if it were possible to take their opinions unseduced by
some false notion of what they imagine they ought to see
in a Picture. As it is an art, they think they ought to be
pleased in proportion as they see that art ostentatiously
displayed; they will, from this supposition, prefer neatness,
high-finishing, and gaudy colouring, to the truth, simplicity,
and unity of nature. Perhaps, too, the totally ignorant
beholder, like the ignorant artist, cannot comprehend an
whole, nor even what it means. But if false notions do
not anticipate their perceptions, they who are capable of
observation, and who, pretending to no skill, look only
straight forward, will praise and condemn in proportion as
the Painter has succeeded in the effect of the whole.
Here, general satisfaction, or general dislike, though
perhaps despised by the Painter, as proceeding from the
ignorance of the principles of art, may yet help to regulate
his conduct, and bring back his attention to that which
ought to be his principal object, and from which he has
deviated for the sake of minuter beauties.
An instance of this right judgment I once saw in a child,
in going through a gallery where there were many portraits
of the last ages, which, though neatly put out of hand, were
very ill put together. The child paid no attention to the
neat finishing or naturalness of any bit of drapery, but
appeared to observe only the ungracefulness of the
persons represented, and put herself in the posture of every
figure which she saw in a forced and awkward attitude.
The censure of nature, uninformed, fastened upon the
greatest fault that could be in a picture, because it related
to the character and management of the whole.
I should be sorry if what has been said should be understood
to have any tendency to encourage that carelessness
 [Pg 188]
which leaves work in an unfinished state. I commend
nothing for the want of exactness; I mean to point out
that kind of exactness which is the best, and which is alone
truly to be esteemed.
So far is my disquisition from giving countenance to
idleness, that there is nothing in our art which enforces
such continual exertion and circumspection, as an attention
to the general effect of the whole. It requires much study
and much practice; it requires the Painter's entire mind;
whereas the parts may be finishing by nice touches, while
his mind is engaged on other matters; he may even hear a
play or a novel read without much disturbance. The artist
who flatters his own indolence will continually find himself
evading this active exertion, and applying his thoughts to
the ease and laziness of highly finishing the parts, producing
at last what Cowley calls "laborious effects of
idleness."
No work can be too much finished, provided the diligence
employed be directed to its proper object; but I have
observed that an excessive labour in the detail has, nine
times in ten, been pernicious to the general effect, even
when it has been the labour of great masters. It indicates
a bad choice, which is an ill setting out in any undertaking.
To give a right direction to your industry has been my
principal purpose in this discourse. It is this which I am
confident often makes the difference between two Students
of equal capacities, and of equal industry. While the one
is employing his labour on minute objects of little consequence,
the other is acquiring the art, and perfecting the
habit, of seeing nature in an extensive view, in its proper
proportions, and its due subordination of parts.
Before I conclude, I must make one observation
sufficiently connected with the present subject.
[Pg 189]
 The same extension of mind which gives the excellence
of Genius to the theory and mechanical practice of the art,
will direct him likewise in the method of study, and give
him the superiority over those who narrowly follow a more
confined track of partial imitation. Whoever, in order to
finish his education, should travel to Italy, and spend his
whole time there only in copying pictures, and measuring
statues or buildings (though these things are not to be
neglected), would return with little improvement. He
that imitates the Iliad, says Dr. Young, is not imitating
Homer. It is not by laying up in the memory the particular
details of any of the great works of art that any man
becomes a great artist, if he stops without making himself
master of the general principles on which these works are
conducted. If he even hopes to rival those whom he
admires, he must consider their works as the means of
teaching him the true art of seeing nature. When this is
acquired, he then may be said to have appropriated their
powers, or, at least, the foundation of their powers, to
himself; the rest must depend upon his own industry and
application. The great business of study is, to form a
mind, adapted and adequate to all times and all occasions;
to which all nature is then laid open, and which may be
said to possess the key of her inexhaustible riches.
[Pg 190]
Delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy, on the Distribution
of the Prizes, December 10, 1784.
PARTICULAR METHODS OF STUDY OF LITTLE CONSEQUENCE.—LITTLE
OF THE ART CAN BE TAUGHT.—LOVE OF METHOD OFTEN A LOVE
OF IDLENESS.—PITTORI IMPROVVISATORI APT TO BE CARELESS
AND INCORRECT; SELDOM ORIGINAL AND STRIKING.—THIS
PROCEEDS FROM THEIR NOT STUDYING THE WORKS OF OTHER
MASTERS.
In consequence of the situation in which I have the honour
to be placed in this Academy, it has often happened that I
have been consulted by the young Students who intend to
spend some years in Italy, concerning the method of
regulating their studies. I am, as I ought to be, solicitously
desirous to communicate the entire result of my experience
and observation; and though my openness and facility in
giving my opinions might make some amends for whatever
was defective in them, yet I fear my answers have not often
given satisfaction. Indeed, I have never been sure that I
understood perfectly what they meant, and was not without
some suspicion that they had not themselves very distinct
ideas of the object of their inquiry.
If the information required was, by what means the path
that leads to excellence could be discovered; if they wished
to know whom they were to take for their guides; what to
adhere to, and what to avoid; where they were to bait, and
where they were to take up their rest; what was to be
tasted only, and what should be their diet; such general
 [Pg 191]
directions are certainly proper for a Student to ask, and for
me, to the best of my capacity, to give; but these rules
have been already given; they have, in reality, been the
subject of almost all my Discourses from this place. But I
am rather inclined to think, that by method of study, it was
meant (as several do mean) that the times and the seasons
should be prescribed, and the order settled, in which everything
was to be done: that it might be useful to point
out to what degree of excellence one part of the Art was to
be carried before the Student proceeded to the next; how
long he was to continue to draw from the ancient statues,
when to begin to compose, and when to apply to the study
of colouring.
Such a detail of instruction might be extended with
a great deal of plausible and ostentatious amplification.
But it would at best be useless. Our studies will be forever,
in a very great degree, under the direction of chance;
like travellers, we must take what we can get, and when we
can get it; whether it is or is not administered to us in the
most commodious manner, in the most proper place, or at
the exact minute when we would wish to have it.
Treatises on education and method of study have always
appeared to me to have one general fault. They proceed
upon a false supposition of life; as if we possessed not only
a power over events and circumstances, but had a greater
power over ourselves than I believe any of us will be found
to possess. Instead of supposing ourselves to be perfect
patterns of wisdom and virtue, it seems to me more reasonable
to treat ourselves (as I am sure we must now and then
treat others) like humorsome children, whose fancies are
often to be indulged, in order to keep them in good humour
with themselves and their pursuits. It is necessary to use
some artifice of this kind in all processes which by their
 [Pg 192]
very nature are long, tedious, and complex, in order
to prevent our taking that aversion to our studies which
the continual shackles of methodical restraint are sure
to produce.
I would rather wish a student, as soon as he goes abroad,
to employ himself upon whatever he has been incited to by
any immediate impulse, than to go sluggishly about a
prescribed task; whatever he does in such a state of mind,
little advantage accrues from it, as nothing sinks deep
enough to leave any lasting impression; and it is impossible
that anything should be well understood, or well done, that
is taken into a reluctant understanding, and executed with
a servile hand.
It is desirable, and indeed is necessary to intellectual
health, that the mind should be recreated and refreshed
with a variety in our studies; that in the irksomeness of
uniform pursuit we should be relieved, and, if I may so say,
deceived, as much as possible. Besides, the minds of men
are so very differently constituted, that it is impossible to
find one method which shall be suitable to all. It is of no
use to prescribe to those who have no talents; and those
who have talents will find methods for themselves—methods
dictated to them by their own particular
dispositions, and by the experience of their own particular
necessities.
However, I would not be understood to extend this
doctrine to the younger students. The first part of the
life of a student, like that of other school-boys, must
necessarily be a life of restraint. The grammar, the
rudiments, however unpalatable, must at all events be
mastered. After a habit is acquired of drawing correctly
from the model (whatever it may be) which he has before
him, the rest, I think, may be safely left to chance; always
 [Pg 193]
supposing that the student is employed, and that his studies
are directed to the proper object.
A passion for his art, and an eager desire to excel, will
more than supply the place of method. By leaving a
student to himself he may possibly indeed be led to undertake
matters above his strength; but the trial will at least
have this advantage—it will discover to himself his own
deficiencies; and this discovery alone is a very considerable
acquisition. One inconvenience, I acknowledge, may
attend bold and arduous attempts; frequent failure may
discourage. This evil, however, is not more pernicious
than the slow proficiency which is the natural consequence
of too easy tasks.
Whatever advantages method may have in despatch of
business (and there it certainly has many), I have but
little confidence of its efficacy in acquiring excellence in
any art whatever. Indeed, I have always strongly suspected
that this love of method, on which some persons appear to
place so great independence, is, in reality, at the bottom, a
love of idleness, a want of sufficient energy to put themselves
into immediate action: it is a sort of an apology to themselves
for doing nothing. I have known artists who may
truly be said to have spent their whole lives, or at least the
most precious part of their lives, in planning methods of
study, without ever beginning; resolving, however, to put
it all in practice at some time or other—when a certain
period arrives—when proper conveniences are procured—or
when they remove to a certain place better calculated for
study. It is not uncommon for such persons to go abroad
with the most honest and sincere resolution of studying
hard, when they shall arrive at the end of their journey.
The same want of exertion, arising from the same cause
which made them at home put off the day of labour until
 [Pg 194]
they had found a proper scheme for it, still continues in
Italy, and they consequently return home with little, if any,
improvement.
In the practice of art, as well as in morals, it is necessary
to keep a watchful and jealous eye over ourselves; idleness,
assuming the specious disguise of industry, will lull to
sleep all suspicion of our want of an active exertion of
strength. A provision of endless apparatus, a bustle of
infinite inquiry and research, or even the mere mechanical
labour of copying, may be employed, to evade and shuffle
off real labour—the real labour of thinking.
I have declined for these reasons to point out any
particular method and course of study to young Artists on
their arrival in Italy. I have left it to their own prudence,
a prudence which will grow and improve upon them in the
course of unremitted, ardent industry, directed by a real
love of their profession, and an unfeigned admiration of
those who have been universally admitted as patterns of
excellence in the art.
In the exercise of that general prudence, I shall here
submit to their consideration such miscellaneous observations
as have occurred to me on considering the mistaken
notions or evil habits, which have prevented that progress
towards excellence, which the natural abilities of several
Artists might otherwise have enabled them to make.
False opinions and vicious habits have done far more
mischief to students, and to Professors too, than any wrong
methods of study.
Under the influence of sloth, or of some mistaken notion,
is that disposition which always wants to lean on other men.
Some Students are always talking of the prodigious progress
they should make, if they could but have the advantage of
being taught by some particular eminent Master. To him
 [Pg 195]
they would wish to transfer that care which they ought and
must take of themselves. Such are to be told, that after
the rudiments are past, very little of our Art can be taught
by others. The most skilful Master can do little more than
put the end of the clue into the hands of his Scholar, by
which he must conduct himself.
It is true, the beauties and defects of the works of our
predecessors may be pointed out; the principles on which
their works are conducted may be explained; the great
examples of Ancient Art may be spread out before them;
but the most sumptuous entertainment is prepared in vain,
if the guests will not take the trouble of helping themselves.
Even the Academy itself, where every convenience for
study is procured and laid before them, may, from that
very circumstance, from leaving no difficulties to be
encountered in the pursuit, cause a remission of their
industry. It is not uncommon to see young artists, whilst
they are struggling with every obstacle in their way, exert
themselves with such success as to outstrip competitors
possessed of every means of improvement. The promising
expectation which was formed, on so much being done
with so little means, has recommended them to a Patron,
who has supplied them with every convenience of study;
from that time their industry and eagerness of pursuit has
forsaken them; they stand still, and see others rush on
before them.
Such men are like certain animals, who will feed only
when there is but little provender, and that got at with
difficulty through the bars of a rack, but refuse to touch it
when there is an abundance before them.
Perhaps such a falling off may proceed from the faculties
being overpowered by the immensity of the materials; as
the traveller despairs ever to arrive at the end of his journey
 [Pg 196]
when the whole extent of the road which he is to pass is at
once displayed to his view.
Among the first moral qualities, therefore, which a
Student ought to cultivate, is a just and manly confidence
in himself, or rather in the effects of that persevering
industry which he is resolved to possess.
When Raffaelle, by means of his connection with
Bramante, the Pope's Architect, was fixed upon to adorn
the Vatican with his works, he had done nothing that
marked in him any great superiority over his contemporaries;
though he was then but young, he had under his direction
the most considerable Artists of his age; and we know
what kind of men those were; a lesser mind would have
sunk under such a weight; and if we should judge from
the meek and gentle disposition which we are told was the
character of Raffaelle, we might expect this would have
happened to him; but his strength appeared to increase in
proportion as exertion was required; and it is not improbable
that we are indebted to the good fortune which first
placed him in that conspicuous situation for those great
examples of excellence which he has left us.
The observations to which I formerly wished, and now
desire, to point your attention, relate not to errors which
are committed by those who have no claim to merit, but to
those inadvertencies into which men of parts only can fall
by the overrating or the abuse of some real, though perhaps
subordinate, excellence. The errors last alluded to are
those of backward, timid characters; what I shall now
speak of belong to another class—to those Artists who are
distinguished for the readiness and facility of their invention.
It is undoubtedly a splendid and desirable accomplishment
to be able to design instantaneously any given
subject. It is an excellence that I believe every Artist
 [Pg 197]
would wish to possess; but unluckily, the manner in which
this dexterity is acquired habituates the mind to be contented
with first thoughts without choice or selection.
The judgment, after it has been long passive, by degrees
loses its power of becoming active when exertion is
necessary.
Whoever, therefore, has this talent, must in some measure
undo what he has had the habit of doing, or at least give a
new turn to his mind: great works, which are to live and
stand the criticism of posterity, are not performed at a heat.
A proportionable time is required for deliberation and circumspection.
I remember when I was at Rome looking at the
fighting Gladiator, in company with an eminent Sculptor,
and I expressed my admiration of the skill with which the
whole is composed, and the minute attention of the Artist
to the change of every muscle in that momentary exertion
of strength: he was of opinion that a work so perfect
required nearly the whole life of man to perform.
I believe, if we look around us, we shall find, that in the
sister art of Poetry, what has been soon done has been as
soon forgotten. The judgment and practice of a great Poet
on this occasion is worthy attention. Metastasio, who has
so much and justly distinguished himself throughout
Europe, at his outset was an Improvvisatore, or extempore
Poet, a description of men not uncommon in Italy: it is
not long since he was asked by a friend, if he did not think
the custom of inventing and reciting extempore, which he
practised when a boy in his character of an Improvvisatore,
might not be considered as a happy beginning of his education;
he thought it, on the contrary, a disadvantage to him:
he said that he had acquired by that habit a carelessness
and incorrectness, which it cost him much trouble to overcome,
and to substitute in the place of it a totally different
 [Pg 198]
habit, that of thinking with selection, and of expressing
himself with correctness and precision.
However extraordinary it may appear, it is certainly true,
that the inventions of the Pittori improvvisatori, as they
may be called, have—notwithstanding the common boast of
their authors, that all is spun from their own brain—very
rarely anything that has in the least the air of originality:—their
compositions are generally commonplace, uninteresting,
without character or expression; like those flowery speeches
that we sometimes hear, which impress no new ideas on the
mind.
I would not be thought, however, by what has been said,
to oppose the use, the advantage, the necessity there is, of
a Painter's being readily able to express his ideas by sketching.
The further he can carry such designs the better.
The evil to be apprehended is, his resting there, and not
correcting them afterwards from nature, or taking the
trouble to look about him for whatever assistance the works
of others will afford him.
We are not to suppose that when a Painter sits down to
deliberate on any work, he has all his knowledge to seek;
he must not only be able to draw extempore the human
figure in every variety of action, but he must be acquainted
likewise with the general principles of composition, and
possess a habit of foreseeing, while he is composing, the
effect of the masses of light and shadow that will attend
such a disposition. His mind is entirely occupied by his
attention to the whole. It is a subsequent consideration to
determine the attitude and expression of individual figures.
It is in this period of his work that I would recommend to
every artist to look over his portfolio, or pocket-book, in
which he has treasured up all the happy inventions, all the
extraordinary and expressive attitudes, that he has met with
 [Pg 199]
in the course of his studies; not only for the sake of
borrowing from those studies whatever may be applicable
to his own work, but likewise on account of the great
advantage he will receive by bringing the ideas of great
Artists more distinctly before his mind, which will teach
him to invent other figures in a similar style.
Sir Francis Bacon speaks with approbation of the pro-visionary
methods Demosthenes and Cicero employed to
assist their invention; and illustrates their use by a quaint
comparison after his manner. These particular Studios
being not immediately connected with our art, I need not
cite the passage I allude to, and shall only observe that
such preparation totally opposes the general received
opinions that are floating in the world concerning genius
and inspiration. The same great man in another place,
speaking of his own essays, remarks, that they treat of
"those things, wherein both men's lives and persons are
most conversant, whereof a man shall find much in experience,
but little in books:" they are then what an artist
would naturally call invention; and yet we may suspect that
even the genius of Bacon, great as it was, would never have
been enabled to have made those observations, if his mind
had not been trained and disciplined by reading the observations
of others. Nor could he without such reading have
known that those opinions were not to be found in other
books.
I know there are many Artists of great fame who appear
never to have looked out of themselves, and who probably
would think it derogatory to their character to be supposed
to borrow from any other Painter. But when we recollect,
and compare the works of such men with those who took
to their assistance the inventions of others, we shall be
convinced of the great advantage of this latter practice.
[Pg 200]
 The two men most eminent for readiness of invention,
that occur to me, are Luca Giordano and La Fage; one in
painting, and the other in drawing.
To such extraordinary powers as were possessed by both
of those Artists, we cannot refuse the character of Genius;
at the same time, it must be acknowledged, that it was that
kind of mechanic Genius which operates without much
assistance of the head. In all their works, which are (as
might be expected) very numerous, we may look in vain for
anything that can be said to be original and striking; and
yet, according to the ordinary ideas of originality, they have
as good pretensions as most Painters; for they borrowed
very little from others, and still less will any Artist, that can
distinguish between excellence and insipidity, ever borrow
from them.
To those men, and all such, let us oppose the practice of
the first of Painters. I suppose we shall all agree, that no
man ever possessed a greater power of invention, and stood
less in need of foreign assistance, than Raffaelle; and yet,
when he was designing one of his greatest as well as latest
works, the Cartoons, it is very apparent that he had the
studies which he had made from Masaccio before him.
Two noble figures of St. Paul, which he found there, he
adopted in his own work: one of them he took for St. Paul
preaching at Athens; and the other for the same Saint
when chastising the sorcerer Elymas. Another figure in
the same work, whose head is sunk in his breast, with his
eyes shut, appearing deeply wrapt up in thought, was introduced
amongst the listeners to the preaching of St. Paul.
The most material alteration that is made in those two
figures of St. Paul is the addition of the left hands, which
are not seen in the original. It is a rule that Raffaelle
observed (and, indeed, ought never to be dispensed with),
 [Pg 201]
in a principal figure, to show both hands; that it should
never be a question, what is become of the other hand.
For the sacrifice at Listra, he took the whole ceremony
much as it stands in an ancient Basso-relievo, since
published in the Admiranda.
I have given examples from those pictures only of
Raffaelle which we have among us, though many other
instances might be produced of this great painter's not
disdaining assistance; indeed, his known wealth was so
great, that he might borrow where he pleased without loss
of credit.
It may be remarked, that this work of Masaccio, from
which he has borrowed so freely, was a public work, and at
no farther distance from Rome than Florence; so that if
he had considered it a disgraceful theft, he was sure to be
detected; but he was well satisfied that his character for
Invention would be little affected by such a discovery; nor
is it, except in the opinion of those who are ignorant of the
manner in which great works are built.
Those who steal from mere poverty; who having nothing
of their own, cannot exist a minute without making such
depredations; who are so poor that they have no place in
which they can even deposit what they have taken; to men
of this description nothing can be said; but such artists as
those to whom I suppose myself now speaking, men whom
I consider as completely provided with all the necessaries
and conveniences of art, and who do not desire to steal
baubles and common trash, but wish only to possess
peculiar rarities which they select to ornament their
cabinets, and take care to enrich the general store with
materials of equal or of greater value than what they have
taken; such men surely need not be ashamed of that
friendly intercourse which ought to exist among artists,
 [Pg 202]
of receiving from the dead and giving to the living, and
perhaps to those who are yet unborn.
The daily food and nourishment of the mind of an artist
is found in the great works of his predecessors. There is
no other way for him to become great himself. Serpens,
nisi serpentem comederit, non fit draco,
[14] is a remark of a
whimsical natural history, which I have read, though I do
not recollect its title; however false as to dragons, it is
applicable enough to artists.
Raffaelle, as appears from what has been said, had
carefully studied the works of Masaccio; and, indeed, there
was no other, if we except Michel Angelo (whom he likewise
imitated), so worthy of his attention; and though his
manner was dry and hard, his compositions formal, and not
enough diversified according to the custom of Painters in
that early period, yet his works possess that grandeur and
simplicity which accompany, and even sometimes proceed
from, regularity and hardness of manner. We must consider
the barbarous state of the Arts before his time, when
skill in drawing was so little understood that the best of the
painters could not even foreshorten the foot, but every
figure appeared to stand upon his toes; and what served
for drapery, had, from the hardness and smallness of the
folds, too much the appearance of cords clinging round the
body. He first introduced large drapery flowing in an
easy and natural manner: indeed, he appears to be the first
who discovered the path that leads to every excellence to
which the Arts afterwards arrived, and may, therefore, be
justly considered as one of the great Fathers of modern Art.
[Pg 203]
 Though I have been led on to a longer digression
respecting this great Painter than I intended, yet I cannot
avoid mentioning another excellence which he possessed in
a very eminent degree; he was as much distinguished
among his contemporaries for his diligence and industry as
he was for the natural faculties of his mind. We are told
that his whole attention was absorbed in the pursuit of his
art, and that he acquired the name of Masaccio,
 
[15] from his
total disregard to his dress, his person, and all the common
concerns of life. He is, indeed, a signal instance of what
well-directed diligence will do in a short time; he lived but
twenty-seven years; yet in that short space carried the art
so far beyond what it had before reached, that he appears
to stand alone as a model for his successors. Vasari gives
a long catalogue of Painters and Sculptors, who formed
their taste, and learned their Art, by studying his works;
among those, he names Michel Angelo, Lionardi da Vinci,
Pietro Perugino, Raffaelle, Bartolomeo, Andrea del Sarto,
Il Rosso, and Pierino del Vaga.
The habit of contemplating and brooding over the ideas
of great geniuses, till you find yourself warmed by the
contact, is the true method of forming an artist-like mind;
it is impossible, in the presence of those great men, to
think, or invent in a mean manner; a state of mind is
acquired that receives those ideas only which relish of
grandeur and simplicity.
Besides the general advantage of forming the taste by
such an intercourse, there is another of a particular kind,
which was suggested to me by the practice of Raffaelle,
when imitating the work of which I have been speaking.
The figure of the Proconsul, Sergius Paulus, is taken from
 [Pg 204]
the Felix of Masaccio, though one is a front figure, and the
other seen in profile; the action is likewise somewhat
changed; but it is plain Raffaelle had that figure in his
mind. There is a circumstance indeed, which I mention
by-the-bye, which marks it very particularly: Sergius Paulus
wears a crown of laurel; this is hardly reconcileable to
strict propriety, and the costume, of which Raffaelle was in
general a good observer; but he found it so in Masaccio,
and he did not bestow so much pains in disguise as to
change it. It appears to me to be an excellent practice,
thus to suppose the figures which you wish to adopt in the
works of those great Painters to be statues; and to give, as
Raffaelle has here given, another view, taking care to
preserve all the spirit and grace you find in the original.
I should hope, from what has been lately said, that it is
not necessary to guard myself against any supposition of
recommending an entire dependence upon former masters.
I do not desire that you should get other people to do your
business, or to think for you; I only wish you to consult
with, to call in, as counsellors, men the most distinguished
for their knowledge and experience, the result of which
counsel must ultimately depend upon yourself. Such
conduct in the commerce of life has never been considered
as disgraceful, or in any respect to imply intellectual
imbecility; it is a sign, rather, of that true wisdom, which
feels individual imperfection; and is conscious to itself how
much collective observation is necessary to fill the immense
extent, and to comprehend the infinite variety of nature. I
recommend neither self-dependence nor plagiarism. I
advise you only to take that assistance which every human
being wants, and which, as appears from the examples that
have been given, the greatest painters have not disdained
to accept. Let me add, that the diligence required in the
 [Pg 205]
search, and the exertion subsequent in accommodating
those ideas to your own purpose, is a business which
idleness will not, and ignorance cannot, perform. But in
order more distinctly to explain what kind of borrowing I
mean, when I recommend so anxiously the study of the
works of great masters, let us, for a minute, return again to
Raffaelle, consider his method of practice, and endeavour to
imitate him, in his manner of imitating others.
The two figures of St. Paul which I lately mentioned are
so nobly conceived by Masaccio, that perhaps it was not in
the power even of Raffaelle himself to raise and improve
them, nor has he attempted it; but he has had the address
to change in some measure without diminishing the
grandeur of their character; he has substituted, in the place
of a serene composed dignity, that animated expression
which was necessary to the more active employment he
assigned them.
In the same manner he has given more animation to the
figure of Sergius Paulus, and to that which is introduced in
the picture of St. Paul preaching, of which little more than
hints are given by Masaccio, which Raffaelle has finished.
The closing the eyes of this figure, which in Masaccio might
be easily mistaken for sleeping, is not in the least ambiguous
in the Cartoon: his eyes, indeed, are closed, but they
are closed with such vehemence, that the agitation of a
mind perplexed in the extreme is seen at the first glance;
but what is most extraordinary, and I think particularly to
be admired, is, that the same idea is continued through the
whole figure, even to the drapery, which is so closely muffled
about him, that even his hands are not seen; by this happy
correspondence between the expression of the countenance,
and the disposition of the parts, the figure appears to think
from head to foot. Men of superior talents alone are
 [Pg 206]
capable of thus using and adapting other men's minds to their
own purposes, or are able to make out and finish what was
only in the original a hint or imperfect conception. A
readiness in taking such hints, which escape the dull and
ignorant, makes, in my opinion, no inconsiderable part of
that faculty of the mind which is called Genius.
It often happens that hints may be taken and employed
in a situation totally different from that in which they were
originally employed. There is a figure of a Bacchante
leaning backward, her head thrown quite behind her, which
seems to be a favourite invention, as it is so frequently
repeated in basso-relievos, cameos, and intaglios; it is
intended to express an enthusiastic, frantic kind of joy.
This figure Baccio Bandinelli, in a drawing that I have of
that Master of the Descent from the Cross, has adopted
(and he knew very well what was worth borrowing) for one
of the Marys, to express frantic agony of grief. It is curious
to observe, and it is certainly true, that the extremes of
contrary passions are, with very little variation, expressed by
the same action.
If I were to recommend method in any part of the
study of a Painter, it would be in regard to invention; that
young Students should not presume to think themselves
qualified to invent till they were acquainted with those
stores of invention the world already possesses, and had by
that means accumulated sufficient materials for the mind to
work with. It would certainly be no improper method of
forming the mind of a young artist, to begin with such
exercises as the Italians call a Pasticcio composition of the
different excellencies which are dispersed in all other works
of the same kind. It is not supposed that he is to stop
here, but that he is to acquire by this means the art of
selecting, first, what is truly excellent in Art, and then, what
 [Pg 207]
is still more excellent in Nature; a task which, without this
previous study, he will be but ill qualified to perform.
The doctrine which is here advanced is acknowledged to
be new, and to many may appear strange. But I only
demand for it the reception of a stranger; a favourable and
attentive consideration, without that entire confidence which
might be claimed under authoritative recommendation.
After you have taken a figure, or any idea of a figure,
from any of those great Painters, there is another operation
still remaining, which I hold to be indispensably necessary—that
is, never to neglect finishing from nature every part of
the work. What is taken from a model, though the first
idea may have been suggested by another, you have a just
right to consider as your own property. And here I cannot
avoid mentioning a circumstance in placing the model,
though to some it may appear trifling. It is better to
possess the model with the attitude you require, than to
place him with your own hands: by this means it happens
often that the model puts himself in an action superior to
your own imagination. It is a great matter to be in the
way of accident, and to be watchful and ready to take
advantage of it: besides, when you fix the position of
a model, there is danger of putting him in an attitude
into which no man would naturally fall. This extends
even to drapery. We must be cautious in touching and
altering a fold of the stuff, which serves as a model, for
fear of giving it inadvertently a forced form; and it is
perhaps better to take the chance of another casual throw,
than to alter the position in which it was at first accidentally
cast.
Rembrandt, in order to take the advantage of accident,
appears often to have used the pallet-knife to lay his colours
on the canvas, instead of the pencil. Whether it is the
 [Pg 208]
knife or any other instrument, it suffices if it is something
that does not follow exactly the will. Accident in the
hands of an artist who knows how to take the advantage of
its hints, will often produce bold and capricious beauties of
handling and facility, such as he would not have thought
of, or ventured, with his pencil, under the regular restraint
of his hand. However, this is fit only on occasions where
no correctness of form is required, such as clouds, stumps
of trees, rocks, or broken ground. Works produced in an
accidental manner will have the same free, unrestrained air
as the works of nature, whose particular combinations seem
to depend upon accident.
I again repeat, you are never to lose sight of nature; the
instant you do, you are all abroad, at the mercy of every
gust of fashion, without knowing or seeing the point to
which you ought to steer. Whatever trips you make, you
must still have nature in your eye. Such deviations as art
necessarily requires, I hope in a future Discourse to be able
to explain. In the meantime, let me recommend to you,
not to have too great dependence on your practice or
memory, however strong those impressions may have been
which are there deposited. They are for ever wearing out,
and will be at last obliterated, unless they are continually
refreshed and repaired.
It is not uncommon to meet with artists who, from a
long neglect of cultivating this necessary intimacy with
Nature, do not even know her when they see her; she
appearing a stranger to them, from their being so long
habituated to their own representation of her. I have
heard Painters acknowledge, though in that acknowledgment
no degradation of themselves was intended, that they
could do better without Nature than with her; or, as they
expressed it themselves, that it only put them out. A
 [Pg 209]
painter with such ideas and such habits is indeed in a most
hopeless state. The art of seeing Nature, or, in other
words, the art of using Models, is in reality the great object,
the point to which all our studies are directed. As for the
power of being able to do tolerably well, from practice
alone, let it be valued according to its worth. But I do
not see in what manner it can be sufficient for the production
of correct, excellent, and finished Pictures. Works
deserving this character never were produced, nor ever will
arise, from memory alone; and I will venture to say, that
an artist who brings to his work a mind tolerably furnished
with the general principles of Art, and a taste formed upon
the works of good Artists—in short, who knows in what
excellence consists, will, with the assistance of Models,
which we will likewise suppose he has learnt the art of
using, be an overmatch for the greatest painter that ever
lived who should be debarred such advantages.
Our neighbours, the French, are much in this practice of
extempore invention, and their dexterity is such as even to
excite admiration, if not envy; but how rarely can this
praise be given to their finished pictures!
The late Director of their Academy, Boucher, was
eminent in this way. When I visited him some years since
in France, I found him at work on a very large Picture,
without drawings or models of any kind. On my remarking
this particular circumstance, he said, when he was young,
studying his art, he found it necessary to use models; but
he had left them off for many years.
Such Pictures as this was, and such as I fear always will
be produced by those who work solely from practice or
memory, may be a convincing proof of the necessity of the
conduct which I have recommended. However, in justice
I cannot quit this Painter without adding, that in the
 [Pg 210]
former part of his life, when he was in the habit of having
recourse to nature, he was not without a considerable
degree of merit—enough to make half the Painters of his
country his imitators; he had often grace and beauty, and
good skill in composition; but I think all under the
influence of a bad taste: his imitators are indeed
abominable.
Those Artists who have quitted the service of nature
(whose service, when well understood, is perfect freedom),
and have put themselves under the direction of I know not
what capricious fantastical mistress, who fascinates and overpowers
their whole mind, and from whose dominion there
are no hopes of their being ever reclaimed (since they
appear perfectly satisfied, and not at all conscious of their
forlorn situation), like the transformed followers of
Comus—
Methinks, such men, who have found out so short a path,
have no reason to complain of the shortness of life, and the
extent of art; since life is so much longer than is wanted for
their improvement, or, indeed, is necessary for the accomplishment
of their idea of perfection. On the contrary, he
who recurs to nature, at every recurrence renews his
strength. The rules of art he is never likely to forget; they
are few and simple; but nature is refined, subtle, and
infinitely various, beyond the power and retention of
memory; it is necessary, therefore, to have continual
recourse to her. In this intercourse there is no end of his
improvement; the longer he lives, the nearer he approaches
to the true and perfect idea of art.
[Pg 211]
Delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy, on the Distribution of
the Prizes, December 11, 1786.
ART NOT MERELY IMITATION, BUT UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE
IMAGINATION.—IN WHAT MANNER POETRY, PAINTING, ACTING,
GARDENING, AND ARCHITECTURE DEPART FROM NATURE.
To discover beauties, or to point out faults, in the works
of celebrated Masters, and to compare the conduct of one
Artist with another, is certainly no mean or inconsiderable
part of criticism; but this is still no more than to know
the art through the Artist. This test of investigation must
have two capital defects; it must be narrow, and it must
be uncertain. To enlarge the boundaries of the Art of
Painting, as well as to fix its principles, it will be necessary
that that art, and those principles, should be considered in
their correspondence with the principles of the other arts,
which, like this, address themselves primarily and principally
to the imagination. When those connected and
kindred principles are brought together to be compared,
another comparison will grow out of this; that is, the
comparison of them all with those of human nature, from
whence arts derive the materials upon which they are to
produce their effects.
When this comparison of art with art, and of all arts
with the nature of man, is once made with success, our
guiding lines are as well ascertained and established as
they can be in matters of this description.
This, as it is the highest style of criticism, is at the same
 [Pg 212]
time the soundest; for it refers to the eternal and immutable
nature of things.
You are not to imagine that I mean to open to you
at large, or to recommend to your research, the whole of
this vast field of science. It is certainly much above my
faculties to reach it; and though it may not be above yours
to comprehend it fully, if it were fully and properly brought
before you, yet perhaps the most perfect criticism requires
habits of speculation and abstraction, not very consistent
with the employment which ought to occupy, and the
habits of mind which ought to prevail, in a practical Artist.
I only point out to you these things, that when you do
criticise (as all who work on a plan will criticise more or
less), your criticism may be built on the foundation of true
principles; and that though you may not always travel a
great way, the way that you do travel may be the right
road.
I observe, as a fundamental ground, common to all the
Arts with which we have any concern in this discourse,
that they address themselves only to two faculties of the
mind—its imagination and its sensibility.
All theories which attempt to direct or to control the
Art, upon any principles falsely called rational, which we
form to ourselves upon a supposition of what ought in
reason to be the end or means of Art, independent of the
known first effect produced by objects on the imagination,
must be false and delusive. For though it may appear
bold to say it, the imagination is here the residence of
truth. If the imagination be affected, the conclusion is
fairly drawn; if it be not affected, the reasoning is
erroneous, because the end is not obtained; the effect itself
being the test, and the only test, of the truth and efficacy
of the means.
[Pg 213]
 There is in the commerce of life, as in Art, a sagacity
which is far from being contradictory to right reason, and
is superior to any occasional exercise of that faculty;
which supersedes it; and does not wait for the slow
progress of deduction, but goes at once, by what appears a
kind of intuition, to the conclusion. A man endowed with
this faculty feels and acknowledges the truth, though it is
not always in his power, perhaps, to give a reason for it;
because he cannot recollect and bring before him all the
materials that gave birth to his opinion; for very many
and very intricate considerations may unite to form the
principle, even of small and minute parts, involved in,
or dependent on, a great system of things: though these in
process of time are forgotten, the right impression still
remains fixed in his mind.
This impression is the result of the accumulated experience
of our whole life, and has been collected, we do
not always know how, or when. But this mass of collective
observation, however acquired, ought to prevail over that
reason, which, however powerfully exerted on any particular
occasion, will probably comprehend but a partial view of
the subject; and our conduct in life, as well as in the
Arts, is, or ought to be, generally governed by this habitual
reason: it is our happiness that we are enabled to draw
on such funds. If we were obliged to enter into a theoretical
deliberation on every occasion, before we act, life
would be at a stand, and Art would be impracticable.
It appears to me, therefore, that our first thoughts, that
is, the effect which anything produces on our minds, on its
first appearance, is never to be forgotten; and it demands
for that reason, because it is the first, to be laid up with
care. If this be not done, the Artist may happen to
impose on himself by partial reasoning; by a cold
 [Pg 214]
consideration of those animated thoughts which proceed, not
perhaps from caprice or rashness (as he may afterwards
conceit), but from the fulness of his mind, enriched with
the copious stores of all the various inventions which he
had ever seen, or had ever passed in his mind. These ideas
are infused into his design, without any conscious effort;
but if he be not on his guard, he may reconsider and
correct them, till the whole matter is reduced to a commonplace
invention.
This is sometimes the effect of what I mean to caution
you against; that is to say, an unfounded distrust of the
imagination and feeling, in favour of narrow, partial, confined,
argumentative theories; and of principles that seem
to apply to the design in hand; without considering those
general impressions on the fancy in which real principles of
sound reason, and of much more weight and importance,
are involved, and, as it were, lie hid under the appearance
of a sort of vulgar sentiment.
Reason, without doubt, must ultimately determine everything;
at this minute it is required to inform us when that
very reason is to give way to feeling.
Though I have often spoken of that mean conception of
our art which confines it to mere imitation, I must add,
that it may be narrowed to such a mere matter of experiment,
as to exclude from it the application of science, which
alone gives dignity and compass to any art. But to find
proper foundations for science is neither to narrow or to
vulgarise it; and this is sufficiently exemplified in the
success of experimental philosophy. It is the false system
of reasoning, grounded on a partial view of things, against
which I would most earnestly guard you. And I do it the
rather, because those narrow theories, so coincident with
the poorest and most miserable practices, and which are
 [Pg 215]
adopted to give it countenance, have not had their origin in
the poorest minds, but in the mistakes, or possibly in the
mistaken interpretations, of great and commanding authorities.
We are not, therefore, in this case misled by feeling,
but by false speculation.
When such a man as Plato speaks of Painting as only an
imitative art, and that our pleasure proceeds from observing
and acknowledging the truth of the imitation, I think he
misleads us by a partial theory. It is in this poor, partial,
and, so far, false view of the art, that Cardinal Bembo has
chosen to distinguish even Raffaelle himself, whom our
enthusiasm honours with the name of Divine. The same
sentiment is adopted by Pope in his epitaph on Sir Godfrey
Kneller; and he turns the panegyric solely on imitation, as
it is a sort of deception.
I shall not think my time misemployed, if by any means
I may contribute to confirm your opinion of what ought to
be the object of your pursuit; because, though the best
critics must always have exploded this strange idea, yet I
know that there is a disposition towards a perpetual
recurrence to it, on account of its simplicity and superficial
plausibility. For this reason I shall beg leave to lay before
you a few thoughts on this subject; to throw out some
hints that may lead your minds to an opinion (which I take
to be the truth), that Painting is not only to be considered
as an imitation, operating by deception, but that it is, and
ought to be, in many points of view, and strictly speaking,
no imitation at all of external nature. Perhaps it ought to
be as far removed from the vulgar idea of imitation as the
refined civilised state in which we live is removed from a
gross state of nature; and those who have not cultivated
their imaginations, which the majority of mankind certainly
have not, may be said, in regard to arts, to continue in this
 [Pg 216]
state of nature. Such men will always prefer imitation to
that excellence which is addressed to another faculty that
they do not possess; but these are not the persons to whom
a Painter is to look, any more than a judge of morals and
manners ought to refer controverted points upon those
subjects to the opinions of people taken from the banks of
the Ohio, or from New Holland.
It is the lowest style only of arts, whether of Painting,
Poetry, or Music, that may be said, in the vulgar sense, to
be naturally pleasing. The higher efforts of those arts, we
know by experience, do not affect minds wholly uncultivated.
This refined taste is the consequence of education and
habit: we are born only with a capacity of entertaining
this refinement, as we are born with a disposition to receive
and obey all the rules and regulations of society; and so
far it may be said to be natural to us, and no further.
What has been said may show the Artist how necessary
it is, when he looks about him for the advice and criticism
of his friends, to make some distinction of the character,
taste, experience, and observation in this Art, of those
from whom it is received. An ignorant, uneducated man
may, like Apelles's critic, be a competent judge of the
truth of the representation of a sandal; or, to go somewhat
higher, like Molière's old woman, may decide upon what is
nature, in regard to comic humour; but a critic in the
higher style of art ought to possess the same refined taste
which directed the Artist in his work.
To illustrate this principle by a comparison with other
Arts, I shall now produce some instances to show that
they, as well as our own Art, renounce the narrow idea of
nature, and the narrow theories derived from that mistaken
principle, and apply to that reason only which informs us
not what imitation is—a natural representation of a given
 [Pg 217]
object—but what it is natural for the imagination to be
delighted with. And perhaps there is no better way of
acquiring this knowledge than by this kind of analogy:
each art will corroborate and mutually reflect the truth on
the other. Such a kind of juxtaposition may likewise have
this use, that whilst the Artist is amusing himself in the
contemplation of other Arts, he may habitually transfer the
principles of those Arts to that which he professes: which
ought to be always present to his mind, and to which everything
is to be referred.
So far is Art from being derived from, or having any
immediate intercourse with particular nature as its model,
that there are many Arts that set out with a professed
deviation from it.
This is certainly not so exactly true in regard to Painting
and Sculpture. Our elements are laid in gross common
nature—an exact imitation of what is before us; but when
we advance to the higher state, we consider this power of
imitation, though first in the order of acquisition, as by no
means the highest in the scale of perfection.
Poetry addresses itself to the same faculties and the same
dispositions as Painting, though by different means. The
object of both is to accommodate itself to all the natural
propensities and inclinations of the mind. The very
existence of Poetry depends on the license it assumes of
deviating from actual nature, in order to gratify natural
propensities by other means, which are found by experience
full as capable of affording such gratification. It sets out
with a language in the highest degree artificial, a construction
of measured words, such as never is, nor ever was,
used by man. Let this measure be what it may, whether
hexameter or any other metre used in Latin or Greek—or
Rhyme, or Blank Verse varied with pauses and accents, in
 [Pg 218]
modern languages—they are all equally removed from
nature, and equally a violation of common speech. When
this artificial mode has been established as the vehicle of
sentiment, there is another principle in the human mind
to which the work must be referred, which still renders it
more artificial, carries it still further from common nature,
and deviates only to render it more perfect. That principle
is the sense of congruity, coherence, and consistency, which
is a real existing principle in man; and it must be gratified.
Therefore, having once adopted a style and a measure not
found in common discourse, it is required that the sentiments
also should be in the same proportion elevated above
common nature, from the necessity of there being an agreement
of the parts among themselves, that one uniform
whole may be produced.
To correspond, therefore, with this general system of
deviation from nature, the manner in which poetry is
offered to the ear, the tone in which it is recited, should be
as far removed from the tone of conversation as the words
of which that Poetry is composed. This naturally suggests
the idea of modulating the voice by art, which, I suppose,
may be considered as accomplished to the highest degree of
excellence in the recitative of the Italian Opera; as we may
conjecture it was in the Chorus that attended the ancient
drama. And though the most violent passions, the highest
distress, even death itself, are expressed in singing or
recitative, I would not admit as sound criticism the condemnation
of such exhibitions on account of their being
unnatural.
If it is natural for our senses, and our imaginations, to
be delighted with singing, with instrumental music, with
poetry, and with graceful action, taken separately (none of
them being in the vulgar sense natural, even in that
 [Pg 219]
separate state); it is conformable to experience, and therefore
agreeable to reason as connected and referred to
experience, that we should also be delighted with this union
of music, poetry, and graceful action, joined to every
circumstance of pomp and magnificence calculated to strike
the senses of the spectator. Shall reason stand in the way,
and tell us that we ought not to like what we know we do
like, and prevent us from feeling the full effect of this
complicated exertion of art? This is what I would understand
by poets and painters being allowed to dare everything;
for what can be more daring than accomplishing
the purpose and end of art, by a complication of means,
none of which have their archetypes in actual nature?
So far, therefore, is servile imitation from being necessary,
that whatever is familiar, or in any way reminds us
of what we see and hear every day, perhaps does not belong
to the higher provinces of art, either in poetry or painting.
The mind is to be transported, as Shakespeare expresses it,
beyond the ignorant present, to ages past. Another and a
higher order of beings is supposed; and to those beings
everything which is introduced into the work must correspond.
Of this conduct, under these circumstances,
the Roman and Florentine schools afford sufficient examples.
Their style by this means is raised and elevated
above all others; and by the same means the compass of
art itself is enlarged.
We often see grave and great subjects attempted by
artists of another school; who, though excellent in the
lower class of art, proceeding on the principles which
regulate that class, and not recollecting, or not knowing,
that they were to address themselves to another faculty of
the mind, have become perfectly ridiculous.
The picture which I have at present in my thoughts is a
 [Pg 220]
sacrifice of Iphigenia, painted by Jan Steen, a painter of
whom I have formerly had occasion to speak with the
highest approbation; and even in this picture, the subject
of which is by no means adapted to his genius, there is
nature and expression; but it is such expression, and
the countenances are so familiar, and consequently so
vulgar, and the whole accompanied with such finery of silks
and velvets, that one would be almost tempted to doubt
whether the artist did not purposely intend to burlesque
his subject.
Instances of the same kind we frequently see in poetry.
Parts of Hobbes's translation of Homer are remembered
and repeated merely for the familiarity and meanness of
their phraseology, so ill corresponding with the ideas which
ought to have been expressed, and, as I conceive, with the
style of the original.
We may proceed in the same manner through the
comparatively inferior branches of art. There are, in
works of that class, the same distinction of a higher and a
lower style; and they take their rank and degree in
proportion as the artist departs more, or less, from common
nature, and makes it an object of his attention to strike the
imagination of the spectator by ways belonging especially
to art—unobserved and untaught out of the school of its
practice.
If our judgments are to be directed by narrow, vulgar,
untaught, or rather ill-taught, reason, we must prefer a
portrait by Denner, or any other high finisher, to those of
Titian or Vandyke; and a landscape of Vanderheyden to
those of Titian or Rubens; for they are certainly more
exact representations of nature.
If we suppose a view of nature represented with all the
truth of the camera obscura, and the same scene represented
 [Pg 221]
by a great artist, how little and mean will the one appear
in comparison of the other, where no superiority is supposed
from the choice of the subject! The scene shall be the
same, the difference only will be in the manner in which it
is presented to the eye. With what additional superiority,
then, will the same artist appear when he has the power of
selecting his materials as well as elevating his style? Like
Nicholas Poussin, he transports us to the environs of
ancient Rome, with all the objects which a literary education
makes so precious and interesting to man; or, like
Sebastian Bourdon, he leads us to the dark antiquity of the
pyramids of Egypt; or, like Claude Lorrain, he conducts
us to the tranquillity of Arcadian scenes and fairy-land.
Like the history-painter, a painter of landscapes, in this
style and with this conduct, sends the imagination back
into antiquity; and, like the poet, he makes the elements
sympathise with his subject: whether the clouds roll in
volumes like those of Titian or Salvator Rosa, or like
those of Claude, are gilded with the setting sun; whether
the mountains have sudden and bold projections, or are
gently sloped; whether the branches of his trees shoot out
abruptly in right angles from their trunks, or follow each
other with only a gentle inclination. All these circumstances
contribute to the general character of the work,
whether it be of the elegant or of the more sublime kind.
If we add to this the powerful materials of lightness and
darkness, over which the artist has complete dominion, to
vary and dispose them as he pleases; to diminish or
increase them as will best suit his purpose, and correspond
to the general idea of his work; a landscape thus conducted,
under the influence of a poetical mind will have the same
superiority over the more ordinary and common views, as
Milton's Allegra and Penseroso have over a cold prosaic
 [Pg 222]
narration or description; and such a picture would make a
more forcible impression on the mind than the real scenes,
were they presented before us.
If we look abroad to other arts, we may observe the
same distinction, the same division into two classes; each
of them acting under the influence of two different
principles, in which the one follows nature, the other varies
it, and sometimes departs from it.
The theatre, which is said to hold the mirror up to nature,
comprehends both those ideas. The lower kind of comedy,
or farce, like the inferior style of painting, the more
naturally it is represented, the better; but the higher
appears to me to aim no more at imitation, so far as it
belongs to anything like deception, or to expect that the
spectators should think that the events there represented are
really passing before them, than Raffaelle in his Cartoons, or
Poussin in his Sacraments, expected it to be believed, even
for a moment, that what they exhibited were real figures.
For want of this distinction the world is filled with
false criticism. Raffaelle is praised for naturalness and
deception, which he certainly has not accomplished, and as
certainly never intended; and our late great actor,
Garrick, has been as ignorantly praised by his friend
Fielding; who doubtless imagined he had hit upon an
ingenious device, by introducing, in one of his novels
(otherwise a work of the highest merit), an ignorant man
mistaking Garrick's representation of a scene in "Hamlet"
for reality. A very little reflection will convince us, that
there is not one circumstance in the whole scene that is of
the nature of deception. The merit and excellence of
Shakespeare, and of Garrick, when they were engaged in
such scenes, is of a different and much higher kind. But
what adds to the falsity of this intended compliment is,
 [Pg 223]
that the best stage-representation appears even more
unnatural to a person of such a character, who is supposed
never to have seen a play before, than it does to those
who have had a habit of allowing for those necessary
deviations from nature which the Art requires.
In theatric representation great allowances must always
be made for the place in which the exhibition is represented;
for the surrounding company, the lighted candles,
the scenes visibly shifted in your sight, and the language
of blank verse, so different from common English; which
merely as English must appear surprising in the mouths
of Hamlet, and all the court and natives of Denmark.
These allowances are made; but their being made puts
an end to all manner of deception: and further, we know
that the more low, illiterate, and vulgar any person is,
the less he will be disposed to make these allowances, and
of course to be deceived by any imitation; the things in
which the trespass against nature and common probability
is made in favour of the theatre being quite within the
sphere of such uninformed men.
Though I have no intention of entering into all the circumstances
of unnaturalness in theatrical representations,
I must observe that even the expression of violent passion
is not always the most excellent in proportion as it is the
most natural; so, great terror and such disagreeable sensations
may be communicated to the audience, that the
balance may be destroyed by which pleasure is preserved
and holds its predominancy in the mind: violent distortion
of action, harsh screamings of the voice, however
great the occasions, or however natural on such occasions,
are therefore not admissible in the theatric art.
Many of these allowed deviations from nature arise
from the necessity which there is, that everything should
 [Pg 224]
be raised and enlarged beyond its natural state; that the
full effect may come home to the spectator, which otherwise
would be lost in the comparatively extensive space
of the Theatre. Hence the deliberate and stately step,
the studied grace of action, which seems to enlarge the
dimensions of the actor, and alone to fill the stage. All
this unnaturalness, though right and proper in its place,
would appear affected and ridiculous in a private room:
quid enim deformius quàm scenam, in vitam transferre?
And here I must observe, and I believe it may be considered
as a general rule, that no Art can be grafted with
success on another Art. For though they all profess the
same origin, and to proceed from the same stock, yet each
has its own peculiar modes both of imitating nature, and of
deviating from it, each for the accomplishment of its own
particular purpose. These deviations, more especially, will
not bear transplantation to another soil.
If a Painter should endeavour to copy the theatrical
pomp and parade of dress, and attitude, instead of that
simplicity, which is not a greater beauty in life than it is
in Painting, we should condemn such pictures, as painted
in the meanest style.
So, also, Gardening, as far as Gardening is an Art, or
entitled to that appellation, is a deviation from nature; for
if the true taste consists, as many hold, in banishing every
appearance of Art, or any traces of the footsteps of man, it
would then be no longer a Garden. Even though we define
it, "Nature to advantage dressed," and in some sense is
such, and much more beautiful and commodious for the
recreation of man; it is, however, when so dressed, no
longer a subject for the pencil of a Landscape-Painter, as
all Landscape-Painters know, who love to have recourse to
Nature herself, and to dress her according to the principles
 [Pg 225]
of their own Art; which are far different from those of
Gardening, even when conducted according to the most
approved principles; and such as a Landscape-Painter
himself would adopt in the disposition of his own grounds,
for his own private satisfaction.
I have brought together as many instances as appear
necessary to make out the several points which I wished to
suggest to your consideration in this Discourse; that your
own thoughts may lead you further in the use that may be
made of the analogy of the Arts; and of the restraint which
a full understanding of the diversity of many of their principles
ought to impose on the employment of that analogy.
The great end of all those arts is, to make an impression
on the imagination and the feeling. The imitation of
nature frequently does this. Sometimes it fails, and something
else succeeds. I think, therefore, the true test of all
the arts is not solely whether the production is a true
copy of nature, but whether it answers the end of art,
which is, to produce a pleasing effect upon the mind.
It remains only to speak a few words of Architecture,
which does not come under the denomination of an imitative
art. It applies itself, like Music (and, I believe, we
may add Poetry), directly to the imagination, without the
intervention of any kind of imitation.
There is in Architecture, as in Painting, an inferior
branch of art, in which the imagination appears to have no
concern. It does not, however, acquire the name of a
polite and liberal art from its usefulness, or administering
to our wants or necessities, but from some higher principle;
we are sure that in the hands of a man of genius it is
capable of inspiring sentiment, and of filling the mind with
great and sublime ideas.
It may be worth the attention of Artists to consider
 [Pg 226]
what materials are in their hands, that may contribute to
this end; and whether this art has it not in its power to
address itself to the imagination with effect, by more ways
than are generally employed by Architects.
To pass over the effect produced by that general
symmetry and proportion, by which the eye is delighted, as
the ear is with music, Architecture certainly possesses
many principles in common with Poetry and Painting.
Among those which may be reckoned as the first, is, that
of affecting the imagination by means of association of
ideas. Thus, for instance, as we have naturally a veneration
for antiquity, whatever building brings to our
remembrance ancient customs and manners, such as the
castles of the Barons of ancient Chivalry, is sure to give
this delight. Hence it is that towers and battlements

[16] are
so often selected by the Painter and the Poet to make a
part of the composition of their ideal Landscape; and it is
from hence, in a great degree, that, in the buildings of
Vanbrugh, who was a Poet as well as an Architect, there
is a greater display of imagination than we shall find,
perhaps, in any other, and this is the ground of the effect
we feel in many of his works, notwithstanding the faults
with which many of them are justly charged. For this
purpose, Vanbrugh appears to have had recourse to some
of the principles of the Gothic Architecture; which, though
not so ancient as the Grecian, is more so to our imagination,
with which the Artist is more concerned than with
absolute truth.
The Barbaric splendour of those Asiatic Buildings, which
are now publishing by a member of this Academy,
 
[17] may
 [Pg 227]
possibly, in the same manner, furnish an Architect, not
with models to copy, but with hints of composition and
general effect, which would not otherwise have occurred.
It is, I know, a delicate and hazardous thing (and, as
such, I have already pointed it out) to carry the principles
of one art to another, or even to reconcile in one object
the various modes of the same art, when they proceed on
different principles. The sound rules of the Grecian
Architecture are not to be lightly sacrificed. A deviation
from them, or even an addition to them, is like a deviation
or addition to, or from, the rules of other Arts—fit only
for a great master, who is thoroughly conversant in
the nature of man, as well as all combinations in his own
Art.
It may not be amiss for the Architect to take advantage
sometimes of that to which I am sure the Painter ought
always to have his eyes open—I mean the use of accidents:
to follow when they lead, and to improve them, rather
than always to trust to a regular plan. It often happens
that additions have been made to houses, at various times,
for use or pleasure. As such buildings depart from
regularity, they now and then acquire something of scenery
by this accident, which I should think might not unsuccessfully
be adopted by an Architect, in an original plan,
if it does not too much interfere with convenience. Variety
and intricacy is a beauty and excellence in every other of
the arts which address the imagination: and why not in
Architecture?
The forms and turnings of the streets of London and
other old towns are produced by accident, without any
original plan or design, but they are not always the less
pleasant to the walker or spectator on that account. On
the contrary, if the city had been built on the regular plan
 [Pg 228]
of Sir Christopher Wren, the effect might have been, as we
know it is in some new parts of the town, rather unpleasing;
the uniformity might have produced weariness, and a
slight degree of disgust.
I can pretend to no skill in the detail of Architecture. I
judge now of the art, merely as a Painter. When I speak
of Vanbrugh, I mean to speak of him in the language of
our art. To speak, then, of Vanbrugh in the language of a
painter, he had originality of invention, he understood
light and shadow, and had great skill in composition. To
support his principal object, he produced his second and
third groups or masses; he perfectly understood in his art
what is the most difficult in ours, the conduct of the background;
by which the design and invention is set off to the
greatest advantage. What the background is in Painting,
in Architecture is the real ground on which the building is
erected; and no Architect took greater care than he that
his work should not appear crude and hard; that is, it did
not abruptly start out of the ground without expectation or
preparation.
This is a tribute which a Painter owes to an Architect
who composed like a painter; and was defrauded of the
due reward of his merit by the wits of his time, who did
not understand the principles of composition in poetry
better than he; and who knew little, or nothing, of what
he understood perfectly—the general ruling principles of
Architecture and Painting. His fate was that of the great
Perrault; both were the objects of the petulant sarcasms
of factious men of letters; and both have left some of the
fairest ornaments which to this day decorate their several
countries; the façade of the Louvre, Blenheim, and Castle
Howard.
Upon the whole it seems to me, that the object and
 [Pg 229]
intention of all the Arts is to supply the natural imperfection
of things, and often to gratify the mind by realising
and embodying what never existed but in the imagination.
It is allowed on all hands, that facts, and events, however
they may bind the Historian, have no dominion over
the Poet or the Painter. With us, History is made to
bend and conform to this great idea of Art. And why?
Because these Arts, in their highest province, are not
addressed to the gross senses; but to the desires of the
mind, to that spark of divinity which we have within,
impatient of being circumscribed and pent up by the world
which is about us. Just so much as our Art has of this,
just so much of dignity, I had almost said of divinity, it
exhibits; and those of our Artists who possessed this mark
of distinction in the highest degree, acquired from thence
the glorious appellation of Divine.
[Pg 230]
Delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy, on the Distribution of
the Prizes, December 10, 1788.
CHARACTER OF GAINSBOROUGH:—HIS EXCELLENCIES AND DEFECTS.
In the study of our art, as in the study of all arts, something
is the result of our own observation of nature;
something, and that not a little, the effect of the example
of those who have studied the same nature before us, and
who have cultivated before us the same art, with diligence
and success. The less we confine ourselves in the choice of
those examples, the more advantage we shall derive from
them; and the nearer we shall bring our performances to a
correspondence with nature and the great general rules of
art. When we draw our examples from remote and
revered antiquity—with some advantage, undoubtedly, in
that selection—we subject ourselves to some inconveniencies.
We may suffer ourselves to be too much led
away by great names, and to be too much subdued by
overbearing authority. Our learning, in that case, is not
so much an exercise of our judgment as a proof of our
docility. We find ourselves, perhaps, too much overshadowed;
and the character of our pursuits is rather distinguished
by the tameness of the follower than animated
by the spirit of emulation. It is sometimes of service that
our examples should be near us; and such as raise a
reverence, sufficient to induce us carefully to observe them,
yet not so great as to prevent us from engaging with them
in something like a generous contention.
[Pg 231]
 We have lately lost Mr. Gainsborough, one of the greatest
ornaments of our Academy. It is not our business here
to make Panegyrics on the living, or even on the dead who
were of our body. The praise of the former might bear
the appearance of adulation; and the latter of untimely
justice; perhaps of envy to those whom we have still the
happiness to enjoy, by an oblique suggestion of invidious
comparisons. In discoursing, therefore, on the talents of
the late Mr. Gainsborough, my object is, not so much to
praise or to blame him, as to draw from his excellencies
and defects matter of instruction to the Students in our
Academy. If ever this nation should produce genius
sufficient to acquire to us the honourable distinction of an
English School, the name of Gainsborough will be transmitted
to posterity, in the history of the art, among the
very first of that rising name. That our reputation in the
Arts is now only rising must be acknowledged; and we
must expect our advances to be attended with old prejudices,
as adversaries, and not as supporters; standing in
this respect in a very different situation from the late
artists of the Roman School, to whose reputation ancient
prejudices have certainly contributed; the way was prepared
for them, and they may be said rather to have lived
in the reputation of their country than have contributed
to it; whilst whatever celebrity is obtained by English
Artists can arise only from the operation of a fair and true
comparison. And when they communicate to their country
a share of their reputation, it is a portion of fame not
borrowed from others, but solely acquired by their own
labour and talents. As Italy has undoubtedly a prescriptive
right to an admiration bordering on prejudice, as a soil
peculiarly adapted, congenial, and, we may add, destined to
the production of men of great genius in our Art, we may
 [Pg 232]
not unreasonably suspect that a portion of the great fame
of some of their late artists has been owing to the general
readiness and disposition of mankind to acquiesce in their
original prepossessions in favour of the productions of the
Roman School.
On this ground, however unsafe, I will venture to prophesy,
that two of the last distinguished painters of that
country, I mean Pompeio Battoni and Raffaelle Mengs,
however great their names may at present sound in our
ears, will very soon fall into the rank of Imperiale,
Sebastian Concha, Placido Constanza, Masaccio, and the
rest of their immediate predecessors; whose names, though
equally renowned in their lifetime, are now fallen into what
is little short of total oblivion. I do not say that those
painters were not superior to the artist I allude to, and
whose loss we lament, in a certain routine of practice,
which, to the eyes of common observers, has the air of a
learned composition, and bears a sort of superficial resemblance
to the manner of the great men who went before
them. I know this perfectly well; but I know likewise,
that a man looking for real and lasting reputation must
unlearn much of the commonplace method so observable in
the works of the artists whom I have named. For my own
part, I confess, I take more interest in and am more captivated
with the powerful impression of nature which Gainsborough
exhibited in his portraits and in his landscapes,
and the interesting simplicity and elegance of his little
ordinary beggar-children, than with any of the works of
that School, since the time of Andrea Sacchi, or perhaps we
may say Carlo Maratti; two painters who may truly be
said to be Ultimi Romanorum.
I am well aware how much I lay myself open to the
censure and ridicule of the academical professors of other
 [Pg 233]
nations, in preferring the humble attempts of Gainsborough
to the works of those regular graduates in the great
historical style. But we have the sanction of all mankind
in preferring genius in a lower rank of art to feebleness
and insipidity in the highest.
It would not be to the present purpose, even if I had the
means and materials, which I have not, to enter into the
private life of Mr. Gainsborough. The history of his
gradual advancement, and the means by which he acquired
such excellence in his art, would come nearer to our purposes
and wishes, if it were by any means attainable; but
the slow progress of advancement is in general imperceptible
to the man himself who makes it; it is the consequence
of an accumulation of various ideas which his
mind has received, he does not perhaps know how or when.
Sometimes, indeed, it happens that he may be able to mark
the time when, from the sight of a picture, a passage in an
author, or a hint in conversation, he has received, as it
were, some new and guiding light, something like inspiration,
by which his mind has been expanded; and is morally
sure that his whole life and conduct has been affected by
that accidental circumstance. Such interesting accounts
we may, however, sometimes obtain from a man who has
acquired an uncommon habit of self-examination, and has
attended to the progress of his own improvement.
It may not be improper to make mention of some of the
customs and habits of this extraordinary man; points which
come more within the reach of an observer: I, however,
mean such only as are connected with his art, and indeed
were, as I apprehend, the causes of his arriving to that
high degree of excellence which we see and acknowledge in
his works. Of these causes we must state, as the fundamental,
the love which he had to his art; to which, indeed,
 [Pg 234]
his whole mind appears to have been devoted, and to which
everything was referred; and this we may fairly conclude
from various circumstances of his life, which were known to
his intimate friends. Among others, he had a habit of continually
remarking to those who happened to be about him
whatever peculiarity of countenance, whatever accidental
combination of figure, or happy effects of light and shadow,
occurred in prospects, in the sky, in walking the streets, or
in company. If, in his walks, he found a character that he
liked, and whose attendance was to be obtained, he ordered
him to his house: and from the fields he brought into his
painting-room stumps of trees, weeds, and animals of
various kinds; and designed them, not from memory, but
immediately from the objects. He even framed a kind of
model of landscapes on his table; composed of broken
stones, dried herbs, and pieces of looking-glass, which he
magnified and improved into rocks, trees, and water. How
far this latter practice may be useful in giving hints, the
professors of landscape can best determine. Like every
other technical practice, it seems to me wholly to depend
on the general talent of him who uses it. Such methods
may be nothing better than contemptible and mischievous
trifling; or they may be aids. I think, upon the whole,
unless we constantly refer to real nature, that practice may
be more likely to do harm than good. I mention it only,
as it shows the solicitude and extreme activity which he
had about everything that related to his art; that he
wished to have his objects embodied, as it were, and distinctly
before him; that he neglected nothing which could
keep his faculties in exercise, and derived hints from every
sort of combination.
We must not forget, whilst we are on this subject, to
make some remarks on his custom of painting by night,
 [Pg 235]
which confirms what I have already mentioned,—his great
affection to his art; since he could not amuse himself in
the evening by any other means so agreeable to himself. I
am, indeed, much inclined to believe that it is a practice
very advantageous and improving to an artist; for by this
means he will acquire a new and a higher perception of
what is great and beautiful in nature. By candle-light,
not only objects appear more beautiful, but from their
being in a greater breadth of light and shadow, as well as
having a greater breadth and uniformity of colour, nature
appears in a higher style; and even the flesh seems to take
a higher and richer tone of colour. Judgment is to direct
us in the use to be made of this method of study; but the
method itself is, I am sure, advantageous. I have often
imagined that the two great colourists, Titian and Correggio,
though I do not know that they painted by night,
formed their high ideas of colouring from the effects of
objects by this artificial light; but I am more assured that
whoever attentively studies the first and best manner of
Guercino, will be convinced that he either painted by this
light, or formed his manner on this conception.
Another practice Gainsborough had, which is worth mentioning,
as it is certainly worthy of imitation; I mean his
manner of forming all the parts of his picture together;
the whole going on at the same time, in the same manner
as nature creates her works. Though this method is not
uncommon to those who have been regularly educated, yet
probably it was suggested to him by his own natural
sagacity. That this custom is not universal appears from
the practice of a painter whom I have just mentioned,
Pompeio Battoni, who finished his historical pictures part
after part, and in his portraits completely finished one
feature before he proceeded to another. The consequence
 [Pg 236]
was as might be expected; the countenance was never well
expressed; and, as the painters say, the whole was not well
put together.
The first thing required to excel in our art, or I believe
in any art, is not only a love for it, but even an enthusiastic
ambition to excel in it. This never fails of success proportioned
to the natural abilities with which the artist has
been endowed by Providence. Of Gainsborough, we
certainly know, that his passion was not the acquirement
of riches, but excellence in his art; and to enjoy that
honourable fame which is sure to attend it.—That he felt
this ruling passion strong in death I am myself a witness.
A few days before he died, he wrote me a letter, to express
his acknowledgments for the good opinion I entertained of
his abilities, and the manner in which (he had been
informed) I always spoke of him; and desired he might
see me once more before he died. I am aware how
flattering it is to myself to be thus connected with the
dying testimony which this excellent painter bore to his
art. But I cannot prevail on myself to suppress that I
was not connected with him, by any habits of familiarity:
if any little jealousies had subsisted between us, they were
forgotten in those moments of sincerity; and he turned
towards me as one who was engrossed by the same pursuits,
and who deserved his good opinion, by being sensible of his
excellence. Without entering into a detail of what passed
at this last interview, the impression of it upon my mind
was, that his regret at losing life was principally the regret
of leaving his art; and more especially as he now began,
he said, to see what his deficiencies were; which, he said,
he flattered himself in his last works were in some measure
supplied.
When such a man as Gainsborough arrives to great fame,
 [Pg 237]
without the assistance of an academical education, without
travelling to Italy, or any of those preparatory studies
which have been so often recommended, he is produced as
an instance how little such studies are necessary; since so
great excellence may be acquired without them. This is an
inference not warranted by the success of any individual;
and I trust it will not be thought that I wish to make this
use of it.
It must be remembered that the style and department of
art which Gainsborough chose, and in which he so much
excelled, did not require that he should go out of his own
country for the objects of his study; they were everywhere
about him; he found them in the streets and in the fields,
and from the models thus accidentally found, he selected
with great judgment such as suited his purpose. As his
studies were directed to the living world principally, he did
not pay a general attention to the works of the various
masters, though they are, in my opinion, always of great
use, even when the character of our subject requires us to
depart from some of their principles. It cannot be denied,
that excellence in the department of the art which he
professed may exist without them; that in such subjects,
and in the manner that belongs to them, the want of them
is supplied, and more than supplied, by natural sagacity,
and a minute observation of particular nature. If
Gainsborough did not look at nature with a poet's eye, it
must be acknowledged that he saw her with the eye
of a painter; and gave a faithful, if not a poetical,
representation of what he had before him.
Though he did not much attend to the works of the
great historical painters of former ages, yet he was well
aware that the language of the art—the art of imitation—must
be learned somewhere; and as he knew that he could
 [Pg 238]
not learn it in an equal degree from his contemporaries, he
very judiciously applied himself to the Flemish School,
who are undoubtedly the greatest masters of one necessary
branch of art; and he did not need to go out of his own
country for examples of that school; from that he learnt
the harmony of colouring, the management and disposition
of light and shadow, and every means which the masters of
it practised, to ornament and give splendour to their
works. And to satisfy himself as well as others how well
he knew the mechanism and artifice which they employed
to bring out that tone of colour which we so much admire
in their works, he occasionally made copies from Rubens,
Teniers, and Vandyke, which it would be no disgrace to
the most accurate connoisseur to mistake, at the first
sight, for the works of those masters. What he thus
learned, he applied to the originals of nature, which he
saw with his own eyes; and imitated, not in the manner of
those masters, but in his own.
Whether he most excelled in portraits, landscapes, or
fancy pictures, it is difficult to determine: whether his
portraits were most admirable for exact truth of resemblance,
or his landscapes for a portrait-like representation
of nature, such as we see in the works of Rubens,
Ruysdaal, and others of those schools. In his fancy
pictures, when he had fixed on his object of imitation,
whether it was the mean and vulgar form of a wood-cutter,
or a child of an interesting character, as he did not attempt
to raise the one, so neither did he lose any of the natural
grace and elegance of the other; such a grace, and such
an elegance, as are more frequently found in cottages than
in courts. This excellence was his own, the result of his
particular observation and taste; for this he was certainly
not indebted to the Flemish School, nor, indeed, to any
 [Pg 239]
school; for his grace was not academical or antique, but
selected by himself from the great school of nature; and
there are yet a thousand modes of grace, which are neither
theirs, nor his, but lie open in the multiplied scenes
and figures of life, to be brought out by skilful and faithful
observers.
Upon the whole, we may justly say, that whatever he
attempted he carried to a high degree of excellence. It is
to the credit of his good sense and judgment, that he never
did attempt that style of historical painting for which his
previous studies had made no preparation.
And here it naturally occurs to oppose the sensible
conduct of Gainsborough in this respect to that of our
late excellent Hogarth, who, with all his extraordinary
talents, was not blessed with this knowledge of his own
deficiency, or of the bounds which were set to the extent
of his own powers. After this admirable artist had spent
the greater part of his life in an active, busy, and, we may
add, successful attention to the ridicule of life; after he
had invented a new species of dramatic painting, in which
probably he will never be equalled, and had stored his
mind with infinite materials to explain and illustrate the
domestic and familiar scenes of common life, which were
generally, and ought to have been always, the subject of
his pencil; he very imprudently, or rather presumptuously,
attempted the great historical style, for which his previous
habits had by no means prepared him: he was indeed so
entirely unacquainted with the principles of this style, that
he was not even aware that any artificial preparation was
at all necessary. It is to be regretted that any part of
the life of such a genius should be fruitlessly employed.
Let his failure teach us not to indulge ourselves in the
vain imagination, that by a momentary resolution we can
 [Pg 240]
give either dexterity to the hand, or a new habit to the
mind.
I have, however, little doubt, but that the same sagacity
which enabled those two extraordinary men to discover
their true object, and the peculiar excellence of that branch
of art which they cultivated, would have been equally
effectual in discovering the principles of the higher style,
if they had investigated those principles with the same
eager industry which they exerted in their own department.
As Gainsborough never attempted the heroic style, so
neither did he destroy the character and uniformity of his
own style by the idle affectation of introducing mythological
learning in any of his pictures. Of this boyish folly we
see instances enough, even in the works of great painters.
When the Dutch School attempt this poetry of our art in
their landscapes, their performances are beneath criticism;
they become only an object of laughter. This practice is
hardly excusable even in Claude Lorrain, who had shown
more discretion if he had never meddled with such subjects.
Our late ingenious Academician, Wilson, has, I fear,
been guilty, like many of his predecessors, of introducing
gods and goddesses, ideal beings, into scenes which were by
no means prepared to receive such personages. His landscapes
were in reality too near common nature to admit
supernatural objects. In consequence of this mistake, in a
very admirable picture of a storm, which I have seen of his
hand, many figures are introduced in the foreground, some
in apparent distress, and some struck dead, as a spectator
would naturally suppose, by the lightning; had not the
painter injudiciously (as I think) rather chosen that their
death should be imputed to a little Apollo, who appears in
the sky, with his bent bow, and that those figures should be
considered as the children of Niobe.
[Pg 241]
 To manage a subject of this kind, a peculiar style of
art is required; and it can only be done without
impropriety, or even without ridicule, when we adapt the
character of the landscape, and that, too, in all its parts, to
the historical or poetical representation. This is a very
difficult adventure, and it requires a mind thrown back two
thousand years, and, as it were, naturalised in antiquity, like
that of Nicolo Poussin, to achieve it. In the picture
alluded to, the first idea that presents itself is that of
wonder, at seeing a figure in so uncommon a situation as
that in which the Apollo is placed; for the clouds on
which he kneels have not the appearance of being able
to support him; they have neither the substance nor the
form fit for the receptacle of a human figure; and they do
not possess in any respect that romantic character which is
appropriated to such an object, and which alone can
harmonise with poetical stories.
It appears to me that such conduct is no less absurd
than if a plain man, giving a relation of real distress
occasioned by an inundation accompanied with thunder and
lightning, should, instead of simply relating the event,
take it into his head, in order to give a grace to his
narration, to talk of Jupiter Pluvius, or Jupiter and his
thunderbolts, or any other figurative idea; an intermixture
which, though in poetry, with its proper preparations and
accompaniments, it might be managed with effect, yet in the
instance before us would counteract the purpose of the
narrator, and, instead of being interesting, would be only
ridiculous.
The Dutch and Flemish style of landscape, not even
excepting those of Rubens, is unfit for poetical subjects;
but to explain in what this ineptitude consists, or to point
out all the circumstances that give nobleness, grandeur,
 [Pg 242]
and the poetic character, to style, in landscape, would
require a long discourse of itself; and the end would be
then perhaps but imperfectly attained. The painter who
is ambitious of this perilous excellence must catch his inspiration
from those who have cultivated with success the poetry,
as it may be called, of the art; and they are few indeed.
I cannot quit this subject without mentioning two
examples which occur to me at present, in which the
poetical style of landscape may be seen happily executed:
the one is Jacob's Dream, by Salvator Rosa, and the other
the return of the Ark from Captivity, by Sebastian
Bourdon. With whatever dignity those histories are presented
to us in the language of Scripture, this style of
painting possesses the same power of inspiring sentiments
of grandeur and sublimity, and is able to communicate
them to subjects which appear by no means adapted to
receive them. A ladder against the sky has no very
promising appearance of possessing a capacity to excite any
heroic ideas; and the Ark, in the hands of a second-rate
master, would have little more effect than a common
waggon on the highway: yet those subjects are so poetically
treated throughout, the parts have such a correspondence
with each other, and the whole and every part of the scene
is so visionary, that it is impossible to look at them without
feeling, in some measure, the enthusiasm which seems
to have inspired the painters.
By continual contemplation of such works, a sense of the
higher excellencies of art will by degrees dawn on the
imagination; at every review that sense will become more
and more assured, until we come to enjoy a sober certainty
of the real existence (if I may so express myself) of those
almost ideal beauties; and the artist will then find no
difficulty in fixing in his mind the principles by which the
 [Pg 243]
impression is produced; which he will feel and practise,
though they are perhaps too delicate and refined, and too
peculiar to the imitative art, to be conveyed to the mind by
any other means.
To return to Gainsborough; the peculiarity of his
manner, or style, or we may call it—the language in which
he expressed his ideas, has been considered by many as his
greatest defect. But without altogether wishing to enter
into the discussion—whether this peculiarity was a defect
or not, intermixed, as it was, with great beauties, of some
of which it was probably the cause, it becomes a proper
subject of criticism and inquiry to a painter.
A novelty and peculiarity of manner, as it is often a
cause of our approbation, so likewise it is often a ground of
censure; as being contrary to the practice of other
painters, in whose manner we have been initiated, and in
whose favour we have perhaps been prepossessed from our
infancy; for, fond as we are of novelty, we are upon the
whole creatures of habit. However, it is certain, that all
those odd scratches and marks, which, on a close examination,
are so observable in Gainsborough's pictures, and
which even to experienced painters appear rather the effect
of accident than design: this chaos, this uncouth and
shapeless appearance, by a kind of magic, at a certain
distance assumes form, and all the parts seem to drop into
their proper places, so that we can hardly refuse acknowledging
the full effect of diligence, under the appearance of
chance and hasty negligence. That Gainsborough himself
considered this peculiarity in his manner, and the power it
possesses of exciting surprise, as a beauty in his works, I
think may be inferred from the eager desire which we
know he always expressed, that his pictures, at the
Exhibition, should be seen near, as well as at a distance.
[Pg 244]
 The slightness which we see in his best works cannot
always be imputed to negligence. However they may
appear to superficial observers, painters know very well
that a steady attention to the general effect takes up more
time, and is much more laborious to the mind, than any
mode of high finishing, or smoothness, without such attention.
His handling, the manner of leaving the colours,
or, in other words, the methods he used for producing the
effect, had very much the appearance of the work of an
artist who had never learned from others the usual and
regular practice belonging to the art; but still, like a man
of strong intuitive perception of what was required, he
found out a way of his own to accomplish his purpose.
It is no disgrace to the genius of Gainsborough to compare
him to such men as we sometimes meet with, whose
natural eloquence appears even in speaking a language
which they can scarce be said to understand; and who,
without knowing the appropriate expression of almost any
one idea, contrive to communicate the lively and forcible
impressions of an energetic mind.
I think some apology may reasonably be made for his
manner without violating truth, or running any risk of
poisoning the minds of the younger students, by propagating
false criticism, for the sake of raising the
character of a favourite artist. It must be allowed, that
this hatching manner of Gainsborough did very much
contribute to the lightness of effect which is so eminent a
beauty in his pictures; as, on the contrary, much smoothness,
and uniting the colours, is apt to produce heaviness.
Every artist must have remarked how often that lightness
of hand which was in his dead colour, or first painting,
escaped in the finishing when he had determined the parts
with more precision; and another loss he often experiences,
 [Pg 245]
which is of greater consequence: whilst he is employed in
the detail, the effect of the whole together is either forgotten
or neglected. The likeness of a portrait, as I have
formerly observed, consists more in preserving the general
effect of the countenance than in the most minute finishing
of the features, or any of the particular parts. Now
Gainsborough's portraits were often little more, in regard
to finishing, or determining the form of the features, than
what generally attends a dead colour; but as he was
always attentive to the general effect, or whole together, I
have often imagined that this unfinished manner contributed
even to that striking resemblance for which his
portraits are so remarkable. Though this opinion may be
considered as fanciful, yet I think a plausible reason may
be given why such a mode of painting should have such
an effect. It is presupposed that in this undetermined
manner there is in the general effect enough to remind
the spectator of the original; the imagination supplies the
rest, and perhaps more satisfactorily to himself, if not
more exactly, than the artist, with all his care, could
possibly have done. At the same time it must be acknowledged
there is one evil attending this mode; that if the
portrait were seen previous to any knowledge of the
original, different persons would form different ideas, and
all would be disappointed at not finding the original correspond
with their own conceptions; under the great
latitude which indistinctness gives to the imagination to
assume almost what character or form it pleases.
Every artist has some favourite part, on which he fixes
his attention, and which he pursues with such eagerness,
that it absorbs every other consideration; and he often
falls into the opposite error of that which he would avoid,
which is always ready to receive him. Now Gainsborough,
 [Pg 246]
having truly a painter's eye for colouring, cultivated those
effects of the art which proceed from colours: and sometimes
appears to be indifferent to or to neglect other excellencies.
Whatever defects are acknowledged, let him still
experience from us the same candour that we so freely
give upon similar occasions to the ancient masters; let us
not encourage that fastidious disposition, which is discontented
with everything short of perfection, and unreasonably
require, as we sometimes do, a union of excellencies,
not perhaps quite compatible with each other. We may,
on this ground, say even of the divine Raffaelle, that he
might have finished his picture as highly and as correctly,
as was his custom, without heaviness of manner; and that
Poussin might have preserved all his precision without
hardness or dryness.
To show the difficulty of uniting solidity with lightness
of manner, we may produce a picture of Rubens in the
church of St. Gudule, at Brussels, as an example; the subject
is "Christ's Charge to Peter;" which, as it is the highest
and smoothest finished picture I remember to have seen
of that master, so it is by far the heaviest; and if I had
found it in any other place, I should have suspected it to
be a copy; for painters know very well, that it is principally
by this air of facility, or the want of it, that originals are
distinguished from copies. A lightness of effect produced
by colour, and that produced by facility of handling, are
generally united; a copy may preserve something of the
one, it is true, but hardly ever of the other; a connoisseur,
therefore, finds it often necessary to look carefully into the
picture before he determines on its originality. Gainsborough
possessed this quality of lightness of manner and
effect, I think, to an unexampled degree of excellence; but
it must be acknowledged, at the same time, that the
 [Pg 247]
sacrifice which he made to this ornament of our art was too
great; it was, in reality, preferring the lesser excellencies
to the greater.
To conclude. However we may apologise for the deficiencies
of Gainsborough (I mean particularly his want of
precision and finishing), who so ingeniously contrived to
cover his defects by his beauties; and who cultivated that
department of art, where such defects are more easily
excused; you are to remember, that no apology can be
made for this deficiency, in that style which this Academy
teaches, and which ought to be the object of your pursuit.
It will be necessary for you, in the first place, never to lose
sight of the great rules and principles of the art, as they
are collected from the full body of the best general practice,
and the most constant and uniform experience; this
must be the groundwork of all your studies: afterwards
you may profit, as in this case I wish you to profit, by the
peculiar experience and personal talents of artists, living
and dead; you may derive lights, and catch hints, from
their practice; but the moment you turn them into models,
you fall infinitely below them; you may be corrupted by
excellencies, not so much belonging to the art, as personal
and appropriated to the artist; and become bad copies of
good painters, instead of excellent imitators of the great
universal truth of things.
[Pg 248]
Delivered to the Students of the Royal Academy, on the Distribution of
the Prizes, December 10, 1790.
THE PRESIDENT TAKES LEAVE OF THE ACADEMY.—A REVIEW OF
THE DISCOURSES.—THE STUDY OF THE WORKS OF MICHEL ANGELO
RECOMMENDED.
The intimate connection which I have had with the Royal
Academy ever since its establishment, the social duties in
which we have all mutually engaged for so many years,
make any profession of attachment to this Institution, on
my part, altogether superfluous; the influence of habit
alone in such a connection would naturally have produced it.
Among men united in the same body, and engaged in the
same pursuit, along with permanent friendship occasional
differences will arise. In these disputes men are naturally
too favourable to themselves, and think, perhaps, too hardly
of their antagonists. But composed and constituted as we
are, those little contentions will be lost to others, and they
ought certainly to be lost amongst ourselves in mutual
esteem for talents and acquirements: every controversy
ought to be, and I am persuaded will be, sunk in our zeal
for the perfection of our common Art.
In parting with the Academy, I shall remember with
pride, affection, and gratitude, the support with which
I have almost uniformly been honoured from the commencement
of our intercourse. I shall leave you, Gentlemen,
with unaffected cordial wishes for your future
concord, and with a well-founded hope, that in that
 [Pg 249]
concord the auspicious and not obscure origin of our
Academy may be forgotten in the splendour of your
succeeding prospects.
My age, and my infirmities still more than my age, make
it probable that this will be the last time I shall have the
honour of addressing you from this place. Excluded as I
am, spatiis iniquis, from indulging my imagination with a
distant and forward perspective of life, I may be excused if
I turn my eyes back on the way which I have passed.
We may assume to ourselves, I should hope, the credit of
having endeavoured, at least, to fill with propriety that
middle station which we hold in the general connection of
things. Our predecessors have laboured for our advantage,
we labour for our successors; and though we have done no
more in this mutual intercourse and reciprocation of benefits
than has been effected by other societies formed in this
nation for the advancement of useful and ornamental
knowledge, yet there is one circumstance which appears to
give us an higher claim than the credit of merely doing our
duty. What I at present allude to is the honour of having
been, some of us, the first contrivers, and all of us the
promoters and supporters, of the annual Exhibition. This
scheme could only have originated from Artists already in
possession of the favour of the public, as it would not have
been so much in the power of others to have excited
curiosity. It must be remembered that, for the sake of
bringing forward into notice concealed merit, they incurred
the risk of producing rivals to themselves; they voluntarily
entered the lists, and ran the race a second time for the
prize which they had already won.
When we take a review of the several departments of the
Institution, I think we may safely congratulate ourselves
on our good fortune in having hitherto seen the chairs of
 [Pg 250]
our Professors filled with men of distinguished abilities,
and who have so well acquitted themselves of their duty in
their several departments. I look upon it to be of importance,
that none of them should be ever left unfilled: a
neglect to provide for qualified persons is to produce a
neglect of qualifications.
In this honourable rank of Professors I have not
presumed to class myself; though in the Discourses which
I have had the honour of delivering from this place, while
in one respect I may be considered as a volunteer, in
another view it seems as if I was involuntarily pressed into
this service. If prizes were to be given, it appeared not
only proper, but almost indispensably necessary, that something
should be said by the President on the delivery of
those prizes: and the President, for his own credit, would
wish to say something more than mere words of compliment,
which, by being frequently repeated, would soon
become flat and uninteresting, and by being uttered to
many, would at last become a distinction to none: I thought,
therefore, if I were to preface this compliment with some
instructive observations on the Art, when we crowned
merit in the Artists whom we rewarded, I might do
something to animate and guide them in their future
attempts.
I am truly sensible how unequal I have been to the
expression of my own ideas. To develop the latent excellencies,
and draw out the interior principles of our art
requires more skill and practice in writing than is likely to
be possessed by a man perpetually occupied in the use of the
pencil and the pallet. It is for that reason, perhaps, that
the sister Art has had the advantage of better criticism.
Poets are naturally writers of prose. They may be said to
be practising only an inferior department of their own art,
 [Pg 251]
when they are explaining and expatiating upon its most
refined principles. But still such difficulties ought not to
deter Artists, who are not prevented by other engagements,
from putting their thoughts in order as well as they can,
and from giving to the public the result of their experience.
The knowledge which an Artist has of his subject will more
than compensate for any want of elegance in the manner of
treating it, or even of perspicuity, which is still more
essential; and I am convinced that one short essay written
by a Painter will contribute more to advance the theory of
our art than a thousand volumes such as we sometimes see;
the purpose of which appears to be rather to display the
refinement of the Author's own conceptions of impossible
practice, than to convey useful knowledge or instruction of
any kind whatever. An Artist knows what is, and what
is not, within the province of his art to perform; and is
not likely to be for ever teasing the poor Student with the
beauties of mixed passions, or to perplex him with an
imaginary union of excellencies incompatible with each other.
To this work, however, I could not be said to come
totally unprovided with materials. I had seen much, and
I had thought much upon what I had seen; I had something
of an habit of investigation, and a disposition to
reduce all that I observed and felt in my own mind to
method and system; but never having seen what I myself
knew distinctly placed before me on paper, I knew nothing
correctly. To put those ideas into something like order
was, to my inexperience, no easy task. The composition,
the ponere totum even of a single Discourse, as well as of a
single statue, was the most difficult part, as perhaps it is of
every other art, and most requires the hand of a master.
For the manner, whatever deficiency there was, I might
reasonably expect indulgence; but I thought it indispensably
 [Pg 252]
necessary well to consider the opinions which
were to be given out from this place, and under the
sanction of a Royal Academy; I therefore examined not
only my own opinions, but likewise the opinions of others.
I found in the course of this research many precepts and
rules established in our art, which did not seem to me
altogether reconcilable with each other, yet each seemed
in itself to have the same claim of being supported by truth
and nature; and this claim, irreconcilable as they may be
thought, they do in reality alike possess.
To clear away those difficulties, and reconcile those
contrary opinions, it became necessary to distinguish the
greater truth, as it may be called, from the lesser truth;
the larger and more liberal idea of nature from the more
narrow and confined; that which addresses itself to the
imagination from that which is solely addressed to the eye.
In consequence of this discrimination, the different
branches of our art, to which those different truths were
referred, were perceived to make so wide a separation, and
put on so new an appearance, that they seemed scarcely to
have proceeded from the same general stock. The different
rules and regulations which presided over each department
of art followed of course: every mode of excellence, from
the grand style of the Roman and Florentine Schools down
to the lowest rank of still life, had its due weight and
value—fitted some class or other; and nothing was thrown
away. By this disposition of our art into classes, that
perplexity and confusion, which I apprehend every Artist
has at some time experienced from the variety of styles
and the variety of excellence with which he is surrounded,
is, I should hope, in some measure removed, and the
student better enabled to judge for himself what peculiarly
belongs to his own particular pursuit.
[Pg 253]
 In reviewing my Discourses, it is no small satisfaction
to be assured that I have, in no part of them, lent my
assistance to foster newly-hatched unfledged opinions, or
endeavoured to support paradoxes, however tempting may
have been their novelty, or however ingenious I might,
for the minute, fancy them to be; nor shall I, I hope,
anywhere be found to have imposed on the minds of
young Students declamation for argument, a smooth period
for a sound precept. I have pursued a plain and honest
method: I have taken up the art simply as I found it
exemplified in the practice of the most approved Painters.
That approbation which the world has uniformly given, I
have endeavoured to justify by such proofs as questions of
this kind will admit; by the analogy which Painting holds
with the sister Arts, and, consequently, by the common
congeniality which they all bear to our nature. And
though in what has been done no new discovery is pretended,
I may still flatter myself, that from the discoveries
which others have made by their own intuitive good sense
and native rectitude of judgment, I have succeeded in
establishing the rules and principles of our art on a more
firm and lasting foundation than that on which they had
formerly been placed.
Without wishing to divert the Student from the practice
of his Art to speculative theory, to make him a mere
Connoisseur instead of a Painter, I cannot but remark,
that he will certainly find an account in considering, once
for all, on what ground the fabric of our art is built. Uncertain,
confused, or erroneous opinions are not only
detrimental to an Artist in their immediate operation, but
may possibly have very serious consequences; affect his conduct,
and give a peculiar character (as it may be called)
to his taste, and to his pursuits, through his whole life.
[Pg 254]
 I was acquainted at Rome, in the early part of my life,
with a Student of the French Academy, who appeared to
me to possess all the qualities requisite to make a great
Artist, if he had suffered his taste and feelings, and I may
add even his prejudices, to have fair play. He saw and felt
the excellencies of the great works of Art with which we
were surrounded, but lamented that there was not to be
found that Nature which is so admirable in the inferior
schools; and he supposed with Felibien, De Piles, and
other Theorists, that such an union of different excellencies
would be the perfection of Art. He was not aware that the
narrow idea of nature, of which he lamented the absence in
the works of those great Artists, would have destroyed the
grandeur of the general ideas which he admired, and which
was, indeed, the cause of his admiration. My opinions
being then confused and unsettled, I was in danger of
being borne down by this kind of plausible reasoning,
though I remember I then had a dawning of suspicion
that it was not sound doctrine; and at the same time I
was unwilling obstinately to refuse assent to what I was
unable to confute.
That the young Artist may not be seduced from the
right path by following what, at first view, he may think
the light of Reason, and which is indeed Reason in part,
but not in the whole, has been much the object of these
Discourses.
I have taken every opportunity of recommending a
rational method of study, as of the last importance. The
great, I may say the sole use of an Academy is, to put,
and for some time to keep, Students in that course, that
too much indulgence may not be given to peculiarity, and
that a young man may not be taught to believe, that what
is generally good for others is not good for him.
[Pg 255]
 I have strongly inculcated in my former Discourses, as I
do in this, my last, the wisdom and necessity of previously
obtaining the appropriated instruments of the Art, in a
first correct design, and a plain manly colouring before anything
more is attempted. But by this I would not wish to
cramp and fetter the mind, or discourage those who follow
(as most of us may at one time have followed) the suggestion
of a strong inclination: something must be conceded
to great and irresistible impulses: perhaps every Student
must not be strictly bound to general methods, if they
strongly thwart the peculiar turn of his own mind. I must
confess that it is not absolutely of much consequence
whether he proceeds in the general method of seeking first
to acquire mechanical accuracy, before he attempts poetical
flights, provided he diligently studies to attain the full
perfection of the style he pursues; whether, like
Parmegiano, he endeavours at grace and grandeur of
manner before he has learned correctness of drawing, if like
him he feels his own wants, and will labour, as that eminent
artist did, to supply those wants; whether he starts from
the East or from the West, if he relaxes in no exertion to
arrive ultimately at the same goal. The first public work
of Parmegiano is the St. Eustachius, in the church of St.
Petronius in Bologna, and was done when he was a boy;
and one of the last of his works is the Moses breaking the
tables in Parma. In the former there is certainly something
of grandeur in the outline, or in the conception of the
figure, which discovers the dawnings of future greatness;
of a young mind impregnated with the sublimity of Michel
Angelo, whose style he here attempts to imitate, though he
could not then draw the human figure with any common
degree of correctness. But this same Parmegiano, when
in his more mature age he painted the Moses, had so
 [Pg 256]
completely supplied his first defects, that we are here at a loss
which to admire most, the correctness of drawing or the
grandeur of the conception. As a confirmation of its great
excellence, and of the impression which it leaves on the
minds of elegant spectators, I may observe, that our great
Lyric Poet, when he conceived his sublime idea of the
indignant Welsh Bard, acknowledged, that though many
years had intervened, he had warmed his imagination with
the remembrance of this noble figure of Parmegiano.
When we consider that Michel Angelo was the great
archetype to whom Parmegiano was indebted for that
grandeur which we find in his works, and from whom all
his contemporaries and successors have derived whatever
they have possessed of the dignified and the majestic; that
he was the bright luminary, from whom Painting has
borrowed a new lustre; that under his hands it assumed a
new appearance, and is become another and superior art; I
may be excused if I take this opportunity, as I have
hitherto taken every occasion, to turn your attention to this
exalted Founder and Father of Modern Art, of which he
was not only the inventor, but which, by the divine energy
of his own mind, he carried at once to its highest point
of possible perfection.
The sudden maturity to which Michel Angelo brought
our Art, and the comparative feebleness of his followers and
imitators, might perhaps be reasonably, at least plausibly
explained, if we had time for such an examination. At
present I shall only observe, that the subordinate parts of
our Art, and perhaps of other Arts, expand themselves by
a slow and progressive growth; but those which depend
on a native vigour of imagination generally burst forth at
once in fulness of beauty. Of this Homer probably,
and Shakespeare more assuredly, are singular examples.
 [Pg 257]
Michel Angelo possessed the poetical part of our art in a
most eminent degree; and the same daring spirit which
urged him first to explore the unknown regions of the
imagination, delighted with the novelty, and animated by
the success of his discoveries, could not have failed to
stimulate and impel him forward in his career beyond those
limits which his followers, destitute of the same incentives,
had not strength to pass.
To distinguish between correctness of drawing and that
part which respects the imagination, we may say the one
approaches to the mechanical (which in its way, too, may
make just pretensions to genius), and the other to the
poetical. To encourage a solid and vigorous course of
study, it may not be amiss to suggest, that perhaps a confidence
in the mechanic produces a boldness in the poetic.
He that is sure of the goodness of his ship and tackle puts
out fearlessly from the shore; and he who knows that his
hand can execute whatever his fancy can suggest, sports
with more freedom in embodying the visionary forms of his
own creation. I will not say Michel Angelo was eminently
poetical, only because he was greatly mechanical; but I am
sure that mechanic excellence invigorated and emboldened
his mind to carry painting into the regions of poetry, and
to emulate that art in its most adventurous flights.
Michel Angelo equally possessed both qualifications. Yet
of mechanic excellence there were certainly great examples
to be found in Ancient Sculpture, and particularly in the
fragment known by the name of the Torso of Michel
Angelo; but of that grandeur of character, air, and
attitude, which he threw into all his figures, and which so
well corresponds with the grandeur of his outline, there
was no example; it could therefore proceed only from the
most poetical and sublime imagination.
[Pg 258]
 It is impossible not to express some surprise that the
race of Painters who preceded Michel Angelo, men of
acknowledged great abilities, should never have thought of
transferring a little of that grandeur of outline which they
could not but see and admire in Ancient Sculpture, into
their own works; but they appear to have considered
Sculpture as the later Schools of Artists look at the inventions
of Michel Angelo—as something to be admired, but
with which they have nothing to do: quod super nos, nihil
ad nos.—The Artists of that age, even Raffaelle himself,
seemed to be going on very contentedly in the dry manner
of Pietro Perugino; and if Michel Angelo had never
appeared, the Art might still have continued in the same
style.
Beside Rome and Florence, where the grandeur of this
style was first displayed, it was on this Foundation that the
Caracci built the truly great Academical Bolognian school,
of which the first stone was laid by Pellegrino Tibaldi.
He first introduced this style amongst them; and many
instances might be given in which he appears to have possessed,
as by inheritance, the true, genuine, noble, and
elevated mind of Michel Angelo. Though we cannot
venture to speak of him with the same fondness as his
countrymen, and call him, as the Caracci did, Nostro
Michel Angelo riformato, yet he has a right to be considered
amongst the first and greatest of his followers;
there are certainly many drawings and inventions of his, of
which Michel Angelo himself might not disdain to be supposed
the author, or that they should be, as in fact they
often are, mistaken for his. I will mention one particular
instance, because it is found in a book which is in every
young Artist's hand;—Bishop's Ancient Statues. He
there has introduced a print, representing Polyphemus,
 [Pg 259]
from a drawing of Tibaldi, and has inscribed it with the
name of Michel Angelo, to whom he has also in the same
book attributed a Sybil of Raffaelle. Both these figures, it
is true, are professedly in Michel Angelo's style and spirit,
and even worthy of his hand. But we know that the
former is painted in the Institute a Bologna by Tibaldi, and
the other in the Pace by Raffaelle.
The Caracci, it is acknowledged, adopted the mechanical
part with sufficient success. But the divine part which
addresses itself to the imagination, as possessed by Michel
Angelo or Tibaldi, was beyond their grasp: they formed, however,
a most respectable school, a style more on the level, and
calculated to please a greater number; and if excellence of
this kind is to be valued according to the number rather
than the weight and quality of admirers, it would assume
even a higher rank in art. The same, in some sort, may be
said of Tintoret, Paolo Veronese, and others of the Venetian
Painters. They certainly much advanced the dignity of
their style by adding to their fascinating powers of colouring
something of the strength of Michel Angelo; at the same
time it may still be a doubt how far their ornamental
elegance would be an advantageous addition to his grandeur.
But if there is any manner of Painting which may be said
to unite kindly with his style, it is that of Titian. His
handling, the manner in which his colours are left on the
canvas, appears to proceed (as far as that goes) from a
congenial mind, equally disdainful of vulgar criticism.
Michel Angelo's strength thus qualified, and made
more palatable to the general taste, reminds me of an
observation which I heard a learned critic make, when it
was incidentally remarked that our translation of Homer,
however excellent, did not convey the character, nor had
the grand air of the original. He replied, that if Pope
 [Pg 260]
had not clothed the naked Majesty of Homer with the
graces and elegancies of modern fashions—though the real
dignity of Homer was degraded by such a dress, his
translation would not have met with such a favourable
reception, and he must have been contented with fewer
readers.
Many of the Flemish painters, who studied at Rome in
that great era of our art, such as Francis Rloris, Hemskirk,
Michael Coxis, Jerom Cock, and others, returned to their
own country with as much of this grandeur as they could
carry. But like seeds falling on a soil not prepared or
adapted to their nature, the manner of Michel Angelo
thrived but little with them; perhaps, however, they contributed
to prepare the way for that free, unconstrained,
and liberal outline, which was afterwards introduced by
Rubens through the medium of the Venetian Painters.
The grandeur of style has been in different degrees
disseminated over all Europe. Some caught it by living at
the time, and coming into contact with the original author,
whilst others received it at second hand; and being everywhere
adopted, it has totally changed the whole taste and
style of design, if there could be said to be any style before
his time. Our art, in consequence, now assumes a rank to
which it could never have dared to aspire, if Michel Angelo
had not discovered to the world the hidden powers which
it possessed. Without his assistance we never could have
been convinced that Painting was capable of producing an
adequate representation of the persons and actions of the
heroes of the Iliad.
I would ask any man qualified to judge of such works,
whether he can look with indifference at the personification
of the Supreme Being in the centre of the Capella Sestina,
or the figures of the Sybils which surround that chapel, to
 [Pg 261]
which we may add the statue of Moses; and whether the
same sensations are not excited by those works, as what he
may remember to have felt from the most sublime passages
of Homer? I mention those figures more particularly, as
they come nearer to a comparison with his Jupiter, his
demi-gods, and heroes; those Sybils and Prophets being a
kind of intermediate beings between men and angels.
Though instances may be produced in the works of other
Painters, which may justly stand in competition with those
I have mentioned—such as the Isaiah, and the vision of
Ezekiel, by Raffaelle, the St. Mark of Frate Bartolomeo,
and many others; yet these, it must be allowed, are inventions
so much in Michel Angelo's manner of thinking, that
they may be truly considered as so many rays, which
discover manifestly the centre from whence they emanated.
The sublime in Painting, as in Poetry, so overpowers,
and takes such a possession of the whole mind, that no
room is left for attention to minute criticism. The little
elegancies of art in the presence of these great ideas thus
greatly expressed, lose all their value, and are, for the
instant, at least, felt to be unworthy of our notice. The
correct judgment, the purity of taste which characterise
Raffaelle, the exquisite grace of Correggio and Parmegiano,
all disappear before them.
That Michel Angelo was capricious in his inventions
cannot be denied; and this may make some circumspection
necessary in studying his works; for though they appear
to become him, an imitation of them is always dangerous,
and will prove sometimes ridiculous. "Within that circle
none durst walk but he." To me, I confess his caprice
does not lower the estimation of his genius, even though it
is sometimes, I acknowledge, carried to the extreme: and
however those eccentric excursions are considered, we must
 [Pg 262]
at the same time recollect that those faults, if they are
faults, are such as never could occur to a mean and vulgar
mind: that they flowed from the same source which produced
his greatest beauties, and were, therefore, such as
none but himself was capable of committing: they were
the powerful impulses of a mind unused to subjection of
any kind, and too high to be controlled by cold criticism.
Many see his daring extravagance who can see nothing
else. A young Artist finds the works of Michel Angelo so
totally different from those of his own master, or of those
with whom he is surrounded, that he may be easily persuaded
to abandon and neglect studying a style which
appears to him wild, mysterious, and above his comprehension,
and which he therefore feels no disposition to admire;
a good disposition, which he concludes that he should
naturally have, if the style deserved it. It is necessary,
therefore, that students should be prepared for the disappointment
which they may experience at their first setting
out; and they must be cautioned, that probably they will
not, at first sight, approve.
It must be remembered, that this great style itself is
artificial in the highest degree: it presupposes in the
spectator, a cultivated and prepared artificial state of mind.
It is an absurdity, therefore, to suppose that we are born
with this taste, though we are with the seeds of it, which,
by the heat and kindly influence of this genius, may be
ripened in us.
A late Philosopher and Critic
[18] has observed, speaking of
taste, that we are on no account to expect that fine things
should descend to us—our taste, if possible, must be made
to ascend to them. The same learned writer recommends
to us even to feign a relish, till we find a relish come; and
 [Pg 263]
feel, that what began in fiction, terminates in reality. If
there be in our Art anything of that agreement or compact,
such as I apprehend there is in music, with which the
Critic is necessarily required previously to be acquainted,
in order to form a correct judgment: the comparison with
this art will illustrate what I have said on these points,
and tend to show the probability, we may say the certainty,
that men are not born with a relish for those arts in their
most refined state, which, as they cannot understand, they
cannot be impressed with their effects. This great style of
Michel Angelo is as far removed from the simple representation
of the common objects of nature, as the most
refined Italian music is from the inartificial notes of nature,
from whence they both profess to originate. But without
such a supposed compact, we may be very confident that
the highest state of refinement in either of those arts will
not be relished without a long and industrious attention.
In pursuing this great Art, it must be acknowledged
that we labour under greater difficulties than those who
were born in the age of its discovery, and whose minds
from their infancy were habituated to this style; who
learned it as language, as their mother tongue. They had
no mean taste to unlearn; they needed no persuasive
discourse to allure them to a favourable reception of it, no
abstruse investigation of its principles to convince them of
the great latent truths on which it is founded. We are
constrained, in these latter days, to have recourse to a sort
of Grammar and Dictionary, as the only means of recovering
a dead language. It was by them learned by rote, and
perhaps better learned that way than by precept.
The style of Michel Angelo, which I have compared to
language, and which may, poetically speaking, be called the
language of the Gods, now no longer exists, as it did in the
 [Pg 264]
fifteenth century; yet, with the aid of diligence, we may in
a great measure supply the deficiency which I mentioned—of
not having his works so perpetually before our eyes—by
having recourse to casts from his models and designs in
Sculpture; to drawings, or even copies of those drawings;
to prints, which, however ill executed, still convey something
by which this taste may be formed, and a relish may
be fixed and established in our minds for this grand style
of invention. Some examples of this kind we have in the
Academy, and I sincerely wish there were more, that the
younger students might in their first nourishment imbibe
this taste, whilst others, though settled in the practice of
the commonplace style of Painters, might infuse, by this
means, a grandeur into their works.
I shall now make some remarks on the course which I
think most proper to be pursued in such a study. I wish
you not to go so much to the derivative streams, as to the
fountain-head; though the copies are not to be neglected;
because they may give you hints in what manner you may
copy; and how the genius of one man may be made to fit
the peculiar manner of another.
To recover this lost taste, I would recommend young
Artists to study the works of Michel Angelo, as he himself
did the works of the ancient Sculptors; he began when a
child a copy of a mutilated Satyr's head, and finished in
his model what was wanting in the original. In the same
manner, the first exercise that I would recommend to the
young artist when he first attempts invention is, to select
every figure, if possible, from the inventions of Michel
Angelo. If such borrowed figures will not bend to his
purpose, and he is constrained to make a change to supply
a figure himself, that figure will necessarily be in the same
style with the rest; and his taste will by this means be
 [Pg 265]
naturally initiated, and nursed in the lap of grandeur. He
will sooner perceive what constitutes this grand style by one
practical trial than by a thousand speculations, and he will
in some sort procure to himself the advantage which in
these later ages has been denied him—the advantage of
having the greatest of Artists for his master and instructor.
The next lesson should be, to change the purpose of the
figures without changing the attitude, as Tintoret has done
with the Samson of Michel Angelo. Instead of the figure
which Samson bestrides, he has placed an eagle under him:
and instead of the jaw-bone, thunder and lightning in his
right hand; and thus it becomes a Jupiter. Titian, in the
same manner, has taken the figure which represents God
dividing the light from the darkness in the vault of the
Capella Sestina, and has introduced it in the famous battle
of Cadore, so much celebrated by Vasari; and extraordinary
as it may seem, it is here converted to a general
falling from his horse. A real judge who should look at
this picture would immediately pronounce the attitude of
that figure to be in a greater style than any other figure of
the composition. These two instances may be sufficient,
though many more might be given in their works, as well
as in those of other great Artists.
When the Student has been habituated to this grand
conception of the Art, when the relish for this style is
established, makes a part of himself, and is woven into his
mind, he will, by this time, have got a power of selecting
from whatever occurs in nature that is grand, and corresponds
with that taste which he has now acquired, and
will pass over whatever is commonplace and insipid. He
may then bring to the mart such works of his own proper
invention as may enrich and increase the general stock of
invention in our Art.
[Pg 266]
 I am confident of the truth and propriety of the advice
which I have recommended; at the same time I am aware
how much by this advice I have laid myself open to the
sarcasms of those critics who imagine our Art to be a
matter of inspiration. But I should be sorry it should
appear even to myself that I wanted that courage which I
have recommended to the Students in another way; equal
courage, perhaps, is required in the adviser and the advised;
they both must equally dare and bid defiance to narrow
criticism and vulgar opinion.
That the Art has been in a gradual state of decline, from
the age of Michel Angelo to the present, must be acknowledged;
and we may reasonably impute this declension to
the same cause to which the ancient Critics and Philosophers
have imputed the corruption of eloquence. Indeed,
the same causes are likely at all times and in all ages to
produce the same effects; indolence—not taking the same
pains as our great predecessors took—desiring to find a
shorter way—are the general imputed causes. The words
of Petronius
[19] are very remarkable. After opposing the
natural chaste beauty of the eloquence of former ages to
the strained, inflated style then in fashion, "neither," says
he, "has the Art of Painting had a better fate, after the
boldness of the Egyptians had found out a compendious
way to execute so great an art."
By compendious, I understand him to mean a mode of
Painting such as has infected the style of the later Painters
of Italy and France; commonplace, without thought, and
with as little trouble, working as by a receipt; in contradistinction
to that style for which even a relish cannot
be acquired without care and long attention, and most
 [Pg 267]
certainly the power of executing cannot be obtained without
the most laborious application.
I have endeavoured to stimulate the ambition of Artists
to tread in this great path of glory, and, as well as I can,
have pointed out the track which leads to it, and have at
the same time told them the price at which it may be
obtained. It is an ancient saying, that labour is the price
which the gods have set upon everything valuable.
The great Artist who has been so much the subject of the
present Discourse, was distinguished even from his infancy
for his indefatigable diligence; and this was continued
through his whole life, till prevented by extreme old age.
The poorest of men, as he observed himself, did not labour
from necessity more than he did from choice. Indeed,
from all the circumstances related of his life, he appears
not to have had the least conception that his art was to be
acquired by any other means than great labour; and yet
he, of all men that ever lived, might make the greatest
pretensions to the efficacy of native genius and inspiration.
I have no doubt that he would have thought it no disgrace
that it should be said of him, as he himself said of Raffaelle,
that he did not possess his art from nature, but by long
study.
[20]
 He was conscious that the great excellence to
which he arrived was gained by dint of labour, and was
unwilling to have it thought that any transcendent skill,
however natural its effects might seem, could be purchased
at a cheaper price than he had paid for it. This seems to
have been the true drift of his observation. We cannot
suppose it made with any intention of depreciating the
genius of Raffaelle, of whom he always spoke, as Coudivi
says, with the greatest respect: though they were rivals,
no such illiberality existed between them; and Raffaelle,
 [Pg 268]
on his part, entertained the greatest veneration for Michel
Angelo, as appears from the speech which is recorded of
him, that he congratulated himself, and thanked God, that
he was born in the same age with that painter.
If the high esteem and veneration in which Michel
Angelo has been held by all nations and in all ages should
be put to the account of prejudice, it must still be granted
that those prejudices could not have been entertained without
a cause: the ground of our prejudice, then, becomes the
source of our admiration. But from whatever it proceeds,
or whatever it is called, it will not, I hope, be thought presumptuous
in me to appear in the train, I cannot say of
his imitators, but of his admirers. I have taken another
course, one more suited to my abilities, and to the taste of
the times in which I live. Yet however unequal I feel
myself to that attempt, were I now to begin the world
again, I would tread in the steps of that great master: to
kiss the hem of his garment, to catch the slightest of his
perfections, would be glory and distinction enough for an
ambitious man.
I feel a self-congratulation in knowing myself capable of
such sensations as he intended to excite. I reflect, not
without vanity, that these Discourses bear testimony of
my admiration of that truly divine man; and I should
desire that the last words which I should pronounce in this
Academy, and from this place, might be the name of—Michel
Angelo.
[21]
[Pg 269]
[Pg 271]
 
Sir—I was much pleased with your ridicule of those
shallow Critics, whose judgment, though often right as far
as it goes, yet reaches only to inferior beauties; and who,
unable to comprehend the whole, judge only by parts, and
from thence determine the merit of extensive works. But
there is another kind of Critic still worse, who judges by
narrow rules, and those too often false, and which though
they should be true, and founded on nature, will lead him
but a very little way towards the just estimation of the
sublime beauties in works of Genius; for whatever part of
an art can be executed or criticised by rules, that part is
no longer the work of Genius, which implies excellence out
of the reach of rules. For my own part, I profess myself
an Idler, and love to give my judgment, such as it is, from
my immediate perceptions, without much fatigue of thinking;
and I am of opinion, that if a man has not those perceptions
right, it will be vain for him to endeavour to
supply their place by rules; which may enable him to talk
more learnedly, but not to distinguish more acutely.
Another reason which has lessened my affection for the
 [Pg 272]
study of Criticism is, that Critics, so far as I have observed,
debar themselves from receiving any pleasure from the
polite arts, at the same time that they profess to love and
admire them; for these rules being always uppermost, give
them such a propensity to criticise, that instead of giving
up the reins of their imagination into their author's hands,
their frigid minds are employed in examining whether the
performance be according to the rules of art.
To those who are resolved to be Critics in spite of nature,
and at the same time have no great disposition to much
reading and study, I would recommend to assume the
character of Connoisseur, which may be purchased at a
much cheaper rate than that of a Critic in poetry. The
remembrance of a few names of Painters, with their general
characters, and a few rules of the Academy, which they
may pick up among the Painters, will go a great way
towards making a very notable Connoisseur.
With a gentleman of this cast I visited last week the
Cartoons at Hampton Court; he was just returned from
Italy, a Connoisseur, of course, and of course his mouth full
of nothing but the Grace of Raffaelle, the Purity of
Domenichino, the Learning of Poussin, the Air of Guido,
the greatness of Taste of the Caraccis, and the Sublimity
and grand Contorno of Michel Angelo; with all the rest of
the cant of Criticism, which he emitted with that volubility
which generally those orators have, who annex no ideas to
their words.
As we were passing through the rooms, in our way to
the Gallery, I made him observe a whole length of Charles
the First, by Vandyke, as a perfect representation of the
character as well as the figure of the man. He agreed it
was very fine, but it wanted spirit and contrast, and had not
the flowing line, without which a figure could not possibly
 [Pg 273]
be graceful. When we entered the Gallery, I thought
I could perceive him recollecting his Rules by which he was
to criticise Raffaelle. I shall pass over his observation of
the boats being too little, and other criticisms of that kind,
till we arrived at St. Paul preaching. "This," says he, "is
esteemed the most excellent of all the Cartoons: what
nobleness, what dignity there is in that figure of St. Paul!
and yet what an addition to that nobleness could Raffaelle
have given, had the art of Contrast been known in his
time; but above all, the flowing line, which constitutes
Grace and Beauty! You would not then have seen an upright
figure standing equally on both legs, and both hands
stretched forward in the same direction, and his drapery,
to all appearance, without the least art of disposition."
The following Picture is the Charge to Peter. "Here,"
says he, "are twelve upright figures; what a pity it is that
Raffaelle was not acquainted with the pyramidal principle!
he would then have contrived the figures in the middle to
have been on higher ground, or the figures at the extremities
stooping or lying; which would not only have formed the
group into the shape of a pyramid, but likewise contrasted
the standing figures. Indeed," added he, "I have often
lamented that so great a genius as Raffaelle had not lived
in this enlightened age, since the art has been reduced to
principles, and had his education in one of the modern
Academies; what glorious works might we then have
expected from his divine pencil!"
I shall trouble you no longer with my friend's observations,
which, I suppose, you are now able to continue by
yourself. It is curious to observe, that at the same time
that great admiration is pretended for a name of fixed
reputation, objections are raised against those very qualities
by which that great name was acquired.
[Pg 274]
 These Critics are continually lamenting that Raffaelle
had not the Colouring and Harmony of Rubens, or the
Light and Shadow of Rembrandt, without considering how
much the gay harmony of the former, and affectation of the
latter, would take from the Dignity of Raffaelle; and yet
Rubens had great Harmony, and Rembrandt understood
Light and Shadow; but what may be an excellence in
a lower class of Painting, becomes a blemish in a higher;
as the quick, sprightly turn, which is the life and beauty of
epigrammatic compositions, would but ill suit with the
majesty of heroic Poetry.
To conclude; I would not be thought to infer from
anything that has been said, that Rules are absolutely
unnecessary, but to censure scrupulosity, a servile attention
to minute exactness, which is sometimes inconsistent with
higher excellence, and is lost in the blaze of expanded
genius.
I do not know whether you will think Painting a general
subject. By inserting this letter, perhaps you will incur
the censure a man would deserve, whose business being to
entertain a whole room, should turn his back on a company,
and talk to a particular person.
[Pg 275]
Sir—Your acceptance of a former letter on Painting
gives me encouragement to offer a few more sketches on the
same subject.
Amongst the Painters and the writers on Painting there
is one maxim universally admitted and continually inculcated.
Imitate Nature is the invariable rule; but I know
none who have explained in what manner this rule is to be
understood; the consequence of which is, that every one
takes it in the most obvious sense—that objects are
represented naturally, when they have such relief that they
seem real. It may appear strange, perhaps, to hear this
sense of the rule disputed; but it must be considered, that
if the excellency of a Painter consisted only in this kind of
imitation, Painting must lose its rank, and be no longer
considered as a liberal art, and sister to Poetry: this
imitation being merely mechanical, in which the slowest
intellect is always sure to succeed best; for the Painter of
genius cannot stoop to drudgery, in which the understanding
has no part; and what pretence has the Art to claim
kindred with Poetry, but by its power over the imagination?
To this power the Painter of genius directs his aim; in this
sense he studies Nature, and often arrives at his end, even
by being unnatural, in the confined sense of the word.
[Pg 276]
 The grand style of Painting requires this minute attention
to be carefully avoided, and must be kept as separate from
it as the style of Poetry from that of History. Poetical
ornaments destroy that air of truth and plainness which
ought to characterise History; but the very being of
Poetry consists in departing from this plain narration, and
adopting every ornament that will warm the imagination.
To desire to see the excellencies of each style united, to
mingle the Dutch with the Italian School, is to join contrarieties
which cannot subsist together, and which destroy
the efficacy of each other. The Italian attends only to the
invariable, the great and general ideas which are fixed and
inherent in universal Nature; the Dutch, on the contrary,
to literal truth and a minute exactness in the detail, as I
may say, of Nature, modified by accident. The attention
to these petty peculiarities is the very cause of this
naturalness so much admired in the Dutch pictures, which,
if we suppose it to be a beauty is certainly of a lower
order, that ought to give place to a beauty of a superior
kind, since one cannot be obtained but by departing from
the other.
If my opinion were asked concerning the works of
Michel Angelo, whether they would receive any advantage
from possessing this mechanical merit, I should not scruple
to say they would lose, in a great measure, the effect which
they now have on every mind susceptible of great and noble
ideas. His works may be said to be all genius and soul;
and why should they be loaded with heavy matter, which
can only counteract his purpose by retarding the progress
of the imagination?
If this opinion should be thought one of the wild
extravagancies of enthusiasm, I shall only say, that those
who censure it are not conversant in the works of the great
 [Pg 277]
Masters. It is very difficult to determine the exact degree
of enthusiasm that the arts of Painting and Poetry may
admit. There may perhaps be too great an indulgence, as
well as too great a restraint of imagination; and if the one
produces incoherent monsters, the other produces what is
full as bad, lifeless insipidity. An intimate knowledge of
the passions and good sense, but not common sense, must at
last determine its limits. It has been thought, and I
believe with reason, that Michel Angelo sometimes transgressed
those limits; and I think I have seen figures by
him, of which it was very difficult to determine whether
they were in the highest degree sublime or extremely
ridiculous. Such faults may be said to be the ebullition of
genius; but at least he had this merit, that he never was
insipid; and whatever passion his works may excite, they
will always escape contempt.
What I have had under consideration is the sublimest
style, particularly that of Michel Angelo, the Homer of
Painting. Other kinds may admit of this naturalness,
which of the lowest kind is the chief merit; but in
Painting, as in Poetry, the highest style has the least of
common nature.
One may safely recommend a little more enthusiasm to
the modern Painters; too much is certainly not the vice of
the present age. The Italians seem to have been continually
declining in this respect from the time of Michel
Angelo to that of Carlo Maratti, and from thence to the
very bathos of insipidity to which they are now sunk; so
that there is no need of remarking, that where I mentioned
the Italian Painters in opposition to the Dutch, I mean not
the moderns, but the heads of the old Roman and Bolognian
Schools; nor did I mean to include in my idea of an Italian
Painter, the Venetian School, which may be said to be the
 [Pg 278]
Dutch part of the Italian Genius. I have only to add a
word of advice to the Painters—that however excellent
they may be in painting naturally, they would not flatter
themselves very much upon it; and to the Connoisseurs,
that when they see a cat or a fiddle painted so finely, that,
as the phrase is, it looks as if you could take it up, they
would not for that reason immediately compare the Painter
to Raffaelle and Michel Angelo.
[Pg 279]
Sir—Discoursing in my last letter on the different practice
of the Italian and Dutch Painters, I observed that
"the Italian Painter attends only to the invariable, the
great, and general ideas, which are fixed and inherent in
universal nature."
I was led into the subject of this letter by endeavouring
to fix the original cause of this conduct of the Italian
Masters. If it can be proved that by this choice they
selected the most beautiful part of the creation, it will
show how much their principles are founded on reason, and,
at the same time, discover the origin of our ideas of beauty.
I suppose it will be easily granted that no man can judge
whether any animal be beautiful in its kind, or deformed,
who has seen only one of that species; this is as conclusive
in regard to the human figure; so that if a man, born
blind, were to recover his sight, and the most beautiful
woman were brought before him, he could not determine
whether she was handsome or not; nor if the most beautiful
and most deformed were produced, could he any better
determine to which he should give the preference, having
seen only those two. To distinguish beauty, then, implies
the having seen many individuals of that species. If it is
asked, how is more skill acquired by the observation of
 [Pg 280]
greater numbers? I answer, that, in consequence of having
seen many, the power is acquired, even without seeking
after it, of distinguishing between accidental blemishes and
excrescences which are continually varying the surface of
Nature's works, and the invariable general form which
Nature most frequently produces, and always seems to
intend in her productions.
Thus amongst the blades of grass or leaves of the same
tree, though no two can be found exactly alike, the general
form is invariable: a Naturalist, before he chose one as a
sample, would examine many; since if he took the first
that occurred, it might have by accident or otherwise such
a form as that it would scarce be known to belong to that
species; he selects as the Painter does, the most beautiful,
that is, the most general form of nature.
Every species of the animal as well as the vegetable
creation may be said to have a fixed or determinate form,
towards which Nature is continually inclining, like various
lines terminating in the centre; or it may be compared to
pendulums vibrating in different directions over one central
point: and as they all cross the centre, though only one
passes through any other point, so it will be found that
perfect beauty is oftener produced by Nature than deformity:
I do not mean than deformity in general, but than
any one kind of deformity. To instance in a particular
part of a feature; the line that forms a ridge of the nose is
beautiful when it is straight; this, then, is the central form,
which is oftener found than either concave, convex, or any
other irregular form that shall be proposed. As we are
then more accustomed to beauty than deformity, we may
conclude that to be the reason why we approve and admire
it, as we approve and admire customs and fashions of dress
for no other reason than that we are used to them; so that
 [Pg 281]
though habit and custom cannot be said to be the cause of
beauty, it is certainly the cause of our liking it; and I
have no doubt but that if we were more used to deformity
than beauty, deformity would then lose the idea now
annexed to it, and take that of beauty: as if the whole
world should agree, that yes and no should change their
meaning; yes would then deny, and no would affirm.
Whoever undertakes to proceed further in this argument,
and endeavours to fix a general criterion of beauty
respecting different species, or to show why one species is
more beautiful than another, it will be required from him
first to prove that one species is really more beautiful than
another. That we prefer one to the other, and with very
good reason, will be readily granted; but it does not follow
from thence that we think it a more beautiful form; for
we have no criterion of form by which to determine our
judgment. He who says a swan is more beautiful than a
dove, means little more than that he has more pleasure in
seeing a swan than a dove, either from the stateliness of its
motions, or its being a more rare bird; and he who gives
the preference to the dove, does it from some association
of ideas of innocence which he always annexes to the
dove; but if he pretends to defend the preference he gives
to one or the other by endeavouring to prove that this more
beautiful form proceeds from a particular gradation of
magnitude, undulation of a curve, or direction of a line, or
whatever other conceit of his imagination he shall fix on, as
a criterion of form, he will be continually contradicting
himself, and find at last that the great Mother of Nature
will not be subjected to such narrow rules. Among the
various reasons why we prefer one part of her works to
another, the most general, I believe, is habit and custom;
custom makes, in a certain sense, white black, and black
 [Pg 282]
white; it is custom alone determines our preference of the
colour of the Europeans to the Ethiopians, and they, for
the same reason, prefer their own colour to ours. I suppose
nobody will doubt, if one of their Painters were to paint
the Goddess of Beauty, but that he would represent her
black, with thick lips, flat nose, and woolly hair; and, it
seems to me, he would act very unnaturally if he did not,
for by what criterion will anyone dispute the propriety of
his idea? We indeed say that the form and colour of the
European is preferable to that of the Ethiopian; but I
know of no other reason we have for it, but that we are
more accustomed to it. It is absurd to say that beauty is
possessed of attractive powers, which irresistibly seize the
corresponding mind with love and admiration, since that
argument is equally conclusive in favour of the white and
the black philosophers.
The black and white nations must, in respect of beauty,
be considered as of different kinds, at least a different
species of the same kind; from one of which to the other,
as I observed, no inference can be drawn.
Novelty is said to be one of the causes of beauty. That
novelty is a very sufficient reason why we should admire is
not denied; but because it is uncommon, is it therefore
beautiful? The beauty that is produced by colour, as
when we prefer one bird to another, though of the same
form, on account of its colour, has nothing to do with the
argument, which reaches only to form. I have here considered
the word Beauty as being properly applied to form
alone. There is a necessity of fixing this confined sense;
for there can be no argument, if the sense of the word is
extended to everything that is approved. A rose may as
well be said to be beautiful because it has a fine smell, as
a bird because of its colour. When we apply the word
 [Pg 283]
Beauty, we do not mean always by it a more beautiful form,
but something valuable on account of its rarity, usefulness,
colour, or any other property. A horse is said to be a
beautiful animal; but had a horse as few good qualities
as a tortoise, I do not imagine that he would then be
deemed beautiful.
A fitness to the end proposed is said to be another cause
of beauty; but supposing we were proper judges of what
form is the most proper in an animal to constitute strength
or swiftness, we always determine concerning its beauty,
before we exert our understanding to judge of its fitness.
From what has been said, it may be inferred, that the
works of Nature, if we compare one species with another,
are all equally beautiful, and that preference is given from
custom or some association of ideas; and that, in creatures
of the same species, beauty is the medium or centre of all
its various forms.
To conclude, then, by way of corollary: if it has been
proved that the Painter, by attending to the invariable and
general ideas of Nature, produce beauty, he must, by
regarding minute particularities, and accidental discriminations,
deviate from the universal rule, and pollute his
canvas with deformity.
Printed by Walter Scott,
Felling, Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
In SHILLING Monthly Volumes, Square 8vo. Well printed on fine
toned paper, with Red-line Border, and strongly bound in Cloth. Each
Volume contains from 300 to 350 pages. With Introductory Notices
by William Sharp, Mathilde
 Blind, Walter Lewin, John
Hogben, A. J. Symington, Joseph
 Skipsey, Eva Hope, John
Richmond, Ernest Rhys, Percy E.
 Pinkerton, Mrs. Garden,
Dean Carrington, Dr. J.
 Bradshaw, Frederick Cooper, Hon.
Roden Noel, J. Addington Symonds, G.
 Willis Cooke, Eric
Mackay, Eric S. Robertson, William
 Tirebuck, Stuart
J. Reid, Mrs. Freiligrath Kroeker, J.
 Logie Robertson, M.A.,
Samuel Waddington, etc., etc.
 
 
ALREADY ISSUED—
LIFE OF LONGFELLOW. By Professor ERIC S. ROBERTSON.
"The story of the poet's life is well told. . . . The remarks on Longfellow as
a translator are excellent."—Saturday Review.
"No better life of Longfellow has been published."—Glasgow Herald.
LIFE OF COLERIDGE. By HALL CAINE.
The Scotsman says—"It is a capital book. . . . Written throughout with
spirit and great literary skill. The bibliography is unusually full, and adds to
the value of the work."
LIFE OF DICKENS. By FRANK T. MARZIALS.
"An interesting and well-written biography."—Scotsman.
LIFE OF DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI. By JOSEPH KNIGHT.
LIFE OF SAMUEL JOHNSON. By Col. F. GRANT.
LIFE OF DARWIN. By G. T. BETTANY.
CHARLOTTE BRONTË. By AUGUSTINE BIRRELL.
LIFE OF THOMAS CARLYLE. By RICHARD GARNETT, LL.D.
LIFE OF ADAM SMITH. By R. B. HALDANE, M.P.
LIFE OF KEATS. By W. M. ROSSETTI.
 
Ready October 25th.
LIFE OF SHELLEY. By WILLIAM SHARP.
 
To be followed on November 25th by
LIFE OF SMOLLETT. By DAVID HANNAY.
Volumes in preparation by Austin Dobson, Canon Venables,
James Sime, Edmund Gosse, Professor Knight, Professor
Yonge, John Stuart Blackie, etc.
LIBRARY EDITION OF "GREAT WRITERS."
An Issue of all the Volumes in this Series will be published, printed
on large paper of extra quality, in handsome binding, Demy 8vo, price
2s. 6d. per volume.
"A sound journal, the monthly advent of which will be awaited with
feelings of satisfaction and pleasure."—Bath Chronicle.
"To the student of nature who has had few opportunities of study,
just such a magazine as this supplies a felt want. We trust that an
appreciative public will ensure the success of this new magazine."—Midlothian
Journal.
"This neatly got-up magazine seems to supply a vacant place in
the ranks of serial literature, and to supply it well."—Nottingham
Guardian.
Part III. Ready October 25th.
Annual Subscription—Seven Shillings. Post free.
London: Walter Scott, 24 Warwick Lane, Paternoster Row.

[1] Lib. 2, in Timæum Platonis, as cited by Junius de Pictura
Veterum.—R.

[2] Essays, p. 252, edit. 1625.

[3] "Those," says Quintilian, "who are taken with the outward show
of things, think that there is more beauty in persons who are trimmed,
curled, and painted, than uncorrupt nature can give; as if beauty were
merely the effect of the corruption of manners."—R.

[4] Sed non qui maxime imitandus, etiam solus imitandus est
Quintilian.

[5] Dr. Goldsmith.

[6] "Nulla ars, non alterius artis, aut mater,
aut popinqua est."—Tertull
as cited by Junius.

[7] "Omnes artes quæ ad humanitatem pertinent, habent quoddam
commune vinculum, et quasi cognatione inter se continentur."—Cicero.

[8] "Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou
standest is holy ground."—Exodus iii. 5.

[9] Discourses II. and VI.

[10] This was inadvertently said. I did not recollect the admirable
treatise On the Sublime and Beautiful.

[11] Sir William Chambers.

[12] In the Loggia dei Lauzi at Florence.—Note, Ed.

[13] Discourse III.

[14] In Ben Jonson's "Catiline" we find this aphorism, with a slight
variation:—


[15] The addition of accio denotes contempt, or some deformity or
imperfection attending the person to whom it is applied.
[16]

[17] Mr. Hodges.

[18] James Harris.

[19] Pictura quoque non alium exitum fecit, postquam Ægyptiorum
audacia tam magnæ artis compendiariam invenit.

[20] Che Raffaelle non ebbe quest' arte
da natura, ma per lungo studio.

[21] Unfortunately for mankind, these were the last words pronounced
by this great Painter from the Academical chair. He died about
fourteen months after this Discourse was delivered.

[Pg v]
[Pg vii]
Sir Joshua Reynolds—to whom is the name unfamiliar?
to whom, hearing it, does not appear in mental
vision the equally familiar autograph portrait of the deaf
artist? This picture, painted originally for Mr. Thrale, shows us
the painter "in his habit as he lived," spectacles on nose, ear-trumpet
in hand—in short, exactly as he was known to his
intimates in his latter days in domestic life. Another autograph
picture of the artist in younger life hangs to-day in the National
Gallery. Close by is seen the portrait by the same hand of his
equally illustrious friend, bluff, common-sense Dr. Johnson,
whom he represents as reading and holding his book close to
his eyes after the manner of the short-sighted. It would seem
that this mode of representation roused Dr. Johnson's ire. "It
is not friendly," he remarked, "to hand down to posterity the
imperfections of any person." This comment of the doctor's
is equally characteristic of the man and his times. At so low
an ebb was art and art criticism in those days, that people less
learned than Johnson failed to grasp the truth of Reynolds'
dictum, now become almost a commonplace, that a portrait
but receives enhanced value as a human and historical document
if it makes us acquainted with any natural peculiarity that
characterises the person delineated. Johnson rebelled against
the notion he deduced from this circumstance that Sir Joshua
would make him known to posterity by his defects only; he
vowed to Mrs. Thrale he would not be so known. "Let Sir
Joshua do his worst, . . . he may paint himself as deaf as he
chooses, but I will not be blinking Sam."
[Pg viii]
 In this anecdote, in this juxtaposition of two great names,
each thoroughly representative of their epoch, can be traced both
the cause of Sir Joshua's success, and of the difficulties against
which he had to strive. Reynolds may with truth be named
the father of modern English art, for before him English art
can scarcely be said to have existed, since what was produced
on British soil was chiefly the work of foreigners. The records
even of this older art are sufficiently barren. It would appear
that in the reign of Henry III. some foreign artists were invited
over to decorate Winchester Castle, but of them and their works
little trace remains. At the time when Italy was producing her
masterpieces no native artist of whom we have record
bedaubed canvas in Great Britain; and when the pomp-loving
Henry VIII. wished to vie with his great contemporaries,
Charles V., Leo X., and Francis I., he had to turn to the Continent
for the men to execute his desires. That he himself had
no true taste or love for the arts is well known; it was purely
the spirit of emulation that prompted him. How crude were
his own art notions may be gathered from the written instructions
he left for a monument to his memory. They serve
equally to illustrate the state of public taste in England at a
period when Italy was inspired by the genius of Michael Angelo,
of Raphael, and of Titian. The memorandum directs that
"the king shall appear on horseback, of the stature of a goodly
man; while over him shall appear the image of God the
Father, holding the king's soul in his left hand, and his right
extended in the act of benediction." This work was to have
been executed in bronze, and was considerably advanced when
Elizabeth put a stop to its progress. It was afterwards sold by
the Puritan parliament for six hundred pounds. Still, for all his
own artistic incapacity, it is more than probable that had not
Henry, for private domestic reasons, adopted the Reformed
faith, England under his reign might have witnessed a prosperous
art period, which, it is true, would not have been native art,
but might have given impetus towards its birth. Thackeray
was fond of saying that it was no idle speculation to suppose
what would have happened had Napoleon won the battle of
 [Pg ix]
Waterloo. To those who love such fruitless mental sports it
may prove no idle speculation to ponder what would have
happened had Henry's amorous desires not led him to liberate
himself and his nation from the bosom of the Catholic Church.
Enough that the facts are there, and that with the first ardour
of Protestant zeal there also made itself felt a chilling influence,
casting a blight over literature and art, and more especially over
art, till then so almost exclusively the handmaiden of religion,
that a work of art came to be regarded as a symbol and
remembrance of popery, and "painting and sculpture were
conscientiously discouraged as tending to encourage idolatry
and superstition and to minister to passion and luxury." Queen
Mary, Elizabeth, and James I., each in their way gave some
encouragement to foreign artists, such as Moro, Zucchero, and
Mytens, but their patronage was purely personal, and did not
operate upon the taste of the nation. More extended influence
was exercised by Charles I. This monarch had a real love and
understanding for art, and under him Rubens and Vandyke
employed their pencils. He also bought many pictures, and
encouraged his nobles to do the like. At least, among the
upper classes the narrow Puritan art views were greatly counteracted.
But Charles had to lay his head upon the block, and
Puritanism had fuller and more unchecked sway than ever
before, creating influences which to this very day are not wholly
extinct, though happily in their death throes. Their latest survival
is the "British Matron" who writes to the Times denouncing
modern pictures that displease her individual taste, and the
artists, happily rare and few, who preach that the study of
the nude and anatomy is no essential part of a painter's
education.
After the death of Charles a general wreck of works of art
ensued. Whatever survived the bigotry of the Puritans was
sacrificed to supply their pecuniary necessities. A curious
mixture of superstition and covetousness was displayed. The
journals of the House of Commons of 1645 afford some
interesting reading like the following:—"Ordered: that all pictures
and sketches as are without superstition shall be forthwith
 [Pg x]
sold for the benefit of Ireland and the north. Ordered: that
all such pictures as have the representation of the Virgin
Mary upon them shall be forthwith burnt. Ordered: that all
such pictures as have the representation of the Second Person
of the Trinity upon them shall be forthwith burnt." It seems,
however, that these orders were not quite strictly executed.
The Puritan conscience having been relieved by this edict,
many prohibited pictures were sold at a high price to swell the
coffers of the zealots. After this it is needless to remark that
art did not flourish under the Commonwealth. With the Restoration
we find Lely practising his method of portrait-painting,
succeeded by Sir Godfrey Kneller, neither, however, being
Englishmen. The era of George I. produced as native
painters, Richardson and Sir James Thornhill; under George
II. Hudson flourished; it was reserved to the long reign of
George III. to see the birth of what can be truly termed art,
of what alone can measure itself with the nations of the Continent.
Hogarth was the first upon the list, but Hogarth,
inimitable as he is, was rather a satirist than an artist in the
full acceptation of the term. Of beauty of draughtmanship, of
colour, we find next to nothing in his canvasses. Together
with him flourished Hudson, and a little later Wilson and
Gainsborough, who, like himself, and, indeed, like all English
artists up to that time, had imbibed their teaching through the
medium of Flanders, producing exact and careful work—indeed,
in Gainsborough's case, work of real beauty—but lacking on the
side of poetical feeling and elevation. Such a method must
be regarded as the infancy of art, its purely observant but
unthinking side. It was reserved to Reynolds to open out to
English understanding the vista of Italian art, with its glories,
its perfections, and it is owing to his Discourses, even more
than to his works, that this mighty revolution came about; a
revolution so mighty, so important, that for its sake alone, had
he never limned a canvas, the name of Reynolds should stand
forth proudly in the annals of England. It was he who, coming
to Italy, already in mature manhood, as a finished artist in the
eyes of his countrymen, had the perception and the courage to
 [Pg xi]
admit before the works of Raphael and Michael Angelo that it
was needful for him "to become as a little child" and recommence
his studies upon principles of which hitherto he was
ignorant.
Joshua Reynolds was born at Plympton, in Devonshire,
July 16th, 1723, the tenth child of the Rev. Samuel Reynolds,
rector of Plympton and principal of the local grammar school.
His father was the boy's only instructor. He had destined
him, it would seem, for the medical profession, and Reynolds
is known to have said in latter life that if this design
had been carried out, "he should have felt the same determination
to become the most eminent physician as he then felt
to be the first painter of his age and country." It was, indeed,
his decided opinion (an opinion modern psychology would
hardly endorse) that "the superiority attainable in any pursuit
whatever does not originate in an innate propensity of the
mind for that pursuit in particular, but depends on the general
strength of the intellect, and on the intense and constant
application of that strength to a specific purpose." He held
that ambition was the cause of eminence, but that accident
pointed out the means. It is impossible to decide whether or
no Reynolds illustrates his own theory, but from what he said
in private, and also in his Discourses, many erroneous conclusions
are drawn as to this point. As his biographer,
Northcote, justly observes, Reynolds "never meant to deny the
existence of genius, supposing the term to denote a greater
degree of natural capacity in some minds than others; but he
always contended strenuously against the vulgar and absurd
interpretation of the word, which supposes that the same person
may be a man of genius in one respect, but utterly unfit for,
and almost an idiot in everything else; and that this singular and
unaccountable faculty is a gift born with us, which does not
need the assistance of pains or culture, time or accident, to
improve and perfect it."
Whatever Reynolds' private views on the subject of native
taste asserting itself in the young, he himself undoubtedly
showed a liking for art at an early age, and his taste was
 [Pg xii]
fostered by his father, himself an amateur possessing a small
collection of anatomical and other prints. If Joshua's love of
drawing did not interfere with his other studies, his father did
not check it. Thus there is extant to this day a perspective
drawing of a bookcase under which Mr. Reynolds has written,
"Done by Joshua out of pure idleness." It is on the back of a
Latin exercise. He copied such prints as he could find in his
father's library, Jacob Cats's Book of Emblems furnishing
him with the richest store. This his grandmother, who was a
native of Holland, had contributed to the family bookshelves.
When he was only eight years old he read with eagerness
The Jesuit's Perspective, and so thoroughly did he master its
rules that he never afterwards had to study any other works on
the subject. An application of these rules to practice is preserved
in a drawing of the grammar school at Plympton. It
was so well done that the father exclaimed, "Now this exemplifies
what the author of the 'Perspective' asserts, that by
observing the rules laid down in this book a man may do
wonders, for this is wonderful."
Visitors to the Reynolds' Exhibition, which was held in the
Grosvenor Gallery in 1884, may remember this little drawing,
which was among the exhibits.
Portraits of his family and friends next occupied Reynolds'
youthful pencil, while his love of art was influenced by reading
Richardson's Treatise of Painting. This book first awoke in
him his enthusiastic adoration of Raffaelle (of whose works he
had till then seen nothing), a love he cherished until the end of
his days. At seventeen his liking for art showing no diminution,
the father decided he should follow a painter's career, and
took him to London, where he placed him under Hudson, the
most eminent artist England could then boast. By a curious
accident he was entered at Hudson's on St. Luke's day, the
patron saint of art and artists. Hudson set him at work at
copying, a system Sir Joshua afterwards strenuously condemned.
His words on this matter, written in the 2nd Discourse, should
be "read, marked, learned, and inwardly digested" by all art
professors and students—they are golden words of wisdom.
[Pg xiii]
 Notwithstanding the master's inadequate teaching, the pupil
made such progress that he aroused Hudson's jealousy, who,
after two years' apprenticeship, found a pretext for dismissing
him. Reynolds, with what he had learnt, continued to paint
down in Devonshire, taking the portraits of the local magnates.
How conventional his style was at first is proved by the following
anecdote. It was a favourite attitude with the portrait-painters
of the time to represent their model with one hand in
waistcoat and the hat under the arm, convenient because it dispensed
the artist from the difficult task of painting the hand.
Now it happened that one gentleman, whose portrait Reynolds
painted, desired to have his hat on his head. The picture,
which was quickly finished and posed in a commonplace attitude,
was done without much study. When sent home, it was
discovered, on inspection, that although this gentleman in his
portrait had one hat upon his head, there was another under
his arm.
For three years Reynolds painted in Devonshire, and
certainly improved greatly under his own instructions and
those of William Gandy of Exeter, so that some of the works
of this period are undoubtedly fine. During these first years
of seclusion he taught himself to think as well as to paint; and
that the labour of the mind is the most essential requisite in
forming a great painter is a doctrine he constantly inculcates in
his Discourses, distinguishing it from that of the hand. He
aptly applied the dictum of Grotius—"Nothing can come of
nothing"—to demonstrate the necessity of teaching.
The more Reynolds thought, however, the less was he satisfied
with his own performances, and that he did not see himself
progress with greater speed no doubt fretted him the more, inasmuch
as he had early declared it his fixed opinion that if he did
not prove himself the best painter of his time, when arrived at
the age of thirty, he never should. For the completion of his
studies he unceasingly felt that he must visit Italy, and behold with
his own eyes those masterpieces of which he had heard so much.
Chance offered him a passage to the Continent in the flagship
of Viscount Keppel, and thus, at the age of twenty-six, May 11th,
 [Pg xiv]
1749, Reynolds first set sail for the Continent, and for the land
of his desires and aspirations.
On Sir Joshua's death papers were found on which were
written a number of detached thoughts, jotted down as hints for
a Discourse, never written, in which the artist intended to give
a history of his mind, so far as it concerned his art, his progress,
studies, and practice. One of these fragments narrates
his feelings on first seeing the treasures of Italian art, and is
sufficiently remarkable. "It has frequently happened," he
writes, "as I was informed by the keeper of the Vatican, that
many of those whom he had conducted through the various
apartments of that edifice, when about to be dismissed, have
asked for the works of Raffaelle, and would not believe that
they had already passed through the rooms where they are
preserved; so little impression had these performances made
on them. One of the first painters in France told me that this
circumstance happened to himself; though he now looks on
Raffaelle with that veneration which he deserves from all
painters and lovers of art. I remember very well my own disappointment
when I first visited the Vatican; but on confessing
my feelings to a brother student, of whose ingenuousness I had
a high opinion, he acknowledged that the works of Raffaelle
had the same effect on him; or rather, that they did not produce
the effect which he expected. This was a great relief to
my mind; and, on inquiring farther of other students, I found
that those persons only who from natural imbecility appeared
to be incapable of ever relishing these divine performances,
made pretensions to instantaneous raptures on first beholding
them. In justice to myself, however, I must add, that though
disappointed and mortified at not finding myself enraptured
with the works of this great master, I did not for a moment
conceive or suppose that the name of Raffaelle and those
admirable paintings in particular owed their reputation to the
ignorance and prejudice of mankind; on the contrary, my not
relishing them, as I was conscious I ought to have done, was
one of the most humiliating things that ever happened to me.
I found myself in the midst of works executed upon principles
[Pg xv]
with which I was unacquainted. I felt my ignorance, and stood
abashed.
"All the indigested notions of painting which I had brought
with me from England, where the art was at the lowest ebb—it
could not indeed be lower—were to be totally done away
with and eradicated from my mind. It was necessary, as it is
expressed on a very solemn occasion, that I should become as a
little child. Notwithstanding my disappointment, I proceeded
to copy some of those excellent works. I viewed them again
and again; I even affected to feel their merits and to admire
them more than I really did. In a short time a new taste and
new perceptions began to dawn upon me, and I was convinced
that I had originally formed a false opinion of the perfection of
art, and that this great painter was well entitled to the high
rank which he holds in the estimation of the world.
"The truth is, that if these works had been really what I
expected, they would have contained beauties superficial and
alluring, but by no means such as would have entitled them
to the great reputation which they have long and so justly
obtained."
It must, of course, be borne in mind, reading these words, that
Sir Joshua Reynolds had not the advantages put into the way
to-day, not only of art students, but of every person more or less
interested in art, in the way of copies, photographs, autotypes,
from the works and drawings of the great masters. He had to
learn to understand, and he at once put himself into the attitude
of the learner, humbly assured that the fault in appreciation
must be in himself, not in those masterpieces. His good sense
told him that "the duration and stability of their fame is
sufficient to evince that it has not been suspended upon the
slender thread of fashion and caprice, but bound to the human
heart by every tie of sympathetic approbation."
"Having since that period," continues Sir Joshua, "frequently
revolved the subject in my mind, I am now clearly of opinion
that a relish for the higher excellences of the art is an acquired
taste, which no man ever possessed without long cultivation and
great labour and attention. On such occasions as that which I
 [Pg xvi]
have mentioned, we are often ashamed of our apparent dulness,
as if it were expected that our minds, like tinder, should
instantly catch fire from the divine spark of Raffaelle's genius.
I flatter myself that now it would be so, and that I have a just
perception of his great powers; but let it be remembered that
the excellence of his style is not on the surface, but lies deep,
and at the first view is seen but mistily. It is the florid style
which strikes at once, and captivates the eye, for a time, without
ever satisfying the judgment. Nor does painting in this respect
differ from other arts. A just poetical taste, and the acquisition
of a nice discriminative musical ear, are equally the
work of time. Even the eye, however perfect in itself, is often
unable to distinguish between the brilliancy of two diamonds,
though the experienced jeweller will be amazed at its blindness;
not considering that there was a time when he himself could
not have been able to pronounce which of the two was the most
perfect, and that his own power of discrimination was acquired
by slow and imperceptible degrees."
From the first Reynolds avoided making copies, and had
refused lucrative orders. He sketched portions of pictures, such
as he thought would help his own comprehension, but he would
do no slavish imitation. "The man of true genius," writes Sir
Joshua, "instead of spending all his hours, as many artists do
while they are at Rome, in measuring statues and copying
pictures, soon begins to think for himself, and endeavour to do
something like what he sees. I consider general copying," he
adds, "as a delusive kind of industry: the student satisfies himself
with the appearance of doing something; he falls into the
dangerous habit of imitating without selecting, and labouring
without a determinate object; as it requires no effort of mind, he
sleeps over his work, and those powers of invention and disposition
which ought particularly to be called out and put into
action lie torpid, and lose their energy for want of exercise.
How incapable of producing anything of their own those are
who have spent most of their time in making finished copies,
is an observation well known to all those who are conversant
with our art."
[Pg xvii]
 His own precise method of study is not known, but it may be
assumed that he was chiefly occupied in reasoning on what he
observed. Elsewhere he writes—"A painter should form his
rules from pictures rather than from books or precepts; rules
were first made from pictures, not pictures from rules. Every
picture an artist sees, whether the most excellent or the most
ordinary, he should consider whence that fine effect or that ill
effect proceeds, and then there is no picture ever so indifferent
but he may look at it to his profit." "The artist," he observes,
"who has his mind filled with ideas, and his hand made expert
by practice, works with ease and readiness; whilst he who
would have you believe that he is waiting for the inspirations of
genius, is in reality at a loss how to begin, and is at last
delivered of his monsters with difficulty and pain. The well-grounded
painter, on the contrary, has only maturely to consider
his subject, and all the mechanical parts of his art will follow,
without his exertion."
The mode of study which Sir Joshua adopted himself he
continually recommends to the students: "Instead of copying
the touches of those great masters, copy only their conceptions;
instead of treading in their footsteps, endeavour only to keep
the same road; labour to invent on their general principles
and way of thinking; possess yourself with their spirit; consider
with yourself how a Michael Angelo or a Raffaelle would
have treated this subject, and work yourself into a belief that
your picture is to be seen and criticised by them when completed;
even an attempt of this kind will raise your powers.
"We all must have experienced how lazily, and consequently
how ineffectually, instruction is received when forced upon the
mind by others. Few have been taught to any purpose who
have not been their own teachers. We prefer those instructions
which we have given ourselves from our affection to the instructor;
and they are more effectual from being received into the mind at
the very time when it is most open to receive them."
Having stayed in Rome as long as his resources allowed,
Sir Joshua visited Florence, Venice, and some of the smaller
Italian towns, everywhere adopting the same careful, observant
 [Pg xviii]
method of study. After an absence of nearly three years he
returned to England, feeling himself indeed a mentally richer,
wiser man than he set out.
It was after his return from Italy that Reynolds took up his
permanent abode in London, then, as now, the only true centre
for art or literature. At first he met much opposition; Hudson
especially was fiercely critical over Reynolds' new style, saying
to him, "You don't paint so well now as you did before you
went to Italy." Another eminent portrait-painter of the time,
now long since consigned to oblivion, shook his head sadly on
seeing one of Sir Joshua's finest portrait works, saying, "Oh,
Reynolds, this will never answer: why, you don't paint in the
least in the manner of Kneller." And when the artist tried to
expose his reasons, his rival, not able to answer him, left the
room in a fury, shouting, "Damme! Shakespeare in poetry,
and Kneller in painting; damme!"
Nevertheless, Reynolds soon became a favourite with the
public, and his painting-room a fashionable resort. To this
end his courtly manner and agreeable conversation may greatly
have aided. By the year 1760 he had become the most sought
for portraitist of his day, and was making as much as £6000
a-year, in those days a very large sum for an artist to earn,
especially as the price he charged for his portraits was very low
as compared with modern artistic demands.
It was in 1759 that Reynolds first put down some of his
artistic ideas in writing. He contributed three papers to the
Idler, then edited by Dr. Johnson, with whom he had, on
coming to London, formed that friendship which lasted all their
lives. They are the Numbers 76, 79, and 82, and are reprinted
in this volume.
"These papers," observes Northcote, "may be considered
as a kind of syllabus of all his future discourses; and they
certainly occasioned him some thinking in their composition.
I have heard Sir Joshua say that Johnson required them from
him on a sudden emergency, and on that account he sat up the
whole night to complete them in time; and by it he was so
much disordered that it produced a vertigo in his head."
[Pg xix]
 The following year, 1760, the one in which Reynolds removed
to his larger residence in Leicester Square, is memorable in the
annals of English art. It witnessed the first public exhibition
of modern paintings and sculptures, and proved so satisfactory
that it was repeated, and finally laid the foundation for what
became the Royal Academy. The catalogue to one of these
first exhibitions was penned by Dr. Johnson, and is written in
his usual pompous style. The worthy doctor had little
appreciation for the fine arts, and in a private letter to Baretti,
speaking of this innovation, he says: "This exhibition has
filled the heads of artists and lovers of art. Surely life, if it be
not long, is tedious; since we are forced to call in the assistance
of so many trifles to rid us of our time—of that time which
never can return."
In 1768 the Royal Academy was founded by royal charter,
and was opened January 1, 1769. Reynolds had been elected
its President, and in accordance with the custom that prevails
to this day, received, together with this dignity, the compliment
of knighthood. On this occasion he delivered the first of his
Discourses, in which, mingled with general instructions concerning
the purpose and method of art, we find the needful
servile adulation of the reigning sovereign. The second, far
more able and to the point, was delivered at the end of the
same year on the occasion of the distribution of prizes to the
students. It contains his admirable views with regard to
copying. From henceforth, on the same occasion, every two
years, when the gold medals are given, up to December 1790,
Sir Joshua delivered such an address to the students, making
in all fifteen Discourses that are read with pleasure to this day.
At the last the hall was so crowded that a beam supporting the
floor actually gave way with the weight. That outsiders should
have been so eager to come is astonishing on this account, that
Reynolds, like most Englishmen, had no powers of elocution.
His manner in delivering his speeches was shy and awkward,
and he often spoke so low that those at some distance could
not hear him. His deafness in a measure may have accounted
for this, for, like all deaf people, he could not modulate his
 [Pg xx]
voice; but yet more, his truly British horror lest he should
seem to be posing as an orator.
It was no part of Sir Joshua's prescribed duty as President to
deliver an address on the presentation of medals; but, "if
prizes were to be given," he himself remarked in the last
Discourse, "it appeared not only proper, but indispensably
necessary, that something should be said by the President on the
delivery of those prizes; and the President, for his own credit,
would wish to say something more than mere words of compliment;
which, by being frequently repeated, would soon
become flat and uninteresting, and, by being uttered to many,
would at last become a distinction to none. I thought, therefore,
if I were to preface this compliment with some instructive
observations on the art, when we crowned merit in the artists
whom we rewarded, I might do something to animate and
guide them in their future attempts."
It was, perhaps, the fact that Reynolds intended this Discourse
to be his last, his farewell to the Academy he had served so
long and well, that attracted such a crowd. In it he takes a
review of all his past Discourses, and ends with commending to
the students the works of his idol, Michael Angelo. It was a
source of joy to him that the last word he spoke in that hall was
the name of this adored master. "I felt a self-congratulation
in knowing myself capable of such sensations as he intended to
excite. I reflect, not without vanity, that these Discourses bear
testimony of my admiration of that truly divine man; and I
should desire that the last words which I should pronounce in
this Academy, and from this place, might be the name of
Michael Angelo!"
Before the next occasion for a Discourse occurred Reynolds
was quietly sleeping his eternal sleep in St. Paul's Cathedral,
having died February 23, 1792, after two years' suffering, borne
with cheerful fortitude.
There are those who think that English art has rather
retrograded than progressed since the days of Reynolds. To
those who speak thus it is only needful to tell that Pliny already
spoke of painting as a "dying art." After this we need reason
 [Pg xxi]
with such blind admirers of antiquity quâ antiquity no farther.
That Reynolds was a great artist is universally admitted beyond
dispute; but to speak of him as the greatest, as unapproachable
henceforward, is as absurd as to claim, as did his contemporaries,
that anything so able as his art discourses had never been
penned. These were above all impressed by the undoubted
influence Johnson had upon Reynolds' style, giving it that
pedantic ring, that monotony of cadence, that want of colour,
which is precisely what we moderns least admire. We should
hardly assent to the contemporary lines lauding Dr. Johnson
and saying—
But then, in any case, such fulsome flattery is not in
accordance with the spirit of our century. We might, too,
now-a-days think it dubious praise that Johnson, after reading
one of his friend's essays and praising it in general, should pick
out one passage in particular with the remark—"I think I
might as well have said this myself." More valuable we should
consider the praise of Burke, who, writing to Mr. Malone, says,
"I have read over some part of the discourses with an unusual
sort of pleasure. . . . He is always the same man, the same
philosophical, the same artist-like critic, the same sagacious
observer, with the same minuteness, without the smallest degree
of trifling."
This is true; Sir Joshua's polished mind and calm philosophical
observation makes itself felt in every line of his
writings.
There was a time when envious calumny disputed the
authorship of these Discourses, attributing them now to Burke,
now to Johnson. The imputation is too futile to need refutation.
There are those who deny to any man the merit of having
written his own works, commencing with Homer and Shakespeare.
This is a strange craze of the critical mind. Seeing
the work is the result of a human hand, why not, for example,
 [Pg xxii]
allow that Shakespeare wrote what he claims as his own, in
lieu of attributing the authorship to Lord Bacon? Again, why
should there not have been a Homer as there was a Dante, in
lieu of an aggregation of men? A very petty and despicable
envy, or the frantic desire of saying something new and strange
to attract attention to ourselves, may be pronounced the motor
force of such theories.
Reynolds' Discourses may be described as the first attempt
in the English language at what may be called a philosophy of
art. To this day there are in English few works of this
character. A science corresponding to the German Aesthetik
does not exist in English, for what modern cant has dubbed
æstheticism, the child's play of "passionate Brompton" and
languishing South Kensington, must on no account be confounded
with a real serious study that in German universities
fills a special chair. The cause for this lack is no doubt to be
sought in the vastly diverse genius of the two nations. The
German is nothing if not abstract; the Englishman nothing
if not positive; and on this account the English take art,
as well as all else, from the practical side. To mention
but a few German works of this character. Hegel has
written a philosophy of the fine arts scarcely less valuable to
art-students and painters, and perchance even as unknown to
the latter—for artists are rarely readers—as the works of the
same class written by Winckelmann and Lessing. Reynolds
addressed an audience not merely of readers and theoreticians,
but of actual workers, practical students; and he strove, therefore,
to combine theory with positive facts, hoping thus to
bridge over the gulf which made, and still unhappily makes,
English art-students learn their profession too much by mere
rule of thumb. That Reynolds' work is neither final nor
all-embracing goes without saying. The mere fact that these
lectures were delivered but rarely, forming no designed
sequence, would have hindered such an end, even had
Reynolds' knowledge been sufficient to accomplish it. Under
the circumstances, it is sufficiently remarkable that they really
form so complete a whole as they undoubtedly do. The one
 [Pg xxiii]
leading idea that informs them is the necessity for the student
to study the works of the great masters, above all of the Roman
and Tuscan schools; and on this doctrine, then so new, Reynolds
could not insist enough. In his last Discourse, with great
modesty he sums up so ably what he has achieved, that it is
best to let him speak for himself. After saying how unequal he
had been to the expression of his ideas, he continues:—
"To this work, however, I could not be said to come totally
unprovided with materials; I had seen much, and I had
thought much upon what I had seen; I had something of a
habit of investigation, and a disposition to reduce all that
I had observed and felt in my own mind to method and
system; but I thought it indispensably necessary well to
consider the opinions which were to be given out from this
place, and under the sanction of a Royal Academy; I therefore
examined not only my own opinions but likewise the
opinions of others.
"In revising my discourses, it is no small satisfaction to be
assured that I have in no part of them lent my assistance to
foster newly-hatched unfledged opinions, or endeavoured to
support paradoxes, however tempting may have been their
novelty, or however ingenious I might, for the minute, fancy
them to be; nor shall I, I hope, anywhere be found to have
imposed on the minds of young students declamation for
argument, a smooth period for a sound precept. I have pursued