# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2019
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Albert Francis Zahm, Aërial Navigation
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/60277/60277-h/60277-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

“Count Zeppelin, who proved that air ships have a practical future,
      is no longer undisputed ‘king of the air.’ His rivals have taken his
      pattern, and improved it until soon air ships will be able to keep
      afloat for many days and in that case to cross oceans. A type of this
      modern ship is the first Schütte leviathan of wood and steel bracing,
      now nearly finished at Mannheim. It is expected to lift its twenty-four
      and one-fifth tons one and a quarter miles, because its beam is sixty
      feet as compared with the forty-four feet of the Zeppelin II. The car
      is one hundred and thirty feet long, with a cabin to accommodate thirty
      passengers. The new ship displaces nineteen thousand cubic meters,
      as against fifteen thousand in the Zeppelin III. It is expected to
      carry a cargo of five to six tons supported by ten spherical sustaining
      chambers, and eight ring-shape reservoir chambers connected by a secret
      apparatus. These eight reservoirs automatically receive all expanding
      gas that escapes from the sustaining chambers, thus conserving the
      entire supporting power. Four motors of combined five hundred and forty
      horse power will drive the propellers. Expert opinion predicts a speed
      of thirty-seven to forty-three miles an hour, three miles faster than
      the Gross III, at this writing the fastest air ship in the world. The
      whole enterprise is backed by Mr. Lanz, a rich manufacturer, who is
      president of the German Air-Navy League. A wooden-braced ship of equal
      equipment and size, designed by the Engineer Rettich, is well under way.
“Another rival of the Zeppelin, so far only projected, has been
      designed by the Engineers Radinger and Wagner, and is intended to
      be an advance in endurance. It should float for fifty days without
      replenishing gas. It is planned to have a rigid hull of hollow
      paper tubes and steel bracing and to be166 thirty per cent lighter
      than a Zeppelin built of aluminum, in any equal size. Drum-shape
      compartments are to hold the sustaining hydrogen, none of which is to
      be lost through expansion by the sun, as any surplus will be compressed
      by automatic pumps into the hollow tubes.[18] Having six thousand
      meters less displacement than the Zeppelin III, it will carry a
      reserve of seven hundred cubic meters of gas. Thirty-two per cent of
      its weight-carrying capacity will be given up to passengers, fuel, and
      baggage. Engines of two hundred and forty-two combined horse power are
      expected to develop a speed of forty to fifty miles an hour. Larger
      craft of the same type would, of course, carry much heavier cargoes
      and have higher speed. This type of ship, soon to be placed in the
      construction cradle, is expected to cross the ocean easily with fifteen
      passengers.”
In keeping with the lively growth of these great ships was the
    formation of the German aërial transportation company, with a capital
    stock of $750,000, reported in l’Aérophile for December, 1909. A line
    of large Zeppelins was to connect Baden-Baden, Mannheim, Munich,
    Leipsic, Cologne, Düsseldorf, Berlin, Dresden, Essen and Frankfort.
    The first two auto balloons of this line were to be the Zeppelin
      IV and Zeppelin V, to be put in commission in the spring of 1910.
    The Zeppelin IV was to cube 706,000 cubic feet, and carry twenty
    passengers in three cars, each containing a motor. The Zeppelin V was
    to be constructed of a remarkably light rigid alloy “electrometal,”
    and was to carry at least thirty passengers. This enterprise certainly
    formed an appropriate termination to the first decade of practical auto
    ballooning.
167
The projected passenger line of the German Air Ship Society was
    inaugurated the following summer with serene audacity and fairy-like
    magnificence. The first ship employed, Zeppelin VII, was a huge
    vessel of unusual power, speed and elegance of appointment. She was
    485 feet long by 46 in diameter, cubed 690,000 feet, and carried three
    engines totaling 420 horse power and competent to drive her 35 miles
    per hour. Midway beneath her hull and rigidly joined to it, was a
    passenger car thirty-five feet long, having a vestibule at one end, a
    lavatory at the other, and five compartments between them, with seats
    for twenty persons. Beyond the ends of the car were open decks leading
    to the boats fore and aft containing the machinery.
At three o’clock on the morning of June 22, 1910, with Count Zeppelin
    in charge, and a dozen passengers aboard, this majestic auto balloon
    sailed from Friedrichshafen up the Rhine Valley for Düsseldorf, three
    hundred miles, and after a prosperous voyage of nine hours, made an
    easy landing. Next morning at eight thirty she voyaged from Düsseldorf
    to Dortmund, thirty-seven miles north, sailing at a general height of
    one thousand feet, over some of the finest industrial parts of Germany.
    Then she returned to Düsseldorf with her delighted passengers who were
    all enthusiasm for the new mode of travel so auspiciously begun. Of the
    thirty-two persons aboard, the majority were regular public passengers
    who had paid fifty dollars each for the trip, several of them tourists
    from various countries, and ten of them women.
The maiden voyage of this first air liner was a marvel and dream
    of delight to the fortunate few traveling in such celestial style.
    The comforts and splendors of the service quite surpassed their
    expectations. Seated in that fairy car of aluminum framing 168lined with
    mahogany and rosewood inlaid with pearl, they looked from spacious
    windows over the beautiful German landscape gliding beneath them, and
    enjoyed visions fit for itinerating gods. Along the shining waters of
    the Rhine, and over its castellated crags, and among its rolling hills
    terraced with luxuriant vineyards, now lapped in the glory of summer,
    and above stately cities murmuring with multitudinous life, they sailed
    in serenest comfort and security, marveling at their own strange
    career through the sky, and equally regarded with wonder by all the
    inhabitants below, not to say written and read about by millions in all
    parts of the civilized world. The delights of land and sea travel were
    happily mingled, without their inconvenience. Neither dust nor smoke
    was here, nor rattle of iron rails, nor lurching and rolling from heavy
    seas. Quite otherwise. The senses were charmed with the fanning of
    fragrant winds forever and uniformly blowing, with the melodious drone
    of the swift propeller wheels, with the green glories of the earth and
    purple splendors of the sky. When the tourist was sated with these he
    could turn to his book; when tired of his chair he could stroll to and
    fro in the car on a soft carpet, or along the trellised deck beyond;
    when his appetite called, he could answer with the choicest food and
    wine; for every convenience of an ample buffet was available. It was
    all so enchanting if only practical.
Encouraged by these trials the company announced, and hoped to make,
    voyages at frequent intervals. But in this they promptly encountered
    difficulties. On June 28th the Deutschland started from Düsseldorf on
    a four-hour cruise, with nearly a score of passengers, mostly newspaper
    representatives. But she remained in the air longer than intended.
    Passing Solingen she tried to reach Eberfeld, but169 ineffectually; nor
    could she find a landing place. Toward five o’clock she was caught in
    a great rising wind and carried one mile aloft like a passive balloon
    in a vortex or thunderhead. Here much gas was lost by expansion, and
    presently, as the ship emerged from a snow cloud in the upper vortex,
    with cooled gas and hull laden with precipitation, she descended at a
    terrible velocity. With crippled motive power, the vessel could not be
    supported dynamically by the impact of the air against her sustaining
    planes and against her canted hull, for lack of forward speed. At
    length with a terrific crash she struck upon the forest of Teutoberg,
    80 miles from Dusseldorf, a great tree trunk piercing the rear boat and
    projecting among the terrified crew. Here the vessel lodged with her
    stern and controlling gear badly wrecked, and here she was abandoned
    by the passengers, with her huge hull resting on the branches forty
    feet from earth. Ere long she was retrieved by a company of infantry
    who sawed down the trees, dismantled the ship, and returned the parts
    on railway trucks to Friedrichshafen, to be used in building another
    vessel.
Thus in both civil and military aëronautics the pioneers had to endure
    many losses and grievous hardships; but the direst disasters often mark
    the way to the greatest victories.
From time immemorial man has admired the aërial evolutions of
    wing-gifted creatures, and aspired to imitate them. But which
    evolutions should he attempt first? Which if any are practicable for
    the ponderous lord of creation? The question is still pertinent.
Nature in her bounty bewilders us with wondrous models. All about
    and overhead, with exquisite art, they challenge us to float or fly.
    Before the flower-bell drifts the ruby-throat, his long bill in the
    honey-hearted bloom; now bulletlike he leaps through boundless space.
    Why not adopt that style of locomotion? Call your rainbow equipage to
    the door, and take the family forth in purple state, to the music of
    melodious wheels.
If the humming bird will not serve, look above you. There rides
    the dark-winged master of aërial motion, throned like a god on the
    impetuous wind. Mark his majestic sweep as all day long, with unbeating
    pinion, he scours the wide plain and rugged regions of the hills,
    unwearied, reposeful, deliberate; now skimming the fragrant forest, or
    meadow; now scaling the precipice, or swinging above the abyss; now
    soaring cloudward beyond the range of human vision. There is a model
    for the ambitious and the brave!
Or turn to mid ocean when the hurricane, shearing the tops of the
    arched billows, scatters them in174 foam and spray over the watery chaos,
    and the big ship strains in the storm. See the long-winged albatross,
    white vision of joy in the darkness, careering all playfully round
    the imperiled vessel, and above the monstrous waves; wheeling in glad
    curves, frolicking in the face of the tempest, riding, without toil or
    trepidation, the rudest[19] winds a thousand miles over the sea. What a
    jocund pace for man!
Of all the charming modes of flight now possible to us it is certain
    that our ancestors could copy but one with any hope of success. Minus
    motive power they could not imitate the direct flight of the homing
    pigeon, much less the mid-air pause of the bumblebee floating round a
    daisy. Hence there remained to them only passive flight on nonvibrant
    wings. The gliding of vultures, of gulls, and of certain quadrupeds and
    fishes, they could imitate with profit; but when they essayed power
    flight they invariably and egregiously failed.
The art of aviation presents two main groups of fliers. The first
    comprises the various man kites, parachutes, gliding machines, soaring
    machines. These may be called passive flyers, because they carry no
    motive power, but ride passively on the air by the force of gravity or
    a towline.
The second group comprises the bird-like flap-wing machines, called
    orthopters by technical people; the screw-lift flyers, called
    helicopters; the aëroplanes, also called monoplanes, biplanes,
    triplanes, according to the number of superposed main lifting surfaces;
    and lastly the gyroplanes, whose sustaining surfaces may turn over and
    over, like a falling lath, or whirl round and round, like a boomerang.
    These all may be called dynamic, or power, 175flyers. The technical
    names, however, are not so important, as they are numerous; for the
    whole aëronautic nomenclature is in a formative, not to say chaotic,
    state. We may, therefore, like Adam, name the creatures as they pass
    before us for review or discussion.
Disregarding the crude essays at human flight, recorded in the early
    literature and history of many peoples, we may notice first the well
    authenticated sketches of Leonardo da Vinci. His fertile mind conceived
    three distinct devices for carrying a man in the air. But he and his
    successors for nearly four centuries could do little more than invent.
    For lack of motive power they could not navigate dynamic flyers,
    however ingeniously contrived.
Da Vinci’s first design, as shown in Fig. 26, provides the operator
    with two wings to be actuated by the power of both arms and legs,
    through the agency of very ingenious harness. With this device
    an acrobat could fly forward and downward, to the delectation of
    a multitude; but he would have to be caught on something soft to
    escape injury. Since Leonardo’s day the experiment has been tried
    occasionally, 176with varied results, sometimes grotesque, sometimes
    tragic. He doubtless realized the impracticability of an orthopter
    actuated by human muscle, and yet he has had many followers. The
    orthopter is still a favorite device cultivated by a few persons who
    propose to work its wings by means of a gasoline motor. Doubtless the
    feat is physically possible, and may be accomplished in time.
Da Vinci’s second flyer was a helicopter, as shown in Fig. 26. An
    aërial screw 96 feet in diameter was to be turned by a strong and
    nimble artist who might, by prodigious effort, lift himself for a short
    time. Though various small paper screws were made to ascend in the air,
    the larger enterprise was never seriously undertaken. Many subsequent
    inventors developed the same project; but the fellow turning the screw
    always found it dreadful toil and a hopelessly futile task. Of late
    the man-driven helicopter has been abandoned, but the motor-driven one
    is very much cultivated. Scores of inventors in recent years, aided by
    light motors, have been trying to screw boldly skyward, and some have
    succeeded in rising on a helicopter carrying one man.
Da Vinci’s third scheme for human flight, as shown in Fig. 27, was a
    framed sail on which a man could ride downward, if not upward. This
    device never fails to navigate with its confiding sailor. Sometimes
    he lands in one posture, again in another; but voyage he must, with
    the certainty of gravitation. Leonardo is, therefore, the father
    of the parachute. This, in turn, has had a varied offspring. 177The
    common parachute, the aërial glider, the soaring machine, or passive
    aëroplane, that rides the wind without motive power and without loss of
    energy.
The foregoing sketches by the great artist were made toward the year
    1500, and there the science stood for nearly three centuries. Much
    speculation followed, but no substantial progress. Mathematicians
    proved by figures the inadequacy of the human muscle to achieve human
    flight. Dreamers demonstrated the same by launching themselves from
    high places, and breaking their bones on the unfeeling earth, before
    unpitying crowds. Finally came the balloon, giving a new impetus to an
    embryo art.
The earliest of Da Vinci’s aëronautic ideas to be practically realized
    was the parachute. The exact date of its first employment is not
    exactly known. In the year 1617 Fauste Veranzio published in Venice
    a good technical description of the construction and operation of
    the parachute, accompanied by a clear illustration, as shown in
    Fig. 28. But the first authentic account of a parachute descent of
    a human being is that given by Sebastien Lenormand. This dauntless
    inventor, on December 26, 1783, descended from the tower of the
    Montpelier Observatory, holding in either hand an umbrella sixty inches
    in diameter. A few days later he sent to the Academy of Lyons the
    following description of his improved parachute, illustrated in Fig. 29:
“I make a circle 14 feet in diameter with a heavy cord; I attach firmly
      all around, a cone of linen whose height is 6 feet; I double this
      cone with paper laid on the linen to render it impermeable to air; or
      better, instead of linen, taffeta covered with gum elastic. I place
      all about the cone small cords, which are attached below to a wicker
      frame, and178 forming with this frame an inverse truncated cone. Upon
      this frame I place myself. By this means I avoid the ribs and handle
      of the umbrella, which would add considerable weight. I am sure to
      risk so little that I offer to make the experiment myself, after once
      having tried the parachute with different weights to make sure of its
      solidity.”
Previous to Lenormand’s experiments, Blanchard, the aëronaut, had
    dropped small parachutes from his balloon, sometimes carrying animals,
    but never a human being. For unaccountable reasons179 the world had to
    wait fourteen years longer to see a man make the new familiar parachute
    descent from a balloon. On October 22, 1797, in presence of a large
    crowd Jacques Garnerin ascended in a closed parachute to a height of
    3,000 feet, then cut loose. The people were astonished and appalled;
    but they soon saw the umbrella-shaped canvas spread open and oscillate
    in the sky with its human freight. As it was but eight yards in
    diameter, it descended rapidly and struck the ground with violence,
    throwing Garnerin from his seat. He escaped with a bruised foot,
    mounted a horse, and returned to the starting point, where he received
    a lively ovation.
After this experiment, parachute descents became popular the world
    over, and have been repeated up to the present time substantially
    without change. A slight improvement in the construction was made by
    cutting away the top of the canvas, thus allowing the air to escape
    sufficiently to check the oscillations; but no radical change in
    the design has come into general use. It would seem easy to have
    transformed the craft into a traveling parachute gliding down the sky
    like a great bird on out-stretched wings. Such a device would enable
    the aëronaut to sail some miles and direct his course in180 the air. If
    fair skill had been acquired it might have hastened the advent of human
    flight twenty years, so far as it is practicable without the aid of
    the internal combustion motor. For two decades ago Maxim produced an
    abundantly powerful steam engine; but could find no one to furnish him
    a manageable glider on which to mount it. Now, indeed, such gliders are
    available; but they were developed by aviators, not by balloonists, or
    parachutists, who should have effected that advance many years ago.
Curiously enough, Nature has furnished a traveling parachute which
    seems never to have been imitated by man, though not difficult to
    copy. It is a large two-winged seed, which when dropped in any poise,
    immediately rights itself, and glides gracefully through the air. The
    seeds grow on a tree in India, bearing the name Zanonia Macrocarpa,
    and when shaken from its branches look like so many sparrows sailing
    earthward in wide curves. Artificial gliders of this type are easy to
    construct, and would make interesting toys. However, if man has not
    copied such natural models, he has done much better, by making his
    gliders concave below instead of concave upward, as are the beautiful
    Indian seeds.
An interesting model of a traveling parachute, quite as efficient as
    the gauzy-winged seed, is shown in the accompanying figure. It is a
    sheet of paper twenty inches long by four inches wide, having a quarter
    inch strip of tin folded in its forward margin, and having its rear
    margin turned upward slightly, to steer the little craft from a too
    steep descent. In order to improve the stability of the paper plane,
    its sides may be bent upward. The model when dropped in any attitude
    quickly rights itself, and sails down a gently sloping course, the rear
    margin functioning as a rudder or tail.
181
One of the earliest trustworthy and scientific accounts of
    experimentation with an aërial glider was given by Sir George Cayley in
    Nicholson’s Journal, in 1809 and 1810. After a careful study of the
    principles of stability, he, in 1808, constructed a glider spreading
    300 square feet of surface and weighing with its load 140 pounds. It
    had wing surfaces slightly inclined to each other, and a tail inclined
    enough to determine a gentle downward course. “When any persons,” says
    Cayley, “ran forward in it with his full speed, taking advantage of a
    gentle breeze in front, it would bear him up so strongly as scarcely
    to allow him to touch the ground, and would frequently lift him up and
    carry him several yards together. It was beautiful to see this noble
    white bird sail majestically from a hill to any given point of the
    plain below it, with perfect steadiness and safety, according to the
    set of the rudder, merely by its own weight, descending in an angle of
    about 18° with the horizon.”
Sir George Cayley made a brave start in the science of dynamic
    flight, marshaling to it all the mechanical resources of his day. He
    applied the most reliable data of fluid resistance then available. He
    formulated the laws of equilibrium and control of a flying machine
    quite as well as any of his successors for two generations. He
    estimated the182 propulsive power required to carry a man, and computed
    the weight of the newly invented Bolton and Watt steam engine capable
    of supplying that power. He even conceived the idea of burning a gas
    or inflammable vapor behind a piston, thus anticipating the modern
    aëronautical motor. But the project as a whole was too formidable at
    that time for the genius of this one man, or of his generation of
    colleagues. Sailing flight they could have practiced with profit to the
    advancement of aviation, but power flight on a practicable scale had to
    await the long evolution of the internal combustion engine.
The next great advancement in the devices and principles of aviation
    was made by another Englishman, and a worthy successor to Sir George
    Cayley. In 1842 Mr. Henson patented the aërial equipage shown in
    the accompanying illustration. It was what in present-day parlance
    is called a monoplane, being in fact the first commercially planned
    aëroplane known to history. As seen at a glance it consisted of a large
    sustaining surface rigidly trussed and driven through the air by two
    propellers actuated by a steam engine. It was to be guided up and down
    by means of a horizontal rudder, and guided to the right and left by
    means of a vertical rudder, seconded by a keel cloth; both rudders
    being at the rear of the large plane. The machine was designed to be
    launched by running down an inclined plane or track. Fuller details
    of this first patent aëroplane are given in the following official
    description in the South Kensington Museum of a model aëroplane
    constructed by Henson and Stringfellow:
“The model consists of an extended surface, or aëroplane, of oiled
      silk or canvas, stretched upon a bamboo frame made rigid by trussing
      both above 183and below. A car is attached to the underside of the
      aëroplane to contain the steam engine, passengers, etc. It has three
      wheels to run freely upon when it reaches earth. Two propellers, three
      feet in diameter, are shown with their blades set at 45°. They are
      operated by endless cords from the engine. Behind these is a fan-shaped
      tail stretched upon a triangular frame capable of being opened out,
      closed, or moved up and down by means of cords and pulleys. By this
      latter arrangement ascent or descent was to be accomplished. A rudder
      for steering sideways is placed under the tail, and above the main
      aëroplane a sail was to be stretched between two masts rising from the
      car, to assist in maintaining the course. When in motion the front edge
      of the machine was to be raised in order to obtain the required air
      support. To start the model it was proposed to allow it to run down
      an incline—e.g., the side of a hill, the propellers being first set
      in motion. The velocity gained in the descent was expected to sustain
      it in its further progress, the engine overcoming the head resistance
      when in full flight. Experiments were eventually made on the Downs
      near Chard, in Somerset, and the night trials were abandoned, as the
      silk became saturated from a deposit of dew. After many day trials,
      down wide inclined rails, the model was found to be deficient in
      stable equilibrium for open-air experiments, little puffs of wind or
      ground currents being sufficient to destroy the balance. The actual
      machine was never constructed, but in 1847–48 F. Stringfellow built a
      model which is supposed to be the first flying machine to perform a
      successful flight.”
The creation of Henson’s flying machine at that early period is one
    of the most original and fruitful achievements in the century-long
    development of the modern aëroplane. Barring the torsional wing-tips184
    invented more recently, it hardly differs in principle from the
    successful monoplane of to-day. The same mode of propulsion, the same
    mode of sustention, the same mode of launching and lighting, the same
    mode of steering and control. What has been added since is not so much
    original invention as perfection of detail through the combined efforts
    of many designers. After Cayley, Henson, as nearly as any one person
    was the inventor of the flying machine. He did not bring his conception
    to practical maturity, nor was that to be expected; but he did lay
    down the broad lines which have led others to success. His ideas still
    feature every practical aëroplane, and particularly every successful
    monoplane. Indeed, it is now possible to construct an aëroplane from
    Henson’s description that will fly, even in breezy weather, with
    a stability practically as good as that of the early Voisin and
    Antoinette machines before the use of the aileron or torsional wing was
    practiced. It is all a question of wise proportioning and sufficient
    motive power.
So much for Henson’s contrivance as an abstract invention. The
    concrete, full scale machine was to spread 6,000 square feet of
    surface, weigh 3,000 pounds, and be propelled by a high pressure steam
    engine of 25 or 30 horse power. The machine was not completed on a
    large scale, and wisely so; for it was inadequately powered, and,
    moreover, required many refinements of detail to make it entirely
    practical. These improvements had to be left to succeeding inventors
    with accumulated experience and resources.
In 1844 Mr. Henson began the construction of a steam-driven model,
    in partnership with his friend, Mr. Stringfellow, who designed the
    motor for it. They experimented together for some weeks with only
    meager success, but gaining valuable experience.185 A model of the
    Henson-Stringfellow machine is on exhibition at the South Kensington
    Museum.
In 1846 Stringfellow built a steam model aëroplane about the size of a
    large soaring bird, and weighing all together, with fuel and water, 6½
    pounds. A special feature of this model was that its main surfaces were
    sloped like the wings of a bird, slightly concave below and feathered
    toward the back; thus making it more efficient and stable in flight.
    With a good head of steam, and propellers whirling, the model ran down
    a stretched wire, leaped into the air “and darted off in as fair a
    flight as it was possible to make, to a distance of about 40 yards.”
    Thus the first power-driven aëroplane to fly successfully was the
    little steam model constructed by Stringfellow in 1846.
In 1866, two decades after the flight of Stringfellow’s monoplane,
    Mr. F. H. Wenham, another Englishman illustrious in the annals of
    aëronautics, patented the multiplane; that is, an aëroplane comprising
    two or more superposed surfaces. This186 proved to be a valuable
    contribution to the art of aviation, and continues in use at the
    present time. The device furnished an increase of sustaining surface
    without enlargement of the ground plan. It moreover lends itself
    conveniently to a strong and simple trussing of the surfaces. Some
    designers protest that superposed surfaces blanket one another; but the
    advantages just named seem amply to compensate for this objectionable
    feature. If the surfaces be properly spaced, very little interference
    is found; moreover, any blanketing that may occur diminishes the drift
    as well as the lift,[20] though not necessarily in the same proportion.
Wenham’s aëroplane is illustrated in Fig. 31. The rider lies underneath
    the multiple wings, so as to diminish the resistance to progression
    through the air. The apparatus could thus be used as an aërial toboggan
    for coasting down the atmosphere. To prolong the flights two flappers
    actuated by a treadle were to be employed, their ends being hinged at
    a point above the operator’s back. Though the device was patented, no
    very serious efforts were made to operate it practically. Once, indeed,
    the inventor took his glider to a meadow and mounted it, during a lull
    in the evening wind, but soon a gust caught him up, carried him some
    distance from the ground and toppled him over sidewise, breaking some
    of the surfaces. The machine disclosed some good working principles;
    but it was inadequately ruddered, and too feebly constructed, to
    weather the buffets of the prevailing ground currents.
Adopting the scheme of superposed surfaces then recently devised
    by Wenham, Mr. Stringfellow in 1868 constructed the interesting
    steam-driven model 187shown in Plate XIII. This consists essentially of
    three superposed planes, rigidly connected by rods and diagonal wires,
    propelled by a pair of screws actuated by a high pressure steam engine,
    and guided by a tail. The three planes aggregated 21 feet in length and
    28 square feet in surface; totaling, with the tail, 36 square feet.
    The engine was rated at one third of one horse power. Its weight is
    not known, but may be roughly surmised from the fact that a separate
    engine exhibited simultaneously by Stringfellow weighed thirteen pounds
    per horse power. The model was entered for competition in the London
    Aëronautical Exhibition of 1868. In actual operation, however, it seems
    not to have excelled the monoplane of 1846; but still it is of much
    interest as being the prototype of the multiple-wing aëroplane now in
    common use. It seems to have been the first aëroplane having two or
    more sustaining surfaces joined by rods and stayed by diagonal cords
    after the manner of a Pratt truss. This historic little model was
    purchased by Professor Langley for the Smithsonian Institution, and
    is now to be seen suspended from the ceiling of the National Museum,
    beside Langley’s own models and Lilienthal’s epoch-making glider.
188
In 1871 M. A. Penaud produced the interesting toy aëroplane shown in
    Fig. 32. The model is propelled horizontally forward by a single screw,
    actuated by twisted rubber, and is fastened, as shown, to the middle of
    a long stick or backbone. The center of mass of the machine is well to
    the front, tending to plunge the model earthward like a heavy-headed
    arrow; but this down-diving is promptly checked by the tiny rudder
    which is so inclined as to counteract the diving proclivity. That is
    to say the rudder dips so as to receive the aërial impact on its upper
    surface; which impact increases with the speed of flight and causes
    the bow to rise, until the weight before the wings just balances the
    impact on the rudder at the rear. The equilibrium is thus automatic, on
    the principle expounded by Sir George Cayley sixty years earlier. This
    quaint little bird when liberated in the Garden of the Tuileries flew
    a distance of 131 feet in eleven seconds, much to the delight of some
    members of the French Society for Aërial Navigation. It may be added
    that Penaud, who was a most promising and clever aëronautical inventor,
    contemplated a twin-screw monoplane large enough to carry189 two men, but
    died in his early manhood, before the project could be realized.
In 1879 M. Victor Tatin made some very promising tests with the model
    shown in Fig. 33, so promising, in fact, as to convince many that human
    flight was even then practicable. This little flyer was a twin-screw
    monoplane mounted on wheels, and actuated by an oscillating compressed
    air engine, the whole machine weighing 3.85 pounds, and supported by a
    silk plane measuring 16 by 75 inches. The central body of the aëroplane
    was a thin steel tube three feet long by four inches in diameter
    containing the compressed air, and weighing only one pound and a half,
    though strong enough to endure a pressure of twenty atmospheres. When
    the model was allowed to run round a board walk 46 feet in diameter,
    tethered to a stake at the center, it quickly acquired a speed of 18
    miles an hour, rose in the air, and flew a distance of fifty feet.
A remarkable deduction from the very careful measurements made with
    this machine was that it carried at the rate of 110 pounds per tow line
    horse power, when flying at an angle of 8 to 10 degrees. Mr. Tatin
    concluded: “These experiments seem to demonstrate that there is no
    impracticability in the construction of a large apparatus for aviation,
    and that perhaps even now such machines could be practically used in
    aërial navigation. Such practical experiments being necessarily very
    costly, I must to my great regret, forego their undertaking, and I
    shall be satisfied if my own labors shall induce others to take up such
    an enterprise.”
Tatin’s faith in the practicability of a large aëroplane was later
    voiced by Mr. Chanute in his valuable book, Progress in Flying
    Machines, published in 1894, but now unfortunately out of print.
    Recalling that Maxim had recently produced a large motor190 weighing
    complete only ten pounds per horse power, he says: “Aviation seems to
    be practicably possible, if only the stability can be secured, and an
    adequate method of alighting be devised.” Since the above quoted facts
    and opinions were published, no competent man well informed in the
    science of aviation has for one moment doubted the feasibility of human
    flight.
In 1891, twelve years after Tatin’s experiment, Lawrence Hargrave, of
    Sydney, Australia, made a similar compressed air monoplane, with a
    single-screw propeller, but without wheels for launching and lighting.
    The model, which is shown in Fig. 34, had a wing-spread of 20 square
    feet, weighed about three pounds, and flew 128 feet in eight seconds.
    The weight carried was at the rate of 90 pounds per horse power, a very
    encouraging result. Two years later he described a small steam engine
    which he had developed, weighing 10.7 pounds per horse power, and
    capable of driving the model about two miles, though he did not use it
    for that purpose, being engrossed with other researches.
One interesting outcome of his numerous experiments was the Hargrave
    Kite, now more familiarly191 known as the box kite. A good example of
    his kites is the type shown in Fig. 35. This consists of two arched
    biplanes mounted tandem on a backbone, or connecting framework. The
    kite floats steadily, and was thought suitable for the body of a flying
    machine to be driven by an engine and propeller. Thus meteorology is
    indebted to aëronautics for its most useful kite.
A very novel and interesting type of aëroplane model was tested by
    Mr. Horatio Phillips in 1893. After careful preliminary experiments
    with various forms of curved “sustainers,” or lifting surfaces, tested
    in a wind tunnel, to determine which were most suitable wing forms,
    he finally constructed the flying apparatus shown in Plate XIV. This
    consisted of a compound aëroplane composed of many superposed narrow
    curved slats, the whole resembling an open Venetian blind. These
    curved blades, or sustainers, measured 12 feet long, 1.5 inches wide,
    2 inches apart, and were held in a frame sharpened to cleave the air
    with slight resistance. The entire aëroplane spread 136 square feet
    of lifting surface, and was mounted on a truck as shown, carrying a
    steam engine and boiler, to actuate a two blade propeller 6 feet in
    diameter. The whole apparatus weighed 330 pounds, to which a dead load
    was usually added, and ran around a circular wooden track 628 feet in
    circumference, being tethered at the center, as in Tatin’s experiment.
    The apparatus readily lifted itself, when running at a speed of 28
    miles an hour,192 and carried at the rate of 72 pounds per horse power,
    the added load weighing at times nearly one fourth that of the machine
    itself. The ultimate purpose of the experiment was to prepare the
    way for a one-man aëroplane like that shown in the lower part of the
    figure. This latter model actually carried a man across a field in
    1904, but was found defective in longitudinal balance, because perhaps
    of its inadequate horizontal rudder. Apparently Mr. Phillips had in
    1904 a machine capable of well-balanced flight, if he had made the
    rudders large enough, and provided a mechanism for rotating the slats
    at either wing end, so as to control the lateral poise, as proposed by
    the present writer in 1893, for practically that same flier (see page
    229).
Phillips’s aëroplane shows a distinct advance over its predecessors,
    even Wenham’s multiplane, because of the careful curving of the
    sustainers. Tatin’s flat wing machine had, indeed, shown a greater
    efficiency as a whole, but that was likely due to less proportionate
    body resistance. To Phillips we owe the introduction of superposed
    arched surfaces, now so commonly used in mechanical flight. Whether he
    was wise in using so many narrow wings, instead of a few broad ones,
    was a question to be answered by precise measurement.
Prof. S. P. Langley, like Mr. Hargrave, made numerous flying models,
    trying, in turn, the power of twisted rubber, compressed air and
    steam. He constructed scores of gauzy winged contrivances which
    flitted about like huge butterflies or birds, till their mission
    was accomplished—that of illustrating a scientific principle to his
    inquiring mind. One by one they came into existence, enjoyed an
    ephemeral life, and then were consigned to the aëronautical attic of
    the Smithsonian Institution, a storehouse of quaint flying creatures.
    It was a most interesting 193collection which well merited preservation
    as the “juvenile” creations of an illustrious man. But the first
    experiments of Langley, like the similar ones of Hargrave, were of
    value chiefly as training to the inventor himself; they were not
    important advances in the art of aviation. Such advances were to follow
    the long preliminary training.
On May 6, 1896, Dr. Langley launched the picturesque steam model,
    which, to his mind, first proved conclusively the practicability of
    mechanical flight. It was the crowning success, and, as he thought
    then, probably the termination of his aëronautic labors. “I have
    brought to a close,” says he, “the portion of the work which seemed
    to be peculiarly mine—the demonstration of the practicability of
    mechanical flight—and for the next stage, which is the commercial
    and practical development of the idea, it is probable that the world
    may look to others. The world, indeed, will be supine if it does not
    realize that a new possibility has come to it, and that the great
    universal highway overhead is now soon to be opened.”
As shown in Plate XV, Langley’s first successful steam flying machine
    is a tandem monoplane[21] with twin screws amidships. It measures
    nearly 13 feet from tip to tip of its wings, about 16 feet along its
    entire length, and weighs with motor and propellers 30 pounds. The
    boiler weighs 5 pounds, the engine 26 ounces, and the power developed
    was between 1 and 1.5 horse power. The model is therefore somewhat
    larger than a large condor, and very much more powerful.
Being too small to carry a pilot, it was launched 194over water, to
    obviate wreckage on landing. The machine was capable of flying several
    miles continuously, but in the actual test on the Potomac River the
    flight was limited, in order to prevent the model passing beyond
    the shore. The flyer was placed on launching ways on the top of a
    houseboat, hurled rapidly forward by force of a spring, and liberated
    in space, with engine and propellers running at full speed. Its
    subsequent behavior has been graphically described by an eyewitness,
    Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, in the following passage, published in
    Nature, May 28, 1896:
“On the occasion referred to, the aërodrome, at a given signal, started
      from a platform about 20 feet above the water, and rose at first
      directly in the face of the wind, moving at all times with remarkable
      steadiness, and subsequently swung around in large curves of perhaps a
      hundred yards in diameter, and continuously ascending till its steam
      was exhausted, when at a lapse of about a minute and a half, and at a
      height which I judged to be between 80 and 100 feet in the air, the
      whole ceased turning, and the machine, deprived of the aid of its
      propellers, to my surprise did not fall, but settled down so softly and
      gently that it touched the water without the least shock, and was in
      fact immediately ready for another trial.
“In the second trial, which followed directly, it repeated in nearly
      every respect the actions of the first, except that the direction of
      its course was different. It ascended again in the face of the wind,
      afterward moving steadily and continually in large curves, accompanied
      with a rising motion and a lateral advance. Its motion was, in fact, so
      steady that I think a glass of water on its surface would have remained
      unspilled. When the steam gave out again it repeated for a second
      time the experience of the first trial when the steam had ceased, and
      settled 195gently and easily down. What height it reached at this trial
      I can not say, as I was not so favorably placed as in the first, but I
      had occasion to notice that this time its course took it over a wooded
      promontory, and I was relieved of some apprehension in seeing that
      it was already so high as to pass the tree tops by 20 or 30 feet. It
      reached the water in one minute and thirty-one seconds from the time
      it started, at a measured distance of over 900 feet from the point at
      which it rose.
“This, however, was by no means the length of its flight. I estimated
      from the diameter of the curve described, from the number of turns of
      the propellers, as given by the automatic counter, after due allowance
      for slip, and from other measures, that the actual length of flight on
      each occasion was slightly over 3,000 feet. It is at least safe to say
      that each exceeded half an English mile.
“From the time and distance, it will be noticed that the velocity was
      between 20 and 25 miles an hour, in a course which was constantly
      taking it ‘up hill.’ I may add that on a previous occasion, I have seen
      a far higher velocity attained by the same aërodrome when its course
      was horizontal.
“I have no desire to enter into detail further than I have done, but
      I can not but add that it seems to me that no one who was present on
      this interesting occasion, could have failed to recognize that the
      practicability of mechanical flight had been demonstrated.”
In passing it may be added that in 1899 this model was again flown
    successfully, having superposed surfaces; for its inventor all along
    recognized the structural advantage of the bridge trussing in biplanes.
    If he preferred the monoplane, or single-tier arrangement, it was
    because the best flights were obtained with such models.
196
Many persons now thought that Langley would do well to rest on his
    laurels, leaving to others the “commercial and practical development”
    of his ideas. But he had caught the aëronautic fever. Like many another
    poor son of fancy, he was haunted by magnificent dreams. Now, perhaps,
    was stirring in his mind that vision of his childhood when he lay on
    his back in the New England pasture and “watched a hawk soaring far
    up in the blue, and sailing for a long time without any motion of its
    wings, as though it needed no work to sustain it, but was kept up there
    by some miracle.” Mr. Andrew D. White declares that Professor Langley
    was a poet by nature. Whatever the dominant impulse, he followed his
    “aërodrome” like one possessed. It was the all engrossing pursuit of
    the latter years of his life, entailing how much vexation, toil and
    unjust censure!
In 1898 the Board of Ordinance and Fortification, after carefully
    studying the flights of 1896, appropriated $50,000 to enable Professor
    Langley to build a one-man flyer. He first tested a gasoline driven
    aëroplane having one fourth the linear dimensions of the man-carrying
    one. In external appearance this model resembled the steam “aërodrome,”
    described above, but was considerably larger. It spread 66 square feet
    of surface, weighed 58 pounds, and developed 2½ to 3 horse power.
    When ready for the test, August 8, 1903, this beautiful white-winged
    creature was taken to the middle of the Potomac, 40 miles below
    Washington, mounted on the launching ways, swiveled into the eye of
    the wind and shot forth like a stone from a catapult, her engine and
    propellers humming merrily.
The flight must have been very graceful and dignified, for it
    elicited commendation even from the squad of reporters present, men
    who customarily197 recorded such events with uncontrollable mirth and
    ridicule. Dr. Langley merely remarks: “This was the first time in
    history, so far as I know, that a successful flight of a mechanically
    sustained flying machine was seen in public.” It was also the first
    successful gasoline[22] aëroplane, and the forerunner of the host
    of flyers presently to spring up in all parts of the world. Its
    flight though very brief, owing to a surcharge of gasoline, was so
    satisfactory in all its dynamic features, that it seemed to justify an
    immediate launching of the one-man machine, with which like maneuvers
    were anticipated. As will appear in the sequel this prospect of fair
    sailing was beset with unsuspected shoals.
We have now traced the growth of the aëroplane from its earliest
    conception to the present time, as exemplified by working models. First
    came the parachute of da Vinci and others, whose sole function was
    to carry a weight softly to earth, with no provision for steadiness
    of motion, or control of direction. Then, in the beginning of the
    nineteenth century, arrived the gliders adjusted for steadiness,
    equilibrium and a predetermined slanting course in the air; beautiful
    passive birds, actuated by gravity, but riderless and awaiting the
    advent of artificial motive power. Then suddenly appeared Mr. Henson’s
    wonderful project; a large man-carrying aëroplane, provided with
    a motor, propellers, rudders, wheels for launching and landing—an
    impossible scheme for that day, but destined to be realized in
    the course of two generations. Henson’s idea was doubtless the
    most prolific in the history of aviation. After this followed the
    numerous instructive models, actuated by twisted rubber, steam,
    gasoline, compressed air—economic 198contrivances for ascertaining the
    secrets of propulsion, equilibrium and control, of the prospective
    man-flyer. These may be said to have demonstrated the practicability
    of man-flight, though many contemporaneous and allied experiments, to
    be noticed presently, all contributed to the triumphs subsequently
    achieved by the race of sanguine, daring and tireless inventors.
In this brief outline, the two other main types of flyers, the
    orthopters and helicopters, have been omitted. The orthopters, or wing
    flapping machines, have been very numerous, but have not yet approached
    practical success in use. Though a man-carrying orthopter has not yet
    been produced, an elegant pigeon-like model operated by rubber has been
    made by Pichancourt, which flies and balances nicely. The helicopters,
    or direct-lifting screws, have more than once raised their weight and
    that of the helicoptrist, or navigator. These latter, therefore, seem
    to be of sufficient interest to merit a short historical review.
Leonardo da Vinci, the fertile pioneer in aviation, missed one novel
    device worthy even of his genius. He constructed aërial screws of
    paper, but he did not endow them with motive force. Such an achievement
    was in his power, and would have ranked him with Archytas of Tarentum,
    who 400 b. c. invented the kite, and an artificial dove said
    to have flown, no one knows how. Having escaped da Vinci’s ingenuity,
    the power helicopter failed to materialize for three centuries, but
    finally appeared in France.
199
In 1784 Launoy and Bienvenu, the first a naturalist, the second a
    mechanician, exhibited before the French Academy the interesting toy
    shown in Fig. 36. This was the first power-driven helicopter, and is
    said to have lifted itself in the air quite readily. As may be observed
    it consists of two coaxial screws rotating in opposite directions
    actuated by the power of an elastic stick, like a bow. The screws were
    each about one foot in diameter and made of four feathers; one screw
    being fastened to the top of the rotating shaft, the other fastened
    to the bow, which rotated in the contrary direction. The little model
    excited much interest, particularly as its inventors expected to build
    a man-carrying helicopter on the same plan. The larger project was
    obviously without merit; for no combination of springs can maintain
    flight for more than a few seconds even on the most favorable scale.
A more powerful toy helicopter was produced by Mr. Horatio Phillips in
    England in 1842. This was a single aërial screw emitting jets of steam
    which compelled it to spin, on the principle of a lawn sprinkler, or
    a Hero engine. The whole apparatus weighed two pounds, and had screw
    blades inclined 20° to the horizon. The steam was generated by the
    combustion of charcoal, niter and gypsum, as in the fire extinguisher
    previously invented by the same ingenious man. The performance of this
    curious helicopter, is thus described by Mr. Phillips: “All being
    arranged, the steam was up in a few seconds, then the whole apparatus
    spun around like a top, and mounted into the air faster than any
    bird; to what height it ascended I have no means of ascertaining. The
    distance traveled was across two fields, where, after a long search, I
    found the machine minus the wings, which had been torn off from contact
    with the ground.”
200
“The distance traveled was across two fields.” For vagueness this
    surpasses the poet’s measure—“as far as oxen draw the plow in a day.”
    It would be most interesting to have an exact description of this
    classical experiment, when for the first time a flying machine rose
    in the air propelled by a heat motor. It would be desirable also
    to know the possibilities of such a helicopter, particularly since
    Prof. Cleveland Abbe has proposed to employ a like agent to carry
    meteorological instruments into the higher atmosphere.[23]
A still more ambitious helicopter was that shown in Fig. 37 invented by
    Professor Forlanini, an Italian Civil Engineer, and launched in 1878.
    The lower screw was fastened to the frame of a steam engine, the upper
    screw was attached to the crank shaft. Steam was supplied from the
    globe shown beneath, which was two thirds filled with water, and well
    heated over a separate fire just before an ascension. As the globe was
    merely a reservoir of hot water and steam, carrying neither fuel nor
    furnace, its power waned rapidly. The best flight lasted about twenty
    201seconds, attaining a height of 42 feet. The apparatus weighed 77
    pounds, spread 21.5 square feet of screw surface, and lifted about 26.4
    pounds per horse power.
Many other helicopter models have been tried from time to time, with
    various sources of power, without, however, yielding any important
    results beyond those already given. But these were sufficiently
    encouraging. If a large machine could be made to lift as many pounds
    per horse power, it would be easy to build one competent to carry
    a man. That, indeed, has been done on several occasions. Of the
    various inventors who have built man-lifting helicopters M. Cornu and
    M. Bréguet, in France, seem to have been first to attain a measure
    of success. While their machines have raised a passenger directly
    from the ground, they have not yet maneuvered in horizontal flight
    with sufficient speed to be of practical service. However, a few
    helicoptrists in various countries are still industriously at work, and
    hope eventually to rival the aëroplanists in the mastery of flight.
    There will doubtless be room in the sky for both. Perhaps also there
    will be occupation and a mission for both.
Having traced the growth of winged models from their earliest beginning
    to the time when they proved the possibility of mechanical flight, we
    may now study the evolution of larger machines, designed to carry human
    beings. Considering first the aëroplane, we may follow the two general
    methods advocated by various inventors for launching a man safely in
    the air, both of which led to success. The first of these may be called
    Henson’s method, the second Lilienthal’s, coupling them with the names
    of their distinguished pioneer exponents. Henson in 1842 proposed
    that the pilot should mount a full-power machine, run along a smooth
    course, and glide into the air without previous experience in the art
    of navigating. Lilienthal recommended careful preliminary training on a
    glider, by which the novice should acquire sufficient skill in parrying
    the wind to qualify him to manage a dynamic machine, under its more
    complex conditions of control. Others, more cautious still, contended
    that automatic equilibrium should be secured before a rider risked his
    bones on the aërial bronco; while still others thought the uncertain
    beast should be tethered to some point in the sky, say a balloon or
    taut wire, or the end of a pole; so that however he bucked, or reared,
    he should not fall over on his rider.
We have noticed in the first chapter some picturesque man-flights,
    usually deplorable or tragic;203 and always fruitless for lack of
    scientific method in experimentation and report to the world. There can
    be no doubt that such flights were accomplished, mainly, of course,
    by the aid of gravity; but the difficulty is to ascertain the exact
    nature of any given performance, the specifications of the apparatus,
    and the principles of equilibrium and control. Gradually, however, the
    experimenters improved both in the construction of man-carrying devices
    and in the manner of imparting their results to their colleagues, or
    successors; and so the flying enterprise began to assume a progressive
    aspect, attended with that scientific dignity which invests secure
    and continuous advance in any branch of knowledge. Little of value,
    however, can be gleaned from any such flights made prior to the middle
    of the nineteenth century. From that time forward observers and
    inventors made definite and fairly methodical efforts to develop the
    art of gliding and soaring in the air, the first fruit of which was to
    hasten the advent of the modern aëroplane.
A French novelist and aëronautic writer, G. de la Landelle, relates
    an amazing adventure in the art of soaring, which may have some
    foundation in fact, though savoring strongly of fiction. An experienced
    sailor, Captain Le Bris, having observed the albatross soaring without
    wing-beat, determined to imitate the fascinating flight of that
    limber-winged spirit of the sea. To such end he built the bird shown in
    Fig. 38, a ninety-pound albatross, with arched wings fifty feet across
    and articulated to the boat-like body. In this the brave aviator would
    stand upright, turn the wings and tail to maintain his balance, and
    steer grandly through the sky. Placing this long-winged creature across
    a cart driven by a peasant, he stood erect and headed against a breeze;
    the wings set low to prevent lifting204 till an opportune moment, and the
    bird held down to the car by a rope which the captain could quickly
    release. When the horse was a-trot, and the wind blowing freshly, Le
    Bris raised the front edges of the wings. Thereupon the albatross
    tugged upward, and the mooring rope was slipped, but accidentally
    whipped around the driver’s waist. The horse galloped away with the
    cart; the bird, with the exultant sailor on its back, soared 300 feet
    into the air, and incidentally carried up the peasant, dangling at
    the end of the rope and howling with fright. Noting the distress of
    his passenger, the kindly captain sailed close to earth, so that the
    peasant might disembark and run to his horse, meaning then to hie away
    for a long cruise in the clouds. But with this change of weight the
    vessel seemed not to navigate well; so she was brought skimming to
    land, with no mishap save a slight damage to the advancing wing, which
    broke as it touched the ground.
Having repaired the great bird’s wing, Captain Le Bris next made
    a launching from the arm of a derrick, 30 feet above the ground,
    overlooking a quarry 70 feet deep. The attendant swains stood
    open-mouthed, wondering whether this madman would overleap the clouds,
    or promptly butt out his brains on a jagged rock. When the wind blowing
    from the quarry seemed to float him in perfect poise, he tripped the
    suspension hook, and headed for the precipice on even keel. He was now
    happily205 launched, and keen for an aërial journey; but after passing
    the brink, he seemed to encounter an eddy which tilted his craft
    forward. The vessel dipped and rose; the captain plied his levers,
    turning now the tail, now the pinions. He crossed safely over the
    invisible breakers, and reached the quiet air of the quarry on level
    wing. But now his forward speed was lost, the great bird sank rapidly
    and crashed upon the rocky bed below. The wary seaman anticipating a
    bump, sprang upward to soften his fall; but a lever rebounding from the
    shock, hit one of his legs and broke it.
Some twelve or thirteen years later, in 1867, Le Bris, aided by a
    public subscription at Brest, built a second albatross, with which
    he made a number of small flights, sometimes riding it himself, and
    sometimes replacing his weight by ballast. On one occasion the loaded
    bird, held by a light line, rose 150 feet and advanced against the
    wind. Suddenly the sailors holding the line observed it slacken, and
    saw with amazement the long-winged creature soar forward 600 feet, as
    stately and serene as its living prototype. Presently encountering a
    sheltered and quiet region of air before some rising ground, it settled
    softly to earth in perfect equipoise. But on a subsequent launching
    from the same favorable ground, the dumb creature pitched forward and
    plunged to the earth where it lay shattered and torn in a hopeless
    tangle. Le Bris looked on the wreck in despair, surveying sadly the
    remains of his once cherished bird; then sat upon the débris a long
    time, his head between his hands, his heart broken, his mind tortured
    with anguish. Impoverished, chagrined, derided, he now must abandon
    the albatross business. Five years later this intrepid sailor of sea
    and air was killed by some ruffians, in 1872, while a constable in his
    native place, and after a period of206 honorable service to the state in
    the Franco-Prussian War.
The story is more romantic than instructive, for want of exact data.
    To give the experiments their proper value to others, fuller details
    of the mechanism should be furnished, and adequate measurements of the
    speed and direction of the aërial currents. At one time the sailing
    was even, at another, rough, though outwardly the conditions appeared
    the same. Apparently the successful flights occurred when the bird was
    launched to windward from rising ground, that is, when the current had
    an upward slant, to exert a propulsive effort. This species of soaring
    has been observed frequently in nature, and has been imitated both with
    models and with man-carrying gliders. Nevertheless Le Bris’ experiments
    were very remarkable for the time, and, if adequately reported, might
    have proved to be of much interest and value to aëronautical science.
Another Frenchman alert to the glory of aërial motion was L. P.
    Mouillard, the poet-farmer of Algeria. From boyhood he studied the
    birds with unabated interest and pleasure. He would journey miles to
    attend the “morning prayer” of the starlings in the forest of Baba-Ali;
    noting, just before sunrise, how their melodies suddenly hushed, and
    the forest seemed to bound upward, and heaven filled with the music of
    innumerable wings. He would time the shadow of the high bird of passage
    riding the hurricane from continent to continent. He saw the tyrant
    eagle fold his wings in mid air and plunge a thousand feet in ferocious
    swoop after the swift-fleeing duck or rabbit. He loved to watch the
    great tawny vulture on the mountain top shake the dew from his vast
    plumes, straddle the morning wind, and all day long, with never a beat
    of those grand pinions, soar godlike through immensity, the marvel207
    and delight of the nether world. When the electric wind of the desert,
    blowing from Central Africa, brought the big scavengers and noble birds
    of prey, he sat on the ground scrutinizing their majestic flight and
    planning to imitate it. He would lie in ambush where the silent-rowing
    owl darted at dusk through the timber, fierce and swift as the eagle;
    a dreadful thing, with its night piercing eyes, its big ears and beak,
    its horrid talons, its sudden shriek startling the forest with ominous
    echoes. No feature escaped him, and least of all an aërodynamic one.
For thirty years he continued these studies. He would bring home
    the birds, lay them on their backs and mark their contour on paper,
    measure their projected area, weigh and compare them. He formulated
    curious conclusions about sailors and rowers, the functions of tail and
    quill feathers, weight and wing-spread, bulk, agglomeration of mass,
    resistance and velocity. He notes that only massive birds soar well,
    the broad-winged ones requiring a moderate wind, the narrow-winged ones
    requiring a gale, and sailing with perfect ease in a tempest; and he
    concludes that man may imitate both types. His book[24] is replete with
    charming anecdotes, observations and quaint theories, interesting alike
    to ornithology and aviation.
But Mouillard did more than theorize; he built soaring machines and
    soared a little. His third and best glider, illustrated in Fig. 39, was
    a tailless monoplane made of curved agave sticks screwed to boards,
    and covered with muslin. The aviator, standing in the open space C,
    harnessed the plane on with straps looped round his legs and shoulders,
    and fastened to the points D D. His forearms, passing under straps,
    rested on the board, enabling 208him to tilt the whole by shifting his
    weight. In order to vary the dihedral angle between the wings, they
    were hinged together and actuated by rods running from the man’s feet
    to the ends of the boards, hardly as far out as the center of wind
    pressure, thus apparently stressing his legs like a wishbone.
He now sent the home folks away from the farm, buckled on his wings and
    walked along the prairie road waiting for a breeze. The road was raised
    five feet above the plain and bordered by ditches ten feet wide. His
    wings felt light; he ran forward to test their lift, and he thought to
    amuse himself by jumping the ditch. The result is thus expressed in his
    own words:[25]
“So I took a good run across the road and jumped at the ditch. But,
      oh, horrors; once across the ditch my feet did not come down to earth;
      I was gliding on the air, and making vain efforts to land; for my
      aëroplane had set out on a cruise. I dangled only one foot from the
      soil, but, do what I would, I could not reach it, and I was skimming
      along without the power to stop. At last my feet touched the earth;
      I fell forward on my hands; broke one of my wings, and all was over;
      but goodness, how frightened I had been! I was saying to myself that
      if even a light wind-gust occurred, it would toss me up 30 to 40 feet
      into the air, and then surely upset me backward, so that I would fall
      on 209my back. This I knew perfectly, for I understood the defects of my
      machine. I was poor, and I had not been able to provide myself with a
      more complete aëroplane. All’s well that ends well. I then measured the
      distance between my toe marks, and found it to be 138 feet.
“Here is the rationale of the thing. In making my jump I acquired a
      speed of 11 to 14 miles per hour, and just as I crossed the ditch I
      must have met a puff of rising wind. It probably was traveling some 8
      to 11 miles per hour, and the two speeds added together produced enough
      pressure to carry my weight.”
He repaired his wing and repeated the test a few days later. A violent
    wind gust came; picked him up from the earth, and whelmed him over. In
    his alarm he allowed his “wish-bone” to spread, and the wings to fold
    up like those of a butterfly at rest, pinching him between them like
    a nut in a nutcracker. One wonders whether the overwheeling vultures
    witnessed this gentleman’s flight with any sense of humor.
After mature reflection, Mouillard concluded that he should give his
    aëroplane a rudder, and flex the wings, in order to insure adequate
    control. But here he halted, being a poor man unskilled in the art
    of construction. He had reached the limit of his endowments. He had
    observed faithfully and described charmingly the wonderful flights
    of various birds; but he must leave to his technical successors the
    pleasure of imitating or excelling those extraordinary maneuvers—leave
    them the pleasure, the sacrifice, the long years of toil and danger,
    accompanied perhaps by indiscriminate applause or derision.
In the meantime another distinguished disciple of the birds was
    energetically at work in Germany.210 No less ardent than Le Bris, or
    Mouillard, Otto Lilienthal was far better equipped and circumstanced.
    He was a graduate of the Potsdam Technical School, and a student
    for three years in the Berlin Technical Academy. He was engaged in
    practical construction ten years in various machine shops at Berlin.
    After 1880 he operated a flourishing machine factory of his own. From
    boyhood he with his brother Gustavus had carefully studied the flight
    of birds, and had made numerous experiments in aviation. On moonlight
    nights in their little home place of Anclam, in Pomerania, the boys
    would run downhill, flapping their home-made wings, like Dædalus and
    Icarus, but with no other danger than discovery and teasing by their
    neighbors. At Potsdam and Berlin they continued to experiment and to
    construct wings of increasing size and power. Thus Otto Lilienthal
    reached early manhood thoroughly trained by his long courses in the
    technical schools and shops, brimming with well pondered ideas,
    strengthened by continuous observation and experiment, and in financial
    circumstances which permitted him to devote time and money to the
    unremunerative pursuit of aviation. To this may be added that his
    mature years were cast in a time when the allied sciences could aid
    him far more than they had aided his predecessors of the preceding
    generation.
After careful research for the most efficient form of alar surface,
    Lilienthal resolved to imitate the birds. First he would build a pair
    of arched wings, and learn to coast down the atmosphere, balancing
    and steering like a stork in the gusty and treacherous current. He
    would thus acquire the pilot’s skill, and ascertain the towline power
    required to sustain a given weight. Then he would add a suitable
    propelling mechanism, test it cautiously, 211and acquire the mastery of
    dynamic flight. Incidentally, perhaps, he would learn to ride all over
    creation without motive power; for he was convinced that certain great
    birds soar without muscular effort, and that man could acquire this
    delightful art in favorable weather. To strengthen the plausibility
    of that doctrine, he announced his discovery that the general trend
    of the wind is three and a half degrees upward, a fact inexplicable
    and almost incredible to his illustrious confrère of the Smithsonian
    Institution.[26] Such was Lilienthal’s ample program; more, indeed,
    than he would live to accomplish, though possibly not beyond his power
    of achievement, if he could have lived to enjoy the hale long years of
    his illustrious countryman aëronaut, Count Von Zeppelin.
In the year 1891 Lilienthal made his first series of trials in sailing
    flight. His glider was the bird-shaped apparatus shown in Plate XVI,
    made of willow wood covered with waxed sheeting. It weighed about 40
    pounds, and spread 107 square feet of surface. Taking this in his arms
    he first ran 24 feet along a raised board and jumped off, gliding
    through still air. Then, elevating the board to a height of six feet,
    he repeated the run, jump and glide, always landing very softly. Thus
    he became “king of the air in calm weather,” a title still creditably
    sustained by his numerous successors of the present day; for as yet no
    one “mounts the whirlwind and directs the storm.”
Next he went to some little mounds in a field beyond Werder, and jumped
    from these, gradually lengthening his flights till he attained a range
    of nearly 80 feet. As he was now gliding in light 212winds, he found it
    necessary to add a vertical rudder, in order to preserve his balance
    easily, and keep his bow toward the direction of the wind. His complete
    apparatus was, therefore, a birdlike affair, with two rigid wings and
    a double tail for steering vertically and horizontally. He found also
    that he could fly longer and alight more softly when the wind was
    blowing—an obvious possibility.
Encouraged by this experience Lilienthal explored the country about
    Berlin for sailing ground where he could make long glides, whatever
    the direction of the wind. Such a region he found near Rathenow, where
    the Rhinow hills, covered with grass and heather, slope gently upward
    from the flat plowland to a height of over 200 feet. This he thought
    an ideal coasting ground; for he felt the aërial currents very smooth,
    and he could always select clear land sloping ten to twenty degrees
    toward the wind. Here in the summer of 1893, with a new and improved
    glider, he made many flights, finally ranging from 200 to 300 yards,
    steering up and down, or to right and left at will; sometimes pausing
    in mid air, and several times returning to the starting point. This was
    more than coasting; for a mere coaster never maintains, nor returns
    to, his original level. It was a fair start at true soaring, the ideal
    locomotion. A glorious sport it was, sailing like an eagle high over
    the landscape and over the heads of the astonished spectators.
The new machine resembled its predecessors in form and maneuver; but
    differed in dimensions. It was a birdlike craft with parabolically
    arched wings and a double tail. It measured 7 meters across, spread
    14 square meters of surface, weighed with the rider 200 pounds, and
    in calm air could sail down a slope of 9°, at a speed of 9 meters
    per second. This was very efficient sailing, the work of 213gravity
    being hardly two horse power. With the man lying prone, as eventually
    planned, the economy would be still greater.
The craft was thought also to possess stability; and this it had, in a
    measure, about those two axes corresponding to the two rudders; but the
    control about the third axis, effected by dangling the legs to right
    or left, was extremely crude and primitive. It was in keeping with his
    adage: “to contrive is nothing; to construct is something; to operate
    is everything.” If he had contrived more intelligently, he would have
    operated more easily, and avoided those wild and dangerous dancings in
    space. A more scientific adage would read: “To design effectually is
    everything, to construct is routine, to operate is play.”
The marvel is that Lilienthal, the observant, the technically trained,
    the practically skilled, should operate for three years, then patent,
    an aërial glider having two rudders, but lacking the third rudder,
    or torsional wing, now so commonly used throughout the world. But
    doubtless he contemplated a device for preserving the lateral balance
    without shifting his weight; for he acknowledged the economic advantage
    of lying prone on the machine, and stated that this might be done after
    some important improvements in the apparatus had been made.
Having executed nearly two thousand flights with his monoplane,
    Lilienthal in 1895 built a two-surface glider. He found this still
    easier to control, and now thought he had sufficiently acquired the
    art of sailing to justify his undertaking the next and more difficult
    art of imitating the rowing flight of birds. He had constructed a
    ninety-pound engine, of two and a half horse power, to actuate the
    wings of his glider; but, before applying this motor, he went to the
    Rhinow Hills for a little further experience 214in sailing. Previously
    he had remained in the air twelve to fifteen seconds; but he wished to
    exceed this record.
On the 9th of August, 1896, he made a long glide to prove the
    effectiveness of the horizontal rudder, and then wished to undertake
    a second flight of the greatest duration feasible. No intimation had
    he that this sail would prove disastrous. Giving the timepiece to his
    assistant, he set forth on a level course, but suddenly dipped forward
    and plunged headlong to earth through a height of fifty feet. He was
    dragged out from the débris with a broken spine, from which he died the
    following day.
The machine on which the father of aërial gliding made his last flight
    is shown in Plate XVI. Of the hazardous nature of its construction Mr.
    Chanute thus writes: “The two surfaces were kept apart by two struts,
    or vertical posts, with a few guy wires, but the connecting joints were
    weak, and there was nothing like trussing. This eventually cost his
    most useful life. Two weeks before that distressing loss to science,
    Herr Wilhelm Kress, the distinguished and veteran aviator of Vienna,
    witnessed a number of glides by Lilienthal with his double-decked
    apparatus. He noticed that it was much wracked and wabbly, and wrote to
    me after the accident: ‘The connection of the wings and the steering
    arrangement were very bad and unreliable. I warned Herr Lilienthal very
    seriously. He promised me that he would soon put it in order, but I
    fear that he did not attend to it immediately.’”
It will be observed that Lilienthal gave fair attention to the merits
    of both the monoplane and the biplane, the two familiar types in
    lively competition at the present hour. The first he found in Nature;
    the second he could have found in England, as the developments
    principally of Wenham and of Phillips. 215His example and prestige did
    much to promote the biplane; but he seems to have had no very decided
    preference for either. Though he found his biplane very satisfactory,
    he thought of returning to the monoplane.
In April, 1896, he wrote:[27] “I am now engaged in constructing an
    apparatus in which the position of the wings can be changed during
    flight in such a way that the balancing is not effected by changing
    the position of the center of gravity of the body. In my opinion this
    means considerable progress, as it will increase the safety. This will
    probably cause me to give up again the double sailing surfaces, as it
    will do away with the necessity which led me to adopt them.” He thus
    seems to have studied the two types impartially, and to have invented a
    means for balancing the machine without shifting the center of mass.
Lilienthal had given a powerful and permanent impulse to aviation,
    both by his writings and by his practical experience in the air. He
    first showed quantitatively the advantage of arched wings, by carefully
    derived tables of wind pressure; then he mounted the wings himself
    and taught the world, by bold and frequent flight, the art of aërial
    gravity sailing. The two remaining achievements, dynamic and soaring
    flight, he was to undertake as promptly as possible. If his life had
    been spared, no doubt he would have contributed much to the advancement
    of these arts, both by example and by direct effort; for he was in the
    prime of life, full of energy and daring, highly equipped, and ardently
    devoted to his favorite science. He began his studies in aviation at
    the age of thirteen and died at the age of forty-eight years.
Among the admirable traits of the father of sailing216 flight must be
    mentioned his scientific liberality and esprit de corps. Though he
    patented his invention he did not conceal, or withhold, his discoveries
    when he could publish them properly. These discoveries were made at
    a great sacrifice of time and means, and must have appeared to him
    valuable trade secrets; yet he published all his scientific data, his
    theories, and observations; he encouraged his confrères in various
    countries to witness and emulate his experiments, to share intimately
    his laboriously developed knowledge of aviation, to join hands with
    him in hastening the advent of practical flight. Such is the esprit
    de corps which has ever prevailed among truly scientific men, as
    distinguished from the mercenary and commercial; such are the unselfish
    investigators whom the world delights to honor, both for their genius
    and for their liberal contributions to the common and permanent
    possessions of humanity.
Before his death Lilienthal had the pleasure of knowing that competent
    disciples were emulating him in doctrine and practice. One of the
    earliest and cleverest of these was Percy S. Pilcher, Assistant
    Lecturer in Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering at the University
    of Glasgow. In the summer of 1895 he built the glider shown in Plate
    XVI. This, like Lilienthal’s, was a double-tailed monoplane arched fore
    and aft; but, better than his for manual control, it was straight from
    tip to tip, like the designs of Henson, Penaud, and other predecessors.
    This improvement was introduced to prevent side gusts from rocking the
    craft so readily as they do the V-shaped gliders. His best sailer, the
    Hawk, shown in the figure, had wings curved one in twenty, about one
    third from their front edge.[28] Sometimes 217he sailed downhill; again
    he was towed or launched, like a kite, by means of a cord, running
    through five-fold multiplying gear, and drawn by running boys, or a
    horse. In both cases he controlled the machine to his own satisfaction,
    making in 1897 smooth downhill glides of 700 feet length, from an
    elevation of 70 feet.[29] He had also visited Lilienthal, but only
    after achieving success at home.
Having acquired some skill in sailing, Mr. Pilcher began work on a
    power machine. This was to be propelled by a screw actuated by an
    oil engine, and was to be mounted on wheels backed by stiff springs.
    Having observed his speed of descent in gliding, he computed that
    two tow-line horse power would float him and his machine, weighing
    together 220 pounds. A like result was obtained when he was flown as
    a kite. He was, therefore, on the straight road to achieving human
    flight on a screw-propelled, wheel-mounted monoplane. If he had been
    more cautious he might have been the first person to achieve human
    flight in a practicable type of dynamic machine; for he seems to have
    equaled, if not excelled, his German master in aëroplane design. But
    like the master he provided inadequately for the structural strength
    of his glider, and braved too far the dangers of gusty weather. One
    stormy day, September 30, 1899, wishing to please several persons who
    had come a long distance to see him, he made two trial flights in a
    gentleman’s park near Rugby. The second of these proved fatal. The
    spectators heard a cracking noise, saw the tail break, and the whole
    craft plunge headlong to the ground. Poor Pilcher was mortally hurt and
    died thirty-four hours later, without ever regaining consciousness. He
    was then in his thirty-third year.
218
Had this talented young Briton and his German tutor both lived, there
    would doubtless have been a pleasant race and rivalry between them;
    for the pupil was forming opinions and plans sufficiently divergent
    from those of his master and friend. He did not approve Lilienthal’s
    high wings and low center of gravity, nor his V-shape for lateral
    equilibrium, nor his flapping wing tips for propulsion, nor his method
    of launching the dynamic machine. Fortunately both published their
    ideas and experiments, leaving to their successors the task of judging
    the merits of their designs, and of adding any improvements that might
    still be required in order to achieve final success.
Contemporary with Pilcher, Mr. Octave Chanute and Mr. A. M. Herring,
    in America, were emulating the work of Lilienthal. Mr. Chanute was an
    experienced civil engineer, who had previously written a history of
    aviation, and experimented with numerous flying models; Mr. Herring,
    his employee for the time, was a mechanical engineer who had assisted
    in Langley’s experiments, and previously had flown a Lilienthal glider,
    and had made researches in the science of mechanical flight. On June
    22, 1896, accompanied by two assistants, they went into camp among the
    sand dunes, on the southern shore of Lake Michigan, to study the art of
    navigating an aëroplane without artificial motive power. Mr. Chanute
    thought that the maintenance of equilibrium under all circumstances
    was at that time the most important problem of aviation; and that
    until automatic stability was secured, it would be premature and
    dangerous to apply a motor. He wished to evade, for he did not relish,
    Lilienthal’s way of balancing by shifting the body and kicking wildly
    at the stars. His main purpose, therefore, was to acquire the pilot’s
    science; but secondarily he would 219learn much about the architecture
    of gliders, the behavior of air currents, the elements of propulsion
    and sustentation.
They made some flights with a Lilienthal monoplane; but, finding this
    unsafe and treacherous, they discarded it in favor of a multiple-wing
    glider designed by Chanute, which after many empirical modifications
    in the placement of the sustaining surfaces, assumed the form shown in
    Plate XVII. This glider resembled the Lilienthal biplane in having the
    surfaces vertically superposed, the rider below them, and the rudder in
    the rear; but it was a five-decker whose wings, on either side, could
    swerve fore and aft, so as to bring the center of lift always over the
    center of gravity, in order to prevent excessive rearing or plunging.
    This glider was found very tractable in a twenty-mile wind, and in a
    thirteen-mile breeze would sail down a slope of one in four.
After further study, the five-decker was replaced by a three-decker;
    which presently was deprived of its obtrusive and unessential lower
    surface, thus assuming the familiar form shown in Plate XVII. As will
    be observed, this was a radically new and elegant design, consisting
    of two superposed arched surfaces held together by vertical posts and
    diagonal wires, like a Pratt truss. It was, in fact, the renowned
    “Chanute glider” which has been copied by so many succeeding designers
    of biplanes.
The Chanute glider weighed 23 pounds, spread 135 square feet, and
    readily carried a total weight of 178 pounds at 23 miles an hour. It
    was provided, as shown, with side planes and a double rudder, and
    this latter was elastically connected to the main body to insure
    steadiness of flight, on the principle of the elastic wing margins used
    by D. S. Brown in 1874. This craft was found easy to manipulate220 in
    launching, sailing and landing, a two-inch shift of the pilot’s weight
    equivalencing a five-inch shift on the Lilienthal monoplane. It was
    steady at a speed of twenty to forty miles an hour through the air,
    even when the wind was blowing seventeen miles an hour overground. The
    angle of descent was 7.5° to 11°, depending on the speed and trend of
    the wind. The work of gravity expended in maintaining steady flight was
    at the rate of two horse power for the 178 pounds, a good showing with
    the rider vertical.
Summer passed before Mr. Chanute could perfect the invention for
    automatic stability by means of swerving wings; but otherwise the
    gliding experiments were very satisfactory. The strong and simple
    biplane evolved during those few weeks of fruitful study, though not
    an original creation, having been foreshadowed theoretically and
    experimentally, in the work of Wenham,[30] Stringfellow, Lilienthal,
    Phillips, and Hargrave, was nevertheless an important contribution to
    the science of aviation, by reason of its strength and simplicity of
    design, its efficiency, its stability, and, best of all for that day,
    its record for good flights and safety. All who could appreciate it
    understood that the addition of a light motor would transform it to
    a dynamic flyer, navigable at least in mild weather. The most eager,
    perhaps, was Mr. Herring; for he had not only mastered this glider,
    but some years previously had flown successfully rubber-driven models
    very much resembling it in design. These two aviators, therefore, came
    to a parting of the ways, Chanute still pursuing automatic stability,
    221Herring impatiently heading for dynamic flight by the shortest route
    available. Had they continued together on a practical course, they
    might, ere the close of the century, have anticipated at least the
    early flights of the French aviators, if they could have constructed or
    purchased an adequate motor.
After some further development of the aërial glider to adapt it
    to power flight, Mr. Herring began the construction of a dynamic
    aëroplane. He had previously built very light steam and gasoline
    engines,[31] and deemed the latter best for a perfected flyer, though
    preferring steam or compressed air in a first experimental test.
When seen by the present writer in October, 1898, at St. Joseph,
    Mich., Mr. Herring was about to launch himself in the compressed-air
    driven biplane shown in Plate XVII. It was essentially a powered
    Chanute-Herring glider, steadied by a double tail, and controlled by
    shift of the pilot’s weight, the tail being elastically attached.
    The writer then suggested that both a glider and a dynamic aëroplane
    should be controlled entirely by steering and balancing surfaces, on
    the principle set forth in his paper of 1893; and, in particular,
    indicated that the lateral balance should be controlled by changing the
    inclination of the wings on either side, while the double tail should
    be used to steer and steady the aëroplane sidewise and vertically; in
    other words, that a torque about each of the three rectangular axes of
    the machine should be secured from impactual pressure, thus obviating
    the need for shifting the pilot’s weight. Mr. Herring, while making no
    objection to this proposal, intimated that he had a device for insuring
    control without shifting the pilot’s weight, but believed the most
    important ef222fort for the moment should be to make a short flight with
    the machine as it stood, for the purpose of enlisting capital, then
    to add the controlling devices at leisure. He expected to remove the
    wheels shown in the figure, hold the aëroplane against a stiff breeze
    from Lake Michigan, start the propellers, strike a soaring attitude,
    and fly forward for a few seconds against the wind.
The successful accomplishment of such a flight covering an overland
    distance of seventy-three feet in eight or ten seconds, against a wind
    of thirty miles an hour, was reported in the Chicago Evening News,
    of November 17th of that year; but the present writer has not been
    able to ascertain the reporter’s name, or that of any other witness to
    the event, which, if true, is well worthy of verification and detailed
    record.
In following the votaries of passive flight, as represented by
    Lilienthal and his school, we have overlooked the great man-carrying
    bird of Clément Ader, one of the most prominent and successful aviators
    of that active period. If the reports be true, Ader may justly claim to
    be the first person to navigate the air in a dynamic flying machine.
    However, it must be observed that his achievements did not at first
    arouse in France a great pitch of exultation and enthusiasm. There
    seemed at the time to be some skepticism as to the practicability of
    his device. But later cordial reparation was made by placing it on the
    Stand of Honor at the Aëronautical Salon, held in the Grand Palais, at
    Paris, in December, 1908.
Clément Ader set out in life with the fixed determination to make
    a fortune, then to build a practical flying machine. Adopting the
    profession of electrical engineer, he quickly accumulated enough
    capital, as he thought, to realize his early ambition. He223 next visited
    Africa to study at close range the great soaring birds that Mouillard
    had described with so much admiration and vivacity. Going to Algeria
    he disguised himself as an Arab, and, with two Arab guides, journeyed
    to the interior where he watched the great soaring vultures, which
    he enticed with bits of meat to perform before him their marvelous
    maneuvers, wheeling in wide circles, and without wing beat, from earth
    to sky.
After several years of study of the anatomy and flight of birds, Ader
    began, at the age of forty-two years, to construct an aëroplane. His
    first machine was a birdlike monoplane mounted on skids, or wheels,
    and driven by a 40-horse-power steam engine actuating a screw, placed
    forward. The total weight was 1,100 pounds, the spread 46 feet, the
    length 21 feet. The Eole, as he called it, received its first
    open-air test on the morning of October 9, 1890, in the grounds
    surrounding the Chateau d’Armainvilliers, near Gretz, a portion of the
    course being so prepared that the trace of the wheels would be visible.
    When everything was ready for the trial, Ader mounted the machine, in
    presence of a few friends, ran quickly over the ground, urged by the
    propeller thrust, then rose into the air and sailed 150 feet. Such is
    the report of the witnesses to what is claimed as the first flight of a
    human being in a power-driven flying machine.
Subsequently this bold inventor built Eole No. 2, which, by special
    permission of the War Department, he tested on a prepared track, 2,400
    feet long, on the Satory Camp. Over this course he ran his machine
    several times, and on one occasion flew 300 feet; but on alighting
    broke one of the wings.
Ader, now having spent one and a half million francs on his
    experiments, placed the Eole on exhibition in order to raise money
    for their continuation. 224In this venture also he was successful,
    being presently subventioned by the French War Department to build an
    aëroplane for its use. His subsequent labors are concisely set forth in
    Automobilia and Flight for February, 1909, as follows:
“Under these new conditions the workshop in the Rue Pajou was abandoned
      for larger premises in the Rue Jasmin, where the construction of the
      Avion was commenced in May, 1892, all persons engaged with the
      construction being under a military vow of secrecy. The motor was built
      first, and tested before a commission composed of army officers and
      some of the leading technicians of France. It was found to develop 30
      horse power for a total weight of 32 kilogrammes; and even now, though
      seventeen years old, is regarded as a chef d’œuvre. In the spring of
      1897 the Avion was ready to make flights. Like its predecessors it
      was modeled on the form of a bat; but, although the wings could not
      be flapped, they could be folded, and could be advanced or retarded
      horizontally.
“Everything appearing satisfactory, Ader informed the military
      commission that he was ready to undergo tests; the committee met at
      the workshops in the Rue Jasmin on August 18, 1897; were pleased with
      the machine, and ordered flights to be made immediately at Satory. It
      was not, however, until October 12th that a flight was attempted on
      the carefully guarded military ground, and in the presence of General
      Mesnier. The apparatus covered a distance of 1,600 yards, and although
      it did not fly, for this distance it is certain that on several
      occasions it completely left the ground. Ader declared that according
      to whether the wings were carried forward or to the rear, it was the
      front or the rear wheels only which left the ground. The pressure in
      the generator at this moment varied between225 3 and 4 atmospheres. On
      increasing it to 6 or 7 atmospheres none of the wheels touched.
“Satisfied with the results of the test, General Mesnier called the
      commission together for further trials on the following day, October
      14, 1897. Unfortunately it was a rough, squally morning, that would
      have prevented many a modern aviator from bringing a machine into the
      open. But as the officers had been brought together specially for this
      purpose, a flight was attempted.
“‘After several revolutions of the propellers, and a few yards covered
      at a moderate speed, we were off at a high rate of travel,’ wrote
      Ader, who was at the wheel on this memorable occasion. ‘The pressure
      was about 7 atmospheres. Almost immediately the vibrations of the
      rear wheel ceased, and, directly after, those of the front wheels
      were no longer felt, showing that we had entirely left the ground.
      Unfortunately the wind had increased in strength, and I had some
      difficulty in keeping to the line that had been marked out. I increased
      the pressure to 9 atmospheres, and immediately the speed increased
      considerably, the vibrations ceased again, showing that we had once
      more left the ground. Under the influence of the wind the aëroplane
      had a constant tendency to drift to the right, away from the circular
      track that had been marked for it. Finally, with the wind broadside on,
      the machine was in a rather dangerous position, for it was being still
      more rapidly driven out of its course. I increased the pressure still
      more and put the rudder hard over to the left, with the result that
      for a few seconds the machine worked back towards the track and still
      maintained itself in the air. But it was impossible to struggle against
      the wind, and finding that the machine was being carried towards some
      artillery sheds, and somewhat unnerved by the226 speed at which the
      ground appeared to be rushing past, I stopped the engine; there was a
      shock, and I was on the ground.’
“Ader was uninjured, but his machine was rather badly smashed. It had
      certainly flown, but with such difficulty in the face of the wind that
      the army commission was evidently little inclined to report favorably
      upon it. Several weeks passed without any communication being received
      from the War Department; then it became apparent to Ader that the
      Government had no longer faith in his invention. This was proved early
      in the following year by an official communication to the effect that
      no further funds could be allotted to this work. Discouraged at the
      abandonment after forty years’ labor and the expenditure of about
      two million francs, Ader commenced the destruction of his machines.
      The earlier ones were destroyed, but the Avion, the one which had
      appeared before the army commission, was saved and sent to the Museum
      of the Arts et Métiers in Paris.”
The last aëroplane, or Avion, weighed 1,100 pounds, spread 270 square
    feet, and was driven by a 40-horse-power steam engine actuating twin
    screws projecting before the bird-shaped flyer. The engine weighed but
    7 pounds per horse power—quite a remarkable achievement for that day.
In following the votaries of passive flight, as represented by
    Lilienthal and his school, we have overlooked the great dynamic
    aëroplane of Mr. Maxim, one of the most prominent aëroplane builders of
    that active period. Having in 1889 made elaborate experiments on the
    atmospheric resistance of sustaining surfaces, and on the thrust of
    screw propellers, he proceeded to build the gigantic aëroplane shown
    in Plate XVIII, the greatest flyer thus far known to history. It was a
    twin-screw multiplane 227mounted on a platform forty feet long by eight
    feet wide, and having four wheels running along a track eight feet
    wide and half a mile long. Above the rails of this track were guard
    rails to prevent the flyer from rising more than three inches during
    the tests. The whole machine weighed 3.5 tons, spread 5,500 square
    feet of surface, and, at a speed of 40 miles an hour, lifted more than
    a ton, in addition to the weight of the three men and 600 pounds of
    water. Its propelling plant comprised a naphtha tubular boiler, and a
    compound steam engine of 350 horse power actuating twin screws 17 feet
    10 inches in diameter which gave a thrust approximating 2,000 pounds.
    These screws were made of American yellow pine, covered with canvas and
    painted, then smoothly sandpapered to reduce the friction; for Maxim,
    like certain French aviators, erroneously imagined that a polished
    surface has less air friction than a dead even surface. The framework
    was composed of seamless steel tubing stayed with steel wire. The
    aëroplane was to be steered right and left by a rudder, and up and down
    by horizontal planes, one fore, another aft, and its lateral stability
    was to be secured by side planes set at a dihedral angle. A meritorious
    feature for that day were the superposed arched surfaces whose framing
    was smoothly covered below and above by skillfully stretched fabric,
    causing the air to flow evenly without wasteful eddies.
Many runs along the track were made to test the working of this
    great apparatus before trusting it to launch forth in free flight.
    Dynamometers gave independently the thrust of the screws, and the lift
    of the wings on the front and rear axles. The ascensional planes for
    controlling the fore and aft equilibrium were tested during the run,
    as also the practical operation of the propelling plant. During228 the
    trials of 1893 the machine frequently lifted clear of the lower track,
    and flew forward resting against the guard rails above the wheels.
    Finally, on a gusty day, the lift against the upper track caused this
    to give way, whereupon the machine rose into the air with Mr. Maxim
    and his assistant, then toppled over on the soft earth, suffering
    some damage to its framework. Here the experiments were discontinued
    for lack of funds, having indeed demonstrated that a large weight
    can be carried in dynamic flight, but having proved little as to the
    feasibility of controlling an aëroplane in launching, in free flight,
    and in landing.
Compared with the work of his contemporaries this achievement of Mr.
    Maxim was herculean, both in construction and expenditure, the cost
    being reported as nearly one hundred thousand dollars. It raised high
    hopes for aviation. It proved conclusively not only that a flying
    machine could be made to lift a pilot, but that it could carry hundreds
    of pounds additional weight. It still holds the world’s record for
    magnitude of machine and cargo. But it had two great defects; it was
    improperly balanced and it was inadequately powered; for, as Mr. Maxim
    says, “the quantity of water consumed was so large that the machine
    could not have remained in the air but a few minutes, even if I had had
    room to maneuver and learned the knack of balancing in the air.”[32]
    These defects, however, would soon be remedied by the work of others,
    and particularly by the costly experiments of the automobilists, who
    were rapidly developing a light gasoline motor suitable for aviation.
The inventors thus far noticed had developed most of the important
    features of the present-day 229flying machines, but had not provided
    adequate mechanism for preserving a steady lateral balance. The present
    writer had proposed the combination of a double rudder and torsional
    wings to steer and control a flyer, and had published a paper setting
    forth its general principle and describing a specific device; but
    inventors had little need for a third rudder till they encountered
    the dangers of dynamic flight in gusty weather. The paper referred
    to was presented to the Third International Conference on Aërial
    Navigation, in August, 1893, under the title, Stability of Aëroplanes
    and Flying Machines, and was published with the proceedings of the
    conference.[33] It discusses mainly the question of automatic stability
    and steadiness; but recommends personal control during the experimental
    period. It concludes as follows:
“We have been considering the question of automatic stability, in so
      far as it may be secured in the construction of the craft itself,[34]
      apart from a pilot, or special equilibrating devices. The application
      of the latter would give exercise to an infinite amount of ingenuity,
      and would, perhaps, best be left to the fancy of the individual
      inventor. One curious design, however, occurs to me, which, since I
      have not seen it described elsewhere, may be worth a moment’s notice.
“Suppose a Phillips’s machine (see Plate XIV) to be provided with a
      double tail, and to have a vertical fin extending longitudinally along
      its entire length, well above the center of gravity. These would steady
      its flight and promote stability. Suppose also that its sustaining
      slats were pivoted, so that a pilot could at pleasure change their
      inclina230tion on the right and left side independently. He could then
      set the engine for a desired speed, sweep forward along the earth
      with the sustainer slats horizontal, and at will mount into the air,
      by giving the slats an upward inclination. Once in the air he could
      raise or lower the machine by slightly changing the angle of the slats;
      he could wheel to right or left by giving one set of slats a little
      different slope from the other; he could arrest all pitching, rocking
      and wheeling by a slight counter movement of the sustainers. It would
      be necessary, of course, to preserve a rapid forward motion, for it
      is a peculiarity of the compound aëroplane that, if it comes to a
      standstill in the air, it will drop plumb down with a frightful plunge
      until it acquires headway.”
The succeeding paragraph disclosed a specific contrivance embodying
    the principle just given. This showed two levers rotating drum shafts
    for actuating wires adapted to change the impact angles of the wing
    surfaces. Accordingly this much of the mechanism of control, together
    with the broad device of the torsion wings, has been the common
    property of inventors since the publication of that paper. Furthermore,
    the combination of torsional wings and a double rudder, either fixed or
    movable, has been public property since that date.[35]
Little was said about the manner of manipulating the double rudder and
    torsional wings; for the rules of manipulation would vary in different
    machines, depending upon structural design and external conditions.
    For example, if the proposed fin and vertical rudder were ample and
    suitably placed, the lateral balance could be controlled by merely
    231twisting the wings, without touching the vertical rudder; but if the
    fin and rudder were not adequate, the lateral poise would be controlled
    by twisting the wings and working the vertical rudder conjunctively.
    A novice might prefer leaving the rudders fixed and controlling the
    poise in short flights by twisting the wings by means of a single lever
    having two independent movements, one to rotate the wings oppositely,
    the other to rotate them identically.
The principle of control expressed in italics had been set forth also
    in a preceding paragraph. Having proposed means for securing both
    stability and steadiness about each of the three axes of an aëroplane,
    the text continued:
“These ends could probably be attained very well by mounting two
      compound aëroplanes on a long backbone,[36] somewhat after the manner
      of the Hargrave cellular kites, and adding a compound rudder to the
      whole.” ... “If the inclination of the sustainers, front and back,
      could be altered independently, it might be feasible for a pilot to
      preserve the equilibrium of the machine even when its center of gravity
      was frequently shifted, as by the moving of passengers to and fro.”[37]
At that date, 1893, an inventor doubtless could have secured a broad
    claim on a mechanism embodying the torsion-wing-and-double-rudder
    mechanism of control. But in those days aviation was pursued largely
    as a liberal study by scientific men who wished to hasten the advent
    of practical flight, by presenting important physical measurements
    and principles which could be freely employed by all. Accordingly the
    three-rudder system of control 232seems not to have been claimed by an
    inventor much before the close of the nineteenth century. Since then it
    has been patented in one form or other by many practical aviators, some
    endeavoring to claim the whole broad contrivance, others claiming more
    restricted devices.
The static principle of the torsion wing is a familiar one in
    elementary mechanics. It is this: a torque of given magnitude and
    direction has the same effect on a rigid body whatever its point of
    application. The longitudinal torque, or moment, may therefore be
    exerted by the wings, by suitable rudders, by forward planes, by any
    auxiliary planes, or fins, however placed or moved for the purpose.
    Accordingly there seems to be an unlimited variety of concrete
    patentable devices available to the inventor for securing impactual
    torque about the longitudinal axis, or either of the other two axes.
    But in planning such devices it is well to remember that the moment of
    a couple increases with its arm, so that in a wide aëroplane the wing
    tips may best furnish the torque; while in a high short-winged machine,
    vertical planes, fins, or rudders may give the desired longitudinal
    moment. Obviously such vertical guiding or controlling surfaces may be
    so placed as to tilt the machine toward the center of curvature of its
    path, at the same time opposing the centrifugal force, and exerting a
    torque about the vertical axis tending to steer the flyer along its
    path.[38]
233
The principle of projectile stability is another consideration of
    some importance in aviation, or more generally in all submerged
    navigation, whether of air or water. A submerged body has projectile
    stability if its nose tends always to forerun its centroid, and follow
    a steady course. A dart is a good example; a fish, a torpedo. Thus if
    a torpedo-shaped homogeneous solid be hurled in any manner through a
    fluid, obliquely or even tail foremost, it promptly turns its nose to
    the front and proceeds steadily along an even course; but if the body
    has not true dynamical balance, it may oscillate or gyrate, or flit
    about in the most erratic manner.
Projectile stability in a flyer, as in an arrow, may be attained by
    playing the centroid in or near the line of forward resistance, and
    well ahead of the side resistance. The reasons for this are manifest.
    If, however, this arrangement be neglected, a special damping, or
    controlling, device is required to preserve headlong and steady motion.
    In particular, the objections to placing the centroid too low were
    emphasized in the above quoted paper as follows:
“I have mentioned the advantage of placing the center of mass below the
      center of surface; this has also its objections. While the stability
      against inversion is increased, the stability against rocking is
      sacrificed. The aëroplane so constructed may not easily overturn; but
      it will sway to and fro with a pendular motion. This, when lateral, is
      very objectionable, when fore and aft it is fatal to uniform progress,
      as we shall see in studying the longitudinal stability of flying
      machines. We shall then see that the center of mass cannot be lowered
      with impunity.”
Of the various flyers and models thus far studied, some manifest fairly
    good, others very imperfect projectile stability. Many inventors have
    been more234 alert to the gravitational stability and safety of the
    parachute than to the kinetic stability and keen, direct flight of the
    arrow. Some of the most pretentious machines imitated the thistle down
    more nearly than the dart or swallow. But the exigencies of actual
    flight would easily rectify such imperfections of design.
Tractional balance also is a property of some importance in fluid
    navigation. This requires that the line of propulsive thrust coincide
    with the line of fluid resistance. It is a property, however, that
    inventors readily apprehend, and usually provide for.
In general a flyer is subject to four forces: weight, thrust, air
    pressure and inertia. When these balance about any axis the craft has
    equilibrium about that axis; when they balance about the three axes
    the craft is completely balanced, and preserves its orientation in
    flight. Devices for preserving this complete balance have already been
    described; as also provision for propulsion and sustentation, launching
    and landing safely.
Thus at the close of the nineteenth century all the essential
    principles and contrivances of pioneer flight were worked out, except
    one—a suitable motor. This was the real problem of the ages. The rest
    was easy by comparison. A light enduring motor, if available to the
    old time inventors, would have brought dynamic flight centuries ago.
    That only could have baffled Da Vinci, Cayley, Henson, Wenham and the
    long line of pioneer aviators. Eventually, of course, steam engines had
    come, endowed with ample power; but costly to build and wasteful to
    operate. The light automobile engine appeared in the latter nineties;
    promptly thereafter followed the dynamic flyer, the snow-winged herald
    of the twentieth century.
The dawn of the twentieth century found several votaries contriving
    aëroplanes for one or more passengers. The epoch of models had
    virtually closed, bequeathing a rich heritage. The essential elements
    of aviation, barring the motor, had been clearly worked out. The age
    of practical flight was at hand. No further need to prove feasible
    the heavier than air; for that had been done repeatedly. Scientific
    design and patient trial, not invention and physical research, were now
    the chief demand. Further research would improve the aëroplane, but
    not bring it into practical operation. Capital, constructive skill,
    judgment in adapting principles and devices already known, energy,
    persistence, caution, imperturbability in danger and derision; these
    were requisites. Science had led the way, with uplifted torch; let the
    craftsmen follow her with kit and apron. The aëroplane was sufficiently
    invented; it now wanted, not fastidious novelty, but concrete and
    skillful design, careful construction, exercise in the open field.
Of the group of aëroplanists in the beginning of the nineteenth century
    Mr. Hugo Mattullath, of New York, was one of the most original, daring
    and resourceful. He had been a successful inventor, manufacturer and
    business man, accustomed to large enterprises. In the latter nineties,
    deeming the time opportune for practical aviation, he determined to236
    build a commercial flying machine. He would begin where Maxim had
    stopped. A larger and swifter craft appeared to him most desirable.
    In his judgment any clever mechanic could make a one-man flyer. “Take
    that for granted and waste no time on toys!” Professor Langley’s
    “aërodrome,” with every spare ounce filed away, should lift itself,
    of course. It might navigate a calm; possibly even a zephyr, if no
    one sneezed; but never could it carry passengers on schedule time. He
    therefore would jump the little flyers, and build at once a commercial
    aëroplane strong enough to defy the storm, powerful enough for regular
    traffic on a business scale. That meant a ship for numerous passengers,
    equipped to fly fifty miles an hour against the prevailing wind. A
    glorious project indeed; an enterprise suited to a gentleman of first
    rate ability.
Mattullath’s aim was aërial transportation, not exhibition at county
    fairs and crowded carnivals. Regular interurban routes were projected,
    terminating in ample landing floors. Broad-winged aëroplanes, huge
    catamarans with shining hulls, sumptuously furnished in gold and
    crimson, should convey happy crews, in all seasons, from metropolis to
    metropolis. Six great engines and propellers to drive the ship, with
    abundant reserve power. Melodious strains of music rising incessantly,
    to soften the thunder of motors and the demoniacal howl of the wind.
    Then transcontinental voyages, outsailing the nimbus, how lovely to
    the anointed of fortune! Jocund savannas nestling by the sea, or in
    the bosom of orchid-crested hills, should welcome to earth the silken
    sojourners of the north migrating, gay-plumed and potent, to their
    winter homes in tropic paradise. All the isles of ocean, all the merry
    mountains, earth, sea and air, one shining empire, blissful and secure
    as Olympus. Chimborazo, girt237 with every clime, from torrid base to
    snowy peak should glow
Such were his holiday fancies, seldom revealed, even to his associates.
    The public had no intimate part in his project. A few trusted
    engineers, eminent in their profession, and a few financiers, formed
    his advisory board. For two years he worked on the structural elements
    of the great sails, propellers, and framing of his ship. But unhappily
    when he was preparing to present his final plans to his council of
    engineers, before building the large vessel, he was brought suddenly to
    the close of his career.[39]
Mattullath’s proposed air ship consisted of two parallel torpedo-shaped
    hulls sustained by superposed plane or slightly arched surfaces, and
    propelled by feathering-paddle disk wheels embedded in the planes;
    the engines, cargo and passengers to be placed within the hulls.[40]
    This arrangement would enhance the comfort of the passengers at high
    speeds, eliminate resistance, distribute the load on the framing,
    and increase the moment of inertia of the vessel, thereby rendering
    it less sensitive to side gusts. To improve the projectile stability
    and steadiness, the centroid was placed as high as practicable. Large
    steering planes were used fore and aft on both sides of the vessel,
    whose inclination could be changed independently, to turn the ship
    about its longitudinal or transverse axis. A vertical rear rudder
    steered 238to right or left, in conjunction with the side planes. All the
    posts were of double wedge shape; all the planes were canvassed above
    and below to shield the framing, after the style of Maxim. The hulls,
    the posts, the planes, all parts, were keenly sharpened to economize
    power. The ship was to run over its smooth launching field till it
    acquired a rising speed of forty to fifty miles an hour, then continue
    accelerating up to velocities sufficient for competition with passenger
    trains in all weather.
While one may easily point out certain questionable features in
    Mattullath’s project, as for example, its odd propellers, one can not
    so easily estimate its true merits. The torsion wing device for lateral
    control and steering, which he claimed in his patent application,
    abandoned after his death, now constitutes a very important feature of
    every flying machine. His planes for fore and aft control, introduced
    by Maxim, are also in general use to-day. The principle of load
    distribution, which he greatly prized for diminishing stress and adding
    stability, has still to be evaluated by practical test in larger craft
    than any now in operation. The closed hull, for comfort and economy at
    high speed, is at present popular with many designers.
One tentative assumption of Mattullath’s, made on the authority of
    Maxim and Langley, was that the friction of the air is a negligible
    part of the entire resistance encountered by the hull, framing and sail
    surfaces. Accepting their experimental conclusion, he designed a flyer
    so sharp and smooth in all its parts as practically to eliminate the
    pressural, or head resistance. With no skin friction, with scant hull
    and frame resistance, he could afford[41] to fly at 239a very slight
    angle, thus minimizing the drift, or wing resistance, while at the same
    time securing abundant lift by rapidity of flight. He thus arrived,
    by cold deduction from the data of those prominent experimentalists,
    at an aëroplane swift as the albatross, and wondrously economical of
    power. But his financiers were loath to gamble on that assumption. He
    therefore, at their suggestion, instigated systematic measurements
    of air friction on smooth surfaces, which demonstrated that in a
    sharp aëroplane flying at a very slight angle, the skin friction is
    nearly equal to all the other resistances combined. These results were
    obtained and published[42] some months after his death. They were
    unfavorable to his project, and to all projects for attaining high
    speed through the air by excessive sharpening of the vehicle.
The first dynamic aëroplane of adequate stability and power to carry a
    man in prolonged flight, was that of Professor Langley. This machine
    was nearly a duplicate, on a four-fold scale, of the gasoline model
    previously described, which had flown many times with good inherent
    equilibrium. There was accordingly every reason to expect that,
    weighted and launched like the model, it would fly with the same poise
    and swiftness, even if left to govern itself. Having in addition
    a living pilot, provided with rudders for steering and balancing,
    together with adequate fuel for a long journey, it seemed to promise
    still better results than the model. But an unfortunate accident in the
    launching so crippled this carefully designed craft that it fell down
    helpless, without a chance to exhibit its powers of sustentation and
    balance, even for a moment, in normal flight.
240
The first trial occurred on September 7, 1903, in the middle of the
    Potomac River at Widewater, Va. The aëroplane was placed on the same
    catapult, above the boat, that had previously started the models on
    their smooth and rapid maneuvers. The pilot took his seat, and started
    the 50-horse-power engine which ran the propellers without appreciable
    vibration. Tugs and launches were placed along the course where they
    might be of service. Photographers, on the water and along shore, were
    ready to furnish important pictorial records of the experiment. The
    aëroplane was released and sped along the track attaining sufficient
    headway for normal flight; but at the end of the rails it was jerked
    violently down at the front, and plunged headlong into the river,
    sinking beneath the waves. Buoyed up by its floats, it quickly rose to
    the surface, with its intrepid pilot uninjured, and with little damage
    to the structure.
As revealed by an examination of the catapult and photographs, the
    guy post that strengthened the front pair of wings had caught in the
    launching ways, and bent so much that those wings lost all support. The
    aëroplane, therefore, had not been set free in the air, but had been
    wrenched and jerked downward. Thus the launching proved nothing of the
    propulsive or sailing powers of the machine.
Those who understand the principles of aviation can judge the merit of
    Langley’s “aërodrome”[43] from its mechanical description. As shown in
    Plate XVIII, it was a tandem monoplane driven by twin screws amidships.
    The pilot seated in the little boat could control the poise and course
    by several devices; he could shift his weight longitudinally 4.5 feet,
    lat241erally 2.5 feet; he could elevate and depress the rear double
    rudder, which when untouched ensured steady longitudinal poise, on the
    principle introduced by Penaud; he could steer to right and left by
    turning about its vertical axis, the wind-vane rudder shown below and
    rearward of the boat. The lines of lift, propeller thrust and forward
    resistance passed through the centroid, or near it, thus providing
    for projectile and gravitational stability. In this feature Langley’s
    “aërodrome” far surpassed those of his immediate predecessors, whose
    machines, by reason of their low centroid, possessed the stability of a
    pendulum, rather than that of a dart, or swallow. These various devices
    combined should give the craft better control in free flight than that
    possessed by any of the models, which had flown successfully many times
    in moderate weather.
If the projectile and steering qualities of Langley’s machine surpassed
    those of its predecessors, the propelling mechanism was a still
    greater advance in the art of aviation. The gasoline engine was a
    marvel of lightness, power, endurance and smoothness of running. It
    weighed, without accessories, 125 pounds, and developed 52.4 horse
    power in actual test at a speed of 930 revolutions a minute. With
    all accessories, including radiator, cooling water, pump, tanks,
    carburetor, spark coil and batteries, it weighed 200 pounds, or
    scarcely five pounds per horse power—a great achievement for that time.
    It could run many hours continuously under full load, consuming about
    one pound of gasoline per horse power per hour. Its five cylinders,
    arranged radially round a single crank shaft, were made of steel lined
    with cast iron, and measured 5 inches in diameter by 5.5 inches in
    stroke. Its running balance was excellent. By means of bevel gears it
    drove the twin screws at 700 revolutions per minute, giving242 a thrust
    of 480 pounds, the screws being very nearly true helices of unit pitch
    ratio and 30° width of blade, carefully formed of three radial arms
    covered with canvas.
The whole machine weighed 830 pounds, including the pilot; spread 1,040
    square feet of wing surface; measured 48 feet from tip to tip, and 52
    feet from the point of its bowsprit to the end of its tail; soared at a
    speed of about 33 feet a second and a ten-degree angle of flight, the
    wings arching one in eighteen at one fourth the distance from their
    front edge. The double rudder, at the extreme rear, measured 95 square
    feet in each of its component surfaces.
It is evident from these figures, very kindly furnished by Mr. Manly,
    the mechanical engineer in charge of the experiments, that such an
    aëroplane had every equipment needed for a steady flight of many hours
    in fair weather. A thrust of 490 pounds on well-designed surfaces
    should easily carry 500 pounds of gasoline in addition to the 830
    pounds regular weight of ship and pilot. This would enable the machine
    to fly practically all day without renewal of supplies. It appears,
    therefore, that Professor Langley had, in 1903, a dynamic aëroplane
    quite the peer, in many respects, of the best that were developed
    during the first decade of aviation, and that a mere accident, which
    should be expected in such complex experimentation, deprived him of
    the credit of the first man-flight on an adequately controlled and
    powered machine. Quite true, he lacked launching wheels; but how easy
    to add these, since they were proposed many times. He omitted the
    front steering plane, but had a rear one serving the same purpose. The
    worst that can be said is that he needed the equivalent of torsion
    wings for lateral control; but in moderate weather he could have flown
    successfully without them, as Farman, Delagrange, Paulhan[44] 243have so
    fully demonstrated. Besides, Langley had already tested the torsion
    wing device, and contemplated using it on his large machine.
A second launching was attempted on the Potomac River near Washington,
    on December 8, 1903. This time the rear guy post was injured, crippling
    the rear wings, so that the aëroplane pitched up in front and plunged
    over backward into the water. After some repairs it was stowed away
    in the Smithsonian Institution, where its frame and engine are still
    intact, its wings having been injured in the wreck and discarded. The
    experiments were now abandoned for want of funds to continue them.
Notwithstanding that Professor Langley had contributed much to the
    science of aërodynamics, by his elaborate researches, and had really
    developed a machine capable of sustained flight, if properly launched,
    he was subjected to unmitigated censure and ridicule; for he had
    incurred the enmity of various journalists and wiseacres, partly by
    his official secrecy, and partly by that natural reticence which
    avoids premature publicity in important scientific enterprises. This
    irresponsible criticism, combined with the cessation of work which
    should have brought success, profoundly grieved him, and doubtless
    hastened his death. He had, however, the satisfaction of knowing that
    a few competent specialists appreciated his labors, and would continue
    them to abundant fruition. A few days before his death he had the
    gratification of receiving, from the newly formed Aëro Club of America,
    the following communication acknowledging the value of his efforts to
    promote aërial travel.
244
Adopted January 20, 1906.
“Whereas, our esteemed colleague, Dr. S. P. Langley, Secretary of
      the Smithsonian Institution, met with an accident in launching his
      aërodrome, thereby missing a decisive test of the capabilities of this
      man-carrying machine, built after his models which flew successfully
      many times; and whereas, in that difficult experiment, he was entitled
      to fair judgment and distinguished consideration because of his
      important achievements in investigating the laws of dynamic flight, and
      in the construction of successful flying models; therefore be it
“Resolved, That the Aëro Club of America, holding in high estimation
      the contributions of Dr. Langley to the science of aërial locomotion,
      hereby expresses to him its sincerest appreciation of his labors as a
      pioneer in this important and complex science; and
“Be it further resolved, That a copy of these resolutions be sent to
      the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution and to Dr. Langley.”
This kindly message from America’s foremost aëronautic society brought
      a moment’s pleasure to the last hours of the illustrious scientist.
      “Professor Langley was on his deathbed when these resolutions were
      brought to his attention, and when asked what should be done with the
      communication, his pathetic answer was: ‘Publish it.’ To all who know
      his extreme aversion to publicity in any form, this reply indicates how
      keenly he felt the misrepresentation of the press.”[45]
245
Professor Langley’s progress with the “aërodrome” was due largely to
    the skill, energy and devotion of his designer and superintendent of
    construction, Mr. Charles M. Manly. This talented young graduate in
    mechanical engineering, of Cornell University, in 1898, went directly
    from the class room to assume the chief burden of Langley’s researches
    in aërodynamics, and his practical experiments in mechanical flight,
    remaining till their termination in 1904. He was the confidential
    secretary and adviser to his chief in that whole enterprise. When
    in 1900 Dr. Langley stood baffled before the greatest obstacle in
    aviation, unable to find any manufacturer, in America or Europe, who
    could furnish a practical engine of the desired power, lightness and
    durability, Manly came to his rescue with a design which guaranteed
    success and which resulted in the wonderful gasoline motor built in the
    Smithsonian shops. Finally when the aëroplane was ready to be launched,
    it was Manly who bore the long weeks of trial in the malarial region of
    Widewater, harassed by accidents and foul weather, not to mention the
    merry agents of the press; and it was he who twice rode the ponderous
    aërodrome, shot forth in mid air at the imminent risk of his life.
While Langley was building his great tandem monoplane, Wilbur and
    Orville Wright of Dayton, Ohio, were developing a biplane which was
    an improvement on the aërial glider of Chanute and Herring. This was
    to be their preliminary effort toward achieving continuous flight.
    Their first product, tried at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, in the
    summer of 1900, is shown in Plate XIX. The chief points of departure
    from Chanute and Herring’s glider were (1) to place the rider prone
    on the lower surface, as first proposed and tried by Wenham, forty
    years’ previously; (2) to discard the vertical rudder; (3) to246 place
    the horizontal rudder forward, as done by Mattullath and Maxim; (4)
    to control the lateral balance by changing the impact angles of the
    wings, as recommended by the present writer in 1893. Of these four
    modifications the first was impractical for general use, though good
    for soaring and possibly racing; the second was unsatisfactory and
    later abandoned; the third was effective, and has been accepted by
    some aviators as an improvement, but rejected by others who prefer the
    rear[46] horizontal rudder; the fourth proved acceptable to them, as to
    various other inventors before and after them.
With this glider they made a number of satisfactory flights. The front
    rudder and the torsional wings proved adequate to control the craft
    in sailing straight ahead down the Kill Devil sand hills, near Kitty
    Hawk, N. C. In this, as in all their machines to the present date, sled
    runners, fixed under the machine, as proposed by Ader and others, were
    used for launching and landing. With a surface of 165 square feet, they
    could glide down a slope of 9.5° at a speed of 25 to 30 miles an hour.
    This showed only a moderate efficiency, but it was a beginning.
The glider used in the summer of 1901 was modeled after that of the
    previous year, but larger. It was 22 feet wide, 14 feet long, 6 feet
    high, spread 308 square feet, and weighed 108 pounds. With this a
    number of glides were made, of various lengths up to 400 feet. At a
    speed of 24 miles an hour gravity exerted on the aërial coaster 2½
    tow line horse power, showing an efficiency nearly equal to that of
    Pilcher’s glider of 1897.
In camp with the Wright brothers in 1901 was Mr. Chanute, the leading
    aëronautic expert in Amer247ica. They thus had the advantage of
    his long experience, both as a student of aviation and a practical
    experimenter. With them were also two other specialists, Mr. E. C.
    Huffaker, an experienced aëronautical investigator, who had worked
    successively with Langley and Chanute; and Dr. G. A. Spratt, who had
    made some important investigations on the value of curved surfaces and
    the travel of the center of pressure with the varying angles of flight.
    The numerous animated conferences with these gentlemen were instructive
    and profitable. When the season closed the brothers returned home and
    experimented on curved surfaces to improve the efficiency of their
    glider.
The 1902 machine, shown in Plate XIX, had two main surfaces, measuring
    each 32 by 15 feet, and a front rudder measuring 15 square feet. The
    whole weight was 116 pounds. It will be noted that a vertical rudder
    was now employed. This was a reversion to the design of Chanute and
    Herring, but after some experience, the rudder was made adjustable,
    as in Henson’s aëroplane of 1842. Its surface was 12 square feet,
    but later reduced to six. With this machine they obtained between
    700 and 1,000 glides during the season. It showed greater efficiency
    than its predecessors, its normal angle of descent being estimated at
    seven degrees or less. This was some improvement over the efficiency
    of the Chanute-Herring glider, partly due, of course, to placing the
    rider flat, instead of allowing him the more comfortable erect posture
    adopted later.
Whatever improvements of efficiency and strength had been made,
    these were of secondary importance compared with the provisions for
    projectile stability and manual control. Here at last, after ten
    years’ groping, was an actual glider with sufficiently high centroid
    to minimize the pendulum effect, and with248 three rudders to give
    impactual torque about the three axes. These simple provisions had
    been previously pointed out in aëronautic writing, and, in the latter
    nineties, had been embodied in Mattullath’s aëroplane, but not tested
    in the large machine, owing to his death. The wonder is that, of all
    the practical inventors of aëroplanes, Mr. Mattullath was the only
    one of that period fully to grasp and adopt these main ideas before
    starting to build a man-carrying machine. However, it must be added
    that he had previously made small flying models, which may have
    suggested the advantage of kinetic stability and the three-torque
    system of control. If Lilienthal and his disciples, who laid so much
    stress on gliding experience, had started like Mattullath with three
    torque-surfaces, they would have missed indeed those acrobatic and
    picturesque kickings at the sky, but they would have reached the
    desired goal with less danger, time and expense. They displayed more
    skill in riding a fractious glider than in designing a tractable
    one, by providing for impactual torque about each of three axes. Had
    they started with a good theory of dynamic control, they could have
    dispensed with coasting entirely, and commenced aviating with short
    runs over a smooth course followed by cautious leaps in the air, after
    the style of certain ingenious French aviators. However, the knack
    of balancing was finally acquired, and thus the glider was ready to
    receive the propelling mechanism.
In 1903 a 16-horse-power engine and twin-screw propellers were applied
    to the navigable glider at Kitty Hawk, as shown in Plate XX. The power
    machine weighed 750 pounds, and was usually started by aid of a tow
    line and falling weight which helped the craft to acquire headway.
    After many trials and modifications, the first successful launchings,
    four in number, were made on December 17th. The 249first flight lasted
    12 seconds, the next two a little more, the fourth lasted 59 seconds,
    covering a distance of 852 feet over the ground in the face of a
    twenty-mile wind. To the superficial observer these performances did
    not seem a very remarkable advance on the flights of Ader, but they
    had in them greater promise and potency of practical flight. They were
    the first flutterings of a fledgling endowed with the chief essential
    organs of aërial locomotion—an awkward but healthy creature that had
    been evolving steadily for several generations. It would grow rapidly,
    and ere another half decade, increase the 59 seconds to so many minutes.
The experiments were continued during the next two years with
    increasing success. During the season of 1904, on a field near Dayton,
    one hundred and five flights were made, some short, others covering the
    entire circuit of the field no fewer than four times, the two largest
    measuring each nearly three miles, each accomplished in about five
    minutes. Various improvements were made in the propelling and steering
    mechanism, and increased skill in maneuvering was gradually acquired.
In 1905 the flights were resumed with a new machine embodying some
    changes dictated by experience, particularly in the method of control.
    Forty-nine landings were made involving seven breakages, but no
    personal injury. On September 26th a flight of eleven miles was
    achieved. This was followed, within the next nine days, by flights of
    twelve, fifteen, twenty-one and twenty-four miles, at a usual speed
    of 38 miles an hour. After this the field practice ceased for more
    than two years, and the machine was dismantled to preserve secret its
    mode of construction till the patents could be disposed of. As these
    performances and those preceding are of unusual interest, a fuller
    account is given in Appendix IV.
250
The Wright brothers now had to assume in aviation the rôle of cautious
    business men. The gliding experiments had been a scientific recreation,
    and had been fairly well reported to engineers, except in those details
    to be covered by patent claims; but the details of the power machine
    were withheld, or sparingly disclosed. The brothers had sacrificed
    time and money. They were making aviation a profession. They must,
    therefore, be repaid. But if they exhibited too promptly their machine
    and aërodynamic data, they might jeopardize their financial interests
    by assisting or stimulating rival aviators. On the other hand, by
    procrastination and concealment they might, in various ways, forfeit
    priority and scientific credit. Chanute’s glider was already familiar
    in Europe, and it was estimated to have ample efficiency for successful
    flight with existent motors. Their own published experiments were
    being studied and repeated. They might, therefore, expect that, at any
    time, some rash or cunning fellow would bolt into the air and proclaim
    to all the world that their unpublished devices, if they possessed
    any novelty, were by no means necessary, as they fancied, to usher
    in actual dynamic flight. The aëroplane would thus appear to be the
    sudden outgrowth of fertile and mature conditions, rather than the
    product of uncommon originality. Scores of aviators would immediately
    spring into being—chauffeurs, mechanics, sporting gentlemen of every
    dye. Light motors being now available, any intelligent artisan could
    power a Hargrave kite, or Chanute glider, and soar aloft. Every odd
    craft, not too absurdly designed, would navigate, with some showing.
    Publicity and prize money would develop and perfect the various types
    with feverish haste. But in 1905 the Wright brothers apprehended no
    portentous or imminent invasion of the sky. The foreign bogie was251 five
    years behind, being unfamiliar with sand hill practice and the torsion
    wing. They would, therefore, chance the result of withholding their
    data and concealing their machine. It was a curious situation; Langley
    and Manly, who produced the first aëroplane endowed with all the
    essential powers of prolonged flight, were bound to official secrecy;
    the Wrights, who had a finished machine, tried and fairly ready for
    public exhibition, were hampered by trade secrecy. These silent leaders
    in aviation presented a gratifying contrast to the shouting fraternity
    who, in the daily press, announced impending marvels which never
    materialized.
The same year, 1905, which crowned with most success the private
    flights of the Wright brothers, brought into unusual prominence
    the quarter century long experiments of Prof. J. J. Montgomery of
    Santa Clara College, Santa Clara, Cal. He had given much attention
    to the science of aviation, particularly to passive flight, and had
    constructed several successful gliders operated by himself or his
    friends. The most remarkable of these machines was a glider resembling
    in general appearance Langley’s tandem monoplane, but having means for
    changing the wing curvature during flight, thus varying the lift on
    such wing, and thereby enabling the operator to control the equilibrium
    and direction during his glides in the air.
On April 29, 1905, a forty-five pound glider of this pattern bearing an
    intrepid parachute jumper, Daniel Maloney, was lifted from the college
    grounds by a hot-air balloon to an elevation of 4,000 feet, then cut
    loose. “In the course of the descent,” writes one of his pupils, “the
    most extraordinary and complex maneuvers were accomplished—spiral and
    circling turns being executed with an ease and grace almost beyond
    description, level travel accomplished252 with the wind and against it,
    figure-eight evolutions performed without difficulty, and hair-raising
    dives were terminated by abrupt checking of the movement by changing
    the angles of the wing surfaces. At times the speed, as estimated by
    eye-witnesses, was over sixty-eight miles an hour, and yet after a
    flight of approximately eight miles in twenty minutes the machine was
    brought to rest upon a previously designated spot, three-quarters of
    a mile from where the balloon had been released, so lightly that the
    aviator was not even jarred, despite the fact that he was compelled
    to land on his feet, not on a special alighting gear.” This daring
    performance amazed the world, and most of all, the specialists who all
    along knew such a feat to be practicable. As a further description
    of Professor Montgomery’s wonderful experiments may interest the
    reader, the following account, written by himself, is inserted from
    Aëronautics for January, 1909:
“When I commenced practical demonstration in my work with aëroplanes
      I had before me three points. First, equilibrium; second, complete
      control; and third, long continued or soaring flight. In starting I
      constructed and tested three sets of models, each in advance of the
      other in regard to the continuance of their soaring powers, but all
      equally perfect as to equilibrium and control. These models were tested
      by dropping them from a cable stretched between two mountain tops, with
      various loads, adjustments and positions. And it made no difference
      whether the models were dropped upside down or in any other conceivable
      position, they always found their equilibrium immediately and glided
      safely to earth.
“Then I constructed a large machine patterned after the first model,
      and with the assistance of three cowboy friends personally made a
      number of flights 253in the steep mountains near San Juan (a hundred
      miles distant). In making these flights I simply took the aëroplane and
      made a running jump. These tests were discontinued after I put my foot
      in a squirrel hole, in landing, and hurt my leg.
“The following year I commenced the work on a larger scale, by engaging
      aëronauts to ride my aëroplane dropped from balloons. During this
      work I used five hot-air balloons and one gas balloon, five or six
      aëroplanes, three riders—Maloney, Wilkie and Defolco—and had sixteen
      applicants on my list and had a training station to prepare any when I
      needed them.
“Exhibitions were given in Santa Cruz, San José, Santa Clara, Oakland
      and Sacramento. The flights that were made, instead of being haphazard
      affairs, were in the order of safety and development. In the first
      flight of an aëronaut the aëroplane was so arranged that the rider had
      little liberty of action, consequently he could make only a limited
      flight. In some of the first flights, the aëroplane did little more
      than settle in the air. But as the rider gained experience in each
      successive flight I changed the adjustments, giving him more liberty of
      action, so he could obtain longer flights and more varied movements in
      the flights. But in none of the flights did I have the adjustments so
      that the riders had full liberty, as I did not consider that they had
      the requisite knowledge and experience necessary for their safety; and
      hence, none of my aëroplanes were launched so arranged that the rider
      could make adjustments necessary for a full flight.
“This line of action caused a good deal of trouble with aëronauts or
      riders who had unbounded confidence and wanted to make long flights
      after the first few trials, but I found it necessary as they seemed
      slow in comprehending the important elements and254 were too willing to
      take risks. To give them the full knowledge in these matters I was
      formulating plans for a large starting station on the Mount Hamilton
      Range from which I could launch an aëroplane capable of carrying two,
      one of my aëronauts and myself, so I could teach him by demonstration.
      But the disasters consequent on the great earthquake, completely
      stopped all my work on these lines. The flights that were given were
      only the first of the series with aëroplanes patterned after the first
      model. There were no aëroplanes constructed according to the two other
      models, as I had not given the full demonstration of the workings of
      the first, though some remarkable and startling work was done. On one
      occasion, Maloney in trying to make a very short turn during rapid
      flight pressed very hard on the stirrup which gives a screw shape
      to the wings and made a side somersault. The course of the machine
      was very much like one turn of a corkscrew. After this movement, the
      machine continued on its regular course. And afterwards Wilkie, not to
      be outdone by Maloney, told his friends he would do the same, and in a
      subsequent flight, made two side somersaults, one in one direction and
      the other in an opposite, then made a deep dive and a long glide, and
      when about three hundred feet in the air, brought the aëroplane to a
      sudden stop and settled to the earth. After these antics, I decreased
      the extent of the possible change in the form of wing surface so as to
      allow only straight sailing or only long curves in turning.
“During my work I had a few carping critics that I silenced by this
      standing offer: If they would deposit a thousand dollars I would cover
      it on this proposition. I would fasten a 150-pound sack of sand in the
      rider’s seat, make the necessary adjustments, and send up an aëroplane
      upside down with a255 balloon, the aëroplane to be liberated by a time
      fuse. If the aëroplane did not immediately right itself, make a flight,
      and come safely to the ground, the money was theirs.
“Now a word in regard to the fatal accident.[47] The circumstances are
      these: The ascension was given to entertain a military company in which
      were many of Maloney’s friends, and he had told them he would give the
      most sensational flight they ever heard of. As the balloon was rising
      with the aëroplane, a guy rope dropping switched around the right wing
      and broke the tower that braced the two rear wings and which also gave
      control over the tail. We shouted Maloney that the machine was broken
      but he probably did not hear us, as he was at the same time saying
      ‘Hurrah for Montgomery’s air ship,’ and as the break was behind him,
      he may not have detected it. Now did he know of the breakage or not,
      and if he knew of it did he take a risk so as not to disappoint his
      friends? At all events, when the machine started on its flight the rear
      wings commenced to flap (thus indicating they were loose), the machine
      turned on its back and settled a little faster than a parachute. When
      we reached Maloney he was unconscious and lived only thirty minutes.
      The only mark of any kind on him was a scratch from a wire on the side
      of his neck. The six attending physicians were puzzled at the cause
      of his death. This is remarkable for a vertical descent of over 2,000
      feet.”
In 1903, Mr. Ernest Archdeacon stimulated by a conference with Mr.
    Chanute, at a meeting of the Aëro Club of France, founded a prize of
    3,000 francs to be awarded to the first person who should sail or
    fly 25 meters, with a maximum descent not exceeding one third of the
    range. As yet no one in either hemisphere had flown in a practical
    machine, but various aviators were industriously pluming their wings.
    Captain Ferber had been a follower of Lilienthal since 1898, and a
    pupil of Mr. Chanute since 1891. Dozens of votaries in France, not
    to mention other countries, had entered, or were about to enter, the
    aviation field. Archdeacon himself, Voisin, Blériot, Esnault-Pélterie,
    Vuia, Delagrange, Tatin, Cornu, Bazin, Levavasseur and many others,
    were stanch apostles of the heavier than air. Many of these were
    disciples of Lilienthal, but they were destined all to be distanced
    by an impetuous Hensonite, who could not realize the necessity for
    spending months, or years, cautiously coasting downhill to acquire the
    adroitness requisite to speed a flying chariot over the plain.
In 1906, while many aviators in Europe were developing flyers, and
    cautiously testing them in various ways, by gliding above sand or
    water, or swinging from a high wire or traveling arm, Señor Alberto
    Santos-Dumont, of Brazil, brought forth in France the quaint and crude
    biplane shown in Plate XXII.257 Aërodynamically this was not a great
    improvement on the aëroplane of Sir George Cayley constructed 98 years
    earlier; but it had a petrol motor whose power and lightness would
    have astounded that talented pioneer in aviation. The motor was an
    eight-cylinder Antoinette, weighing 170 pounds and developing 50 horse
    power. The screw, formed of two aluminum blades, was of two meters
    diameter, one meter pitch, mounted on the engine shaft, and, at 1,500
    revolutions a minute, gave a thrust of 330 pounds. The total lifting
    surface of the aëroplane was 650 square feet, and the weight, including
    pilot, 645 pounds. This bird-shaped craft ran tail foremost through the
    air, having the screw at the rear, and the rider in a small basket just
    before the wings. By means of a pilot-wheel and lever, he could operate
    the “tail,” i. e., the front rudder, sidewise and vertically, thus
    steering the craft in two directions. The lateral balance was preserved
    automatically by means of the dihedral inclination of the wings, aided
    sometimes by the rider swaying his weight to right or left.
After some days of preliminary adjustment and trial, Santos-Dumont was
    ready for a dash in his new aëromobile. On August 22d, 1906, he made
    a brief tentative flight, the first witnessed in Europe since Ader’s
    surreptitious experiment. On October 23d, he ran this strange machine
    swiftly over the ground and glided boldly into the air, flying above
    the excited spectators at a speed of 25 miles an hour, and covering
    a distance of 200 feet, thus gaining the Archdeacon cup. Again on
    November 12th, 1906, he made four flights, the last one covering 220
    meters in twenty-one seconds, thus gaining the prize of 1,500 francs
    offered by the Aëro Club of France for the first person who should fly
    100 meters. The demonstration was made before the general public258 and
    technical witnesses, including an official committee of the Aëro Club
    of France, who reported that the aëroplane preserved good balance and a
    true soaring speed independent of the acquired momentum.
Intrinsically the achievements of November 12th were crude and
    primitive; but in moral effect they were very important. They marked
    the inception of public aëroplaning before the professional and lay
    world alike. There was no patent mechanism to conceal, no secret to
    withhold from rivals, such as had shrouded the work of more circumspect
    aviators in Europe and America. If Santos-Dumont was not the first to
    fly, he was the first aëroplane inventor to give his art to the world,
    and to inaugurate true public flying in presence of technical men, as
    he had initiated modern motor ballooning. His liberal enthusiasm and
    that of his colleagues, both aëroplanists and patrons, quickly made
    France the world’s foremost theater of aviation, at least for the
    moment. The contagion would of course spread swiftly, and involve the
    entire civilized world.
Santos-Dumont’s unconventional dash into the air sounded the knell of
    Lilienthalism. This slow method served to pass time profitably in the
    nineties, while the gasoline motor was still developing. But with an
    Antoinette in hand, what live man, particularly what live Frenchman,
    could tinker long years on the sand hills? Why not mount the craft
    on little wheels and take a cautious little run; then after some
    adjustment, make more runs followed by innocuous saltatory flights?
    This would be so easy, so fascinating, so instructive. How much better
    than to make two thousand preliminary jumps down the hill slope
    with the body dangling wildly to keep the balance, then to redesign
    the entire frame before an engine could be successfully applied!
    An Antoinette259 motor, placed on a competently designed Henson
    aëroplane, would have obviated the whole Lilienthal school. However,
    they did noble and opportune work, while awaiting the growth of the
    gasoline engine. This school achieved success by a roundabout method
    because Henson’s method was not available till the present century,
    for want of a cheap, light motor. When that appeared Lilienthalism
    quickly subsided. In other words, Lilienthal’s method was a passing
    convenience, never a necessity. It could have been employed very
    profitably in Cayley’s time to develop the art of gliding and soaring;
    but in the time of Santos-Dumont and his colleagues, flying by Henson’s
    method would have burst upon the world by reason of its superior value
    and the allied progress, even if the Lilienthal school had never
    existed. This is illustrated by the fact that Santos-Dumont succeeded
    without aid from the sand-hill votaries.
The next daring aëroplanist to arouse the world of aviation was Henri
    Farman, also a votary of the wheel-mounted flyer. He had been an adept
    motorist, therefore accustomed to brisk driving. In the summer of
    1907 he received from the Voisin brothers the aëroplane illustrated
    in Plate XXIII. With this he made a number of preliminary flights
    during the autumn, proving that his aëroplane had suitable stability
    and motive power. On October 26th, on the government drill grounds at
    Issy-les-Moulineaux he surpassed Santos-Dumont’s record, by flying
    771 meters. But this was to him of minor importance; he was preparing
    to win the Deutsch-Archdeacon prize of 50,000 francs offered for the
    first person who should fly one kilometer over a returning course.
    On January 12th, he convoked a committee of the Aëro Club of France
    to witness a trial on the morrow. Next morning at ten o’clock, the260
    weather being calm and clear, his great machine ran a hundred yards
    across the course, then rose gracefully into the air, and sailed away
    for the 500-meter post. Here, making a wide curve, it rounded safely
    and returned, passing the home line in elegant flight, thus winning the
    grand prize.
The machine with which Farman achieved his first success, and which
    broadly resembles his subsequent triumphal flyers, seems to be a cross
    between a Hargrave kite and a Chanute glider, having a Maxim horizontal
    steering plane in front. As shown in the figure it was mounted on
    four bicycle wheels; was steered up and down by the front plane, and
    sidewise by the box rudder seen in the rear. The rider seated between
    the large supporting surfaces, and in front of his engine, operated
    these rudders separately, by pushing or rotating a pilot wheel, and
    abetted the automatic lateral balance by swaying his body. The machine
    spread 559 square feet of sustaining surface, weighed 1,100 pounds
    and carried a 50-horse-power Antoinette motor actuating a single
    two-blade aluminum propeller 6.9 feet in diameter by 3.6 feet pitch,
    directly connected to the engine shaft. The stability in mild weather
    was so great that Farman, during his first few weeks’ practice, made
    over 200 flights, measuring in length from 100 to 500 yards, without
    serious mishap. In gusty weather, however, his machine was defective
    in steadiness, and unsafe near the ground. This objection was remedied
    later by adding flexible wing margins for controlling the lateral
    balance.
The age of prize flying was thus fairly ushered in by the feeble but
    very important public demonstrations of Santos-Dumont and Henri Farman.
    Other public flyers would quickly follow. Delagrange, Blériot, Curtiss
    would soon become international figures, not to mention numerous more
    recent avia261tors. They, were men of originality, skill and energy,
    who would shortly be in the front line contesting for world laurels,
    and winning them gloriously.
Leon Delagrange, the sculptor-inventor, who first had demonstrated
    the biplane, on March 30, 1907, aspired in 1908 to outfly Farman.
    He now practiced industriously on the military drill ground at
    Issy-les-Moulineaux, a large field which the Minister of War permitted
    the Aëro Club of France to use for such purpose. Here he and Farman,
    in friendly competition, flew day by day over gradually increasing
    courses. At times they were joined by other aviators, and thus the
    drill grounds at Issy became famous as an aviation school.
Farman’s new rival made startling progress during those frequent trials
    of March, 1908. “Just imagine,” he says, “that within a week I was
    able to complete my education as an aviator.” On March 17th he made an
    official flight of 269.6 meters, thus winning a prize of 200 francs
    offered by the Aëro Club of France for a beginner who should fly over
    200 meters. Four days later he engaged in contest with Farman. Two
    poles were erected 500 meters apart to mark the points about which the
    men must race. The machines were brought forth from their sheds in
    the morning, gleaming dimly through a dense fog, and were given some
    preliminary trials. Then Farman made a flight of 2004.8 meters, going
    twice around the course in 3 minutes, 31 seconds. He thus trebled his
    grand prize flight of January. Presently Delagrange took wing and flew
    1,500 meters in 2.5 minutes. Having been beaten by Farman, he invited
    his successful rival to take a seat behind him, and the two sailed away
    close to the ground, covering a distance of 50 meters. This was the
    first trip ever made by two262 men in one flying machine. For the first
    time also two machines had flown in competition over a considerable
    course.
Delagrange continued to pursue Farman for the championship. On April
    11th, he flew 2,500 meters, and would have exceeded Farman’s official
    record of 2,004 meters, had he not touched the ground. The next day
    he summoned the official committee of the Aëro Club of France to
    witness and time his performance. Poles were erected at the corners
    of a triangle 350, 200, 275 feet apart respectively. Around this
    course he flew nearly five times, covering a distance of 5,575 meters
    in 9¼ minutes. Of this range the last 3,925 meters were covered
    without touching the ground. Thus at last he had out-flown Farman and
    established a new official record, the total distance actually covered
    being about ten kilometers, or approximately six miles. This ended,
    at least temporarily, the friendly competition at Issy; for now the
    aviators separated, Farman going to Belgium, Delagrange to Italy.
Delagrange’s fortune accompanied him abroad. On May 24th, he made some
    impressive demonstrations on the Place d’Armes at Rome in presence of
    the Minister of War and thirty thousand people. On May 27th, he flew
    before the King and Queen of Italy and many other court personages,
    remaining in the air nine and one half minutes, thus surpassing all
    previous European records for endurance and distance. But this was
    only preliminary. On the morning of May 30th, he came forth again on
    the Place d’Armes, a light breeze blowing. His machine rolled quickly
    over the ground, then circled gracefully ten times around in the air
    at a height of four to seven meters, covering an official distance of
    12.75 kilometers, and remaining aloft 15 minutes, 26 seconds. On June
    22d, at Milan, he flew before 15,000263 people in the Place d’Armes,
    covering seventeen kilometers in 16 minutes, 30 seconds. Finally, on
    September 6th, at Issy-les-Moulineaux, he flew 29 minutes, 54 seconds,
    covering 14.8 miles, which proved his crowning effort for the year. As
    the two flights just mentioned surpassed all previous official ones
    in duration, it appears that Delagrange raised the world’s record
    four times within five months, increasing his own time from six and a
    half minutes in April to about thirty minutes in September, or nearly
    fivefold.
In the meantime, Farman was making rapid progress, gathering prizes and
    achieving wide renown. On May 30th, at Ghent, Belgium, taking with him
    M. Archdeacon, he flew 1,241 meters at a height of seven meters. He
    thus established a new record with two people, and won the 1,200 franc
    wager made with Santos-Dumont and Archdeacon against M. Charron, who
    contended that a flying machine would not, within the year, carry two
    men weighing sixty kilograms each. On June 6th he flew 20 minutes, 20
    seconds, covering 19.7 kilometers, thus again increasing the world’s
    record, and winning the Armengaud prize of ten thousand francs for the
    first aviator to remain aloft fifteen minutes in France. On September
    29th and October 2d, at Chalons, he successively increased the world’s
    record, and achieved his best results for the year. The first of these
    trials lasted 42 minutes, covering 24.5 miles; the second lasted 44.5
    minutes, covering 25 miles. This last flight was forty times as long as
    the one of January, which gave him the grand prize of fifty thousand
    francs, and is a good index of the wonderful progress in aviation
    made in France during the year 1908. Between these two performances
    he, on September 30th, sailed from Chalons to Rheims, a distance of
    27 kilometers, in twenty minutes. This264 flight was made over trees
    and houses, sometimes at an elevation of 200 feet, and was the first
    town-to-town flight ever accomplished. The following day he won the 500
    franc prize for height, passing over balloons 82 feet from the ground.
    Such was the lively pace Farman set for the rest of the world.
Mr. Curtiss drifted into the business of building and operating air
    ships and flying machines by frequent association with inventors, who
    came to his bicycle works at Hammondsport, N. Y., for assistance in the
    design and construction of aërial craft. He was particularly sought as
    a constructor of propelling mechanism, for he had special skill and
    experience in producing light gasoline engines. As a motor expert he
    was invited to the laboratory of Dr. Alexander Graham Bell, at Beinn
    Breagh, near Baddeck, Nova Scotia, in the summer of 1907. Dr. Bell had
    developed his wonderfully light, strong and stable tetrahedral kites
    to such an extent that he wished to convert them into “aërodromes” by
    applying light propelling mechanism. He accordingly invited two young
    Canadian engineers, F. W. Baldwin and J. A. D. McCurdy, to consult
    with him regarding the structural details of his proposed flyer,
    and contracted with Mr. Curtiss to supply the motive power. These
    gentlemen with Lieutenant T. Selfridge, a guest of Dr. Bell, developed
    so many independent ideas that Mrs. Bell suggested the advantage of
    forming themselves into a scientific organization, at the same time
    offering the capital required for experimentation. Acting on this
    advice and generous offer, they formed themselves into the now famous
    Aërial Experiment Association, whose object was the construction of a
    practical aëroplane, driven through the air by its own motive power,
    and carrying a man.
265
After some preliminary downhill glides[48] and studies with a motorless
    aëroplane, the association, on March 12, 1908, brought forth their
    first dynamic machine, the Red Wing, shown in Plate XXIV, in order
    to speed it along the ice of Lake Keuka, near Curtiss’s factory; the
    purpose being, not to fly, but to test the effect of the vertical
    rudder. To the surprise of the twenty-five onlookers, the machine,
    after running two hundred feet along the ice, serenely rose into the
    air and flew 319 feet. “This,” says Dr. Bell, “was the first public
    exhibition of the flight of a heavier-than-air machine in America.”
    It is noteworthy also that this machine was completed and ready for
    trial in less than seven weeks from the time of starting. Its design,
    while embodying suggestions from each member of the association, was
    attributed chiefly to Lieutenant Selfridge, who took the leading part
    in evolving the plans, and who gave them his final approval, it being
    the intention of the association to offer each man a chance to produce
    a flying machine after his own notions, aided by the experience and
    liberal advice of his fellows.
As the advantage of flying from the ice had been suggested some years
    before the death of Lilienthal, it seems remarkable that this method
    did not yield important results earlier in the development of aviation.
    A smooth ice field is such an ideal place for testing a dynamic
    aëroplane, that previous gliding experience would seem unnecessary,
    providing the machines were designed with a fair knowledge of the
    elementary principles of stability and control. Even glider practice
    could be effectively conducted over a smooth ice field after momentum
    had been acquired by aid of gravity, or a tow line. Having sufficient
    momentum the aviator could test his rud266ders cautiously without rising,
    then, after a little experience, make short glides in the air, and so
    be prepared to install the motor. Landing or falling on smooth ice at
    great horizontal speed, from a low elevation, is much less hurtful than
    tumbling on the ground, as every bold skater knows from experience.
The aëroplane II, designed by Mr. Baldwin, aided by his associates
    and their combined experience, resembled that of Lieutenant Selfridge
    in the trussing of its body surfaces, but was mounted on wheels, and
    provided with torsional wing tips for lateral control. When tested, it
    was found easy to launch and land, besides responding very promptly to
    the three-rudder control. In the hands of Mr. Curtiss, on May 22d, this
    aëroplane, called the White Wing, flew 1,017 feet in 19 seconds, and
    landed smoothly on a plowed field. This at the time was the longest
    flight ever made by an aviator in his first trip on a heavier-than-air
    machine.
It was now Mr. Curtiss’ turn to be captain of design and construction.
    Under his supervision aëroplane III, called the June Bug, was ushered
    forth, in the month of honeymoons. It differed from the two preceding
    in having a box tail; also in having a nainsook cover, instead of the
    red and white silk that characterized the Red Wing and the White
    Wing.
After some practice, this flyer behaved so well that it seemed
    competent to win the Scientific American Cup offered for a public
    flight of one kilometer straight away. Accordingly an official trial
    was arranged with a committee of the Aëro Club of America, for the
    fourth of July, 1908. It was the first official flight in the western
    hemisphere, and proved in every way most satisfactory. The machine
    flew 2,000 yards over an S-shaped course at a speed of 39 miles an
    hour, displayed admirable control, and267 had abundant motive power. The
    performance was an intimation and augury of the victorious flights to
    come the following year. As the Association now repaired to Dr. Bell’s
    summer home, the Hammondsport experiments terminated for the season.
The year 1908 also brought to happy fruition the long and persistent
    experiments of Louis Blériot, the most illustrious pioneer and
    champion of the monoplane. Beginning in 1900, he had tried one type
    after another, of flying machine, till he became world renowned for
    his fertility of invention, his daring, his picturesque accidents and
    hairbreadth escapes. So long as he was not killed he was certain to
    make progress; for he had every endowment that ensures success. He
    possessed the energy of early manhood, having been born in 1872; he
    had the thorough technical training of the Central School of Arts and
    Manufactures, where he graduated in 1895; he possessed extraordinary
    talent for invention and constructional detail; he had the prowess,
    courage and coolness requisite for testing intractable and dangerous
    flyers; he was in the world’s most active center of aviation; he
    also had sufficient means. If he was late in achieving success, it
    was because he preferred to develop original ideas, and could not be
    content with merely copying his predecessors.
Like many other novices in aviation, Blériot began by trying to build
    a machine with flapping wings that should fly like a bird. This was to
    be actuated by a carbonic acid motor. In 1904 he abandoned his first
    machine, of bird type, and turned to aëroplanes, beginning with a
    biplane of the Farman, or Voisin type. His second machine was built by
    Gabriel Voisin, one of the most experienced of the pioneer aëroplane
    manufacturers. This biplane, unprovided with an engine, was mounted
    on floats, towed along the Seine by a motor boat, and rose from the268
    surface carrying Voisin as pilot. Blériot III, composed of elliptical
    cells, or sustaining surfaces, and powered with two Antoinette
    motors of 25 horse power each, was tested without success on Lake
    Enghien during the year 1905–6. Blériot IV was made of quadrangular
    cells, and launched at Bagatelle in 1906, carrying a soldier, Peyret;
    but crashed to earth in its first trial. Finally in 1907, Blériot
    V, mounted by the inventor himself, rose into the air and flew
    successfully, but was lacking in stability. His sixth aëroplane was
    of the Langley type, provided with a 24-horse-power motor, then with
    a 50-horse-power Antoinette; but it was unstable fore and aft. One
    day it traversed 184 meters, then fell from a height of 25 meters and
    was shattered on the ground. His seventh was one of the swiftest yet
    constructed, attaining a speed of nearly 80 kilometers an hour, and, in
    two private trials, covering a distance of 500 meters. Thus seven years
    had slipped away, leaving Blériot still in the tentative period of his
    work. But now he was at the threshold of a career of brilliant success,
    which soon brought him the highest honors at home and throughout the
    world.
After various minor flights in the spring and summer of 1908, Blériot,
    on October 31st of that eventful year in aviation, determined to
    attempt a cross country voyage, as Farman had done the day before. As
    will be remembered, Farman had flown from Chalons to Rheims, above
    trees and houses, a distance of nearly 17 miles, thus achieving the
    first town-to-town flight in history. Blériot would improve that record
    at once, by flying in a closed circuit embracing several villages.
His renowned cross-country flight was directed from Toury to Artenay, a
    village nine miles distant. Mounting his aëroplane VIII-ter, at mid
    afternoon, 269in presence of a large gathering, Blériot followed the
    course shown in Fig. 40. In the neighborhood of Artenay he landed for a
    few minutes. After some slight repairs to his magneto, he reascended,
    turned about and headed for home. Half way on his return course he
    stopped again for a few minutes, at the Village of Santilly; then
    readily reascended and flew to the neighborhood of his starting point.
    He thus traveled about 17 miles in a closed circuit. This performance,
    with that of Farman the day before, inaugurated the period of aërial
    voyages in heavier-than-air machines. It appealed so powerfully to the
    sentiment of the community that a monument was erected at Toury to
    commemorate the glorious achievement.
270A fair view of the famous monoplane, in its renowned cross-country
    voyage, is presented in Plate XXV. It consisted of a single sustaining
    surface firmly attached to a long trussed spine mounted on three
    wheels, and carrying at its front end the gasoline motor and propeller,
    at its rear end two of the rudders, the third, or lateral, rudder
    being placed at the wing terminals. A part of the trussed frame was
    covered, to minimize the atmospheric resistance against the framing,
    pilot and engine. The vertical rudder at the rear turned the machine
    to right or left; the horizontal rear rudder controlled the elevation
    and pitching of the machine; the torsional wing tips controlled the
    lateral stability, and could be used to cant the aëroplane or check its
    listing, as in the Wright and Curtiss machines. The craft exhibited an
    easy poise in the air, and possessed good equilibrium, owing to its
    arrowlike structure and its three-rudder system of control. It was a
    strong rival of the biplanes previously noticed, and a herald of better
    things to come.
In the meantime the Wright brothers had resumed their field practice.
    During the month of May, 1908, they tested their famous aëroplane of
    1905, provided with increased engine power, and carrying two passengers
    upright. A few brief flights were made at speeds of 41 to 44 miles an
    hour, showing that all the mechanism was adequate and effective. But on
    May 14th a false push on a271 lever, made by Wilbur Wright, brought the
    flyer to earth, wrecking it too badly to be repaired in the few days
    available for experimentation. These flights were but preliminary to
    the official trials set for the approaching summer; for the brothers
    had contracted to furnish one machine to the United States Signal
    Corps, another to a French syndicate.
The Chief Signal Officer of the United States Army in December, 1907,
    had issued specifications, and invited bids, for a flying machine
    apparently far in advance of the art. The flyer was to carry two men
    aggregating 350 pounds, was to remain aloft one hour continuously, and
    was to maintain an average speed of 40 miles an hour in a cross-country
    flight to and fro, covering a distance of ten miles. The contractor
    must instruct two officers to operate the flyer. Furthermore the
    machine must be capable of flying 125 miles without stopping. The
    requirements seemed severe, even to those well versed in aviation.
    Nevertheless two bids were received; one from the Wright brothers for a
    biplane to cost $25,000, another from Mr. A. M. Herring for a biplane
    costing $20,000. Both bids were accepted for the summer of 1908; but
    only the Wright contract was eventually carried out.
About the same time the Dayton inventors had sold their patent rights
    in France to a syndicate in that country. The contract specified
    a machine for two passengers, having a speed of 50 kilometers an
    hour, and a range of 125 miles. Furthermore, the inventors agreed to
    instruct three pupils to manage the aëroplane. The fulfillment of
    these two contracts occupied some months, but presented no formidable
    difficulties. Though neither of the brothers had ever flown an hour,
    and though both were comparatively unskilled as operators, they had
    such faith in their invention that they undertook to272 launch themselves
    publicly in untried machines, Wilbur Wright in France, Orville in
    America, at about the same time.
Of these two tests, the one conducted by Orville Wright at Fort Myer,
    near Washington, was the most successful at first. After a few brief
    preliminary trips, he suddenly astonished the world by phenomenal
    flying. On the morning of September 9, 1908, he made a voyage above
    the drill ground lasting 57 minutes, 31 seconds, and again in the
    evening another flight lasting one hour and three minutes, this time
    before a throng of distinguished spectators. Immediately thereafter
    he took aboard Lieut. Frank P. Lahm for a flight of six minutes’
    duration. These records were improved day by day, and all things
    seemed propitious for the official tests of speed and endurance.
    But on September 17th, while sailing with Lieutenant Selfridge at a
    height of about 75 feet, a blade of the right-hand propeller struck
    and loosened a stay wire of the rear rudder. Instantly the wire coiled
    about the blade, snapping it across the middle. Thereupon the machine
    became difficult to manage, and plunged headlong to earth, throwing the
    men with their faces on the bare ground, fatally wounding Lieutenant
    Selfridge, and seriously injuring Mr. Wright. Lieutenant Selfridge did
    not recover consciousness, and died within three hours, from wounds
    on the forehead and concussion of the base of the brain. Mr. Wright
    suffered a fracture of the left thigh and of two ribs on the right
    side. The aëroplane was badly shattered in its framing, but the engine
    was practically intact. This accident terminated the tests for the
    season; but ere long a date was set for their resumption during the
    following year.
Wilbur Wright began his demonstration for the French syndicate on the
    plain of Auvours, ten miles 273from Le Mans, France, on August 8,
    1908. For some weeks his flights were very brief, owing to the balky
    condition of his engine; but this difficulty was removed by the middle
    of September. After the accident to his brother he remained inactive
    for a few days; then, to reassure his supporters, he raised the world’s
    record by flying a distance of over 52 miles, remaining aloft 1 hour,
    31 minutes, 25 seconds. After this he continued at frequent intervals
    to make long flights, quite usually taking a passenger with him, and on
    several occasions a lady. His endurance, his altitude, his abandon and
    perfect control amazed and delighted Europe. Incidentally he won some
    valuable prizes, beating the French records for duration, distance and
    elevation. Once he rose to a height of 380 feet. On September 21st, he
    flew 42 miles in 1 hour and 31 minutes; on October 11th, he carried a
    passenger an hour and ten minutes; finally on the last day of the year
    he flew 77 miles in two hours and twenty minutes, thus winning the
    much coveted Michelin prize, of twenty thousand francs for the longest
    distance flown during the year. It was a triumphal close to the most
    progressive and eventful year in aviation—the first year of exhibition
    flying, the inaugural year of a noble art.
Having completed the speed and distance tests at Le Mans by the close
    of the year 1908, Wilbur Wright went to Pau, in the South of France,
    for the winter practice with his three pupils, Count de Lambert, Paul
    Tissandier and Alfred Leblanc. Here on the vast trial grounds at Pont
    Long, six miles from Pau, he had a commodious hangar with a workshop
    on one side, and on the other, apartments for the aviator and his
    mechanics. He arrived with his pupils, on January 14th, and next day
    was joined by his brother and sister, who had followed him from Paris,
    Orville being now well recovered from his274 injuries received at Fort
    Myer. In a short time the machine was set up, and early in February
    began its regular service, having a pair of levers for the teacher and
    another pair for the passenger. The pupils quickly acquired the art of
    steering, being first allowed to control one lever, with Mr. Wright
    holding the other; then being entrusted to manage the whole machine,
    with their tutor as passenger; and finally becoming themselves teachers
    of the newly acquired art. Only a few hours’ practice was needed to
    attain proficiency, the whole time in the air aggregating hardly half a
    day for each pupil, though the lessons extended over many days.
A pleasant feature of the sojourn at Pau and Le Mans was the number
    and character of the visitors, and the boundless enthusiasm displayed
    toward the new art. Tens of thousands of people from the neighboring
    places, and tourists from many parts of the earth assembled to see the
    flights; statesmen, military officers, scientific and parliamentary
    delegations, representatives of innumerable periodicals. Queen
    Margherita, having missed a flight on her first visit to Le Mans,
    came a second time, and remained three hours standing on the field,
    fascinated by the wonderful aërial equipage. The King of Spain, Alfonso
    XIII, who visited the aërodrome at Pau, on February 20th, manifested
    the keenest interest and delight in examining the aëroplane and seeing
    it fly; first with the pilot alone, then with an extra passenger. He
    took a seat in the machine beside Mr. Wright, discussed its working,
    and expressed his deep regret that reasons of state prevented him from
    making an ascension. A month later the King of England, who was at
    Biarritz, adjourned to Pau, where he remained to witness two unusually
    fine flights. He expressed the greatest pleasure in the performance,
    questioned the brothers about the details 275of the machine, and
    complimented them on their achievement.
From Pau, Wilbur Wright went to Italy, about the end of March, to
    fulfill an engagement to give demonstrations and lessons in the use of
    the biplane. He was welcomed at Rome by the King of Italy, on April 2d,
    and later gave a public exhibition of flying, to aid the sufferers in
    the recent earthquake at Messina. His flights were attended with great
    enthusiasm, and his lessons in aviation were quickly mastered; his
    pupil, Lieutenant Calderara, soon making public flights alone. A rare
    sight it was, this modern winged chariot soaring above the ruins of
    that ancient campagna, bearing with it a moving-picture camera.
By the end of April Mr. Wright had finished his task in Italy, and was
    journeying homeward with his sister and brother by way of London, where
    they enjoyed the hospitalities of the Aëronautical Society of Great
    Britain; and where, on May 3d, the brothers received the beautiful gold
    medal of that famous society, the oldest aëronautical organization in
    the world.
The return to America was primarily for the purpose of completing
    the official tests at Fort Myer; but incidentally the brothers must
    find time to receive new honors and ovations. While in the shop at
    Dayton, working vigorously to complete a new aëroplane for the War
    Department, in the hope of finishing the demonstrations by June 28th,
    the limit of their allotted month, they were showered with attentions
    too numerous for their comfort. They must drop their tools in order to
    go to Washington to receive the gold medal of the Aëro Club of America
    from President Taft, at the White House, on June 10th. On June 17th
    they must witness an elaborate demonstration in their honor at Dayton,276
    where they received a gold medal from the city, another from the State,
    and another from the Federal Government. Finally late in June, they
    arrived in Washington with the rehabilitated biplane, to make good
    their contract with the Signal Corps.
The early tests of this aëroplane were not an unmixed triumph for the
    Wright brothers and their well-wishers. At first the machine failed to
    fly completely about the drill ground. It took the air with difficulty,
    and came to the earth on the first turn. Some lack of adjustment in the
    frame was suspected. The motor was accused of weakness. The launching
    weights[49] were too light. The brothers explained that a new flyer
    is like a new horse; the driver must learn his idiosyncrasies before
    attempting to show him off to advantage. They intimated also that
    they would be pleased to have the great throng of prominent people,
    who flocked daily to the drill ground, kept away until their flying
    instrument was properly tuned for public performances. They discouraged
    superfluous attentions. The big legislators who ventured audaciously
    to peep into the sacred shed containing the marvelous machine, were
    hailed by the military guard, and unceremoniously marched across the
    line among the plain people. It was a dreadful shock to these mighty
    signors, and many a fat lawmaker cursed audibly, vowing never to vote
    a cent for flying squadrons. But still they haunted the drill ground
    daily, despite the long journey and the late dinner; for they were
    fascinated by the untold and unconjecturable possibilities of the new
    art.
June 28th came quickly, obliging the patient aviators to beg another
    extension of time. They 277were granted thirty days longer, which seemed
    to them more than necessary; but in this judgment they were mistaken.
    One accident after another delayed the consummation of their official
    task of flying one hour above the field, then five miles across country
    and return. Finally, on July 27th, Orville Wright, who was making all
    the flights, took with him Lieut. Frank P. Lahm, and sailed gloriously
    for one hour, twelve minutes and forty seconds, before ten thousand
    delighted spectators. It was an ideal summer evening, and all the
    maneuvers were performed with excellent poise, security and grace. A
    new world’s record was established. Now all the vast throng from the
    President and his cabinet to the simplest laborer, appreciating the
    achievement as a triumph for America and for humanity, burst forth into
    prolonged acclamation and applause.
The cross-country flight was next in order. The course from Fort
    Myer to Alexandria lay over scattered forests and a deep valley. The
    flight seemed a difficult and hazardous enterprise; but the brothers,
    confiding in their machine, seemed to have little apprehension of
    failure or peril. Indeed, they seemed most concerned about the bonus
    to be secured by flying at an average rate exceeding the contract
    speed of 40 miles an hour; for each additional mile an hour would pay
    them $2,500 above the normal price of the aëroplane. They accordingly
    declined to fly in any but very calm weather, no matter how vast the
    gathering of visitors, or how illustrious. They wished, of course, to
    expedite the final and crucial test; but they could not always have
    ideal conditions, and would not take undue chances. On the evening
    after the endurance test the engine balked, owing to the clogging of a
    rubber pipe from the gasoline tank. Dusk came on, and the disappointed
    crowd went home to a late dinner.278 The Secretary of War, who was
    present, very kindly granted a third extension of time, covering the
    rest of the month. Next evening it was a trifle breezy. Wilbur Wright
    announced that the flight could be made, but that the bonus would
    be less than on a still evening; he would therefore wait for calmer
    weather. Twelve thousand people were turned away disappointed. There
    was muttering among the impatient and warm of blood. It was remarked
    that the War Department could easily drop these procrastinated
    experiments and buy a practical aëroplane in the open market for
    $5,000. But the discommoded officers good-naturedly allowed the thrifty
    sons of Dayton to have their way in striving for a large bonus, beyond
    the normal price of $25,000.
On the following evening the weather was clear and fairly still. All
    was in readiness for the flight to Alexandria and return. Orville
    Wright, taking with him Lieut. B. D. Foulois, circled the drill ground
    on easy wing, then sailed directly across country for the captive
    balloon at Shuter’s Hill. In a few moments they vanished beyond the
    forest, and for a while even the most optimistic were doubtful of their
    safety. At length they reappeared sailing homeward at very great speed.
    The machine proudly circled the drill ground amid thunders of applause,
    and landed softly at the lower end, beyond the shed.
The multitude hastened to congratulate the aviators on their marvelous
    performance. For everybody it was a scientific and national triumph;
    for Wilbur Wright it was something more. With pencil and pad he quickly
    computed the bonus, surrounded by a wall of reporters. “Wise old
    Wilbur,” remarked one, “he knows the worth of coin in a crude republic.
    While Fame blows her trumpet he counts the solid gain.” The figures
    showed an average279 speed of 42.6 miles, making the bonus $5,000. The
    voyage was one of the finest ever executed up to that date; it was
    a glorious termination to a long and troublesome, but epoch-making
    demonstration. Now there remained only the task of instructing two
    officers to fly, and this was leisurely accomplished by Wilbur Wright
    in October.
As shown in Plate XXVI the Wright aëroplane used at Fort Myer in
    September, 1908, was a twin screw biplane mounted on skids and having
    the three-rudder system of control. The rear rudder turned the machine
    right or left, the front rudder raised or lowered it, the warping of
    the wings controlled the lateral poise. The turning right or left
    could be effected on level wing; but the inventors canted the machine
    sidewise, to obviate skidding, or sidewise gliding of the craft, due
    to centrifugal force. These three-rudder movements were performed by
    three separate levers actuating suitable mechanism; but they could be
    performed easily by a single lever having three separate movements, as
    preferred by some designers. The aëroplane in launching ran along a
    monorail, accelerated by a towrope passing over pulleys, and attached
    to a falling weight comprising nearly a ton of iron. The dimensions of
    the various parts are given as follows by Major George O. Squier,[50]
    the officer in charge of the experiments:
“The aëroplane has two superposed main surfaces 6 feet apart with
      a spread of 40 feet, and a distance of 6½ feet from front to rear.
      The area of this double supporting surface is about 500 square feet.
      A horizontal rudder of two superposed plane surfaces about 15 feet
      long and 3 feet wide is placed in front of the main surfaces. Behind
      the main 280planes is a vertical rudder formed of two surfaces trussed
      together about 5½ feet long and one foot wide. The motor, which was
      designed by the Wright brothers, has four cylinders and is water
      cooled. It develops about 25 horse power at 1,400 r. p. m. There are
      two wooden propellers 8½ feet in diameter which are designed to run at
      about 400 r. p. m. The machine is supported on two runners and weighs
      about 800 pounds.”
On the whole the demonstrations at Fort Myer in 1909 did not greatly
    enhance the prestige of aviation. They were attended by too many delays
    and accidents, and too much waiting for ideal weather. As a consequence
    the guardians of the national purse were not clamoring for an aërial
    flotilla. Some few, no doubt, understood that the aëroplane could
    brave more than a zephyr with safety; but the general public accepted
    the demonstrations at their face value. The unthinking multitude did
    not realize that with sufficient incentive, such as war presents,
    the Wright brothers could repeat those brilliant flights, of the end
    of July, under more severe weather conditions. Fortunately, events
    were transpiring elsewhere which vastly increased the popular fame
    and valuation of the new art. This refers more particularly to those
    startling achievements in aviation abroad which were largely stimulated
    by competition and prizes.
After the Fort Myer flights the Wright brothers separated, Orville
    going to Germany to represent their interests and give demonstrations;
    Wilbur exhibiting at the Hudson-Fulton celebration in New York, and
    teaching the Signal Corps officers to manipulate the newly purchased
    government aëroplane. As usual, both achieved distinction in their new
    fields. At Potsdam, on October 2d, Orville Wright, after a ten-minute
    flight with Crown Prince Frederic281 William, ascended alone, mounting
    steadily in circles for fifteen minutes, and reaching an elevation
    roughly estimated at 500 meters, after which he descended safely in
    five minutes. On September 18th, he made a new record at Berlin by
    carrying a passenger, Captain Englehardt, for 1 hour, 35 minutes and 47
    seconds. Wilbur Wright, on September 9th, flew from Governor’s Island,
    in New York harbor, to and around the Statue of Liberty, then returned
    to the point of departure. On October 4th, starting from the same
    point, he flew over the waters of New York Bay and above the Hudson
    River to a point opposite Grant’s Tomb, then returned to Governor’s
    Island, covering a distance of about 19½ miles in 33½ minutes. The
    trip upward was made at an elevation of about 200 feet, through a
    stratum disturbed by vortices rising from the steamer smokestacks, and
    eddies caused by the northeast wind blowing over the tall buildings.
    The return was made at a level of 50 feet on the Jersey side of the
    river where the air was less turbulent. He intended later in the day
    to make a long flight, but, owing to the bursting of a cylinder head,
    he stopped his demonstrations and returned to Washington to finish
    his instruction of the Signal Corps officers. This was easy routine,
    and it afforded opportunity to try the effect of transferring one of
    the forward steering planes to the rear and applying it there as a
    fixed horizontal tail, as used by Voisin, Curtiss and others. The new
    arrangement was reported to increase the longitudinal steadiness of the
    aëroplane, and was used in subsequent Wright aëroplanes.
The brothers now ceased public flying for a while, to attend to the
    business of manufacturing and selling their craft. They formed an
    American company, enlarged their facilities for constructing machines,
    procured grounds for training operators, and282 prepared generally to
    fill orders both for aëroplanes and for public exhibitions. Not the
    least of their labor was to defend their patent claims, which they
    wished to be interpreted so broadly as practically to exclude all
    flyers whose lateral poise is controlled by changing the angle of
    incidence of the wings, or of lateral stabilizing planes. This was
    not an easy undertaking, since the torsion wing was a well-known
    device, having been described many times in public print, and having
    figured in earlier patents and experiments in various countries. To
    add to the difficulty, their patent claims apply specifically to the
    warping of normally flat sustaining surfaces, the warping of arched
    wings having been patented by Prof. J. J. Montgomery, whose invention
    antedates theirs.[51] However, if they produced no novel and radical
    invention in aviation, they, like Santos-Dumont in aëronautics, were
    first to achieve some measure of practical success, by applying a light
    automobile engine to a familiar machine in which former inventions
    and ideas were skillfully employed. On this ground of practical
    success they strove for an interpretation broad enough to establish
    a monopoly covering even Montgomery’s rights, which apparently they
    were infringing. But when to this end they applied for a preliminary
    injunction restraining Curtiss from using his system of control, and
    Paulhan from using Farman’s system, they were unable to convince the
    court of the justice of their petition, and the injunction suit was
    vacated.
The cardinal allurements in aviation for 1909 were the prize offered
    for the first flight across the English Channel, and the prizes to be
    won at the world’s first aviation meet, scheduled for the last week
    in August of that year, at Rheims, France. The desire to win these
    honors stimulated to livelier effort the most noted designers and
    operators of aëroplanes, all of whose machines were represented at the
    great tournament. It also brought into sudden prominence several new
    aviators. Young men, little versed in the science or literature of
    flight, took to wing, and in a few days found themselves world-famous.
    Aërial chauffeurs, skillful and daring, delighted vast throngs of
    people, kept the cables warm with news, and incidentally filled their
    purses with money. Thus the trade of aëroplane jockey was one of the
    interesting products of this eventful year.
The first half of the aviation season of 1909 brought forth many
    improvements which seemed to augur well for the public demonstrations
    to follow. Hubert Latham, with the swallowlike Antoinette monoplane,
    designed by Levavasseur, the inventor of the Antoinette motor, began
    soaring grandly in the sky and into fame. Paul Tissandier, on May 20th
    at Pau, established a new French record by flying 1 hour and 2 minutes.
    The Voisin brothers were perfecting in detail their boxlike aëroplanes,
    noted for inherent stability, and destined to achieve further 284renown
    during the summer, under the dexterous hand of intrepid young Paulhan.
    This new and daring young aviator, after a few practice flights, began
    making world records. On July 15th, he flew 1 hour, 7 minutes and
    19 seconds. On July 18th he made a new world’s record for altitude,
    driving his Voisin aloft 150 meters at Douai. Impatient Roger Sommer,
    rejecting his own make of biplane, purchased a machine from Farman,
    and after a little practice, broke the world’s record for distance on
    August 7th, by flying at Chalons, 2 hours, 27 minutes, 15 seconds. Many
    others were advancing in skill, and would erelong achieve excellent
    results. Most strenuous of all, perhaps, were Curtiss and Blériot, the
    champions of high speed, respectively in the biplane and monoplane, and
    Farman, the winner of large prizes.
In the latter part of April, Henri Farman tested a new biplane of
    his own design and manufacture, which proved very satisfactory. It
    resembled his former craft, but was provided with small balancing
    planes hinged to the rear margins of the wings near their tips.
    This machine, furthermore, was provided with both landing skids and
    wheels, the latter yielding to any unusual stress by means of elastic
    connections, so that the skids took up the shock. With this improved
    biplane, Farman beat his former records by flying continuously 1 hour,
    23 minutes, at Chalons, on July 19th. Four days later he made a new
    cross-country record by flying from the Chalons parade ground to Suppe,
    about forty miles, in 1 hour and 5 minutes. These flights were gently
    suggestive of what might be expected at Rheims the following month.
During the opening period of the 1909 aëroplane season, Glenn H.
    Curtiss brought forth a new biplane, designed for the Aëronautic
    Society of New285 York, with the coöperation of his new partner, Mr. A.
    M. Herring, and began active practice for various prizes at home and
    abroad. After some brief trials at Hammondsport, N. Y., he shipped his
    aëroplane to Morris Park, in order to participate in the Aëronautic
    Society’s first flight exhibition of the year. On June 26th he flew,
    but without official witness, far enough to win one of the $250
    prizes offered to the Aëro Club of America by its president, Mr.
    Cortlandt Field Bishop, for the first four persons who should fly one
    kilometer. He now wished to make an official flight for this prize
    and also for the Scientific American trophy, a beautiful engraved
    silver cup—which he had won a year previously for the first public
    flight of one kilometer, made in America, but which now should go to
    the person making the longest official flight of the year 1909, not
    under 25 kilometers. But the Morris Park race track proved unsuitable
    for such contest, being too restricted. He therefore took his biplane
    to Mineola, Long Island, where he could practice on a wide plain, and
    possibly make some new records. Here a triangular course 1.3 miles long
    was staked off, and some short trial flights were made. Then Mr. C. M.
    Manly, who was official timekeeper for the Aëro Club of America, was
    notified that a trial for the prize would be made.
The demonstrations near Mineola were most successful, and proved the
    beginning of a brilliant summer for Mr. Curtiss. On July 17th he won in
    quick succession both of the prizes mentioned above. The trial for the
    smaller prize began at 5.15 in the morning and lasted but 2½ minutes,
    followed 6 minutes later by the start for the coveted cup. In both
    cases the machine took the air with ease and grace, after a 200-foot
    run over the rough marsh land. In the cup trial the first twelve
    turns, aggregating 25 kilometers, 286were accomplished in 33½ minutes,
    but the machine continued for seven more rounds, and finally landed
    in excellent form, just 52½ minutes after it had crossed the starting
    line. The actual measured distance flown was 24.7 miles, but the true
    distance traversed by the machine was probably 30 miles, making the
    time speed between 30 and 40 miles per hour. This was slow, indeed, but
    the control was satisfactory. Those who wished for high speed would
    find it in the new aëroplane which Mr. Curtiss would presently take to
    Rheims for the speed contest, in which he was to fly as sole champion
    of the United States.
The type of machine used by Mr. Curtiss in 1909 was a natural outgrowth
    of his previous ones, but very much perfected in power and finish. It
    was a biplane mounted on a three-wheeled chassis, two wheels under the
    main body and one well to the front, so as to prevent toppling forward.
    It was propelled by a single screw at the rear, directly connected to
    a water-cooled motor of the Curtiss make. Its flight was controlled
    by three rudders exerting torque respectively about the three axes of
    the aëroplane, supplemented by two fixed keels, a vertical one in the
    front and a horizontal one in the rear. Of the three rudders mentioned,
    one in the rear turned the craft right and left, like a boat, one in
    the front raised or lowered her, while the third or lateral rudder,
    consisting of small horizontally pivoted planes between the wing-ends,
    and turning oppositely to each other, controlled the lateral poise.
    These lateral rudders, or winglets, used by Curtiss, Farman and others,
    are commonly called ailerons.
Louis Blériot with his two new machines, his No. XI at Douay and
    his No. XII at Issy-les-Moulineaux, practiced nearly every fine
    day in June and July, making fast progress in the art, and achieving
    some 287notable records. By warping the wings he could keep his
    balance better than in former years, and dare more severe weather.
    On June 12th, he made a straightaway flight of 820 feet in his No.
    XII, taking as passengers A. Santos-Dumont and A. Fournier, the
    entire weight being 1,232 pounds. This was the first flight of three
    passengers in an aëroplane. On June 25th, despite a strong wind, he
    circled in his No. XII eleven times about the parade ground at
    Issy-les-Moulineaux in 15½ minutes, maintaining excellent stability.
    Next day he made 30 circuits in 36 minutes, 55⅗ seconds, stopping
    finally because of spark failure due to excess of oil. On July 4th,
    at the aëronautic meet at the Juvisy Aërodrome, for sufferers from
    the earthquake in the south of France, he flew in his No. XI for 50
    minutes, 8 seconds, at a height of 50 to 80 feet, finally stopping
    because of feed trouble in his engine. This flight was his second up to
    that date. On July 13th, he made a new cross-country record by an early
    morning flight in his No. XI from Etampes to within eight miles of
    Orleans, stopping some minutes en route, to show the practicability of
    his monoplane. Thirty-five minutes after landing, his machine was taken
    apart and shipped back to his factory at Neuilly, near Paris. After
    this record he received gold medals from the Aëro Club of Great Britain
    and the Aëro Club of France. He was also awarded the Prix de Voyage
    of 14,000 francs, of which he himself received 5,000 as pilot, 4,000 as
    constructor, while 3,000 went to the motor manufacturer and 2,000 to
    the propeller designer.
The monoplanes No. XI and No. XII represented Blériot’s most
    successful types. They bore a family resemblance to his preceding
    machines, but had a more vigorous lateral control due to warpage of
    their main surfaces instead of the wing-tips, as of288 old. Both were
    provided with a single-screw propeller in front, and both were mounted
    on three-wheeled chassis with shock absorbers. The larger machine, or
    No. XII, had a wing surface of 337 square feet; the smaller a surface
    of 151 square feet. The latter, on its historic cross-Channel trip,
    carried a three-cylinder air-cooled Anzani engine.
Hubert Latham, in his beautiful Antoinette monoplane, began to
    achieve distinction for himself and his admirably designed long-tailed
    flyer early in the spring, and, ere midsummer, was one of the favorite
    idols of the thronged aërodromes. He preferred a lofty course; he
    cut through the sky with the precision and grace of a winged-spear;
    he fascinated the spectators by the steadiness of his sweep. The
    French reporters declare they saw him roll and light cigarettes in
    full flight. Not only did he delight the artist, but he surprised the
    official measurer. Toward the end of May he established a new monoplane
    record by a flight lasting 37 minutes and 3 seconds. On the 5th of
    June he flew continuously 1 hour, 7 minutes and 37 seconds, at a speed
    of 45 miles an hour. This was done in a wind and heavy rain which
    drenched and blinded him, finally inducing him to come down. On June
    7th he carried a passenger, something new for a monoplane. In July he
    increased the altitude record by flying 450 feet high. Next day he
    flew across country from Arras to Douai, 12½ miles, in 20 minutes.
    Very reasonably, therefore, he announced, his intention of sailing for
    England above the waters of the turbulent strait.
The Antoinette monoplane resembled, at a distance, a long-winged
    fish with its head cut off and replaced by a screw-propeller. It had a
    skifflike body with the screw in front, followed by the Antoinette
    engine, then by the pilot’s seat, the tail part carrying fixed
    horizontal and vertical fins and mov289able horizontal and vertical
    rudders. These rudders together with ailerons, or warping wings,
    controlled the poise in flight. The body was mounted on a light chassis
    having cushioned wheels, and a landing skid for absorbing shocks. The
    engine employed no carburetor, and was cooled by water which turned
    to steam in the engine jackets, condensed in tubes on the side of the
    prow, then was pumped back to the jackets.
The cross-Channel prize, above mentioned, was a cash sum of one
    thousand pounds, offered by the London Daily Mail for the first
    successful flight from France to England. Many would fain have it,
    though the voyage seemed dangerous, if not foolhardy. Of the various
    aviators who coveted the prize, Latham and Blériot were the most
    strenuous in competing for it. The bold boy tried first.
Housing his aëroplane on the high cliff facing the Channel near Calais,
    Latham looked toward England, impatiently waiting for placid weather,
    and a chance to soar. The venture was hazardous. By some it was deemed
    rash, owing to the uncertainty of having to alight upon the water, if
    the motor should fail. But the brave youth was less alarmed than the
    old aviators, who had no intention of competing with him. So, with a
    boy’s confidence, he brought forth his huge-winged Antoinette, on
    July 19th, skimmed along the ground, soared grandly above the high
    cliffs, and sped over the waters at a great elevation, as usual in his
    aërial voyages.
Latham’s flight was magnificent, but brief. Owing to spark failure
    and the stoppage of his motor six miles from the French shore, he
    settled promptly, but skillfully, down upon the sea. When found by
    the accompanying torpedo boat destroyer, detailed to follow him from
    Calais, he was seated on the aëroplane, serenely smoking, buoyed up by
    the great290 hollow wings. He was quickly brought to shore, undaunted and
    eager for another trial; but in the rescue his frail flyer was roughly
    handled and very much wrecked.
Louis Blériot now hurried to Calais eager to attempt the cross-Channel
    flight. Placing his little monoplane, No. XI, in a tent on a farm
    near Calais, he waited an opportune moment to sail. On Sunday, July
    25th, he was routed from bed very early by his friend, Alfred LeBlanc,
    and taken forth all reluctant to the field, for preliminary practice
    before sunrise; for the weather was favorable and he should sail as
    soon as the sun arose. Though suffering from a foot burned in a recent
    accident, he discarded his crutches and mounted his winged machine with
    eager courage, remarking: “If I cannot walk I will show the world that
    I can fly.” For some minutes he circled about the ground where, even
    at that early hour, many scores of people were assembling. All was now
    in readiness; the flyer was in excellent trim, the pilot in buoyant
    spirits, and the torpedo boat destroyer, Escopette, well out at sea
    to escort her swift aërial charge as well as might be.
The moment of departure had come. Blériot, buttoned in his
    close-fitting suit and hood, sat on his white-winged machine, headed
    for the cliff, and surrounded by a group of well-wishers. At 4.35 the
    light-wheeled craft with propeller whirring, sped along the ground,
    rose gracefully in the air and shot bravely over the precipice, with
    the hustling aviator on its back. The admiring spectators were wild
    with excitement and joy. But there was one sad group in Calais that
    morning. Latham and his watchers, who had been waiting for better
    weather, rose in time to see his rival on the wing, but too late for
    pursuit, as the wind had suddenly risen.291 The unwary boy remained
    behind, weeping with disappointment.
Blériot was now soaring high over the sea, faring toward Dover without
    a guide or a compass. For some time he could observe the Escopette
    following him, her great column of smoke obscuring the new risen sun.
    Presently both shores vanished, and for ten minutes he could descry
    neither land nor signal of any kind. He was sailing over the sea at
    forty miles an hour and drifting with the air he knew not whither; but
    he allowed his fiery steed to follow its instinct, as a bewildered
    horseman does sometimes. Along the horizon now appeared the white
    cliffs of the English shore. He was headed not for Dover but for
    Deal, carried adrift by the southwest wind. Three boats crossing his
    course seemed plying for some port on his left, and hailed him with
    lively greeting. He could not well inquire the way, but he followed
    the general course of the vessels, soaring high aloft. At length he
    saw a man on the cliff violently waving the tricolor, and strenuously
    shouting: “Bravo! Bravo!” He plunged in the direction of the signaler,
    whom he knew to be his friend M. Montaine. On nearing the earth he was
    caught in a violent turmoil of air and whirled about. Wishing to land
    at once, he stopped his power sixty feet aloft, and swooped abruptly
    down with an awakening thud upon the old English soil, sleeping in the
    peaceful sunlight of a Sabbath morning.[52]
Blériot’s landing was the greatest jolt to British insularity since the
    birth of steam navigation. Nevertheless it was welcomed with unfeigned
    delight as emphasizing the triumph of a new art which enriches all
    people. Shortly afterward was erected 292on the spot a monument in white
    granite having the plan and size of the renowned No. XI monoplane.
Sportsmanlike, Latham wired his congratulations to Blériot, expressing
    the hope to follow ere long. Two days later he flew across the Channel
    to within one mile of the English coast, where he had to land in the
    water again because of motor failure. This time he struck the sea
    violently and suffered a broken nose. His goggles were shattered and
    cut his face.
The big competitive flyers of the world now turned toward Betheny
    Plain near Rheims, where the first International Aviation Meet was to
    be held August 22–29, 1909. Here was a place to make record flights,
    to win rich prizes, and to achieve great distinction. A well-designed
    aërodrome had been prepared for the occasion. In the midst of a broad
    plain was marked by means of high poles, or pylons, a rectangular
    course, measuring roughly one by two miles, or more exactly, 1,500 by
    3,500 meters. At one end was the judges stand, the grand stand, the
    café and the aëroplane sheds. The numerous cash prizes offered for
    speed, for distance, for endurance, for altitude, etc., totaled in
    value nearly forty thousand dollars. But the most coveted prize of
    all was the James Gordon Bennett Aviation Cup, together with $5,000
    cash, the winner of which should have the honor of placing the next
    international contest in his own country. This should be awarded to the
    aviator having the best speed over a two-round, or 20-kilometer course.
    The next most desired prize was a cash sum of $10,000 for the longest
    flight. A special charm of the tournament was that each fortunate
    entrant should meet the distinguished aviators from all localities, and
    should fly in presence of a world-gathering. Aëroplanes of all the most
    successful 293types were there, numbering together thirty-eight machines.
The first day of the great aviation week, Sunday, August 22d, was
    devoted to elimination trials to determine which aviators should
    represent France in the race for the Bennett trophy. Of the seventeen
    entrants in these trials the three who should cover two rounds of
    the course in the shortest time should be selected as champions, the
    next six, in order of speed, to act as reserve pilots. But owing to
    the severe weather of that day, only six of the seventeen entrants
    succeeded in flying well enough to be admitted in either capacity.
    Of these six the cup champions were: Blériot, Lefebvre, Lambert and
    Latham; the reserve champions being in order, Tissandier, Paulhan and
    Sommer. These men won their places by bold flying in rough conditions;
    for rain had fallen heavily during the previous night, and the wind
    was still blowing in swift and gusty current over the sodden field.
    Indeed, the weather seemed anything but propitious at the opening of
    that great experimental tournament, on the success of which should be
    based the estimates and forecast of so many subsequent meets. Swift
    clouds overhead, and black flags displayed on high masts, indicated
    that flying would be impossible. A passing storm raged at five o’clock
    in the afternoon. But toward evening the face of Nature brightened,
    and with it the hopes of the aviationists. The weather at last became
    ideal. Nearly all the aëroplanes came forth, and at six o’clock no
    fewer than seven were on the wing at one time. Some of them were
    doing most startling feats. Lefebvre would make a threatening swoop
    at the grand stand, then circle swiftly away. Blériot, in a moment of
    unsteadiness, charged a wheat stack with his swift monoplane, damaging
    his sharp-bladed propeller. Count de294 Lambert sailed under Paul
    Tissandier, heedless of the aërial wake beneath. The crowds applauded
    and cheered every novel and bold maneuver. The closing hour with its
    sunny calm atmosphere and its vivacious well-pleased populace, presaged
    greater joys for the morrow. Sir Henry Norman, who was present,
    declared that those events marked the birth of a new epoch in human
    development.
Monday, the second day of the meet, dawned fair and calm, with
    promise of settled weather. It was the last qualifying day for
    the ten-thousand-dollar long-distance prize, the Grand Prix de la
    Champagne. No one who had not flown a reasonable space on, or before
    Monday, could take part in the trials for that coveted honor on
    Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. The aviators were about early, and many
    had qualified before evening. Several of the pilots tried for speed
    records. Blériot, with an 80-horse-power monoplane, made one round of
    the course in 8 minutes, 42⅖ seconds. Curtiss, in his 60-horse-power
    biplane, lowered the time to 8 minutes, 35⅗ seconds. This was an
    achievement of the greatest concern, since Curtiss stood alone, as
    champion of America, against the more experienced flyers of Europe.
    He thought of nothing, engaged in nothing, except the speed trials,
    for in these he hoped to win, with his 60-horse flyer, even against
    renowned Blériot, in his 80-horse machine. Other interesting events
    were designed solely to entertain or amuse the people. Lefebvre again
    furnished merriment by sweeping over and under, and around Paulhan, who
    was flying at an elevation of 25 feet. M. Kapferer had navigated from
    Meaux, in the dirigible Colonel Renard, and sailed about the grounds,
    with fine effect.
Tuesday should have brought ideal conditions and performances; for it
    was the day set for the295 visit of M. Falliéres, President of France.
    But the morning was dark, with ominous clouds gathering over the
    aërodrome, and black flags streaming in the strong wind. When the
    President arrived, though the clock told four, no flying had yet begun.
    He examined the machines, held an informal reception, and at five took
    his box in the grand stand. Presently Bunau-Varilla in his Voisin
    biplane, rocking in the fifteen-mile wind, flew past, waving his hat to
    the distinguished spectators. After him came dauntless young Paulhan
    who also passed the President, shortly before the latter, with his
    party, returned to the railway station. He flew at an elevation of 300
    to 500 feet, his Voisin heaving and lurching in the tumultuous wind,
    like a boat on the breakers. He had no lateral stabilizing plane, so
    he let his box kite rock. The people were appalled, but what cared he
    for wind gusts, so far from earth? Let the craft roll and pitch; he
    was not uneasy. On the return lap he raced and beat a railway train.
    These were but inklings of what he would do with increased experience.
    Latham followed presently on his long swift monoplane, to the delight
    of all who love the graceful in mechanism and motion. Ere long he
    was chased and overhauled by Blériot, in his cross-Channel flyer.
    This was exciting, but Blériot produced still greater enthusiasm by
    beating the speed record, lowering it to 8 minutes, 4⅖ seconds, for
    one round of the 10-kilometer (6.21 mile) course. The day was ended,
    and the spectators were charmed again by the spectacular evolutions
    of Lefebvre, who cavorted in the air before the grand stand, cutting
    impressive curves and figure “8’s.”
Wednesday morning, the fourth of the meet, was heavy with black clouds,
    which presaged unfavorable weather. The winds were light, but still
    nothing transpired till late in the afternoon to break the296 monotony
    of waiting. During this long interval the crowd could amuse itself
    with gossip, refreshments and music, and with an occasional flight of
    lesser moment. About four o’clock Paulhan set forth in a six-mile wind
    to try for the Grand Prix de la Champagne. His lumbering Voisin had
    a speed of hardly more than thirty miles an hour, but it was driven
    by a very reliable 50-horse Gnome 7-cylinder motor, whose body spins
    round a fixed crank, carrying the propeller with it. No one at first
    expected a very long flight. The wind rose, sometimes exceeding 20
    miles an hour, tossing the young pilot terribly, and once throwing
    him so far within the course that he must turn a complete circle in
    order to round the corner post, or pylon. But he kept right on, so
    long as there remained a drop of fuel. He first broke Wilbur Wright’s
    best record, by 23 minutes, then Sommer’s recent record, by 6 minutes,
    finally landing, at half past six o’clock, with a new world’s record
    of 82 miles in 2 hours, 43 minutes and 24⅘ seconds. The people were
    frantic with excitement; they clapped their hands and waved thousands
    of handkerchiefs; they rent the air with tremendous applause as he
    was borne toward the grand stand on the shoulders of his clamorous
    comrades. Others at the same time had been flying with varied fortune.
    During Paulhan’s long demonstration, Fournier had encountered a
    miniature whirlwind, turned over in the air, at a great height, and
    crashed sidewise to the ground, with some injury to his nose, and with
    much damage to the wings and tail of his machine. Latham, wishing to
    lower his circuit time, flew thrice around the course, but without
    improvement. During his flight, a splendid rainbow appeared, which
    together with the Antoinette dragon fly soaring high aloft with
    Latham on its back, produced an impressive spectacle.
297
Thursday morning brought fine weather and the promise of an eventful
    day. As a consequence serious efforts were made to excel all previous
    records, particularly for speed, duration and distance. In the forenoon
    Latham flew 43.5 miles in the Antoinette XIII. In the afternoon Count
    de Lambert, in his Wright biplane, flew 72 miles. Blériot entertained
    the throng by carrying Delagrange as passenger; but while sailing near
    the ground he encountered some dragoons, turned sidewise to avoid
    striking them, and plunged into a fence, breaking his propeller. But
    the great sensation of the day was Latham’s afternoon flight for the
    Grand Prix, in his Antoinette No. 29. Starting with plenty of fuel
    and favorable weather, he rose to a high level and flew till his supply
    was exhausted, at times encountering rough winds and for a while
    plowing through a rainstorm. It was the banner flight of the week thus
    far; for it surpassed all other long ones in distance and speed, though
    not equaling Paulhan’s in endurance. His total range, when compelled
    to alight through exhaustion of fuel, was 95.88 miles, in 2 hours,
    18 minutes, 9⅗ seconds. This showed an average speed of 41.63 miles
    an hour for the whole distance, while the speed for his first round
    was 44.65 miles an hour. For this great achievement he could thank
    his 50-horse, 8-cylinder Antoinette motor, one of the lightest in
    existence, for that power.
Friday, August 27th, was the last day allotted for the distance, or
    Grand Prix contest. After the wonderful new records of Paulhan and
    Latham, people were marveling what might happen on the final day. Many
    assumed, of course, that Latham’s record of 96 miles would remain
    unsurpassed. At four-thirty, Latham started on another long flight, in
    his Antoinette monoplane No. 13, followed presently298 by Farman and
    Sommer in Farman biplanes; these flying six to twelve feet from the
    ground, with gallant Latham soaring aloft nearly three hundred feet in
    his swift long-winged fish, and occasionally gaining a lap on them.
    Sommer stopped after three rounds, because of motor trouble. Latham’s
    fuel gave out after a voyage of 68.35 miles, and he glided to earth.
    Farman continued to plod along on his slow, low-wandering craft, with
    little attention. Others were in the air, with biplanes and monoplanes,
    entertaining the populace—Blériot, Curtiss, Delagrange, Tissandier,
    Bunau-Varilla—these had the applause. Presently the spectators
    remembered that ground-skimming Farman had been a very long time on the
    wing. He now became the center of rapt attention. Slowly he distanced
    Paulhan’s great world’s record of Wednesday; slowly he distanced
    Latham’s greater world’s record of Thursday; but still he plodded away.
    The sun sank on his flight; darkness came on the field, so that he
    vanished from view at the far end of the course. At the close of the
    nineteenth round he landed in the dark before the grand stand, limp
    and exhausted, having journeyed 3¼ hours and traversed 118.06 miles.
    For the second time he had won a $10,000 prize; nineteen months ago by
    flying 1 kilometer, to-day by flying 190 kilometers. A searchlight was
    thrown upon him. He was pulled from his machine and carried upon the
    shoulders of his friends, receiving a prolonged and tremendous ovation.
The seventh morning of the tournament, Saturday, August 28th,
    came with a beaming smile, promising good flights and a pleasant
    termination of the glorious cup contest for the highest speed in two
    rounds of the 10-kilometer course. The air was calm, mild and hazy
    above the Betheny plain. The299 flyers were in fine mood for great
    achievements. The thronging groups of well-dressed men and women
    awaited further startling events, with varied animation and constant
    chatter. The day was well diversified with interesting flights; but,
    of course, not with long ones. The chief interest centered in the
    leading cup-champions—solitary Yankee Curtiss and great Blériot with
    his 80-horse monoplane, supported, if need be, by his allies in the
    contest, Lefebvre and Latham.
Curtiss, shortly after ten o’clock, made a preliminary trial, lowering
    his best anterior time. With this he was so pleased that he prepared
    immediately for the one official flight allowed in that contest. He
    filled his small gasoline tank, replenished his radiator, signed a
    legal paper certifying this to be his trial for the cup, and at once
    took wing, circling before the grand stand, then crossing the line at
    full speed. The biplane pitched perceptibly at its unusual gait, but
    turned the corner in easy curves, completing the first round in 7.57⅖,
    the second in 7.53⅕; the total time being 15 minutes, 50⅗ seconds, and
    showing an average speed of 47.04 miles an hour.
About noon Blériot came forth with his 80-horse monoplane No. 22,
    which was expected to eclipse the Curtiss biplane, but in reality
    proved exasperatingly slow. At two o’clock he tried another propeller,
    with little encouragement. An hour later he tried again with a
    four-blade propeller, but descended before completing the round. After
    tinkering for an hour, aided by several mechanics, he flew to his shed,
    shortly before five o’clock. As no start was allowed after five-thirty,
    he hastened zealously and started his official flight at five-ten. The
    mighty monoplane cut the air at terrific speed, without pitching, or
    rolling, and finished the first round in300 7.47⅘, or 5⅔ seconds less
    than Curtiss’ best lap. The overjoyed French throng rent the air with
    frantic bravos! Curtiss and Mr. Bishop were silent, appreciating the
    skill of that fiery antagonist, with his monster engine. As the steady
    birdlike craft turned the last pylon, and swept homeward in magnificent
    career, the timers called out the seconds. The throng listened with
    abated breath and then with alarm. Blériot had lost speed in the
    second round. When he crossed the line his total time was 5⅗ seconds
    greater than that of his only rival. The conqueror of the Channel, the
    champion of France, was defeated and the international trophy must go
    to America, won by a taciturn, calculating Yankee, never before seen in
    Europe, and hardly known to fame.
Other official flights for the cup during the day were made by Latham
    and Lefebvre for France, and by Mr. Cockburn, champion for England,
    the latter bird-man sailing into a stack of wheat in the middle of
    his first round, then wheeling to earth. Incidentally Henri Farman
    established a new world’s three-man duration distance and speed record
    by carrying two passengers ten kilometers in 10 minutes 39 seconds.
    Thus ended the chief day of the tournament, leaving the contestants in
    the following order of speed: Curtiss, Blériot, Latham, Lefebvre.
Of the other leading prizes, that for the fastest single round was
    taken by Blériot; that for the fastest three-round flight was won by
    Curtiss on Sunday, with a record of 23 minutes, 29 seconds for the
    thirty kilometers; the Altitude Prize was won by Latham, who attained
    an elevation of 508.5 feet; the Prix des Mecaniciens was won by
    Bunau-Varilla in a flight of 100 kilometers; the Prix des Aëronats
    was won, on Sunday, by the large dirigible, the Colonel Renard,301
    in a voyage of 50 kilometers, or 31.06 miles, at an average speed of
    24.9 miles an hour. Along with the chief prizes, many smaller ones of
    considerable value were awarded, thus summing up the total of $37,000.
The small band of men who organized the first international aviation
    meet, with the Marquis de Polignac as president, and the great wine
    merchants of the Champagne district as their supporters, were now
    elated and triumphant. They had undertaken a novel and costly sporting
    enterprise, regarded by many as hazardous, or rash, even though
    sanctioned by the Aëro Club of France. For an enormous attendance
    would be required to meet the expense of preparations and prize money.
    It was doubtful whether the few available aviators could draw large
    crowds to Betheny for a week, even in ideal weather, and there was risk
    of sending the critical populace away displeased if abundant flights
    were not made. The whole event might prove a painful fiasco, if rains
    and high winds should predominate; for were not aviators notoriously
    reluctant to fly in rough weather? Vain apprehensions, ignoring the
    reckless and intrepid daring of the Gallic sportsmen! Nothing short of
    a week’s continual tempest could have kept them down.
The great tournament was a triumph, not only to the courageous
    promoters, but also to the aviators, the manufacturers, the whole of
    mankind. It astonished both actors and spectators. It marked a new
    epoch in the art of aëroplaning. It inaugurated a magical and wholly
    novel kind of recreation and public amusement that should be demanded
    at once in all civilized countries. It eradicated, in a measure, the
    inveterate notion that the aëroplane is essentially a fair-weather
    machine. With a cheap instrument capable of flying scores of miles
    in rain and wind,302 what applications might not come, of the greatest
    import to the world?
The fashion set at Rheims was imitated in other cities. Before the
    close of the year 1909, aviation meets were scheduled for Brescia in
    Italy, Berlin, Juvisy, near Paris, Blackpool and Doncaster, England.
    The succeeding year was to have more such events than the really
    capable aviators could attend. In both hemispheres, sums in cash,
    equaling or exceeding those at Rheims, would be offered by many
    prominent communities, eager to witness such novel and thrilling
    entertainment as only dexterous aviators could furnish. But it would be
    learned also that considerable financial risk attends an aviation meet,
    unless good judgment mark the choice of site, season, pilots and the
    executive agencies. Several of the meets following the one at Rheims
    succeeded neither in defraying expenses nor in furnishing competent
    aviators to repay the trouble of holding the tournament. The meets
    held in England were practically failures. A most interesting flight,
    however, was performed by Latham in a wind of 25 to 35 miles an hour.
    This itself was a very impressive achievement. The Brescia meeting was
    remarkable for the turbulence of its aërial currents and for Rougier’s
    record high flight of 645 feet.
The two most wonderful flights in the autumn of 1909 were those of
    Count de Lambert and Farman. During a meet at the Juvisy aërodrome,
    Lambert, on October 18th, after circling the ground a few times on a
    Wright biplane, attaining a height of 450 feet, started for Paris,
    steadily ascending in the direction of the Eiffel Tower. Circling this
    at an altitude of about 1,300 feet, he returned to Juvisy at 5.30
    p.m., having journeyed 30 miles over that dangerous route, in
    about 50 minutes. This indicated 303that lofty flying might enable one
    to pass safely over a city, even with an unreliable motor, since, if
    the propeller stopped, a glide of many thousands of feet could be made,
    to choose a landing. Farman’s flight was less spectacular, but quite
    as marvelous. On November 4th, while competing for the Michelin trophy
    for the longest distance traversed in 1909, he flew continuously for
    4 hours, 6 minutes, 25 seconds, voyaging in that time 144 miles, at
    an average speed of 35.06 miles an hour. This proved to be the record
    distance-and-endurance flight for the year. Other men spoke of sailing
    all day in a machine carrying ample gasoline, but failed to make good
    their words.
Unheralded, but quite astonishing, were the flights of Santos-Dumont
    in September, 1909. Though conspicuous as a pioneer in aviation, he
    for a while had been absorbed in other affairs, and had not kept pace
    with his brother aëroplanists in France, since his bold and brief
    dashes into the air in the early days of the art. During the season of
    1909, however, he developed a surprisingly small and simple monoplane,
    spreading 102 square feet of wing surface, and weighing in complete
    running order, 259 pounds. It was driven by a Darrac motor, mounted
    above the main surface, carrying the propeller directly on its shaft,
    and having radiator tubes along the inner surface of the main plane.
    Its triangular trussed frame was wheel-mounted, and tapered rapidly
    to the rear, terminating in horizontal and vertical rudders. With
    this tiniest flyer he sailed across country from St. Cyr to Buc, 4¾
    miles, in five minutes, at the unprecedented speed of 55 miles an
    hour, repeating the performance several times, according to report. He
    also left the ground after a run of 60 feet, in an unofficial trial.
    Characteristically, he presented to the public the scale304 drawings of
    his machine, with all rights to its use.
A very original type of monoplane was developed by Robert
    Esnault-Pélterie, who began experimenting in 1903. As shown in Plate
    XXIX, its body frame was covered to reduce air-resistance, and was
    provided with ample keel surface to promote directness and steadiness
    of flight. The weight was borne on two wheels in tandem, aided by
    wheels at the wing tips to preserve the lateral balance when the
    machine was resting. When under way the lateral poise was controlled by
    wing warping; the motion about the other two axes being controlled by a
    horizontal and a vertical rudder, the latter being “compensated,” that
    is, having its axis near the center of side pressure, when in action.
    An air-cooled motor of 30 to 35 horse power with a direct mounted
    four-blade screw formed the propulsion plant. Though the “R. E. P.”
    aëroplane, as it was commonly called, did not achieve great distinction
    at first, due, perhaps, to the inventor’s being over original, and
    making all its parts himself, instead of buying some high-class engine
    and propeller, as other successful aëroplanists had done, still his
    machine was greatly admired by technicians for its excellent finish and
    the fastidious, thorough and patient manner in which its young inventor
    labored to make it perfect, both in design and construction. It was
    regarded as a future record breaker, which, indeed, it was destined to
    become on further improvement.
Although little was accomplished in building aëroplanes in other
    countries than America and France, up to the beginning of 1909, that
    year witnessed some good flights in homemade machines in Germany,
    England and Canada. In November, 1909, Herr Grade, in Germany, made
    a flight of 30555 minutes in his monoplane. Mr. S. F. Cody, who
    constructed a biplane for the British army, flew over forty miles
    across country on September 8th, high above trees and buildings,
    remaining on the wing for 63 minutes. The machine spanned 52 feet,
    weighed with the pilot, nearly a ton, and was controlled by front
    and rear vertical rudders and two lateral rudders, well in front, so
    geared that if worked oppositely the machine listed, while if worked
    identically it rose or fell. In Canada Dr. Alexander Graham Bell and
    his associates continued the experiments, already described, begun
    in 1908 by the Aërial Experiment Association. In 1909 their fourth
    machine, the Silver Dart, flew many times round a course on the
    frozen lake, Bras d’Or, traversing, all told, about 1,000 miles in 100
    flights.
The last months of this strenuous year, 1909, and of the first decade
    of dynamic flight, closed without further startling developments. True,
    some records were made, but they merely pleased, not perturbed the
    world, now accustomed to marvels. Be it recorded, however, that, with a
    Voisin biplane, Paulhan, on November 1st, flew 96 miles in 2 hours, 20
    minutes, and on November 20th flew 1,960 feet high in a Farman biplane;
    on December 9th, Maurice Farman, mounted on his own type of biplane,
    rode through the icy atmosphere from Buc to Chartres, a distance of 40
    kilometers, in 50 minutes, the longest town-to-town flight up to that
    date; and on December 31st he flew from Chartres to Orleans, a distance
    of 41.6 miles, in forty-six minutes. But several fine achievements
    which the world anticipated for that year remained unattempted. The
    great prize flight of 183 miles from London to Manchester was still
    untried, though several machines and pilots seemed equal to the voyage,
    and $50,000 would be awarded by Lord Northcliffe to the brave306 aviator
    who should accomplish that journey in not more than three stages and
    within a period of twenty-four hours. Neither had anyone yet flown
    to an elevation of one kilometer. These tasks were left over as
    allurements for the succeeding year.
The decade that inaugurated dynamic man-flight had closed without fully
    demonstrating the capabilities of such aëroplanes as had been so far
    developed. No considerable altitude record had as yet been achieved. No
    very long cross-country flight had yet been attempted, though for many
    months the New York World had offered $10,000 for the first aërial
    voyage from Albany to New York, and the London Daily Mail had long
    offered $50,000 for a flight from London to Manchester. The uses of the
    aëroplane for scouting by land and sea had not been tested, much less
    its probable value in aggressive warfare. Such experiments were for
    the immediate future, as also the development of specialized types of
    machines for racing, for climbing, for burden bearing, for distance,
    for endurance, for landing on water, for rising from water, for
    protection of passengers from severe weather. To air men and spectators
    alike the future of the art promised to be quite as captivating as the
    past.
The first startling achievements to usher in the new decade were the
    great altitude flights. New world records followed in rapid succession
    all through the year 1910, with marked persistence and wonderful
    progress. Levels that had been regarded as the peculiar region of motor
    balloons were passed one after another, until the aviators vanished
    beyond the clouds, their limbs palsied with cold, and308 their aëroplane
    wings whitened with frost. Though the greatest prizes were not offered
    for this species of flight, and frequently none at all, it had an
    abiding fascination for both the flyers and the public. At the same
    time it proved to be as safe as it was theatrical and popular.
The starter in this exciting race for cloudland was Hubert Latham,
    already the official holder of the world’s altitude record. At Bouy,
    on January 7th, in presence of official witnesses, he rose in his
    Antoinette monoplane, describing a great upward spiral till his
    barometer recorded 1,050 meters; then returned to earth with like ease
    and precision, landing softly near his hangar, before his assistants,
    transported with enthusiasm. He had touched the goal of Gallic
    ambition, having driven his aëroplane to the height of one kilometer.
Latham’s tenure of the world’s altitude record quickly passed to
    his doughty rival, Louis Paulhan. At Los Angeles, on the twelfth of
    January, Paulhan, mounted on a Farman biplane, ascended 4,165 feet, as
    against Latham’s record of 3,444 feet. This was a great step upward,
    due not only to Paulhan’s prowess and dexterity, but also to the
    science and constructive skill of the less spectacular gentlemen in the
    designing room, workshop and laboratory.
Latham strove again for the world’s altitude record and gained it on
    July 7th at the second Rheims tournament, by driving his Antoinette
    to a height of 4,541 feet.[53] But again his victory was soon eclipsed;
    for two days later, Walter Brookins at Atlantic City ascended 6,175
    feet in a Wright biplane. An American was thus the first to fly above
    one mile, as a Frenchman had been first to pass the 3091-kilometer limit.
    The 2-kilometer and 2-mile elevations were exceeded before the close of
    the year, as shown by the following table, which also manifests a fair
    distribution of honors among various nations and types of machines:
Such lofty flights have proved a severe test of both the aëroplane and
    the pilot. In the lighter atmosphere the engine must turn the propeller
    at higher speed to secure the same thrust, and the aëroplane must sail
    faster to support the same weight as at the lower levels. Thus more
    power is required on high, though the explosive medium, being less
    dense, is less capable of exerting power. The driver has, therefore, to
    jockey his machine with assiduous care and alertness, at a time when he
    is least fitted for exertion, owing to fatigue, cold, and it may be,
    physical discomfort due to the great change of atmospheric pressure.
    But still, both aëroplane and pilot are capable of ascending well above
    any levels thus far attained.
After the triumphant altitude flights of 1910 the aëronautical
    skeptics could no longer contend that 310the aëroplane was useless in
    transportation and warfare, because of its inability to fly above
    high land or the usual range of the guns of battleships and coast
    fortifications. Most of the important mountain passes lie below 10,000
    feet. The safe elevation for motor balloons menaced by terrene guns is
    taken to be much less than two miles, and in military practice they
    usually operate below the one-mile level. The aëroplanes, therefore,
    may not only cross mountain ranges, but may also scrutinize, or
    grievously molest, land forces, marine squadrons and perhaps even the
    great gaseous cruisers of the atmosphere, which they can far outspeed,
    and may even destroy.
The increase in speed of flight during 1910 was also quite remarkable.
    The official record by which Mr. Curtiss won the Bennett Aviation
    Contest at Rheims, in 1909, showed a speed of 47.04 miles an hour.
    Still higher velocities, ranging from 50 to 60 miles an hour, were
    reported later in that season from England and France. In 1910,
    however, at the Rheims aviation meet, Morane, with a Blériot monoplane,
    covered the 20-kilometer course in 12 minutes 45.2 seconds, or at an
    average speed of 66.2 miles an hour, showing a gain of forty per cent
    on Mr. Curtiss’s speed of the preceding year. Still better was achieved
    at the international tournament held at Belmont Park in 1910. Le Blanc
    in a 100-horse Blériot monoplane, especially designed for speed,
    covered nineteen laps of the 5-kilometer course at an average rate of
    61 miles an hour, and his fastest lap at the rate of 71.68 miles an
    hour, thus exceeding Curtiss’s speed of the previous year by fifty per
    cent. Other spurts during the latter part of 1910 were reported to have
    attained nearly 80 miles an hour over a closed circuit, though perhaps
    not a level one. The best results were311 achieved with machines having
    high power engines, small surfaces and slight forward resistance.
The advance in long-distance flying in 1910 more than kept pace with
    the progress in speed. The best achievement at the close of the
    preceding year had been Farman’s flight of 144 miles at an average rate
    of 35.06 miles an hour in a closed circuit. At the Rheims aviation meet
    in 1910, Jan Olieslaegers, in a Blériot monoplane, driven by a Gnome
    engine, covered 244 miles in a rectangular course, at an average speed
    of 48.31 miles an hour. At Buc, on the 28th of October, an aviator of
    three months’ practice, Maurice Tabuteau, in a Maurice Farman biplane,
    driven by a Rénault engine, flew over a closed circuit, covering 288.8
    miles at an average speed of 47.9 miles an hour. At Pau on December
    21st, M. G. Leganeaux, in a Blériot monoplane, flew for the Michelin
    Cup, covering 516 kilometers or 320.6 miles in six hours and one
    minute, or at an average speed of 53¼ miles an hour—a splendid showing.
    Finally, at Buc, on December 30th, Tabuteau, flying for the annual
    Michelin prize, covered 362.66 miles in a Maurice Farman biplane with
    an 8-cylinder 60-horse Rénault motor. The average speed in this very
    long flight was 47.3 miles an hour, or practically the rate by which
    Curtiss won the international contest of the preceding year. Of course
    a considerably better showing of both distance and velocity could have
    been made on a longer course.
The world records for cross-country flying and for endurance and load
    illustrate both the increasing perfection of the machine and of the
    pilot’s skill and confidence. At Los Angeles, on January 19th, Mr. and
    Mrs. Paulhan, in a Farman biplane, flew together 21 miles overland from
    the aviation field to Redondo and Hermosa Beach and return.312 On January
    31st Van der Born made a world’s duration record with a passenger on
    a Farman biplane, flying 1 hour 48 minutes 50 seconds. On March 5th,
    Henri Farman, who had previously twice broken the world’s duration
    record for a pilot with two passengers, set a new and astonishing
    pace at Mourmelon, by carrying Mr. Hevardson and Madame Frank in
    easy flight for 62.5 minutes on his new biplane. In France, on April
    3d, Emile Dubonnet on his Tellier monoplane flew from Juvisy to La
    Ferte-Saint Aubin, a distance of 109 kilometers or 70 miles in 1 hour
    and 50 minutes, thus winning the ten-thousand-franc prize offered
    by La Nature for the first straightaway flight of 100 kilometers
    to be effected in less than two hours, over a previously indicated
    course. This fine record voyage was achieved in a machine never before
    thoroughly tried. At Chalons-sur-Marne, on April 8th, Daniel Kinet,
    a Belgian, mounted with a passenger on a Farman biplane driven by
    a 50-horse Gnome engine, broke the world’s record for duration and
    distance for two persons by flying round a closed circuit 2 hours 19¼
    minutes, covering a distance of 152 kilometers, or 94 miles. On April
    17th, H. Farman, with a passenger in his biplane, voyaged from Etampes
    to Orleans, 28 miles. Next day, Paulhan, mounting the same machine,
    flew 108 miles, and the following day 42 miles. This tour established a
    new cross-country record for total distance, for single stage distance
    with one passenger, and for duration and single stage distance with two
    passengers. During the same month Farman made a new record for four
    passengers by carrying three gentlemen for 1 hour and 4 minutes on his
    new biplane, spreading 47.6 feet. On June 9th, two French officers,
    Lieutenant Fequant piloting and Captain Marconnet observing, flew
    on a Farman biplane 313from Bouy to Vincennes, 145 kilometers, in two
    hours and a half, thus breaking the world’s cross-country distance and
    duration record for a pilot with a passenger. On June 13th, Charles K.
    Hamilton, in a Curtiss biplane, flew from New York to Philadelphia, a
    distance of 86 miles in 103 minutes, and returned the same day, thus
    completing 172 miles in one day. This was an exhibition flight made for
    The New York Times and the Philadelphia Ledger, for a sum reported
    to be $10,000. It was a sequel to Glenn H. Curtiss’s memorable flight
    on June 5th, down the Hudson River from Albany to New York, for the New
    York World’s $10,000 prize. Hamilton’s average speed was 50 miles
    an hour going and 51 miles returning. On August 29th, at Lille, Louis
    Bréguet is reported to have carried with him on a biplane of his make,
    five passengers, who, together with the gasoline, weighed 921 pounds.
    It may be added that the Bréguet biplane of that date was advertised
    and guaranteed to carry a cargo, or extra load, of 250 kilograms. It
    thus appears that by 1910 the aëroplane had grown powerful enough for
    an aërial cab service, and that it could carry sufficient explosive
    gelatine to derange a battleship.
The contest for cross-country records continued unabated all that
    memorable year. During the first three days of September, Jean
    Bielovucic, a youth of twenty-one, mounted on a new type of Voisin
    biplane, with but a few days’ practice, flew from Paris to Bordeaux,
    covering 540 kilometers, or 336 miles, in four stages, comprising
    altogether 6¼ hours on the wing. In spite of severe weather, at times,
    he beat the regular express train and established a new world’s record
    for cross-country straightaway distance flying with stops. On August
    17th, Alfred Le Blanc, finished a six-stage tour round a hexagonal
    circuit northeast of Paris, with the finish at Issy,314 near Paris,
    covering a total distance of 785 kilometers, or 440 miles, in 12
    hours 56.4 seconds effective time. On September 7th, Weyman flew with
    a passenger from Paris to Clermont near the Puy de Dome, covering
    205 miles in one day, while trying for the Michelin prize of 100,000
    francs, for a flight to the Puy de Dome inside of six hours. On
    December 18th, Thomas Sopwith, competing for the longest flight across
    the Channel and into Belgium, on a British-built aëroplane, flew from
    the Isle of Sheppy across the Channel, and landed at Beaumont, Belgium,
    covering a distance of 174 miles in 3.5 hours. At Buc, on November
    27th, Laurens, in a 60-horse R. E. P. monoplane, flew with his wife 53
    miles at an average speed of nearly 50 miles an hour. On December 22d,
    Lieutenant Cammerman, a French army officer, won the L. Weiller prize
    by flying across country with a passenger, 147 miles in 4 hours and 2
    minutes.
These are but a few of the records which serve to illustrate the
    progress in cross-country flying during that year of strenuous and
    world-wide popular demonstrations. But the bare numerical statement of
    facts can give no conception of the delight and exultation aroused in
    millions of souls who witnessed or learned of these marvelous human
    achievements. They were the advancing triumph of a proud and fortunate
    generation, happy in realizing one of the fondest dreams of the ages.
    Often during one of these cross-country flights the aëroplane was
    accompanied by a swift railway train whose passengers were delirious
    with enthusiasm. The entire route was thronged with people assembled
    from afar. It was a general holiday for all the fortunate cities and
    villages along the way. Mills and factories blew their whistles and
    forgot the serious business of life, homes were deserted, schools
    were315 dismissed; the whole population for the time congregated in
    the open; bearded mechanics in their aprons, bare-armed housewives
    holding their children aloft, girls and boys with wondering eyes, all
    shouting, waving banners, throwing up hats, and hailing with tumultuous
    demonstration that strange and huge-winged creature gliding from
    horizon to horizon with the steadiness, precision and directness of a
    mighty projectile. But beyond stating the records of this season of
    aërial wonders, only a passing notice can be given to some of the more
    conspicuous events.
The most famous overland voyages of the season 1910 began with the
    race for the London Daily Mail prize of $50,000, offered by Lord
    Northcliffe for the first person who should fly from London to
    Manchester, 183 miles within twenty-four hours, with not more than
    two stops. An Englishman, Claude Grahame-White, comparatively new in
    the pilot’s art, was first to undertake that difficult and perilous
    adventure. Starting from London, without competitor, on April 24th, he
    flew in his Farman biplane, from London to Rugby, thence to Hademore,
    about halfway to Manchester, landing at a quarter past nine o’clock
    at night, after a four-hour trip, and hoping to reach Manchester next
    day. But during the night his aëroplane, which was left in the open,
    was damaged by the wind, thus necessitating repairs and a new start. On
    April 27th, while he was strenuously mending and adjusting his biplane
    for a new start, Louis Paulhan, who the day previously had arrived from
    France with a Farman biplane to enter the contest, was also vigorously
    setting up and adjusting his machine.
At half past five in the afternoon, Paulhan suddenly set out for
    Manchester. Mr. White, who was much fatigued and expecting to start on
    the morrow316 at dawn, after much-needed rest, learned toward six o’clock
    that his rival was on the wing, and hurriedly sailed from London,
    hoping by skill and good chance to overtake the flying Frenchman.
    The race was now the most exciting event in the world. The first
    flyers of France and England were competing for the greatest prize
    yet offered in the history of aviation, competing in a most modern
    and extraordinary race, attended with abundant danger and hardship.
    The contestants were evenly matched in mechanism and capability, but
    the Frenchman had gotten the march on the unwary Englishman. Paulhan
    followed the Northwestern Railway, at times outracing the special
    pilot train carrying his mechanics and supplies. At ten minutes after
    eight o’clock, he landed at Lichfield, having covered 115 miles. Mr.
    White had landed five minutes before eight near Roade, after flying
    fifty-nine miles.
Next morning, Paulhan sailed away at a quarter past four. Mr. White,
    hoping to overtake him, had started at dead of night and covered
    twenty miles before Paulhan had started. It was a heroic effort, but
    unavailing. At twelve minutes after five, Mr. White landed at Hademore,
    having completed two thirds of the entire journey. Twenty-five minutes
    later Paulhan landed on the outskirts of Manchester, greeted by a
    thousand persons. He had covered the whole distance in 4.2 hours, and
    had fulfilled all the essential conditions for winning the great prize.
The next world-famous aëroplane voyage was that of Glenn H. Curtiss for
    the New York World’s prize of $10,000 for the first aërial journey
    from Albany to New York, allowing two stops. Aviators had been yearning
    for this prize since the previous year, but had been too timidly shying
    at the dangers of the route. After most careful preparations for this
    voyage, Curtiss, bearing a letter from the317 Mayor of Albany to the
    Mayor of New York, sailed away at seven o’clock on Sunday morning, May
    29th, accompanied by a New York Central special train, bearing his wife
    and a few friends and newspaper men. He landed an hour for supplies
    and adjustment at Camelot, 41 miles down the river, and thence flew to
    Spuyten Duyvil, at the northern extremity of New York, having completed
    the required distance, 128 miles, in 2 hours and 32 minutes, or at the
    rate of 50.52 miles per hour along the course. An hour later, he flew
    down the river to New York Harbor and landed on Governor’s Island,
    where he received a becoming ovation.
Perhaps the most exciting incident of the voyage to Mr. Curtiss was his
    transit of the Storm King Mountain. As he was flying through the narrow
    gap at this place he caught the down-rolling air on one side more
    than on the other, and dropped very suddenly sidewise 30 or 40 feet.
    By shifting his front control, he quickly gained headway and promptly
    righted his machine.
Commenting on Mr. Curtiss’s average speed of 50 miles an hour and his
    rugged course, Aëronautics makes comparison between his voyage and
    Paulhan’s great prize flight as follows:
“Paulhan took 4 hours 12 minutes elapsed time to cover 183 miles when
      he won the London Mail’s $50,000 and made it in two stages of 117 and
      66 miles each. The 117 miles were covered in 2.39, a rate of nearly 44
      miles per hour. A night’s sleep intervened and the remaining 66 miles
      were covered in 1.23, a rate of nearly 48 miles per hour. The average
      for the above was 44.37 miles per hour. Paulhan could have landed at
      almost any time and started again, whereas Curtiss could not have
      started if he had had to land in the water, and for the whole distance
      there was scarcely a suitable318 space for landing on the ground, as for
      nearly the entire way rocky, wooded hills with precipitous sides line
      the river.”
The most audacious and marvelous aëronautic exploit of the year was the
    flight of George Chavez across the Alps from Brig to Domodossola, in
    his attempt to win the prize of 70,000 francs offered by the Italian
    Aviation Society for the first aëroplane flight from Brig to Milan, a
    distance of 75 miles. From the nine volunteers for this contest who
    presented themselves to the committee in charge, five competitors
    were selected, and these for several days made tentative efforts to
    scale the lofty pass, but were baffled by the wind or fog. Finally at
    one-thirty, on September 23d, the conditions being favorable, Chavez
    rose, from Briegen-Berg, in his white-winged Blériot, spiraled upward
    1,000 meters, circling around the vast amphitheater of the mountains,
    and in nineteen minutes appeared in magnificent career well above the
    Simplon Pass, probably 7,000 feet above the sea, whence he glided
    grandly down the Italian slope, parrying the rude cross winds and
    finally reaching Domodossola, where the enthusiasm was at its climax.
    Here he expected to land on a level spot to replenish his supplies,
    thence proceed over the easy remaining two thirds of his journey. But
    though the perilous pass had been crossed so successfully, disaster
    appeared in the valley when least expected. As the aëroplane was
    gliding thirty feet high over the level tract chosen for landing, it
    met a sudden gust, its wings collapsed, and it fell crashing to earth,
    pinioning its brave pilot under the débris.
Poor Chavez suffered severe wounds about the face and head, had both
    legs broken, and for some moments lay unconscious. But he was soon
    revived by his friends and taken to a hospital, where he died319 four
    days later. Thus ended the career of a brave and most promising youth
    of twenty-three. He had taken his pilot’s license only in February,
    1910, yet had established a new world’s record on September 8th, by
    driving his Blériot to an elevation of 8,406 feet. He was of Peruvian
    parentage and born in Paris.
The exact nature of the accident was never ascertained, but it was
    surmised that the sudden starting of his engine preparatory to landing
    overstressed some part of the structure already fatigued from hard
    usage. However this be, the committee recognized that Chavez had with
    excellent skill covered all the really difficult and dangerous part
    of this journey. Accordingly they very generously waived the exact
    letter of the rules, and awarded him one half the prize, though he had
    completed but one third of the journey.
Quite as dangerous, spectacular and brilliant as the flight across
    the Alps, though less arduous, was Hubert Latham’s aërial voyage over
    Baltimore. On previous occasions cross-city flights had been made,
    but never one of such length or one executed under such exacting
    conditions. At various times aviators had flown above Paris, Rome,
    Berlin, etc. On October 14th Mr. White had flown across Washington,
    landing on a narrow street between the White House and War Department;
    on October 15th Leganeaux had flown above Paris with a passenger; but
    these were short flights over an uncharted course. Latham’s voyage
    was unique; for he had to follow a long and a prescribed course over
    the business section and closely built residence portion of the city.
    This great exploit was an exhibition flight made on the invitation
    of the Baltimore Sun for a sum of $5,000. It was to be made at the
    time of the Baltimore aviation tournament at Halethorpe, Md., and320 was
    calculated to be seen by half a million people; for the whole city was
    to be notified and would cease its usual activities to witness the rare
    and hazardous demonstration.
The voyage was triumphant and glorious in every feature. Starting from
    the aviation ground, seven miles south of Baltimore, about noon on
    November 7th, Latham drove his beautiful Antoinette about the field
    in an ascending spiral, like some imperial bird taking its bearings;
    then, chart in hand, deliberately sailed away over his elaborately
    prescribed journey. This was a figure 8 course with its bottom at the
    aviation field and its center at the Sun Building in the heart of
    Baltimore, the whole length being 22 miles. As the long-winged bird
    in majestic poise, with the intrepid rider on its back, approached
    in the distance, soaring 1,000 feet above the gleaming waters of the
    Chesapeake, the great bell of the City Hall sounded a mighty peal, and
    the whole populace responded in tumultuous chorus; whistles, bells and
    a myriad voices mingling their heartiest welcome to the bravest of
    aviators. With arrowlike speed and directness he rounded the center of
    the course at the Sun Building, then looped the vast northern half of
    the city, flying a thousand to three thousand feet high, more easily
    to parry the surging eddies of the northwest wind; rounded again the
    center of his course and then returned to the aviation field, where he
    landed with infinite coolness before the excited throng of applauding
    spectators, whose acclaim was all too feeble to express their mingled
    wonder, admiration and delight. The voyage lasted forty-two minutes and
    fulfilled perfectly every minute requirement, including a short circle
    and salutation before the home of Mr. Ross Winans, an invalid gentleman
    who had solicited this unique favor, and rewarded321 it with a gift of
    $500. It was the climax of the aviation week at Baltimore.
Among the many brilliant flights of that memorable year of strenuous
    piloting will long be remembered the voyage of the Hon. C. S. Rolls to
    Calais and return without landing, and that of Mr. Sopwith, already
    recounted; the splendid flight of Mr. Clifford B. Harmon in his Farman
    biplane from Mineola, Long Island, to a small rounded island before
    his house on the Connecticut shore, for the trophy offered by Country
    Life to the first person who should fly across Long Island Sound;
    Henri Farman’s flight of December 18th, for the Michelin long-distance
    prize, covering 288 miles, and establishing a new endurance record of
    8 hours 23 minutes; Mlle. Helene Dutrieu’s flight of December 21st,
    for the Coupe Femina, covering 103¾ miles in 2 hours and 35 minutes
    in a Farman biplane. Interesting, too, were the first attempt to fly
    from Paris to Brussels with a passenger, when Mahieu and Manihé on
    starting were brought to bay by a vicious dog which violently attacked
    the propeller and was cut in two; and when Loridan and Fay landed on a
    tree, from which they descended by a ladder. After this followed the
    glorious voyage of Henri Wijnmalen, the youthful and many-sided Dutch
    sport, for the prize of 150,000 francs offered by the Automobile Club
    of France for the quickest aëroplane trip not exceeding 36 hours, with
    a passenger from Paris to Brussels and return. This voyage of some
    320 miles was valiantly accomplished by Wijnmalen and his companion
    Dufour, in a day and a half, of 13.2 effective hours, and in weather
    for the most part windy or tempestuous. Finally to the foregoing list
    of splendid achievements must be added the glorious voyage of John
    Moisant, who in August flew with a passenger, by compass, from Paris to
    London,322 though he had never been over the route before and had only
    just learned to use an aëroplane.
The International Aviation Tournament of 1910, held at Belmont Park,
    Long Island, October 22d to 31st, was the most prominent and eventful
    meet of the year, and the second of its kind in history, as the
    meeting of the preceding year at Rheims was the first. The present
    meet was conducted by the Aëro Corporation, Limited, of New York,
    under the auspices and official sanction of the Aëro Club of America,
    representing the Federation Aëronautique Internationale.
This tournament was the annual aërial Olympic contest of the world, and
    should have been indicative not only of the aviator’s skill, but also
    of the state of national progress in the science and art of aëroplane
    construction. Unfortunately, however, for the prestige of the most
    deserving nations, the rules of the International Aëronautic Federation
    did not confine the contestants to the use of home-built machines, to
    prevent the glory of winning the international contest from passing to
    the nation which merely furnished the operator, a person who might be
    an illiterate jockey, and representative of a country wholly devoid of
    science. As luck decided, however, the highest honor in 1910 was won by
    a first-class French machine driven by a first-class English aviator.
In some respects the raw material and working elements of this meet
    were most satisfactory. The site is near the wealthiest and most
    populous center in America. The grounds are spacious and level,
    and provided with all the equipment of a great race course; the
    transportation facilities by carriage and by rail from the heart of
    New York are adequate to every requirement. The personnel of the
    meet comprised the most experienced and most devoted323 members of the
    Aëro Club of America, the oldest and strongest aëronautical body in
    the western world, and the only one representing the International
    Aëronautic Federation. It is true the season was late and the weather
    would probably be cold and tempestuous; the management was burdened by
    a costly license, whether just or unjust, imposed upon it as the price
    of immunity from patent litigation; the remaining time, after the final
    placement of the meet, was all too short for the myriad preparations
    to be made. But whatever the obstacles, physical or financial, the
    personnel was paramount, and naturally made the huge tournament a
    glorious triumph. It was the cardinal sporting event of the year.
The status of aviation was well represented in both pilots and
    machines. Twenty-seven aviators were entered on the program, many of
    them world famous. Of these Alfred Le Blanc, Hubert Latham, Emile
    Aubrun were the formidable champions of France in the contest for the
    James Gordon Bennett aviation trophy; Claude Grahame-White, James
    Radley, A. Ogilvie represented England; while Walter Brookins, J. A.
    Drexel, Charles K. Hamilton were enlisted as defenders of the coveted
    cup and of American prestige. All told, the aviators brought with them
    nearly two-score machines, ranging in capacity from 30 to 100 horse
    power. Of these about half were monoplanes and half biplanes, for the
    most part of French and American manufacture.
The prizes and remuneration awarded to the contestants were on a
    scale proportionate to their skill and number. All told the winnings
    aggregated more than $60,000. Further appropriations were made to
    cover the expenses of the aviators, and a further sum equal to about
    forty per cent of the winnings was paid for immunity from prosecution
    for possible 324infringement of an unlitigated patent. Considering the
    immense expenditures for buildings, for policing and other incidentals
    of the meet, it may be readily inferred that there was an ample
    deficit, and that the air men as a whole were much better rewarded
    than some of the sportsmen who gave so much time and labor to the
    organization of the tournament.
A conspicuous feature of the meet was the display of hardiness and
    skill of several of the aviators in facing the cold and tempestuous
    weather. This was particularly characteristic of Latham in his
    Antoinette monoplane, and of Ralph Johnstone and Arch Hoxsey in
    Wright biplanes. On October 27th Latham flew round the regular course
    for an hour when it was nearly impossible to turn the pylons against
    the fierce wind, while Johnstone and Hoxsey performed lofty altitude
    flights in a powerful gale which carried them backward, sometimes at
    the rate of 40 miles an hour. As a consequence they landed in the
    open country, remained overnight and returned next day. Johnstone was
    carried backward to Holtsville, 55 miles east of the aviation grounds,
    and Hoxsey was blown to Brentwood, 25 miles away, both landing at dusk
    in open fields, and both having attained great elevations: Hoxsey,
    6,903 feet; Johnstone, 8,471 feet.
An interesting novelty of the aviation week, at least to Americans,
    were the erratic Demoiselle monoplanes, invented by Santos-Dumont and
    piloted by Garros and Audemars. These aëroplanes were notable as having
    the pilot under the sustaining plane, and the engine above with its
    direct mounted propeller. The lateral stability was enhanced by a low
    placement of the center of mass, and by a slight dihedral inclination
    of the wings. Furthermore, as there was not much leverage or surface in
    the rear325 double rudder, the flight was more stable than steady, like
    that of a propelled parachute. In fact, the little monoplanes pitched,
    rocked, and fluttered about so like huge butterflies as to provoke
    constant merriment. They gave a faint suggestion of how ludicrous
    aëroplane clowns could be made by one who has genius for such things.
Barring the stormy voyages above mentioned, the most memorable events
    of the tournament were the Gordon Bennett speed contest, the Statue of
    Liberty race and Johnstone’s great altitude flight. Of the numerous
    other performances little need be said, except that they contributed
    to the general success of an elaborate and most interesting program.
    They served the daily need of a costly tournament; they delighted vast
    throngs of spectators whose admission fees helped to promote the aërial
    sport; but they did not of themselves have more than local interest, or
    constitute an advance in the records of first-class achievement.
The chief race of the meet, the James Gordon Bennett speed contest,
    was scheduled for Saturday, October 29th. The prize of $5,000 and the
    coveted cup were to be awarded to the pilot who should make the best
    average speed in 20 laps over a 5-kilometer course, aggregating 100
    kilometers, or 62.14 miles. The winner should have the distinguished
    honor of taking to his own country the next annual contest for the
    precious speed prize.
Grahame-White, England’s foremost aviator and strongest hope in
    the contest, brought forth his untried 100-horse Blériot in the
    calmest part of the day, and took wing a quarter before nine. He
    flew with steady poise and swift, well-sustained speed, completing
    the 100-kilometer distance in 1 hour 1 minute and 4.7 seconds, at an
    average speed of 61 miles an hour.
326
Le Blanc, the most likely winner of all, sailed at nine o’clock. He was
    mounted on a 100-horse Blériot with nearly flat wings, the swiftest
    monoplane of French manufacture. He was the boldest, sturdiest and
    most dexterous pilot in a nation of renowned aviators, the winner of
    unnumbered trophies, the “Vainquer de l’Est.” He now flew at unwonted
    speed, establishing new world records at every round of the course. It
    seemed evident to the timers that only an accident to this impetuous
    Frenchman could retrieve the glory of England and save that of America.
    Suddenly the accident came. In the last lap, when victory seemed
    assured, the gasoline failed; the monoplane shot downward, knocked off
    a telegraph pole, and, with broken frame and engine, fell crashing
    to earth, entangling the brave aviator. Le Blanc was cut and bruised
    about the forehead, and was taken to the hospital to be bandaged,
    not seriously injured but in a towering rage, suspecting that some
    trickery had given him a shortage of fuel. He had lost the day, though
    his average speed for the whole flight was 67 miles an hour as against
    Grahame-White’s speed of 61 miles.
No well-tried machine was available to defend the American prestige.
    Curtiss had constructed a new monoplane designed for speed, but though
    he had brought the cup to America, he was not chosen as one of its
    three defenders. The little Wright biplane of 61 horse power had
    flown a few minutes with great velocity, and was looked to with some
    confidence. Mounted by Walter Brookins, it set out with tremendous
    speed, but had only well started when the cylinders began to miss fire.
    Brookins turned toward the infield to land, struck the ground with
    terrific shock and tumbled violently on the field beside his broken
    machine. He, too, was taken to327 the hospital for treatment, but was not
    seriously injured.
It was now granted that Grahame-White would be the ultimate winner.
    Other aviators attempted to defeat him, but lacked either the necessary
    speed or endurance. The cup was accordingly taken from the nations
    that had done the most to develop the practical art of aëroplaning. Of
    these two nations, the one most deserving of victory, by virtue of its
    more careful preparation, was defeated by an extraordinary mishap, when
    victory was at hand; the other failed perhaps for want of preparation
    rather than from lack of manipulative or constructive skill.
Of the various highly coveted stakes the largest in monetary value was
    known as the Thomas F. Ryan Statue of Liberty Prize. This was a cash
    sum of $10,000, to be awarded to the properly qualified contestant who
    should fly from the aviation ground to and around the Statue of Liberty
    in New York Harbor, and return in the shortest time, the airline
    distance being 16 miles each way. The prize was founded by Mr. Thomas
    F. Ryan, whose son, Allan A. Ryan, was Chairman of the Committee on
    Arrangements of the tournament, and who though suffering with pain and
    ill-health, labored so indefatigably to insure the success of the event
    so germain to the aëronautical prestige of his country.
The Statue of Liberty race occurred on Sunday afternoon, October 30th,
    beginning just after three o’clock. Count De Lesseps in a 50-horse
    Blériot monoplane led the race, followed three minutes later by
    Grahame-White. They passed toward the southwest in perfect poise and
    vanished beyond the horizon unchallenged by an American contestant;
    for Moisant, the American champion, had shortly before injured his
    racing monoplane, and the other American racing machines had been
    damaged the328 week before, or had not yet been fully tested. But with
    admirable enterprise, Moisant telephoned Le Blanc, in New York, who
    was not racing because of the accident to his 100-horse Blériot the
    day previously, and offered the Frenchman $10,000 for his 50-horse
    Blériot monoplane. The sale was effected in time for the race that
    day. But for all that the enterprise seemed futile; for as Moisant
    was preparing to start, the others were returning, Grahame-White well
    in the lead, having overtaken De Lesseps. As these two aviators were
    receiving the applause of innumerable spectators and the felicitations
    of their friends, audacious Moisant, the impetuous soldier of fortune,
    and hero of the famous flight by compass from Paris to London, started
    toward the declining sun, just after four o’clock. He was determined
    to win by superior skill and daring. His prudent competitors had
    followed a circuitous southern route interspersed with landing places;
    but he flew like a maniac straight over the church spires and crowded
    buildings of Brooklyn, guided to his goal by a compass, rounded the
    Statue of Liberty at a great altitude and plunged homeward with all
    possible speed and directness. The megaphone announced his progress,
    which indicated some hope of victory so little expected and so much
    desired by the vast throng that stood gazing toward the western sun.
    In headlong career the swooping monoplane shot by the judges’ stand,
    circled and softly landed on the field, triumphant by 43 seconds
    over the 100-horse Blériot of Grahame-White. As the intrepid aviator
    approached the vast and delighted throng of spectators to acknowledge
    its noisy and tumultuous ovation, he was met by the chiefs of the
    tournament, draped in an American flag, and paraded before the grand
    stand, “which shook in its effort to do honor to the little air
    conqueror.” Ultimately, 329however, the prize was awarded to Count
    De Lesseps, because Moisant had failed to qualify properly, and
    Grahame-White had fouled the initial pylon.
The final day of the tournament was made memorable by Johnstone’s
    altitude flight. The best previous record was that of Wijnmalen to an
    elevation of 9,104 feet, made at Mourmelon, France. Johnstone ascended
    on a small Wright machine with powerful propellers adapted to rapid
    climbing, determined not only to surpass Wijnmalen but to exceed,
    if possible, the ten-thousand-foot level, and win the special prize
    offered for such achievement. He actually rose to the great elevation
    of 9,714 feet, but could not develop power enough to continue upward.
    On his descent he fully exhausted his fuel at 3,000 feet, and thence
    glided to earth, landing softly, 1 hour and 43 minutes from the time of
    starting.
Thus the greatest tournament of the year terminated with fine new
    laurels for the science and art of aviation; for the spectacular
    pilots and for the unseen men behind them—the scientific men in the
    laboratories, the designing rooms and the workshops. New standards had
    been established in speed, in altitude, in prowess and daring. In these
    elements, the spectators could hardly ask for a better exhibition. What
    is it to the onlooker to have an aëroplane go higher than the cumuli,
    since at that level a thousand feet makes no perceptible difference?
    What more could he wish in dexterity of manipulation and audacity in
    braving the elements? One thing more, doubtless, and that is, security
    and precision of flight in stormy weather. When these improvements
    shall have been effected much will have been added to both the sportive
    interest and practical utility of the aëroplane.
330
The most businesslike and crucial flying contest of the year was the
    famous “Circuit de l’Est,” organized by the Paris Matin. It was a
    competitive voyage over an irregular hexagonal course, lying generally
    northeast of Paris, and having its vertices at various cities to the
    east and north of the national capital. The main prize offered by
    the Matin was one hundred thousand francs for the first air man to
    complete the entire course, doing the first side of the hexagon on
    August 7th, and the succeeding sides in regular order on successive
    odd days of the month, the place and hour of starting each stage
    being assigned in advance. Various subsidiary prizes aggregating
    nearly a hundred thousand francs more, were available for meritorious
    performances at the various stages and stopping-places along the
    route.331 But there were also penalizations for those contestants who
    failed to start on schedule time and observe the rules of the course.
The race began at Issy, near Paris, on August 7th, with eight aviators
    on the wing—Le Blanc, Aubrun, Leganeaux, Mamet, Lindpainter, Weyman. It
    terminated August 17th, headed by Alfred Le Blanc on his Blériot, and
    followed by Emile Aubrun on a Blériot, then by Weyman on a Farman, all
    three driven by Gnome engines actuating Chauvière propellers. Le Blanc
    completed the tour of six stages, covering an air-line distance of 488
    miles, in 12 hours’ effective flying, or at the average rate of 40.6
    miles per hour.
This long tour on schedule time over a rough and varied country in
    face of fog, wind and rain, was a most severe trial of the prowess and
    endurance of the brave pilots who had the hardiness and pertinacity
    to complete the voyage. Needless to add that it created unbounded
    enthusiasm among millions of people who witnessed the event, or read of
    it, and that the clocklike precision of the “grand raid” inspired new
    confidence in the practicability of the aëroplane.
A particularly impressive feature of the event was that many of its
    participants, the aviators, government officers, and members of the
    controlling committee, assembled at Issy and other posts of duty,
    not by rail, but by aëroplane, sailing across country from many
    directions and from great distances. This matter-of-fact procedure led
    many persons to believe that the period of mere demonstrations had
    approached its close, and that the epoch of practical utility was at
    hand; that after marveling so much at the aëroplane, with mingled faith
    and skepticism, people would next calmly turn it to practical use.
332
Though the progress in designing and constructing aëroplanes in 1910
    did not keep pace with the wonderful advance in new records, still the
    inventors and manufacturers continued industriously to perfect the
    details of their best standard machines, and in a few instances to
    make radical innovations. The perfection in details of construction
    manifested itself in the public performance of aëroplanes, particularly
    in their greater reliability and their increased capabilities. The
    radical innovations were mainly experimental, and not generally
    exhibited, though none the less important for all that. Chief of these
    perhaps were the hydro-aëroplane developments of Fabre in France, and
    of Mr. Glenn H. Curtiss in America, which enabled the aviator to launch
    into the air directly from the water and to alight safely on the water,
    thus virtually adding a new and very important domain to the empire of
    dynamic flight.
Curtiss, in 1909, succeeded in landing his aëroplane safely on the
    water of Lake Keuka, first with sheet iron cylindrical floats under
    each wing, and a simple float well to the front of his protruding
    chassis, then with a hydroplane surface to the front as being more
    effective than the float. But when he attempted to glide up from the
    lake with this arrangement, he could not entirely clear the surface,
    though his aëroplane under the powerful thrust of her aërial screw,
    very nearly lifted from the water. Then he planned to use hydroplane
    floats, of hollow wing form, and of such size that they would buoy up
    the machine when at rest, and during motion would skim over the water
    like a skipping stone, till the biplane should acquire sufficient speed
    to rise by the dynamic reaction of the air. In the successful execution
    of this plan, however, he was anticipated by Fabre, who made the first
    successful flight from the 333water, on March 28th, 1910, at Martigues,
    France. But the Frenchman was not left to bear the palm alone. Early in
    the year 1911, Mr. Curtiss rose and landed successfully on the water at
    San Diego Bay, Cal., by means of a single float like a flatboat placed
    centrally under his biplane, seconded by small auxiliary floats at the
    wing ends. A full account of these valuable contributions to aviation
    is given in Appendix V.
As shown in Plate XXXI, Fabre’s hydro-aëroplane was substantially a
    monoplane mounted on three richochet floats. It was propelled by a
    screw at the rear, and controlled in flight by the usual three-torque
    system, in this case consisting of horizontal rudders in front,
    vertical rudders front and rear, and suitable mechanism for twisting
    the wings. The floats were hollow to give them static buoyancy; they
    were curved fore and aft like wings, to give them dynamic lift, both in
    water and in air; they were elastically constructed with thin veneer
    bottoms and flexibly attached to the framing, so as to endure the
    severe buffeting, at high speeds, against the uneven water surface;
    they were capable of landing the machine safely on a sandy beach or
    meadow, as well as on the water. Indeed, a plan was conceived for
    rising and alighting on land and water indifferently.
334The first machine weighed in flight 950 pounds and spread 280 square
    feet of surface, giving a loading of 3.4 pounds per square foot. It was
    driven by a 50-horse Gnome engine actuating a Chauvière propeller 7.5
    feet in diameter. In the trials of March 28th, the machine cleared the
    water at a speed of 34 miles per hour, and flew about one-third of a
    mile, at an elevation of two to three yards; then at the will of the
    operator it alighted softly on the water.
The structural design of the Fabre monoplane was novel and unique, not
    to say radical. The wing framing consisted of a single Fabre trussed
    beam with ribs attached like the quills of a bird, over which was
    stretched the light sailcloth cover, then laced to the beam. The girder
    itself was formed of two ash planks eight inches wide by one-fourth
    inch thick trussed together by flat steel plates zigzagging trelliswise
    between them. As all parts of the beam cut the air edgewise it offered
    very little resistance, while at the same time being very strong. The
    ribs being attached only at one end allowed the sailcloth to be quickly
    slipped on and off for washing and proper care.
The characteristic features of Fabre’s wing construction were adopted
    by Paulhan in his novel and picturesque biplane shown in Plate
    XXXI. Trussed beams were used for all parts requiring considerable
    stiffness, the longitudinal ones being covered with fabric to reduce
    the resistance. The wings whose solid ribs were fastened only at their
    front ends were quite elastic, a quality conducive to stability, as
    long taught by writers[55] on aviation. In addition 335to the front
    rudder, there was at the rear a horizontal rudder with a vertical one
    just before it. To reduce the air resistance further the pilot and
    passenger were to sit tandem in a torpedo-shaped car with the 50-horse
    Gnome engine and fuel tank back of them. Beneath the longitudinal
    girders were two Farman skids flanked with the usual wheels,
    elastically connected. The machine, besides flying well, was readily
    demountable. The wings could be quickly removed, thus allowing the
    biplane to enter a door fifteen feet wide. The entire machine could be
    packed in a case 15½ feet long by 3¼ feet square, the whole case cubing
    less than six solid yards. Hundreds of them, therefore, could be stowed
    away in an ocean cruiser.
The flying quality of adequately designed flexible aëroplanes is well
    illustrated by the swallowlike monoplane shown in Fig. 43. This airy
    creation of the distinguished Austrian engineer, Igo Etrich, came into
    public prominence in the spring of 1910, though it had been developing
    privately for half a decade or more. On May 14th, near Vienna, it
    carried pilot Illner 84 kilometers in 80 minutes, at an elevation of
    300 meters, thus surpassing all previous Austrian records for distance,
    duration and altitude. Its successor, Etrich IV, had wing tips still
    more turned up, and possessed such stability that during the meet at
    Johannisthal in October, Illner circled the pylons with his hands off
    the warping levers. At times he wheeled round curves of only ten meters
    radius, the whole machine tilted at an alarming angle, yet maintaining
    its poise with the natural ease and grace of a soaring albatross.
The prominent feature of Etrich’s monoplane336 was the elastic
    construction of its wings and tail. Across the rigid main bars of each
    wing were fastened numerous ribs with bamboo terminals, thus making
    the rear margin and tip of the wing flexible. Similarly the tail, or
    horizontal rudder, was framed of bamboo. Hence the pilot, by use of
    control wires, could flex both the wing margins and the tail up and
    down at will, to steer the machine, or he could let go the controls and
    allow the distorted surfaces to spring into their normal positions,
    and the machine to pursue the even tenor of its way. Moreover, the
    gusts and whirls in the air, on striking the elastic rear margins of
    the tail and wings, exert a propulsive effort. Thus could be utilized
    the wind’s energy of turbulence, as indicated by the present writer
    in 1893, in a paper on “Windgusts and Their Relation to Flight,”
    published in the Proceedings of the International Conference on Aërial
    Navigation of that year. In passing it may be remarked that many other
    aëroplane designers, notably Bréguet, have emulated Mr. Etrich, though
    unconsciously perhaps, in providing elastic ribs, hinges or pivots to
    permit the rear parts of the wings and tails of their machines to yield
    freely to intentional or unusual impulses, and then spring back to
    their normal positions.
337The carefully elaborated monoplane of Robert Esnault-Pélterie, which
    had been steadily improving for eight years, had now attained great
    perfection of finish, and merited prominence in actual flight. As shown
    in Plate XXIX, it had a general resemblance to the Antoinette, though
    differing throughout in its manifold details. The stream-line body was
    of steel tubing, braced with wire, and tightly covered with smooth
    fabric to reduce resistance. A five-cylinder R. E. P. motor in front
    connected directly with the two-blade propeller. The pilot sat between
    the wings with the passenger before him at the center of gravity, both
    having control levers when desired for instruction. The wings could be
    warped and the rudders, at the end of ample empennage planes, occupied
    the extreme rear as shown. An elastically cushioned skid between the
    two freely turning wheels served to absorb the shock of hard landing,
    though usually not touching the ground. The R. E. P. monoplane of 1910
    was a very graceful, swift and strong machine, of marked efficiency.
As always happens in the many-minded development 338of a complex
    invention, the general exhibition and use of the aëroplane led toward
    uniformity of design. This became particularly noticeable during the
    world-wide demonstrations of 1909 and 1910. Whatever predilection the
    inventor might have for his own devices, he would rather cast them
    aside than lose at the tournament and in the market. Without a monopoly
    of the flying art, he could ill afford to retain too affectionately
    his own second-rate device in competition with a rival having a more
    effective one. Accordingly there was a judicious and general adoption
    of those devices which had proved best in practice, from whatever lowly
    intellect they had emanated. Thus there was a marked tendency to the
    general use of starting wheels, landing skids, large warping surfaces,
    and, in racing machines, to the stream line concentration of the load,
    and the severe elimination of resistance.
A few examples will illustrate this tendency to choose the most
    practical devices from the world’s general stock. The Wright brothers,
    who, following Maxim, had been ardent votaries of the forward
    horizontal rudder, discarded this in 1910 for the elastic rear
    horizontal rudder introduced by Etrich. At the same time they abandoned
    the antiquated catapult introduced by Langley, and adopted the
    combination of wheels and skids introduced by Farman. In their racing
    machine they no longer placed the aviator beside his engine, presenting
    a broad front to the wind, but, like Curtiss and foreign designers,
    they placed the driver and power plant in line, to diminish the
    atmospheric resistance. These manifold and timely improvements indicate
    clearly the advantages to mankind of an “open door” in a crescent art.
But if the Wrights adopted the most successful devices of their
    neighbors, these in turn were not339 slow to reciprocate that policy.
    There was ample recognition of the merit of the combination of warping
    sustainers and double rudder proposed by scientific men before the
    advent of power aëroplanes, and so admirably employed by the Wrights
    and Prof. Montgomery in their early coasting flights. The warping wing
    was quite generally used on monoplanes in 1910; not to mention the
    ailerons, which frequently were an adaptation of the same principle.
As further illustrations, it may be noted that Voisin brothers adopted
    the Farman ailerons and abandoned the cellular type of sustaining
    surface introduced by Hargrave, finding the vertical surfaces strongly
    frictional and unnecessary for lateral equilibrium, in presence of
    the ailerons. They also abandoned the forward horizontal rudder,
    seeing that it could very well be omitted. On the other hand, it must
    be observed that the Farmans, Sommer and Curtiss still retained the
    combined fore and aft rudder. Curtiss and Farman also tried their hands
    at monoplane construction, though without abandoning the biplane. The
    most famous monoplanists, however, held firmly to their first love.
    In this they were emulated by many new designers, Nieuport, Hanriot,
    Déperdussin, etc. These show a marked tendency to employ smoothly
    covered hulls shaped after the fish or torpedo.
To drive the little aëroplanes so far developed, especially the
    racers, there was a general preference for a single-screw propeller
    mounted directly on the engine shaft, though doubtless for machines
    weighing many tons a multiplicity of such propellers would be used.
    Theoretically the advantage of twin screws was conceded, but in
    practice they were employed by very few constructors. The Chauvière
    wooden propeller was the favorite in France, and was approved by
    the constructors of propellers elsewhere, 340at least in its general
    features. The Voisin firm, indeed, still adhered to the metal
    propeller, and occasionally some experimentalist employed the more
    venerable French screw consisting of radial sticks covered with fabric.
    But the great records in the sporting world were achieved with solid
    wooden propellers.
A special chapter would be required to describe the various motors,
    even cursorily. Their relative values, however, may be summarized in
    the following brief words by Réné Gasnier, in the Aërophile for
    November, 1910:
“Last year we had but few light types; this year there is no dearth
      of them, and at their head stands that admirable motor Gnome, which
      has enabled aviators to accomplish all their fine performances. At
      first many persons had no confidence in the future of the rotatory
      motor. One must bow to the facts; on considering the nature of this
      motor it is seen to be of an admirable simplicity. It is evidently the
      typical aviation motor, and an approach toward the veritable rotatory
      motor which later will be the turbine. Numerous motors of four to
      eight cylinders are very well spoken of, but none attain the lightness
      of the Gnome. Among the air-cooled motors the Esnault-Pélterie
      is remarkable for the series of trials it has endured, and among
      water-cooled motors we may cite the splendid performance of the
      Antoinette—2,100 kilometers in one week at the Bordeaux meeting.
      This would be quite a good run even in an automobile. It is noticeable
      that the aëroplane motor tends distinctly to differentiate itself from
      its senior, the automobile motor, and assume a type absolutely adapted
      to its special work. In addition to the greatest possible lightness,
      a demand now arises for a slight consumption of fuel, and a range of
      speed which is indispensable for landing. It is dangerous341 to descend
      rapidly with the motor at full speed; on the other hand, in cutting off
      the ignition to glide down, one risks not being able to restart the
      motor, if need be, while if the motor relax sufficiently the descent
      takes place in perfect security. It suffices to speed up at the right
      moment.”
The practical utility of aviation began now to be questioned. The
    aëroplane had passed the primary epoch of experimental development
    and was becoming a standard article of manufacture representing a
    considerable industry. But what was it all worth? Aviators had flown
    faster than the eagle, higher than the clouds, farther than the common
    distance from metropolis to metropolis. Schools were licensing new
    pilots from day to day. But what career had these before them, and what
    essential function in the affairs of humanity could they perform? Some,
    indeed, might fit themselves for aërial service in warfare, some for
    the pleasant profession of amusing and entertaining mankind; but in the
    serious business of life, what important rôle could the air men hope
    to play? This was the pertinent inquiry, and it was largely a question
    of the reliability and economy of the aëroplane. Improvement in these
    two elements might therefore receive attentive consideration in the
    immediate future.
The reliability of the aëroplane depends partly on its environment,
    partly on its plan and structure, partly on the skill of its pilot.
    The pilot’s skill had been admirably developed in the tournaments and
    public exhibitions. The aërodynamic design conducive to stability and
    steadiness, the structural design conducive to maximum strength and
    resiliency, uniformly proportioned to the stress and work of each
    part of the complex machine; and above all the design of the motor,
    to ensure it against a thousand foibles—all these could be improved
    by the patient342 methods of theoretical and experimental science.
    The environment could, of course, be chosen. At first only the most
    favorable regions need be attempted for regular transportation, regions
    of level plain and farm land, or of lake and river surrounded by
    country not too rough and precipitous.
The general cost of the aëroplane to mankind depends on its plan and
    structure, on the methods of manufacture, on the material running
    expense; but its particular cost to the passenger is determined largely
    by the cupidity or business acumen of those who furnish the machine
    and those who operate it. Naturally when the world first awoke in
    the morning of practical sporting aviation, with a sudden and strong
    relish for flying, the prices would be fabulous, not to say ridiculous.
    During that hour no commercial transportation could be contemplated.
    But without monopoly the prices must quickly abate; for neither the
    manufacture nor manipulation of the aëroplane demand rare ability or
    training. The cost of manufacture would promptly be diminished by means
    of specialized tools and operatives, immediately upon the assurance
    of large and continuous orders. The cost of pilotage would become
    insignificant when a single chauffeur could take a dozen passengers on
    one aëroplane.
So much for the human and external elements in the cost of aviation.
    The inherent and material cost of the aëroplane could also be reduced,
    though perhaps less readily. It was unlikely that the machine would
    be built of much cheaper materials, or made much lighter per pound of
    cargo. Nor were such improvements of so much importance since they
    would affect only the first cost of the flyer. But an increase of
    aërodynamic efficiency in the propeller and aëroplane proper, together
    with increased thermodynamic efficiency in the motor, would materially343
    lower the current cost of transportation at any given speed. These
    improvements would require careful research in the laboratory and
    patient trial in the workshop and field. The refinement and perfection
    of the aëroplane might therefore be looked for in those communities
    where men have sufficient foresight, enterprise and liberality to endow
    research, and to encourage the science and the art of aviation to
    supplement each other.
For aëronautic uses the atmosphere may be regarded as a mixture of two
    substances, dry air and water. The first remains always in the gaseous
    state; the second shifts erratically through all possible states. Rain
    drops freeze or evaporate; sleet, snow, and hail evaporate or melt;
    the aqueous vapor condenses or congeals. Thus the world is wrapped in
    a dual sea, one part naturally serene, the other capricious, protean,
    and turbulent. Dry air, indeed, is a composite of many gases of vast
    concern in chemistry and biology; but in relation to aëronautics it
    is practically a single permanent gas. This placid element and its
    inconstant mate, so curiously mingled, constitute the medium whose flux
    and vicissitudes the aërial sailor has duly to learn before he can
    navigate with skill or safety.[56]
But these aërial oceans, the moist and dry, are of very different
    depth. They commingle only in the lower levels of the atmosphere, whose
    qualities vary accordingly, both physical and transportational. While
    the dry air may reach up to more than a hundred miles, substantial
    enough to singe a meteorite, the sea of aqueous vapor is bounded
    practically by the shallow region of the visible clouds. Beyond the
    feather-like cirri, which just overtop the loftiest 348mountain peaks,
    there is scant, if any, moisture. Never rain, nor cloud is there, nor
    tempest nor any great perturbation. Beyond the highest excursions of
    the cirri, at an elevation of some ten miles, stretches the deep ocean
    of eternal sunshine, of equable and nearly constant temperature. Into
    that zone of perpetual serenity no tumult of the nether atmosphere
    can penetrate; against the floor of the isothermal layer the cyclonic
    currents spread and dissipate. The upper air has, of course, a
    considerable drift, like a majestic river or stream of the sea, but
    never turmoil or tempest disturbs its stately march.
In some respects, therefore, that lofty ocean is an ideal one for swift
    transportation. But at present it is beyond the range of any navigable
    craft of human invention. Occasionally, indeed, a gauzy balloon from
    the hand of some inquisitive weather sage penetrates a little way into
    the exalted deep next the cosmic void, bearing its delicate recorders
    of heat and pressure; but it wanders alone in a silent and vast
    solitude outcubing all the habitable space allotted to bird, beast
    and fish; then at last sinks down to deliver the story of its strange
    voyage in that lifeless outer sphere. Volcanic and celestial dust may
    flourish there, tingeing the twilight with rosy flush, but no biologic
    forms from the teeming underworld may find refuge or sustenance. It is
    the unconquered domain of who knows what meteoric craft of the future,
    sweeping the globe from continent to continent, with now unimaginable
    celerity, grace and precision.
Incidentally and aside from its aëronautic interest, the composition
    of the atmosphere may be presented in fuller detail, showing the
    wide variations from level to level, and the manifold complexity of
    the fluid we daily breathe, not to mention the349 myriads of motes and
    germs inhabiting every inch of it. The gaseous components and their
    distribution are well exhibited in the following table,[57] which
    represents an average condition:
Percentage Distribution of Gases in the Atmosphere
Fixing attention first upon the gases other than water, it will be
    at once observed from the table that these gases show a very uniform
    mixture in the moist and turbulent region, while farther aloft the
    lighter of them tend to predominate in relative proportion. This
    uniformity of composition at the lower levels, which accords with
    experience, is due to the constant circulation and turmoil in that
    region. But for this constant agitation, the uniformity350 of mixture
    could not last. If the atmosphere were perpetually at rest throughout,
    or moving only in horizontal flow, each constituent gas would assume
    the same status and distribution as if the others were absent. Each,
    therefore, obeying Dalton’s law of diffusion, would form an atmosphere
    of itself, independent of the others, and unaffected in density by
    them. Such a condition is assumed for the higher levels. The percentage
    distribution in the higher levels is calculated from the known
    elasticity and density of the gases, assumed as resting in perpetual
    calm at a constant temperature of .55° C. beyond eleven kilometers, or
    above the highest ascent of man, and, furthermore, as having at the
    earth’s surface 1.2 per cent moisture and a temperature of 11° C.
But only in the quiescent outersphere can that dynamic gradation be
    established or perpetuated. Below this lofty region is the sea of
    water vapor, mingled intimately with the dry air, and churned with
    it, yet not sharing its uniformity of distribution. Why this rapid
    diminution of moisture with elevation, as shown in the table? Because
    throughout the moist region the temperature falls rapidly—about 6° C.
    per kilometer ascent above the earth—thus chilling and precipitating
    the vapor, whose pressural resistance to liquefaction diminishes with
    waning temperature. The explanation is obvious; but why does it not
    apply as well to the other elements of the atmosphere: why do not the
    other gases present liquefy with falling temperature as well as the
    water vapor, which is merely water in the gaseous state? The question
    cannot be answered very profoundly, but an essential condition of
    liquefaction of any gas can be stated in learned phraseology, after the
    preliminary exposition of certain general properties of matter.
351
We may first set forth those general physical properties, then apply
    them to answering the above question. Every known substance may exist
    in either of three states, the solid, liquid or gaseous. For every
    substance there is a critical temperature above which it can exist
    only as a gas, and cannot be liquefied by any pressure, but below
    which a suitable pressure will cause liquefaction. Below its critical
    temperature a gas is called a vapor, above it a permanent gas. Now in
    the free atmosphere some of the gases are never below their critical
    temperatures and, therefore, cannot be liquefied by any pressure,
    without special cooling; others are sometimes below their critical
    temperatures and are then capable of liquefaction by sufficient
    pressure, which however is not always found in free space, but can be
    supplied by a compression pump; one other gas, that is water vapor,
    is always below its critical temperature in the free atmosphere, and
    therefore may always be turned into water by sufficient pressure at its
    actual atmospheric temperature. Such sufficient pressure in the water
    vapor actually occurs from time to time in all parts of the atmosphere
    from the earth’s sur352face to the highest cirrus region, but more
    frequently in the nimbus levels, a mile or two above the earth. Thus
    at all parts of the lower atmosphere liquefaction of aqueous vapor is
    sometimes observed, either as mist or rain, snow or ice particles, and
    on the earth as dew or frost. In order to illustrate the above ideas
    by numerical citation, the accompanying table is given, showing the
    critical temperature and pressure of the chief gaseous constituents of
    the atmosphere.
Critical Temperature and Corresponding Pressure of Liquefaction for
    the Chief Constituent Gases of the Atmosphere.
A glance at this table shows that for the pressures and temperatures
    prevailing in our atmosphere most of the constituents are permanent
    gases. The conspicuous exception is water which, when in the gaseous
    state, always exists as a vapor, and never as a permanent gas, since
    it never even approaches the critical temperature. Fortunately for all
    life on earth the aqueous vapor condenses at very ordinary temperatures
    and pressures, else there would be no rainfall for irrigation and