# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	1876
# year_published:	2013
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Gustavus George Zerffi, A Manual of the Historical Development of Art
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/44509/44509-h/44509-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

‘Anything capable of uniting many souls—is
sacred,’ says Goethe. The sacredness of religious
tenets or monumental buildings is at once explained
by this. To unite humanity into one great brotherhood
was first attempted by the Babylonians with
their huge tower of Belus, Baal, or Babel. Men for
the first time left patriarchal particularism, and tried
to build a beacon reaching up to the stars, calling
humanity together to one spot, by a work produced
by their united labour as a visible sign of their union.
This first attempt at a really monumental building
was made in the plains of the Euphrates. Whilst the
people of Asia still struggled to settle down, and
changed their habitations and with them their forms
of art, we see monuments emerge from the dim past,
which reflect man for the first time in his grandeur as
wielder of matter.
The sphinx in its incomprehensible, mysterious
form, half brute, half human being, may be looked
upon as the very emblem of Egyptian art.
104
It is written in one of the Hermetic books, ‘O
Egypt, fables alone will be thy future history, wholly
incredible to later generations, and nought but the
letter of thy stone-engraved monuments will survive.’
Our knowledge of Egypt is scarcely half a century
old. It originated in a black basalt stone, the so-called
Rosetta-stone, deposited, at the beginning of
the century, in the British Museum. Approached by
Dr. Young, of Cambridge, with the wand of investigation,
this stone poured forth a little spring, which has
now swollen into a mighty river, carrying off with
irresistible force all those little souls who, on their
small boats of prejudice, with tiny chronological ladles,
try to stop the sweeping power of historical truth.
We know something at least of Egypt; we have monumental
evidence, which surpasses all written documents,
which may be voluntarily or involuntarily falsified.
Egyptologists may be divided into two parties:—the
long and the short chronologists. The short chronologists,
in the face of our advanced knowledge of
geology, of the vast accumulation of pre-historic relics,
consisting of flint instruments, pottery, weavings, and
architectural remains (lake and pile-dwellings), deserve
no consideration. They follow the chronological
dislocation of Rabbi Hillel, of the first half of the fourth
century A.D., with childish ignorance. This view
is the most charitable, as otherwise we should be
driven to accuse them of interested knavery. After
the exertions of a Champollion-Figeac, Böckh,105
Barucchi, Bunsen, Brugsch, Henry, Lesueur, Lepsius,
Hincks, Kenrick, Uhleman, &c.—who all belong to
the long chronologists, to turn to the short chronology
is impossible.
Lepsius succeeded in tracing Egyptian history,
king by king, event by event, to Alexander the Great,
and hence through the XXXIst, XXXth, XXIXth,
XXVIIIth, XXVIIth, XXVIth, XXVth, XXIVth,
and XXIIIrd consecutive Egyptian dynasties, back
to Sheshonk Shishak, founder of the XXIInd dynasty,
who conquered Jerusalem ‘in the Vth year of King
Rehoboam,’ as is hieroglyphically recorded in Karnac.
This furnishes us with a perfect synchronism between
Egyptian and Hebrew history up to 971–3 B.C.
From this point we have innumerable Egyptian tablets,
papyri, and genealogical lists, carrying us upward
through the XXIst, XXth, XIXth, and XVIIIth dynasties
to Ramses I. (Ramesu) 15th-16th century B.C.
Here we have a short period of anarchy, represented
in the Disk heresy, and find sundry royal claimants,
at the head of whom stands Atenra-Bakhan, or Bexen-aten,
called by Lepsius ‘Amenophis IV.’ From
the reign of his father Amenophis III. every king is
known, by means of hieroglyphical inscriptions on stone
and papyri, back to the beginning of the XVIIth
Theban dynasty, in the reign of AAHMES I. (Amosis),
about 1671 B.C. Here again we have the mysterious
period of the Hyksos or Shepherd kings, who, according
to Manetho, ruled 511 years. Three dynasties106
may be put down for this period—the XVIth, XVth,
and XIVth. But we again step into the broad daylight
of monumental facts when we reach the XIIIth
dynasty, and with it the ‘Old Empire’ in the land of
Kham, Ham, the venerable Chemnus, the Sebakhetps
and Hepherhetps of the XIIIth dynasty; whilst the
glories of the XIIth blaze forth effulgently, thanks
to the critical investigations of the Turin Papyrus by
the immortal Lepsius.
The XIIth dynasty ends about 2124 B.C.
Though little is known of the XIth, Xth, IXth,
VIIIth, and VIIth dynasties, the VIth and Vth
dynasties stand solid as rocks on the Turin papyrus,
and are thoroughly known in consequence of the
recovery of all the kings, but one, from the tombs
opened at Memphis. The remains of the IVth
dynasty surpass belief; those who doubt can refer to
the folio plates, the ‘Denkmäler,’ by Lepsius, copies
of which are in nearly all our libraries.
Of the IIIrd, IInd, and Ist dynasties we have no
monuments, but even this unknown age must have
been preceded by a long period of development, till
at last Menes is set down as the first Pharaoh of
Egypt about 3892 B.C. according to Lepsius, or
5702 B.C. according to Böckh; 5613 B.C. according to
Unger; Brugsch puts him 4455 B.C.; Lauth 4157 B.C.,
and Bunsen 3623 B.C. But before Menes constructed
Memphis; Teni, This, or Thinis, was already a once
flourishing and then decaying town. Menes erected107
at Memphis a green sanctuary, ornamented with the
figures of men and animals. Memphis (Men-ofer)
means ‘the good station.’ The king in the times of
Menes had already several titles. He was called the
great house—Per-āo, Pharaoh; as we speak of the
‘sublime Porte.’ The king was to his subjects nuter
(divine), or neb (master). He was addressed by the
title of hon-f, corresponding to our ‘Your Majesty’;
or only by on, which would be our ‘Sire.’ The
Egyptians under Menes had already rewards in the
form of decorations, in nub, the golden collar, corresponding
to our ‘order of the garter.’ The court
consisted of nobles and attendants. The nobles were
Sez, and had to distinguish themselves by wisdom
and learning. The house of the king’s children was
under a governor, who was responsible for their
health and education. Those belonging to the highest
classes had the title of erpa, illustrious, ha, chief, or
set, your excellency. The affairs of the court were
entrusted to intendants, the hir-sesta, the secretary
and numerous scribes. The king 3000 or 5000 years
B.C. had a quartermaster-general; a director of vocal
music; a director of amusements; a chief of the
chamber of the robes; a chief hair-dresser; a
master of trimming the nails of H.M., and a superintendent
of the baths. Inferior court-officials were
intrusted with the supervision of the granaries, the
fruit and oil-chambers; there were royal purveyors of
meat, royal bakers, and equerries. Architects, who108
were held in the very highest honour, because they could
marry the daughters of the king, had to inspect the
public works. Judges administered the law, already
divided into a civil and criminal section. The title
hir-sesta meant ‘he who is above a secret,’ There
was a hir-sesta of heaven (the royal astronomer), one
of ‘secret words,’ a kind of private secretary, who had
to compose important political or social essays;
another of grammar. The scribes again were divided
into different classes. They had to transmit orders
from their superiors; to register dry facts; to keep
accounts. The very titles of these court-officials are
enough to convince us that at the time of Menes,
Egypt must have already possessed a highly-complicated
and civilised State-organisation.
The successor of Menes, Atos or Akotus, is recorded
to have written ‘books on Anatomy,’ and
constructed the royal palace of Memphis.
This was the state of Egypt under Menes. His
name suggests a more than merely accidental analogy
with Manû, Minos, or Man, and has reference to the
time when man became conscious of law, and assembled
into a social bondship. The Egyptians,
before a Menes could have ruled over them, must
have gone through the savage and nomadic, or pastoral
stages, and have passed from the palæolithic,
neolithic, and bronze ages of art into that of iron.
When did they invent their hieroglyphs, which must
first have been ideographic before they became phonetic?109
From the first-recorded meeting between the
Hebrews, then still nomads, and the Egyptians, it
appears that the latter already then formed a well-organised
State-body. As regards their monuments,
we see them enter the mythical age with their grand
stone-constructions, their pyramids, colosses, temples,
palaces, sphinxes, catacombs and obelisks, as a developed
artistic nation. All these stupendous works
are constructed for eternity; there is nothing nomadic
in them, though this element here and there shows
itself in colossal petrifactions. Wood-constructions
and textile fabrics form the bases of their ornamentation,
but this influence must have taken effect in
antediluvian, nay, even pre-Adamitic, times, when
humanity everywhere else was sunk in a state of unconscious
inactivity. The mound, constructed with
geometrical accuracy as a huge pyramid, must have
had an origin somewhere. The construction itself
has a purpose. The crystal form surrounds an inner
kernel, around which the stone shell is laid; it not
only serves to point upwards, but also downwards.
Thus mortality and immortality are already blended
into one in these hoary monuments.
To proclaim the grandeur of the silent inhabitant,
once a mighty ruler, to the four quarters of the globe,
was the purpose of these pyramids.
Natural caves must have suggested their tombs
and catacombs. The sacred Nile with its majestic
flow is reflected in the endless horizontal lines of their110
temples. The rising peaks of mountains seem to
have suggested their huge pylons. The rays of the
sun were transformed by them into stones, recording,
as gigantic obelisks, the deeds of their kings. When
did these obelisks shake off the rough shape of mere
huge monoliths, placed in plains to commemorate
some grand event? To point upwards in isolated
forms was the secret tendency of these half-sculptured,
half-architectural marvels. Trees and forests were
turned by the Egyptian artists into hypostyle halls,
with innumerable columns, spreading a mysterious
gloom about them.
The Chinese were practical; the Trans-Himâlâyans
metaphysical; the Cis-Himâlâyans agricultural, commercial
and warlike; and the Egyptians pre-eminently
architectural and monumental.
Their whole historical life may be divided into
the following art-periods.
A. These four epochs of art-development resemble
layers in the earth’s crust. Whilst with other nations
the remnants of art are mere skeletons, colourless
frames of an extinct social organism, with the Egyptians
we have art in all its different phases, with the
dried flesh and the scarcely-faded colours, embalmed111
like a mummy. Life and death were with them so
closely allied, that we may say, their life was a continual
death, and their death was everlasting life.
The spiritual conceptions of the Egyptians, which
might have served to enable us to understand their
art thoroughly, were lost with their sacred books, of
which, with one exception, we have merely the titles.
Plato considered them 10,000 years old in his time.
They consisted of:—
1. The two books of the Chanter—like the Vedas
and the Zend-Avesta containing hymns in honour
of the gods, and a code of laws like those of
Manû.
2. The four astronomical books of the Horoskopus;
treating of fixed stars, and of solar and lunar
conjunctions, making the sun the centre, round which
we revolve.
3. The ten books of the Hierogrammatist, or the
Sacred Scribe, treating of the art of writing, which was:
hieroglyphic (sacred), hieratic (a kind of hieroglyphic
tachygraphy—short-hand writing, used by priests
only), and enchorial or demotic, used by the people.
These books contained, further, the elements of cosmography
and geography; tablets, on which the high-roads
of the earth were marked; astronomical records,
mentioning, according to Diogenes Laertius, 373
solar and 832 lunar eclipses, referring thus to a period
of 48,863 years; a chorography of Egypt, and the
delineation of the course of the sacred Nile; an112
inventory of each temple, of the landed property of
the priests, and a treatise on weights and measures.
4. The ten ceremonial books of the Stolists, which
were entirely devoted to religious worship, containing
the ordinances as to ‘the first-fruits, and the sacrificial
stamp, sacrifices, prayers, processions,’ and the like.
No human sacrifices were offered up from at least 3000
years B.C.
5. The ten books of the prophets, consisting of
thirty-six sections, called the hieratic writings, with
which the prophets, the first order of the priests, were
entrusted. A description of the deities, regulations for
the education of the priests, and general laws formed
their contents.
The oldest books of law, were attributed to Hermes
(Toth), implying, that the first germ of an hierarchical
organisation of society sprung from the sacred songs,
and that law was entirely based upon the religious
conceptions of the secret forces of nature by which
man had been impressed. Like the Code of Manû,
which took its origin in the Vedas, or the Laws of
Zoroaster based on the Zend-Avesta, or the injunctions
of Confucius founded on the holy records and songs
of by-gone ages, the Egyptian laws took their origin
in the first poetical feelings of awakened humanity,
excited by the mysteries of nature under the rule
of an incomprehensible first cause.
6. The six books of the Dead. The only books
still extant, written in hieroglyphs, and divided by113
Lepsius into 165 sections. The first fifteen chapters
form a distinct and connected whole, with the superscription:
‘Here begin the Sections of the glorification
in the Light of Osiris.’
It concludes with a book entitled ‘The Book of
Deliverance in the Hall of the twofold Justice
(Reward and Punishment), and the Book of Redemption.’
With such a deep and mystic literature, encompassing
the gods, nature, and man, in life and death,
it is no wonder that a mystic and symbolic art should
have succeeded in Egypt.
Their mythology was not less profound than that of
the Trans-Himâlâyans; there was more of symmetry,
at least architectural symmetry, in their conceptions
and representations than in those of the Brahmans,
though Egyptian priests and Brahmans have apparently
taken their conceptions from one and the
same source. The Egyptian had eight gods of the
first order, twelve gods of the second, and seven gods
of the third order, pointing by these very numbers
to an astronomical basis, thus:—
1. The cosmical forces of creative nature.
2. The twelve months of the year.
3. The seven days of the week.
Astronomy is the first powerful divisor of time
and the supreme lord of agriculture. Only when
the ‘Sacred Nile’ deposited its fructifying alluvium
on the barren limestone of the valleys, formed by the114
Libyan and Arabian mountain ranges, man could
exist and develop in that region. The regular
inundation appeared to have taken place under the
influence of the sun, moon, and stars. The sun
(Osiris) was, therefore, believed to call forth the Nile
(Isis) from regions unknown down to our own days,
and sun and water became, as with the Indians
(Indra and Agni), the first visible, creative forces of
nature.
The eight gods of the first order were:—
I. Amn (Brahm), Am-Ra, Ammon, the Greek
Zeus (the son of Kronos and Rhea), the Roman
Jupiter; the ‘Concealed God,’ the ‘Lord of Heaven,’
the ‘Lord of Thrones’; the first creative, incomprehensible,
invisible force of the universe. The
Brahmă of the Indians, the Zeruane-Akerene of the
Persians.
II. Khem (Kama), the generative God of Nature,
Brahmā. He was worshipped, under the second
Thinite Dynasty, under the symbol of the goat. The
primitive, active, or male element of nature.
III. Mut (μαῖα {maîa}, matter, Demeter, Leto, Latona,
Bhavani), the primitive, passive, or female element
of nature.
IV. Num (Nu, Kneph, ChNUbis, the Indian VischNU,
Noah, Neptun). In Arabic nef means to breathe.
The breath of the universe when condensed—‘water;’
the creative spirit, the Ἀγαθοδαίμων {Agathodaίmôn}; the πνεῦμα {pneûma} (the
wind, the air) of the Greeks.
115
V. Seti (in Koptic Sate), the ray, the arrow; at
a later period the frog-headed goddess, the consort
of Kneph; the sun-beam, the fructifying heat in
union with water (cosmical moisture), producing the
inner force of creation.
VI. Phtah (Ptah, Phthah, S’iva, Vulcan), the
creator of the world, which sprang from the mouth
of Kneph, meaning at his bidding. His symbol
became at a later period the scarabæus. The more
numerous this animal was in the Nile valley after the
subsidence of the inundation, the more fruitful was
the year. Phtah was in reality telluric heat.
VII. Net (Neith, Athene, Pallas, Minerva, Doorga),
the bright goddess of intellectual power, wisdom,
knowledge, virtue, passionless happiness. Isis was
her substitute. Her temple at Saïs had no roof, but
was vaulted over by the sunny or starry canopy of
heaven, and bore the mysterious inscription: ‘I am
all that was, and is, and is to be; no mortal has
lifted up my veil, and the fruit I bore is Helios.’
Past, present, and future, are mysteriously entwined
in the conception of intellect, pervading and ruling
the universe.
VIII. Ra (Helios, Apollo, Adonis, Adonaïs, the
Lord, Baal, Mithras, Moloch, Teotl, Toth, Hermes,
Odin, Thor, Atys, Janus, Kekrops, Endymion, &c.),
the sun, the reflected light (with the Cabalists Hachoser,
in opposition to the expanding light, Hajashor).
The representations of these divinities were not116
monstrous, like those of the Indians; the human
form predominates, but the symbolic is still the
most important element. The outward form has an
inward, secret meaning. ‘Meaning’ and ‘meant’
are still in wild conflict. The sublime forces of the
deity were to be hewn in stone, or given in outlines,
or painted; the result was a grotesque product of
art, and as such a complete failure.
The twelve gods of the second order were the
children of four of the gods of the first order.
I. Amn had only one son, Khunsu (Chous, Chaos,
the prototype of Herkules).
II. Kneph had also only one son, Teth (Toth,
Thoth, Hermes), who taught men to write and to
read.
III. Phtah had two children, Atumu (Atum,
Atmu), and Pecht, the cat-headed goddess of Bubastis
(the Greek Artemis or Diana).
IV. Ra had eight children, Hat-her (Athyr,
Athor, Aphrodite); Mau (Jao); Ma (Truth); Tefun
(the lion-headed goddess); Muntu (Mant); Sebak
(Sebek), the crocodile-headed god; Seb (Kronos),
and Nutpe (Rhea).
The seven gods of the third order, emanations
from those of the second, as these were emanations
from those of the first, were:—
1. Set, Nubi, or Typhon, celebrated for his struggle
with Horus, the son of Osiris, in the infernal regions.
(See what is said of Krishna, p. 70.)
117
2. Hesiri, Osiris (also the solar year), HSR.
3. Hes or Isis, HS, the Nile, the moon (the lunar
year).
4. Nebt-hi or Nephthys, the sister of Isis; sister
and wife of Typhon.
5. Her-Her (Aroëris, Arueris).
6. Her (Horus, the child of Osiris and Isis,
Harpokrates), who, with Isis and Osiris, formed
the great, incomprehensible, mystic trinity of the
Egyptians, of which we have the following record:—
Osiris was the father, husband, brother, and son
of Isis.
Isis was the mother, wife, sister, and daughter
of Osiris.
Horus was the brother and son of Osiris and
Isis, and was Osiris himself.
7. Anubis (Anupo) the dog-star.
Who does not understand at once that, out of
these half-astronomical, half-cosmogonical conceptions,
a religion and art full of mysticism, blending into one
Fetishism, Astrology, and Anthropomorphism, must
have grown? Only through a careful study of
Egyptian mythology are we enabled to comprehend
that gigantic power which urged the people to construct
those temples and palaces, those labyrinths
and catacombs, as mystic in themselves, as the hidden
powers of nature. The masses in Egypt were kept in
a degraded state of passive obedience; they were overawed
by metaphysical subtleties, and by huge stone118
monsters, which filled them with horror, and made
them subservient to the dictates of a gloomy priesthood.
Religion and art, both supported by a vast
store of natural science, were the exclusive property
of the priests, of whom the Pharaoh was the merely
tolerated head, a kind of stone idol in the flesh.
Egyptian art was an echo of priestly caprices,
which, wrapt in symbolism, had a powerful hold on
the untutored minds of the people. Careful investigations
have proved that these priests were of a
different race to the aborigines; their mythological
analogies point to immigrated Brahmans, who brought
some religious notions with them from the Ganges,
and transferred them to the Nile.
Egyptian art reflects in every form the gorgeous
influences of religion. The whole life of every
Egyptian was placed, in seven phases, under the protection
of seven divinities. The first period of man’s
life was under the influence of Isis, the moon (Luna,
Selene). The second was devoted to Hermes; during
this period man had to learn to read and to write, to
play the harp, to dance, to develop the body in the
gymnasium, and to make himself well versed in knowledge
according to his station in life; but the only
station that granted man an insight into knowledge
was that of the priest. During the third period man
was under the care of Hat-her (Athyr), or Venus.
Love was to rule the youth; the world was to appear
to him in the rosy hue of a mystic foam of incomprehensible119
longing. The fourth period was under the
dominion of Ra (Helios); when love had ceased to
disturb the mind, and to fill this world with illusions,
the light of truth and earnest activity was to ripen
man, and to prepare him for the fifth period, under
the protection of Man or Mars, the God of War; man
was to learn either to conquer others, or to conquer
his own passions, and to work in the State as a useful
member. Few only reached the sixth period, guided
by Amn, the supreme representative of abstract
wisdom; during this period man was admitted to
act as a judge, to sit at the board of a hierarchical
council, or to teach priests as high-priest. At last
man became, during the seventh period, vapour—breath—air—under
the dominion of Num (Kneph),
and was detached from reality; if good, transferred
into a state of ideality; if not, doomed to begin life
anew as a loathsome animal, till he atoned for his
evil deeds, and, purified, reached the bright abode of
Osiris.
B. The pyramidal period, the most ancient of
Egyptian art, is the outgrowth of these mystic
religious conceptions. Nature was to be reproduced,
and surpassed in her sublime grandeur. The mountain
was brought into a geometrical shape.
The three principal pyramids were built during the
reign of the fourth dynasty, 3426 B.C.-3220 B.C.; the
first, by Shufu (Cheops), was, in extent, 13 acres 1 rood
and 22 perches, more than twice the area of St. Peter’s120
at Rome. The original quantity of masonry was
89,028,000 cubic feet. Total height 480 feet; 16
feet higher than St. Peter’s, and 120 feet higher than
St. Paul’s (London); 360,000 human beings worked
at it for twenty years. The stones are from 9 to
12 feet in length, and 6½ to 8 feet in breadth. The
second pyramid was smaller, built by Shafra
(Chephren), only 454 feet high; and the third by
Menkare (Mykerinus), 218 feet high. The mode of
fitting the polished stones together is a perfect master-piece
of architectural construction.
Osiris was to be worshipped in all halls of festival,
in all creation, in all places. Temples were erected
in honour of the gods, which were approached
through avenues of sphinxes. These sphinxes were
of six different kinds. 1. The pure lion (symbol of
Amn). 2. The lion with the ram’s head (Krio-sphinx—symbol
of Khem or Amn). 3. The lion
with hawk’s head (symbol of Ra). 4. The lion with
a male human head (the symbol of Osiris or Horus).
5. The lion with a female human head (the symbol
of Mut or Isis). 6. The lion’s half-body and legs,
with female human head and arms, as in the reliefs
of Karnack, and on the Campesian obelisk (probably
the symbol of Net).
The tombs were, more or less deeply, hewn into
rocks. They generally begin with a small sanctuary,
from which an inclined passage leads down into the
sepulchral chamber. The decoration is an imitation121
of wooden trellis-work in very gay colours. The
threshold also distinctly bears the traces of a primitive
wood construction; a round, trunk-like beam
generally unites the two door-posts, and even the
ceilings of the apartments are repeatedly made in
imitation of wooden boards fastened together. The
pillars are square, and united either by a rectangular
architrave or by circular beams.
The temples point, by their forms, to a civilisation
which took its course from south to north. This
bears out the theory that Meroe was once the seat of
a colony of priests, who spread religion, and with it
science and art, from Upper into Lower Egypt.
Thebes appears to have been the most ancient
seat of the Egyptian Pharaohs, one of the first
of whom was perhaps Osiris, though he has been
placed amongst the gods, and was said to have been,
like Krishna, an incarnation of the Supreme Being,
who revealed himself in love and kindness, and was to
put an end to the dominion of Typhon, the Eternal
Evil. Might not this myth conceal some historical
fact—the advent of a wise hero, who conquers a wild
and reckless tyrant? For Osiris had to go through
all the sufferings of humanity, and even to suffer
death, so as to become the saviour, the deliverer of his
people; and then only was he able to turn the earth
into a powerful kingdom. By Earth, we may assume,
Upper Egypt was meant, where the god-man Osiris
presided, who, in spite of his having become man, and122
belonging to the third order of the gods, was placed
on an equality with the gods of the first order. The
temple or tomb of Ipsambul may be considered the
very oldest rock-hewn construction; it has a figure of
Osiris twenty feet high over the entrance door. We
pass over the remains of Philæ, Elephantine, and
Edfou, and come to those of Karnac and Luxor, the
venerable Thebes, which, in the fifth century B.C.,
during the times of Herodotus, were already in a
state of dilapidation.
Upon extensive brick terraces, raised high above
the flat banks of the Nile, the Egyptian temple stood,
a strictly secluded building. Strong walls, rising in
pyramidal form, crowned with an overhanging fluted
cornice, gave the mural enclosure a mysterious
and stern character. No opening for windows, no
colonnade interrupted the monotonous flatness, which
is covered, as by one long tapestry, with hieroglyphs,
and representations of gods and Pharaohs. The
entrance to these buildings, like that of the temple of
Edfou, was placed between two tower-like structures
called propylæa, the walls of which were decorated
with sculptured figures—in three or more rows. Then
followed a court, surrounded by pillars, placed at a
distance from the walls on both sides, roofed over
with stone, and forming a gallery. Thence we reach
the pronaos or portico, after which we enter the cell,
divided into the naos and adytum. The naos was
generally a kind of hypostyle hall, with a flat roof123
raised in the middle. The pillars and columns had a
variety of capitals, but these were generally of one
pattern throughout the temple. The quadrilateral
Isis-headed capital, as at Denderah, was often used.
The monuments of the ‘hundred-gated’ Thebes are
the best school for the study of genuine Egyptian
art. The temples on the eastern side of the river are
symbolical of the dawn of life; on the western side
we find tombs, catacombs, and Memnoniums. At
Karnac we have one of the grandest constructions of
the world in the ruins of the hypostyle hall, with its
gigantic stone ceiling supported by 134 columns, of
which the twelve middle ones, about 65 feet high
and 11 feet in diameter, are larger and taller than the
others, supporting a loftier central nave. The width
of this hall is 338 feet, the depth 170½ feet, and the
area 57,629 feet, or about five times as large as the
church of St. Martin-in-the-Fields in London.
Columns and walls are completely covered with
sculptured forms of deities; Osiris predominates.
Pylons, propylæa, obelisks, colossal statues of red,
grey, and black granite cover the courts; chapel-like
apartments, connected and unconnected, are strangely
intermingled.
Next to the temples we must mention one of the
most gorgeous buildings, the Labyrinth, containing
between three and four thousand chambers in rows,
facing inwards the winding alleys, which ascended
in a spiral line to the middle, and descended from it124
in the same way. It has been minutely described by
Herodotus, Pomponius Mela, Pliny, and Ezekiel.
The building was to be a strict architectural imitation
of the planetary system. The inner 1,500 chambers
were divided into twelve courtyards, corresponding
to the twelve signs of the zodiac, six of which
were towards the north, and six towards the south.
The Memnons were monolith statues of imposing
size, symbolic of the rising sun—of Horus or Osiris.
Homer mentions Memnon, for his remarkable beauty,
as the son of the east. Diodorus speaks of him as
Tithonus, a general, sent out to aid Priamus of Troy
against the besieging Greeks.
The walls of temples, palaces, tombs, and catacombs
were partly decorated with reliefs en creux,
and partly with tapestry-like patterns, using geometrical
figures, sometimes, though rarely, intermixed
with plants, or plants treated with conventional stiffness.
The walls with the Egyptians had a different
purpose than merely to encircle or to enclose; they
served as huge blackboards of stone, on which the
priests wrote their mystic records. The superfluous
thickness of the walls suggests that they were once
made of brick, like those of Nineveh or Babylon, and,
further, the overlaying of these immense granite
blocks with stucco, serves to bear out this supposition.
The walls of the enclosures of temples and the sarcophagi
were covered with hieroglyphs or scenes from
life, both on the inside and outside; tombs and catacombs125
were decorated on the inside only. These
scenes are framed in with borders, reminding us of
the broad seams in woven stuffs. In temples the
scenes refer to burial rituals, or the judgment of
the dead; in palaces to hunts and conquests of the
kings. We see the Asian and African conquests of
Ramses II. represented on the walls of Ipsambul
(Aboosimbal in Nubia) in bright-coloured pictures.
The king brandishes a pole-axe over the heads of
Negroes, Hebrews, and Aryans, that is, over one
mixed and two pure groups of mankind. Above
his head runs the hieroglyphic scroll: ‘The beneficent
living God, guardian of glory, smites the South; puts
to flight the East; rules by victory, and drags to his
country all the earth, and all foreign lands.’ High
officials and private persons ornamented the walls of
their houses and tombs with scenes of every-day
occurrences. We may study in these their whole
domestic and public life, their customs and manners,
their amusements and toils. The ceilings of the
chambers are not covered with symbolic pictures, but
generally with patterns of conventional wall-decorations.
In temples they are sometimes decorated with
zodiacs, as at Denderah—the best-preserved Egyptian
temple, of which, however, the date is doubtful.
C. The hieratic style of the Pharaohs substituted
a greater amount of very tasteful symbolic ornamentation.
The Hathor-masks, the names of kings in cartouches,126
the viper as a symbol of divine or royal
power; serpents, scarabæi, winged globes, either
symbolic of the sun, the moon, or the earth, formed
the principal elements of the innumerable variety of
severe ornamentation. In addition to these the following
were used:—
1. The papyrus, as the symbol of bodily and
intellectual food.
2. The lotus, as a symbol of the creative mysteries
of the universe.
3. The palm-tree, with its graceful and simple
form, served as the prototype of their columns, the
capitals of which were either open or closed lotus-buds
or flowers.
4. Lastly, the feather ornament, as the emblem of
sovereignty.
The columns during the pyramidal, or old style
expressed with distinct clearness their purpose to
serve as a support; in the hieratic, or new style this
purpose is detached from the outer form of the
column, which no longer has to support, but merely
to serve as an ornament, or to proclaim some mysterious
tenet in symbolic types. The face of Isis is to
look to the four quarters of the globe; the closed or
open lotus to symbolise the mystery of creation, the
fountain of life, the cup of plenty, and the fount of all
blessings. In this treatment they went so far as to
imitate the very dew-drops on the lotus, in granite.
A strict naturalism was the foundation of all Egyptian127
conventionalism, and in many instances they succeeded
in producing perfectly astonishing effects. In
their columns we recognise the very plant which
must have suggested the forms. When made circular
and of granite, these columns still retained the
triangular shape of the papyrus by means of three
raised lines on the round surface. At a later period
they were fluted, and apparently tied together under
the capital with a strap, cord, or band of a broad
fibrous substance; the capital above rose in four
divisions in the form of a closed lotus. In the
hieratic style the fluting of the columns disappears—they
are smooth, round, and covered with hieroglyphs,
but the base still discloses the plant origin,
disguised in an ornament of palm or reed leaves.
Characteristic in these columns is the expression of
tension in the swelling shaft, which was probably an
unconscious imitation of wood-construction; the heavy
cross-beams pressing on the thin posts produced this
effect, which has been slavishly copied in stone. With
the Greeks this swelling of the column became one of
the elements of its beauty, because with them it was
an abstraction of symmetrical proportion, consciously
done, to express the conflicting powers of pressure
and resistance. With a proud obstinacy the Egyptians,
during their hieratic period, insisted on separating
the ornamental from the architectural part of
the building, so that no organic connection existed
between sculpture and architecture. This is most128
striking in those colossal sitting figures which are
placed in the front and at the back of propylæa, or
before the walls of pylons. It is a clear separation of
matter and spirit, of purpose and form, which is
altogether contrary to the fundamental principles of
good architecture.
Art with the Egyptians was thoroughly polychromatic;
they tinted granite, of whatever colour, with
a red pigment, so that the stone might have its
proper divine colour, hallowed by the priests. They
coloured in flat tints, and used no shading or shadow;
they had, however, no difficulty in conveying to the
mind the original forms which they intended to copy.
Priestly canons regulated the size, form, colour, and
expression of every statue, and every attribute had its
prescribed form, the meaning of which was concealed
from the artist, turning him into a mere unconscious
machine, a tool in priestly hands. This is the reason
why their works of art look monotonous, and everything
with them is impressed by the crushing influence
of over-regulation. The Typhonic blast of uniformity
killed every higher aspiration in the artist. The
human figure had to consist of nineteen units; the
second finger was that unit. Squares of this unit were
drawn on the flat, and according to these measurements
the human figure was constructed with
geometrical accuracy, looking as flat as possible.
Dreary deserts of religious prejudices, gloomy superstitions,
and childish formalities hindered all progress,129
and marked their sculpture and ornamentation with
fixed, stereotyped stiffness, until the last period of
their art.
D. The Ptolemaic style began to develop a little
more life and taste. The statues did not look as if
cast in a general mould; the gods were allowed to
have their feet asunder, the one in advance of the
other, which gave them some appearance of motion.
How taste may be degraded by prejudice and custom,
can be seen in the fact, that when this innovation in
Egyptian art was settled by a general law of the
Pharaoh, with the connivance of the high ceremonial
courts, the masses, on seeing their gods with legs
apart, as if ready to walk, rushed from all sides with
strong ropes, and tied the divinities to their pedestals,
horrified at the possibility of their leaving the country
altogether. And the gods did leave the country.
Anything based on superstition or prejudice, anything
having for its vivifying element symbolism or
mysticism, must die away in time.
What we said of Indian art holds good of Egyptian
forms. Take away from the Uræus, the lotus, papyrus,
palm, crocodile, cat, and bull their symbolic
meaning, and these elements of ornamentation lose
their vitality. The Greeks, and more especially the
Romans, have shown us how we may use some of
their patterns to advantage: how an entrance hall
may be decorated with silent and mournful-looking
sphinxes, and what an unsurpassed charm there is in130
the obelisk, directing the thought upwards. A
pyramid still remains one of the finest monuments
for one who has filled the four quarters of the globe
with his fame.
In their every-day ornaments, rings, bracelets,
necklaces, head-dresses and furniture, the architectural
straight lines prevail; variety is not much required,
the forms as well as the patterns must be the same.
Just as we reproduce horse-shoe upon horse-shoe
because they bring ‘luck,’ the Egyptian jeweller
reproduced the scarabæus, and the Turin Museum has
not less than 180 different kinds of scarabæi. In
their architecture they suffered from one great evil—from
a horror of symmetry. Their grand palaces or
temples have no ruling element; everything is out of
proportion, and though in their detailed ornamentation
they were symmetrical, and even eurythmical—the
harmony of purpose is often wanting. The
thought of building for eternity, however, is always
present, whilst no one can deny that in our buildings
the ninety years’ lease is to be traced in every corner.
The Egyptians tried to represent the forms of monumental
architecture, and they certainly succeeded in
reaching the sublime, but they did this in neglecting
the beautiful. Their symmetrophobia, which
many of our architects imitate only too successfully,
spoilt everything. Their weavings were excellent;
their wood-constructions, as far as furniture was concerned,
faultless; music was known to them; they131
worked gold, and ornamented it in the so-called
‘champ-levé’ manner, and were acquainted with
enamel ‘cloisonné.’ They also fixed thin layers of
gold thread on metal, and filled the remaining spaces
with enamel of different colours, which method the
ancients called ‘encaustum.’ Notwithstanding all
these advantages Egyptian art never reached the ideal
of beauty; it has only the charm of the mysterious
for us. To keep this sentiment alive is the duty of
any modern artist who wishes to work in the Egyptian
style. He must try to convey some mystic cosmogonical
or incomprehensible religious thought in
diapers, and floral ornament, or in the use of animals
or the human frame in outlines, he must place his
ideas and forms under a strict linear canon. He may
then succeed in reproducing the artistic forms of a
nation, during a period, in which humanity did not go
beyond the hierarchical in religion, and the practical
in art; during which mankind struggled to find forms,
but was prevented from the freer exercise of its innate
artistic force by the dictates of a despotic priesthood,
and was tied with merciless tyranny to monotonous
canons, crushing under the weight of symbolism and
mysticism every higher artistic aspiration.
132
Little, or rather nothing, can properly be said of
Hebrew art, for it is a non-entity. The Hebrews are
a mixed race. They assert themselves to be of the
Semitic group of mankind, but ethnologically they
are a composition of black, yellow, and white men,
and are closely related to the Arabs and Phœnicians.
They were generally slaves. For 450 years they
were in bondage in Egypt, whence they first emerged
into a national existence. From Moses to Saul, for
450 years, they lived under a kind of theocratic democracy:
God, the supreme ruler in heaven, and the
Jews on earth his chosen people. For another 450
years they had a kind of theocratic monarchy: God
ruled in heaven, as the king ruled on earth. This
period lasted from Saul to Zedekiah, and gives us—
(α) A period of 100 years under the first three
kings, when the twelve tribes were yet united; and
(β) Another period during which they formed two
separate kingdoms. Of these
(a) Israel, in this condition, lasted 220 years under133
twenty kings, who ruled at Samaria, and was destroyed
by the Assyrians.
(b) Judæa, as a separate State, existed 350 years
under twenty-one kings, and was annihilated by the
Babylonians.
Not less than 650 years intervened between the
destruction of Jerusalem and its second destruction
by the Romans. During this period the chosen
people were
1. 200 years under Persian sway.
2. 170 years under the dominion of Alexander
the Great and his successors.
3. 130 years they enjoyed a certain independence
under the Maccabees.
4. 100 years they were ruled by the Herodes
and Romans. After the second destruction of Jerusalem
the Jews ceased to have an independent State
of their own, and were scattered all over the earth.
They in reality enjoyed only 550 years of freedom, as
a grand and united nation, out of a period of not less
than 6,000 historically-known years.
Intellect came to absolute consciousness for the
first time amongst the Jews, and in this their historical
importance and weight lie. Man, created in the image
of God, lost his state of innocence, absolute contentment
and immortality, by eating of the tree of knowledge.
The Jews were the first to recognise in a
higher sense the double nature of man—his godhead
and his animal nature. The country in which they134
developed is a perfect geological marvel. The region
in which they settled was divided by a river and a
sea. This sea is 1,400 feet below the level of the
Mediterranean. The river flows downwards, like
the Stygian river, far beneath the level of the ocean.
The banks of the Jordan and the lake Asphaltites
are the lowest regions of the habitable globe. In
the west the Jews found some fertile plains, but
they never could obtain full and peaceful possession
of them, nor of the sea-coast. They were shut out
from the world in a mountainous region as in a gloomy
Puritan chapel, and had ample leisure for self-contemplation,
and for attempting to solve the riddle of man’s
destiny with the help of Egyptian wisdom, Persian,
Assyrian and Babylonian theories. Rocks and sand
formed the foreground of their earthly existence; the
background was made up by a gloomy river and a
still gloomier sea—the sea of death, the Acherusian,
the Plutonian lake. A sea too low, too mephitic and
poisonous for art to exist round it. A region of
sorrow, sinfulness, and abject wretchedness cannot be
the abode of art and science. The fine art of the
Jews was like a migratory bird in its passage over
the sea of death.
Not only with the Jews, but also with the Egyptians,
Persians, and early Greeks, to represent a god in the
likeness of man was considered sinful. The Persians
abhorred idols in any shape. The Egyptians gave
their gods shape and form, but a merely symbolic135
form, expressing in concrete signs some higher abstract
conception. The human head, the body of a beast or
fish, the horns of a ram, or the ears of a cow; the
human leg with the foot of a goat, or the human arm
with the claws of a bird of prey, were sacred, because
symbolical. They had a metaphysical theology
written in hieroglyphs. All this was prohibited with
the Jews. They allowed some exceptions, and borrowed
the figures of the cherubim from the Assyrians,
the oxen of the temple from the Egyptians, and the
sculptured lions of Solomon’s palace from the Persians;
their artists were foreigners, and the imitation of these
works was ever after forbidden.
‘All those things,’ says Rabbi Manasseh Ben
Israel, one of their most learned commentators, ‘which
are esteemed holy in the presence of God, or idea of
man, may not be imitated in any known form or shape,
although made without the intention of adoring them,
so as to preclude the possibility of their being worshipped
or deified hereafter. Thus the figure of the
divine chariot, which Ezekiel saw, may not be made,
nor the likeness of angels of any degree, nor of man,
for these creatures are all superior from being made
in the image of God.’ ... The prohibition is
further applied by him to everything appertaining to
the holy temple, and no house or palace could be
built of its size or proportions.
Poetry and music were exempt from this enactment.
The importance and influence of the social and136
religious condition on the development of art may
best be studied in the Jews. They had no great
architects, sculptors or painters, no inventors, no philosophers
in natural science, but many excellent poets,
theologians, cabalists, necromancers, philologists and
composers. In our times, however, influenced by the
vivifying spirit of Christianity, they count amongst
themselves, in addition to an inordinate number of
picture-dealers, some creditable painters.
They possessed legitimately only one temple.
Their first temple was a portable tent. The second
was almost entirely of cedar-wood, richly provided
with metallic ornaments, made by artists from Tyre
and Sidon. They possessed one palace, that of
Solomon. Babylonian or Assyrian architecture was
probably reflected in this, and we may thus form
a dim idea of what Solomon’s palace must have
been. First the temple, then the palace was constructed.
The fact that the first temple was a mere tent,
shows at once the nomadic character of the Jews, at
a period when the Egyptians had possessed their
architectural marvels for thousands of years. To the
student of history, architecture is a sure measure of
the degree of artistic and social development of a
nation. We may boldly say, show us the plans of
the houses, palaces, and temples of any nation, and
we can determine the degree of its civilisation; we
can do even more, we can read its character and137
religious fervour in these wood, brick, or stone records.
That the Jews, having been compelled to witness all
the misery and superstitious dulness which the
Egyptian hierarchy and theocracy produced, should
have detested architecture, and looked upon sculpture
or any stone and brick as a curse to humanity, was
quite natural; and that, once escaped from the
bondage of Egypt, they should have hated any
monumental, architectural, or artistic sculptural attempt,
is equally obvious.
The egotistical character of the nomadic trader
may be traced in the architectural constructions of
the Jews. Any nation that loves its god or gods with
zeal and self-denial will be sure to build grand
temples to his or their glorification. The Persians
had no temples, because they spiritualised the divine
conception to such a degree, that they thought the
first cause present everywhere like light. The Jews
borrowed the same idea, and yet to fix the Eternal
Spirit visibly amongst themselves, they assigned him
a permanent abode, where he was exclusively to
dwell; to be near them and to watch over them.
Religious egotism was the mainspring of their
national existence, and this general egotism made
every individual Jew an egotist; and egotists are
always bad supporters of anything by which the
masses generally may benefit. Such people look
only to the satisfaction of their momentary wants;
they will collect trinkets, earrings, bracelets, armlets,138
goblets, gold and silver vessels, but the divine art of
architecture, which binds masses together, will be
neglected. We see them at first contented with a
mere tent, and, when they undertook to construct a
lasting building, it was done with all the pomp and
gaudiness of a parvenu; they borrowed from all the
surrounding rich people anything they could lay
hands upon, merely to be able to say, without reason
or taste—‘Look, my special God has also his special
house.’ In the most powerful period of their national
existence, which was a very short one, the Jews
roused themselves to the construction of at least one
temple to their Javeh. They wished at last to
possess an Akropolis like the Egyptians, who had so
many, or the Greeks, Persians, Assyrians and Babylonians.
Their God was at last to be housed, like
the gods of the despised Gentiles.
The temple of Solomon has been much written
upon. Prejudice, religious fanaticism, blind faith,
and unconscious or voluntary ignorance, dictated the
descriptions and guided the reconstructions. Michaelis,
one of the greatest Jewish authorities on Scriptural
matters, tells us that ‘all the representations which we
possess of the temple of Solomon are ornamented with
arbitrary forms, and if we ask for authority or proof of
this or that ornamental form, we invariably receive the
answer: It must have been so, for I would have built
in this way.’ It is naturally very difficult to obtain
a correct description of the temple of Solomon, for139
with regard to its construction we must rely on the
records of the Jews themselves. Unfortunately
the Books of the Kings, Chronicles, Ezekiel, and the
writings of Josephus, the varying descriptions of the
translators, and the host of commentators, who generally
obscure the simplicity of the simplest subject,
are all at variance.
We may divide Jewish history into the eight
following periods.
During the first period we find them as nomads
on the shores of the Euphrates and Tigris.
During the second period they were received as
shepherds in Egypt Here they learnt for the first
time the arts of a settled people. They found a mighty
hierarchy already established; astronomy, chemistry,
architecture, and sculpture were practised by priests,
who were well-versed theologians, lawyers, physicians,
and philosophers. Not only the Jews, who lived
amongst the Egyptians, but also the wisest and most
learned men of Greece, owed much to the land
of hidden wisdom, which was undoubtedly the cradle
of the Jewish faith and of Greek philosophy. Moses,
Lykurgus, and Solon sat piously listening to the
oracular instructions of the Egyptian priests, who
taught in mystic symbols. Thales, Pythagoras
and Plato borrowed their philosophical theories and
systems largely from the Egyptians. The Egyptians
worked out the incarnation theory with mystic refinement.
Osiris, the concealed Lord of heaven, had to140
become flesh, to conquer evil. He condescended to
become a redeemer—had to suffer a cruel death in
order to paralyse the influences of Typhon. The
Greeks and Jews never could grasp the mystery of a
god changing his almighty subjectivity into an objective
human form, in order to attain, through suffering
and death, what he could have fulfilled in a thousand
other ways. Osiris was not only the supreme ruler
in heaven, but he was also the supremely just and
inexorable judge in hell. The division of the universe
into an abode of bliss for the departed just, and of
eternal darkness and fire for the unjust, was an Indian,
Persian, and Egyptian dogma. To the blessed it was
promised that they should pluck the sweetest fruits
in heaven, ‘for they have given food to the hungry,
and water to the thirsty; they clothed the naked,
and lived in truth; for their heart was with God and
God was with them, and they will enjoy eternal life
in his presence,’ Of the wicked, on the contrary, it
was said: ‘that they could not see the countenance
of the Lord of heaven, nor ever hear his voice; they
would go about without heads, drag after them their
hearts, be boiled for ever in a cauldron, be hanged
for ever by their legs.’
From these metaphysical and mystic Egyptians,
the immortal Jewish lawgiver borrowed the division
of his nation into twelve tribes, in imitation of the
twelve zodiacal signs, and the division of Egypt into
twelve nomes. In Egypt he learnt to distinguish141
between clean and unclean animals; to practise
circumcision, which was with the Egyptians confined
to their priests; but Moses promised to make his
compatriots ‘a nation of priests.’ He established the
tribe of the Levites, in imitation of the Egyptian
priest-caste; and regulated their income, mode of
living, and duties according to the ten books of the
prophets (see p. 112); he divided the priests into
four different classes, which at a later period were called
Peshat, exegists, Remes, expounders of dubious points,
Derush, composers of homilies, and Sod, the hierophants,
or those versed in the real mysteries. The
initials of the four names are taken from the Persian
word PRDS (paradise) which may be adduced to prove
that what Moses originally instituted was worked out,
and systematised, at a later period, under Persian
influence. The whole arrangement of the tabernacle
was Egyptian; the serpent-worship was Egyptian,
and so was the idolatrous predilection for the golden
calf. Moses in his wise gratitude forbade the Jews
ever to be hostile to the Egyptians.
During the third period they left Egypt, and
though they were acquainted with all the smaller arts
of their Egyptian task-masters, and knew how to
weave, to cut stones, to model, to cast, and to found
gold and silver, they had to seek and to gain by hard
fighting a new home to settle in. During this period
they forgot everything; their accomplishments were
gone when they settled in the Holy Land. For142
during times of war the growth of sciences and arts
was never fostered.
During the fourth period they reached the very
climax of their national glory. David became master
of a large empire which extended from the shores of
the Euphrates to the frontiers of Egypt; this expansion
was accomplished by the force of arms. His
successor Solomon administered and consolidated the
empire, founded on blood and iron, by wisdom and
the culture of the arts of peace. After a Cæsar, the
Jews had an Augustus. Solomon lived in friendship
and peace with the surrounding mighty kingdoms,
especially with Hiram, King of Tyre. It was Solomon
who began to build Tadmor (afterwards Palmyra, the
queen of the East), to establish in the desert a
common emporium for Phœnician wares, and to
enable the Jews to trade with them.
During the fifth period the vast empire was
divided into two parts, the one of which was
altogether annihilated, and the other fell into the
hands of the Babylonians, and the temple of Solomon
was destroyed. Slaves and captives are rarely good
artists.
During the sixth period, after Kyrus had freed the
Jews and permitted them to return to their native
country, their national position improved. Under
Darius, Zorobabel received permission to reconstruct
the temple of Solomon on the foundations of the one
erected by that wise king, and it was accordingly143
rebuilt, but this could only be done in accordance
with the impoverished condition of freed captives.
During the seventh period, under Alexander the
Great and his followers, the Jews, attacked by Persians,
Egyptians, and Syrians, showed that they could rise to
the very highest deeds of heroism and self-sacrifice.
Finally, during the eighth period, under the Romans,
they gave up all hope of maintaining their position as
a chosen people; they revolted sometimes, but more
for theological than political reasons. Pompey treated
them with great kindness and consideration after the
capture of Jerusalem. During the reign of Augustus
the town attained a grandeur and extension which it
had never possessed, even in its brightest days under
the sway of Solomon. But stubborn and arrogant
as the Jews always were in times of prosperity, though
enjoying a certain amount of freedom, they revolted,
and the town and temple were destroyed. Nothing
was left but the candlestick with seven branches,
symbolic with the Egyptians of the seven planets,
and with the Jews of seven archangels, or of the
seven days of the week, sculptured in marble on the
Arch of Titus, together with a facsimile of the holy
ark, and some of the trumpets, used in religious
ceremonies. It would be most interesting if the
original relics, which it is assumed are buried in the
Tiber, could be recovered; and, as so many venerable
relics of by-gone ages have been brought to light,
we do not despair of once seeing these remains.
144
The tabernacle, or earliest temple of the Jews, was
entirely constructed on the plan of an Egyptian
temple. To convince ourselves of this truth we need
only compare its plan with that of the temple at
Edfou. The triple division into a Pronaos, Naos,
and Adytum, or the Holy of Holies, was strictly
observed in both. The Adytum was a cube 10 cubits,
or 15 feet each way; an outer temple, as Naos, consisted
of two such cubes, 15 feet broad by 30 feet long.
Adytum and Naos were covered by a sloping roof,
which projected 5 cubits (7½ feet) in every direction
beyond the temple itself, making the whole 40 cubits,
or 60 feet, in length, by 20 cubits, or 30 feet, in width.
Adytum and Naos stood in an enclosure—the Pronaos,
100 cubits (150 feet) long, by 50 cubits (75 feet) broad.
From Moses to Solomon, for 600 years, this tabernacle
was the only temple of the Jews. When
Solomon began to construct the temple, he adhered
strictly to the above arrangement, only doubling all
the dimensions. The temple partook more of the
character of a square shrine, or a store-house intended
to contain precious works in metal; a kind of opisthodomos.
The principal ornaments were two brazen
pillars, Jachin and Boaz (sun and moon), by the skilful
Hiram of Tyre. They were said to have been
marvels of metal-work. The pillars of Susan or
Persepolis, which had capitals of the same relative
proportions, may give us some idea of these.
In Egyptian temples it was also usual to place145
propyleæ at the porch of a temple, and the same
custom prevailed with the Phœnicians, as in the case
of the celebrated Venus (Astarte or Astharote) shrine
at Paphos. After the construction of the temple by
Solomon, Jerusalem became the holy and exclusive
central point of Judaism. There only, and nowhere
else, did they allow their God to be present. Zorobabel
erected on the very spot another altar and
temple in the same spirit, and this is the reason why
the erection of a second temple at Heliopolis by Onias,
under the Ptolemæians, caused such animosity and
jealousy amongst Egyptian and Judaic Jews. It is
said that the necessary marble, wood, and stone, and
also the gold, silver, and brass vessels had already
been weighed and prepared for the construction of
the temple during the reign of King David, who gave
his son the plan of the whole architectural construction.
According to Chronicles, however, it appears
that David made little or no preparation, and that
Solomon only found some of the brass-work ready for
use. This latter assertion is clearly verified by the
correspondence between Solomon and Hiram. Solomon
asks for wood for building in general, as also
cedars and cypress trees from Mount Lebanon;
adding that he wishes that Sidonians, as experienced
carpenters, should help his own workmen, whom he
designates as less able. This does not say very much
in favour of the artistic skill of the Jews, who at the
period of Solomon’s reign had not yet attained the same146
degree of proficiency as the pre-historic constructors
of pile-dwellings. The request of Solomon was
granted by the King of Tyre, and Adoniram was
sent as foreman of the Sidonian carpenters, of whom
30,000 were appointed by Solomon; 10,000 of these
worked alternately from month to month. Besides
the 30,000 carpenters, there were 80,000 sculptors, or
rather stone-cutters and masons, and 70,000 journeymen,
making altogether 180,000 working men, under
3,300 overseers, employed in the construction of the
temple, all tributary strangers whom David had
conquered. The construction began 592 years after
Exodus, about 975 years B.C. Mount Moreah, or
Moriah, was the site chosen, and the temple was completed
in seven years. The inner temple was 60
cubits (90 feet) long, 20 cubits (30 feet) broad, and
30 cubits (45 feet) high. Josephus says it was 120
cubits (180 feet) high; this would make the edifice
resemble a square tower. The Pronaos may have
been 120 cubits high. The space, 60 cubits long and
20 broad, was separated into two divisions. Of these
the rear was 20 cubits square, forming the Holy of
Holies, the ‘sekos’ of the Egyptian temples. The
other division, 40 by 10, formed the Naos, the holy
place, which was preceded by a hall, the Pronaos.
The division: One God, one priesthood, and one
people, was thus expressed. Rooms were constructed
round the temple three stories high, corresponding to
the rooms in the Egyptian Labyrinth, and the Brahmanic147
and Buddhistic choultries, or cloisters. There
were thirty rooms on each floor. The height of the
temple having been 30 cubits, this would give 15 feet
for each story, walls included. Josephus doubles all
these dimensions, and adopts inconceivable measurements.
The ninety rooms were used as receptacles
for the sacred vessels, and the temple was thus literally
a holy treasury. The Holy of Holies having been
only 20 cubits high, a space of 10 cubits, or 15 feet,
would have been left above it; of this room no intelligible
mention is made. In the Septuagint there is
an allusion, which differs from the Vulgate and the
different translations. In Chronicles we have upper
chambers mentioned, which were overlaid with gold;
this might have been the rooms or chambers above
the Holy of Holies. No special staircase led to this
room. It was undoubtedly a mysterious apartment,
and, like all mysteries, excited some writers to very
varied speculations on its possible nature. Amongst
others the learned Ben David, in a letter to Lichtenberg
in the Berlin ‘Archive der Zeit,’ asserted that
this chamber must have contained an electric battery,
for golden chains connected the room with the pillars
of Jachin and Boaz, which were hollow, and could be
placed in communication with the altar of brass. The
points of the temple were golden. At the consecration
of the temple, clouds, produced by incense,
suddenly filled the interior of the temple, and a flash
of lightning ignited the sacrifice. Michaelis tells us148
that the temple was never struck by lightning—the
lightning, therefore, setting fire to the sacrifice must
have been produced within the temple.
No stone roofs or vaults are mentioned in connection
with the temple or palace built by the Jews;
architecture was, therefore, in its most primitive stage.
The inner temple and the Holy of Holies were
entered through folding-doors. The Holy of Holies
was entirely empty, symbolic of the incomprehensibility
of the nature of the Deity. This was also the
case in Egypt with the ‘sekos,’ which was, in fact,
a shrine either quite empty, or containing a scroll,
on which were written the words: ‘I am that was,
that is, and that shall be.’ Two courts surrounded
the temple, an inner and an outer court. The outer
court was open to every Jew, but the inner court to
the priests only. The former was surrounded by a
double row of pillars overlaid with cedar-wood. It
is said that Solomon had valleys filled up in order
to make the concrete subconstruction of the length
even. Each side of the outer wall surrounding the
whole temple was 4 stadia or 1 stadium (606 feet
9 inches English) in length, giving 2,427 feet all
round. The pillars Jachin and Boaz stood on the
staircase of the inner court; each was 36 feet in
circumference, 54 feet in height without the capital,
which was 15 feet high. The shafts were hollow and
the brass 4 inches thick. On the south-eastern side
stood the round brass basin, called the sea, 30 feet149
in diameter, in which the priests used to wash their
hands. Besides the ‘sea,’ there stood on pedestals
on either side of the temple five cups, 12 feet
in diameter and 9 feet high. The altar of the
burning sacrifice, in the middle of this space, was
60 feet broad and as many feet long; all these
secondary necessaries of the temple stood in the
east. The surrounding courts rose in terraces like
those of the palace of Persepolis. The temple,
whatever its magnificence might have been in precious
stones, gold, silver, carved cherubim, brass and
silver vessels, washing-basins and candlesticks, was
architecturally an utter failure, whether compared
with the monumental temples of Egypt, the grand
and splendid palaces of Assyria, Babylon, or Persepolis,
or the temple of Diana at Ephesus. The latter,
which was built on a marsh, that it might not be
endangered by earthquakes, was 425 feet in length
and 220 in width, and had 127 columns 60 feet high,
each the gift of a king. This is the account given
by Pliny, who, however, describes either the seventh
or eighth temple. Stable as was everything in religious
matters with the Jews, they did not venture
in rebuilding their temple to make any alterations;
a stone displaced, an ornament improved, might have
driven their God from his chosen abode. With such
ideas art is impossible. The additions made to the
temple under the Romans, in order to render the
building more in harmony with their street architecture,150
were only outer courts with rich colonnades
of Corinthian columns, and had nothing to do with
the temple itself. These formed the Stoa-Basilica,
with the court of the Gentiles, which is spoken of
as imposing and forming a mighty group, and must
not be confounded with the temple itself, which was
certainly no specimen of architecture, either in dimension,
in plan, or in decoration, if we except
some stiff vine foliage on capitals, which was exceptionally
characteristic of the Jewish style.
The numerous tombs in the neighbourhood of
Jerusalem are rock-hewn, clearly betraying their
Egyptian origin; they are provided with numerous
hollows for the reception of the bodies. These
sepulchres are without any artistic stamp; on some
façades we can see the Egyptian fluted corona. The
façades of the so-called royal tombs of Jacob or
the judges are decorated in a Greek style, as are the
tombs of Zacharias and Absalom; the latter stand
out from the rock as independent structures, ornamented
with Ionic pillars, and above the Egyptian
corona rises a pyramidal or conical structure; a combination
of the pre-historic tumulus with Egyptian
and classic elements. Something is borrowed from
everyone to make up a chosen national element.
In books or in conversation this may avail, but
in art, where the outer impression is to create a
corresponding sensation, assertions must be borne out
by visible productions, and to falsify architectural151
records is much more difficult than to interpolate
passages, alter dates, or make assertions in utter
defiance of probability and possibility. The Hebrews,
whether as Jews or Israelites, had no art, and never
pretended to have one; they were contented with the
art-products which other nations made for them, in
perfect accordance with the clearly-expressed promise
of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: ‘That He
would give them great and goodly cities, which they
would not build; and houses full of good things,
which they would not fill; and wells digged, which
they would not dig; and vineyards and olive trees,
which they would not plant.’ With such principles
neither architecture, sculpture, nor ornamentation
could flourish. Art in Asia never became master
of matter from an esthetical point of view, for, in all
these works, matter sways the mind; it is either
an exhibition of precious stones on walls, or lace-work
in marble, or endless heaps of huge granite
blocks and columns without purpose, or decorations
in wild, fantastic, and endless combinations. The
Eastern mind could not free itself from the influence
of a mighty hierarchy. In the East it was the eternal
Hermes, the Logos, the priest, who read truth in the
stars, manufactured gods and goddesses, wrote the
language of heaven, drew up plans for temples,
squared out the proportions of the human body, and
gave laws to sculptors and painters, to stone-cutters
and masons, to joiners and carpenters, weavers and152
dyers. Hermes, with his followers, was the physician,
the lawgiver, and the judge of the masses; he prayed,
he sacrificed for them, he prophesied, circumcised,
married, embalmed, and buried them. The priest in
the East, whether as Brahman, Buddhist, Hierophant,
Magi, or Levite, generally placed the idea, the spirit,
the word, the λόγος {logos} above the form, which, in itself,
crippled the form the more effectually, because the
form, however revolting, was the mere symbol of
some sacred mystery. The creative genius of art
was thus almost extinguished under the stifling and
petrifying influence of hierarchical formalism, and,
until it had been freed from this, could neither
develop nor prosper. The process of freeing humanity
from this formalism was first begun and accomplished
by the Greeks.
153
Art has appeared to us till now under peculiar circumstances.
We have seen it in Asia and Africa,
and in both parts of the world it represented the
uninterrupted struggle of humanity for self-consciousness.
Humanity was too much under the influence
of the marvellous and incomprehensible, and neither
the marvellous nor the incomprehensible can be
brought into shape. The Indians tried to give forms
to the metaphysical phenomena of nature; the
Persians were bent on the glorification of the power
of one visible earthly despot; the Egyptians tried to
copy the realistic phenomena of nature, and inscribed
them with mystic signs, uniting Indian abstractions
with the real phenomena of nature. When a
thought was fixed into a form; the thought, being
at the same time a religious conception, could no
more be changed; it became in art what a technical
name for a natural phenomenon is in science. Oxygen
is oxygen, and designates only that element; so when
once a form was settled, as that of Vishnu or Amn,154
S’iva or Osiris—or the serpent fixed as a symbol of
eternity, or the hawk as a symbol of light—the inner
or spiritual life of the artist was fettered down to
outward forms with special inward meanings. Thus
the constraining sway of misunderstood nature on one
side, and the stationary precepts of an omnipotent
hierarchy on the other, entangled the artist’s imagination
and paralysed every effort of his subjective
power of production. The different nations began to
be wrapped up in their different artistic forms, which
became by degrees hard and impenetrable national
and religious incrustations; the masses, held in abeyance,
led by theocratical art, had only to glorify one
visible or invisible tyrant, with whom the universe
was blessed. Eastern art was to a certain degree
plastic, only too plastic as in India; but it was too
penetrated with an incomprehensible spiritualism to
find the right objects for its plastic tendencies. Even
where geometrical figures, flowers, or trees were used,
the effect of their simple combination was marred by
a want of harmony between thought and form, or
idea and body. This harmony between outward
form and inner spirit, wherein real beauty consists,
this balance between the dynamic and static cosmogonical
elements, was wanting in Eastern art. The
East rent nature asunder, and looked upon matter as
evil; and yet matter was to be used, to bring spirit
into form. The element of S’iva, Ahriman, or Typhon
was to give visible form to the conceptions of Brahmă,155
Ormuzd, or Osiris, and could not do this, because the
connecting link to blend the apparently-opposed
powers into one, was wanting. A uniting force for
this mysterious antagonism, a mediator between
heaven and earth, divinity and humanity, was sought
for, but not found. The Persian unconsciously set
Meshiah (man, mensch) down as that element, but
Meshiah was not yet allowed to come to any free
development, and he sank into the pitiful and degraded
position of a slave to despotic oligarchs, or
still more intolerant spiritual hierarchs. Meshiah
(humanity) was first freed by the Greeks in form and
by Christ in spirit.
There can be no doubt that the Greeks were, for a
short time at least, the ancient representatives of the
well-balanced static and dynamic forces in humanity.
Of all the geographical districts of the world, whether
in the Eastern or Western hemisphere, none are so
admirably adapted for the cultivation of social intercourse
as the Grecian isles, and the Grecian peninsula,
the classical region of the Ægean Sea. Nowhere is
so large a coast-line found, surrounding so small a
territorial surface; nowhere such a variety of creeks,
capes, promontories, inlets, and harbours as round the
Peloponnesus, and the islands uniting Asia Minor
with Greece and Italy. No streams like the Ganges,
or the Hoang-ho; no mountains like the Belur Tag
or Himâlâya. Gorgeous uniformity is the characteristic
of China and India; variety and change the156
very element of the Greek world. Mountains, plains,
valleys, streams, are all of a limited size; there rules
a sweet, eternal harmony between spirit and form;
nothing is exaggerated, nothing overawes man; he
feels at home; the dark-blue sky over-arches his
verdant, hilly, amiable earth, adorned with brooks and
hills, boskets and flowers. Valley chases valley;
rivulet pursues rivulet; clouds follow clouds; the
morning dawn flies before the bright noon, and the
noon dies away, in the cool sighs of the evening
breezes, into the embrace of dark night. The self-conscious
spirit of youthful humanity came into life
for the first time in Greece. Everything with the
Greeks was feeling, but a feeling, conscious of a real
purpose in religion, the State, the family, and in art.
We shall see that intuitive feeling grow by degrees
into critical reflection, but in the first instance everything
with the Greeks was ingenuous, or, as the French
call it, ‘naïve.’ This classical ‘naïveté,’ this unconscious,
unaffected simplicity, enabled them to become
masters of intuitive productions, and to look upon
this world with an unbiassed eye, prone only to see
what was harmonious and beautiful. The whole life
of the Greeks was thus one long ideal dream of
poetical and artistic reality. They took an interest,
however, in objective individuality only; the beauties
of nature as one great total did not yet affect their
subjective comprehension. They could not grasp the
pantheistic notion of the Indians, who saw in every157
detailed phenomenon of the universe the working of
ONE indivisible and incomprehensible first cause.
They shuddered at the Egyptian monsters, which
were to serve as symbols of that sublime conception
which lost on the Nile all its primitive grandeur.
They found the Persian absorption of the universe
into a conflict between light and darkness too dreary,
and ascribed to it the loss of all individual freedom.
They worked out a system of their own, based on
Indian grandeur, Egyptian symbolism, and Persian
abstractions. To be thoroughly acquainted with this
combination of influences is the very first step towards
an understanding of Greek art.
The Greeks were Aryans in language, and in
mode of thinking; Aryans who had detached themselves
very early from their Cis-Himâlâyan brethren,
and peopled Asia Minor and the surrounding islands.
They were strengthened by Egyptian and Phœnician
immigrations, and invigorated by Thracia’s warlike
spirit.
Like a plant that only lives and grows by means
of the antithetic activity of air, light, and water, the
Greek State-body had air supplied by Orpheus from
Thracia, light by Kekrops from Egypt, and water
by Kadmus from Phœnicia. Independent freedom
and love of the arts were the gifts of the North; the
South furnished them with deep knowledge, and
Phœnicia gave them the vivifying spirit of commerce.
Their language is an offshoot of the Sanskrit, but158
stands in a more distant relation to it than the Zend—to
which it is closely allied. They are principally
distinguished from the Asiatic nations by their
decided hatred of everything arbitrary and chaotic.
From their love for individuality and diversity of
customs, manners and modes of thinking, sprang the
national unity of the Greeks in the fairy realms of
Poetry and Art. When they began to feel themselves
a people, they assumed the name of Hellenes;
and their first historical deed was the admirable completion
of a language which, for simplicity, power, and
beauty, has remained up to our own days a model for
all other languages, for it alike possesses eurythmy
and power of expression. The overwhelming metaphysical
subtleties of the Sanskrit are simplified; the
variety of consonants and vowels reduced, and the
mode of writing corrected; everything proving a deep
sense for order, clearness, and moderation.
They had three dialects: the Doric, distinguished
by a broader pronunciation; the Ionic, possessed of
softness and a melodious richness; and the Æolic, a
kind of mixture without a special character. The
Dorians came southwards from the hoary mountains
of Thessaly, and gained step by step an influence and
dominion over the other tribes of Greece. The
Ionians occupied the east, and were considered the
connecting link between Hellas and Asia; but whatever
the Hellenes took from Byblos, Sidon, Tyros or
the Libanon, assumed a really Hellenic form, after it159
had passed through the purifying element of Doric
correctness. The south gave ideas, and the north
brought them into form.
Whatever the Hellenes touched they beautified.
The powerful giant Bhîma of the Mahâbhârata is the
prototype of Herakles; but in the myths concerning
Herakles we recognise the mere personification of
commercial daring and enterprise. Accompanied by
his dog, he finds the cochineal; the goblet in which
he sails to Erytheia is but the Phœnician merchantman;
the Phœnicians are referred to, when it is recorded
of him that he had broken the devastating
horn of the mountain-streams. Moloch, to whom
Assyrians, Indians and Hebrews sacrificed, without
ever being capable of investing the fire-spitting
monster with anything like poetry, was destroyed by
Herakles. The gods of Asia became with the
Hellenes demons, from whom they learned some
useful trades. Poseidon, the god of the sea, is, like
the element over which he rules and in which he
dwells, of a sinister, implacable character; he requires
human sacrifices, annihilates horses (meaning ships),
in fact does, as incarnate divinity, what the sea does
in our own times. The Titans are acquainted with
astronomy, and are personifications of a certain knowledge
in maritime matters. Proteus, the Egyptian
Pharaoh, is with them the keeper of the seas, and
Atlas the father of nautical astronomy, and both
were companions of the Tyrean Herkules. In all the160
myths and legends of the Greeks we can trace some
facts. The divinity they could only comprehend in
the well-proportioned form of a human being, and a
hero or benefactor of humanity became with them a
divinity. This blending into one of the divine and
human is the most important feature in Greek
thought. Vishnu and Osiris also became incarnate—but
their deeds were supernatural; the principal
feature of their ‘man-godhead,’ or ‘divine manhood,’
is an incomprehensible mysticism. Their anthropomorphism
had in it something gloomy. When the
divine Apollo uttered the memorable words: ‘Man,
know thyself,’ the Greeks became suddenly conscious
of the inborn spark of the divine intellect in man; the
gods were intelligible to them, and the Asiatic world
of abstractions emerged in a thousand different human
forms of divine conceptions.
Uranos (Varuna in Sanskrit) is heaven, or rather
space—Kronos, time, and Gæa, earth. Uranos as well
as Kronos and Pontos were offsprings of the Earth. So
far we have to deal with the same mystical elements
which engendered all the Asiatic cosmogonies. But
Uranos and Gæa are set down as male and female,
and are endowed with powerful children—the Titans
and Titanides, the Hekatoncheires (or Kentimanos,
hundred-handed, powerful giants with fifty heads),
and the Kyklopes, who were very clever, and invented
many useful arts.
The most important gods were Okeanos, Japetós,161
and Kronos. The human character of Greek mythology
begins even before the birth of Zeus. Uranos
was afraid of his own children, and had them confined
in eternal darkness in Tartaros; their mother, Gæa,
had pity on them, and armed the youngest, Kronos,
with a sickle, with which he attacked Uranos, and deprived
him of his creative power. From that moment
Uranos was idle, could produce no new forms, and
was neither worshipped by gods nor men. The fact
which underlies this dramatic scene, in which gods
are the actors, is a cosmical phenomenon. In time
all things were created, and in time the creative
force, as far as our earth was concerned, ceased with
the creation of man, to be productive of new forms.
Kronos had five children—Hestia, Demeter, Here,
Pluton, and Poseidon, and these he devoured. In
this cruel image we see represented the revolving
movements of time, in which the present is everlastingly
the prey of the past, engendering the future.
The sixth son of Kronos, Zeus (creative ether), was
saved by his mother’s cunning, for she gave the inhuman
god a stone instead of her child; Metis, however
(Maya, Matter), afterwards the wife of Zeus;
rescues the children that Kronos had swallowed, and
he is obliged to give them back again in an eternal
circle. These children of Kronos are years, months,
weeks, days and hours. We have here an instance
of the manner in which phenomena were turned by
the Hellenes into living beings. Kronos was an old162
man with a long flowing beard, and held a sickle or
scythe in his hands, with which he cut down everything.
And as symbol of eternity a serpent lay by
his side.
Zeus serves us even more as a specimen of the
anthropomorphic tendency of the Greeks. He was
the father of the gods, and had to fight with the
Titans. He led the immortal gods, who assembled
on Mount Olympus against these terrible Titans,
who mustered in great strength on Mount Othrys.
For ten years the battle raged without result;
heaven, earth, and sea resounded with the frightful
struggle. Gæa advised the gods to call in the
Kyklopes and Hekatoncheires. These presented
Poseidon with the trident, Pluton with the helmet that
had the power to make the wearer invisible, and
Zeus received from the depths of the earth the flaming
thunderbolts. Then only the Titans had to yield to
storms and lightnings, and were chained down at last
in Tartaros. We read a chapter of geology when we
peruse Hesiod’s description of this struggle. In the
Titans, Kyklopes, and the hundred-handed giants we
recognise the antediluvian monsters—the mastodons,
megatheriums, and saurians, petrified for ever in the
strata of the earth’s crust. Zeus, after his conquest,
began to rule the Olympian gods and mankind.
He himself was full of passion and wrath, of human
failings and shortcomings; but, after all, he was kind,
dignified—even in his weakness, just and grand. He163
smiled, and love and joy pervaded the universe; he
frowned, and the universe shook to its very foundations.
He indulged in freaks, and still was afraid of
his haughty and jealous wife, who acted in many
instances as a well-bred lady would, who had the
misfortune to be wedded to an amorous husband.
Zeus was frequently so troubled by his riotous gods
and goddesses, that he had a bad headache, and was
once obliged to call in Hephaistos to cure him with
a heavy blow, and on this occasion Minerva (wisdom)
sprang forth armed with spear, helmet, and shield.
The truth that intellect and reason are of divine
origin was proclaimed in this myth. In the Greek
legends the poet’s imagination has turned the forces
of nature into beautiful men, women, or children.
How much the gods, with them, were the creatures
of man’s fancy, may be seen in the fear of the
opinions of their earth-born children with which the
gods were endowed. The Almighty Thunderer,
when his heavenly subjects made too much noise,
often cried: ‘What will my earthly sons say?’ and
for fear that they might find fault with him he yielded,
and made concessions, and heaven and earth, sun,
moon and stars were again at peace.
It is true that in Indian lore the same characters
are drawn, but, like their supernatural gods, they
are gigantic and monstrous. Men and women in
the Indian fables, behave like unwieldy spectres,
that frighten us during an uneasy dream; we must164
first divest them of their inhuman forms in order
to comprehend them. The conceptions are too
marvellous to impress us with moral lessons; we are
lost in allegories, metaphors, symbols and double
meanings. This occurs less in Greek mythology.
Atlas was the representative of patience; he had
for ever to carry the world on his shoulders, and
was turned at last into a rocky mountain range.
Epimetheus was the prototype of senseless carelessness,
and was destroyed by his own folly. Prometheus
at last was the embodiment of considerate
prudence; he was devoured by the vulture of ‘care
and sorrow for the morrow.’ Prometheus may be said
to be the best, most intelligible emblem of classic
humanity, as Faust may be considered as the incarnation
of romantic mankind. Prometheus wanted
to bring matter into form; Faust to know what
held spirit and matter together. Prometheus stole
fire from heaven, made man of clay, and vivified him.
Faust knew that this heavenly fire was a force over
which he had no control, and he called in a spirit
to teach him ‘how all one whole harmonious weaves,
each in the other works and lives.’ The ‘formal’
is the longing of the Greek Faust, and the ‘spiritual’
the aspiration of the Teuton Prometheus. All the
Greek eîdola embodied some power of nature.
Philomela was a pining woman. The Laurel was
formed out of the lovely Daphne (from the Sanskrit
Dahanah, our word ‘dawn’). In every tree a Dryad165
dwelt, in every wave a Naiad sported. Demeter’s
tears for her lost daughter Persephone nourished
rivulets. On the bright heights of Mount Olympus,
on Helikon, or Parnassus, or Pindus, above the petty
cares of every-day life, sat the earnest Klio with an
open scroll and a stylum, recording with lovely patience
the events of the past. Euterpe, with her two flutes,
brought harmony into the discordant sounds of the
earthly spheres, and filled the world with songs and
tunes; Melpomene, armed with gloomy mask and
dagger, presided over the fictitious sufferings of
humanity struggling with the inexorable fates,
reflecting in an artificial mirror—reality. Thalia,
with a shepherd’s staff and a Silenus’ mask, endowed
with an eternal smile, comforted man with more
cheerful views. Terpsichore, with a lyre of seven
chords, taught him to express joy, happiness, and
pious veneration by the rhythmical movements of his
body. Erato, on her Kythera with nine chords, warbled
love-songs, and inspired and aided young poets to
pour out in measured language the immeasurable
feelings of their souls. Polyhymnia, or Polymnia,
protected orators, philosophers, and stage-players,
and enabled them to keep within the boundaries of
moderation, for she placed the first finger of her
right hand on her lips, impressing them with the
necessity for caution. Urania, with her eyes lifted
to the starry heavens, tried to draw man’s attention
to the well-regulated courses of the heavenly bodies,166
proclaiming in eternal silence with fiery tongues the
glories of the universe. Kalliope finally taught man
to record heroic deeds in epic poetry. These nine
muses, presided over by the manly and wise, valorous
and glorious Apollo, nursed, taught, and accompanied
the Hellenes through life; they met them as lovely
charmers in a thousand different forms, in temples,
on friezes, metopes, goblets, pateras, amphoræ, and
urns; nothing possessed a meaning for them that
had not a poetical, artistic, and scientific aim.
Life with the Greeks was one continual festivity.
They worshipped their gods in singing joyous songs,
in running, playing, and wrestling. They thought it
a duty to develop both body and intellect, the gifts
of the immortal gods. They deeply loved poetry,
wrote it if they could, or recited it, or listened to it and
imbibed it with their whole souls. They rejoiced in
athletic sports; influenced by Terpsichore, they showed
the wondrous beauty of their harmoniously-constructed
bodies. Joy and delight swelled their muscles when
they wrestled, and throbbed through all their veins
when they moved in rhythmical simplicity, like the
stars in heaven. They prayed when they composed
epic poems; they worshipped when they wrote
tragedies or comedies; they honoured the gods when
they built temples; they humbly beseeched their
blessing when they sculptured. The whole life of the
Greeks was one grateful act of artistic devotion. Their
temples were so many hymns in stone and marble;167
their ornamentations in reliefs, sculptures, winding
frets and meanders, are epic poems, dramatic representations,
and lyric effusions of the very highest
intellectual refinement. Art with the Greeks was
cherished, cultivated, and loved for its own divine
sake. Rich and poor, old and young, men and
women, boys and girls, used art and poetry, science
and philosophy, as the plastic language of their
ever-praying lips, hands and minds. Whenever the
life of a nation is thus inspired; when the comprehensive
culture of intellect, the harmonious development
of the body, and the mysterious feelings of
existence are guided by the mighty and productive
energy of an awakened and excited imagination, and
regulated by a consciousness of order; art must attain
that expansive, noble, and beautiful form which we
admire in the Greeks.
Greek poetry and philosophy had the same basis
of reality as their mythology. That which was
asserted by the Asiatic and African law-givers to
have been directly dictated by the gods, was gradually
acquired by the Greeks through deductive and inductive
reasoning. Soon the mythological conceptions
of the poets were turned into eîdola. Aphrodite was
set down as the representative of matter, out of which
all things were formed. Pallas-Athene lost her individuality,
and became intellect pervading humanity.
Apollo was no more the ‘god-man’ or the living sun,
but cosmical heat. The forms of fearful monsters168
that originated in Asia, with ferocious jaws, with
three heads, spreading fear and awe, looking as if
nothing but human flesh could satisfy their voracity,
also terrified the Greeks during the mythic period of
their national existence, and human flesh was accordingly
sacrificed. Such sacrifices were prevalent
wherever monster-gods, without human shape, without
legs or arms, with fishes’ tails, dog’s or cat’s heads,
with round and glaring eyes, and many arms, inspired
the masses with fear and trembling. This was the
case in Greece when monsters and pirates peopled the
sea-coasts; when Geryon, the giant with three bodies,
three heads, six hands, six legs, and two wings;
Echidna, the wife of Typhon; the Lernean serpent,
with nine or with fifty heads; the Chimera, with a lion’s
or goat’s head; the Sphinx, with a woman’s head and
bust, the body of a lion, and the wings and tail of a
dragon; and the fearfully howling Skylla, with six
heads and six long necks, formed part of their pantheon.
As soon, however, as poetry threw a glittering
veil of beauty over the forces and phenomena of nature,
no one thought of sacrificing human flesh to the gods.
Who could have slaughtered a human being in the
sight of the Olympian Zeus or the Pallas-Athene of
Pheidias, the Venus of Alkemenes, or the Apollo of
Praxiteles?
The Greek mind, once on the road to progress
through a correct appreciation of beauty, developed
with incredible rapidity.
169
The elements of art as well as of science are threefold.
We have:—
α. The reign of imagination through the emotional
element, more or less regulated;
β. That of intellect, the reflective element, more
or less influenced by imagination; and
γ. That of reason, the speculative element, discerning
between imagination and intellect, and binding
the two into one.
The first element is the province of the unconscious
artist. He trusts his own subjective imagination,
and sees things only from his individual point of
view.
The second tries to compare the different products
of art, to draw analogies between them, and to assign
causes for certain forms. This is the province of the
chronicler, the antiquary, and the art-historian.
The third reaches the sphere of philosophical
consciousness. In it the esthetical writer combines a
correct appreciation of art as a grand total, with all
its essential details. He sees distinctly its inner
element based on immutable general laws, and comprehends
the necessary organism, without which an
artistic work cannot exist.
Poetry and philosophy, like art, passed through
these developments in Greece. First we have the
epic and lyric poets: Homer, Hesiod, Sappho,
Alkæus, and Pindar; next the dramatic poets:
Æschylus, Sophokles, and Euripides. At last the170
philosophers and historians: Plato, Aristotle, Herodotus,
Thukydides, and Xenophon.
In analogy with these purely mental phases we
have in art: the architect, who constructs a small
world of organic coherence out of inorganic matter
by means of his imagination; the sculptor, who reproduces
with discernment the organic world around
him in inorganic matter, but endows it with individual
expression and feeling; the painter at last, who
creates with his colours a union of spirit and matter,
of idea and form.
Beauty was in all Greek products the vital element.
‘True beauty, the companion of the gods,
must be sought for,’ says Pausanias, and makes no
advances; it is too elevated to communicate itself,’
And Plato propounds: ‘The Supreme has no image;
he converses only with the wise; with the vulgar he
shows himself proud and forbidding; always equal,
he expresses the emotion of the souls, he wraps himself
in the delicious calm of that divine nature of
which the great masters in the arts, according to
ancient writers, endeavoured to seize the type.’ This
delicious calm may be traced everywhere in Greek
art, and forms its essential element.
The temples of the Greeks were national and
public buildings. They were not mere shrines destined
as exclusive dwelling-places for some visible or
invisible, concrete or abstract, theocratic monster.
They were the central spots for their national assemblies,171
their gatherings, and for the celebration of their
public festivities.
The Olympian, Pythian, Nemæan, and Isthmian
games attracted visitors to these temples. These games
did not consist of mere exhibitions of athletic prowess;
but poets like Pindar—tragedians like Æschylus and
Sophokles—historians like Herodotus—read to enraptured
audiences the masterly products of their intellectual
powers. Wrestlers and runners, sculptors and
poets, and tragic and comic writers vied with one
another to be crowned with a laurel wreath, or to
receive a palm-twig, some a crown, or a tripod. No
sordid feeling of gain mingled with their yet unalloyed
pleasure in being distinguished for mere distinction’s
sake; the commercial question was unregarded. The
prizes, given away in the sight of the delighted masses,
were for everything—for bodily as well as for intellectual
excellence—even for proficiency in the art of
kissing. At the festival of the Philesian Apollo a
prize for the most exquisite kiss was conferred upon a
young lady. At Sparta and at Lesbos, in the temple of
Here, and also among the citizens of Parrhasia, women
contended for the prizes with men. How much we try
to imitate Greek customs may be judged from the
fact, that we also give prizes for exquisite dogs, cats
out of proportion, and fat babies; but we are sorry
to say, that this is done with a keen eye to business—to
advertise a baby-food or a dog-or cat-fancier.
That art is not altogether Greek with us need astonish172
no one. We are trained for practical purposes, but
the Greeks were trained to appreciate beauty, symmetry,
and harmony, not in verses only, but also in
the human frame and in every product of art. Architecture
with them was thoroughly plastic; it was
never subservient to some metaphysical subtlety; it
was finished in itself; a total of which every part
formed, as in the human body, a completing element—without
which the whole conception of a temple would
be as incomplete as a man without arms, legs, or toes.
The Greek temple entirely differed from the gloomy
buildings of Egypt or India, which were constructed
as symbols of hell, earth, and heaven; hell was for
the sinners, the outcasts and the poor; earth for the
respectable middle-classes; and heaven for the priests,
the kings and their high officials. The constructions
never made any attempt at symmetrical beauty, but
aimed only at gorgeous pomp, in order to overawe the
credulous mob—mystery was their essence. Sudden
turnings placed the terrified worshipper, unawares, face
to face with some colossal idol, looking to the excited
and surprised imagination twice as large as it was,
and ascending and descending staircases visibly
divided the temple into abodes of splendour and
horror. With the ancient Greeks in constructing a
temple, the first question was the aim of the building;
to whom was it to be dedicated—to Zeus, Apollo,
Poseidon, Minerva or Venus? This question once
decided, the most convenient spot, in accordance with173
the character of the god to whose worship the
temple was to be dedicated, was chosen. The building
to be erected was always to be in harmony with the
surrounding scenery.
The temple with the Greeks generally stood on a
terrace-like base of several steps.
The Doric, Ionic, and Korinthian orders, as
architectural subdivisions, are most usual. So far as
the different styles are concerned, a fourth must be
added, which modern art-historians call the Attic.
The Greeks were undoubtedly the first people who
succeeded in producing architectural works of art;
they were also the first:—
(a) To distinguish the material;
(b) To bring about symmetry and proportion; and
(c) To construct with a clear consciousness of
purpose.
Marble was most profusely made use of; wood
also, but the latter by degrees disappeared altogether.
The Athenians completed even the roofs of their
temples in stone.
The Greeks availed themselves of soft materials,
such as clay, chalk, gypsum, and marble dust, for
stucco (κονίασις {koniasis}), in which they excelled all other
nations.
Metal too formed an important element in their
decorations. It is asserted by many authorities that
the Korinthian capital was not the latest development
of Greek architecture; but that on the contrary it174
was older than the simplified and more correct Doric
capital, which, showing no traces of wood-construction,
is altogether of a pure ‘stone-feeling,’ whilst the forms
of the Korinthian capital bear undoubted traces of
wood-carving and metallotechnic.
We see that the Greeks employed pliable, plastic,
elastic and solid materials; the great secret of their
success lay in the fact that they made use of these
elements appropriately.
The vertical and horizontal were the principal
lines used by the Greeks. The curved line was not
altogether excluded. The uprising straight lines in
columns were cylindrical or conical. The relation of
the lines to one another, and to the whole of the
building, was regulated by a strict observation of the
laws of proportion.
The diameter or half-diameter of the column (the
module) served as the unit for the whole building.
As in the human body the general law of proportion
does not exclude an infinite diversity of forms, so in
the Greek temples regulation did not preclude variety.
In man the height is limited, and, to a certain extent,
determined by his bones. This was the case in the
Greek temple. The height was limited by the diameter
of the column. Taking two columns of the
same height, the one thin and the other thick, the
thin column will appear high and the other short,
but both will have a certain proportion, taken from
their own body; the one will be, say, nine times the175
diameter of its body, and the other only seven times.
Proportion in no way fetters the artist; it allows him
perfect freedom, but freedom in order, without which
no good building is possible. All architectural elements
are of geometrical origin. These elements are
to be divided into those that support, and those that
are supported. The column is the most perfect
supporting body; surrounding a vertical axis in a
slightly conical form. Through the ‘contractura,’ the
swelling or tapering, it assumes the most perfect
expression of the dynamic force in the striving
upwards. Through the square plinth (Abacus) a
harmonious union is effected between column, as
supporter, and architrave, as the supported, or static,
element of the building.
The Greek temple was pre-eminently the house
of the man-like god. The god in the most exquisite
idealised human form was visibly present. A forecourt
(pronaos) led to the cella (naos); there was a
rear-court (posticum), and occasionally a special court
(the opisthodome) was added. Architecture and
sculpture were closely allied in Greece; and still so
clear and rational a separation between these two
art-sisters, as existed there, has nowhere been
observed. Through this apparent contradiction,
architecture gained an independent soul, full of emotion
and life, whilst sculpture obtained a well-proportioned
body, the closely united artistic product
being thus endowed with solidity and firmness.
176
The general architectural arrangement of a Greek
temple was invariably the same. The cella, the
abode of the divinity, was of smaller or larger
dimensions. Two rows of columns adorned the
interior, supporting an upper gallery. If the central
space was left roofless, to supply the temple with
light, it was called hypæthral. A temple, surrounded
by one row of columns, was designated a Peripteros;
if two rows of columns ornamented it, a Dipteros.
With a front portico it was Prostyle; provided with
a court, both front and back, Amphiprostyle. The
pillars projecting on the side walls were antæ; and
a temple having this decorative element was styled
an Antætemple. The colonnade surrounding the
temple at smaller or greater distances, represented
a combined power of support. The base marked the
independent existence of the separate columns. The
shaft was covered with channelled flutings, and rose
vertically with a convex extension of its circumference
(called entasis). It then strongly contracted, thus
expressing in the most perfect manner not merely
passive sustaining, but an active and lively support.
Above the capitals the mighty beams of the architrave
(epistyle) were held together by a broad band, on
which rested the frieze, sometimes adorned with
triglyphs and metopes, or with reliefs; above it
projected the overhanging plinth of the principal
cornice. On the narrow sides of the oblong building,
bordered by a cornice (the corona, geison) and the177
roof-gutter, rose the pediment with its groups and
statues. On the front edge of the roof, both at
the corners and in the middle, there stood smaller
sculptures or marble palm-trees; whilst at the sides
the rain-water was ejected through lions’ heads; the
finishing horizontal lines were eurythmically crowned
with palm-shaped tiles (antifixæ). The roof and the
rest of the building, in the noblest works, were of
marble, the architectural product being thus transformed
into an elegant chiselled work of sculpture.
The Greeks had in their mythology:
1. Powerful gods and goddesses, as Zeus, Pallas,
Poseidon, and Mars.
2. Charming and lovely divinities, as Aphrodite,
Eros, and Persephone.
3. Mixtures of sublime power and beauty, of
manly dignity and womanly grace, as Here, Diana,
Bacchus, and Apollo. In studying the characteristics
of these three groups of divinities we become acquainted
with the principal features of the three
orders of their architecture.
I. The Doric order is full of power and monumental
dignity. Force is its most prominent characteristic.
II. The Ionic order mingles southern imagination
with northern severity; this order, with its voluted
capital instead of the simple abacus, is of a more
complicated character and livelier expression.
III. The Korinthian order exhibits, instead of178
the tapering Doric, a slender column—ending in a
richly-decorated, upward-striving capital. There is
something of the Doric style in the Ionic, and something
of the Ionic in the Korinthian. The Doric was,
however, the basis of Greek architecture.
A. The Doric order had six distinct developments
of style.
a. The proto-Doric, compressed and heavy.
b. The lax Archaic-Doric, slender, with more distinctly-tapering
columns.
c. The stern Archaic-Doric, more finished and
graceful in its proportions.
d. The pure Doric, most correct in all its details.
e. The Attic-Doric, during the rule of Perikles,
combining utmost severity with the very highest
refinement in execution.
f. The Makedonian-Doric style; not correctly
proportioned, the columns becoming elongated, and
the distances narrowed. Gorgeousness and vanity
predominate.
B. The Ionic order had three distinct phases of
development in style.
a. The first simple in form, with the strongly-pronounced
volute.
b. The richly ornamented style, as in the temple of
Minerva Polias.
c. The compound style; half Doric and half Ionic.
C. The Korinthian order passed through four
phases of style:
179
a. The undecided style; half Ionic and half Korinthian.
b. The finished style; graceful and rich.
c. The over-decorated style, with strong Ionic
forms.
d. The variegated style, with decorative additions
of trophies, winged-horses, dolphins, and eagles; half
northern and half southern—combining Asiatic with
Greek forms.
D. The Doric intermingled with Ionic forms produced
in Attica a peculiar order, or rather mere style,
neither Doric, nor Ionic, nor Korinthian—a kind of
eclectic style which we may very properly call the
Attic style. The Erechtheium of Athens was in this
style. There are six principal distinctions in this
style, which justify us in treating it as totally distinct
from those mentioned under A, B and C:—
1. A particular plinth is wanting in the base.
2. Instead of this, a double contraction is transformed
into one, united to the common support by
means of a strong circular ovolo. The contractura is
expressed on a small scale in the base.
3. The shaft is more slender in proportion.
4. The volutes are more projecting.
5. The frieze is considerably higher than it is
generally in any of the other orders.
6. The corona is without the dentated ornament;
but the projecting plinth is strongly undercut, and180
powerfully overhangs the finishing member of the
frieze.
In all classifications of this kind a narrow-minded
pedantry is to be avoided; canons, of whatever sort,
hinder the natural growth of art. Still worse than
strict canons is ignorance. Without a correct and
thorough knowledge of Greek literature, no man can
aspire to an exalted position in poetry and science;
and without a correct and thorough study of Greek
art, no man can become an artist. We do not recommend
a slavish imitation of the Greeks, but a thorough
understanding of their slow development, through the
phases of unconscious reproduction and systematically
conscious creation, to the philosophical appreciation of
beauty, which enabled them to reflect in their works
of art the eternal types of Nature in an idealised form.
The same gradual development which we remarked
in their architecture also took place in Greek
keramic art. The oldest pottery was coarse, the
material generally taken from the most recent formation
of the soil, the Cainozoic period. These older
specimens are very much alike amongst all the Aryan
nations. The forms are undecided, and made by the
hand; the ornaments, as in pre-historic times, consisted
of points, zigzags, spirals and knobs. At a
very early period, however, the Greeks as Pelasgians,
Achaians, Danaians and Argeians, possessed more
defined outlines, and a more perfect symmetry, even
in their very coarsest pottery.
181
In the oldest, so-called Tyrrhenian, vases we
have already a decided plastic improvement. The
ornamentation takes its patterns from metallotechnic,
and we recognise Asiatic influences in the winged
horses and lions, stamped in the clay as flat ornaments.
The Greek taste improved; leaves and
flowers were treated with a delicate, idealising conventionalism;
the vine, ivy, anthimion, and masks and
festoons, were used for decorative purposes, and gave
to the well-shaped vessel a high artistic value. This
was the most successful period of pottery for Greece.
Samos appears to have been the principal place for
its manufacture. The use of the wheel was long
dispensed with; the Greeks trusting more to the
delicacy of their touch than to the technical accuracy
of a machine. In Asia the wheel had long been
known, and it had exercised rather a detrimental than
an improving influence on pottery, as the forms, settled
by religious prejudices, or venerable custom, did not
change, but remained stationary. As soon as the
Greeks adopted the wheel—it must have been in
use before Homer, for he speaks of it—their better-trained
minds brought a new spirit into the handicraft
of the potter, which was then turned into real art.
Korœbos, of Athens, a mythic person, is said to
have elevated keramic art to high perfection. Dibutades
is said to have been the first modeller in clay,
and Talos, his nephew, is mentioned as the inventor of
the potter’s wheel in Hellas.
182
With reference to the process of colouring we
have two distinct classes of Greek pottery:—
1. The oligochromatic, from ὀλίγος {oligos} (small), and
χρῶμα {chrôma} (colour).
2. The polychromatic, from πολύς {polus} (many), and
χρῶμα {chrôma} (colour).
I. The oligochromatic class of Greek pottery may
be divided into two distinct styles: a. The Archaic;
b. The Hellenic.
A. As soon as the wheel became generally used, a
finer paste was required, fit for exposure to a greater
heat, and for the production of a greater variety of
vessels. In the beginning the paste was coarse-grained
and of a yellowish-grey; later it was fine,
and the colour homogeneous. The glazing was
without lustre, brownish-black, and spotted, proving
a want of experience in baking. We have violet,
brownish-red, and white tints badly fixed on the
black glaze. With the exception of Pithoi (wine
jars) found at Thera, the vessels belonging to the
Archaic style are generally of moderate size, broad
and compressed, with sudden and bold interruptions
of the curves, and abrupt unions of the extremities.
The ornament is not yet an integral part of the
vessel. The general forms are cups, pots, flasks, &c.,
all being entirely black. Some are ornamented with
yellowish or white points, or with simple lines drawn
all over the vessel. By degrees a clearer understanding
of the laws of ornamentation is perceptible; the183
ornamentation becomes restricted to the bulge, whilst
rings, meanders, and floral ornamentations mark the
upper and lower parts of the vessel. A further
progress may be seen in the treatment of ornamentation
in the animals which surround the vessels
in parallel circles. Highly interesting are the flowers,
balls, and crosses on these oligochromatic vases. With
the progress of civilisation we find the human figure
introduced, surrounded, however, by monstrous combinations
of Asiatic origin. Genii, with and without
wings, make their appearance; then divinities amongst
lions, panthers, ostriches, and a profusion of symbolic
representations. Swans are either tamed, chased,
or killed. The spirit of Persepolis and Nineveh, of
Phœnicia and Egypt, animates these pre-Homeric
compositions; they are entirely incomprehensible.
This pottery of the Greeks is of the very highest
interest; we may advantageously study in it the
progress of civilisation amongst them.
We have a period in which monster chases
monster; then a period in which men kill monsters;
then, when men begin to settle down, and to pass
from the barbarous state of mere hunters into a more
settled mode of living, freed from obnoxious wild
animals, they fight against men. The conquerors
have decidedly Aryan features, whilst the conquered
have unmistakably Turanian faces. (See the work
of Lord Hamilton.) At length we suddenly surprise
them before the walls of Troy; the incidents of184
the Iliad are known, and furnish the potters with
heroic subjects. Achilles and Hektor, Penelope and
Ulysses, may be recognised; the first two in deadly
combat, the two latter meeting after a long separation.
The subject, in these Archaic vases and vessels, is not
yet thoroughly purified, for amongst the heroes we
see Gorgons with spread wings and lolling tongues.
Other monsters, destroying animals, surround the
principal actors of the drama as mere unconcerned
‘dummies.’ We accompany the development a step
further, and observe that the monsters have a share
in the action; they seem to take part pro and con,
like the gods in the Iliad, and, later, they appear in
yet more purified forms as protecting divinities. It
is as if the Iliad had first been drawn in clay by
potters and improved upon, till at last it was shaped
in its divine form, and edited under the name of
Homer.
B. The Hellenic, or classic, style of Greek pottery,
based on the Archaic, shows great improvements in
every direction. The paste is harder, finer, and well
glazed, and the colours are less discordant. The red is
of a fiery brightness, and the black without any spots—sometimes
with a greenish hue. In the decoration great
delicacy of shape and feeling is prominent. The figures
are laid on with anatomical accuracy. The limiting
frame is dispensed with, giving ampler scope to a
freer and still more connected ornamentation. The
curves are less protruding, and the transition from185
concave to convex lines is gentler. The canon of this
period, that the vessel had to form in all its parts
one continuous line, rendered these products sometimes
stiff and over-regulated. The influence of the progress
in the Attic style, however, soon corrected this
evil, and the potters of Greece vied with the very
best sculptors and painters in beautiful works.
The Asiatic types of winged or unwinged monsters
were merely used as grotesque or comical friezes,
and soon began to disappear altogether, to make
room for some useful animal, and, finally, to give
place to frets or garlands of the most beautiful combinations.
For the monstrous creations of an overheated
imagination, heroes, gods, and goddesses were
substituted. Perseus destroying Medusa; the Forge of
Hephaistos; a triclinium with Herakles and Alkmene,
Hermes and Athene; diskoboli and their teachers;
Aphrodite at her toilette; Ares, Herakles, Athene,
and Zeus driven in their quadrigas by Nikê;
Elektra at the tomb of Agamemnon; Aphrodite
crossing the sea on a swan; the blind Chiron healed
by Apollo; the weighing of Cupids—‘young loves
for sale;’ and rows of well-sketched warriors, representing
the victories of valour, beauty, and honesty
over barbaric roughness, dishonesty, and despotism,
form the subjects of pictorial ornamentation. What
an immense field for the student of art to peruse, to
fill his imagination with lively classical scenes!
II. The polychromatic style took its origin in the186
very first attempts in pottery, when white pipe-clay
was painted over. The colours used were red, violet,
and yellow oxides of iron. At the period when
marble was introduced in architecture, and ivory in
sculpture, during the middle of the fifth century B.C., we
find these highly-coloured and richly-decorated vases.
The paste was very fine, originally white, and the
colouring encaustic. Not only mineral pigments and
metallic oxides, but also vegetable colours, requiring
only a very slow fire, were known and used. The
encaustic consisted of a polychromatic paste more or
less opaque, containing, in addition to wax, also flint,
whether as principal or secondary element it is difficult
to decide. This polychromatic treatment is to
be observed on some smaller vessels, and vases known
under the name of Lekythus (with a narrow mouth),
and on saucers of large dimensions, the outsides
having reddish figures on black grounds, and the
insides, coloured figures on white grounds. Pottery
led to fashioning in clay, and this to modelling in
bronze and sculpture.
Architecture took its origin in religion, as also did
sculpture. Opposed to the inorganic, objective productions
of human intellect, as embodied in architecture,
is spirit aspiring to a subjective existence in
sculpture. The inorganic sternness of architecture is
far surpassed by plastic art, which embodies spirit in
a less fixed form. Spirit is not yet absolutely free,
for it requires a tangible body to show its existence.187
Unlike music and painting, which by a mere movement
of the air, or a mixture of tints, produce bodies,
plastic art has to fill the three dimensions of space,
and does this by means of coarse matter—with clay,
wood, bronze, or stone.
Sculpture stands higher in the scale of art than
architecture, for it is not obliged to transform inorganic
matter for a utilitarian purpose.
At a certain period the Greeks were contented
with shapeless divinities; a pointed stone, a square
piece of wood, the deformed root of a tree, a pillar
with a circular finish, or a cone, sufficed for their
piety. Even Plato indulged in the untenable proposition
that art was mere mimicry, and therefore
a falsehood, and detrimental to virtue; as truth
ought to be the only aim of humanity. The Beautiful
with Plato was a mere abstraction, applicable exclusively
to the absolute ‘good’; artistic beauty was
looked down upon by him as something bad and
altogether objectionable. The Kynic and Kyrenæic
schools held to a certain degree the opinions of Plato.
The Kynics said that anything good was beautiful—anything
bad ugly; whilst the Kyrenæics propounded
that everything beautiful must be good—anything
ugly must be bad; and in this way the
notions, good and bad, beautiful and ugly, changed
places. This dialectic difference led at last to Aristotle’s
deeper appreciation of art.
Aristotle, who rarely started from pre-conceived,188
à priori ideas, but attached his deep reasonings and
admirable inductions to something tangible and really
existent, pronounced, in opposition to the idealistic
Plato, more correct thoughts on art. Imitation,
mimicry (μίμησις {mimêsis}), is with him the subjective formation
or creation of an idea, and therefore a process far
superior to that of imperfect reality; in fact it is a
sublimated, idealised representation and reproduction
of reality. Next to the ‘mimesis’ he required purification
from all passion (κάθαρσις {katharsis}) to be the aim and
purpose of art. Genius and imagination were the
means by which alone a work of art could be produced.
The principal element in every work of art
was with him ἦθος {êthos}, and wherever Ethos, the ethic or
moral principle, was wanting, the product failed to
be artistic in the highest sense of the word.
The development of Greek sculpture has borne
out the sublime views of Aristotle on art. As soon
as the merely naturalistic and sensational began to
rule supreme, the Katharsis was neglected, the Ethic
no longer swayed works of art, and the Antique died
out.
The priests at Delphos, at a time when Greece
abounded with the most exquisite Apollo-statues,
still held to a pointed pillar as the emblem of the
god of wisdom and the leader of the muses. Anthropomorphism
was long opposed by the hierarchy of
Delphi, but they encouraged the artists to produce
beautiful vessels, tripods, lamps, sacrificial basins, &c.,189
which had to be made according to certain prescribed
forms. By degrees the Asiatic idea ‘that God
created man in his own image’ was inverted by the
Greeks, ‘and man began to create the gods in his
own image.’ This one sentence embodies the cause
of the progressive development of Greek sculpture on
the one hand, and the ever-stationary forms of the
East on the other. The Greeks had also idols that
dropped from heaven, puppet-like forms or symbolic
carvings, like the Artemis of Ephesus or the four-armed
Apollo of the Lakedemonians, reminding us
of Vishnu.
The discoveries at Athens, Kyprus, and most
recently at Hassarlik by Dr. Schliemann, prove the
gradual and slow progress of Greek sculpture in all
its different phases. The first Parthenon, destroyed
by the Persians, was adorned with divinities entirely
different in shape from those which surrounded it
after it had been rebuilt 444 B.C. The dresses,
ornamentations, jewels, and pearls are of Assyro-Egyptian
and Indo-Persian patterns. The faces of
the divinities show far more of the Turanian than
of the Aryan type. The eyes are protruding, the
cheek-bones high, the drapery is extremely stiff, the
anatomy doll-like, and the features bear a kind of
repulsive grin. In the gigantic, rock-hewn bull, near
Smyrna, we have a proof that the Indian Nundi and
the Egyptian Apis must have had their worshippers
in Greece.
190
Of Daidalos it is reported that he was the first
who improved upon these symbolic carvings. He
made winking gods and walking images by means
of mechanical contrivances. He is said to have
been a contemporary of Theseus; both belong therefore
to the mythical period. Though a statue of
Herakles, holding in his right arm a club, whilst his
left extended bears a lion’s skin as a shield, is
attributed to him; and though Homer mentions
Daidalos, of Krete, as having wrought a dance in
metal for Ariadne, which formed the model for that
wrought by Hephaistos on the shield of Achilles;
the fact that the very word to ‘embellish’ is taken
from his name, points less to a distinct person than
to the period in which Greek art began to free itself
from Asiatic bondage.
The historical periods into which we may group
Greek sculpture correspond to those of their architecture.
First period, from the 8th century B.C. to the
Persian wars, 470 B.C.
Second period, from Kimon to the end of the
Peloponnesian war, 470 B.C.-400 B.C.
Third period, from the delivery of Athens to the
conquest of Greece by the Romans, 400 B.C.-146 B.C.
This third period comprises Greek sculpture in its
decline.
Struggle into existence, growth and development,
acme and decline, follow in rapid succession. Wood-191carvers
and potters begin; then we have a transition
to bronze-works under Glaukos, who was the first to
solder the separate parts of the statues, which prior to
him had been always beaten into union. Following up
this improvement, the artists of Samos succeeded in
making a clay-model, and then in covering it with
the fluid metal. As if by a supernatural charm the
bright metal statue grew out of the gloomy clay, and
formed an everlasting monument to adorn temples,
squares, and streets. Rhœkos and Theodorus of
Samos, with Smilis, built the Labyrinth at Lemnos,
which they adorned with 150 columns, which were
turned out by an ingenious mechanism, an improvement
on the art of casting in bronze. Pliny describes
a bronze figure by Theodorus, which held in its right
hand a file, and in its left a quadriga with a charioteer,
which was so small that the car, with the four horses
and the driver, could be covered by the wing of a
fly. The celebrated ring of Polykrates, admirably
wrought gold and silver sacrificial vessels, and a vine
with golden leaves and grapes of precious stones, were
also attributed to this artist. At Chios, the birth-place
of Glaukos, the family of Mêlas worked for the
first time in Parian marble; whilst Byzes of Naxos
cut marble into thin slabs for architectural purposes,
giving a more exquisite finish to the houses of the
gods. On every side a marked improvement took
place. The head-dress of Apollo was still that of
the Egyptian sphinx. The faces of the statues were192
placid, mask-like, as if modelled separately and then
fixed on; the eyes looked as if first cut out, and then
placed into their sockets; but the anatomy of the body
was treated with greater care and a more refined feeling.
The legs were close together and the arms hung down
perpendicularly, with a prescribed stiffness, but there
were details in the treatment of the stone surface, which
promised well for the future of Greek art, and the
promise was most faithfully kept.
The struggling art freed itself from the fetters of
stern canons. Custom, struck by the lightning of
genius, had to vanish, and life, truth, and beauty
as essential elements ruled the Greek mind. To
blend the isolated perfections of the two sexes into
one became the aim of Greek art. Women were
sculptured with the colder lines of manly firmness,
and men received gentler forms through a less angular
treatment. The artists conscientiously purified their
works from all passions and second thoughts, expressing
nothing that could divert the mind from the simple
admiration of idealised nature. At this period they
only succeeded in animating the limbs of their statues:
action was expressed with great power in strained
muscles and swelling veins. The faces were still
without life, and without a comprehension of those
emotions which vibrate electrically in the countenances
of excited humanity. They could not yet petrify the
thinking soul, but they undoubtedly already succeeded
in sculpturing the animated body to perfection.
193
The second period was ushered in by the versatile
and productive talents of Onatas, Ageladas, Kalamis,
Iphikrates, Pythagoras of Regium, and Myron.
Greece had attained her independence, the Persian
hordes of despotism were vanquished, and Athens
enjoyed her hegemony. Freedom and national
exultation produced Sokrates, Plato, and Anaxagoras
in philosophy; Kimon, Perikles, and Themistokles
in politics; Æschylus, Sophokles, and
Euripides in dramatic poetry; and Pheidias, Praxiteles,
and Skopas in sculpture. If we add to
this fourfold triad Herodotus, Thukydides, and
Xenophon, we have given an array of names each
of which singly would have filled the world with its
fame, and become a landmark in the progressive
development of humanity. Athens was at this
period the most brilliant centre of intellectual and
artistic life. Men were inspired by the general
animation; they began to modify old thoughts, to
transform eîdola, and to give birth to numberless
productions which in beauty and striving for truth
surpassed anything attempted before. Schools of
arts vied with the schools of wrestlers, poets, and
thinkers, and all excited the dramatists to their
grand conceptions, which again reacted on plastic
art. Under these influences the imaginary theogony
yielded to a more scientific inquiry into the origin
of all things, which led to the recognition of the first
incomprehensible, immutable, eternal cause, no longer194
based on mere belief, but on the immovable rock of
scientific conviction. No wonder that art was also
inspired by this spiritual movement. The conceptions
of the priests and philosophers were to be loudly
proclaimed in visible forms, and the sculptor, from a
deep feeling of veneration for the Supreme Artist of
the Universe, became the expounder of the divinity,
and the exclusive high priest of beauty and truth.
Instead of singing Vedantic hymns or Egyptian
psalms and litanies to the glory of God, the Greek
sculptors hewed the gods in majestic forms, and every
touch of their chisels on the lifeless marble, every
blow of their hammers, became an eternally resounding
prayer in honour of God.
Wood, metal, clay, precious stones, and marble
had by degrees yielded to the creative power of the
Greek masters; and matter could no longer resist in
any way their ruling intellectual force. At this moment,
under these circumstances, Pheidias, the son of Charmides
of Athens, the pupil of Hegias and Ageladas,
stepped forward, and was raised by the superiority of
his genius to the dignity of king of Greek plastic
art. The Zeus of Olympia and the Athene of the
Parthenon qualified Pheidias as the sculptor of the concrete
form of the divinity; for if the father of the gods
had had a visible form, and his wisdom and intellect
had been incarnate in Athene, both must have looked
as they were sculptured by Pheidias. In symbolic emblems
he poetically expressed the powers of the two195
divinities; and used the mineral, the vegetable, and
animal kingdoms to glorify their power.
Nothing is left us of these two master-pieces but
the glowing descriptions of those who saw and admired
them. That which a combination of thousands
of our artists, with all our technical advancement, can
scarcely accomplish; the drawing of thousands and
thousands of intellectual human beings together to
admire their works of art; was done by Pheidias.
Men flocked from all parts of the world to see and
admire his statues, and to offer fervent thanks to the
Father of all for having endowed one of his creatures
with the power to give a correct form to Homer’s
lines:
We possess in the Vatican a copy of the original
head of the Jupiter, and what a master-piece even
this bad copy is! What a power in the bold, arched
brows; the large eyes with their benevolent, forgiving,
and yet commanding glance; the full, parted
lips ready to bless and to forgive; the luxuriant
beard, the mighty locks inspiring veneration, and the
beautifully-rounded cheeks, expressive of creative
force and eternal manly beauty! The independent
works of Pheidias were very numerous. Besides the
two colossal divinities of bronze (Athene Promachos,196
50 feet high, and Athene ἡ Λημνία {hê Lêmnia}), we find twelve
others mentioned: of these, six were statues of Athene;
one colossal Apollo of bronze, 70 feet high; one
marble Hermes; three of Aphrodite (two of marble,
and one of ivory and gold); a mother of the gods,
material unknown; and an Asklepios (Æsculapius) of
gold and ivory. Of sacrificial statues, a group of
thirteen bronze figures, in commemoration of the
victory of Marathon, is mentioned as having been
executed by him. In this work twelve mythical
characters surrounded one historical figure—that of
Miltiades; a proof that the Greeks attributed their
victory far more to the help of the gods than to the
exertions of their leaders. They were much more
inclined to adorn the courts of their temples and
their public places with the statues of orators, wrestlers,
poets, artists, and philosophers, than with those
of men who, in defending their country against invading
hordes of barbarians, did their duty and nothing
more. What a scope for our artists if we were to
adorn our town-halls, courts of justice, our museums,
universities, academies, public places, and churches
with the statues of those who had devoted their
energies to religion, oratory, science, art, politics, and
the general welfare of their country! If gratitude
were to prompt us to do this, and not childish vanity
or egotistical pride, we should shortly have many
Pantheons with excellent sculptures.
In no town in Europe can the artist study the197
sculptural splendour of ancient Greece with greater
ease than in London. Of the ninety-two metopes
which adorned the Parthenon on the Akropolis at
Athens we possess seventeen; of the frieze of the
cella 3–1/5 feet high and 524 feet long, representing
the Panathenaic procession, we possess fifty-three
plates and casts of the whole western side. In
all these sculptures what a clear power of grouping,
what a variety of characters, what handsome men
and women! The flower of Athens is seen assembled
to do homage in joyous excitement to the supreme
divinity of the State, the embodiment of wisdom and
intellect. Some are crowned with wreaths; others
carry sun-shades, chairs, splendid pitchers, ornamented
vases, or decorated pateras; some are ready to
start; others, preparing in animated haste to take their
places, are in the act of mounting their prancing
horses, or, already mounted, eagerly await the arrival
of their friends. On the eastern side, under the entrance
to the temple, there was an admirable group of
gods and goddesses, in whose presence peplus, or
sacred veil, is delivered to the authorities of the
temple; animals are led to be sacrificed—flute and
kythara-players follow. Amongst the hundreds and
hundreds of figures not one is like the other; the
exquisite variety in the folds of the dresses of the
sitting, standing, walking, riding, driving groups is in
general unsurpassed for beauty of design, and perfection
of execution. None of the figures are raised198
more than three inches from the background, and yet
the most correct perspective is observed. There is
such a softness and truthfulness, such a firmness and
ideal vitality in this frieze, that we may at least
attribute the composition to Pheidias himself. Some
plates of the western side are less excellent in execution;
the forms are marked with roughness and
dryness, and some faults in the outlines are also
apparent to the critic. Some of the horses have legs
too long, and bodies too thin; in one of the horses,
which is bending its neck to rub its head against one
of its fore feet, the curves are much too stiff. The
execution of these reliefs must have been left to some
inferior artist. What we must admire is, that there
are so few faults. The correct study of this frieze
ought to serve us as an example in grouping, and
would teach us how to arrange a marble strip round
some monument for the sake of decoration. Little of
this influence, however, is to be observed in our
sculptors. We intend to evolve sculpture from our own
inner consciousness, and neglect these ancient books
with their glorious poems in Pentelic marble; we
prefer ‘going to nature’ as the popular phrase runs,
and ignore or despise the study of the antique.
Now the Greeks had an opportunity of going to real
nature—not with the darkened eye of Asiatic prejudice,
despising matter and exalting spirit—but
with a prejudice in the very opposite direction, cultivating
spirit only so far as it served to embellish and199
to reproduce form. In this they attained perfection,
and to surpass them in sculpture is after all impossible;
we can only try to equal them, and to learn from
what they have left us, to produce other combinations.
In this spirit we ought to study the nine figures from
the eastern pediment of the Parthenon, in the British
Museum. What forms, what exquisite drapery! The
finest tissue of pliable stuff is reproduced in hard
Pentelic marble. The drapery disguises, and at the
same time reveals, the beautiful forms of the human
frame. Softness and sensationalism were equally
avoided by Pheidias and his school. The study of
anatomy was not yet degraded to coarse realism. It
was not yet the aim of Greek sculptors to distort the
human body so as to exhibit expanded muscles, over-strained
sinews, and swelling veins, as expressions of
pain, grief, distress, or contortions of the death-agony.
Anatomy served Pheidias as a mould, into which he
poured his beautiful conceptions—the spiritualised
forms of gods and men. Katharsis was the principle
of his school. The very heights of perfection were
reached by Pheidias, Polykletus, and Alkemenes.
Gods and goddesses were the subjects of their chisels.
They were not only the high-priests of art—but inspired
prophets, to whom divine beauty was revealed
in all its brightness and splendour.
The existence of the Greek State was suddenly
shaken to its very foundation. Internal dissensions
weakened the safety of the citizens; sophistry destroyed200
philosophy, and mannerism grasped Greek
art, dragged it down from its heights of idealised
beauty and hurled it into the abyss of sensational
realism. The best specimen of this school is the
frieze from the temple of Apollo at Bassæ, near
Phigalia in Arkadia. (Found 1812, now in the
British Museum.) It represents Kentaurs fighting
with Amazons. The old Indian Ghandarvas, the
moist and heavy clouds that hinder the sun from
breaking forth in all his glory, and are conquered by
his fiery shafts, became in time monsters, half-men,
half-horses, fighting against loveliness and civilisation.
The Amazons in this instance represent fair Greece
rushing into civil strife. Passion is predominant in
action and expression. Amazons are dragged by
the hair and by the legs from their horses; a Kentaur
is seen biting a warrior in the shoulder. Bold naturalism
and vulgar realism go hand-in-hand in these
sculptures. How sensitive art is—how faithfully it
reflects the social condition of a nation! and the feelings
by which the artists were pervaded may be studied
in this frieze. The nude is treated with exquisite
truthfulness, but there is heaviness in the sudden, too
violent movements. Action and expression lose the
balance of the symmetrical. The women are common;
their drapery floating and yet stiff, deranged for the
sake of effect. The artists worked no more with love
and security. The political party spirit troubled
their imagination. The chisel trembled with rage201
or fear, with hatred or passion, in their hands; they
saw prophetically the national downfall of their
country, and with it science, art, poetry, and philosophy
were to be rendered for thousands of years
houseless and homeless.
Once more art revived under Skopas, Praxiteles,
and Lysippus, but in a totally different shape. Greece
had lost through her civil war the proper balance
between her moral and intellectual forces. Simplicity
and refinement of thought had vanished. In
literature metaphors prevailed; in politics Aristides
had to yield to the double-tongued Alkibiades; in
tragedy Sophokles was superseded by Euripides;
in sculpture the immortal Pheidias was followed by
Praxiteles. The national spirit of the Greeks, inspired
by common interests, swayed by the very
highest aspirations in arts and sciences, suddenly collapsed
into a narrow-minded, particularising egotism.
Tribes cared only for tribes, parties for parties. The
public buildings began to be neglected, whilst the
private dwellings gained in ornamentation and
comfort, what was denied to the grand national
enterprises. The public places were no longer adorned
with the statues of those who had gained the general
approbation of the masses. The artist, doubtful
whom to please, tried to please everyone, or to
satisfy the individual fancy of a paying patron. Art
was no more the chaste virgin sacrificing to beauty,
but became a courtesan seeking general and special202
favour at all hazards. The divinities were no more
the representations of a spiritual eîdolon, but a glowing
sentiment of sensual love was poured over their
frames; they were no longer ideal conceptions in
marble, but beautiful flesh forms in stone or
bronze. They lost all generalisation, they were more
correct in the anatomical outlines, but a passionate
sentiment of sensuality thrilled through every
point. Kephisodotus (the elder), probably the father
of Praxiteles, embodied the change in Greek
thought in a beautiful group. Eirene (peace) fondles
the child Pluton (riches)—a splendid allegorical representation
of the political condition of Greece at
this time. ‘Let us put an end to our quarrels; let
us have peace, and enjoy life once more.’
Skopas, born on the island of Paros, expressed
the modern flow of ideas in Greece with greater
clearness. Violent scenes of deadly struggle filled
the pediments of the temple of Athene Alea at
Tegea. In front, the hunt of the Kalydonian boar
by Herakles, at the back Achilles fighting with
Telephos was represented. An under-current of
thought, a kind of allegory, may be traced in this
composition, for the boar to be hunted was the
opposition. Art was no longer to exalt the mind
unconditionally, but to fulfil another purpose—to irritate,
to excite to hatred, and to arouse passion; thus
placed, art must lose its civilising influence, and it
did this step by step. Even the divinities sculptured203
by Skopas were not to inspire veneration, but to
please by little allegorical additions; his Apollo
(Smintheus) stood on a mouse; Apollo, the leader of
the muses, the representative of vivifying light in art,
science, and the universe, degraded to a beautiful
‘mouse-killer.’ Aphrodite, the mother of humanity,
was sculptured sitting on a goat—the vilest emblem
of passion in union with the purest eîdolon of tender
love. Another Apollo was represented in the long
waving robes of an elegant Grecian lady playing the
lyre; this was still more objectionable. Though the
drapery excites our admiration by its exquisite softness
and finish, the statue appears to have been
chiselled to show the artist’s skill in carving a heap
of waving drapery. Whenever art condescends to
such tricks it is on the high-road to degradation.
Skopas composed a splendid group for a pediment,
representing Achilles receiving from his mother the
arms forged by Hephaistos. The principal figures
are Thetis, the queen of the bright green waves,
Poseidon, and Achilles; they are surrounded by a
crowd of Nereids and Tritons, all in harmonious
arrangement. Richer in grouping are some marble
reliefs (now in the Glyptothek at Münich), representing
the wedding of Poseidon and Amphitrite.
The mother of the bride, Doris, is seated on a Hippokamp
(sea-horse), holding two torches towards the
couple; Tritons play on shells and lyres a merry
wedding tune. Nereids surround them. One rides204
on a sea-bull, led by a mischievous-looking Eros,
standing on its left fore-foot; another, mounted on a
fantastic sea-monster, is accompanied by another, borne
by a Triton; other Nereids follow, pointing towards
the principal group, one sitting on a Hippokamp,
with an Eros on its curled tail; a dragon carrying a
Nereid is led with self-conscious pride by another
Eros, whilst a Triton carries another sea-nymph on
his winding body with placid and contented looks.
The composition in general, and in all its details,
is perfect. Without over-crowding the allotted space,
it could not be better filled up. There is a striking
freedom in the lines, and lively contrast of forms.
We may consider this relief the prototype of all
those fantastic compositions of the pure renaissance
style, in which we see dragons and monsters, bulls
and horses, entwined with plants and flowers, nymphs
and gods, everything real and imaginary, beautiful
and graceful, united into one great dissonant
harmony. Skopas was the first (so far as we know)
who sculptured Venus in the full beauty of her nude
body. Pheidias would have considered such a treatment
of the mother of mankind blasphemy. In a
group of Eros, Himeros, and Pothos (Love, Longing,
and Desire), we find a classification of a general
feeling into three distinct subdivisions, executed with
conscious discernment in order to produce a sensational
effect. A raving Bacchante appears to rush
away with dishevelled hair, in flowing robes; the head205
is thrown backwards in delirious delight; the marble
lives and breathes maddening joy, but is vivified with
sensual feelings, and not inspired with the elevating
spirit of artistic simplicity and purity.
Of this period we may study another master-piece
in the British Museum; the frieze of the tomb of
Mausolos at Halikarnassus. The greater part is in
London and the remainder at Genoa. The subject
is a battle between Greeks and Amazons. The composition
is nearly as good as that on the Parthenon.
There is a continuous symmetrical stream of action
and reaction, as in the dashing waves of a stormy
sea. Skopas worked the eastern, Bryaxis the
northern, Timeotheos the southern, and Leochares the
western side. Many mistakes may be found in the
details, but the whole is a master-piece of manly
thought;—it may be said to have been the last manly
product of the period.
Praxiteles altogether turned the scale; Aphrodite,
Demeter, Persephone, Flora, Eros, Dionysius,
and Apollo, are the divinities mostly sculptured by
him. Everything is smooth, young, and effeminate.
All harshness of line is avoided, all loftier ideas discarded.
The flesh become stone is placed before us
in charming and full roundness. Aphrodite was no
longer draped—but with the concealing drapery the
higher conception of the divinity fled. Venus, conscious
of her charms, with a smile on her lips, and a
coquettish movement of her hand, sinks to the level206
of an every-day woman. Venus had eaten of the tree
of knowledge; with the consciousness of her particular
womanly charms the ideal of divine universality was
gone.
We possess of Praxiteles, an Eros in the Vatican,
and his celebrated Apollo with the lizard (Saurokthonos)
in the Louvre. Both these statues are more
women than men. The lines are too soft; the bodies
as though without muscles or bones, composed only
of flesh and fat. It is true that the older artists also
softened down the too marked lines of the sexes, and
in blending them together created ideal forms of
beauty; but now the mere surface of the woman’s
body was used for both sexes, to affect the senses
exclusively.
Three groups (the one probably for the pediment
of a temple, the other two forming independent works
of art) deserve special mention.
The group of Niobe and her dying children,
attributed to Skopas or Praxiteles. Greece was fast
sinking. Niobe-Greece sees her children struck down
one after the other by the inexorable decree of the gods,
who are bent on punishing the proud mother who only
cared for the outward beauty of her children, and
neglected their moral inner grandeur. Niobe, amidst
a harmonious confusion of misery and endless woe,
stands erect, and presses the youngest child to herself,
turning her proud looks upwards, her eyes filled with
tears of heroic resignation—for she knows the gods207
have willed her downfall, and their will is unalterable.
This moment of agony, of mental rather than bodily
suffering, makes the group a master-piece of antique
beauty and grandeur.
This cannot be said of the sensational Laokoön,
the joint work of Agesander, Athenodorus, and Polydoros
(of which there is a copy in the Vatican), and
the so-called ‘Farnese Bull,’ the joint work of Apollonios
and Tauriskos (a copy of which exists in the
museum at Naples). Bodily anguish is the dominating
element in these two groups. If it were the
province of art to depress the soul, and to fill us with
pain and horror, nothing could surpass the technical
skill with which these two are arranged.
In the first we have:—
1. In the father a stifled death scream.
2. In the younger son, to the right, the last convulsions
of a dying boy.
3. In the elder son, to the left, an unbounded horror
at witnessing the frightful death of father and brother.
There is no psychological necessity in this group
to indemnify us for the pathological and anatomical
truthfulness of so great an amount of horrible suffering.
Art has never to serve as a hospital ward, and
to force us to witness the contortions of a poor family
dying poisoned by strychnine or arsenic. Not less
objectionable is the revenge of a mother and her two
sons on a defenceless woman. In this group we
have:—
208
1. The horror-stricken, half-dying, half-imploring
look of poor Dirkê.
2. The merciless glance of the jealous Antiope,
wrapt in placid satisfaction to see herself revenged on
her rival.
3. The ferocious anger of the two passionate sons;
and, lastly,
4. The wild look of the furious bull, ready to dash
the beautiful frame of a frail woman to pieces. Dramatic
justice is here meted out by the artist in a most
revolting way. A bull is called in to help to punish;
it is the vulgarity of the cruel revenge that degrades
the technically masterly work of art. The free
grouping of marble statues is one of the most difficult
tasks, and was never attempted during the classic
period of ancient art. A mixture of men and animals
is even more to be avoided.
As soon as the gods of Egypt changed their
architectural and monumental position, they lost
their sway over the superstitious masses; as soon as
the Greeks lost that balance of morality, which, in the
form of the beautiful, regulated their life, science, and
art, they lost at the same time their productive power.
Form and idea as in Asia came into conflict; the
formal had attained the extreme of perfection, and
the new ideas had not yet ripened.
Art was either to touch the feelings or to speak to
reason—it was to be based on a mere imitation of
nature, or to be the expression of some thought in209
some form. This ‘either,’—‘or,’—or this ‘neither,’—‘nor,’
which divided art-critics during this period,
made an end of art altogether. The Asiatics rent the
universe asunder with conflicting abstractions based
on the phenomena of nature; the Greeks lost their
power, when they once recognised that there was
something higher than the mere form. A new sphere
was felt to open new spiritual beauties—but this
sphere was to be attained through totally different
means. The formal was however so highly developed
by the Greeks that we shall see the new spirit, after
more than a thousand years, become incarnate in those
forms.
We see then clearly that art, the product of the
creative force of men, requires a certain moral and
intellectual condition, under which alone it can actively
live. Change the moral temperature through the
superstitions of a terrified populace, the aspect of
nature, the despotic organisation of government, or
the rule of a wild, uneducated mob, and the artistic
force will also change or die out altogether. The
artist acts only to a certain degree on the public; the
public reacts with a greater combined vis inertiæ on
the artist, who is merely the reflection of certain
ideas floating in the intellectual atmosphere around
him. Is a man who sees nothing but emaciated,
beggarly, or sanctimonious faces, thin limbs, hungry
looks, dwellings bare of all domestic comfort, decayed
brick-houses and crumbling walls, to paint convivial210
scenes of happiness and joy? Or let him change this
atmosphere and live in a sphere of so-called respectability;
having always the same bland smile before
him, the same trimmed whiskers, the same business-like
self-contentment, the same stiff collars and cuffs;
hearing the same stereotyped, insignificant phrases
about the weather or the funds, the price of coals or
meat—will he, influenced by such an atmosphere, not
draw or paint only caricatures, and never grand and
heart-stirring historical paintings, recording in glowing
colours scenes full of life, excitement, passion,
and dramatic action? In such surroundings it is
necessary for an artist to create for himself a world of
his own—an intellectual world—by turning to the
glorious records of the past, and devoting every
spare hour to the study of the ancients and the reading
of history. His imagination, deadened by reality,
must be fed and nourished by the poets, poetry,
works of art, and historical facts of the past. Our
meagreness and poverty in artistic productions take
their origin in our unpardonable neglect of the study
of history; through this neglect we have deprived art
altogether of its firmest basis.
The very moment that the Greek artists lost their
historical and poetical ground, they took to and excelled
in painting barbers’ and shoemakers’ shops;
oyster shells, vases, little combinations of chairs and
musical instruments, and small things, with great
accuracy. In fact the same causes produced the same211
pictorial effects; the mind of the Greek nation had
dwindled, and their works of art embraced decorations
of household furniture and pottery. In these ornamentations
the reminiscences of a by-gone age may
be traced; they are still symmetrical to the highest
degree, plants are still treated with great conventional
freedom, but the Greeks only worked as skilful workmen—artists
they produced no more.
212
The first question that here suggests itself is, who
were the Etruskans? Their name Tuskan, from Tuisko,
points at once to an Aryan branch of Teutonic race.
But ethnologists differ. Some say they were Phœnicians,
others assert they were Egyptians; some that
they were pure Teutons, and others that they were
pure Kelts. Taking their old pottery into consideration,
as given in Lord Hamilton’s admirable plates,
or in the collection of the Museum at Clusium
(Chiusi), we are induced to pronounce the aborigines
of Etruria to have been Turanians, conquered by
immigrant Aryans. This mixture of Aryans and
Mongols under the influence of a totally different
aspect of nature, on a different soil, under different
social and religious conditions, produced a type quite
different from the Greek—a kind of transition link
between the Pelasgians and the Romans.
Two distinct immigrations of Aryans into Etruria
are recorded. The first about 1650 B.C., when Pelasgians
and Thyrrenians settled amongst the aborigines;213
and the second, 400 years before Herodotus, about
the times of Thales and Lykurgus. Of the first immigration
we have scarcely any relics; the second time
the immigrants succeeded in forming an organised
social state; they brought with them Greek mythological
notions, and a kind of Greek writing. Their
language and writing died out after Augustus, and disappeared
altogether before Julian, fourth century A.D.
Nature forced them to industry and enterprise. The
Etruskans had to cultivate their fields by individual
exertion; in spring they had to ward off the devastating
waters of overflowing rivers, and in summer
they had to provide water for their parched valleys.
They consequently became masters in constructing
aqueducts and irrigating the land, at an early period.
Their mythology was composed of Assyrian,
Persian, and Egyptian notions, strongly tinged with
gloomy superstitions. Petrifactions of the most
astonishing forms abound in the plains where they
settled. Near Cortona the bones of a whale have been
found. The Arno valley resembles a vast elephant
burial-place; and the bones of the mastodon, rhinoceros,
and hippopotamus, are scattered broadcast
all over old Etruria, and are still used to fence in the
fields. Besides the bones of these huge monsters,
those of hyænas, panthers, bears, and wolves are
found in such abundance, that the peasants to this
very day believe they grew like mushrooms over
night, having been sown by invisible spirits to give214
the poor the trouble of picking them up. The aspect
of nature and the remains of an antediluvian world
gave the Etruskan priesthood an irresistible sway
over the minds of the people. Whilst in Greece, under
the influence of a happy aspect of nature, the Indian,
Assyrian, and Egyptian embodiments of the forces of
nature lost their fearful forms; in Etruria they gained
even more gloomy and melancholy figures in the
presence of everlasting thunder and lightning, and
volcanic disturbances.
The Etruskans had two sets of gods.
a. The veiled gods, with ‘Asar’ at their head,
representing the cosmognical forces of nature; especially
fire, water, earth, and ether, like the divinities
of India and Egypt.
b. Twelve lower divinities presiding over the order
of existing and visible things. Their gods have a
great resemblance to those of the Scandinavians,
uniting in one distinct chain the Aryans on the Ganges,
those on the Nile, and those round the Delphic
oracle, with the Hyperboreans of the farthest north.
They all believed in an ‘inferno,’ only with the Greeks
this was an Elysium, a land of shadows, a land of
happiness. The divinities of the Etruskans were phantoms
of horror. The whole of their creed was devoid
of a comforting union between gods and men. This
despairing faith impressed the people with a ferocious
character. Their art under such impressions never
could reach the beautiful. A tribe of whom it has215
been said that their priests attacked the Romans with
hissing serpents and burning torches—a tribe that
crouched in fear before invisible gods, and hated every
other tribe—could never take an interest in the gentler
emotions produced by poetry or art. They remembered
the Greek expedition against Thebes, and
adorned their burial urns with scenes from the battle
at Marathon; they commemorated the heroic deed of
a ploughman, who, in the midst of the battle, took up
his plough and drove the Persians before him like a
flock of frightened sheep, whilst the Greeks remembered
the deed in mentioning Echetlos in connection
with Marathon, but possessed no record of the fact on
any of their monuments. The Etruscans, however,
delighted in such scenes. At their funerals they had
no dances, but sanguinary fights.
No less than twelve different thunderbolts were
known to them. They believed in a thunderbolt of
prophecy, one of authority, one of law, one of wish,
one of admonition, one of approval, one of help, one
of prosperity, one of falsehood, one of plague, one of
threats, and one of murder. Every transaction in life,
with the best or the worst of mankind, might have
been accompanied by an approving or disapproving
thunder-clap. They firmly believed the thunderbolts
used by the Supreme Deity were all manufactured
in the fiery interior of Mount Ætna. They possessed
no ritual of the dead like the Egyptians, but a
thunderbolt ritual. Every day of the year that216
brought thunder had its special signification. All
the veiled gods, and nine of the secondary gods, had
the power of thundering.
Their conception of angry, jealous, persecuting,
thundering, and lightning divinities has much in
common with the Jewish and Phœnician ideals of
the Supreme Deity. This peculiarity the Northerns
shared in their conception of Thor. The Etruskan
belief, that aërolites were thunderbolts sent by the
angels against the Titans, has a great analogy with
the Persian legends assuming these to have been
hurled by the Fervers against the Devas.
Their superior divinities are, like the kings or
priests of Persia, Assyria, and Babylon, provided with
wings. Jupiter, Diana, Minerva (a kind of female
Mercury with the Etruskans, who had wings not only
on her shoulders, but also on her feet) and Venus
were all winged; others, like Proserpina (Persephone),
Amor (Eros), and the Furies, had wings on their heads.
White and black winged genii (angels and demons)
are plentiful in the subterranean tombs of the old
Etruskan town, Tarquinium. According to Dempster,
their cars even are often provided with wings.
What was a metaphor with the Greeks was turned
by the Etruskans into matter-of-fact. Euripides
in his ‘Orestes’ speaks of the winged car of Phœbus,
and on some Eleusian coins Ceres is seen sitting
in a winged car, drawn by two serpents.
From a gloomy contemplation of supernatural217
matters the Etruskans turned their minds to extremely
worldly and practical purposes. They wished
to secure their towns and to protect them against real
and imaginary monsters, and they constructed excellent
walls and most comfortable houses. The
‘cavœdium’ (‘cavum œdium’), with the impluvium
and compluvium (the one for collecting and the other
for preserving water), was altogether an Etruskan
invention, and was called by the Romans who adopted
it, Tuscanicum. They constructed temples differing
only in some details from those of the Greeks. The
cella was generally square; sometimes they had more
than one cella; one in the Postica and one in the
Antica (the rear and front of the temple). The
portico was often filled with columns. The architectural
style was a rough and primitive Doric. They
never attained the majestic simplicity which distinguished
this order in Greece. The columns had a
base, were more slender (about fourteen moduli), stood
more apart, and supported a wooden roof with
clumsily-protruding beams, an unwieldy cornice, and
a high pediment.
Cinerary chests they had in abundance with
divinities on them, worked in reliefs of a decidedly
Egyptian type. They used brazen tablets representing
Osiris and Isis. Little clay figures were put into the
graves to protect the dead. Amongst these has been
found a winged Harpokrates or Horus, with the fore-218finger
of one hand on his lips, a lotus on his head,
and a cornucopia in his other hand.
Their ancient pottery is more in the Egyptian than
the Greek style. Their jars represent sphinxes and
women; their drinking cups are in the form of human
legs, with human faces replacing the knee; some
are in the form of Mercury with a pointed, attached
beard, like those to be seen in Egyptian divinities.
Some of the patterns of their ornamentation, in general
as well as in detail, are perfectly Mexican. On one
of their lamps we have a winged Kentaur holding
a rabbit, whilst four rabbits running after one
another, form the spirited ornamentation of the
border, intermixed with triangles, rosettes, or solar
circles.
With their religious notions, it is not surprising that
the Etruskans should have devoted the greatest care
to their tombs and burial-places.
These tombs were:—
1. Subterranean; hewn into the tufa on plains.
Steps led underground, where a vestibulum, consisting
of several chambers, sometimes provided with columns,
led into the vault. The ceiling of this was either
horizontal or pointed, in imitation of a wooden roof.
Many such tombs are found at Volci, Clusium, and
Volaterra.
2. A second species of their subterranean tombs
consisted of those provided with tumuli above-ground;
simple graves as found in Scandinavia and the north219
of the Western hemisphere, the corpses lying on
simple stone beds.
3. Burial chambers (cucumella) with artificial hills
above them, and provided with a tower-like construction,
or with conical columns. They are found
near Volci, Tarquinii, and Viterbo.
4. Chambers, vertically hewn into the rocks, with a
simple or decorated entrance near Tuskania.
5. Rock-hewn chambers with façades screening the
entrance, as at Aria, or with Doric fronts as at Orchia.
Asia furnished patterns for the decoration and construction
of these tombs. The reliefs are full of lively
scenes, reminding us of Assyrian and Babylonian
sculptures. The figures are heavy, the legs short and
thick; the upper part of the statues is placed ‘en face,’
whilst the legs and feet are in profile. The monstrous
element predominates. Harpies, chimeras, winged
lions, sphinxes, and griffins abound; but they are
void of any symmetrical arrangement, and are dry,
stiff, and as revolting as possible in their coarse outlines.
With regard to the construction of their walls it is
remarkable that they improved very early on the
Kyklopean mode, and constructed the very best
regular freestone walls. They had arched gates,
built with wedge-shaped stones, which produced by
their span a firmly-vaulted construction. The Etruskans
thus acquired a lasting merit in the history of
art by the new epoch which they inaugurated with the220
introduction of this decidedly progressive element in
the technical construction of architectural works. As
potters and metal-workers they distinguished themselves
more than either as architects or sculptors. As
the Chinese are considered as the potters par excellence
of the farthest East, the Etruskans may be called the
potters of the West. In burning, painting, and
fashioning clay they appear to have acquired a
speciality, so that their trade in vases extended all
over the then known world, and even the Greeks
furnished their houses with Etruskan pottery in preference
to their own. The gloomy mythology of the
Etruskans was far better suited to potters, manufacturing
black vases with red figures, or red vases
with black figures, or for casting dark bronze figures,
than to sculptors handling white marble. They also
distinguished themselves in chiselling and founding
metal. Innumerable chests, candelabra, metal frames
for looking-glasses, and other utensils show their
cleverness in working gold, silver, and bronze. Some
ivory carvings, described in a report of the Archæological
Society at Rome, 1862, are of great interest.
They were found at Præneste (Palestrina), where also
silver vessels in the purest Egyptian style, and an
ivory tablet with Assyrian patterns, were excavated.
More important even than these discoveries are four
ivory tablets found at Corneto, showing traces of
gilding and painting. The carvings represent scenes
of every-day life, mixed with mystic figures. We see221
on the tablets a lady and gentleman sitting at dinner,
served by a little boy; a huntsman chasing game; a
kind of sea-divinity holding in each hand a fish; and
a man in a biga driving winged horses. These figures
might have formed representations concerning the
zodiac, namely: the Twins, Sagittarius, Pisces, and
the Sun (Phœbus or Horus). The receding forehead of
the driver and his manner of holding the whip are
types which we constantly meet in Egyptian sculptures
and reliefs.
About 660 B.C. Eucheir, Diopos, Eugrammos and
Demeratos were driven from Korinthum into Etruria,
and from that date we note a decided improvement
in the artistic productions. The Etruskans began to
excel in terra-cotta and bronze works. Their vases,
amphoræ, statuettes, cinerary and mystic chests, prove
this. Their mystic chests (cistæ mysticæ, corresponding
to the quippa-chests of the Mexicans) were made of
embossed bronze. The lids were ornamented with
mysterious animals, and the legs formed of the claws
or paws of mythical brutes. Foliage and Greek frets
in good arrangement were also used. Their candelabra
are of a superior design. Other works of art, such
as ornamented backs and handles for mystic mirrors,
in gold, silver, or bronze, are of excellent technical
execution.
There was, however, too much of the aborigine
Turanian element left in the Etruskans. The noble
and elevating rhythmus of Greek idealisation is222
everywhere wanting. Cooking utensils, small pieces
of furniture, tables, chairs, and couches, aqueducts and
viaducts, and even cloacas, were made and constructed
to perfection, but as soon as they attempted the
production of human forms, or of higher works in
architecture, they did not succeed. The heads of
their figures are either too small or too large. The
legs are short; the drapery in stiff lines hangs down
with rope-like regularity. Animals are much better
executed; but the human form, in consequence of a
scrupulous and constrained conception, and an exaggerated
attention to detail, had a cold, lifeless
appearance, void of all spiritual animation. Their
imagination was one-sidedly directed by nature and
religion to take a gloomy and distorted view of
creation, and their products bear this spiritual stamp.
In everything they touched we recognise the
Egyptian mythology with its stifling breath, and the
influence of the volcanic ground on which the Aryans
were thrown, amongst a number of superstitious Turanians.
The rumbling, fire-spitting Vesuvius and
Ætna worked on the brains of the new immigrants.
The sudden, devastating bursts of fire and
water filled their minds with horror; they were forced
to ponder over the instability of human things. The
beauty of the Italian sky, the exuberant luxury of
the vegetation, heightened in them a feeling of dumb
despair. The contrast between life and death was
too striking, and filled the souls of the artists with223
awe and dread, reflected in their artistic compositions.
Their representations were often divided into two
distinct compartments. On one side were scenes
from the lower regions. Mantus, Mania, and furies
pursuing the deceased with hammers. Mantus of the
Etruskans, probably a descendant of Radamanthus,
was an infernal divinity. Mania (whose name we
have preserved in the words mania and maniac) was
the mother of the Lares and persecuted the dead. Our
readers must begin to see whence many of the horrifying
scenes of the middle ages took their origin. On
the other side were scenes from life in the upper regions—joyous,
triumphal processions and festivities.
Drunkenness and licentiousness are always twin-sisters
of superstition and bigotry. These arrangements
recall the same custom of dividing subjects in antithetical
groups observed in Assyria, where we find on
the slabs hunts in the upper compartments, and joyous
festivities in the row below. The subjects chosen
with the Assyrians were undoubtedly much healthier.
Hard work first, and joy and happiness afterwards.
The Etruskans kept to the old Egyptian customs,
reminding man continually of the short duration of
his life. The mummy placed in Egyptian banqueting
halls, with the inscription: ‘Eat and drink; such a one
wilt thou be,’ had a pernicious ethical effect; instead
of sobering man down, it drove him to reckless and
despairing gaiety and extravagance. The Etruskans,224
though filling their imaginations with horrors, could
never master art in life. They had the savage fondness
for adorning their persons with innumerable trinkets.
The desire to shine conspicuously for the short and
uncertain time of their existence absorbed their
artistic endeavours, and this fashion prevails amongst
the peasants in Italy at the present day. The
patterns are now filigree Moresque; in ancient times
they were in a clumsy Greek style. To wear a
ring was considered essential to man’s and woman’s
existence.
This led them very early to cultivate glyptics, or
the art of stone-cutting. The subjects were partly
mythological, partly heroic; the artists delighted in
strong muscles, attitudinizing groups, and theatrical
postures.
In the paintings and mosaics, with which they
adorned their burial chambers, we may distinguish, in
reference to their treatment:
a. An Archaic style;
b. An Etruskan style.
A. In the Archaic Style they exhibit a thorough
acquaintance with Greek mythology and classical
poetry. Orpheus, Homer, Hesiod and Pindar furnish
the scenes, but the dead play the most conspicuous
part. We have, in another world, festivities in vine
bowers and blooming gardens; processions, gymnastic
games and races amongst the departed. The grouping
is spirited so far as variety is concerned, but the225
execution is rough, and bare of all higher artistic
feeling.
B. In the Etruskan Style, stern simplicity and
roughness yield to a freer treatment of the human
form. The thick-set, short figures are replaced by
better drawn and lighter forms; the subjects are exclusively
taken from Etruskan mythology. White
and black spirits (angels and devils), armed with big
hammers, are represented as fighting for the souls of
the departed. In one of the graves (see Dempster
and Agincourt) we have a soul hanged, and tormented
with iron instruments, roasting over a brisk fire. In
these products, in spite of the intervention of the
Roman period of history, we find the direct connecting
link between the old Assyrian, Egyptian, Etruskan,
and early Christian arts.
The Etruskans indulged in fantastic conceptions,
and rejoiced in forced and cruel scenes, and in bizarre
compositions. Art with them was exclusively technical.
We may arrange their works into the following
five groups:—
1. The original Tuscanica (as Strabo has it) or
Etruskan works. Heavy in form and details; dresses
very stiff; figures without beards. Of this group we
have many bronze figures, very few sculptures in stone,
some gems, and some very old wall-paintings.
2. The Oriental group. Imitations of Egyptian,
Assyrian, and Babylonian patterns. Tapestry, for
floor and wall-decorations, was much used. The226
imitations were good, but without any effort at originality.
Remains plentiful.
3. Caricatures distinguished by grotesque quaintness.
This style predominates at periods, when
nations look upon art as superfluous; not as one of
the most important factors of civilization. Taste
degenerates, and the higher aspirations of art are
crippled by distorted products. The quaint is preferred
to the beautiful, and the dynamic force of the
artistic element, driven into this direction, loses itself in
a broad grin at everything sacred and elevated in State,
religion, and science, fostering a deplorable spirit of
vulgar egotism, which looks down upon the sublime
exertions of artists, as the mere vagaries of simpletons
or madmen.
4. Works in the best Greek style, but only in
bronze, as frames and handles of mirrors. Whenever
the higher spirit of art is neglected, the power of the
artist is directed to small matters; he serves trade
and nothing but trade. We have in these ‘Articles
of Etruria’ the prototypes of our ‘Articles de
Paris.’
5. Mechanical products, such as helmets, weapons,
swords, shields, hatchets, clubs, wall-breakers, cooking
utensils, pots, pans, and saucers, were of exquisite
workmanship, but without any attempt at artistic
forms. The utilitarian incubus is as bad as the hierarchical
canon; both expel all higher aspirations from
the realm of art.
227
The Etruskans thought, with many of us, that if
the house were only built of dry bricks, the carpet
thick, the furniture solid and heavy, and the knife
sharp, it was unnecessary to care for anything else.
Whilst such ideas exist, art, in a higher sense, will
remain as little possible, as it was with the Etruskans.
228
The Greeks, from a poetical, artistic, and esthetical,
and the Romans, from a social, legal, and political
point of view, are still our masters. Historical art-critics,
and a certain class of writers, who would wish
to see the whole universe one great court of justice
with an infinite variety of crimes, subdivided into
felony, misdemeanour, petty larceny, &c., will never
agree as to the place that should be assigned to the
Romans in the world’s history. We are bold enough
to assert that the whole of the criminal and sanguinary
history of Rome, with her products in literature
and art, might be wiped out, and yet philosophically,
poetically, and artistically, not the slightest
gap in the progressive development of humanity
would be found. Socially and legally, we should be
sorry to miss a state, which had a mission of its own,
which, if well understood, may teach us the causes
why the gentler feelings of morality were oppressed,
imagination defiled, and every higher artistic aspiration
deadened in Rome.
229
From beginning to end, Roma, read backwards
Amor, was an ambiguous ‘state-abstraction,’ which
absorbed the individual. The State with the Greeks
was a concrete association of freemen. With the
Romans, it was the abstract principle of an imaginary
union of heterogeneous citizens. The Greeks fostered
science and art, poetry and philosophy. The
Romans despised science, mocked art, scorned poetry,
and never condescended to trouble themselves about
philosophy. The Greeks colonised and civilised their
colonies, which became the free daughters of a free
mother-country, attached to it by the ties of a common
worship of beauty and intellectual enjoyment.
The Romans conquered, and the conquered provinces
were to furnish soldiers or labourers, and were tied
by means of despotism to the wheels of the proud
state-carriage. The Greeks humanised; the Romans
demoralised and organised. The Greeks played at
soldiers in a spirit of glorious patriotism. The Romans
were soldiers for the sake of conquest, plunder,
and vain glory. Spirited youthfulness was the
Greek element. Stern and calculating manliness the
essence of the Roman. The Greek was free in life,
in art, in the worship of his gods, in poetry and
philosophy. The Roman was cowed down in religion,
politics and life, by the inexorable despotic force of
legal phantoms, which turned men into mere machines.
The despotism of the East was the despotism of
some invisible god, or some visible ruler; and it often230
overlooked the individual in its almighty position.
The democracy of Greece gave fair play to individual
talent and genius in art and science; but the Roman
self-constituted aristocracy, or rather triple theocracy,
invented the inexorable and meddlesome monster
authority, to which everything was to be sacrificed.
Under the tragi-comical sobriquet, Salus reipublicæ
suprema lex (in free translation, ‘whatever we in
authority find good, is good’), they committed the
blackest crimes, which no historian could venture to
commit to paper in their whole truthfulness.
This triple theocracy presented itself in the shape
of seven mythical kings; in the form of a nominal
republic, which was in reality a military and theocratic
aristocracy; and lastly in the theocracy of the
Cæsars, which in course of time was changed into a
papal theocracy.
The Romans had to reverence and submit to theocracy
under the form of a triple authority—the political
authority; the paternal authority; and the legal
authority. Wherever the Roman turned to, in that
vast empire, which was bounded in the west by the
Atlantic, in the north by the Rhine and the Danube,
in the east by the Euphrates, and in the south by the
deserts of Arabia and Africa, he met his triple crown
of authority. He was confronted by some consul or proconsul,
some law, some edict, some whim or caprice
of an invisible something, that always had a visible
lictor at its command with a bundle of sticks, ready for231
flogging, or, in urgent cases, with a well-sharpened
axe to sever the head from the trunk. He had to obey a
power, with innumerable soldiers, ready to punish
whole provinces if they resisted that ever present, ever
vigilant, and ever-active State abstraction. Whilst in
Greece, the individual man was developed with all his
bodily and intellectual faculties in science and art,
Rome disturbed and hindered this individual development,
concentrating the static and dynamic forces of
her citizens on brutal military enterprises.
Rome, through its theocratical spirit, oppressed the
conquered by the conqueror, the poor by the rich, the
‘nihil habentes’ by the ‘possedentes,’ the client by
the patron, the plebeian by the patrician, humanity
by priests and gods, and the individual by the State.
The Roman as individual was never a self-acting, self-conscious,
and free-thinking entity, but a mere cipher
after the State unit; a wheel in a large and complicated
machine; a drop of water in an ocean; an atom
in the universe. The Greek recognised in the State
only an agglomeration of men like himself; this sum
total of citizens had to serve him; the State was to him
a means, not an aim. The Greek demanded of the
State that it should protect him in the free and perfect
use of his bodily and intellectual faculties. He was,
if he liked, poet, magistrate, athlete, judge, dancer,
philosopher, fighter, priest, wrestler, tragedian, soldier,
or singer; all for his own sake, without ever becoming
an over-regulated or over-regulating pedant. He worshipped232
his gods without restraining dogmas; he never
allowed his individuality to be absorbed by some
incomprehensible, shapeless, universal theocracy; his
whole scientific and artistic national career was one
glorious struggle against such an accomplishment.
All this was the very reverse with the Romans. That
Rome had no art or science of her own, was the effect
of those causes which we have here tried to sketch in
a general way.
The Romans, like the Greeks, were a mixture of
Aryans and Turanians, with this difference, that with
the Greeks the Aryan element predominated, whilst
with the Romans the Turanian, and even the black elements
formed a considerable portion of the national
State body. The Greek element, which, at the time of
the earliest formation of the Roman State, was very
powerful, soon became absorbed in the Gallic, Iberian,
African, Egyptian, and Syrian elements. The enervating
south was not counterbalanced by the energetic
north, but, on the contrary, the south predominated;
and as in the south-east theocratic despotism flourished,
the same principle was adopted by the Romans, and
worked into a perfect system.
That the language of the Romans had a common
origin with that of the Greeks, Persians, and Indians
is evident from the consideration even of a few words.
The verbs sum (I am), do (I give), and the words pater,
mater, frater, are Sanskrit. The most important pastoral
and agricultural expressions are Sanskrit, showing233
that a certain degree of civilisation must have been
brought with them by the settlers, after their separation
from their Trans-Himâlâyan brethren, when they
peopled the shores of the Mediterranean, and occupied
that small coast-land which was probably once connected
with the African continent through Sicily.
Pecus, sus, taurus, and canis are Sanskrit words.
The Sanskrit agras (meadow) is the Latin ager
(Germ. acker, acre). The Sanskrit kurnu (Germ. korn,
corn, grain) is the Latin granum. The settlers were undoubtedly
acquainted with even higher elements of a
steady and civilised life. The Sanskrit word aritram
(ship and oar), survived as aratrum the plough, cutting
through the ground like the aritram through the
waves. The Sanskrit damas, δόμος {domos} is the Latin domus;
naus is navis; akshas is axis (Germ. achse) a coach or
cart; and we have in the Sanskrit vastra, the Latin
vestis (vestment), not only a proof of the connection
between the Aryans of the Ganges, and those on the
shores of the Tiber, but a living testimony that the
former had left off tattooing their bodies and used
textile fabrics. The Romans were first called Ramnes.
Three races may be said to have furnished the first
settlers on the Seven Hills, the Ramnes, Titians, and
Lukeres. From this threefold confederation we have
the word tribuere, tribus (tribe). Later Pelasgians,
Sabines, Albans, Etruskans, and Hellenes joined the
first settlers, and formed by degrees the Roman State.
As the Britons at one time earnestly believed that234
they were the direct descendants of Brutus, the son
of Æneas, we need not wonder that the Romans should
have indulged in the flattering faith that they were the
direct descendants of Æneas himself. They had
scarcely attained a settled state, when they began
to work out their legends and myths, concerning the
divine foundation of their town, which had taken place
under seven kings.
1. Romulus, a god-man, for he and his brother,
Remus, were incarnations of the war-god Mars and
miraculously born of a virgin. Their uncle Amulius,
fearing that they might deprive him of his throne,
had them exposed in the swollen Tiber in a cradle.
The river subsided, and the cradle was caught by a
sacred fig-tree at the foot of the Palatine hill, and a
she-wolf had pity on the boys, and suckled them.
The founders of Rome thus mythically imbibed, with
their foster-mother’s milk, that savage brutality and
thirst for blood which distinguished the citizens
of the Holy City for thousands of years. Romulus and
Remus were found by shepherds, and brought up by
them. Subsequently a town was founded by the twins,
and Romulus then killed his brother and ruled alone.
He divided the people into curiæ.
2. Numa Pompilius enlarged the town and introduced
a settled form of worship, not out of piety, but
in order to subject the citizens to the will of the State.
3. Tullus Hostilius improved upon the theocratical
institutions of Numa, and gave Rome a military235
organisation, as the secret tool with which her will was
to be enforced throughout a vast part of the globe.
4. Ancus Martius commanded the citizens to have
taste and to beautify the town, or rather had this done,
superintending the improvements himself. He is
stated to have been a grandson of Numa.
5. Tarquinius Priscus, of a Korinthian family,
showed in his very infancy that he was destined by
supernatural influences to become a benefactor of the
chosen people, the Romans. When a tender boy
sleeping in his cradle, his head was surrounded by a
brilliant halo of flames. He conquered many Latin
and Sabine towns, and showed himself worthy of his
exalted position. He introduced the golden diadem,
the ivory throne, the sceptre adorned with an eagle,
and the purple toga, as distinctive marks of the
supreme authority.
6. Servius Tullius was also of supernatural origin.
He was the son of a female slave, and the protecting
divinity of the royal castle. He divided the people
into five classes or castes; instituted tribunes, and
founded the orders of senators, knights, and commons.
7. Tarquinius Superbus, like the Chinese tyrant
Ly-wang, who succeeded the five good emperors, defiled
the imperial dignity, outraged all laws, divine
and human, and was rebelled against by the patricians,
who abolished the regal authority. The innocent
Lucretia is said to have been the direct cause of the236
expulsion of the tyrant, and the establishment of the
republic.
In the myths concerning these seven kings we have
abundant elements for the most beautiful songs, epic
poems, and artistic subjects full of dramatic power
and vitality. The remarkable fact with the Romans
was, that they preserved these myths as historical
truths, recorded them in dull prose, affixing to them
dates, each of which was a flagrant falsehood, and
used them in good earnest as the basis of their
national existence.
The royal period ended with the seven kings.
Rome had prepared in perfect silence her murderous
weapons, and, suddenly dashing forward a well-trained
prize-fighter, inaugurated the military theocracy. The
history of this second period, with its appalling
monotony, may be condensed into one terrible word—WAR.
From 342–340 B.C. war with the Samnites. From
340–337 B.C. war with the Latins. From 325–290
B.C. the second and third Latin war. From 288–264
B.C. war with Carthage and Syrakuse. From 264–241
B.C. the first Punic war. Peace was made,
and to fill up the leisure hours, there was a Gallic
war. From 218–201 B.C. the second Punic war.
Peace was again concluded, and during the interval
(183 B.C.) Greece and the Makedonian empire were
subjugated. From 149–146 B.C. the third Punic war.
The world was conquered, and the boundaries of the237
vast empire extended in all directions; but the warlike
spirit of the Romans had not learnt to rest and
to enjoy these conquests in peace; industry, arts, and
sciences, had no charm for these wild and indomitable
conquerors, and wanting a foreign enemy, they
quarrelled amongst themselves. The internal dissensions
began. There were the Numantian troubles,
the tumults of the Gracchi, and the feud between
Marius and Sulla. A foreign war happily put an end
to these internal struggles. From 112–106 B.C. war
with Jugurtha. From 88–80 B.C. war with Mithridates.
From 72–71 B.C. the slaves rebelled and called
for bread and for revenge. This was the first civil war—individual
egotism conspired against the supreme
power, faction fought against faction; a dissolution of
all law and order threatened the State. From 54–51
B.C. the Gallic war amused the Roman spectators
and war-comedians. From 49–48 B.C. there was a
second civil war; from 43–30 B.C. a third; and the
republic was at last absorbed by a Cæsarian theocracy.
That arts and sciences did not flourish in a
state of continual warfare is quite natural. The houses
were mean and low, here and there adorned with
clumsy Etruskan pillars; the temples had some Greek
forms; sculpture was not cultivated, and Greeks had
to chisel or to carve the scanty embellishments. On
the other hand, high roads of great excellence, and bold
bridges with magnificent arches, were constructed, for238
everywhere the spirit of practical realism was served;
in every stone, every column, every pillar, every statue,
the spirit of theocratic despotism predominated. The
charming gods of the Greeks were turned into haughty
military commanders, not inviting love through beauty,
but demanding blind obedience with a thundering ‘sic
volo, sic jubeo’ (‘as I will it, so I command it’).
The period of imperial theocracy showed Rome
in her pomp and splendour, covering inner hollowness
and gradual decay with marble slabs. Palaces
and temples, basilicæ and arcades, triumphal arches
and amphitheatres, arenas and baths (of the latter
Rome alone had about 768), naumachiæ and circuses,
theatres and arenas, hippodromes and magnificent
tombs abounded; but in all these architectural
marvels, the monumental spirit of pride, self-glorification,
vain ostentation, and theatrical display, is to be
traced; the love of beauty, of artistic moderation, and
simplicity being everywhere conspicuous by its absence.
Roman art and decoration are to be carefully
studied, that we may learn ‘how not to do it,’ if we
earnestly intend to produce works of art, and not
works of ornamentation, forming a very Paradise for
‘parvenus’ with bad taste.
We have asserted that the Romans never produced
anything original in art and science. Their religion,
their literature, and their products of art, bear this
assertion out to the very letter.
The word ‘religion’ is of Roman origin. The239
Teutons have faith or trust in God. The Roman
word meant the tying down of everyone to certain
formulas or dogmas. They borrowed their dogmas
and superstitions, their gods and ceremonies, from all
parts of the world; especially from the Greeks and
Etruskans, and later from the Egyptians. Everything
served their purpose so soon as it helped to overawe
the masses. They had augurs, auspices, and sibylline
oracles. From the entrails of beasts and human
beings they predicted the future. Flashes of lightning,
the rolling thunder, the flight of birds, meetings
with hares, goats, dogs, or cats, announced the will of
the gods. The conceptions of the Eastern gods were
disfigured, and they were made more jealous, threatening,
merciless, revengeful, and inexorable. Jupiter
the thunderer (Jupiter tonans) did not govern by any
moral law, but by mere force; he spoke in flashes of
lightning and in thunder, in terrifying earthquakes
and volcanic eruptions. Amongst the 30,000 deities
with which the Roman triple theocracy peopled the
visible and invisible world, there was not ONE divinity
of kindness, mercy, and comfort.
They had a divinity of peace, to urge them on to
war; they had divinities of plague, hunger, fever,
mildew, and death. In their practical spirit they went
even so far as to have a ‘Dea Cloacina.’
What subjects to paint or sculpture!
A pale-yellow woman with dishevelled hair, protruding
ghastly eyes, wasted lips, fleshless and emaciated240
limbs, may represent the goddess of hunger;
another woman deliberately and slowly tearing the
limbs of helpless creatures from their bodies with diabolical
delight, may be a goddess of plague; another,
placidly playing with human skulls in a field surrounded
by dying men, women, and children, may be
the goddess of death.
In the illustration of a Dante or a Milton, a
knowledge of the Roman mythology may prove full
of suggestive power.
The Greeks had a principle in their anthropomorphic
worship; the Romans had no aim. Roman
high-priests were spiritual butchers, who tried to
appease the angry gods with the smoke of burning
bullocks, to nourish them with fat, with which they
literally besmeared the statues, and to quench their
thirst with blood which they poured over the altars.
When already educated enough to consider all these
divinities with a cold and sceptic indifference; when
the augurs could no longer meet without laughing and
sneering at each other and their sacred office, then
the Roman mind became eager for a more concrete
god than these stone figures, and they found a corresponding
living divinity in the person of their Emperors.
Earth certainly could offer nothing more divine in the
form of visible majesty, recognised and obeyed,
as soon as clothed in the imperial purple and crowned
with the imperial diadem, than the irresponsible ‘god-man,’
who sat on the throne of the Cæsars. The241
creative force of the Universe, and the phenomena of
nature, were moulded in visible forms; and now for
the first time a political abstraction had become incarnate
in the Emperor pro tem. The hordes of
courtiers, courtezans, flatterers, poets, philosophers,
historians, juris consults, orators, prætors, and consuls,
supported by the thoughtless mass of the people,
rendered divine honours to a mortal, in whom, however,
the immortal principle of theocratic authority was
concentrated. Not even the Egyptians, crouching in
grateful admiration before the crocodiles of the Nile,
outraged humanity to such a degree as these polite
Romans, rendering divine honour to an Emperor, like
Aurelius Commodus, who fought 735 times as a
common gladiator in the arena before his enervated
people. The Roman religion was, in fact, a cosmopolitan
mixture of all the atrocious superstitions of
the world.
The Romans also instituted public games in
imitation of the Greeks, on the degrading ‘panis et
circenses’ principle. In Greece, Apollo with his
nine muses presided over the public games. The
Romans had specially-trained gladiators, wrestlers,
dancers, and prize-fighters. The competitors at the
Greek games were free and independent citizens;
with the Romans they were either criminals, runaway
slaves, or men condemned to death. Bears,
lions, tigers, and elephants were starved, and set
against one another, to delight the spectators with242
their savage brutality. Soon an improvement was
effected, and men were arrayed against men with
deadly weapons, to amuse men and women, boys and
girls, with their skill in murdering; and at last, as a
further progressive development in taste, men were
pitted against wild beasts. In the Greek tragedy, the
ideal sufferings of humanity, struggling in an unequal
combat with omnipotent and inexorable fate, were
prominently set forth to purify men from their
passions by showing the consequences of even unconscious
guilt. The Greek tragedy was the
national moral conscience brought into the most
perfect poetical form. The Romans instituted a cruel
reality of bodily suffering; real blood streaming from
real limbs; the real rattle in the throat, which signals
death; and the real last gasp of an expiring man,
afforded them amusement.
Like their religion and public games, their literature,
with the exception of their satires and law-codes,
was matter of fact and imitative. The generation
of the Roman products of poetry and prose was
the following: Homer engendered Virgil, Hesiod—Lucretius;
Pindar—Horace; Æsop—Phædrus; Euripides—Terence;
Aristophanes—Plautus; Xenophon—Sallust;
Thukydides—Titus Livy; Demosthenes—Cicero.
Ovid and Tacitus were the only really
original writers; the first faithfully depicted the hollowness
of Roman ethics; and the other, in unsurpassed
language, drew a historical sketch of the Teutons,243
mercilessly exposing the contrast between noble
simplicity, grandeur and honesty, and the demoralised
state of his own country.
If art is the outgrowth of the intellectual and
moral condition of a people, what kind of art could
the Romans have produced? None. And this was
the case. Roman art is altogether a misnomer; it is
in fact Etruskan, Greek, Assyrian, and Egyptian art,
dressed in an eclectic Roman garb by foreign artists.
Art with the Romans was never the glorious emanation
of the poet’s sacred ideal of the gods, or the
irresistible civilising power of beauty; it was merely
the handmaid of power, wealth, pomp, and vanity.
Art was with them a slave, well fed, well clad, well
housed, well paid, to make power more powerful,
to dazzle the people, to proclaim the universal dominion
of Rome over the world. The Roman
character was dry and geometrical, and therefore in
its artistic taste architectural and monumental. Anything
that could serve, by means of technical perfection,
to promote art, was encouraged, adopted, and supported
by the Romans.
We have given a drastic picture of the evils of the
Roman spirit; we must be just to the great mission
which it fulfilled unconsciously and against its will.
The centralisation in language, customs, and manners
produced a cosmopolitan spirit. Greek artists and
philosophers spread taste and learning. Distant
nations were brought into closer connection. The244
roads constructed to facilitate the march of legions,
bent on devastating a province, served as means of
communication; so did their aqueducts and bridges.
The wants of an increasing population forced the
Romans to improve agriculture, and commerce was
found necessary. Corn had to be brought from one
quarter, textile fabrics from another; Greece and
Egypt were pillaged of their innumerable works of
art, and Rome may be said to have been at that
period the greatest museum of the universe. The
superstition and credulity which existed among the
people, by degrees disappeared. Africa had been
considered a land of monsters, with serpents large
enough to entangle a whole army and to crush it;
other regions of the accessible world had been thought
inhabited by men without heads. Giants, kyklops,
and enchantresses had been said to perform incredible
feats, but were found to be without supernatural
power; the golden apples of Spain turned out to be
mere oranges, and graced the tables of the wealthier,
and in time even of the poorer classes. The mouth
of hell had been placed on the shores of the Euxine
(Black Sea), but when those regions were occupied by
Roman soldiers, the mouth of hell had to be removed
elsewhere. East and west, south and north, were
united under one great Roman vault, the four quarters
of the globe were over-arched, and the broad cupola
of universalism set over them. Man was made a
common slave to one grand and common abstraction,245
typically foreshadowing the time when men would be
brought as free agents under one great dome of universal
brotherhood.
For this grand and really majestic soldering of
humanity into one total, the Romans found the
spiritual as well as the material form in
Through the arch, which was used by the Etruskans,
but which under the Romans became a most
important part of architecture, the art of constructing
was suddenly freed of all hindrances. Courts
could be formed with more ease, and the ground-plan
drawn with greater variety.
The cross-vault may be considered a specially
Roman form. Two cylindrical arches were constructed
intersecting each other at right angles in a quadrangular
space. The intersection takes place at the
two diagonal lines, thus uniting the opposite corners.
The arches in their cross-form rise from four points
of support, and divide the arch into four curved triangles,
called calottes.
The cupola, a third form of the vault, was called
forth in the Romans by their preference for circular
buildings. The ancient mound was revived by them.
It was the application of the arch to a circular ground-plan.
A powerful larger or smaller member of
decoration was produced, interrupting the flatness of246
walls, and allowing a rich variety of statuary to be
used as ornament. This refers to the use of the half-cupola
for semicircular niches and the apsidæ. These
merely geometrical constructions would have been
monotonous and without grace, like our railway
stations; and would have been classed as works of
engineering, but never of art; had not the Romans
employed Greek forms in the shape of columns and
pilasters, to adorn them. The Doric, Ionic, Attic,
and Korinthian styles were all used, and a so-called
composite or Roman order was added. The composite
stood in the same relation to the proto-Korinthian,
as Plautus to Aristophanes. The Romans, with arrogant
clumsiness, placed a coarser and more contracted
form of the Ionic capital on two rows of richly carved
acanthus leaves. This was a bad composition, and
left room for much improvement, which was effected
more than fifteen hundred years later.
Nothing is known of art during the mythical
period of Roman history.
During the first centuries of the Republic, the
Etruskan style is said to have been prevalent, introduced
by Tarquin. Square wooden huts with a
rounded and tumulus-like roof of straw, were the first
palaces of the Roman citizens. Only after the conquest
of Greece 183 B.C., Grecian architecture and
sculpture were introduced. From this date we may
classify Roman art, under Greek, Assyrian, and
Egyptian influences, into the following periods.
247
a. The first begins in the second century B.C.,
under the Republic, after the destruction of Korinthum
by Mummius, and ends with the reign of the Augustan
house, and the beginning of the rule of the Flavians,
69 A.D. This was the Græco-Roman Period of architecture
and sculpture.
b. The second period commences with the Flavians,
69 A.D. After the tyrannical reigns of Tiberius and
Nero, the cosmopolitan Imperial state acquired an
apparent stability in new social forms, which found
expression in gigantic artistic constructions. This
period, which lasted down to Septimus Severus, 193
A.D., has three distinct phases.
α. A phase of powerful development under the
Flavians.
β. A phase of brilliant success under Trajan
(98–117 A.D.)
γ. A phase of revival of classic Greek forms under
Hadrian (117–138 A.D.)
We may designate these phases of development
as the Romano-Greek period.
c. The third period under the military despotism
of the prætorian guards, during which Rome ceased
to be the centre of universal dominion, and each
province began to feel its own vitality, lasted from
Septimus Severus (193–211 A.D.) to Constantine the
Great. Art lost every basis—degenerated into
luxurious pomp, and became heavier with each new
product, and more fantastic in incredible details and248
impossible executions. We may best designate this
as the Romano-eclectic period.
A. After the destruction of Korinthum, Rome
abounded in Greek immigrants, and in Greek marble
and bronze statues, friezes, pillars, and various movable
works of art. The spoils of Greek temples and
houses were set up in Roman houses built of bricks
and mortar. The contrast between the unartistic
architecture of the Romans, and the master-pieces of
Greek art, was so striking, that they were forced to
endeavour to improve their architecture, and art became
to a certain degree fashionable. The wealthier
classes began to study it theoretically, and to affect an
immense amount of patronizing enthusiasm, without
any deeper understanding of the laws of taste and
beauty, but with a determination to outdo all other
nations in the profession of works of art. Such
sentiments often engender a brisk trade, but they fail
to promote real art, or to benefit genuine artists.
The walls of the houses of this period were generally
white, with red painted ornamentations. Red is the
favourite colour with children, savages, and butchers
in mind. This led to the making of red bricks,
which were mixed with others of different colours,
and thus originated polylithic wall-decoration. The
spaces between the red bricks were filled in with a
black composition in imitation of different textile patterns,
and this mode of decoration was called Niello.
By degrees, bricks and cement were superseded by249
marble, and the houses became so rich, that a Puritan
party of Roman ἰδιώταις {idiôtais} formed itself, and thundered
against corruption and enervation, luxury and degradation.
The power of this party was so great
that Cicero, fearing lest these stern and dull Roman
worthies should think him acquainted with the principles
of artistic refinement, declared his utter ignorance
of art, and expressed his high contempt for all such
futile ‘allotria.’
The art of ornamentation became more and more
universal. The fora and atria were overcrowded with
bronze and marble statues and groups. These efforts,
however, were not genuine; they did not grow out of
the artistic wants and love of the people—the whole
movement was strange to their minds—and was altogether
a heterogeneous element grafted on their natures
by the force of circumstances. They succeeded by
degrees in ornamenting grandly, but there was always
something in contradiction to, or in conflict with,
really good taste. They used patterns meant for
floors on their walls, and wall patterns on their ceilings,
and that which would have fitted a ceiling, they laid
on their floors; creating by this means a sad confusion.
Asia always excelling in bright colours, and
in a secret talent for matching them correctly, excited
the admiration of the Romans, and they began to
paint their walls. They often cut out the decorated
parts of a pillaged Greek temple, and fixed these
pieces at random in their houses, caring very little250
whether there was a congruity between these and
their own wall-decoration or not. We have, during
this period, an attempt at ‘scenography.’ The walls
were painted over with architectural views, representing
colonnades, interiors, landscapes, and later, Greek
mythological and even historical scenes. In these,
Perseus and Andromeda, or Medea meditating the
murder of her children, or Herkules destroying the
serpent, or some other sensational deed, formed the
cherished subjects. Under the influence of the Greeks
of Alexandria, another custom became prevalent.
The walls were more and more panelled, and the
panels filled with works of art.
This ‘mania,’ or fashion, became so universal with
the Romans that they could find no more works of
classic art, and had to engage living artists to reproduce
antique cornices, metopes, colonnades, capitals,
shields, helmets, tripods, sphinxes, and griffins; but
even these artists were so overwhelmed with commissions,
that it was impossible for them to satisfy
the feverish demand. To produce works of art more
quickly, they began to paint the panels, and the Roman
empire became a complete manufactory of wall-decorations.
Light colonnades of slender reeds, baldachins
with pointed arches and fantastic monsters, filled
the walls, and sometimes mere combinations of colours
were used in a conventional style. Art again sank
into mere trade. The panels and walls were not decorated
with the works of the good old Greek masters,251
but with mere imitations. Mannerism supplanted
style, and arabesques, flourishes, insignificant chequered
patterns, or geometrical puzzles, took the place of historical
paintings—poor wall-decorations in a theatrical
style, without any attempt at higher art.
The use of marble as a means of decoration was
not always customary with the Romans, and was
introduced by L. Crassus, the censor, who had his
house decorated with six small columns of marble
from Hymettus, and was very much blamed for this
extravagance. M. Scaurus, the ædile, who built the
famous wooden theatre, decorated with 360 pillars of
marble, glass, and bronze, and about 3,000 statues
and images, had the atrium and peristyle of his
private house richly adorned with exquisite columns.
Manurra, prefect of the armourers, under Julius Cæsar
in Gaul, is set down as the first who had his walls
decorated with marble incrustations; whilst M. Catulus
could boast of the first marble flooring, and of
thresholds in Numidian marble. Of temples, one of
the first constructed of marble blocks in a purer
Greek style was that of Jupiter Tonans. The temple
of Fortuna Virilis which rose on a lofty substructure
on the banks of the Tiber, was in the Ionic style. The
Vesta temple at Tivoli, enthroned on a steep and
rocky height above the foaming waters of the Anio,
was a circular building in the Korinthian style.
Theatres, public halls, baths, and Fora were found
necessary, either to distract the public mind from252
political matters, or to gain the suffrages of the fickle
mob, eager for amusement and excitement. The first
theatre in stone was erected by Pompey. Julius Cæsar
surpassed all his predecessors and rivals in magnificence.
He began the theatre of Marcellus, which was
completed by Augustus, and so enlarged and beautified
the Circus Maximus that it could accommodate
150,000 spectators; he built the beautiful Basilica
Julia, a public law-court for the Centumviri or Judges
to sit in, and hear causes, and for the counsellors to
receive their clients, and had a new Forum constructed,
and adorned it with a temple dedicated to Venus
Genetrix. The Roman Forum (in imitation of the
Greek Agora) was a building about three times as
long as broad. The interior was surrounded by arched
porticos, and flanked by the most stately edifices, such
as theatres, basilicæ, and temples.
These Fora were devoted to special purposes, as
Fora civilia or Fora venalia, and were used for
public meetings, or as market-places. Cæsar tried
to become a Roman Perikles, but was distanced in this
by the Emperor Augustus. Up to the establishment of
Cæsarism, Rome had been literally a city of ‘bricks;’
now it became a ‘city of marble.’ Temples were
profusely built and rebuilt. The Cæsarian theocracy
required these abodes of splendour and self-glorification.
One of the most imposing specimens of this
Græco-Roman architecture was the Pantheon, built by
Agrippa, the son-in-law of Augustus. Originally it was253
to have been an entrance-hall to splendid Thermæ, but
on its completion it was turned into a temple, and dedicated
to the avenging Jupiter. It was a circular building
132 feet in diameter, and 132 feet high, and triumphantly
proclaimed Rome’s wealth and might. It
contained a statue of Minerva by Pheidias, and a
Venus, who it is said had in her ear the half of the
pearl left by Cleopatra. The pearl was valued at
125,000l. That a Greek marble statue should have
been ornamented with part of the ear-ring of an
Egyptian princess, is highly characteristic of Roman
taste in matters of art. One of the most splendid
remains in the style of good Greek Korinthian ornamentation
is the temple of Augustus at Pola in Istria.
Triumphal gates, these Roman specialities, were at
this period simple in design, and perfect in execution.
Of the Mausoleum of Augustus nothing is left but the
substructure, 220 feet in diameter, now used as a circus
for equestrian performances. ‘Sic transit gloria mundi,’
if based on mere ostentation and vain pride.
During this period Nikopolis was planned and built;
the Temple of Solomon was adorned with colonnades
in the Greek Korinthian style, and at Nîmes (Nemausus)
we possess the most complete remains of a
prostylos pseudipteros temple of Roman architecture,
with the purest Korinthian columns. Under Tiberius
the camp of the prætorians was turned into a marble
palace. Under Claudius harbours and moles were
enlarged, built, and decorated. Nero burned Rome,254
to reconstruct it with greater pomp. The architects
Celerus and Severus had to build the golden houses, of
which the porticos were miles long. The dining-rooms
surpassed in splendour anything dreamt of in
Indian poetry. In the decoration of this palace, or
rather cluster of palaces, we trace the greatest mistake
an artist can be guilty of. The error is of Asiatic
origin. It may be designated as a conscious ‘lying’
in the constructive elements. They tried to hide the
costly material under a cheap disguise; a tendency
as bad and objectionable, as a ‘lying’ in cheap substances
to represent costly materials. The Romans
used tortoise-shell as veneer for their furniture, and
painted it to make it appear like wood; we, on the
other hand, use wood, and paint it over to make it
appear ‘giallo antico,’ (yellow marble), or any other
costly stone. Ornamentation began to lose all symmetry
and proportion. Confusion and profusion
ruled supreme. The walls of the rooms looked like
exhibitions of oriental carpets, tapestry, and jewelry.
Art retrograded to the over-painted, over-decorated,
over-ornamented shrouds, in which the mummies of
old were buried. For a time art was carried with
Asiatic splendour to a grave of tasteless pomposity.
B. With the Flavians, down to Septimus Severus,
a new spirit of artistic universalism pervaded the
Roman world. The Greek element waned, and the
circular forms of the Romans, ornamented with an indiscriminate
mixture of Doric, Ionic, and Korinthian255
columns, predominated. The Colosseum, a Flavian
amphitheatre, begun by Vespasian and finished by
Titus, belongs to this period. Three rows of arcades,
the first of Doric, the second of Ionic, and the third
of Korinthian half-columns, with their entablatures,
crowned with a fourth story, adorned with Korinthian
pilasters, and furnished with windows, encompassed
an oval, 600 feet long by 500 feet broad, capable of
holding 80,000 spectators. The circus was so constructed
that it could also be used as a naumachy. In
this over-decorated pompous building, the great fights
of the gladiators took place; here men and wild
beasts met in deadly struggle; here men, if killed,
were dragged away by ropes fixed in their bodies
with iron hooks; here the Imperators sat with all the
nobility of Rome, and delighted in sports, which, at a
later period of Rome’s spiritual dominion, were only
surpassed in cruelty by the pious ‘auto-da-fés’ of misguided
priests.
The triumphal arch of Titus, on the heights of the
Via Sacra; with one arch broken through the massive
walls, ornamented on each side by half-columns; was
the first to be decorated with the coarser form of the
Roman composite capital. The ornamentation keeps
within certain limits; the inner side walls of the arch
have excellent reliefs, referring to the destruction of
Jerusalem.
Everything yet enumerated was surpassed in splendour
and magnificence by the ‘Forum Trajanum’256
(A.D. 98–117), of which Apollodorus, born at Damaskus,
was the architect. The great basilica Ulpia,
with its five aisles, formed part of it. In a small
courtyard, surrounded by pillars, rose the gigantic
column of Trajan to a height of 92 feet. The reliefs,
which in spiral windings surround the richly ornamented
column, are a kind of Imperial record,
chronicling with historical accuracy and dryness, scene
after scene of the Dacian war. The figures are two
feet high and not less than 2,500 in number; they
are sculptured in a simple naturalistic style, void of all
idealisation, and show the artist’s talent for grouping.
The heads of the figures, as was generally the case
in all sculptures by the Romans, are too small for the
bodies.
The triumphal arch of Constantine, with three
openings, is undoubtedly the most splendid monument
of its kind. It was of Pentelic marble, taken from
the fragments of an arch in honour of Trajan. The
proportions are noble, and the execution is technically
precise; the ornamentation, however, is too profuse.
The second phase of this period degenerated very
quickly. Cornices began to be fluted; triglyphs and
indentations were used alternately in endless rows;
even the central volutes of the Corinthian capitals (the
caulicoli) were over-decorated. Everything ran wild;
rosettes, cassettes, shields, consols, stereobates, and
stylobates were used abundantly, without sense and
reason, to heighten the effect of the horizontal lines of257
the buildings. Everything was out of shape, out of
proportion, and out of place. An eternal repetition
of the same forms proclaimed the same desperate
deification of the omnipotent power of the theocratic
ruler.
Hadrian, the emperor, whose position constituted
him a divine architect, and who by his very dignity
must have known art better than any other mortal,
did not share, with many a self-conceited artist of our
time, the idea that the ‘work and labour done’ was all
that was required in art, and that any knowledge of
correct principles, any feeling of beauty, any acquaintance
with esthetics or with art-history, was useless,
and that money and power of execution were the
only things required. On the contrary, though Emperor
of the Romans, he diligently studied the
antique, and tried to revive classic art.
We had an imperial architect, with an unlimited
amount of gold, silver, marble, wood, and precious
material at his command, and yet he had to go
back to the Greeks for elegant forms in ornamentation.
He had Apollodorus executed for daring to
find fault with the confused plan of the temple of
Venus (Amor) and Roma, which was a building surpassing,
so far as splendour went, any construction of
those times. The double temple had certainly something
whimsical in its plan. The Emperor was too
forcibly struck by the discovery that Roma read
backwards gave Amor, and wanted to express this258
discovery in an architectural allegory, placing two
temples back to back so that they made one, to typify
two words with two meanings, that yet were one word.
The success, so far as correctness of plan went, was
doubtful. The cassettes of the bronze roof which
united the two temples into one, were most elegantly
finished. The court of the temple was 500 feet by
300. Another tower-like circular monument, based on
a square sub-structure, formed the Mausoleum (now
the Castle of St. Angelo). The diameter of the circular
part was 226 feet. The construction vies in solidity
and grandeur with the Egyptian monuments. The
blocks of travertin are colossal, and the immense
building was covered with Parian marble, and crowned
with a huge quadriga.
Under the Antonines architecture, and art in
general, gradually declined. The people occupied
themselves with entirely different topics. Stoicism
and Christianity—the old world of heathen formality,
and the new world of spiritual redemption—were
placed in conflict. A disturbed state of the public
mind rarely favours plastic art. A specimen exhibiting
this conflict may be seen in the temple of
Antoninus and Faustina, built by Antoninus Pius
(A.D. 138–161). A second edition of Trajan’s column
is given in that of Marcus Aurelius (A.D. 161–180),
which stands on the field of Mars. The reliefs,
winding round the shaft, represent scenes from the
war against the Markomanni. There is a certain259
liveliness in the execution, but the composition is
wanting in clearness and precision, and above all in
idealisation. Rivers, fields, and enclosures of walls,
are marked with great accuracy; and the reliefs take,
in style, the forms of geographical maps. Strict
realism is the leading feature in this monument.
C. During the third period architecture and
sculpture, ornamentation and painting, had soon to
yield to a continual use of arms. The proud mistress
of the world no more expanded her sway; she was
once more busy in decorating her rich palaces, but in
care and sorrow, and with an anxious brow, haunted by
the necessity for exerting all her powers to keep what
she possessed. The provinces had learnt to do without
Rome; the consuls and pro-consuls had so well
imitated their divine masters, that they thought
themselves gods, and the supreme deity, the
Imperator, lost his power over them. The State—based
on an abstraction—began to vanish like a
midnight phantom at daybreak. The one-sided
deification of matter, during the old heathen times,
had to yield to a totally new mode of feeling, thinking,
speaking, and acting. The new times were
seeking new forms, and had to pass from a savage
state, through that of barbarism, symbolism, and
mysticism, into self-consciousness, in order to find such
shapes as would express a perfect harmony between
spirit and matter. In the meantime, art dragged on
its existence in copying what the old masters of260
Greece and the artists of Rome had done. The
chisel, ruler, nay the very stones, trembled in the
hands of the artists. They felt that they worked
without a basis; that they heaped up blocks to see
them soon crumble into the dust; that they constructed
streets of pompous columns, some of them
3,500 feet long, to see them empty and deserted;
they ornamented, but did it with a heavy heart;
their soul was no more in the work. They heard
already the deep spiritual whisper of other tidings
resounding through the world on one side, and the
terrible temporal shout of powerful barbarians, not
yet enervated by luxury and licentiousness, armed
with swords and iron clubs, on the other. The
footsteps of avenging phantoms were heard in the
North; the ‘hallelujahs’ of redeemed humanity in
the South. This period is ushered in with the
triumphal arch of Severus, on which the reliefs are
placed without any regard to the architectural arrangement.
Caracalla (A.D. 211–217) had baths constructed,
with gigantic halls, furnished with 1,600
marble seats, with shady promenades, pompous reading-rooms,
and places for games of every variety.
This was to be a paradise on earth, to detach men from
that spiritual Eden of love and happiness, the gates of
which were opened by Christ. In feverish excitement,
streets, palaces, basilicæ, halls, market-places, monuments,
and whole towns, were built by the heathens.
The pomp of worship was increased. Diocletian constructed261
baths with 2,400 seats; the principal hall
was under three cross-vaults, with a span of 80 feet
each, resting on granite columns. Sensationalism
seized upon both people and artists; a sensationalism
tinged with Roman vulgarity. All the principles
of architecture, sculpture, and ornamentation were
neglected. Columns and arches were mixed together
in doleful incongruity. The arch rested on the architrave,
or often rose without interruption directly from
the capital. Columns were made in spiral or screw
form; the variety of details was oppressive; no rest,
no cæsura distinguished their ornamentation. It
was, in fact, an ornamentation over-ornamented. The
technical execution was everywhere splendid, but
utterly mechanical; principles were neglected in art,
because Roman life had lost even the one guiding
principle of its existence—expansion by brutal force.
The vulgar in mind and taste will always be charmed
by huge and imposing masses, by the richness of the
material, the daring of geometrical combination, and
by startling feats of mechanical contrivance. The
gorgeous mouldings, the friezes of endless decorations,
the capitals with their rich foliage, marshalled in
precise architectural lines, like Roman legions placed
in battle array, have a peculiarly mystic charm for
all those, who care more for effect than for taste or
severity of style, or more for show than for symmetry
and proportion; but if they love the old Roman
style, and wish to work in it, let them above all insist262
on genuine materials. Let them work in real granite,
travertin, and marble; let them not work in iron and
glass, or in plaster of Paris, instead of Carrara marble;
or in wood painted and varnished to represent granite,
lapis lazuli (azure-stone), or giallo antico. An artist’s
first duty is to know and master his material, and not
to try and bring about Roman architectural effects
with substances that require an altogether different
treatment. Whenever we endeavour to shirk this
law, we are sure to produce something small and
mean, thin and wasted, notwithstanding gorgeous
dimensions. Whilst trying to look grand and haughty,
substantial and pompous, we tell ‘falsehoods’ in
bricks and mortar, in painted friezes, sham columns,
and meretricious porticos; and we are then astonished
that our artistic product, instead of being admired, is
laughed at as a caricature.
In Greece the dynamic force was concentrated on
the reproduction of ideal beauty; in Rome it was
exhausted in conquests and politics. Only so long
as the moral force of beauty—equivalent to that of
virtue—counterbalanced the eccentricities of a wild
fantastic imagination, the Greeks were capable of
producing models of art. The Romans never cultivated
this balance; they disciplined themselves, but
in a totally different direction. This technical,
mechanical, and military discipline is, at a certain
period of an individual’s or a nation’s life, highly
necessary, in order to place the bodily and intellectual263
capacities under the guidance of some authority,
although this may be a mere abstraction. The
results which may thus be attained, can be studied in
Roman art, in spite of all its shortcomings.
Christianity now illuminated the world with its
clear light; but, dazzled by the divine brilliancy, everything
in art, science and social life appeared at first
dark, black, and hopeless. By degrees the minds of
men began to grasp the newly proclaimed eternal
law, through which alone the disturbed inner and
outer, spiritual and material, moral and intellectual,
static and dynamic forces of humanity were to attain
a perfect balance. In time man became conscious of
his nature, and emancipated his spirit in life and in
art. He began to strive upwards, to detach himself
from mere forms, however beautiful, if there was no
meaning, no soul, no sense in them; he sought in
everything the redeeming IDEA, without which no
modern work of art is possible. Thus, ancient art
had to yield to different principles. We shall have
in future to distinguish between artistic products of
reality, feeling, and intellect, till we shall find ourselves
obliged to seek for a combination of these
elements in order to understand modern art.
264
Historically and philosophically, from the point of
view of whatever religious denomination; in the eyes
of the devout believer, as well as in the eyes of the
sceptic; by the thinker, and by the mere automaton
of blood, flesh and bones; it must be admitted, that
the two most important events in the history of
humanity were the foundation of Christianity, and
the great migration of the Northern people. The one
was a spiritual movement, the other thoroughly
material.
It is usual, in tracing the historical development
of mankind in science and art, to follow the apparent
course of the sun, and to assume that progress
travelled with Indra, Ormuzd, Horus and Phoibos
Apollo, from East to West. This is, however, a mere
phrase. To understand and appreciate the history of
man, it is better to divide the globe into a southern
and northern hemisphere; for we find, that in analogy
with this subdivision, the material as well as the intellectual
development of life on our globe took place.265
We may even go further, and trace a distinction
between the development of life and art in the south
and north of the northern and southern hemispheres.
In the farthest south of the southern hemisphere we
have animal life and man, in the very lowest scale of
progressive development; whilst the further we travel
towards the north, the more animal life and the
intellectual capacity of man increase. This is also
the case in the northern hemisphere, up to the frigid
zone, where a reaction sets in. In the south the
moral power was more developed than the intellectual.
In the south the predominant static force, joined to an
ill-disciplined imagination, drove man to the field of
metaphysical speculation; the misunderstood laws of
nature, and the ignorance of the sluggish and indolent
masses, gave free play to superstition and priestcraft.
Thus the south (or south-east) was the birth-place of
various theogonies, and religious systems. Idolatry,
zoolatry, Sabaism, theism, pantheism, astrology, symbolism,
mysticism, alchemy, magic, and cabalism originated
in the south. The intellectual power in humanity,
with a strong tendency to regulate itself by moral
force, decidedly prevailed in the north, or north-west
of our globe; and we received philosophy, as well as
art, in their highest perfection, from Greece, the then
most northern dwelling-place of civilized humanity.
All the sciences which, through their beneficial influence
have promoted the welfare and progress of
humanity, were fostered in the North. In the North,266
astronomy, geography, history, botany, zoology, physiology,
anatomy, chemistry, geology, and cosmogony
were developed.
The savage of the South, up to our days, does not
go beyond an ornamentation with geometrical figures;
he can neither produce animals nor the human figure.
The Egyptians surpassed the Assyrians and Babylonians
in their monumental architecture, but in the
plastic reproduction of the human form they never succeeded.
Their sitting figures had legs and thighs
forming right angles in the side view, while in front
they were parallel; the drapery was merely marked
by lines, rarely interrupted by folds. In their historical
and allegorical bas-reliefs the composition is devoid
of elegance and correctness of outlines; but they
already showed a remarkable power in drawing
animals. The Indians reached a higher stage of progress
in sculpture; their mythology and poetry furnished
them with a variety of subjects, with which
they covered the walls of their shrines and temples;
after the doctrines of Buddha became more universal,
they attained grandeur in their architecture,
combined with a certain degree of elegance. The
human form is reproduced with ease; the proportions,
though too soft, too sensual, are more correct than
with the Egyptians.
So long as the Greek artists worked with reverence
and modesty, inspired by faith in the gods, they were
capable of understanding God’s revelation of beauty267
in man’s outer form. So long as the Romans unconsciously
worked in this spirit, they produced their
stupendous architectural monuments. When, however,
State and citizens were forced by false principles
to war with reality for a beggarly existence, or to
plunge into mere sensuous enjoyments, man came to
an open rupture with his destiny, and humanity might
have perished altogether in sin and iniquity, had not
Providence mercifully interfered by freeing, through
Christ, the ‘inner man’—that is, the intellectual and
moral force in man—thus preparing humanity for a
higher progressive life. The south of Asia had to go
through the same religious and artistic phases of development.
Buddhism stands to Brahmanism in the
same relation as Christianity to Mosaism and Heathenism.
Excepting, however, that both religions were
reformations of older established creeds, all analogy
between them ceases. The proof of the difference lies
in the diametrically opposed development produced by
Buddhism and Christianity. It is true that Buddhism
teaches us not to kill, not to steal, not to lie, and not
to be drunken. Christianity does the same. Buddha,
in twelve other ordinances, extols self-abnegation,
poverty, and commands all to meditate amongst the
tombs on the fleeting transitoriness of our earthly existence.
Christianity does the same. Christ, however,
redeemed and freed our spiritual nature, and brought
it into a self-conscious, vivid activity; whilst Buddhism
degraded this higher individual nature into268
a nonentity, denying that there was an independent
moral agent in us; teaching that we were phenomena
of an all-pervading divine power, by which universality
we should be absorbed after life. So long as Christianity
held, though in a different shape, nearly the
same mystic principles as Buddhism, the results in
art were the same; for our ecclesiastical art was a
revival of Buddhistic temples, with all their divisions
and sub-divisions, their pointed arches, their variegated
columns and pillars, the triforium, the altar
(Daghopa), cloisters, chapels, and crypts.
Christ’s divine words resounded at a period when
the Greeks had long turned their minds to the licentious
worship of the sensuous. The Egyptians, sighing
under their Roman taskmasters, had taken refuge in
dark mysticism, the meaning of which had been long
lost to them; the Jews were divided into quarrelling
sects, sunken in religious indifference, or occupied with
mere outward formalities, hating everyone and hated
by everyone. The Romans knelt tremblingly before
an imperial divinity, slaves and poor being considered
mere burdens on society; the rich were merciless,
debauched, and revelled in amusements; infanticides,
suicides, murder and decay, despair and annihilation,
were every-day occurrences. At this period, under
such circumstances, the divine Master died on the
cross, sealing with his death the one great tiding of
love: ‘that we are all children of one Father, who is
in heaven.’ The god of revenge of the old world269
was transformed into a God of inexhaustible love.
With the Jews and the ancients, he only was blessed
who had plenty on earth; now, the pure in mind,
whether poor or rich, weak or mighty, beautiful or
ugly, was extolled. God was not merely present in
the universe as its living soul, or in a burning bush,
in thunder and lightning, in growling volcanoes, in an
ark, a carved idol, a statue or in a temple. God was
present, wherever a kind, loving, and forgiving mind
was ready to be His ark or temple. Christ repudiated
all local gods; did not require any sacrifices of plants
or animals; did not prescribe any diet, or outward
sanguinary sign; did not allow polygamy; did not
proclaim his followers the only chosen children of the
Father of All; but taught the one and indivisible, and
ever-true law of peace, love, and tolerance. This doctrine
is as universal as intellect; it must be of as divine
origin as intellect itself; it is, and can be, the only
faith which must once unite Humanity into one great
loving and beloved brotherhood. What a change!
Not only a change; it was the building up of a new
glorious future; it was the re-establishment of the
lost balance between the working forces of humanity;
it was the redemption of our individual, moral, and
intellectual capacities; it was the enunciation of an
eternal law, under which humanity had, till then, unconsciously
developed, but of which it became
conscious in word as well as in spirit, through Christ.
Slavery in body or mind was, at least in principle, for270
ever abolished; and one of the noblest edifices of Byzantine
architecture in Italy, the church of St. Vitale
at Ravenna, was dedicated by Justinian, a Roman
Emperor, to the memory of a slave, who was martyred
for the sake of his piety and love. Hospitals for the
poor and sick, Xenodochia (refuges for strangers)
began to be built—architectural constructions of which
the whole ancient world could not boast.
The Christian spirit at first struggled to find a
corresponding form in art; the new wine was put
into the old vessels till it burst the decaying fetters
and issued forth in a life-giving art-stream, in two
directions:—
(a) As Romanesque art in the West, a decaying
continuation of Roman art;
(b) As Byzantine art in the East, a revival of
Asiatic art.
The beginning of Christian plastic and pictorial art
is to be looked for in subterranean caves; in catacombs,
used by Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians, Greeks,
Etruskans, and Romans as burial-places. The deep
but simple doctrines of Christ were at first hidden
in symbols, types, allegories and emblems. In a
Symbol we try to express a general idea by a special
outward sign, totally heterogeneous in form to the
meaning. Geometrical figures, plants, and animals,
furnish the elements of symbolism. In the Allegory
the artist represents congruities, traces connections,
unites analogies and separates differences.271
Imagination has in allegories an inexhaustible field
for composition. Types are signs, arbitrarily interpreted
as meaning something, which they may or
may not mean. Emblems with the Greeks were
golden or silver figures which could be detached from
vessels. With the Romans the word was used as a
synonym for symbol or metaphor. They became
with us Christians signs in colours. White or blue
was the emblem of innocence, red of joy, black of
mourning, green of hope, and purple of power or
dignity.
Myths generally had their origin in symbols and
allegories, which found interpreters, commentators,
exegists, and expounders in the priests of the ancient
world. Later, the myths were taken up by poets and
artists, and the dogmatic explanations of mystic signs
were transformed into legends, tales, sagas, or even
into historical facts. Nothing affords greater delight
to the inquisitive mind of man than a mystic
sign! The more unintelligible such a sign is, the more
welcome it is to the childish creature. Anything
veiled in doubt, shrouded in a symbol or type, has a
peculiar charm. Anything that can only be guessed
at, or dimly felt, is more admired than that which lies
clearly before our perceptive faculty. ‘Mysteries
were taught in symbols, in darkness at night-time;
the symbolic itself is to be compared to night and
darkness,’ says Demetrius. No wonder that symbols
were adopted by the first followers of Christ. They272
were too near to Egypt; the ancient world had not
yet altogether lost its hold on the minds of the
masses, and they could not have avoided availing
themselves of forms which were used by Indians,
Greeks, Egyptians, or Romans.
In the old catacombs of St. Sebastiano, St.
Calisto, St. Lorenzo, and Sta. Agnese at Rome, extending
altogether to about 750 miles, and in those
of St. Gennaro de Poveri, Sta. Maria della Sanitá,
and Sta. Maria della Vita at Naples, we find some
attempts at symbolism; the cross, the monogram of
Christ’s name ΧΡ {CHR}; or an ΑΩ {AÔ}, symbolical of the beginning
and the end of all things; a palm branch,
doves, the piscis vesica, and here and there a lamb. But
these signs belong to the fourth and fifth centuries
A.D. The inscriptions do not go farther back than
the second century. The homely simplicity of the
early Christians is distinctly to be traced in the absence
of all symbolic decoration during the first two
centuries. Gradually the Christians passed through
the phase of geometrical ornamentation. Triangles
and circles, crosses and squares, squares divided
into four squares, or the square taken three times,
giving twelve points, which number contains the sacred
numbers; three (the Trinity), five (the five sacred
wounds of Christ), seven (the seven cardinal virtues, or
the seven days of Creation), and twelve (the twelve
apostles), made their appearance. Seven was a holy
and mystic number with all the ancient nations.273
There were seven planets, and seven colours in olden
times; Apollo’s lyre had seven strings; Pan used seven
pipes for his flute. There are seven days of the week;
seven or three times seven are the critical days in medicine;
there were seven branches to the candlestick of
the Jews in the Temple of Jerusalem. Seven years
Jacob had to serve for Leah; and seven others for
Rachel; seven were the ears and kine of which
Pharaoh dreamt; seven were the gods in Scandinavian
mythology; seven were the sufferings of the Virgin
Mary; seven the cardinal virtues; seven the deadly
sins; seven are the sacraments of the Romish Church.
We cannot fail to see in the minutest details of history
and art, philosophy and religious systems, an eternally
progressing ‘one-ness’ pervading humanity as
a great whole.
Scarcely had the Christians adopted these signs,
when they passed on to the next phase, adorning
churches and tombs, altars and sacred vessels, with
emblems taken from the vegetable and animal
kingdoms, to serve as the holy visible outward
signs of some sacred inward grace or virtue. What
was immortal was to be expressed in mortal forms,
and the finite was to embody the infinite. Again,
the meaning hallowed the form; again, by degrees,
the form became all, and the spirit was altogether
lost through the mere outward sign. Art suffered for
centuries under the gloomy pressure of symbolism, and
in striving to disentangle itself, produced marvels, but274
it was only freed and attained higher forms of beauty
again, when humanity had gone back to those laws,
which when followed out had produced forms perfect
in themselves.
For centuries art revelled in the reproduction of
symbolical crows, eagles, peacocks, doves, gridirons,
pitchers, beehives, oxen, pigs, bulls, geese, violins,
fishes, &c., as the attributes of St. Sebastian, St. John,
Sta. Barbara, St. Thomas of Aquin, St. Cyprian, St.
Narcissus, St. Bernard, St. Sebaldus, St. Anthony, St.
Martin, St. Genesius, St. Chrysogonus, &c. A whole
science arose out of these symbols and emblems:
Iconology, which differs only in form from mythology.
The mere phenomena of nature were no longer embodied;
the individual spirit that lived in the form,
became all in all. We were thus introduced to a
two-fold world by Christian art.
(1) Into a spiritual world, in which our intellect
moved, as it were, in a circle. We took our beginning
in the infinite, lost our transitory bodily form, and
returned to the infinite from which we emanated—a
kind of idealisation of the corporeal.
(2) A world of external forms, which in their
individual phenomena had only a meaning as the
fragile temporary vessels of the eternal Spirit; this
Spirit was no longer a universal sum total by which
the individual was hereafter absorbed, but was assumed
to remain individualised through all eternity.
Artists and men worked not only for this world, but275
their deeds were to outlast all time to come. In this
two-fold world, Christian art went through the following
phases:—
(a) Through a historical phase, which commenced
with Christ’s birth, life, death, and resurrection, as the
new central point of all things. The eternal Spirit
was embodied, worked in a finite form, and freed
from it, regained its absolute divinity. This led in
time to sublime historical sketches in sculpture and
painting.
(b) Through a religious phase. The spirit, freed
and redeemed by Christ, sought in deeds of harmonious
love totally new spheres of action. Crystals,
flowers, trees, landscapes, animals and men, were
interwoven to proclaim not only outward beauty, as
with the Greeks, but a union of the inorganic and the
organic, the ancient and the new worlds, in honour of
one God in three emanations or personifications.
So long as bishops, priests, elders, deacons and
laymen, were occupied in trying to shape the new
spirit into words, art appeared to slumber. A too
strong storm-wind of dissension on metaphysical
niceties, of mystic and dogmatic hair-splittings,
hindered a plastic treatment of Christianity. Gnostics,
Nestorians, Manichæans, Donatists, Arians, and
Athanasians, &c., wasted the energies of the early
Christian artists, with their wild distinctions, their
incomprehensible differences. Quarrels as to whether
a blessing was more efficacious when bestowed with276
three or only with two uplifted fingers; whether
crosses of equal parts, or crosses in which one division
was smaller than the other, were more powerful, did
not promote the productive ability of artists. When,
under Constantine, Christianity was elevated to the
rank of a State religion, churches were built in honour
of the new faith. In the West the Roman Basilicæ
were given up to the religious worship of the Christians,
and in time, mixed with Teuton forms, produced
the Romanesque style. In the East a lively
revival of Asiatic forms, of Indian, Assyrian, and
Babylonian patterns, took place, and from these combinations
we have the so-called Byzantine style.
The general characteristics of the early Christian
style, in which the form of the Roman basilica
predominated, were the following:—The apsis, the
seat of the bishop and clergy, was semicircular.
Between the apsis and the nave stood the altar, or
rather the common table, canopied by a baldachin
supported by columns. The walls were covered with
figures of Christ. The main body consisted of a
broad and lofty central nave, on the two sides of
which there were two lower passages, divided by rows
of columns, supporting the upper wall of the nave
either by a common architrave, or by strong circular
arches. The upper wall was provided with large
broad windows, some being also placed in the low
walls of the side-aisles. The apsis was kept in mystic
darkness.
277
The threefold division of the Indian, Egyptian,
and Hebrew temples was carefully kept up. The
priests assembled in the apsis; the worshippers in
the hall or the galleries; and the penitents or sinners
stopped at the entrance. Of this period, we have the
Basilica of Reparatus, in Tingitanum (now Orléansville)
in Algeria, and another in El Hayz, on a small
oasis, in the Libyan desert. In the former the pillars
were probably square, and the apsis is not marked
outside. The latter is furnished with vaulted aisles,
adorned with pilasters and niches in the Romano-Egyptian
style.
Under Constantine, Christian churches of larger
dimensions were constructed; marble decorations and
a profusion of columns were common. The five aisles
still predominated, the Athanasians not having yet
succeeded in establishing the Trinitarian doctrine.
St. Peter’s at Rome (rebuilt in the 16th century); Sta.
Croce at Jerusalem, and the Church of Sta. Maria
at Bethlehem, built by Helena, the wife of Constantine,
were splendid specimens of the pure early Christian
style. The transept before the raised apsis was an
innovation. The central aisle (the nave) rises in
independent loftiness. The galleries are dispensed
with, as the dimensions of the building are considerably
increased. Light is admitted through windows
in the lofty central aisle. The lines all tend towards
the altar, and the high tribune. The nave is separated
from the transept by a lofty arch supported by pillars.278
The transept is provided with broad windows, throwing
the greatest amount of light on the altar, by which
means a sublime effect is attained. St. Peter’s at
Rome, and Sta. Maria at Bethlehem, are provided
with cross-beams, which do not accord with the
superstructure, which is too heavy. Before these
churches, in a court-yard, stood the fountain. These
fountains were common to all the Indian, Egyptian,
and Hebrew temples, because the sanctity of water
was recognised by all the religious sects of the Southeast.
San Paolo fuori le mura belonged to this class
of churches. It was constructed by Theodosius and
Honorius. ‘The mighty apsis, about eighty feet in
breadth, is increased in effect by a lofty transept,
which stretches in front of it, across the whole nave.
The body of the church has five aisles. Eighty
granite columns, connected by circular arches, rise in
four rows in order to divide the aisles, and to support
the upper wall of the central aisle, and the framework
of the roof. The main aisle opens into the transept
with a broad and lofty triumphal arch, which rests on
two colossal columns. A splendid atrium, surrounded
with colonnades, was added to the front, completing
the plan of this basilica.’ The high walls above the
central isle fulfilled a double purpose: they vividly expressed
an expanding tendency upwards, and filled the
soul with the idea of the infinite. This tendency was
still more strongly expressed in ecclesiastical or Gothic
architecture. Scenes from the life of Christ and his279
disciples were painted, and, in imitation of Roman decoration,
gilded panels and marble pavings were freely
used. After the fourth century the five aisles were
gradually abandoned, and only three were used,
symbolic of the Trinity. We have here a kind of
Indian or rather Buddhistic renaissance.
When Ravenna became the seat of the Byzantine
Exarchs (viceroys), the Ostrogoth influences which
were perceptible under Theodoric vanished, and a
freer organisation of the sacred edifices was introduced
by the addition of an independent bell-tower,
reminding us of the Buddhistic towers or pillars, the
Irish round towers, the minarets of the Mahomedans,
and the obelisks of the Egyptians. The tower rose
in a cylindrical form, without tapering. The roofs of
the churches were generally flat. Strong wall pillars,
connected by circular arches, framed the windows as
a repetition of the arcades below. The capitals retained
a double row of acanthus leaves, but the
imposts became stronger, taking the form of a coffin
or a small altar, adorned with crosses, or the monogram
of Christ. The churches of St. Vitale and St.
Apollinare in Classe, are models of this transition
style, which formed the link between the Romanesque
and the Byzantine. In these we find Greek marble
columns, profuse mosaics on gold grounds, panels
and medallions filled with historical scenes, or the
portraits of bishops, prophets, saints, and martyrs; the
decoration is heavy in outlines, the forms and figures280
too naturalistic; the taste gorgeous without refinement;
and the technical treatment rough and defective.
Whilst the architectural and ornamental styles were
receiving fixed forms as the pure Romanesque of the
West—through the influence of the Teutons, who became
masters of Italy and worked with greater stiffness,
simplicity, and angularity—Byzantine architecture
assumed, from the time of Justinian, a peculiarly
pompous, Asiatic type. The dome prevailed; the
ground-plan was composed of squares and circles.
Ceremonies and mysteries borrowed from the Egyptians,
Persians, and Romans, and the division of
priests into different castes, required a different arrangement
of the building. There was a place for the
high and one for the low clergy; another for the laymen;
the galleries were, in the old Jewish fashion,
assigned to the women; and, lastly, there was a place
for the penitent. These divisions and subdivisions
induced confusion and disunion in the whole plan.
Many of the Christian buildings have become, in
their turn, Mahomedan mosques, just as the Roman
basilicæ of old were turned into Christian churches.
The mightiest and the most gigantic of all Byzantine
churches is undoubtedly that of St. Sophia, at
Constantinople. First the building was a temple
dedicated to ‘Holy Wisdom,’ in the ancient or classic
meaning of the word. The edifice was destroyed by
fire, and rebuilt by Justinian in five years (A.D. 532–537).
Twenty years later it was much damaged by281
an earthquake. The injured dome was removed,
raised somewhat higher upon strengthened counterfoils,
and finished A.D. 563. The architects were
Anthemis of Tralles, and Isidorus of Miletus. The
ground-plan, ornamentation, and construction, aim in
combination at one single result—surprise. There is
a contradiction between lengths and circles, destroying
all effect of simple perspective. The various
cupolas, arches, and half-cupolas, connected with great
technical skill, have no organically united life. An
antediluvian world opens its gates to us. There is
everywhere something astounding and gorgeous, but we
are unable to discern the necessity for the existence of
the parts, to form a coherent total. The galleries with
their colonnades puzzle us. The outer square-form,
overtowered by a mighty cupola, and by half-cupolas,
is as incongruous as the ornamentation of the interior.
The shafts of the columns are amongst the finest
specimens of Roman architecture. Walls and pillars
are adorned with variegated marble panels in mosaic
patterns. The roofs of the dome and semi-domes are
covered with gold mosaics, set in coloured ornamented
frames, interspersed with figurative tapestry-like representations.
Christ, saints, and prophets, are suspended
in golden clouds. The effect on an untutored mind
is perfectly intoxicating. Though we do not underrate
the fully developed system of stone-roof construction,
we must draw the attention of our readers to
the heavy and shapeless capitals with the scarcely282
recognisable Ionic volutes, combined with Corinthian
leaf-work; all outlines being smothered by over-ornamentation,
destroying the beautiful effect of the
antique by a clumsy impost. Byzantine architecture
remained stationary for hundreds of years. The
religious spirit went hand in hand with their stiff,
lifeless art. Ignorance and credulity engendered in
the East a boundless intolerance of all divergence of
opinion, to which was added an equally boundless
toleration of falsehoods and frauds, so soon as these
means served to support the received opinions. An
intellectual standstill was the result of these principles,
and acted on art, rendering it in general as well as in
detail an unwieldy mixture of Egyptian, Assyrian,
Greek, and Roman forms, overloaded with Asiatic
filigree composed of lines drawn from Christian symbolism.
The Byzantine style of ornamentation will
always be, like that of China, a strange element to us.
However much the ingenuity of the winding, coiling,
and recoiling lines, interspersed with small and large
jewels, may interest us, though we may gaze at the
profusion of gold mixed with gaudy colours with a
kind of vague bewilderment, Byzantine art can never
appeal to our sense of beauty.
A most important branch of Byzantine ornamentation
was the treatment of metals. For flat decoration,
in the style of embroidery, nothing can excel the
use of metal, be it gold, silver, bronze, or steel, or a
combination of all these. There was a fantastic283
originality in these productions which, when combined
with an assiduous study of the antique, may
aid us in many instances to produce excellent specimens
of book-covers, patterns for ornamented salvers,
caskets, cups, candlesticks, crosses, &c. Byzantine
art, however, is the very opposite of classic art.
Repose, as a consequence of the liveliest vibration of
forms, and uniformity through a rich variation of
patterns, are the real elements of Byzantine and
Oriental art; in contradistinction to classic art, which
is based on the authority of purpose and a correct
subordination of details. This is the reason why the
free but well-systematised ornaments of classic Greece
were revived at this period with Assyrian, Babylonian,
and Persian textile patterns in metal, stone, or colours.
Nothing could be more appropriate for this mode of
ornamentation than leaf-work, flowers, creepers, &c.,
in the arrangement of which, the stern law of a well-regulated
distribution of the repeated forms must be
observed, to bring about a thorough balance between
rest and vibration, variety and uniformity.
Whilst Byzantium was exhausting all its powers,
and socially and artistically preparing to fall a prey to
iconoclasts and Mahomedans; the movement, next
in importance to the establishment of Christianity,
viz. the migration of the Northern Teutons, took
place.
We intend to group Kelts, Normans, Franks, Ostrogoths,
and Westrogoths or Visigoths, Alemanni,284
Burgundians, Vinilians, Ingavorians, Istavorians, Vandals,
Saxons, Anglo-Saxons, Markomanni, Rugi, Ubi,
Gurgerni, Herulians, Bojoarians, Gepidi, Quadi, Marsingi,
Sclavons, &c., all under the one name of North-European
Ayrans. It is an imperative duty, with the
art-historian, to group these scattered elements together,
according to some visible signs, which serve to
prove that, wherever we find an average facial angle of
90°, and an amount of brain averaging 92 cubic
inches, we have to deal with the Aryan group of
humanity. We avoid by this means divisions and
sub-divisions ad infinitum, and the danger of losing
ourselves in a labyrinth of petty national animosities
and jealousies. Art, based on ethnology, and a study
of climatological influences, has an immensely
Christianising power. We see in the common language
of forms, a common bond between those who
formed themselves into small political communities,
each in turn arrogating to themselves a kind of
‘chosen-people’ superiority, and turning their powers
against that very mother-stock from which they received
life, vigour, a common language, and a common
mode of thinking on supernatural matters, and the
phenomena of nature. The Kelts, Normans, Saxons,
Danes, Swedes, Teutons, Germans (Garmans, Wahrmans,
or Wehrmans, Brahmans), are all of the same
stock. Separated at different periods from their Trans-and
Cis-Himâlâyan ancestors, they lost more or less
of their old religious notions, customs, and manners,285
according to their lesser or greater intermixture with
the Turanian substrata of aborigines, who peopled the
countries wherein they settled. Next to the aspect
of the country in which they established themselves,
its climate must be taken into consideration. The
Aryan, snowed in for six months in Scandinavia, or
living on the coasts of the Baltic, obliged to fight for
every foot of fertile ground with a boisterous and obstinate
nature, must have developed otherwise than
the self-same Aryan who, as Kelt, took up his abode on
an island everlastingly green with refreshing verdure,
and was insulated from outer influences for long
periods, being thus led to look upon this detached
spot as the very centre of the universe around which
the five parts of our globe, the myriads of suns, stars,
planets, and comets revolved. Between the Aryan-Kelt
and the Aryan-Frank or Norman, there will be
a difference, brought about by the progress of time
and a freer intermixture with other branches of the
mother-stock who attained a higher kind of civilisation.
The Aryans in India lost themselves in metaphysical
abstractions, and made of fire, water, and air
a theogony in which the anthropomorphic element
was altogether effaced. The Aryans in the north
of Europe, in their cosmogony, held to the original
conceptions. They had to battle with fire, water,
and air, in the form of volcanoes, seas, rain, snow,
hail and storms; and finding that with their intellectual
power they could master these elements,286
they soon deprived them of their individual godhead,
and the whole earth, with its loves and passions,
its kindnesses and destructive tendencies, was looked
upon as a living being. They also knew of two
regions on earth—not of a spiritually created paradise
and hell, but of a Muspel-heim in the south, and a
Nifel-heim in the north: the one giving warmth, heat,
life; the other cold and death; the one light, the
other night; the one summer, and the other winter.
According to the Aryans of the north of Europe the
first cosmical heat produced the giant Ymir, or
Angelmir, who was nourished by the sacred cow
Audumbla, from which ran four streams of milk, the
four seasons. Like Brahmă, Ymir had a son and a
daughter; the daughter grew out of his arm, and the
son out of his foot. The Brahman was the outgrowth
of Brahmă’s mouth: the Kshattriya sprung from
his arms, the Vaisya grew out of his thighs, and the
S’udra out of his feet. Ymir’s son became the father
of the Hirmthursen (giants). By licking huge rocks
of sandstone the cow became the mother of Buri.
We thus pass from the pastoral into the agricultural
state, and have the legend of Jupiter and Io before
us. Buri had a son, Bor, who had three sons.
Odin, Guodan, Wuodan, Wodan, the All-pervader—the
‘Allvater’ (father of all), Willi and We—air, fire
and water. Wodan was also Baal, or the sun-god, in
which capacity he had only one eye (the sun); he was
also Apollo, the god of poetry, and of all things that287
love light and goodness. He was also the warfaring
god who led the people to battle, and protected the
valorous and virtuous. He had to fight against the
giant Ymir with his brothers. A reminiscence of
the wars of the Greek gods with the Titans, &c.; the
Indian Vritaghna or the Persian Veretaghna, with
the evil spirits of darkness, or the Egyptian Horus
with Typhon. Out of the dead body of Ymir, the
sons of Bor created everything. They formed the
earth of his flesh, the rocks of his bones, the skull
became heaven, and his blood furnished seas, rivers,
and streams. They then took four dwarfs and placed
Austri (in the East), Westri (in the West), Sudri (in
the South), and Nordri (in the North), to guard the
four corners of the heavens. Wuodan then embraced
the earth, and created his mighty son Thor, Donar,
Thunder, the protector of his mother-earth, and the
enemy of the wicked. He sent his lightnings against
giants, purified the air, dispersed frost and cold,
killed the demons of heat, silenced the destructive
storms, built bridges, made high-roads, furthered the
intercourse of man with man, and promoted civilisation.
The second son of Wuodan was Zio (Ziu,
Zeus, Jovis, Síva, also Tyr-Tiu or Tusco), the god
of battles, the destroyer. The third son was Fro
(Froho, Freyr, free), the happy god, the god of love
and marriage. Who does not recognise in Thor,
Froh, and Ziu—Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva—Jupiter,
Apollo and Mars? As with the Aryans on the288
Ganges, so also with those on the Rhine, the Elbe or
the Weser, and in Scandinavia, the passive element of
nature was embodied in female divinities. Hertha,
Nerthus (the earth), corresponds to S’ris, Hera, Ceres,
Isis; Holda is closely allied with Hilda, Hela, Hell
(the hidden), the goddess of death, Durga; and
Freyja represents Venus, the goddess of love.
These Aryans of northern Europe were known to the
ancients as Hyperboræans. They were tall, blue-eyed,
fair-haired, addicted to fighting, and sport.
Some of them erected, in analogy with Buddhists
and Egyptians, long thin towers reaching high into
the air, pointing mystically upwards. The ‘Crux
Ansata’ is reproduced in the Irish crosses, and their
mode of ornamentation, with its twisted rope-like
windings, and its serpent-like entanglements, points
to Indian patterns of a very ancient type. When
these Aryans of the north of Europe first dashed
into the south, and destroyed the Roman colossus,
they embraced Christianity with all the fervour of
their unbiassed hearts. Entirely given up to the
culture of the wild powers of nature, free from all
metaphysical subtleties—the genuine men of wild
oak, pine, and beech forests—they had no Vedas, no
Homer, no Zoroaster, no Hermes, and no Moses to
forget; they, in fact, only knew of an Allvater,
because no two Teuton tribes held the same opinions
on metaphysics. They had only one common
ground, honest work—industry (at those times concentrated289
on warfare); and therefore they received
Christianity with the greatest eagerness, and became
the only upholders, expounders, and propagators of
a religion for which their hearts were created. They
recognised in Christ’s words, what they heard in
whispers in their legends, and in the experiences of
their wild life—that we ought to love others as ourselves.
They added some of their old superstitions
to the pure faith, which they found already much
impregnated with Egyptian, Roman, and Indian signs
and symbols. In the beginning, whilst Christianity
was spreading all over Europe, they cultivated a
mixture of North European and Roman forms in
architecture as well as in ornamentation. They constructed
their churches with plans borrowed from
ancient times, and freely used geometrical symbols—for
the sign of the Indian Trimurty, that of the
shields of David or Solomon, and that of the Trinity,
did not differ. The pentagram is still made on every
loaf the Germans bake; it was a Druidical mystic
sign, and now serves good Christians to protect their
bread from being eaten by evil spirits. If we look
at our Tudor roses, or St. Katherine’s wheels, we may
clearly trace their origin to the Zodiacs of Egypt,
used as signs of the Makrokosm. The Teuton minds
found themselves suddenly dazzled by Christian
theology. Greek, Alexandrian, Nestorian, Arian,
Athanasian, Jewish and Christian mystics and casuists,
already abounded in the sunny Muspel-heim, in which290
the Teutons settled, and they had to exchange their
gloomy, foggy, and stormy Nifel-heim of reality, for a
spiritual Nifel-heim of doctrinal controversies. They
turned their elfs and sprites, their kobolds and gnomes,
their spirits of air, water, and fire, into so many evil
spirits. They looked upon the literature of the
Greeks and Romans, of which they knew nothing, as
the work of Beelzebub. Art was an enchantress of
the senses, and sculpture invented by the father of
all ‘lies,’ to deceive us with mock-creatures, to seduce
men, and to cheat them of their share in everlasting
salvation. In this gloomy spirit the newly converted
Teuton Christians built churches, and, sunken in the
most atrocious superstition, occupied themselves with
the casting out of devils. Nature was, in fact, one
grand dwelling-place for demons. Plague, poverty,
and sickness, were attributed to the agency of the
enemy of mankind. Epileptic fits and insanity were
signs that the demon had taken possession of unfortunate
wretches, who were either tormented or put to
death. Satan, with his legions of devils, continually
harassed mankind. To mortify and kill the body by
fasting, chanting, whipping, praying, and self-inflicted
mortification, was thought the only worthy and
cheerful occupation of mankind. In addition to these
religious tendencies, wars were waged with merciless
cruelty, either in favour of, or against the new Christian
superstition. A few so-called learned theologians
studied the Jewish Cabala, Egyptian mysteries,291
Zoroastrian magical calculations, Greek sophisms, and
Alexandrian Neo-Platonism. How could art have
flourished under such circumstances? Incantations,
astrological calculations, alchemical experiments, were
the order of the day. The few learned men, whether
architects or others, as soon as they produced anything
astounding, were said to have received their ideas or
plans, or their powers, from the devil. Who was to
create any beautifully shaped product of art, surrounded
by such misgivings?
This struggle lasted for several centuries; until,
stimulated by movements in the far East, the
Christian world left its secluded haunts in cloisters,
monasteries, churches, and castles, and mixed once
more with the outer world, and the whole gloomy
medley of Christianised northern mythology had to
yield to new forms in art.
Of this period we have a quantity of wood and
ivory carvings, swords in the form of crosiers, and
crosiers in the form of swords, cups and candlesticks,
censers and pastoral staffs, diptichs and triptichs,
recording scenes from the life of Christ or of some
saint. From the third century down to the twelfth,
year by year, artistic products of ornamentation grew
worse and worse. In the third century there was some
naturalness in the drapery, the folds being well
executed; but in the fifth century the treatment of
the human figure deteriorated; folds became more
rope-like; Christ was represented as very young,292
with or without a beard, often retaining the form of
Apollo, or of Hermes, carrying a lamb (the good
shepherd). Bodies of saints and holy persons grew
more and more emaciated; the anatomy was altogether
neglected. After the Crusades in the twelfth
century a marked improvement took place, but everything
was then impregnated with Mahomedan forms.
We should look with deep interest, and a sense of
filial piety, on these primitive attempts of Christian
art; the execution is bad, but the sentiments spread
by their carvings, faulty designs, and poor ornamentations,
are always excellent. The artists address us
in a rough and unskilful manner, yet some spiritual
truth awakens our better nature to exalted feelings
of love. This, however, teaches us that a good feeling,
a devout spirit, or a religious sentiment in the
artists, is not alone enough to produce works of
art.
Whilst Europe was expending its powers in the
re-arrangement of the disturbed social and religious
relations of humanity, a new movement arose which
threatened to overwhelm the whole world.
The new movement produced new art forms,
which in their turn serve to prove that art is a most
important factor of civilisation. Till lately, the erroneous
notion that art is a mere superfluous luxury has
appeared to prevail with us. Art was placed by
the ethicists in opposition to morals, and scientists
either altogether ignored it, or regarded it as diametrically293
opposed to science—a pretty but useless toy.
Art is as necessary to man as either ethics or science.
For man is endowed with an emotional element,
which must be satisfied and cultivated, in order to
raise him to the dignity of a human being using his
esthetical and intellectual faculties. It is vain to
attempt to draw lines of demarcation, between our
component material and spiritual elements. We recognise,
or become conscious, through our senses;
we sift the impressions made on our senses by the
power of our intellect: and we regulate and arrange
these impressions with the aid of our reason. We
may, therefore, strictly treat art scientifically, as well
as historically. For works of art may be considered
under the following heads:—
(a.) As the concrete embodiments of man’s
thoughts; the importance of the historical study
of which cannot be too strongly insisted upon,
for through it we can best become acquainted
with the past, from a social and religious point of
view.
(b.) As products that act upon our emotional,
intellectual, and reasoning faculties. It is our duty to
endeavour to ascertain what forms at different times,
and under various impressions, acted most agreeably
on us. We must learn to know the causes that produced
certain art forms at certain periods, amongst
certain people, under certain intellectual, social, and
religious conditions. We must inquire why such294
forms flourished, decayed, or revived at different
times.
(c.) We may examine the relations in which our
subjective impressions stand to the products of art,
and learn how far such sensations developed, in
time and space, to lead us to the consciousness of
beauty.
From pre-historic times to the advent of Christ
humanity was always engaged as a busy artist. In
studying the history of man we find that art ushers us
into life, gladdens the child, inspires the youth, and
interests the man. All our public actions, all our religious
ceremonies, our Court pageantry, our battles
and funerals, all our useful or useless surroundings,
pass more or less through an artistic process. In
analysing the historical development of humanity
at large, or that of a nation, or even that of single
individuals, we find that our sensations, intellect, and
reason have always been at work to create something
in their respective spheres. From the times of Plato
to our own all great thinkers have more or less occupied
themselves with the endeavour to establish the
principles of beauty; just as from Thales of Miletus,
and Demokritos to Bacon, Kant, Darwin, and Häckel,
they have sought to discover the principle of truth;
or from Manû, Confucius, Moses, the Apostles, and
Mahomet, to our own theologians, they have striven
to decide what is right or wrong. Art worked synchronically
with these endeavours, and its products295
are as numerous and variegated as our philosophical
systems, or our creeds and sects. Moreover, works of
art are, in many instances, far less perishable than
works of mere speculation. It becomes an imperative
duty, therefore, to study historically one of the most
important branches of human activity and ingenuity,
which furnishes us in its very products with a record
in lasting forms, with at least the same ardour,
earnestness, and veneration, with which we devote
ourselves to more varying, changing, and perishable
products. One fact must be obvious to every reader
of these pages—that real art has so exalted a sphere
that it can only exist to perfection wherever sciences
and morals are highly cultivated.
In cursorily summarising these pages, we find
that wherever and whenever beauty as the ideal,
truth as the real, or goodness as the ethical element
in humanity, has been one-sidedly cultivated, works
of art have not succeeded, for the harmony and union
of these three can alone be the aim of humanity.
This harmonious union it is difficult to attain, but we
must endeavour to become historically conscious of
the continuous striving of humanity to bring it about.
We find two forces constantly at work in humanity—the
one static (morals), the other dynamic (intellect)—bent
upon leading us to culture, progress, truth, goodness,
and beauty. In the fifth and at the beginning
of the fourth century B.C., for once in our development,
and then only for a short period, humanity296
undoubtedly succeeded in attaining a perfect balance
of its moral, intellectual, and esthetical faculties.
We may well call that period the golden age of
mankind in art. We still live on the mere interest
of that immense capital which was left by the Greeks
as an imperishable legacy to humanity. Whatever
the Greeks touched at that period they transformed
into pearls of beauty, gold of truth, and jewels of
goodness. They mounted the winged steed of imagination,
and were taken up to the bright heaven of
pure idealisation, where they saw boundless beauty in
forms, and acquired an immortal striving after truth
and the eternal laws of goodness, based on the very
organisation of our complicated double nature. This
dream of reality was short but vivid. Humanity
lives still in an ineffaceable longing and a burning
desire to regain that period. Like diamonds dropped
in unknown ages in small crystallisations into the
sand of rivers, the works of Greece appear in the
stream of time, serving as a fundamental basis of
beauty, truth, and goodness.
The well-balanced harmony was unfortunately
soon disturbed.
Giddy with victory and joy, the Greeks discarded
ethics; truth was made the handmaid of sophistry,
superstition, and scepticism; and beauty, in losing
her ideal glory, sank into the depths of sensualism
and realism. The harmony of the triad, which artists,
philosophers, and moral teachers had succeeded in297
establishing, was destroyed, and a discordant strain
of melancholy woe resounded through history, echoing
here and there some remnants of the old and
charming melodies. The conquests of Philip of
Makedon and Alexander the Great brought the East
into contact with the Greek spirit. The East furnished
mystic incomprehensibilities, and an egotistic
hatred of all art that could not be turned into money,
or used for serving some deity to buy up its good
graces. Buddhistic tenets joined hands with Brahmanic
conceits; Egyptian symbols were intermingled
with Hebrew practical enactments, without any ideal
aspirations. Greek philosophical diatribes were used
to prove the impossible possible, and the ‘supernatural’
most natural. Some Greeks attempted to
revive the antique mode of thinking, but they were
silenced by the Neo-Platonists, and thus the Greeks
themselves became the most successful apostles of
unnaturally-shaped superstitions, deadening the vivifying
spirit of Christ’s teachings.
The Romans had only one aim in history—to
regulate their conquests. The State was everything
with them; they taught us how to systematise the
actions of men, to make them useful citizens in this
world, and, when they left their legacy of infallible
authority to the Romish Church, how to prepare fit
inhabitants for another world. The outward realistic
form, proclaiming some inward mystic grace or meaning,
became everything. Base hollowness in art and298
morals, vapid verbiage in philosophy, unnatural profligacy
and licentiousness, mean covetousness and
heartless egotism, brought humanity intellectually,
morally, and spiritually, to the brink of destruction.
Everyone thirsted for a change—reality was unbearable.
Men strove, in deadening their bodies, to seek
the salvation of their souls. The realistic tendency
of the degenerated ancient times gave way to blind
faith, which by degrees obtained an exclusive hold
on the ideal in man, ignoring his reflective and
reasoning nature, working only on the emotional,
and burying antiquity under the gloomy ruins of the
Middle Ages. For more than 1000 years beauty
had to yield to mystic symbolism, truth to superstitious
prejudice, and ethics to a morbid sentimentality
and a cruel hierarchical despotism. Dogmatic
scholasticism sought to foster elegance of forms; to
create artistic enthusiasm; but this attempt was vain.
When, however, the dogmatic ice began to melt in
the burning rays of the rising sun of a freer inquiry;
when the Romish Church, anxious for some powerful
helpmate to check the rays of this sun, and work
on the gloomy, stupified emotions of the masses,
called in to aid her the spirit of the Greeks in art,
she prepared a bright and happy future for humanity.
The reformation in art-forms, and the revival of the
antique spirit in poetry, was soon followed by a
revival in science and ethics. Philosophy began to299
unravel the mysteries of nature, and to make natural
forces subservient to man’s wants and happiness.
Ethics, based on freedom of thought, grew day by
day more powerful, and Greek forms were used in
the purified spirit of Christ, divested of strange and
unintelligible dogmas.
Having secured the right freely to store up the
results of our intellectual investigations, we must
devote our artistic energies, through an assiduous
study of the historical development of art, to a corresponding
culture of our sense of beauty. This is
essential, if we hope to stand as high artistically, as
we do technically and mechanically. Without culture
we cannot hope to vie with other nations in
high art, in historical paintings, frescoes, sculpture,
and architecture. A thorough knowledge of art-history
will destroy tasteless prejudices, and enable us
progressively to develop the past without becoming
guilty of anachronisms. Inspired by the firm conviction
that the culture of taste leads to the very
highest development of ethics, and that art can only
flourish in strict harmony with truth and goodness,
we can progress, but not otherwise.
In this volume we have brought the reader down
to the art of the Mahomedans, and trust in a future
work to trace the historical development of art to
our own times. What we have said in praise of
Greek art, must not be misunderstood to imply that,
since it flourished, we have not made gigantic progressive300
strides in sculpture, architecture, and painting;
but we have done so only when we have worked
in the Greek spirit, that is, on the principles which
stamped their works of art with perfection.
301
Agincourt, ‘Histoire de l’Art par les Monuments’. 6 vols. Fol. Paris,
1823.
Asiatic Researches.
Birch, ‘Ancient Pottery.’
Blanc (Charles), ‘Grammaire des Arts du Dessin.’ Paris, 1870.
Bohlen (von), ‘Das alte Indian.’ Königsberg, 1830. 2 vols.
Bökh, Works, 1811. Leipzig.
Botta and Flandin, ‘Monuments de Ninive,’ 1849. Paris.
Boutell, ‘Arms and Armour.’
Brugsch, ‘Histoire d’Egypte,’ 1875. Leipzig.
Bunsen, ‘Place of Egypt in History of the World,’ vol. 5.
Burnouf, ‘Introduction à l’Histoire du Buddhisme Indien.’ Paris, 1844.
Carrière (Moriz), ‘Die Kunst im Zusammenhange der Kulturentwickelung.’
5 vols. Leipzig; Brockhaus, 1871.
Champollion, ‘Lettres écrites de l’Egypte.’
‘Christy, Museum Catalogue,’ 103 Victoria Street. By A. W. Franks,
M.A., Curator. Photographs of same.
Cox, ‘History of Mythology of Aryan Nations.’
Cox, ‘Manual of Ancient Mythology.’
Cox, ‘Mythology of the Aryan Nations.’ Longmans, 1870. 2 vols.
Creuzer (Dr. Friedrich), ‘Symbolik und Mythologie.’ Leipzig and
Darmstadt, 1836. 4 vols.
Curtius, ‘History of Greece.’
Darwin, ‘Expression of the Emotions.’ London, 1872.
Davis (Sir J. F.), ‘China.’ John Murray, 1857.
Denon, ‘L’Egypte.’
D’Hancarville, ‘Recherches sur l’origine, l’esprit et le progrès des Arts
de la Grèce.’ London, 1785.
Dyer, ‘History of the City of Rome.’
302
Dyer, ‘History of Rome.’ 1864.
Dyer, ‘Pompei.’
Eber (Dr.), ‘Ægypten und die Bücher Moses.’ Leipzig, 1868.
Egypt, Guide to. Written by Wilkinson. John Murray.
Engelhardt, ‘Denmark in the Old Iron Age.’ London, 1866.
‘Ethnological Society Transactions,’ 1869. Easter Island.
Fellows, ‘Asia Minor and Lycia.’
Fergusson (J.), ‘Indian Architecture.’
Fergusson (J.), ‘Palaces of Nineveh and Persepolis Restored.’ London,
1851.
Figuier, ‘Earth and Sea.’ 1870.
Flaxman, ‘Lectures.’
‘Fortnightly Review’—Spencer’s articles on Nature Worship. Chapman
and Hall.
Gailhabaud, ‘Monuments de l’Architecture.’
Gau (F. C.), ‘Antiquités de la Nubie.’ Paris, 1821–27.
Gibbon, ‘History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.’
Gladstone (Right Hon. W. E.), ‘Homeric Synchronism.’ London,
1876.
Gould (Baring), ‘Origin and Development of Religious Belief.’ Rivingtons,
1869.
Grote, ‘History of Greece.’
Guilleman, ‘Heavens.’
Harrison (Charles), ‘Catalogue of a Series of Photographs from the
Collection of the British Museum.’ W. A. Mansell & Co.
Hegel, ‘Æsthetik.’ Berlin, 1842. 3 vols.
Hegel, ‘Philosophy of History.’
Herder, ‘Ideen zur Geschichte der Menschheit.’ Stuttgart, 1827. 4 vols.
Hirt, ‘Monography of the Temple of Solomon.’
Hutcheson, ‘An Inquiry into the Origin of our Ideas of Beauty and
Virtue.’ London, 1729.
Hyde, ‘Historiæ Religionis veterum Persarum.’ Oxonii, 1700.
‘International Congress of Prehistoric Archæology.’ 1868.
Jennings (Hargrave), ‘The Rosicrucians.’ London, 1870.
Jones (Owen), ‘Apology for Colouring the Greek Court of the Crystal
Palace.’
Jones (Sir Wm.), Works. London, 1799. 6 vols. 4to.
303
Kant, ‘Æsthetik.’ Leipzig, 1838.
King, ‘Antique Gems.’
Kingsborough (Lord), ‘Antiquities of Mexico.’ London, 1831–48.
9 vols. Imp. Folio.
Klaproth, ‘Nouv. Jour. Asiat.’ vol. 5.
Layard, ‘Nineveh.’
Lenormant, ‘Manual of the History of the East.’ 2 vols. Asher
and Co., 1875.
Lepsius, ‘Denkmäler.’ Berlin.
Lewes, ‘Biographical History of Philosophy.’
Lubbock, ‘Origin of Civilization and Primitive Condition of Man.’
Particularly chapters on Religion, and page 119. 1870.
Lubbock, ‘Prehistoric Times.’
Lübke (Dr.), ‘History of Art.’ Smith, Elder, and Co., 1868.
Madsen, ‘Afbildinger af Danske Oldsager og Mindesmar.’ Ker.
Kjöbenhavn, 1872.
‘Manual of Ethnology.’ John Murray.
Mommsen, ‘Römische Geschichte.’ Berlin, 1868.
Müller (C. O.), ‘Ancient Art and its Remains.’ London: B. Quaritch,
1852.
Müller (Max), ‘Chips from a German Workshop.’ Longmans, 1868.
Newton, ‘Second Catalogue of Vase Rooms, British Museum.’
Nott and G. R. Gliddon, ‘Types of Mankind.’ Dr. Morton.
Oppert (Dr. J.), ‘Expéd. scient. en Mésop.’
Parthey (Dr.), ‘De Philis insula ejusque monumentis commentatis.’
Berolini, 1830.
Philosophy. See Smith’s ‘Dictionary of the Bible.’
Piper (Prof. Ferdinand), ‘Mythologie der Christlichen Kunst.’ Weimar,
1847.
Potter, ‘Antiquities of Greece.’ Edinburgh, 1818.
‘Pyramid Builders of the Mississippi.’
Rawlinson, ‘Herodotus.’
Rawlinson, ‘Manual of Ancient History.’
Rémusat (Abel), ‘Mélanges Asiatiques.’ vol. 1.
Sandreczki (C.), ‘Reise nach Mosul und durch Kurdistan.’ Stuttgart,
1857. 4 vols.
304
Schliemann (Dr.), ‘Discoveries at Hassarlik.’
Schnaase (Dr. E.), ‘Geschichte der Bildenden Künste.’ Düsseldorf,
1866.
Schwegler, ‘History of Philosophy.’
Sef (Abd Alla), ‘Relation de l’Egypte traduite par Silvestre de Sacy.’
Paris, 1810.
Semper (Dr.), ‘Die Textile Kunst.’ Frankfurt a. M., 1860.
Shaftesbury (Earl of), ‘Characteristics.’ 1743. 3 vols.
Smith, ‘Ancient History.’
Smith, ‘Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities.’
Spruner, ‘Historical Atlas.’
Squier and Davis, ‘Ancient Monuments of the Mississippi Valley.’
Stephens, ‘Runic Monuments.’ 2 vols. London, 1866.
Stevens, ‘Flint Chips.’ Bell and Daldy, 1870.
Stuart & Revett, ‘Antiquities of Athens.’ London, 1827.
Taine, ‘Lectures on Art.’
‘Traveller’s Art Companion.’ Principal Sculptors. See pages 414 et seq.
‘Traveller’s Companion, The.’ Bell and Daldy, 1868.
Tylor, ‘Primitive Culture.’ London, 1871.
Uhlemann (Dr. Max), ‘Thoth oder die Wissenschaft der alten Aegypter.’
Göttingen, 1855.
Valeriani (Prof. Domenico), ‘Etrusco Museo Chiusino.’ Poligrafia
Fiesolana, 1839.
Vaux, ‘British Museum.’
Vogüé (Le Comte de), ‘Le Temple de Jérusalem.’ Paris, 1864.
Wilkinson, ‘Manners and Customs of Egyptians.’ Murray, 1855.
Small edition.
Winkelmann, Werke. 2 vols.
Worsaae, ‘Norse Antiquities.’ Copenhagen, 1859.
Zerffi (Dr.), Historic Art Studies, with 1030 illustrations. ‘Building
News,’ 1872–6.
305

LONDON: PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET

Punctuation and spelling were made consistent when a predominant
preference was found in this book; otherwise they were not changed.
Simple typographical errors were corrected.
Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines were retained.
Some words were printed both with and without accent marks. The ones
clearly meant to be the same (e.g., Index references to the other
form) were changed; the rest appear both ways.
Devices unable to display Greek and some other symbols may
substitute question marks or other placeholders.

A MANUAL
OF THE HISTORICAL
DEVELOPMENT OF ART
Pre-historic—Ancient—Classic—Early Christian
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO
Architecture, Sculpture, Painting, and Ornamentation
BY
G. G. ZERFFI, Ph.D., F.R.S.L.
ONE OF THE LECTURERS OF H. M. DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND ART.
 
 
 
LONDON:
HARDWICKE & BOGUE, 192 PICCADILLY, W.
1876.


LONDON: PRINTED BY
SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
AND PARLIAMENT STREET
The right of translation is reserved.
This Book is Inscribed
TO
E. J. POYNTER, Esq., R.A.
DIRECTOR OF THE ART TRAINING SCHOOLS,
SOUTH KENSINGTON,

IN RECOGNITION OF HIS GENIUS AS A PAINTER,
AND OF
HIS UNTIRING EFFORTS IN PROMOTING
HIGHER ART EDUCATION.
vii
An experience of more than eight years as Lecturer
on the ‘Historical Development of Art,’ at the
National Art Training School, South Kensington, has
convinced me of the necessity for a short and concise
Manual, which should serve both the public and students
as a guide to the study of the history of art.
In all our educational establishments, colleges, and
ladies’ schools, the study of art-history, which ought
to form one of the most important subjects of our
educational system, is entirely neglected. To suggest
and to excite to such a study is the aim of this book.
It would be impossible to exhaust in a short volume
even that section of the subject which I propose to
treat, and the most that can be done is to give
outlines, which must be filled in by further studies.
Art is at last assuming a better position with us,
thanks to the influence of the lamented Prince Consort,
to whom we undoubtedly owe the revival of the
culture of sciences and arts, and the indefatigableviii
exertions of the Government, aided by munificent
grants of Parliament. But much more is to be desired
from the public. If the ‘National Association
for the Promotion of Social Science’ is a faithful
mirror of our intellectual stand-point, we certainly
have not yet attained a very high position as an
artistic national body. For twenty years the Association
has met and has discussed a variety of topics, and
this year, for the first time, it occurred to the learned
socialists that there was such a factor in humanity as
art, and the congress allowed an art-section to be
opened under the presidency of Mr. E. J. Poynter,
R.A., the director of the ‘National Art Training
School.’ Four questions were proposed for discussion,
and I gave anticipatory answers to these, before the
congress was opened, in my introductory lecture to
the students of the Art Training School. These
answers will serve as so many reasons for the issue of
this book, and I therefore reproduce them here, with
the questions to which they refer.
1. ‘What are the best methods of securing the
improvement of Street Architecture, especially as regards
its connection with public buildings?’
Answer.—Architects must be trained in art-history
to prevent them from committing glaring anachronisms
in brick, mortar, stone, iron, wood, or any other building
material. Our street architecture cannot improveix
so long as we allow any original genius to copy
mediæval oddities, and revive by-gone monstrosities
at random, in perfect contradiction to the spirit of our
times.
2. ‘How best can the encouragement of Mural
Decoration, especially Frescoes, be secured?’
Answer.—This might be attained by enlarging the
area of national interest beyond horse-racing, pigeon-shooting,
and deer-stalking, the buying of old china,
mediæval candlesticks, ewers and salvers, or of old
pictures, that can scarcely be seen; and extending
our general art-support to our own talented artists, even
though they may not all be Michael Angelos or
Raphaels. We could allow them to decorate the
walls of our town-houses, public buildings, chapels,
churches, banks, and museums. We must, however,
first train their minds to a correct appreciation of art-history,
of the world’s history, and of the glorious
History of England, thus enriching their imaginations
with the illustrious deeds of the past, in which they
may mirror our present state, and foreshadow a continually
progressing glorious future. For there is a
mysterious and marvellous ‘one-ness’ in the religious,
social, and artistic development of humanity which I
have tried in the pages of this book continually to
point out.
No civilised and wealthy country on the surface ofx
our globe, can boast of more heroic deeds on sea and
land, in and out of Parliament; of more splendid conquests
by warlike and peaceful means than ours.
The Wars of the Roses, the colonisation of America,
the occupation of India, the peopling of Australia,
the struggles of conformists and non-conformists, of
Cavaliers and Roundheads, of Churchmen and
Puritans, of Independents and Royalists, of Papists
and Covenanters, of Iconoclasts and Free-thinkers, all
offer stirring scenes; and yet, if we want to see on
canvas pictures of our past, we must turn to France
or Germany for them. I am sorry to say that until
lately the Iconoclasts have borne all before them. As,
however, the ‘National Association’ has at length
consented to allow the discussion of art, and as words
are in general precursors of deeds, we may expect
some results from our awakened interest in art-matters.
3. ‘What is the influence of academies upon the
art of the nation?’
Answer.—Academies have no influence whatever,