# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2011
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Frank Wedekind, The Awakening of Spring
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/35242/35242-h/35242-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

THE AWAKENING OF SPRING.
A Tragedy of Childhood
Net, $1.25. By mail, $1.35


SUCH IS LIFE. A Play in Five Acts
Net, $1.25. By mail, $1.34


RABBI EZRA AND THE VICTIM.
Two Stories
Net, 25c. By mail, 29c


THE GRISLEY SUITOR. A Story
Net, 25c. By mail, 29c.


A TRAGEDY OF CHILDHOOD
BY
FRANK WEDEKIND
Translated from the German by Francis J. Ziegler


THIRD EDITION


PHILADELPHIA
BROWN BROTHERS
1912
Copyright, 1910
BY
BROWN BROTHERS
[Pg v]

That it is a fatal error to bring up children, either
boys or girls, in ignorance of their sexual nature
is the thesis of Frank Wedekind's drama “Frühlings
Erwachen.” From its title one might suppose it a
peaceful little idyl of the youth of the year. No idea
a could be more mistaken. It is a tragedy of frightful
import, and its action is concerned with the development
of natural instincts in the adolescent of both
sexes.


The playwright has attacked his theme with European
frankness; but of plot, in the usual acceptance of the
term, there is little. Instead of the coherent drama of
conventional type, Wedekind has given us a series of
loosely connected scenes illuminative of character—scenes
which surely have profound significance for all
occupied in the training of the young. He sets before
us a group of school children, lads and lassies just past
the age of puberty, and shows logically that death and
degradation may be their lot as the outcome of parental
reticence. They are not vicious children, but little ones
such as we meet every day, imaginative beings living in
a world of youthful ideals and speculating about the
mysteries which surround them. Wendla, sent to her
grave by the abortive administered with the connivance
of her affectionate but mistaken mother, is a most lovable
creature, while Melchior, the father of her unborn
[Pg vi]
child, is a high type of boy whose downfall is due to a
philosophic temperament, which leads him to inquire
into the nature of life and to impart his knowledge to
others; a temperament which, under proper guidance,
would make him a useful, intelligent man. It is Melchior's
very excellence of character which proves his
undoing. That he should be imprisoned as a moral degenerate
only serves to illustrate the stupidity of his
parents and teachers. As for the suicide of Moritz, the
imaginative youth who kills himself because he has
failed in his examinations, that is another crime for
which the dramatist makes false educational methods
responsible.


A grim vein of humor is exhibited now and then, as
when we are introduced to the conference room in
which the members of a gymnasium faculty, met to
consider the regulation of their pupils' morals, sit beneath
the portraits of Pestalozzi and J. J. Rousseau
disputing with considerable acrimony about the opening
and shutting of a window. The exchange of unpleasant
personalities is interrupted only by the entrance of the
accused student, to whose defense the faculty refuses to
listen, having marked the boy for expulsion prior to the
formal farce of his trial.


Wedekind has been accused of depicting his adults
as too ignorant and too indifferent to the needs of the
younger generation. But most of us will have to admit
that the majority of his scenes and characters seem very
true to life.


“Frühlings Erwachen” may not be pleasant reading
exactly, but there is no forgetting it after one has
perused it; there is an elemental strength about it which
[Pg vii]
grips the intellect. As a play it stands unique in the
annals of dramatic art. That it has succeeded in attracting
much attention abroad is shown by the fact
that this drama in book form has gone through twenty-six
editions in its original version and has been translated
into several European tongues, Russian included,
while stage performances of the work have been given
in France as well as in Germany.


The Teutonic grimness of the work puzzled the
Parisians, who are not used to having philosophy thrust
at them over the footlights; but in Germany “Frühlings
Erwachen” proved much more successful. In Berlin,
indeed, it has become part of the regular stock of plays
acted at “Das Neue Theater,” where it is said to be
certain of drawing a crowded audience. That the play
is radically different from anything given on the American
stage is undoubtedly true. It must be remembered,
however, that the Continental European playwright regards
the stage as a medium of instruction, as well as a
place of amusement. The dictum of the Swedish
dramatist, August Strindberg, that the playwright
should be a lay priest preaching on vital topics of the day
in a way to make them intelligible to mediocre intellects,
is not appreciated in this country as it should be; but
once admit the kinship of dramatist and priest, and the
position taken by Wedekind in writing “Frühlings
Erwachen” becomes self-evident. There should be no
question concerning the importance of his topic, nor
should it be forgotten that the evident lesson he seeks
to inculcate is one now preached by numerous ethical
teachers. In order to estimate the relationship of this
play toward modern thought in Germany, it must be
[Pg viii]
understood that Wedekind's tragedy is merely one of
the documents in a paper war which has resulted at last
in having the physiology of sex taught in many German
schools. The fact that Wedekind's dialogue is frank
to a remarkable degree only makes his preachment more
effective: “One does not cure the pest with attar of
roses,” as St. Augustine remarked.


Conditions in this country are not so very different
from those depicted in this play, and evidence is not
lacking that gradually, very gradually, we are beginning
to realize that ignorance and innocence are not
synonymous; that an evil is not palliated by ignoring its
existence; the Podsnappian wave of the hand has not
disappeared entirely, but it is not quite as fashionable
as of yore. All things considered, the moment
seems appropriate for the publication, of “Frühlings
Erwachen” in an English version. The translation
given in this volume follows the German original as
closely as the translator can reconcile the nature of the
two languages.


Considered as a work of literature, “Frühlings
Erwachen” is remarkable as one of the few realistic
studies of adolescence. Its deceptive simplicity is the
hall mark of that supreme literary ability which knows
how to conceal art by art. Dealing with adolescence, an
unformed period of human life, it is necessarily without
the climaxes we expect in dramas in which the characters
are adult, and the gruesome scene in the churchyard
with which the play closes—a scene with such
peculiar symbolism could spring only from a Teutonic
imagination—leaves much unended.


It is interesting to note, by the way, that Wedekind
[Pg ix]
himself appears as the Masked Man when “Frühlings
Erwachen” is given in Berlin, a fact which gives this
scene somewhat the nature of a parabasis.


Frank Wedekind's name is just beginning to be
heard in America. In Germany he has been recognized
for some time as one of the leaders in the new art of
the theatre. Naturally enough, his plays are too outspoken
in their realism to appeal to all his fellow-countrymen.
But, if certain Germans reject this
mental pabulum, others become intoxicated by it, and,
waxing enthusiastic with a flow of language almost bacchic,
hail Wedekind as the forerunner of a new drama—as
a power destined to infuse fresh strength into the
German stage. “With this drink in its body,” writes
one admirer, “the public will never more endure lyrical
lemonade, nor the dregs of dramatic penury.”


Again, these enthusiasts compare Wedekind's work
to that of the pre-Shakesperian dramatists, or even to
that of the Bard of Avon himself, both of which comparisons
are difficult to grasp by an English-speaking
student of the British drama.


Wedekind, it is true, has a habit of using the news
of the day as material for plays, just as the old English
dramatists did when they wrote “domestic tragedies.”
He has a fondness, moreover, for gruesome situations
such as we can imagine appealing to the melancholy
genius of Webster; but of the childlike simplicity which
marks much of the Elizabethan drama there is not a
particle.


Certainly there is no trace of the gentle romanticism
which one finds in some of the other modern German
realists. Gerhart Hauptmann can turn from the grim
[Pg x]
task of dramatizing starvation, as he does in “Die
Weber,” to indulge in the naïve Christian symbolism of
“Hannele,” or the mythological poetry of “Die Versunkene
Glocke.” Even the iconoclast Strindberg
writes romantically at times, and gives us something resembling
Maeterlinck; but when Wedekind departs
from pure realism his fancy creates a Gothic nightmare
of horrors, peopled with such terrifying creatures as the
headless suicide wandering amid the graves.


Wedekind's kinship to the dramatists of the “domestic
tragedies” is shown clearly in the tragedy “Musik,”
which deals with a phase of music study only too common
in Germany. It is asserted that of the thousands
of students of music in that country not one in a hundred
amounts to anything artistically, while of those
who master their art not one in a thousand is capable
of profiting financially by it. It is this condition of
affairs which gives additional importance to this recent
work of Wedekind.


“Musik” is described by the author as a depiction of
morals in four pictures (“Sittengemälde in vier Bildern”),
to each of which he has given a separate
title, a method which enables him to indulge in his
trick of applying a pretty, inoffensive name to a tragic
subject, as he does in picture two of this series, which
he calls “Behind Swedish Curtains,” and which represents
the interior of a jail. The curtains to which the
playwright refers are the iron bars of the prison.


The central character in “Musik,” Klara Huhnerwadel,
is a neurotic girl, whose mad love for her singing
teacher has entangled her in the meshes of the legal
net drawn to catch Madame Fischer, a notorious character
[Pg xi]
in real life, who actively engaged the attention of
the German police authorities not long ago. At the instigation
of her lover, Josef Reissner, and with money
supplied by Else Reissner, Josef's wife, Klara flees
to Antwerp, only to find existence insupportable there,
and to return to a life in jail which drives her to the
edge of insanity. Released from imprisonment, she
continues her relationship with her teacher until their
association becomes public scandal, and then takes refuge
in the country, intending to devote her life to her
illegitimate child. The child dies, however, and there
descends upon Klara what Wedekind describes as “the
curse of the ridiculous.” In an outburst of frightful
anguish she is filled with “a nameless loathing of the
horrible fate of being racked to death by bursts of
sneering laughter,” and raves in hysteria by the bedside
of her dead baby.


Upon this final picture Wedekind has expended his
full power of biting irony. Josef Reissner, the cause
of Klara's misfortune, is thanked by her mother for all
he has done for her, while Franz Lindekuh, a literary
man, whose rôle in the play has been that of a good
Samaritan, is accused as the author of her disgrace.
During previous tribulations Reissner has assured
Klara repeatedly that her suffering would develop her
artistic temperament and result in bringing her fame
as a singer. At the end, when Klara, after undergoing
imprisonment, exile, poverty, public disgrace and the
loss of her beloved child, finds herself bereft of even
Reissner's regard, she is led away in a stupor from her
miserable attic. It is then, in reply to a wish of the
physician that she will suffer from no lasting mental
[Pg xii]
disturbance, that Lindekuh preludes the fall of the
curtain by the caustic remark: “She'll be able to sing a
song.”


Here, truly, is a tragedy! There can be no doubt but
what Wedekind has handled it in a powerful fashion.
He sounds the tragic note upon the first rising of the
curtain, a note which grows in intensity until the auditor
wonders if it is possible for it to reach higher——and
yet it swells.


“Frühlings Erwachen” is the best known of the Wedekind
dramas and the most original in its treatment. It
has peculiarities, however, which make it somewhat
difficult to give as a stage performance. To see what
this German playwright can do on more conservative
lines, and to appreciate his mastership of the conventional
technique of the stage, one must turn to the
dramas of modern life in which he handles such subjects
as socialism, woman's emancipation, naturalism
and divorce; frequently, it must be confessed, in a way
which Americans refuse to tolerate upon the stage,
despite their fondness for the same sort of information
when supplied by the newspapers.


Selecting his characters from all classes of life, Wedekind
brings to their making the knowledge of life as
the police reporter sees it plus the science of a skilled
psychologist. There is something sardonic about his
art. He does not appear to sympathize with any of his
characters, but to stand outside of life making note of
the foibles and failures of his fellow-creatures. His
irony appears in the most tragic places, and his dialogue,
wrought with a cunning which requires strict
attention on the part of the auditor if its subtleties
[Pg xiii]
would be grasped, serves Wedekind as an instrument
for dissecting souls which he wields quite regardless of
the mess he may make in the operating room.


None knows better how to show the peculiarities of a
neurotic woman, or to betray a man's weakness by a few
short sentences. The demonstration is direct and
thorough, and we watch it fascinated, as we might the
work of a skilled vivisectionist. When the job is finished
we feel convinced that Wedekind's personages are
real, although many of them are not the kind we enjoy
meeting in actual life. We do meet them daily, nevertheless,
tolerating them chiefly by our own polite habit
of ascribing imaginary virtues to those that possess
them not.


Take that curious comedy, “Der Marquis von
Keith,” as an example of Wedekind's skill as a psychologist.
“Comedy” the author names it himself, but
he might just as well have called it a tragic farce, so
thoroughly has he mingled the laughable with the tragic.
The protagonist of this peculiar play (the underlying
tone of which has been likened musically to a Dies Irae
written by Offenbach) is the illegitimate son of a teacher
of mathematics and a gypsy trull, an adventurer who
keeps on the shady side of the law, and who, despite his
practical view of life in general, is an idealist in several
particulars. His title of Marquis von Keith is merely
a nom de guerre, and his attempts to obtain a fortune
involve methods which the world acclaims as evidences
of wonderful financial ability, or stigmatizes as the
practices of a sharper, according to their success or failure.
Resourceful, energetic, unhampered by vain regrets
or restrictions of conventional morals, wasting
[Pg xiv]
not a moment upon a scheme which has proved unprofitable,
von Keith is a forceful personage who manages
to pass in Munich as a wealthy American, even when
his pockets are empty and the sheriff is at the door.
His own view of life is embodied in his definition of
sin as “the mythological symbol for bad business,” and
his accompanying explanation that good business can
be conducted only by a person accepted by the existing
order of society.


In other words, von Keith is a hypocrite for revenue
only, but never is deceived concerning his own personality.


The play deals with von Keith's scheme to build an
amusement hall, to be known as “The Fairy Palace.”
He applies himself so sedulously that his plans are on
the eve of realization, when suddenly he finds himself
ousted from the management of his own enterprise by
the very men he has interested in it.


Now all this is comedy, of course, but Wedekind is
not to be deprived of his predelection for the minor key.
He introduces the tragic tone in this instance right in
the final scene, when von Keith is confronted by the
dead body of his common-law wife, Molly Griefinger.
In some respects this episode resembles a travesty upon
the final act of Sudermann's “Sodoms Ende;” but it is
characteristic of Wedekind that he makes Molly kill herself
because she fears von Keith's success will estrange
her from her husband, and that her suicide is followed
directly by the failure of von Keith's well-laid plans,
just as they seemed about to mature.


It is characteristic, also, that the crowd which denounces
von Keith as the cause of Molly's death, and
[Pg xv]
which threatens to do him bodily harm, is composed of
tradesmen whose initial cause of discontent is to be
found in the promoter's failure to pay his bills.


Wedekind's certainty of touch is as much in evidence
in his handling of his minor characters as it is in the
portrayal of von Keith. There is Molly, whose little
bourgeois soul fears the great world, shrinks from her
husband's acquaintances, and dreads to take its place
among the wealthy classes; Simba, the artist's model,
who is astonished at anybody pitying her as a victim of
civilization when she can get drunk on champagne;
Casimir, the wealthy merchant; and the Bohemian
painter Saranieff, with his friend Zamrjaki, the composer.
As an antithesis to von Keith we are introduced
to Ernst Scholz, a weakling whose soul is torn by internal
strife, until its owner is at peace neither with himself
nor the world. Scholz wastes his time seeking a
reason for his own existence and in longing to become a
useful member of society; von Keith scorns to bother
his brain with such trifles, boldly proclaiming the Nietzschean
doctrine that the only way to be useful to others
is to help one's self as much as possible, and asserting
that he would rather gather cigar stumps in the café
gutters than live in slothful peace in the country. There
is no doubt about von Keith being a rogue, in the conventional
acceptance of the term, but his enthusiasm
appeals to us and we feel for him in his undoing at the
end of the play.


In “Die Junge Welt” Wedekind shows us the laughable
attempts of a party of young girls to live a life
of celibacy in pursuance of a resolution taken in boarding
school. It is an amusing comedy, and contains,
[Pg xvi]
among other interesting personages, a literary man, who
nearly drives his wife to divorce by his habit of jotting
down notes of her emotions, even when he is kissing her.


An opportunity to comment upon the German lese
majesty is not neglected by Wedekind in the romantic
drama, “So ist das Leben,” a dignified and carefully
wrought work, partly in verse, which deals with the
tribulations of a deposed monarch in his own country.
This exiled king becomes tramp, tailor and strolling
player, to end eventually as court jester of the very man
who has taken his place on the throne.


“Der Kammersänger,” three scenes from the life of
a popular tenor, is little more than a dramatic sketch.
“Der Erdgeist” and “Die Büchse der Pandora,” two
plays which constitute an integral whole, deal with
a lady who embraces Mrs. Warren's profession.
These, with “Der Leibestrank” and “Oaha,” two farces,
with traces of real psychology, round out the total of
Wedekind's dramatic works. In addition, he has indulged
in verse-making and written a number of short
stories somewhat in the manner of De Maupassant.


One may feel at times that Wedekind's art would
gain by the exercise of more restraint, but there is no
denying it is a great relief from “lyric lemonade.”


An attempt to explain symbolism is usually a dangerous
matter. If a failure, it makes the one who
essays the task ridiculous. If successful, it cheapens
the value of the symbolism; symbolism being a kind
of an overtone to verbal reasoning, to which it bears
much the same relationship as music does to poetry.
In spite of this double danger, the translator ventures
to close this review with a guess at the personality of
[Pg xvii]
the Masked Man who plays such an important part in
the final scene of “Frühlings Erwachen” and to whom
the author has dedicated the play. To the translator,
then, this mysterious personage is none other than Life,
Life in its reality, not Life as seen through the fogged
glasses of Melchior's pedagogues or the purblind eyes of
the unfortunate mother who sends her daughter to an
untimely grave.


FRANCIS J. ZIEGLER.


June, 1909.
[Pg xviii]
[Pg xix]
TO THE MASKED MAN


A Dwelling Room.
Wendla.


Why have you made my dress so long, Mother?


Frau Bergmann.


You are fourteen years old to-day.


Wendla.


Had I known you were going to make my dress so
long, I would rather not have been fourteen.


Frau Bergmann.


The dress is not too long, Wendla. What do you
want? Can I help it that my child is two inches taller
every spring? As a grown-up maiden you cannot go
about in short dresses.


Wendla.


At any rate, my short dress becomes me better than
this nightgown.—Let me wear it again, Mother, only
through this summer. This penitential robe will fit me
just as well whether I am fifteen or fourteen. Let's
[Pg 24]
put it aside until my next birthday, now I should only
tear the flounces.


Frau Bergmann.


I don't know what to say. I want to take special
care of you just now, child. Other girls are hardy and
plump at your age. You are the contrary.——Who
knows what you will be when the others have developed?


Wendla.


Who knows—possibly I shall not be at all.


Frau Bergmann.


Child, child, how do such thoughts come to you!


Wendla.


Don't, dear Mother, don't be sad.


Frau Bergmann.


(Kissing her.)


My own darling!


Wendla.


They come to me at night when I can't sleep. I am
not made sad by them, and I believe that I sleep better
after them. Is it sinful, Mother, to have such
thoughts?


Frau Bergmann.


Go hang the long dress up in the closet. Put on your
short dress again, in God's name!—I will put
another depth of ruffles on it.
[Pg 25]
Wendla.


(Hanging the dress in the closet.)


No, I would rather be twenty at once——!


Frau Bergmann.


If only you are not too cold!——The dress was long
enough for you in its time, but——


Wendla.


Now, when summer is coming?——Mother, when
one is a child, one doesn't catch diphtheria in one's
knees! Who would be so cowardly. At my age one
doesn't freeze—least of all in the legs. Would it be
any better for me to be too warm, Mother? Give
thanks to God if some day your darling doesn't tear out
the sleeves and come to you at twilight without her
shoes and stockings!—If I wore my long dress I should
dress like an elfin queen under it.—Don't scold, Mother!
Nobody sees it any more.


Sunday Evening.
Melchior.


This is too tiresome for me. I won't do anything
more with it.


Otto.


Then we others can stop, too!——Have you the work,
Melchior?
[Pg 26]
Melchior.


Keep right on playing!


Moritz.


Where are you going?


Melchior.


For a walk.


George.


But it's growing dark!


Robert.


Have you the work already?


Melchior.


Why shouldn't I go walking in the dark?


Ernest.


Central America!——Louis the Fifteenth!——Sixty
verses of Homer!——Seven equations!


Melchior.


Damn the work!


George.


If only Latin composition didn't come to-morrow!
[Pg 27]
Moritz.


One can't think of anything without a task intervening.


Otto.


I'm going home.


George.


I, too, to work.


Ernest.


I, too, I too.


Robert.


Good-night, Melchior.


Melchior.


Sleep well! (All withdraw save Moritz and Melchior.)
I'd like to know why we really are on earth!


Moritz.


I'd rather be a cab-horse than go to school!——Why
do we go to school?——We go to school so that somebody
can examine us!——And why do they examine us?——In
order that we may fail. Seven must fail, because the
upper classroom will hold only sixty.——I feel so queer
since Christmas.——The devil take me, if it were not
for Papa, I'd pack my bundle and go to Altoona to-day!
[Pg 28]
Melchior.


Let's talk of something else——


(They go for a walk.)
Moritz.


Do you see that black cat there with its tail sticking
up?


Melchior.


Do you believe in omens?


Moritz.


I don't know exactly. They come down to us. They
don't matter.


Melchior.


I believe that is the Charybdis on which one runs when
one steers clear of the Scylla of religious folly.——Let's
sit down under this beech tree. The cool wind
blows over the mountains. Now I should like to be a
young dryad up there in the wood to cradle myself in
the topmost branches and be rocked the livelong night.


Moritz.


Unbutton your vest, Melchior.


Melchior.


Ha!——How clothes make one puff up!
[Pg 29]
Moritz.


God knows, it's growing so dark that one can't see
one's hand before one's eyes. Where are you?——Do
you believe, Melchior, that the feeling of shame in man
is only a product of his education?


Melchior.


I was thinking over that for the first time the day
before yesterday. It seems to me deeply rooted in human
nature. Only think, you must appear entirely
clothed before your best friend. You wouldn't do so if
he didn't do the same thing.——Therefore, it's more
or less of a fashion.


Moritz.


I have often thought that if I have children, boys
and girls, I will let them occupy the same room; let
them sleep together in the same bed, if possible; let
them help each other dress and undress night and morning.
In hot weather, the boys as well as the girls,
should wear nothing all day long but a short white
woolen tunic with a girdle.——It seems to me that if
they grew up that way they would be easier in mind
than we are under the present regulations.


Melchior.


I believe so decidedly, Moritz!——The only question
is, suppose the girls have children, what then?
[Pg 30]
Moritz.


How could they have children?


Melchior.


In that respect I believe in instinct. I believe, for
example, that if one brought up a male and a female cat
together, and kept both separated from the outside
world——that is, left them entirely to their own devices——that,
sooner or later, the she cat would become pregnant,
even if she, and the tom cat as well, had nobody to open
their eyes by example.


Moritz.


That might happen with animals——


Melchior.


I believe the same of human beings. I assure you,
Moritz, if your boys sleep in the same bed with the
girls, and the first emotion of manhood comes unexpectedly
to them—I should like to wager with anyone——


Moritz.


You may be right—but after all——


Melchior.


And when your girls reached the same age it would
be the same with them! Not that the girls exactly—one
can't judge that the same, certainly—at any rate, it
[Pg 31]
is supposable—and then their curiosity must not be left
out of account.


Moritz.


A question, by the way——


Melchior.


Well?


Moritz.


But you will answer?


Melchior.


Naturally!


Moritz.


Truly?!


Melchior.


My hand on it.——Now, Moritz?


Moritz.


Have you written your composition yet??


Melchior.


Speak right out from your heart!——Nobody sees
or hears us here.
[Pg 32]
Moritz.


Of course, my children will have to work all day long
in yard or garden, or find their amusement in games
which are combined with physical exercise. They must
ride, do gymnastics, climb, and, above all things, must
not sleep as soft as we do. We are weakened frightfully.——I
believe one would not dream if one slept
harder.


Melchior.


From now until fall I shall sleep only in my hammock.
I have shoved my bed back of the stove. It is a
folding one. Last winter I dreamed once that I
flogged our Lolo until he couldn't move a limb. That
was the most gruesome thing I ever dreamed.——Why
do you look at me so strangely?


Moritz.


Have you experienced it yet?


Melchior.


What?


Moritz.


How do you say it?


Melchior.


Manhood's emotion?


Moritz.


M—'hm.
[Pg 33]
Melchior.


Certainly!


Moritz.


I also —— —— —— —— —— —— —— ——
—— —— —— —— —— —— —— —— ——


Melchior.


I've known that for a long while!——Almost for a
year.


Moritz.


I was startled as if by lightning.


Melchior.


Did you dream?


Moritz.


Only for a little while—of legs in light blue tights,
that strode over the teacher's desk—to be correct, I
thought they wanted to go over it. I only saw them for
an instant.


Melchior.


George Zirschnitz dreamed of his mother.


Moritz.


Did he tell you that?
[Pg 34]
Melchior.


Out there on the gallow's road.


Moritz.


If you only knew what I have endured since that
night!


Melchior.


Qualms of conscience?


Moritz.


Qualms of conscience??——The anguish of death!


Melchior.


Good Lord——


Moritz.


I thought I was incurable. I believed I was suffering
from an inward hurt.——Finally I became calm enough
to begin to jot down the recollections of my life. Yes,
yes, dear Melchior, the last three weeks have been a
Gethsemane for me.


Melchior.


I was more or less prepared for it when it came. I
felt a little ashamed of myself.——But that was all.


Moritz.


And yet you are a whole year younger than I am.
[Pg 35]
Melchior.


I wouldn't bother about that, Moritz. All my experience
shows that the appearance of this phantom belongs
to no particular age. You know that big Lämmermeier
with the straw-colored hair and the hooked
nose. He is three years older than I am. Little Hans
Rilow says Lämmermeier dreams now only of tarts and
apricot preserves.


Moritz.


But, I ask you, how can Hans Rilow know that?


Melchior.


He asked him.


Moritz.


He asked him?——I didn't dare ask anybody.


Melchior.


But you asked me.


Moritz.


God knows, yes!——Possibly Hans, too, has made
his will.——Truly they play a remarkable game with
us. And we're expected to give thanks for it. I don't
remember to have had any longing for this kind of excitement.
Why didn't they let me sleep peacefully until
all was still again. My dear parents might have had
[Pg 36]
a hundred better children. I came here, I don't know
how, and must be responsible because I didn't stay
away.——Haven't you often wondered, Melchior, by
what means we were brought into this whirl?


Melchior.


Don't you know that yet either, Moritz?


Moritz.


How should I know it? I see how the hens lay eggs,
and hear that Mamma had to carry me under her heart.
But is that enough?——I remember, too, when I was
a five year old child, to have been embarrassed when
anyone turned up the décolleté queen of hearts.
This feeling has disappeared. At the same time, I can
hardly talk with a girl to-day without thinking of something
indecent, and—I swear to you, Melchior—I don't
know what.


Melchior.


I will tell you everything. I have gotten it partly
from books, partly from illustrations, partly from observations
of nature. You will be surprised; it made
me an atheist. I told it to George Zirschnitz! George
Zirschnitz wanted to tell it to Hans Rilow, but Hans
Rilow had learned it all from his governess when he was
a child.


Moritz.


I have gone through Meyer's Little Encyclopedia
from A to Z. Words—nothing but words and words!
[Pg 37]
Not a single plain explanation. Oh, this feeling of
shame!——What good to me is an encyclopedia that
won't answer me concerning the most important question
in life?


Melchior.


Did you ever see two dogs running together about
the streets?


Moritz.


No!——Don't tell me anything to-day, Melchior.
I have Central America and Louis the Fifteenth before
me. And then the sixty verses of Homer, the seven
equations and the Latin composition.——I would fail
in all of them again to-morrow. To drudge successfully
I must be as stupid as an ox.


Melchior.


Come with me to my room. In three-quarters of an
hour I will have the Homer, the equations and two
compositions. I will put one or two harmless errors in
yours, and the thing is done. Mamma will make lemonade
for us again, and we can chat comfortably about
propagation.


Moritz.


I can't——I can't chat comfortably about propagation!
If you want to do me a favor, give me your information
in writing. Write me out what you know.
Write it as briefly and clearly as possible, and put it
between my books to-morrow during recess. I will
[Pg 38]
carry it home without knowing that I have it. I will
find it unexpectedly. I cannot but help going over it
with tired eyes——in case it is hard to explain, you can
use a marginal diagram or so.


Melchior.


You are like a girl.——Nevertheless, as you wish.
It will be a very interesting task for me.——One question,
Moritz?


Moritz.


Hm?


Melchior.


Did you ever see a girl?


Moritz.


Yes!


Melchior.


All of her?


Moritz.


Certainly!


Melchior.


So have I!——Then we won't need any illustrations.


Moritz.


During the Schützenfest in Leilich's anatomical
[Pg 39]
museum! If it had leaked out I should have been
hunted out of school.——Beautiful as the light of day,
and——oh, so true to nature!


Melchior.


I was at Frankfurt with Mamma last summer——Are
you going already, Moritz?


Moritz.


I must work.——Good-night.


Melchior.


'Till we meet again.


Thea, Wendla and Martha come along the street arm
in arm.
Martha.


How the water gets into one's shoes!


Wendla.


How the wind blows against one's cheeks!


Thea.


How one's heart thumps!
[Pg 40]
Wendla.


Let's go out there to the bridge. Ilse says the stream
is full of bushes and trees. The boys have built a raft.
Melchi Gabor was almost drowned yesterday.


Thea.


Oh, he can swim!


Martha.


I should think so, child!


Wendla.


If he hadn't been able to swim he would have been
drowned!


Thea.


Your hair is coming down, Martha, your hair is coming
down.


Martha.


Pooh!——Let it come down! It bothers me day and
night. I may not wear short hair like you; I may not
wear my hair down my back like Wendla; I may not
wear bangs, and I must always do my hair up at home——all
on account of my aunt!


Wendla.


I'll bring the scissors with me to-morrow to devotions.
While you are saying, “Blessed are they who do not
stray,” I will clip it off.
[Pg 41]
Martha.


For heaven's sake, Wendla! Papa would beat me
black and blue, and Mamma would lock me up in the
coal hole for three nights.


Wendla.


What does he beat you with, Martha?


Martha.


It often seems to me as if they would miss something
if they didn't have an ill-conditioned brat like me.


Thea.


Why, girl!


Martha.


Are you ever allowed to put a blue ribbon through
the top of your chemise?


Thea.


A pink ribbon! Mamma thinks a pink ribbon goes
well with my big dark eyes.


Martha.


Blue suits me to a T!——Mamma pulled me out of
bed by the hair. I fell with my hands out so on the
floor.——Mamma prayed night after night with us——
[Pg 42]
Wendla.


In your place I should have run away long ago.


Martha.


There you have it! The reason I am going away!——There
you have it!——They will soon see——oh,
they will soon see! At least I shall never be able to
reproach my mother——


Thea.


H'm, h'm.——


Martha.


Can you imagine, Thea, what Mamma meant by it?


Thea.


I can't——can you, Wendla?


Wendla.


I should simply have asked her.


Martha.


I lay on the floor and shrieked and howled. Then
Papa came in. Rip——he tore off my chemise. Out
of the door I went. There you have it!——I only
wanted to get out in the street that way——


Wendla.


But that is not so, Martha.
[Pg 43]
Martha.


I froze. I was locked up. I had to sleep all night
in a sack.


Thea.


Never in my life could I sleep in a sack!


Wendla.


I only wish I could sleep once for you in your sack.


Martha.


If only one weren't beaten!


Thea.


But one would suffocate in it!


Martha.


Your head is left outside. It's tied under your chin.


Thea.


And then they beat you?


Martha.


No. Only when there is special occasion.


Wendla.


What do they beat you with, Martha?
[Pg 44]
Martha.


Oh, with anything that is handy.——Does your
mother think it's naughty to eat a piece of bread in bed?


Wendla.


No! no!


Martha.


I believe they enjoy it——even if they don't say so.
If I ever have children I will let them grow up like the
weeds in our flower garden. Nobody worries about
them and they grow so high and thick——while the
roses in the beds grow poorer and poorer every summer.


Thea.


If I have children I shall dress them all in pink.
Pink hats, pink dresses, pink shoes. Only the stockings——the
stockings shall be black as night! When I go
for a walk they shall march in front of me.——And
you, Wendla?


Wendla.


How do you know that you will have any?


Thea.


Why shouldn't we have any?


Martha.


Well, Aunt Euphemia hasn't any.
[Pg 45]
Thea.


You goose, that's because she isn't married.


Wendla.


Aunt Bauer was married three times and she didn't
have a single one.


Martha.


If you have any, Wendla, which would you rather
have, boys or girls?


Wendla.


Boys! boys!


Thea.


I, too, boys!


Martha.


So would I. Better twenty boys than three girls.


Thea.


Girls are tiresome.


Martha.


If I weren't a girl already I certainly wouldn't want
to be one.


Wendla.


That's a matter of taste, I believe, Martha. I rejoice
every day that I am a girl. Believe me, I
wouldn't change places with a king's son.——That's
the reason why I only want boys!
[Pg 46]
Thea.


But that's crazy, pure craziness, Wendla!


Wendla.


But it must be a thousand times more exciting to be
loved by a man than by a girl!


Thea.


But you don't want to assert that Forest Inspector
Pfälle loves Melitta more than she does him.


Wendla.


That I do, Thea. Pfälle is proud. Pfälle is proud
because he is a forest inspector—for Pfälle has nothing.——Melitta
is happy because she gets ten thousand
times more than she is.


Martha.


Aren't you proud of yourself, Wendla?


Wendla.


That would be silly.


Martha.


In your place I should be proud of my appearance.
[Pg 47]
Thea.


Only look how she steps out——how free her glance
is—how she holds herself, Martha. Isn't that pride?


Wendla.


Why not? I am so happy to be a girl; if I weren't a
girl I should break down the next time——


(Melchior passes and greets them.)
Thea.


He has a wonderful head.


Martha.


He makes me think of the young Alexander going to
school to Aristotle.


Thea.


Oh dear, Greek history!——I only know how Socrates
lay in his barrel when Alexander sold him the ass'
shadow.


Wendla.


He stands third in his class.


Thea.


Professor Knochenbruch says he can be first if he
wants.
[Pg 48]
Martha.


He has a beautiful brow, but his friend has a soulful
look.


Thea.


Moritz Stiefel?——He's a stupid!


Martha.


I've always gotten along well with him.


Thea.


He disgraces anybody who is with him. At Rilow's
party he offered me some bon-bons. Only think,
Wendla, they were soft and warm. Isn't that——? He
said he had kept them too long in his trouser's pocket.


Wendla.


Only think, Melchi Gabor told me once that he didn't
believe anything——not in God, not in a hereafter——in
anything more in this world.


A park in front of the grammar school. Melchior,
Otto, George, Robert, Hans Rilow and Lämmermeier.
Melchior.


Can any of you say where Moritz Stiefel is keeping
himself?
[Pg 49]
George.


It may go hard with him!——Oh, it may go hard
with him!


Otto.


He'll keep on until he gets caught dead to rights.


Laemmermeier.


Lord knows, I wouldn't want to be in his skin at this
moment!


Robert.


What cheek! What insolence!


Melchior.


Wha——Wha——what do you know?


George.


What do we know?——Now, I tell you——


Laemmermeier.


I wish I hadn't said anything!


Otto.


So do I——God knows I do!


Melchior.


If you don't at once——
[Pg 50]
Robert.


The long and the short of it is, Moritz Stiefel has
broken into the Board Room.


Melchior.


Into the Board Room——?


Otto.


Into the Board Room. Right after the Latin lesson.


George.


He was the last. He hung back intentionally.


Laemmermeier.


As I turned the corner of the corridor, I saw him
open the door.


Melchior.


The devil take——


Laemmermeier.


If only the devil doesn't take him.


George.


Perhaps the Rector didn't take the key.


Robert.


Or Moritz Stiefel carries a skeleton key.


Otto.


That may be possible.
[Pg 51]
Laemmermeier.


If he has luck, he'll only be kept in.


Robert.


Besides getting a demerit mark in his report!


Otto.


If this doesn't result in his being kicked out.


Hans Rilow.


There he is!


Melchior.


White as a handkerchief.


(Moritz comes in in great agitation.)
Laemmermeier.


Moritz, Moritz, what have you done!


Moritz.


Nothing——nothing——


Robert.


You're feverish!


Moritz.


From good fortune——from happiness——from jubilation——
[Pg 52]
Otto.


You were caught!


Moritz.


I am promoted!——Melchior, I am promoted! Oh,
I don't care what happens now!——I am promoted!——Who
would have believed that I should be promoted!——I
don't realize it yet!——I read it twenty
times!——I couldn't believe it——Good Lord, it's so!——It's
so; I am promoted! (Laughing.) I don't
know——I feel so queer——the ground turns around——Melchior,
Melchior, can you realize what I've
gone through?


Hans Rilow.


I congratulate you, Moritz——Only be happy that
you got away with it!


Moritz.


You don't know, Hans, you can't guess, what depends
on it. For three weeks I've slunk past that door as if
it were a hellish abyss. To-day I saw it was ajar. I
believe that if some one had offered me a million——nothing,
oh nothing, could have held me.——I stood in
the middle of the room,—I opened the report book——ran
over the leaves——found——and during all
that time——I shudder——


Melchior.


——During all that time?
[Pg 53]
Moritz.


During all that time the door behind me stood wide
open. How I got out——how I came down the steps,
I don't know.


Hans Rilow.


Is Ernest Röbel promoted, too?


Moritz.


Oh, certainly, Hans, certainly!——Ernest Röbel is
promoted, too.


Robert.


Then you can't have read correctly. Counting in
the dunce's stool, we, with you and Robert, make sixty-one,
and the upper class-room cannot accommodate more
than sixty.


Moritz.


I read it right enough. Ernest Röbel is given as high
a rating as I am—both of us have conditions to work
off.——During the first quarter it will be seen which
of us has to make room for the other. Poor Röbel!——Heaven
knows, I'm not afraid of myself any longer.
I've looked into it too deeply this time for that.


Otto.


I bet five marks that you lose your place.
[Pg 54]
Moritz.


You haven't anything. I won't rob you.——Lord,
but I'll grind from to-day on!——I can say so now——whether
you believe it or not——It's all the same now——I——I
know how true it is; if I hadn't been promoted
I would have shot myself.


Robert.


Boaster!


George.


Coward!


Otto.


I'd like to see you shoot yourself!


Laemmermeier.


Box his ears.


Melchior.


(Gives him a cuff.)


Come, Moritz, let's go to the forester's house!


George.


Do you believe his nonsense?


Melchior.


What's that to you? Let them chatter, Moritz!
Come on, let's go to town.


(Professors Hungergurt and Knochenbruch pass by.)
[Pg 55]
Knochenbruch.


It is inexplicable to me, my dear colleague, how the
best of my scholars can fail the very worst of all.


Hungergurt.


To me, also, professor.


A sunny afternoon—Melchior and Wendla meet each
other in the wood.
Melchior.


Is it really you, Wendla?——What are you doing up
here all alone?——For three hours I've been going from
one side of the wood to the other without meeting a soul,
and now you come upon me out of the thickest part of it!


Wendla.


Yes, it's I.


Melchior.


If I didn't know you were Wendla Bergmann, I
would take you for a dryad, fallen out of your tree.


Wendla.


No, no, I am Wendla Bergmann.——How did you
come here?
[Pg 56]
Melchior.


I followed my thoughts.


Wendla.


I'm hunting waldmeister.[1] Mamma wants to make
Maybowl. At first she intended coming along herself,
but at the last moment Aunt Bauer dropped in, and
she doesn't like to climb.——So I came by myself.


Melchior.


Have you found your waldmeister?


Wendla.


A whole basketful. Down there under the beach it
grows as thick as meadow clover. Just now I am
looking for a way out. I seem to have lost the path.
Can you tell me what time it is?


Melchior.


Just a little after half-past four. When do they expect
you?


Wendla.


I thought it was later. I lay dreaming for a long
time on the moss by the brook. The time went by so
fast, I feared it was already evening.
[Pg 57]
Melchior.


If nobody is waiting for you, let us linger here a
little longer. Under the oak tree there is my favorite
place. If one leans one's head back against the trunk
and looks up through the branches at the sky, one becomes
hypnotized. The ground is warm yet from the
morning sun.——For weeks I've been wanting to ask
you something, Wendla.


Wendla.


But I must be home at five o'clock.


Melchior.


We'll go together, then. I'll take the basket and we'll
beat our way through the bushes, so that in ten minutes
we'll be on the bridge!——When one lies so, with one's
head in one's hand, one has the strangest thoughts.——


(Both lie down under the oak.)
Wendla.


What do you want to ask me, Melchior?


Melchior.


I've heard, Wendla, that you visit poor people's
houses. You take them food and clothes and money
also. Do you do that of your own free will, or does
your mother send you?
[Pg 58]
Wendla.


Mother sends me mostly. They are families of day
laborers that have too many children. Often the
husband can't find work and then they freeze and go
hungry. We have a lot of things which were laid
away long ago in our closets and wardrobes and which
are no longer needed.——But how did you know it?


Melchior.


Do you go willingly or unwillingly, when your
mother sends you?


Wendla.


Oh, I love to go!——How can you ask?


Melchior.


But the children are dirty, the women are sick, the
houses are full of filth, the men hate you because you
don't work——


Wendla.


That's not true, Melchior. And if it were true, I'd
go just the same!


Melchior.


Why just the same, Wendla?


Wendla.


I'd go just the same! It would make me all the
happier to be able to help them.
[Pg 59]
Melchior.


Then you go to see the poor because it makes you
happy?


Wendla.


I go to them because they are poor.


Melchior.


But if it weren't a pleasure to you, you wouldn't go?


Wendla.


Can I help it that it makes me happy?


Melchior.


And because of it you expect to go to heaven! So it's
true, then, that which has given me no peace for a month
past!—Can the covetous man help it that it is no
pleasure to him to go to see dirty sick children?


Wendla.


Oh, surely it would give you the greatest pleasure!


Melchior.


And, therefore, he must suffer everlasting death.
I'll write a paper on it and send it to Pastor Kahlbauch.
He is the cause of it. Why did he fool us with the
[Pg 60]
joy of good works.—If he can't answer me I won't go
to Sunday-school any longer and won't let them confirm
me.


Wendla.


Why don't you tell your trouble to your dear parents?
Let yourself be confirmed, it won't cost you your head.
If it weren't for our horrid white dresses and your
long trousers one might be more spiritual.


Melchior.


There is no sacrifice! There is no self-denial! I see
the good rejoice in their hearts, I see the evil tremble
and groan—I see you, Wendla Bergmann, shake your
locks and laugh while I am as melancholy as an outlaw.—What
did you dream, Wendla, when you lay in
the grass by the brook?


Wendla.


——Foolishness——nonsense.——


Melchior.


With your eyes open?


Wendla.


I dreamed I was a poor, poor beggar girl, who was
turned out in the street at five o'clock in the morning.
I had to beg the whole long day in storm and bad
weather from rough, hard-hearted people. When I
[Pg 61]
came home at night, shivering from hunger and cold,
and without as much money as my father coveted, then
I was beaten——beaten——


Melchior.


I know that, Wendla. You have the silly children's
stories to thank for that. Believe me, such brutal men
exist no longer.


Wendla.


Oh yes, Melchior, you're mistaken. Martha Bessel
is beaten night after night, so that one sees the marks
of it the next day. Oh, but it must hurt! It makes one
boiling hot when she tells it. I'm so frightfully sorry
for her that I often cry over it in my pillows at night.
For months I've been thinking how one can help
her.——I'd take her place for eight days with pleasure.


Melchior.


One should complain of her father at once. Then
the child would be taken away from him.


Wendla.


I, Melchior, have never been beaten in my life——not
a single time. I can hardly imagine what it means
to be beaten. I have beaten myself in order to see how
one felt then in one's heart——It must be a gruesome
feeling.


Melchior.


I don't believe a child is better for it.
[Pg 62]
Wendla.


Better for what?


Melchior.


For being beaten.


Wendla.


With this switch, for instance! Ha! but it's tough
and thin.


Melchior.


That would draw blood!


Wendla.


Would you like to beat me with it once?


Melchior.


Who?


Wendla.


Me.


Melchior.


What's the matter with you, Wendla?


Wendla.


What might happen?


Melchior.


Oh, be quiet! I won't beat you.
[Pg 63]
Wendla.


Not if I allow you?


Melchior.


No, girl!


Wendla.


Not even if I ask you, Melchior?


Melchior.


Are you out of your senses?


Wendla.


I've never been beaten in my life!


Melchior.


If you can ask for such a thing——


Wendla.


Please——please——


Melchior.


I'll teach you to say please! (He hits her.)


Wendla.


Oh, Lord, I don't notice it in the least!


Melchior.


I believe you——through all your skirts——
[Pg 64]
Wendla.


Then strike me on my legs!


Melchior.


Wendla! (He strikes her harder.)


Wendla.


You're stroking me! You're stroking me!


Melchior.


Wait, witch, I'll flog Satan out of you!


(He throws the switch aside and beats her with his
fists so that she breaks out with a frightful cry. He
pays no attention to this, but falls upon her as if he
were crazy, while the tears stream heavily down his
cheeks. Presently he springs away, holds both hands to
his temples and rushes into the depths of the wood crying
out in anguish of soul.)


1: An aromatic herb, used in preparing a beverage drunk in Spring time.
[Pg 65]
Evening in Melchior's study. The window is open,
a lamp burns on the table.—Melchior and Moritz on the
divan.
Moritz.


Now I'm quite gay again, only a little bit excited.——But
during the Greek lesson I slept like the besotted
Polyphemus. I'm astonished that the pronunciation of
the ancient tongue doesn't give me the earache.——To-day
I was within a hair of being late——My first
thought on waking was of the verbs in μι——Himmel—Herrgott—Teufel—Donnerwetter,
during breakfast and
all along the road I conjugated until I saw green.——I
must have popped off to sleep shortly after three. My
pen made a blot in the book. The lamp was smoking
when Mathilde woke me; the blackbirds in the elder
bushes under the window were chirping so happily——and
I felt so inexpressibly melancholy. I put on my
collar and passed the brush through my hair.——One
feels it when one imposes upon nature.


Melchior.


May I roll you a cigarette?
[Pg 68]
Moritz.


Thanks, I don't smoke.——If it only keeps on this
way! I will work and work until my eyes fall out of
my head.——Ernest Röbel has failed three times since
vacation; three times in Greek, twice with Knochenbruch;
the last time in the history of literature. I
have been first five times in this lamentable conflict, and
from to-day it does not bother me!——Röbel will not
shoot himself. Röbel has no parents who sacrifice
everything for him. If he wants he can become a soldier,
a cowboy or a sailor. If I fail, my father will feel
the blow and Mamma will land in the madhouse. One
can't live through a thing like that!——Before the examination
I begged God to give me consumption that
the cup might pass me by untouched. He passed me by,
though to-day His aureole shines in the distance, so that
I dare not lift my eyes by night or day.——Now that
I have grasped the bar I shall swing up on it. The
natural consequence will be that I shall break my neck
if I fall.


Melchior.


Life is a worthless commonplace. It wouldn't have
been a bad idea if I had hanged myself in the cradle.——Why
doesn't Mamma come with the tea!


Moritz.


Your tea will do me good, Melchior!——I'm shivering.
I feel so strangely spiritualized. Touch me once,
please. I see,—I hear,—I feel, much more acutely——and
yet everything seems like a dream——oh, so harmonious.——How
[Pg 69]
still the garden stretches out there in
the moonlight, so still, so deep, as if it extended to
eternity. From out the bushes step indefinable figures
that slip away in breathless officiousness through
the clearings and then vanish in the twilight. It seems
to me as if a counsel were to be held under the chestnut
tree.——Shall we go down there, Melchior?


Melchior.


Let's wait until we have drunk our tea.


Moritz.


The leaves whisper so busily.——It's just as if I
heard my dead grandmother telling me the story of the
“Queen Without a Head.” There was once a wonderfully
beautiful Queen, beautiful as the sun, more beautiful
than all the maidens in the country. Only, unfortunately,
she came into the world without a head.
She could not eat, not drink, not kiss. She could only
communicate with her courtiers by using her soft little
hand. With her dainty feet she stamped declarations
of war and orders for executions. Then, one day, she
was besieged by a King, who, by chance, had two heads,
which, year in and year out, disputed with one another
so violently that neither could get a word in edgewise.
The Court Conjurer-in-chief took off the smallest of
these heads and set it upon the Queen's body. And,
behold, it became her extraordinarily well! Therefore,
the King and the Queen were married, and the two
heads disputed no longer, but kissed each other upon
the brow, the cheeks and the mouth, and lived thereafter
[Pg 70]
through long, long years of joy and peace.——Delectable
nonsense! Since vacation I can't get the
headless Queen out of my mind. When I see a pretty
girl, I see her without a head——and then presently, I,
myself appear to be the headless Queen.——It is possible
that someone may be set over me yet.


(Frau Gabor comes in with the steaming tea, which
she sets before Melchior and Moritz on the table.)


Frau Gabor.


Here, children, here's a mouthful for you. Good-evening,
Herr Stiefel, how are you?


Moritz.


Thank you, Frau Gabor.——I'm watching the dance
down there.


Frau Gabor.


But you don't look very good——don't you feel well?


Moritz.


It's not worth mentioning. I went to bed somewhat
too late last night.


Melchior.


Only think, he worked all through the night.


Frau Gabor.


You shouldn't do such things, Herr Stiefel. You
[Pg 71]
ought to take care of yourself. Think of your health.
Don't set your school above your health. Take plenty
of walks in the fresh air. At your age, that is more
important than a correct use of middle high German.


Moritz.


I will go walking. You are right. One can be industrious
while one is taking a walk. Why didn't I
think of that myself!——The written work I shall still
have to do at home.


Melchior.


You can do your writing here; that will make it
easier for both of us.——You know, Mamma, that Max
von Trenk has been down with brain fever!——To-day
at noon Hans Rilow came from von Trenk's deathbed
to announce to Rector Sonnenstich that von Trenk
had just died in his presence. “Indeed?” said Sonnenstich,
“haven't you two hours from last week to make
up? Here is the beadle's report. See that the matter
is cleared up once for all! The whole class will attend
the burial.”——Hans was struck dumb.


Frau Gabor.


What book is that you have, Melchior?


Melchior.


“Faust.”


Frau Gabor.


Have you read it yet?
[Pg 72]
Melchior.


Not to the end.


Moritz.


We're just at the Walpurgisnacht.


Frau Gabor.


If I were you I should have waited for one or two
years.


Melchior.


I know of no book, Mamma, in which I have found so
much beauty. Why shouldn't I read it?


Frau Gabor.


Because you can't understand it.


Melchior.


You can't know that, Mamma. I feel very well that I
am not yet able to grasp the work in its entirety——


Moritz.


We always read together; that helps our understanding
wonderfully.


Frau Gabor.


You are old enough, Melchior, to be able to know
what is good and what is bad for you. Do what you
think best for yourself. I should be the first to
[Pg 73]
acknowledge your right in this respect, because you have
never given me a reason to have to deny you anything.
I only want to warn you that even the best can do one
harm when one isn't ripe enough in years to receive it
properly.——I would rather put my trust in you than
in conventional educational methods.——If you need
anything, children, you, Melchior, come up and call me.
I shall be in my bedroom.


(Exit.)
Moritz.


Your Mamma means the story of Gretchen.


Melchior.


Weren't we discussing it just a moment ago!


Moritz.


Faust himself cannot have deserted her in cold blood!


Melchior.


The masterpiece does not end with this infamous
action!——Faust might have promised the maiden
marriage, he might have forsaken her afterwards, but
in my eyes he would have been not a hair less worthy of
punishment. Gretchen might have died of a broken
heart for all I care.——One sees how this attracts the
eyes continually; one might think that the whole world
turned on sex![2]
[Pg 74]
Moritz.


To be frank with you, Melchior, I have almost the
same feeling since I read your explanation.——It fell
at my feet during the first vacation days. I was
startled. I fastened the door and flew through the
flaming lines as a frightened owl flies through a burning
wood——I believe I read most of it with my eyes
shut. Your explanation brought up a host of dim recollections,
which affected me as a song of his childhood
affects a man on his deathbed when heard from the
lips of another. I felt the most vehement pity over
what you wrote about maidens. I shall never lose that
sensation. Believe me, Melchior, to suffer a wrong is
sweeter than to do a wrong. To be overcome by such a
sweet wrong and still be blameless seems to me the fullness
of earthly bliss.


Melchior.


I don't want my bliss as alms!


Moritz.


But why not?


Melchior.


I don't want anything for which I don't have to fight!


Moritz.


Is it enjoyable then, Melchior?——The maiden's enjoyment
is as that of the holy gods. The maiden controls
herself, thanks to her self-denial. She keeps herself
[Pg 75]
free from every bitterness until the last moment, in
order that she may see the heavens open over her in an
instant. The maiden fears hell even at the moment
that she perceives a blooming paradise. Her feeling is
as pure as a mountain spring. The maiden holds a
cup over which no earthly breath has blown as yet; a
nectar chalice, the contents of which is spilled when it
flames and flares.——The enjoyment that the man
finds in that, I think, is insipid and flat.


Melchior.


You can think what you like about it, but keep your
thoughts to yourself——I don't like to think about it.


2: “Man möchte glauben, die ganze Welt drehe sich um P—— und
V——!”


A Dwelling Room.
Frau Bergmann.


(Enters by the center door. Her face is beaming.
She is without a hat, wears a mantilla on her head and
has a basket on her arm.)


Wendla! Wendla!


Wendla.


(Appears in petticoats and corset in the doorway to
the right.)


What's the matter, Mother?


Frau Bergmann.


You are up already, child? Now, that is nice of you!
[Pg 76]
Wendla.


You have been out already?


Frau Bergmann.


Get dressed quickly!——You must go down to
Ina's at once. You must take her this basket!


Wendla.


(Dressing herself during the following conversation.)


You have been to Ina's?—How is Ina?—Is she ever
going to get better?


Frau Bergmann.


Only think, Wendla, last night the stork paid her a
visit and brought her a little baby boy!


Wendla.


A little boy?——A little boy!——Oh, that's lovely!——That's
the cause of that tedious influenza!


Frau Bergmann.


A fine little boy!


Wendla.


I must see him, Mother. That makes me an aunt for
the third time——aunt to a little girl and two little
boys!
[Pg 77]
Frau Bergmann.


And what little boys!——It always happens that way
when one lives so near the church roof!——To-morrow
will be just two years since she went up the steps in her
mull gown.


Wendla.


Were you there when he brought him?


Frau Bergmann.


He had just flown away again.——Won't you put on
a rose?


Wendla.


Why couldn't you have been a little earlier, Mother?


Frau Bergmann.


I almost believe he brought you something, too——a
breastpin or something.


Wendla.


It's really a shame!


Frau Bergmann.


But, I tell you, he brought you a breastpin!


Wendla.


I have breastpins enough——
[Pg 78]
Frau Bergmann.


Then be happy, child. What do you want besides?


Wendla.


I would have liked so much to have known whether
he flew through the window or down the chimney.


Frau Bergmann.


You must ask Ina. Ha! You must ask Ina that,
dear heart! Ina will tell you that fast enough. Ina
talked with him for a whole half hour.


Wendla.


I will ask Ina when I get there.


Frau Bergmann.


Now don't forget, sweet angel! I'm interested myself
to know if he came in through the window or by
the chimney.


Wendla.


Or hadn't I better ask the chimney-sweep?——The
chimney-sweep must know best whether he flew down the
chimney or not.


Frau Bergmann.


Not the chimney-sweep, child; not the chimney-sweep.
What does the chimney-sweep know about the
[Pg 79]
stork! He'd tell you a lot of foolishness he didn't believe
himself——Wha——what are you staring at down
there in the street?


Wendla.


A man, Mother,——three times as big as an ox!——with
feet like steamboats——!


Frau Bergmann.


(Rushing to the window.)


Impossible! Impossible!


Wendla.


(At the same time.)


He holds a bedslat under his chin and fiddles “Die
Wacht am Rhein” on it——there, he's just turned the
corner.——


Frau Bergmann.


You are, and always will be a foolish child!——To
frighten your old simple mother that way!——Go get
your hat! I wonder when you will understand things.
I've given up hope of you.


Wendla.


So have I, Mother dear, so have I. It's a sad thing
about my understanding.——I have a sister who has
been married for two and a half years, I myself have
been made an aunt for the third time, and I haven't the
[Pg 80]
least idea how it all comes about.——Don't be cross,
Mother dear, don't be cross! Whom in the world should
I ask but you! Please tell me, dear Mother! Tell me,
dear Mother! I'm ashamed for myself. Please,
Mother, speak! Don't scold me for asking you about
it. Give me an answer——How does it happen?——How
does it all come about?——You cannot really deceive
yourself that I, who am fourteen years old, still
believe in the stork.


Frau Bergmann.


Good. Lord, child, but you are peculiar!——What
ideas you have!——I really can't do that!


Wendla.


But why not, Mother?——Why not?——It can't be
anything ugly if everybody is delighted over it!


Frau Bergmann.


O——O God protect me!——I deserve——Go get
dressed, child, go get dressed!


Wendla.


I'll go——And suppose your child went and asked
the chimney-sweep?


Frau Bergmann.


But that would be madness!——Come here, child,
come here, I'll tell you! I'll tell you everything——O
[Pg 81]
Almighty Goodness!——only not to-day, Wendla!——To-morrow,
the next day, next week——any time
you want, dear heart——


Wendla.


Tell me to-day, Mother; tell me now! Right away!——Now
that I have seen you so frightened I can never
be peaceful until you do.


Frau Bergmann.


I can't do it, Wendla.


Wendla.


Oh, why can't you, Mother dear!——I will kneel
here at your feet and lay my head in your lap. You
can cover my head with your apron and talk and talk,
as if you were entirely alone in the room. I won't
move, I won't cry, I will bear all patiently, no matter
what may come.


Frau Bergmann.


Heaven knows, Wendla, that I am not to blame!
Heaven knows it!——Come here in God's name! I
will tell you, child, how you came into this world.——Listen
to me, Wendla.——


Wendla.


(Under the apron.)


I'm listening.
[Pg 82]
Frau Bergmann.


(Extatically.)


But it's no use, child!——I can't justify it. I deserve
to be put into prison——to have you taken from
me.


Wendla.


Take heart, Mother!


Frau Bergmann.


Listen, then——!


Wendla.


(Trembling under the apron.)


O God! O God!


Frau Bergmann.


In order to have a child——do you understand me,
Wendla?


Wendla.


Quick, Mother, I can't stand it much longer.


Frau Bergmann.


In order to have a child——one must love—the
man—to whom one is married—love him, I tell you—as
one can only love a man! One must love him so much
with one's whole heart, so—so that one can't describe
it! One must love him, Wendla, as you at your age
are still unable to love——Now you know it!
[Pg 83]
Wendla.


(Getting up.)


Great——God——in heaven!


Frau Bergmann.


Now you know what an ordeal awaits you!


Wendla.


And that is all?


Frau Bergmann.


As true as God helps me!——Take your basket now
and go to Ina. You will get chocolate and cakes there.——Come,
let's look you over, the laced shoes, the
silk gloves, the sailor blouse, the rose in your hair—your
dress is really becoming much too short for you,
Wendla!


Wendla.


Did you get meat for lunch, Mother?


Frau Bergmann.


The Good God protect and bless you——I will find
an opportunity to add a handbreadth of flounces to the
bottom.
[Pg 84]
Hans Rilow.


(With a light in his hand, fastens the door behind him
and opens the lid.)


“Have you prayed to-night, Desdemona?” (He takes
a reproduction of the Venus of Palma Vecchio from
his bosom.)——Thou wilt not appear to me after the
Our Father, darling,——as in that moment of anticipated
bliss when I saw thee contemplatively expectant of
someone's coming, lying in Jonathan Schlesinger's shop
window——just as enticing as thou art now, with these
supple limbs, these softly arched hips, these plump,
youthful breasts.——Oh how intoxicated with joy the
great master must have been when his glance strayed
over the fourteen-year-old original stretched out upon
the divan!


Wilt thou not visit me for awhile in my dreams? I
will receive thee with widely open arms and will kiss
thee until thou art breathless. Thou drawest me onward
as the enchanted princess in her deserted castle.
Portals and doors open themselves as if by an unseen
hand, while the fountain in the park below begins to
splash joyously——


“It is the cause!——It is the cause!” The frightful
beating in my breast shows thee that I do not murder
thee from frivolous emotion. The thought of my lonely
nights is strangling me. I swear to thee, child, on my
soul, that it is not satiety which rules me. Who could
ever boast of being satiated of thee!
[Pg 85]


But thou suckest the marrow from my bones, thou
bendest my back, thou robbest my youthful eyes of their
last spark of brilliancy.——Thou art so arrogant
toward me in thy inhuman modesty, so galling with thy
immovable limbs!——Thou or I! And I have won the
victory.


Suppose I count them——all those who sleep, with
whom I have fought the same battle here——: Psyche
by Thumann—another bequest from the spindle-shanked
Mademoiselle Angelique, that rattlesnake in the paradise
of my childhood; Io by Corregio; Galathea by
Lossow; then a Cupid by Bouguereau; Ada by J. van
Beers—that Ada whom I had to abduct from a secret
drawer in Papa's secretary in order to incorporate in
my harem; a trembling, modest Leda by Makart, whom
I found by chance among my brother's college books——seven,
thou blooming candidate for death, have preceded
thee upon this path to Tartarus. Let that be a
consolation unto thee, and seek not to increase my torments
at this enormity by that fleeting look.


Thou diest not for thy sins, thou diest on account of
mine!——As protection against myself I go to my
seventh wife-murder with a bleeding heart. There is
something tragic in the rôle of Bluebeard. I believe
the combined sufferings of his murdered wives did not
equal the torments he underwent each time he strangled
one of them.


But my thoughts will become more peaceful, my body
will strengthen itself, when thou, thou little devil, residest
no longer in the red satin padding of my jewel
case. In place of thee, I will indulge in wanton joyousness
with Bodenhausen's Lurlei or Linger's Forsaken
[Pg 86]
One, or Defregger's Loni—so I should be all the
quicker! But a quarter of a year more, perhaps thy
unveiled charms, sweet soul, would begin to consume
my poor head as the sun does a pat of butter. It is high
time to declare the divorce from bed and board.


Brrr! I feel a Heliogablus within me? Moritura
me salutat! Maiden, maiden, why dost thou press thy
knees together?——Why now of all times?——In face
of the inscrutable eternity?——A movement and I will
spare thy life!——A womanly emotion, a sign of passion,
of sympathy, maiden!——I will frame thee in
gold, and hang thee over my bed! Doest thou not
guess that only thy chastity begets my debauchery?——Woe,
woe, unto the inhuman ones!——


One always perceives that they received an exemplary
education——It is just so with me.


“Have you prayed to-night, Desdemona?”


My heart contracts,——madness!——St. Agnes also
died for her reserve and was not half as naked as thou!——Another
kiss upon thy blooming body——upon thy
childish swelling breast—upon thy sweetly rounded—thy
cruel knees——


“It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!
It is the cause!”——


(The picture falls into the depths, he shuts the lid.)
[Pg 87]
A haymow. Melchior lies on his back in the fresh hay.
Wendla comes up the ladder.
Wendla.


Here's where you've hid yourself?——They're all
hunting for you. The wagon is outside again. You
must help. There's a storm coming up.


Melchior.


Go away from me! Go away from me!


Wendla.


What's the matter with you?——Why are you hiding
your face?


Melchior.


Out! out! I'll throw you down on the floor below.


Wendla.


Now for certain I'm not going.—(Kneels down by
him.) Why won't you come out with me into the
meadow, Melchior?——Here it is hot and dark. Suppose
we do get wet to the skin, what difference will that
make to us!


Melchior.


The hay smells so fine.——The sky outside must be
as black as a pall——I only see the brilliant poppy on
your breast——and I hear your heart beating——
[Pg 88]
Wendla.


Don't kiss me, Melchior!——Don't kiss me!


Melchior.


Your heart——I hear beating——


Wendla.


People love——when they kiss——Don't, don't!


Melchior.


Oh, believe me, there's no such thing as love! Everything
is selfishness, everything is egotism!——I love
you as little as you love me.


Wendla.


Don't——don't, Melchior!——


Melchior.


Wendla!


Wendla.


Oh, Melchior!——Don't, don't——
[Pg 89]
Frau Gabor.


(Sits writing.)
Dear Herr Stiefel:—After twenty-four hours of consideration
and reconsideration of all you have written
me, I take up my pen with a heavy heart. I cannot
furnish you with the necessary amount for the voyage
to America—I give you my word of honor. In the
first place, I have not that much to my credit, and in
the second place, if I had, it would be the greatest sin
imaginable for me to put into your hands the means of
accomplishing such an ill-considered measure. You
will be doing me a bitter wrong, Herr Stiefel, if you see
a sign of lack of love in my refusal. On the contrary,
it would be the greatest neglect of my duty as your
motherly friend were I to allow myself to be affected
by your temporary lack of determination, so that I also
lost my head and blindly followed my first fleeting impulse.
I am very ready—in case you desire it—to
write to your parents. I should seek to convince your
parents that you have done what you could during this
quarter, that you have exhausted your strength, that a
rigorous judgment of your case would not only be inadvisable,
but might be in the greatest degree prejudicial
to your mental and bodily health.


That you imply a threat to take your own life in case
flight is impossible for you, to speak plainly, has somewhat
surprised me. No matter how undeserving is a
misfortune, Herr Stiefel, one should never choose improper
means to escape it. The way in which you, to
[Pg 90]
whom I have always done only good, want to make
me responsible for a possible frightful action on your
part, has something about it which, in the eyes of an
evil-thinking person, might be misconstrued very easily.
I must confess that this outbreak of yours—you who
know so well what one owes to oneself—is the last thing
for which I was prepared. However, I cherish the strong
conviction that you are laboring yet too much under the
shock of your first fright to be able to understand completely
your action.


And, therefore, I hope with confidence that these
words of mine will find you already in better spirits.
Take up the matter as it stands. In my opinion it is
unwise to judge a young man by his school record.
We have too many examples of bad students becoming
distinguished men, and, on the other hand, of brilliant
students not being at all remarkable in life. At any
rate, I can assure you that your misfortune, as far as
it lies with me, shall make no difference in your association
with Melchior. On the contrary, it will afford
me the greatest pleasure to see my son going with a
young man who, let the world judge him as it will, is
able to win my fullest sympathy.


And, therefore, hold your head high, Herr Stiefel!——Such
a crisis as this comes to all of us and will
soon be surmounted. If all of us had recourse to dagger
or poison in such cases, there would soon be no men
left in the world. Let me hear from you right soon
again, and accept the heartfelt greetings of your unchanged


Motherly friend,
Fanny G.
[Pg 91]
Bergmann's garden in the morning sunlight.
Wendla.


Why have you slipped out of the room?——To hunt
violets!——Because Mother seems to laugh at me.——Why
can't you bring your lips together any more?——I
don't know.——Indeed I don't know, I can't find
words——The path is like a velvet carpet, no pebbles,
no thorns.——My feet don't touch the ground.——Oh,
how I slept last night!


Here they are.——I become as grave as a nun at
communion.——Sweet violets!——Peace, little mother,
I will put on my long dress.——Oh God, if somebody
would come upon whose neck I could fall and tell!


Evening twilight. Light clouds in the sky. The
path straggles through low bushes and coarse grass.
The flow of the stream is heard in the distance.
Moritz.


Better and better.——I am not fit. Another may be
able to climb to the top. I pull the door to behind me
and step into the open.——I don't care enough about it
to let myself be turned back.
[Pg 92]


I haven't succeeded in forcing my way. How shall
I force my way now!——I have no contract with God.
Let them make out of the thing what they will. I
have been forced.——I do not hold my parents answerable.
At the same time, the worst must fall upon
them. They were old enough to know what they were
doing. I was a weakling when I came into the world——or
else I would have been wise enough to become
another being. Why should I be forced to pay for the
fact that the others were here already!


I must have fallen on my head——If anybody makes
me a present of a mad dog I'll give him back a mad dog.
And if he won't take back his mad dog, then I am human
and——


I must have fallen on my head!


Man is born by chance and should not, after mature
consideration——It is to shoot oneself dead!


The weather at least has shown itself considerate.
The whole day it looked like rain and yet it has held off.——A
rare peace rules in nature. Nowhere anything
dazzling, exciting. Heaven and earth are like a transparent
fabric. And everything seems so happy. The
landscape is as sweet as the melody of a lullaby.——“Sleep,
little prince, sleep on,” as Fräulein Snandulia
sang. It's a shame she holds her elbows so awkwardly!——I
danced for the last time at the Cäcilienfest. Snandulia
only dances with good matches.——Her silk dress
was cut low in front and in the back. In the back, down
to her girdle and in the front down——unconscionably
low.——She couldn't have worn a chemise.———That
might be something able to affect me yet.——More
than half curiosity.——It must be a wonderful
[Pg 93]
sensation——a feeling as if one were being carried
through the rapids——I should never tell anybody that
I was experiencing something untried before——I
would act as if I had done it all.—There is something
shameful in growing up to be a man without having
learned the chief function of masculinity.——You come
from Egypt, honorable sir, and have not seen the pyramids?!


I will not cry again to-day. I will not think of my
burial again.——Melchior will lay a wreath on my
coffin. Pastor Kahlbauch will console my parents.
Rector Sonnenstich will cite examples from history.——It
is possible that I shall not have a tombstone. I had
wanted a snow-white marble urn on a pedestal of black
syenite.——Thank God, I shall not miss them. Monuments
are for the living, not for the dead.


I should need a whole year to say farewell to everything
in my thoughts. I will not cry again. I am so
happy to be able to look back without bitterness. How
many beautiful evenings I have passed with Melchior!——under
the osiers; at the forester's house; on the
highway where the five lindens stand; on the Schlossberg,
among the restful ruins of the Runenburg.——When
the hour comes, I will think with all my might of
whipped cream. Whipped cream doesn't stay firm. It
falls and leaves a pleasant after-taste.——I had thought
men were infinitely worse. I haven't found one who
didn't want to do his best. Many have suffered with
me on my own account.


I wander to the altar like the ancient Etrurian youth
whose dying rattle bought his brothers' prosperity for
the coming year.——I experience bit by bit the mysterious
[Pg 94]
awe of liberation. I sob with sorrow over my
lot.——Life has turned its cold shoulder to me. I see
earnest, friendly glances luring me there in the distance,
the headless queen, the headless queen—compassion
awaiting me with open arms——Your commands
concern minors; I carry my free ticket in myself.
If the shell sinks, the butterfly flits from it; the
delusion no longer holds.——You should drive no mad
bargain with the swindle! The mists close in; life is
bitter on the tongue.


Ilse.


(In torn clothing, a bright cloth about her head, grabs
him by the shoulder from behind.)


What have you lost?


Moritz.


Ilse!


Ilse.


What are you hunting here?


Moritz.


Why did you frighten me so?


Ilse.


What are you hunting?——What have you lost?


Moritz.


Why did you frighten me so fearfully?
[Pg 95]
Ilse.


I'm coming from town.——I'm going home.


Moritz.


I don't know what I've lost.


Ilse.


Then seeking won't help you.


Moritz.


Sakerment, sakerment!


Ilse.


I haven't been home for four days.


Moritz.


Restless as a cat!


Ilse.


Because I have on my dancing slippers——Mother
will make eyes!——Come to our house with me!


Moritz.


Where have you been strolling again?


Ilse.


With the Priapia!
[Pg 96]
Moritz.


Priapia?


Ilse.


With Nohl, with Fehrendorf, with Padinsky, with
Lenz, Rank, Spühler—with all of them possible!
Kling, kling——things were lively!


Moritz.


Do they paint you?


Ilse.


Fehrendorf painted me as a pillar saint. I am standing
on a Corinthian capital. Fehrendorf, I tell you, is
a gibbering idiot. The last time, I trod on one of his
tubes. He wiped his brush on my hair. I fetched him
a box on the ear. He threw his palette at my head. I
upset the easel. He chased me all about the studio,
over divans, tables and chairs, with his mahlstick. Behind
the stove stood a sketch;——Be good or I'll tear it!
He swore amnesty, and—and then kissed me promptly
and frightfully, frightfully, I tell you.


Moritz.


Where do you spend the night when you stop in
town?


Ilse.


Yesterday we were at Nohl's.——The day before
with Bojokewitsch—Sunday with Oikonomopulos. We
had champagne at Padinsky's. Valabregez had sold his
[Pg 97]
“Woman Dead of the Pest.” Adolar drank out of the
ash tray. Lenz sang the “Child's Murderer,” and
Adolar pounded the guitar out of shape. I was so drunk
they had to put me to bed.——Do you go to school yet,
Moritz?


Moritz.


No, no,——I take my leave of it this quarter.


Ilse.


You are right. Ah, how time passes when one earns
money!——Do you remember how we used to play robbers?——Wendla
Bergmann and you and I and the
others, when you used to come out in the evening and
drink warm goat's milk at our house?——What is
Wendla doing? I haven't seen her since the flood——What
is Melchi Gabor doing?——Does he seem as deep
thinking as ever?——We used to stand opposite each
other during singing.


Moritz.


He philosophizes.


Ilse.


Wendla came to see us a while ago and brought
Mother some presents. I sat that day for Isidor Landauer.
He needed me for the Holy Mary, the Mother of
God, with the Christ Child. He is a ninny and disagreeable.
Hu, like a weathercock!——Have you a
katzenjammer?
[Pg 98]
Moritz.


From last night!——We soaked like hippopotami. I
staggered home at five o'clock.


Ilse.


One need only to look at you.——Were there any
girls there?


Moritz.


Arabella, the beer nymph, an Andalusian. The landlord
let all of us spend the whole night alone with her.


Ilse.


One only need look at you, Moritz!——I don't know
what a katzenjammer's like. During the last carnival
I went three days and three nights without going to bed
or taking my clothes off. From the ball to the café,
noon at Bellavista; evenings, Tingle-Tangle; night, to
the ball. Lena was there, and the fat Viola.——The
third night Heinrich found me.


Moritz.


Had he been looking for you?


Ilse.


He tripped over my arm. I lay senseless in the snow
in the street.——That's how I went with him. For
fourteen days I didn't leave his lodgings——a dreadful
time! In the morning I had to throw on his Persian
[Pg 99]
nightgown and in the evening go about the room in the
black costume of a page; white lace ruffles at my neck,
my knees and my wrists. Every day he photographed
me in some new arrangement——once on the sofa as
Ariadne, once as Leda, once as Ganymede, once on all
fours as a feminine Nebuchadnezzar. Then he longed
for murder, for shooting, suicide and coal gas. Early
in the morning he brought a pistol into bed, loaded it
full of shot and put it against my breast! A twitch and
I'll pull!——Oh, he would have fired, Moritz, he would
have fired!——Then he put the thing in his mouth like
a blow-pipe.——That awoke the feeling of self-preservation.
And then——brrr!——the shot might have gone
through my spine.


Moritz.


Is Heinrich living yet?


Ilse.


How do I know!——Over the bed was a large mirror
set into the ceiling. The room seemed as high as a
tower and as bright as an opera house. One saw one's
self hanging down bodily from heaven. I had frightful
dreams at night——O God, O God, if it were only day!——Good-night,
Ilse, when you are asleep you will
be pretty to murder!


Moritz.


Is this Heinrich living yet?
[Pg 100]
Ilse.


Please God, no!——One day, when he went for absinthe,
I put on the mantle and ran out into the street.
The carnival was over; the police arrested me; what
was I doing in man's clothes?——They took me to the
Central Station. Nohl, Fehrendorf, Padinsky, Spühler,
Oikonomopulos, the whole Priapia came there and
bailed me out. They transported me in a cab to Adolar's
studio. Since then I've been true to the herd.
Fehrendorf is an ape, Nohl is a pig, Bojokewitsch an
owl, Loison a hyena, Oikonomopulos a camel——therefore
I love one and all of them the same and wouldn't
attach myself to anyone else, even if the world were
full of archangels and millionaires!


Moritz.


I must go back, Ilse.


Ilse.


Come as far as our house with me!


Moritz.


What for?——What for?——


Ilse.


To drink warm goat's milk! I will singe your hair
and hang a little bell around your neck.——Then we
have another kid with which you can play.
[Pg 101]
Moritz.


I must go back. I have yet the Sassanides, the Sermon
on the Mount and the parallelepipedon on my
thoughts.——Good-night, Ilse!


Ilse.


Sleep well!——Do you ever go to the wigwam where
Melchi Gabor buried my tomahawk?——Brrr! until
you are married I'll lie in the straw.


(Runs out.)
Moritz.


(Alone.)


It might have cost only a word.——(He calls)——Ilse?——Ilse!——Thank
God she doesn't hear me any
more.——I am not in the humor.——One needs a clear
head and a happy heart for it.——What a lost opportunity!——I
would have said that I had many crystal
mirrors over my bed——that I had trained an unbroken
filly——that I had her proudly march in front
of me on the carpet in long black silk stockings and
black patent leather shoes, long black gloves, black velvet
about her neck——had strangled her in a moment
of madness with my cushions. I would laugh when
the talk turned on passion——I would cry out!——Cry
out!——Cry out! It is you, Ilse!——Priapia!——Loss
of memory!——That takes my strength!——This
[Pg 102]
child of fortune, this sunny child——this joyous
maiden on my dolorous path!——O!——O!———
—— —— —— —— —— —— —— —— ——
—— —— —— —— —— —— —— —— ——


(In the bushes by the bank.)


Have I found it again unwillingly—the seat of turf.
The mulleins seem to have grown since yesterday. The
outlook between the willows is still the same——The
water runs as heavy as melted lead. I mustn't forget.
(He takes Frau Gabor's letter from his pocket and
burns it.)——How the sparks fly—here and there,
downward and upward——souls!——shooting stars!


Before I struck a light one could see the grass and a
streak on the horizon.——Now it is dark. Now I shall
never return home again.
[Pg 103]
The Board Room—On the walls pictures of Pestalozzi
and Jean Jacques Rousseau.
Professors Affenschmalz, Knüppeldick, Hungergurt,
Knochenbruch, Zungenschlag and Fliegentod are
seated around a green-covered table, over which are
burning several gas jets. At the upper end, on a raised
seat, is Rector Sonnenstich. Beadle Habebald squats
near the door.
Sonnenstich.


Has any gentleman something further to remark?——Gentlemen!
We cannot help moving the expulsion
of our guilty pupil before the National Board of Education;
there are the strongest reasons why we cannot:
We cannot, because we must expiate the misfortune
which has fallen upon us already; we cannot, because of
our need to protect ourselves from similar blows in the
future; we cannot, because we must chastise our guilty
pupil for the demoralizing influence he exerted upon his
classmates; we cannot, above all, because we must hinder
him from exerting the same influence upon his remaining
classmates. We cannot ignore the charge—and
[Pg 106]
this, gentlemen, is possibly the weightiest of all——on
any pretext concerning a ruined career, because it is
our duty to protect ourselves from an epidemic of suicide
similar to that which has broken out recently in
various grammar schools, and which until to-day has
mocked all attempts of the teachers to shackle it by any
means known to advanced education——Has any gentleman
something further to remark?


Knüppeldick.


I can rid myself of the conception no longer that it
is time at last to open a window here.


Zungenschlag.


Th- th- there is an a- a- at- atmosphere here li- li-
like th- th- that of the cata- catacombs, like that in the
document room of the former Cha-Cha-Chamber of
Justice at Wetzlar.


Sonnenstich.


Habebald!


Habebald.


At your service, Herr Rector.


Sonnenstich.


Open a window. Thank God there's fresh air enough
outside.——Has any other gentleman anything to say?
[Pg 107]
Fliegentod.


If my associate wants to have a window opened, I
haven't the least objection to it. Only I should like to
ask that the window opened is not the one directly behind
my back!


Sonnenstich.


Habebald!


Habebald.


At your service, Herr Rector.


Sonnenstich.


Open the other window!——Has any other gentleman
anything to remark?


Hungergurt.


Without wishing to increase the controversy, I should
like to recall the important fact that the other window
has been walled up since vacation.


Sonnenstich.


Habebald!


Habebald.


At your service, Herr Rector.
[Pg 108]
Sonnenstich.


Leave the other window shut!——I find it necessary,
gentlemen, to put this matter to a vote. I request those
who are in favor of having the only window which can
enter into this discussion opened to rise from their
seats. (He counts.) One, two, three——one, two, three——Habebald!


Habebald.


At your service, Herr Rector.


Sonnenstich.


Leave that window shut likewise! I, for my part, am
of the opinion that the air here leaves nothing to be
desired!——Has any gentleman anything further to remark?——Let
us suppose that we omitted to move the
expulsion of our guilty pupil before the National Board
of Education, then the National Board of Education
would hold us responsible for the misfortune which has
overwhelmed us. Of the various grammar schools visited
by the epidemic of self-murder, those in which the
devastation of self-murder has reached 25 per cent. have
been closed by the National Board of Education. It
is our duty, as the guardians and protectors of our institute,
to protect our institute from this staggering
blow. It grieves us deeply, gentlemen, that we are not
in a position to consider the other qualifications of our
guilt-laden pupil as mitigating circumstances. An indulgent
treatment, which would allow our guilty pupil
to be vindicated, would not in any conceivable way imaginable
[Pg 109]
vindicate the present imperiled existence of our
institute. We see ourselves under the necessity of judging
the guilt-laden that we may not be judged guilty
ourselves.——Habebald!


Habebald.


At your service, Herr Rector!


Sonnenstich.


Bring him up! (Exit Habebald.)


Zungenschlag.


If the pre-present atmosphere leaves little or nothing
to desire, I should like to suggest that the other window
be walled up during the summer va- va- va- vacation.


Fliegentod.


If our esteemed colleague, Zungenschlag, does not find
our room ventilated sufficiently, I should like to suggest
that our esteemed colleague, Zungenschlag, have a ventilator
set into his forehead.


Zungenschlag.


I do- do- don't have to stand that!——I- I- I- I- do-
do- don't have to st- st- st- stand rudeness!——I have
my fi- fi- five senses!
[Pg 110]
Sonnenstich.


I must ask our esteemed colleagues, Fliegentod and
Zungenschlag, to preserve decorum. It seems to me
that our guilt-laden pupil is already on the stairs.


(Habebald opens the door, whereupon Melchior, pale
but collected, appears before the meeting.)


Sonnenstich.


Come nearer to the table!——After Herr Stiefel became
aware of the profligate deed of his son, the distracted
father searched the remaining effects of his
son Moritz, hoping if possible, to find the cause of the
abominable deed, and discovered among them, in an
unexpected place, a manuscript, which, while it did not
make us understand the abominable deed, threw an unfortunate
and sufficient light upon the moral disorder
of the criminal. This manuscript, in the form of a
dialogue entitled “The Nuptial Sleep,” illustrated
with life-size pictures full of shameless obscenity, has
twenty pages of long explanations that seek to satisfy
every claim a profligate imagination can make upon a
lewd book.——


Melchior.


I have——


Sonnenstich.


You have to keep quiet!——After Herr Stiefel had
questioningly handed us this manuscript and we had
promised the distracted father to discover the author at
any price, we compared the handwriting before us with
[Pg 111]
the collected handwriting of the fellow-students of the
deceased profligate, and concluded, in the unanimous
judgment of the teaching staff, as well as with the full
coincidence of a valued colleague, the master of calligraphy,
that the resemblance to your——


Melchior.


I have——


Sonnenstich.


You have to keep quiet!——In spite of this likeness,
recognized as crushing evidence by incontrovertible authority,
we believe that we should allow ourselves to go
further and to take the widest latitude in examining
the guilty one at first hand, in order to make him
answerable to this charge of an offense against morals,
and to discover its relationship to the resultant suicide.——


Melchior.


I have——


Sonnenstich.


You have to answer the exact questions which I shall
put to you, one after the other, with a plain and modest
“yes” or “no.”——Habebald!


Habebald.


At your service, Herr Rector!
[Pg 112]
Sonnenstich.


The minutes!——I request our writing master, Herr
Fliegentod, from now on to take down the proceedings
as nearly verbatim as possible.——(to Melchior.) Do
you know this writing?


Melchior.


Yes.


Sonnenstich.


Do you know whose writing it is?


Melchior.


Yes.


Sonnenstich.


Is the writing in this manuscript yours?


Melchior.


Yes.


Sonnenstich.


Are you the author of this obscene manuscript?


Melchior.


Yes——I request you, sir, to show me anything obscene
in it.


Sonnenstich.


You have to answer with a modest “yes” or “no” the
exact questions which I put to you!
[Pg 113]
Melchior.


I have written neither more nor less than what are
well-known facts to all of you.


Sonnenstich.


You shameless boy!


Melchior.


I request you to show me an offense against morals
in this manuscript!


Sonnenstich.


Are you counting on a desire on my part to be a clown
for you?——Habebald——!


Melchior.


I have——


Sonnenstich.


You have as little respect for the dignity of your
assembled teachers as you have a proper appreciation
of mankind's innate sense of shame which belongs to
a moral world!——Habebald!


Habebald.


At your service, Herr Rector!
[Pg 114]
Sonnenstich.


It is past the time for the three hours' exercise in
agglutive Volapuk.


Melchior.


I have——


Sonnenstich.


I will request our secretary, Herr Fliegentod, to close
the minutes.


Melchior.


I have——


Sonnenstich.


You have to keep still!!——Habebald!


Habebald.


At your service, Herr Rector!


Sonnenstich.


Take him down!
[Pg 115]
A graveyard in the pouring rain——Pastor Kahlbauch
stands beside an open grave with a raised umbrella
in his hand. To his right are Renter Stiefel, his friend
Ziegenmelker and Uncle Probst. To the left Rector
Sonnenstich with Professor Knochenbruch, The grammar
school students complete the circle. Martha and
Ilse stand somewhat apart upon a fallen monument.
Pastor Kahlbauch.


For, he who rejects the grace with which the Everlasting
Father has blessed those born in sin, he shall die a
spiritual death!——He, however, who in willful carnal
abnegation of God's proper honor, lives for and serves
evil, shall die the death of the body!——Who, however,
wickedly throws away from him the cross which the All
Merciful has laid upon him for his sins, verily, verily,
I say unto you, he shall die the everlasting death!
(He throws a shovelful of earth into the grave.)——Let
us, however, praise the All Gracious Lord and
thank Him for His inscrutable grace in order that we
may travel the thorny path more and more surely. For
as truly as this one died a triple death, as truly will
the Lord God conduct the righteous unto happiness and
everlasting life.


Renter Stiefel.


(His voice stopped with tears, throws a shovelful of
earth into the grave.)


The boy was nothing to me!——The boy was nothing
to me!——The boy was a burden from his birth!
[Pg 116]
Rector Sonnenstich.


(Throws a shovelful of earth into the grave.)


Suicide being the greatest conceivable fault against
the moral order of the world, is the greatest evidence of
the moral order of the world. The suicide himself
spares the world the need of pronouncing judgment of
condemnation against himself, and confirms the existence
of the moral order of the world.


Professor Knochenbruch.


(Throws a shovelful of earth into the grave.)


Wasted—soiled—debauched—tattered and squandered!


Uncle Probst.


(Throws a shovelful of earth into the grave.)


I would not have believed my own mother had she
told me that a child could act so basely towards its own
parents.


Friend Ziegenmelker.


(Throws a shovelful of earth into the grave.)


To treat a father so, who for twenty years, from late
to early, had no other thought than the welfare of his
child!


Pastor Kahlbauch.


(Shaking Renter Stiefel's hand.)


We know that those who love God serve all things
[Pg 117]
best (1 Corinthians 12:15).——Think of the bereaved
mother and strive to console her for her loss by
doubled love.


Rector Sonnenstich.


(Shaking Renter Stiefel's hand.)


Indeed, we could not possibly have promoted him.


Professor Knochenbruch.


(Shaking Renter Stiefel's hand.)


And if we had promoted him, next spring he would
have certainly failed to pass.


Uncle Probst.


(Shaking Renter Stiefel's hand.)


It is your duty now to think of yourself first of all.
You are the father of a family——


Friend Ziegenmelker.


(Shaking Renter Stiefel's hand.)


Trust yourself to my guidance!——This devilish
weather shakes one's guts!——The man who doesn't
prevent it with a grog will ruin his heart valves.


Renter Stiefel.


(Blowing his nose.)


The boy was nothing to me——the boy was nothing
to me!
[Pg 118]


(Renter Stiefel leaves, accompanied by Pastor Kahlbauch,
Rector Sonnenstich, Professor Knockenbruch,
Uncle Probst and Friend Ziegenmelker.——The rain
ceases.)


Hans Rilow.


(Throws a shovelful of earth into the grave.)


Rest in peace, you honest fellow!——Greet my
eternal brides for me, those sacrificed remembrances,
and commend me respectfully to the grace of God——you
poor clown——They will put a scarecrow on top
of your grave because of your angelic simplicity.


George.


Did they find the pistol?


Robert.


There's no use looking for the pistol!


Ernest.


Did you see him, Robert?


Robert.


It's a damned infernal swindle!——Who did see
him?——Who did?


Otto.


He was hidden!——They threw a covering over him.
[Pg 119]
George.


Was his tongue hanging out?


Robert.


His eyes——That's why they threw the cloth over
him.


Otto.


Frightful!


Hans Rilow.


Do you know for certain that he hanged himself?


Ernest.


They say he has no head left.


Otto.


Incredible!——Nonsense!


Robert.


I have the clue in my hands. I have never seen a
man who hanged himself that they haven't thrown a
cloth over.


George.


He couldn't have taken his leave in a vulgarer way!


Hans Rilow.


The devil! Hanging is pretty enough!
[Pg 120]
Otto.


He owes me five marks. We had a bet. He swore he
would keep his place.


Hans Rilow.


You are to blame for his lying there. You called him
a boaster.


Otto.


Nonsense! I, too, must grind away all night. If he
had learned the history of Greek literature he would
not have had to hang himself!


Ernest.


Have you your composition, Otto?


Otto.


First comes the introduction.


Ernest.


I don't know at all what to write.


George.


Weren't you there when Affenschmalz gave us the
theme?


Hans Rilow.


I'll fake up something out of Democritus.
[Pg 121]
Ernst.


I will see if there is anything left to be found in
Meyer's Little Encyclopedia.


Otto.


Have you your Virgil for to-morrow?——


(The schoolboys leave——Martha and Ilse approach
the grave.)


Ilse.


Quick, quick!——Here are the grave-diggers coming!


Martha.


Hadn't we better wait, Ilse?


Ilse.


What for?——We'll bring fresh ones. Always fresh
ones. There are enough growing.


Martha.


You're right, Ilse!——(She throws a wreath of ivy
into the grave, Ilse drops her apron and allows a
shower of fresh anemones to rain down on the coffin.)


Martha.


I'll dig up our roses. I'll be beaten for it!——They
will be of some use here.
[Pg 122]
Ilse.


I'll water them as often as I pass here. I'll fetch
violets from the brook and bring some iris from our
house.


Martha.


It will be beautiful!——beautiful!


Ilse.


I was just across the brook on that side when I heard
the shot.


Martha.


Poor dear!


Ilse.


And I know the reason, too, Martha.


Martha.


Did he tell you anything?


Ilse.


Parallelepipedon! But don't tell anybody.


Martha.


My hand on it.


Ilse.


Here is the pistol.
[Pg 123]
Martha.


That's the reason they didn't find it!


Ilse.


I took it right out of his hand when I came along in
the morning.


Martha.


Give it to me, Ilse!——Please give it to me!


Ilse.


No, I'm going to keep it for a souvenir.


Martha.


Is it true, Ilse, that he lay there without a head?


Ilse.


He must have loaded it with water!——The mulleins
were spattered all over with blood. His brains were
scattered about the pasture.


Herr and Frau Gabor.
Frau Gabor.


They needed a scapegoat. They did not dare meet
[Pg 124]
the charge that was made everywhere against themselves.
And now that my child has had the misfortune
to run his head into the noose at the right moment, shall
I, his own mother, help to end the work of his executioners?——God
keep me from it!


Herr Gabor.


For fourteen years I have looked on at your spirited
educational methods in silence. They were contrary to
my ideas. I had always lived in the conviction that a
child was not a plaything; a child should have a claim
upon our most earnest efforts. But, I said to myself, if
the spirit and the grace of the one parent are able to
compensate for the serious maxims of the other, they
may be given preference over the serious maxims.——I
am not reproaching you, Fanny, but don't stand in
my way when I seek to right your injustice and mine
toward the lad.


Frau Gabor.


I will block the way for you as long as a warm drop of
blood beats in me. My child would be lost in the House
of Correction. A criminal nature might be bettered in
such an institution. I don't know. A fine natured man
would just as surely turn into a criminal, like the plants
when they are kept from sun and light. I am conscious
of no injustice on my part. To-day, as always, I thank
heaven that it showed me the way to awaken righteousness
of character and nobility of thought in my child.
What has he done which is so frightful? It doesn't occur
to me to apologize for him——now that they have
[Pg 125]
hunted him out of school, he bears no fault! And if it
was his fault he has paid for it. You may know better.
You may be entirely right theoretically. But I cannot
allow my only child to be forcibly hunted to death.


Herr Gabor.


That doesn't depend on us, Fanny. That is the risk
we took with our happiness. He who is too weak to
march stops by the wayside. And, in the end, it is not
the worst when what was certain to come comes in time
to be bettered. Heaven protect us from that! It is our
duty to strengthen the loiterer as long as reason supplies
a means.——That they have hunted him out of school
is not his own fault. If they hadn't hunted him
out of school, that wouldn't have been his fault, either!——You
are so lighthearted. You perceive inconsiderable
trifles when the question concerns a fundamental
injury to character. You women are not accustomed to
judge such things. Anyone who can write what
Melchior wrote must be rotten to the core of his being.
The mark is plain. A half-healthy nature wouldn't do
such a thing. None of us are saints. Each of us
wanders from the straight path. His writing, on the
contrary, tramples on principle. His writing is no
evidence of a chance slip in the usual way; it sets forth
with dreadful plainness and a frankly definite purpose
that natural longing, that propensity for immorality,
because it is immorality. His writing manifests that
exceptional state of spiritual corruption which we
jurists classify under the term “moral imbecility.”——If
anything can be done in his case, I am not able to
[Pg 126]
say. If we want to preserve a glimmer of hope, and
keep our spotless consciences as the parents of the
victim, it is time for us to go to work determinedly in
earnest.—Don't let us contend any more, Fanny! I
feel how hard it is for you. I know that you idolize him
because he expresses so entirely your genial nature. Be
stronger than yourself. Show yourself for once devoid
of self-interest towards your son.


Frau Gabor.


God help me, how can one get along that way! One
must be a man to be able to talk that way! One must
be a man to be able to blind oneself so with the dead
letter! One must be a man to be so blind that one can't
see what stares him in the eyes. I have conscientiously
and thoughtfully managed Melchior from his first day,
because I found him impressionable to his surroundings.
Are we answerable for what has happened? A tile might
fall off the roof upon your head to-morrow, and then
comes your friend—your father, and, instead of taking
care of you, tramples upon you!——I will not let my
child be destroyed before my eyes. That's the reason
I'm his mother.——It is inconceivable! It is not to
be believed! What did he write, then, after all! Isn't
it the most striking proof of his harmlessness, of his
stupidity, of his childish obscurity, that he can write
so!——One must possess no intuitive knowledge of
mankind——one must be an out and out bureaucrat, or
weak in intellect, to scent moral corruption here!——Say
what you will. If you land Melchior in the House
of Correction, I will get a divorce. Then let me see if
[Pg 127]
I can't find help and means somewhere in the world to
rescue my child from destruction.


Herr Gabor.


You must prepare yourself for it——if not to-day,
then to-morrow. It is not easy for anyone to discount
misfortune. I will stand beside you, and when your
courage begins to fail will spare no trouble or effort to
relieve your heart. The future seems so gray to me, so
full of clouds——it only remains for you to leave me
too.


Frau Gabor.


I should never see him again: I should never see him
again! He can't bear the vulgar. He will not be able
to stand the dirt. He will break under restraint; the
most frightful examples will be before his eyes!——And
if I see him again——O, God, O, God, that joyous
heart——his clear laughter——all, all,——his
childish resolution to fight courageously for good and
righteousness——oh, this morning sky, how I cherished
it light and pure in his soul as my highest good——Hold
me to account if the sin cries for expiation! Hold
me to account! Do with me what you will! I will
bear the guilt.——But keep your frightful hand off
the boy.


Herr Gabor.


He has gone wrong!
[Pg 128]
Frau Gabor.


He has not gone wrong!


Herr Gabor.


He has gone wrong!——I would have given everything
to be able to spare your boundless love.——A terrified
woman came to me this morning, scarcely able to
control her speech, with this letter in her hand——a
letter to her fifteen-year-old daughter. She had opened
it simply out of curiosity; the girl was not at home.——In
the letter Melchior explains to the fifteen-year-old
girl that his manner of acting left him no peace, that
he had sinned against her, etc., etc., and that naturally
he would answer for it. She must not fret herself even
if she felt results. He was already on the road after
help; his expulsion made it easier for him. The previous
false step could still lead to her happiness——and
more of such irrational nonsense.


Frau Gabor.


Impossible!


Herr Gabor.


The letter is forged. It's a cheat. Somebody is trying
to take advantage of his generally known expulsion.
I have not yet spoken to the lad about it——but please
look at this hand! See the writing!


Frau Gabor.


An unprecedented, shameless bit of knavery!
[Pg 129]
Herr Gabor.


That's what I'm afraid!


Frau Gabor.


No, no——never, never!


Herr Gabor.


It would be so much the better for us.——The woman,
wringing her hands, asked me what she should do. I
told her she should not leave her fifteen-year-old daughter
lying about a haymow. Fortunately she left me the
letter.——If we send Melchior to another grammar
school, where he is not under parental supervision, in
three weeks we shall have the same result.——A new
expulsion——his joyful heart will get used to it after
awhile.——Tell me, Fanny, where shall I send the lad?


Frau Gabor.


To the House of Correction——


Herr Gabor.


To the?——


Frau Gabor.


House of Correction!


Herr Gabor.


He will find there, in the first place, that which has
[Pg 130]
been wrongfully withheld from him at home, parental
discipline, principles, and a moral constraint to which
he must submit under all circumstances.——Moreover,
the House of Correction is not a place of terror, as you
think it. The greatest weight is laid in the establishment
upon the development of Christian thought and
sensibility. The lad will learn at last to follow good
in place of desire and not to follow his natural instincts,
but to observe the letter of the law.——A half hour
ago I received a telegram from my brother that confirms
the woman's statement. Melchior has confided in him
and begged him for 200 marks in order to fly to
England——


Frau Gabor.


(Covering her face.)


Merciful heavens!


The House of Correction.—A corridor.—Diethelm,
Rheinhold, Ruprecht, Helmuth, Gaston and Melchior.
Diethelm.


Here is a twenty pfennig piece!
[Pg 131]
Rheinhold.


What shall we do with it?


Diethelm.


I will lay it on the floor. Arrange yourselves about
it. Who can get it can keep it.


Ruprecht.


Won't you join us, Melchior?


Melchior.


No, thank you.


Helmuth.


The Joseph!


Gaston.


He can't do anything else. He is here for recreation.


Melchior.


(To himself.)


It is not wise for me to separate myself from them.
They all have an eye on me. I must join them——or
the creature goes to the devil——imprisonment drives
it to suicide.——If I break my neck, all is well!——If
I escape, that is good, too! I can only win. Ruprecht
would become my friend. He has acquaintances here.——I
had better give him the chapter of Judas' daughter-in-law,
[Pg 132]
Thamar, of Moab, of Lot and his kindred,
of Queen Vashti and of Abishag the Shunammite.——He
has the unhappiest physiognomy of the lot of them.


Ruprecht.


I have it!


Helmuth.


I'll get it yet!


Gaston.


The day after to-morrow, perhaps.


Helmuth.


Right away!——Now!——O God! O God!——


All.


Summa——Summa cum laude!!


Ruprecht.


(Taking the money.)


Many thanks!


Helmuth.


Here, you dog!


Ruprecht.


You swine!


Helmuth.


Gallows bird!
[Pg 133]
Ruprecht.


(Hits him in the face.)


There! (Runs away.)


Helmuth.


(Running after him.)


I'll strike you dead!


The Rest of Them.


(Running after.)


Chase him! Chase him! Chase him! Chase him!


Melchior.


(Alone, wandering toward the window.)


The lightning rod runs down there.——One would
have to wind a pocket handkerchief about it.——When
I think of them the blood always rushes to my head.
And Moritz turns my feet to lead.——I'll go to a newspaper.
If they pay me by space I'll be a free lance!——collect
the news of the day——write——locals——ethical——psychophysical——one
doesn't starve
so easily nowadays. Public soup houses, Café Temperance——The
house is sixty feet high and the cornice
is crumbling——They hate me——they hate me because
I rob them of liberty. Handle myself as I will,
there remain misdemeanors——I dare only hope in the
course of the year, gradually——It will be new moon
[Pg 134]
in eight days. To-morrow I'll grease the hinges. By
Sunday evening I must find out somehow who has the
key.——Sunday evening, during prayers, a cataleptic
fit——I hope to God nobody else will be sick!——Everything
seems as clear to me as if it had happened.
Over the window-frames I can reach easily—a swing—a
clutch—but one must wind a handkerchief about it.——There
comes the head inquisitor. (Exit to the
left.)


(Dr. Prokrustes enters from the right with a locksmith.)
Dr. Prokrustes.


The window is on the third floor and has stinging
nettles planted under it, but what do the degenerates
care for stinging nettles!——Last winter one of them
got out of the trap door on the roof, and we had the
whole trouble of capturing him, bringing him back,
and locking him up again——


The Locksmith.


Do you want the grating of wrought iron?


Dr. Prokrustes.


Of wrought iron——riveted so they cannot meddle
with it.
[Pg 135]
A bedchamber.—Frau Bergmann, Ina Müller and
Doctor von Brausepulver. Wendla, in bed.
Dr. von Brausepulver.


How old are you, exactly?


Wendla.


Fourteen and a half.


Dr. von Brausepulver.


I have been ordering Blaud's pills for fifteen years
and have noticed astonishing results in the majority of
cases. I prefer them to cod liver oil and wine of iron.
Begin with three or four pills a day, and increase the
number just as soon as you are able. I ordered Fräulein
Elfriede, Baroness von Witzleben to increase the
number of them by one, every third day. The Baroness
misunderstood me and increased the number every day
by three. Scarcely three weeks later the Baroness was
able to go to Pyrmont with her mother to complete her
cure.——I will allow you to dispense with exhausting
walks and extra meals; therefore, promise me, dear
child, to take frequent exercise and to avoid unwholesome
food as soon as the desire for it appears again.
Then this palpitation of the heart will soon cease——and
the headache, the chills, the giddiness——and this
[Pg 136]
frightful indigestion. Fräulein Elfriede, Baroness von
Witzleben, ate a whole roast chicken with new potatoes
for her breakfast eight days after her convalescence.


Frau Bergmann.


May I offer you a glass of wine, Doctor?


Dr. von Brausepulver.


I thank you, dear Frau Bergmann, my carriage is
waiting.——Do not take it so to heart. In a few weeks
our dear little patient will be again as fresh and bright
as a gazelle. Be of good cheer.——Good-day, Frau
Bergmann, good-day, dear child, good-day, ladies——good-day.


(Frau Bergmann accompanies him to the door.)
Ina.


(At the window.)


Now your plantains are in bloom again.——Can
you see that from your bed?——A short display,
hardly worth rejoicing over them, they come and go
so quickly. I, too, must go right away now. Müller
is waiting for me in front of the post-office, and I must
go first to the dressmaker's. Mucki is to have his first
trousers and Karl is to have new knit leggings for winter.


Wendla.


Sometimes I feel so happy——all joy and sunshine.
[Pg 137]
I had not guessed that it could go so well in one's heart!
I want to go out, to go over the meadows in the twilight,
to look for primroses along the river and to sit
down on the banks and dream—Then comes the toothache,
and I feel as if I had to die the next morning
at daybreak; I grow hot and cold, it becomes dark before
my eyes; and then the beast flutters inside.——As
often as I wake up, I see Mother crying. Oh, that
hurts me so.——I can't tell you how much, Ina!


Ina.


Shall I lift your pillows higher?


Frau Bergmann.


(Returning.)


He thinks the vomiting will soon cease; and then you
can get up in peace——I, too, think it would be better
if you got up soon, Wendla.


Ina.


Possibly when I visit you the next time you will be
dancing around the house again. Good-bye, Mother. I
must positively go to the dressmaker's. God guard you,
Wendla dear. (Kisses her.) A speedy, speedy recovery!
(Exit Ina.)


Wendla.


What did he tell you, Mother, when he was outside?
[Pg 138]
Frau Bergmann.


He didn't say anything.——He said Fraülein von
Witzleben was subject to fainting spells also. It is
almost always so with chlorosis.


Wendla.


Did he say that I have chlorosis, Mother?


Frau Bergmann.


You are to drink milk and eat meat and vegetables
when your appetite comes back.


Wendla.


O, Mother, Mother, I believe I haven't chlorosis——


Frau Bergmann.


You have chlorosis, child. Be calm, Wendla, be
calm, you have chlorosis.


Wendla.


No, Mother, no! I know it. I feel it. I haven't
chlorosis. I have dropsy——


Frau Bergmann.


You have chlorosis. He said positively that you have
chlorosis. Calm yourself, girl. You will get better.
[Pg 139]
Wendla.


I won't get better. I have the dropsy, I must die,
Mother.——O, Mother, I must die!


Frau Bergmann.


You must not die, child! You must not die—Great
heavens, you must not die!


Wendla.


But why do you weep so frightfully, then?


Frau Bergmann.


You must not die, child! You haven't the dropsy,
you have a child, girl! You have a child!——Oh, why
did you do that to me!


Wendla.


I haven't done anything to you.


Frau Bergmann.


Oh don't deny it any more, Wendla!——I know
everything. See, I didn't want to say a word to you.——Wendla,
my Wendla——!


Wendla.


But it's not possible, Mother. I'm not married yet!
[Pg 140]
Frau Bergmann.


Great Almighty God——that's just it, that you are
not married! That is the most frightful thing of all!——Wendla,
Wendla, Wendla, what have you done!!


Wendla.


God knows, I don't know any more! We lay in the
hay——I have loved nobody in the world as I do you,
Mother.


Frau Bergmann.


My sweetheart——


Wendla.


O Mother, why didn't you tell me everything!


Frau Bergmann.


Child, child, let us not make each other's hearts any
heavier! Take hold of yourself! Don't make me desperate,
child. To tell that to a fourteen-year-old girl!
See, I expected that about as much as I did the sun
going out. I haven't acted any differently towards you
than my dear, good mother did toward me.——Oh, let
us trust in the dear God, Wendla; let us hope for compassion,
and have compassion toward ourselves! See,
nothing has happened yet, child. And if we are not
cowardly now, God won't forsake us.——Be cheerful,
Wendla, be cheerful!——One sits so at the window
with one's hands in one's lap, while everything changes
[Pg 141]
to good, and then one realizes that one almost wanted
to break one's heart——Wa——why are you shivering?


Wendla.


Somebody knocked.


Frau Bergmann.


I didn't hear anything, dear heart. (Goes and opens
the door.)


Wendla.


But I heard it very plainly——Who is outside?


Frau Bergmann.


Nobody——Schmidt's Mother from Garden street.——You
come just at the right time, Mother Schmidt.


Men and women wine-dressers in the vineyard.
The sun is setting behind the peaks of the mountains in
the west. A clear sound of bells rises from the valley below.
Hans Rilow and Ernest Röbel roll about in the dry
grass of the highest plot under the overhanging rocks.
Ernest.


I have overworked myself.
[Pg 142]
Hans.


Don't let us be sad!——It's a pity the minutes are
passing.


Ernest.


One sees them hanging and can't manage any more——and
to-morrow they are in the wine press.


Hans.


Fatigue is as intolerable to me as hunger.


Ernest.


Oh, I can't eat any more.


Hans.


Just this shining muscatelle!


Ernest.


My elasticity has its limit.


Hans.


If I bend down the vine, we can sway it from mouth
to mouth. Neither of us will have to disturb himself.
We can bite off the grapes and let the branches fly back
to the trunk.


Ernest.


One hardly decides upon a thing, when, see, that vanishing
power begins to darken.
[Pg 143]
Hans.


Hence the flaming firmament——and the evening
bells——I promise myself little more for the future.


Ernest.


Sometimes I see myself already as a worthy pastor—with
a good-natured little wife, a well-filled library and
offices and dignities all about me. For six days one
has to think, and on the seventh one opens one's mouth.
When out walking, one gives one's hand to the school-girls
and boys, and when one comes home the coffee
steams, the cookies are brought out and the maids fetch
apples through the garden door.——Can you imagine
anything more beautiful?


Hans.


I imagine half-closed eyelids, half-open lips and
Turkish draperies.——I do not believe in pathos. Our
elders show us long faces in order to hide their stupidity.
Among themselves they call each other donkeys
just as we do. I know that.——When I am a millionaire
I'll erect a monument to God.——Imagine the
future as a milkshake with sugar and cinnamon. One
fellow upsets it and howls, another stirs it all together
and sweats. Why not skim off the cream?——Or don't
you believe that one can learn how?


Ernest.


Let us skim!
[Pg 144]
Hans.


What remains the hens will eat.——I have pulled
my head out of so many traps already——


Ernest.


Let us skim, Hans!——Why do you laugh?


Hans.


Are you beginning again already?


Ernest.


But one of us must begin.


Hans.


Thirty years from now, on some evening like to-day,
if we recall this one, perhaps it will seem too beautiful
for expression.


Ernest.


And how everything springs from self!


Hans.


Why not?


Ernest.


If by chance one were alone——one might like to
weep!
[Pg 145]
Hans.


Don't let us be sad! (He kisses him on the mouth.)


Ernest.


(Returning the kiss.)


I left the house with the idea of just speaking to you
and turning back again.


Hans.


I waited for you.——Virtue is not a bad garment,
but it requires an imposing figure.


Ernest.


It fits us loosely as yet.——I should not have been
content if I had not met you.——I love you, Hans, as
I have never loved a soul——


Hans.


Let us not be sad.——If we recall this in thirty years,
perhaps we shall make fun of it.——And yet everything
is so beautiful. The mountains glow; the grapes
hang before our mouths and the evening breeze caresses
the rocks like a playful flatterer.——
[Pg 146]
A clear November night. The dry foliage of the
bushes and trees rustles. Torn clouds chase each other
beneath the moon——Melchior clambers over the
churchyard wall.
Melchior.


(Springing down inside.)


The pack won't follow me here.——While they are
searching the brothels I can get my breath and discover
how much I have accomplished.


Coat in tatters, pockets empty——I'm not safe from
the most harmless.——I must try to get deeper into
the wood to-morrow.


I have trampled down a cross——Even to-day the
flowers are frozen!——The earth is cold all around——


In the domain of the dead!——


To climb out of the hole in the roof was not as hard
as this road!——It was only there that I kept my
presence of mind——


I hung over the abyss——everything was lost in it,
vanished——Oh, if I could have stayed there.


Why she, on my account!——Why not the guilty!——Inscrutable
providence!——I would have broken
stones and gone hungry!——What is to keep me straight
now?——Offense follows offense. I am swallowed up
in the morass. I haven't strength left to get out of
it——
[Pg 147]


I was not bad!——I was not bad!——I was not bad!——No
mortal ever wandered so dejectedly over graves
before.——Pah!——I won't lose courage! Oh, if I
should go crazy——during this very night!


I must seek there among the latest ones!——The
wind pipes on every stone in a different key——an anguishing
symphony!——The decayed wreaths rip apart
and swing with their long threads in bits about the marble
crosses——A wood of scarecrows!——Scarecrows
on every grave, each more gruesome than the other——as
high as houses, from which the devil runs away.——The
golden letters sparkle so coldly——The weeping
willows groan and move their giant fingers over the
inscriptions——


A praying angel——a tablet.


The clouds throw their shadows over it.——How the
wind hurries and howls!——Like the march of an army
it drives in from the east.——Not a star in the
heavens——


Evergreen in the garden plot?——Evergreen?——A
maiden——


HERE RESTS IN GOD


Wendla Bergmann,
born May 5, 1878,
died from Cholorosis,
October 27, 1892.
Blessed are the Pure of Heart
[Pg 148]


And I am her murderer. I am her murderer!——Despair
is left me——I dare not weep here. Away
from here!——Away——


Moritz Stiefel.


(With his head under his arm, comes stamping over
the graves.)


A moment, Melchior! The opportunity will not occur
so readily again. You can't guess what depends
upon the place and the time——


Melchior.


Where do you come from?


Moritz.


From over there——over by the wall. You knocked
down my cross. I lie by the wall.——Give me your
hand, Melchior.——


Melchior.


You are not Moritz Stiefel!


Moritz.


Give me your hand. I am convinced you will thank
me. It won't be so easy again! This is an unusually
fortunate encounter.——I came out especially——


Melchior.


Don't you sleep?
[Pg 149]
Moritz.


Not what you call sleep.——We sit on the church-tower,
on the high gables of the roof——wherever we
please.——


Melchior.


Restless?


Moritz.


Half happy.——We wander among the Mayflowers,
among the lonely paths in the woods. We hover over
gatherings of people, over the scene of accidents, gardens,
festivals.——We cower in the chimneys of
dwelling-places and behind the bed curtains.——Give
me your hand.——We don't associate with each other,
but we see and hear everything that is going on in the
world. We know that everything is stupidity, everything
that men do and contend for, and we laugh at it.


Melchior.


What good does that do?


Moritz.


What good does it have to do?——We are fit for
nothing more, neither good nor evil. We stand high,
high above earthly beings—each for himself alone. We
do not associate with each other, because it would bore
us. Not one of us cares for anything which he might
lose. We are indifferent both to sorrow and to joy. We
are satisfied with ourselves and that is all. We despise
[Pg 150]
the living so heartily that we can hardly pity them.
They amuse us with their doings, because, being alive,
they are not worthy of compassion. We laugh at their
tragedies—each by himself——and make reflections
upon them.——Give me your hand! If you give me
your hand, you will fall down with laughter over the
sensation which made you give me your hand.


Melchior.


Doesn't that disgust you?


Moritz.


We are too high for that. We smile!——At my
burial I was among the mourners. I had a right good
time. That is sublimity, Melchior! I howled louder
than any and slunk over to the wall to hold my belly
from shaking with laughter. Our unapproachable sublimity
is the only viewpoint which the trash understands——They
would have laughed at me also before I
swung myself off.


Melchior.


I have no desire to laugh at myself.


Moritz.


The living, as such, are not really worth compassion!——I
admit I should not have thought so either. And
now it is incomprehensible to me how one can be so
naïve. I see through the fraud so clearly that not a
[Pg 151]
cloud remains.——Why do you want to loiter now,
Melchior! Give me your hand! In the turn of a head
you will stand heaven high above yourself.——Your
life is a sin of omission——


Melchior.


Can you forget?


Moritz.


We can do everything. Give me your hand! We
can pity the young, who take their timidity for idealism,
and the old, who break their hearts from stoical
deliberation. We see the Kaiser tremble at a scurrilous
ballad and the lazzaroni before the youngest policeman.
We ignore the masks of comedians and see the
poet in the shadow of the mask. We see happiness in
beggars' rags and the capitalist in misery and toil. We
observe lovers and see them blush before each other,
foreseeing that they are deceived deceivers. We see
parents bringing children into the world that they may
be able to say to them: “How happy you are to have
such parents!”——and see the children go and do likewise.
We can observe the innocent girl in the qualms
of her first love, and the five-groschen harlot reading
Schiller.——We see God and the devil blaming each
other, and cherish the unspeakable belief that both of
them are drunk——Peace and joy, Melchior! You
only need to reach me your little finger. You may become
snow-white before you have such a favorable opportunity
again!
[Pg 152]
Melchior.


If I gave you my hand, Moritz, it would be from
self-contempt.——I see myself outlawed. What lent
me courage lies in the grave. I can no longer consider
noble emotions as worthy.——And see nothing, nothing,
that can save me now from my degradation.——To
myself I am the most contemptible creature in the universe.


Moritz.


What delays you?——


(A masked man appears.)
The Masked Man.


(To Melchior.)


You are trembling from hunger. You are not fit
to judge. (To Moritz.) You go!


Melchior.


Who are you?


The Masked Man.


I refuse to tell. (To Moritz.) Vanish!——What
business have you here!——Why haven't you on your
head?


Moritz.


I shot myself.
[Pg 153]
The Masked Man.


Then stay where you belong. You are done with!
Don't annoy us here with your stink of the grave. It's
inconceivable!——Look at your fingers! Pfu, the
devil! They will crumble soon.


Moritz.


Please don't send me away——


Melchior.


Who are you, sir??


Moritz.


Please don't send me away. Please don't. Let me
stay here a bit with you; I won't disturb you in anything——It
is so dreadful down there.


The Masked Man.


Why do you gabble about sublimity, then?——You
know that that is humbug——sour grapes! Why do
you lie so diligently, you chimera? If you consider
it so great a favor, you may stay, as far as I am concerned.
But take yourself to leeward, my dear friend——and
please keep your dead man's hand out of the
game!


Melchior.


Will you tell me once for all who you are, or not?
[Pg 154]
The Masked Man.


No——I propose to you that you shall confide yourself
to me. I will take care of your future success.


Melchior.


You are——my father?


The Masked Man.


Wouldn't you know your father by his voice?


Melchior.


No.


The Masked Man.


Your father seeks consolation at this moment in the
sturdy arms of your mother.——I will open the world
to you. Your momentary lack of resolution springs
from your miserable condition. With a warm supper
inside of you, you will make fun of it.


Melchior.


(To himself.)


It can only be the devil! (Aloud.) After that of
which I have been guilty, a warm supper cannot give
me back my peace!


The Masked Man.


That will follow the supper!——I can tell you this
[Pg 155]
much, the girl had better have given birth. She was
built properly. Unfortunately, she was killed by the
abortives given by Mother Schmidt.——I will take you
out among men. I will give you the opportunity to enlarge
your horizon fabulously. I will make you thoroughly
acquainted with everything interesting that the
world has to offer.


Melchior.


Who are you? Who are you?——I can't trust a
man that I don't know.


The Masked Man.


You can't learn to know me unless you trust me.


Melchior.


Do you think so?


The Masked Man.


Of course!——Besides, you have no choice.


Melchior.


I can reach my hand to my friend here at any moment.


The Masked Man.


Your friend is a charlatan. Nobody laughs who has
a pfennig left in cash. The sublime humorist is the
most miserable, most pitiable creature in creation.
[Pg 156]
Melchior.


Let the humorist be what he may; you tell me who
you are, or I'll reach the humorist my hand.


The Masked Man.


What then?


Moritz.


He is right, Melchior. I have boasted. Take his
advice and profit by it. No matter how masked he is——he
is, at least.


Melchior.


Do you believe in God?


The Masked Man.


Yes, conditionally.


Melchior.


Will you tell me who discovered gunpowder?


The Masked Man.


Berthold Schwarz——alias Konstantin Anklitzen.——A
Franciscan monk at Freiburg in Breisgau, in
1330.


Moritz.


What wouldn't I give if he had let it alone!
[Pg 157]
The Masked Man.


You would only have hanged yourself then.


Melchior.


What do you think about morals?


The Masked Man.


You rascal, am I your schoolboy?


Melchior.


Do I know what you are?


Moritz.


Don't quarrel!——Please don't quarrel. What good
does that do?——Why should we sit, two living men
and a corpse, together in a churchyard at two o'clock in
the morning if we want to quarrel like topers! It will
be a pleasure to me to arbitrate between you. If you
want to quarrel, I'll take my head under my arm and go!


Melchior.


You are the same old 'fraid cat as ever.


The Masked Man.


The phantom is not wrong. One shouldn't forget
one's dignity.——By morals I understand the real
[Pg 158]
product of two imaginary quantities. The imaginary
quantities are “shall” and “will.” The product is
called morals and leaves no doubt of its reality.


Moritz.


If you had only told me that earlier! My morals
hounded me to death. For the sake of my dear parents
I killed myself. “Honor thy father and mother that
thy days may be long in the land.” The text made a
phenomenal fool of me.


The Masked Man.


Give yourself up to no more illusions, dear friend.
Your dear parents would have died as little from it as
you did. Judged righteously, they would only have
raged and stormed from the healthiest necessity.


Melchior.


That may be right as far as it goes.——I can assure
you, however, sir, that if I reach Moritz my hand,
sooner or later my morals alone will have to bear the
blame.


The Masked Man.


That is just the reason you are not Moritz!


Moritz.


But I don't believe the difference is so material, so
compulsive at least, esteemed unknown, but what by
[Pg 159]
chance the same thing might have happened to you as
happened to me that time when I trotted through the
alder grove with a pistol in my pocket.


The Masked Man.


Don't you remember me? You have been standing
for the moment actually between life and death.——Moreover,
in my opinion, this is not exactly the place
in which to continue such a profound debate.


Moritz.


Certainly, it's growing cold, gentlemen! They
dressed me in my Sunday suit, but I wear neither undershirt
nor drawers.


Melchior.


Farewell, dear Moritz. I don't know where the man
is taking me. But he is a man——


Moritz.


Don't blame me for seeking to kill you, Melchior.
It was old attachment. All my life I shall only be able
to complain and lament that I cannot accompany you
once more.


The Masked Man.


At the end everyone has his part——You the consoling
consciousness of having nothing——you an enervating
doubt of everything.—Farewell.
[Pg 160]
Melchior.


Farewell, Moritz. Take my heartfelt thanks for appearing
before me again. How many former bright
days have we lived together during the fourteen years!
I promise you, Moritz, come what may, whether during
the coming years I become ten times another, whether
I prosper or fail, I shall never forget you——


Moritz.


Thanks, thanks, dear friend.


Melchior.


——and when at last I am an old man with gray
hair, then, perhaps, you will again stand closer to me
than all those living about me.


Moritz.


I thank you. Good luck to your journey, gentlemen.
Do not delay any longer.


The Masked Man.


Come, child! (He lays his arm upon that of
Melchior and disappears with him over the graves.)


Moritz.


(Alone.)


Now I sit here with my head under my arm.——The
[Pg 161]
moon covers her face, unveils herself again and seems
not a hair the cleverer.——I will go back to my place,
right my cross, which that madcap trampled down so
inconsiderately, and when everything is in order I will
lie down on my back again, warm myself in the corruption
and smile.

[Pg 162]

Wedekind's dramas are reminiscent of the pre-Shakespearian
stage. But often enough one may recall
Shakespeare himself.——But we do not wish to fall
into the error of that unstable enthusiasm which always
makes comparison with the very greatest when only
something remarkable is in question. The aim of these
lines is not to hail Wedekind as the Messiah of the
drama, nor as the John of a coming Messiah. For all
I care, he might be the devil himself. Only one thing
is certain: he is a power without his like among us, and
where such a power has worked once it produces after
results. Power releases power. With this drink in
their bodies the public will not long continue to support
either lyrical lemonade on the stage nor the dregs of
dramatic penury.


This poet, this artist is at the same time a knower
of life. One cannot be mistaken! This is no joke. Behind
all this swarm of jumping, dancing, tumbling, contending,
inflamed, agitated discourse; behind all this
pushing, roaring, foaming, gargling, flood of action,
stands intuition of the world, stands the sense of life,
as made manifest in the thoughts of Wedekind. It is
no tearer, no eradicator, no falterer, who in this frightfully
beautiful bustle of passion and inevitableness has
given a picture of his own dissoluteness. He is a poet-animal
trainer, who knows and rules his beasts. A
man—if you please.

[Pg 163]
Published by BROWN BROTHERS
LAFAYETTE BUILDING, PHILADELPHIA


THE AWAKENING OF SPRING. By Frank Wedekind.
A tragedy of childhood, dealing with the sex question in
its relationship to the education of children. A new edition
just out. Cloth, gilt top, deckle edge, $1.25 net. By mail,
$1.35. “Here is a play which on its production caused a
sensation in Germany, and can without exaggeration be
described as remarkable. These studies of adolescence
are as impressive as they are unique.”—The Athenæum, London.


THE CREDITOR. By August Strindberg. Translated from
the Swedish by Francis J. Ziegler. A psychological study
of the divorce question by the greatest living Scandinavian
dramatist. Cloth, $1.00 net; postage, 8 cents. “Fordringsägare”
was produced for the first time in 1889, when it was given
at Copenhagen as a substitute for “Fröken Julie,” the performance
of which was forbidden by the censor. Four years later
Berlin audiences made its acquaintance, since when it has
remained the most popular of Strindberg's plays in Germany.


A DILEMMA. By Leonidas Andreiyeff. Translated from the
Russian by John Cournos. Cloth, 75 cents net; postage, 7
cents. A remarkable analysis of mental subtleties as experienced
by a man who is uncertain as to whether or not he is
insane. A story that is Poe-like in its intensity and full of
grim humor. “One of the most interesting literary studies of
crime since Dostoieffsky's Crime and Punishment.”—Chicago
Evening Post.


DISCORDS. A volume of poems by Donald Evans. With the
publication of this volume must end the oft-repeated complaint
that real English poetry is no longer being written. These
poems have no sermon to preach, no evils to arraign, no new
[Pg 164]
scheme of things to propound. They are poems written in the
sincere joy of artistic creation, and they possess a compelling
music and an abiding beauty. This poet, who is singing only
for the pleasure of singing, in his sixty or more poems that
make up the volume, offers vivid glimpses of the stress and
strain of modern life. He thinks frankly, and his utterances
are full of free sweep and a passionate intensity. Dark green
boards, $1.00 net; postage, 8 cents.


SWANWHITE. By August Strindberg. A Fairy Drama, translated
by Francis J. Ziegler. Printed on deckle edge paper and
attractively bound in cloth, $1.00 net; postage, 8 cents. “A
poetic idyl, which is charming in its sweet purity, delightful
in its optimism, elusive in its complete symbolism, but wholesome
in its message that pure love can conquer evil. So out of
the cold North, out of the mouth of the world's most terrible
misogynist, comes a strange message—one which is as sweet
as it is unexpected. And August Strindberg, the enemy of love,
sings that pure love is all powerful and all-conquering.”—Springfield,
Mass., Republican.


THE WOMAN AND THE FIDDLER. A play in three acts
by Arne Norrevang. Translated from the Norwegian by Mrs.
Herman Sandby. Cloth, uncut edges, $1.00 net. By mail, $1.08.
This play is based upon one of the legends of the fiddlers who
used to go about from valley to valley, playing for the peasants
at their festivities.


FOR A NIGHT. A novelette by Emile Zola. Translated from
the French by Alison M. Lederer. $1.00 net. Postage, 10 cents.
The imaginative realism, the poetic psychology, of this story of
the abnormal Thérèse who kills her lover; of the simple minded
Julien who becomes an accessory after the fact for love of
her, and finally “let himself fall” into the river, having first
dropped the body of Colombel over, are gripping and intense.
The masochism at the basis of the love of Thérèse and Colombel,
resulting in the murder, is depicted with wonderful art
and yet without any coarseness. The author does not moralize,
but with relentless pen delineates that madness of Thérèse
sown in her soul from birth—a madness which her convent
training rather enhances than abrogates. The book contains
two other typical Zola stories: “The Maid of the Dawber”
and “Complements”—two delightful, crisp bits of literature.
[Pg 165]


FRÖKEN JULIE (Countess Julia). A Naturalistic Tragedy,
by August Strindberg. Cloth, $1.00 net; by mail, $1.08. Says
Mr. James Huneker; It is an emotional bombshell. The
social world seems topsy-turvied after a first reading. After
a second, while the gripping power does not relax, one
realizes the writers deep, almost abysmal knowledge of human
nature.... Passion there is, and a horrible atmosphere
of reality. Everything is brought about naturally, inevitably.
Be it understood, Strindberg is never pornographic, nor does
he show a naked soul merely to afford a charming diversion,
which is the practice of some French dramatists. That kitchen—fancy
a kitchen as a battlefield of souls!—with its good-hearted
and pious cook, the impudent scoundrel of a valet
eager for revenge on his superiors, and the hallucinated girl
from above stairs—it is a tiny epic of hatred, of class against
mass.


THE LIVING CORPSE (Zhivoi Trup). A Drama in six
Acts and twelve Tableaux, by Count Leo N. Tolstoi. Cloth,
$1.00 net; by mail, $1.08. There is no question as to the
tremendous power and simple impressiveness of this posthumous
work, which is the literary sensation of the day not
alone in Russia, but throughout Europe. As a protest against
certain marriage and divorce laws, the absurdity of which is
portrayed with a satiric pen, “The Living Corpse” is a most
effective document.


SUCH IS LIFE. A Play in five Acts, by Frank Wedekind,
Author of “The Awakening of Spring,” etc. Cloth, gilt top,
raw edge, Net, $1.25, by Mail, $1.34. Whatever Wedekind's
theme may be, it is always sure to be treated in a strikingly
original fashion. In “Such is Life” it is Regality and Kingship.
Though the locale is mediaeval Italy, the scene might
as well have been laid at the present day, but this was, perhaps,
too dangerous. While satire runs as an undercurrent
throughout, the play is primarily one of tense dramatic situations
and a clearly outlined plot, full of color and action.
Portions of the play are written in verse—verse that runs with
almost Elizabethan fire and impetuosity.

[Pg 166]

Under this title appear from time to time short stories and
dramas, chiefly translations from the works of modern European
authors, each containing from 32 to 64 pages. Printed in large,
clear type and tastefully bound in gray boards with paper label.
Each, 25 cents net; by mail, 29 cents. Now ready:


SILENCE. From the Russian of Leonidas Andreiyeff. Second
edition. An unusual short story that reads like a poem in
prose by the leading exponent of the new Russian school of
novelists.


MOTHERLOVE. From the Swedish of August Strindberg.
An example of Strindberg's power as analyst of human nature.


A RED FLOWER. By Vsevolod Garshin. A powerful short
story by one of Russia's popular authors, unknown as yet to
the English-speaking public.


THE GRISLEY SUITOR. From the German of Frank Wedekind.
An excellent story of the De-Maupassant type.


RABBI EZRA AND THE VICTIM. By Frank Wedekind.
Two sketches characteristic of the pen of this noted German
author.


The following printer's errors have been corrected:


predeliction changed to predelection
woollen changed to woolen
decollete changed to décolleté
mochte changed to möchte
missing opening quotation mark at the beginning of a footnote
fulness changed to fullness
Nuptual changed to Nuptial
incontrovertable changed to incontrovertible
wilful changed to willful
postoffice changed to post-office
leggins changed to leggings
penomenal changed to phenomenal
Shakesperian changed to Shakespearian