# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2010
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Louis Zangwill, An Engagement of Convenience
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/33747/33747-h/33747-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

With Illustrations by GERTRUDE BRADLEY. Cover Design in
Colour. 2s. 6d. net.
A charming book for children who wish to learn how to manage a
small garden.
"This book should be given to every little girl or boy who has a garden, and who is
anxious to do things properly."—Examiner.
 
14 vols. 12mo. Cloth, gilt top, 1s. 6d. net.
Lambskin, 2s. 6d. net, each.

 
 
 
 
 
[Pg 1]
Miss Robinson had first seen Wyndham and
fallen in love with him on the day that he
appeared in the road as a neighbour and set
up his studio there. But that was years before,
and she had never made his acquaintance. He
was the Prince Charming of the romances,
handsome, of knightly bearing, with a winning
smile on his frank face. From her magic
window in the big corner house where the road
branched off into two, she had narrowly observed
his goings and comings, had watched
eagerly all that was visible of his romantic,
mysterious profession—the picturesque Italian
models that pulled his bell, the great canvasses
and frames that, during the earlier years at
least, were borne in through his door, to reappear
in due course as finished pictures on
their way to the exhibitions—and it was sometimes
    [Pg 2]
possible to catch glimpses of stately
figure-paintings and fascinating scenes and
landscapes.
Then, too, there was the suggestion of his
belonging to a brilliant social world: she had
indeed felt that at her first sight of him.
Smart broughams and victorias in which nestled
stylish people not unfrequently drew up at his
studio about tea-time, and in the season he
could be seen going off every night in garb of
ceremony; not to speak of his occasional
departures—to important country-houses, no
doubt—with portmanteaus and dressing-bags
stacked on the roof of his hansom.
And not less eagerly had Miss Robinson
followed his work, scanning the magazines for
his drawings, and haunting the galleries in the
search for his paintings. No one guessed how
much he was the interest of her life: her
parents had no suspicion at all, though they
knew of their unusual neighbour, and spoke of
him occasionally at table. But Alice Robinson
was the humblest of womankind. Her youth
lay already in the past: she accounted herself
the plainest of the plain. So she idealised and
worshipped her hero at a distance, feeling
immeasurably farther from him than the
hundred yards of respectable Hampstead pavement
that separated their lives.
One morning at breakfast her father read
out from his paper the news of a sensational
    [Pg 3]
bankruptcy. A world-famous house of solicitors
had fallen, and some of the first families
in England were losers. Immense trust funds
had gone for building speculations, and
amongst the fashionable creditors who had
been hit the worst were Mr. Walter Lloyd
Wyndham, the artist, of Hampstead, and
Miss Mary Wyndham, his sister. It seemed a
curious little fact to Mr. Robinson that this
affair should vibrate so near to them, and a
mild and not unpleasant stimulation was thereby
imparted to the breakfast-table. But Miss
Robinson was hard put to it to dissimulate her
deeper interest in the announcement. Her
agitation was profound, shattering: she was
glad to escape, and sit alone with her secret.
It seemed a sacrilege that earthly vicissitude
should touch this brilliant existence. And
thereafter she watched her hero more narrowly
than ever, reading in his bearing a stern defiance
of adversity.
At first indeed there was little difference
visible in Wyndham's outward seemings, and
Miss Robinson was thankful that the calamity
had ruffled him so imperceptibly. Yet, as the
year went by, it began to dawn upon her that
things nevertheless were changing. She had
learnt to read with consummate skill all the
little activities that beat around the studio,
and it did not escape her attention that he
was going into society rarely, that smart
    [Pg 4]
visitors were fewer, and that pictures were being
returned to him after astonishingly brief
intervals. And gradually, as if in corroboration
of her own conclusions, she found his work
missing from the exhibitions, and knew with
a sinking of her heart that his brilliant days
were waning.
And as time further passed, and one year
merged into another, she realised definitely
that his vogue had ended. She could not even
find anything of his in the magazines, though
she purchased them prodigally, and searched
them through with a hope that was desperation,
and a fear that was well-nigh frenzy.
The last year or two a dead unnatural calm
had settled over the studio. Pictures were
neither despatched nor returned: if models
rang the bell, it was only to turn away the
next minute with disappointed faces. Of
fashionable visitors there was never a sign
now: not even a comrade or fellow-artist came
to look him up. But only a tall, sad-faced girl,
who somehow resembled him, called there at
long intervals, and Miss Robinson envied this
sister the sympathy she could bring him.
He did not leave London now. All through
the summer he kept in town, lying low, as
Miss Robinson could well see from the pallor
of his face on her return from her own conventional
holiday at the seaside. She could
cherish no delusions—he was a beaten man!
[Pg 5]
    Time and again she brushed close to him,
passing him by chance in the street, and
observed the languor of his step, the growing
sadness of his features. Other details did not
escape her. There was no one to attend on
him; no one to care for him. Even a charwoman
was a rarity at last, and Wyndham
could be seen shopping almost furtively in the
adjoining streets, and bearing back his own
provisions to the studio. Miss Robinson divined,
under their wrappings, the tin of sardines, the
potted tongue, the loaf of bread. She knew
that he never took a meal out now, and that,
if he left the studio in the daytime, it was only
to escape from the misery of solitude and hopelessness.
She alone observed him so minutely. Her
mother had in some degree shared her interest
in his work, and had sometimes accompanied
her to the galleries; but the common interest
of the family in their neighbour was casual and
fitful. Miss Robinson hardly dared mention
his name now: it seemed to her that to draw
attention to his poverty was to humiliate him.
Besides, she feared to reveal her own emotion.
One day Miss Robinson's own life caught her
with a breathless upheaval. An honoured and
intimate friend of her father's, successful, opulent,
came forward with an avowal of esteem
for her; deferentially desired her association
with him in his second essay in matrimony!
    [Pg 6]
Mr. Shanner seemed to spring it on her with
untempered abruptness; though the attentive
courtesies that had preceded the crisis might
have glimmered some little warning. But Mr.
Shanner's footing in the house was as old-established
as the rest of his appertainings;
and Miss Robinson's spirit was ever at the
nadir of diffidence. Men as a rule shunned her:
women cared as little to talk to her. That
anybody might ever wish to marry her had
seemed impossible, inconceivable. Mr. Shanner
had many pretensions to style, yet, to her
spoiled eye, he seemed merely of clay indifferent.
She strung herself to the ordeal of refusing
him, though her real strength knew no faltering.
For he proved insistent; wooed her—soberly—decorously—as
became the dignity of five
decades completed; wooed her with reasons of
urgency, and implications of sentiment. He was
to depart on a mission to the New World;
wished to bear her promise with him. He
would treasure it; would think of the new light
to shine in his household. But within her lay
an unfailing inspiration, and her innermost soul
stood like a tower impregnable; though she
was all wounds and distress, and quivered with
the hurt. Was not her heart with her Prince
Charming? her one dream in life the privilege
of helping him?
Mr. Shanner had to sail away disconsolate!
But, though Miss Robinson's mind was occupied
    [Pg 7]
day and night with this problem of Wyndham's
salvation, she could arrive at no plausible
solution. For how should she ever dare to give
him a sign? She who would have yielded her
life for him could only watch him drifting
downwards with an agonised sense of her
helplessness.
And he all the while unsuspecting of this
obscure, loving historian of his existence; of
the warm heart that beat for him in these evil
days on which he had fallen!
[Pg 8]
For hours the rain had beaten against his
windows, and at last, now that a lull had
declared itself, Wyndham dragged himself to
the door, and looked out into the gray afternoon.
His eye took in the familiar vista, but,
as it rested on the great bow-windowed house
at the corner where the road branched into two,
he turned away with a shudder. For years the
sight of that house had irritated him: its ugly
brick bulk had been symbolic of all Suburbia, of
everything in life to which he was instinctively
hostile as an artist and a gentleman.
But presently he laughed: it had struck him
as comic that he should have preserved in its
freshness his full youthful contempt for all this
Philistine universe!—he, a half-starved devil of
an artist, down in the mouth, with a solitary
half-crown in his pocket, speculating with bitter
humiliation whether his hard-worked sister had
yet a little to spare for him, after all the life-blood
which, leech-like, he had sucked out of
her! Nay, more, he was conscious that his
distaste for this surrounding wilderness of
    [Pg 9]
affluent homes, in the midst of which he had so
long dwelt as an isolated superior intelligence,
had grown more marked in direct proportion as
he had become poorer and poorer.
The prosperous figure of the owner of the
bow-windowed house rose before him. Immersed
in his own existence, Wyndham had deigned to
notice very few indeed of his neighbours. But
old Mr. Robinson was one of the few, not only
because of the regularity with which he passed
the studio every day at six o'clock as he came
home from business, but also because he invariably
bore something in a plaited rush-bag that
had a skewer thrust through it, suggesting visits
to Leadenhall Market, and purchases of game or
salmon for the good wife according to season.
But Mr. Robinson's mild aspect, benevolent
white beard, and gentle amble had never impressed
Wyndham with much of a sense of
human fellowship. He might concede that the
old man was "a decent sort, no doubt, in his
own way"; but they were creatures belonging
to different planets.
Still amused at his own disdain, though the
corners of his mouth were set a trifle grimly,
Wyndham turned back into the studio with the
idea of making himself presentable and going
to see his sister—since it now seemed possible to
get across town without the prospect of an
absolute drenching. Happily his wardrobe had
substantial resources: in the old days he had
    [Pg 10]
kept it well replenished, and his simple life of
late here in the studio had made small demands
on it. Thus he could still go out faultlessly clad
and shod. Nobody need suspect his poverty, he
flattered himself, if he ever chose to dip into his
own world again. Only he did not choose;
there was always so much questioning to face.
"We've seen nothing of yours in the last two
or three Academies—when are you going to
give us another masterpiece?" "Still on the
big picture? How is it getting along?" However
genially thrown out, such usual interrogation
annoyed him beyond measure. It was so
long since anything had been "getting along."
On all sides he was regarded as a doomed man,
and suspected it: suspecting it, he was morbidly
sensitive. His life was unnatural and not worth
the living. Months and months had been wasted
in apathy. Each day he dreamt of a new lease
of energy and courage to begin on the morrow;
but, after making his bed and clearing away his
breakfast and purchasing his food for the day,
he would find himself dejected and incapable of
a single stroke.
And yet he could not wholly realise the
change that had come over the scene. He
rubbed his eyes sometimes, as if expecting to
awake from an unhappy dream. Was not the
flourish of early trumpets still in his ears?
The dazzle of admiration still on his retina?
The gush of extensive and important family
    [Pg 11]
connections still tickling his self-esteem? The
sweeter approval of a superior art-clique still
flattering his deeper vanity?
He had been born with a silver spoon; his
childhood and youth had been ideally happy.
From the playing-fields of Eton he had passed
to the quadrangles of Oxford. A distinguished
student of his college?—not in the ordinary
grooves; yet favourably known as an intellect
with enthusiasms. Phidias was more of an
inspiration to him than Aristotle; Titian more
actual than Todhunter. Ruskin, Pater, Turner,
had stirred him; left his mind subdued to their
colours. From boyhood had been his the swift
skill with pencil that ran as easily to grace as
to mockery. And, left early arbiter of his own
existence, with gold enough for freedom, he had
made for the one career that called to him.
Genius cannot prove itself at a stroke: it has
its adventurings to make. Seldom it realises at
the outset that it is adventuring in the dark,
therein to grope as best it may to self-discovery.
Even this first stage may be long deferred; yet,
however sure of himself at last, the artist has
still to tread the unending road with the great
light of self-realisation ever in the distance.
There are the years of strenuous search, of
faithful labour; of bitterest failure on failure
to bring the deep, mysterious impulses to bloom
and fruition. But there is yet another, if independent,
adventuring. The great light that
    [Pg 12]
crowns the artist's journey shines only in his
own spirit. The world sees and knows nothing
of it. He has none the less to find his way into
that other light—the lurid, mocking limelight
of the world's acceptance; to seek a place beside
or beneath the charlatan. This is the bitterest
stage of all—- to stand shivering in marketplaces
that are knee-deep with dung and offal;
to be upholding precious things to the vision
of swine. What wonder if in the course of so
harsh a journeying, as he lives and breathes
in his own universe of striving, his precise
moral relation to things external grows dim,
intangible; and, if money one day give out, he
clutches at any crust for sustenance.
Wyndham began his journeyings. His advantages
were many and obvious; his disadvantages
subtle and unseen. There was the danger that
facile talent and social prestige might bring him
an early delusive success; a failure, rightly seen,
however tricked out with glamour.
His beginnings, indeed, were pleasant: it was
great fun throwing himself into this new queer
Bohemian world of art. He worked hard as a
student, the sheer interest of his labours lightening
them astonishingly. And, after some preliminary
swayings in varying directions, he at
last "found himself," as he supposed; developing
a dexterous imitative craft, and joining an
advanced crowd with Whistler and Sargent for
his deities.
[Pg 13]
    Wherever he pursued his studies—in London,
or Paris, or Italy—there he was remarkably
popular. Everybody said: "Wyndham belongs
to very good people. They're swells—tip-top!"
And indeed he had obviously the stamp of being
"the real thing," and even the elect of Bohemia
were flattered and fascinated by personal association
with him.
When ultimately he set up his studio here in
Hampstead, he had his policy definitely before
him. With the means and the leisure to aim at
a high career, he would make no concessions
to popularity or the market. He had chosen
the locality deliberately. It was London, and
within reach of the world; but not so near the
world as to endanger his labours. The little
tide of fashion that rolled up to his door was
not a tribute to fame, but merely the fuss and
interest of his non-Bohemian circle pleased for
a time with the novelty of having a studio
and a genius connected with them.
So in the early years he worked enthusiastically,
and was able to win some footing in the
galleries. But, in the eyes of his numerous
family connections, he was seriously launched;
especially when a couple of his pictures at last
attracted buyers, and he moreover found himself
earning guineas from the patronage of friendly
editors whose humbler commissions he carried
out in the same spirit of the dignified, ambitious
worker.
[Pg 14]
    Then the financial crash came, leaving brother
and sister entirely dependent on their labours.
Both met the crisis with commendable philosophy.
Mary, who had long before taken up
educational work as an amateur, was soon able
to establish herself as a professional, and had
taught ever since at a high school in Kensington;
picturesquely settling herself in a tiny flat in
an artisan's building, and living as a homely
worker. The dignity and serene simplicity of
her life had of late furnished the one ideal thing
for Wyndham's contemplation.
Wyndham himself had stood up straight and
felt very strong; had reassured his fussy,
frightened folk that he could rely on his profession.
He felt in himself an endless ardour
for achievement, a confidence of triumph in the
contest with men. Nay, more, he would gain
his bread without descending from his high
standpoint! The task was fully as difficult as
he had anticipated; but at any rate he contrived
to live for a couple of years. Then, somewhat
to his surprise, the Academy began to return
his pictures; and somehow, to his greater surprise,
everything else went against him at the
same time. He could not even get "illustrating"
to do. Those who had acclaimed him
before because he was a "swell" were now
turning against him apparently for the same
reason. Your aristocrats were never to be
taken seriously; they were necessarily amateurs!
    [Pg 15]
It was all so unanimous, so settled and
persistent, that it had almost the air of a conspiracy.
Wyndham saw well enough that
everybody had tired of his work, that he had
had his hour and his vogue; his career lay like
a squib that had blazed itself out. All bangs
and fizzings, and then a blackened bit of casing,
silent, extinguished! Yet he had the discernment
to recognise that the dying-down had been
really inevitable; that his present relative
poverty had little or nothing to do with it. He
had been dexterous on the surface, but the
sameness of his note—without even the saving
grace of convention—had destroyed him commercially.
Well, he believed in himself, and he refused to
accept this erasure. On the contrary, he would
launch out more daringly than ever. An end to
facile imitation of other people's styles! He
must express his own deeper self. The strict
Whistlerian creed was much too narrow. Art
was not merely a bare abstract aesthetics:
humanity counted for something after all.
Was woman's loveliness something really apart
from woman herself? True that art meant
beauty—in the largest sense, of course; but why
should not humanity and beauty fuse together?
So, scraping together all he could command in
the way of money, he set himself to work out
a large dramatic idea, suggested by the sight
of a May-day demonstration. The canvas was
    [Pg 16]
gigantic, and he strove to depict a mob of
strikers straggling out of the Park after their
great meeting, with elements of fashion caught
in this męlée of labour. The pictorial irony had
greatly interested him, and he felt that this
painting on the grand scale was being sincerely
born out of his own emotion, that it would
trumpet out a warning to the age.
The beginnings were full of promise, and he
decided to stake everything on it. But for so
realistic a representation of Hyde Park Corner
he needed to make a great many sketches on
the spot. So, through the friendly offices of an
amiable acquaintance, he obtained access to a
convenient window in Grosvenor Place, and
made free use of the privilege. The master of
the house, a nobleman of the old school, who at
first sight seemed stately as the portraits in his
own dining-room, proved on acquaintance to be
singularly bluff and genial, sometimes almost
slap-dash. He had made Wyndham welcome
and at his ease, bidding him come and go as he
pleased, and "never to mind a bit about turning
the room into a studio." And this charming
nobleman had likewise a charming daughter,
who sometimes came for a minute or two to
talk to Wyndham and interest herself in the
sketches. Lady Betty was a brilliant figure of
a girl; had travelled a good deal and knew the
world. She was sunny and friendly, yet naturally
on a pedestal. She was clear-headed and
    [Pg 17]
capable; in the home supreme mistress. Wyndham
was the subject of many graceful little
attentions. If he came in the morning she saw
that his glass of sherry and biscuit was never
neglected; in the afternoon she presided over
tea in the drawing-room and expected him to
appear there.
Of course poor Wyndham never dared tell
himself that he was in love with her. A girl
like that must naturally be reserved for a great
match, as regards both position and fortune.
He could not think of her save as presiding over
a plurality of palaces or voyaging in a magnificent
yacht. Palaces and yachts were not the
rewards of painters, so Wyndham kept his mind
sternly fixed on the purpose for which he was
there. Even so, the intervals between his
appearances grew wider and wider. And when,
after some couple of years of toil, discipline,
searching, it had come home to him that in this
terrible picture he had undertaken a task
beyond his strength and experience, he found
himself too shamefaced to "abuse" further the
courtesy that had been extended to him. The
consciousness, too, of his growing poverty was
becoming acuter and acuter. Already he was
drawing back into his shell, and, once he had
ceased going to Grosvenor Place for the sake of
his work, he had not the heart to continue his
visits as an ordinary acquaintance. More than
a year afterwards he read of Lady Betty's engagement
    [Pg 18]
in the papers—it was the very match
one would naturally look for. Yet the news
"shattered him to bits"—absurdly enough, he
told himself, since he had known her at best
irregularly, and not in the ordinary course of
social intimacy. He was really half-surprised
at receiving an invitation to the wedding. He
could not prevail on himself to go; but, remembering
she had once admired one of his Academy
pictures, he sent her a photograph of it on a
miniature silver easel as a trifling wedding gift.
She wrote back a gracious acknowledgment,
which had since remained one of his treasures.
Meanwhile he had been struggling on with
the picture, determined to conquer. But its
difficulties and problems were endless. After
all his toil it stood on his easel in a terribly
unfinished condition, though he had stinted his
own body to lavish his money on it. At last,
gulping down the humiliation, he was forced to
accept of Mary's little store of savings to pay his
rent and his models. It was his first step of the
kind, and he paid the full proverbial cost of it.
But he had still the hope of returning the loan a
thousandfold. Was not his success to redeem
her life as well as his?
Certainly Mary believed in him and the picture,
and looked forward to its scoring a great
triumph. The whole heart and hope of the
sister centred on that vast canvas. She sometimes
ran across town to see it, though—poor
    [Pg 19]
child!—Hyde Park Corner always looked the
same to her at every stage of its long creation.
But the picture was Wyndham's backbone; it
was his stock-in-trade before his world. He was
more and more of a recluse now, refusing all invitations,
discouraging his friends from coming
to interrupt him—as he put it. Certainly
Wyndham would rather have died than confess
to failure after all the magnificent trumpeting.
Even as it was, the time came soon enough
when the big picture no longer served to protect
his dignity. He imagined half-pitying glances
and ironic smiles, and so eventually he found
himself avoiding everybody without exception.
It was only on Lady Betty's wedding day,
after more than three years of futile striving,
that he had the resolution to remove the great
canvas from the easel and stand it with its face
to the wall.
He was tired now, but he must make an effort
to emancipate himself from Mary's exchequer.
Till then he could not hold his head up. So he
painted some smaller and pleasanter pictures,
but again he could do nothing with them. The
Academy sent them back, the minor galleries
sent them back, the Salon sent them back the
following year. The dealers offered less than
the cost of the frames. Meantime he had ceased
to count up the five-pound notes Mary had
starved herself to keep for him. He knew he
was a coward and dared not. He had reached
    [Pg 20]
that stage of moral confusion which Nietzsche
registers as in the natural history of the artist-type,
and which may not be eyed too harshly
from the point of vantage of ordered and organised
existence in this outer universe. One idea
stood clear beyond all others; grew into his
mind; grew till it became his mind. He must
cling to his studio, hold desperately to this
atmosphere of paint and canvasses.
He was getting on in years now—past thirty-three.
It was like the striking of a pitiless
clock, this adding of swift year after year to his
unsuccessful life. His hand began to fail him.
The necessity of now doing his own house-work;
of bothering with coals and cinders, preparing
his makeshift monotonous meals, pouring oil
into lamps, and boiling kettles, and washing
plates and teacups, had begun by encroaching
on his time and energies, and ended by absorbing
them altogether. The care of ministering
to his own primary needs had at last
superseded art as his profession. Even so, the
cobwebs multiplied and the dust lay thick.
Months now slipped by, he scarcely knew
how; he was astonished to realise how time
might elude one, how a colourless day might be
trifled away without appearing to hold the
possibility of even a morsel of achievement.
Yet he still grasped the hope that something
would "arrive"—an unexpected magazine commission,
a request from a dealer. Ideas for a
    [Pg 21]
new start would teem in his head as he lay tossing
on the narrow iron bed up in the gallery at
the end of the studio. Why not do some pretty
little things—to fetch ten guineas apiece, say—Cupids
playing amid wreathed flowers with pale
Doric structures in the background? If Mary
could manage just another few pounds for him,
he would have time to turn out a number of such
decorative trifles. Such things were in constant
demand and were a sure source of livelihood.
He had stood out long enough, much longer
indeed than he had had the right. He had consistently
worked on a basis of high endeavour,
but now he must withdraw his dignity and enter
on the pot-boiler phase. Better that than this
abominable leech-like existence. Continued
misfortune had befogged his wits, and this
last year certainly he had been half mad.
So be it! He must wake up now, and no
longer lose his days in this stupid pottering
about!
Every dog had his day, and his own turn
would come in time. He was an artist. He
felt it in his bones and blood. Art was his life
and destiny. He had blundered in attempting
too big a feat too early in his career, but he did
not intend that that should wreck his existence.
No, no! he would never throw up the sponge.
He would rather die than admit defeat, with all
those who knew him looking on at the game.
[Pg 22]
He dressed himself carefully to go to Mary's,
trying hard not to think of the real purpose
of his visit—he had merely informed her that
he would be in the neighbourhood and would
look in for a cup of tea. But, though it was
distasteful to dwell on these unending demands
on her earnings, he was anything but profligate
in spending them. He had spun out her previous
five-pound note so that it had kept him
going for weeks and weeks, and he had grudged
himself even a newspaper. In view of the
newly-projected work to tickle the dealers, he
regretted more than ever that he had not been
able to pull himself together sooner: in these
past precious weeks he might have knocked off
half a dozen of such pretty-pretty things.
A series of omnibuses took him across London
to Kensington Church, where he descended,
presently turning out of the High Street. The
"Buildings" where Mary resided were in a side
alley at the back, and Wyndham made direct
for them. He walked straight in through the
large front door that stood perennially open,
    [Pg 23]
and followed the trail of muddy footmarks up
the worn stone stairway. On the third landing
he came to a stop, and pulled a bell half hidden
in the obscurity of a corner. The door opened,
and Mary stood before him. He could not help
seeing how unnaturally slim she appeared to-day;
how her simple stuff dress seemed to hang
loosely on her.
"This is so good of you. I am so glad to see
you, dear." Her earnest face brightened with a
wistful yet pleasant smile.
He stooped and kissed her, then followed her
into her tiny sitting-room. It was evidently the
home of a gentlewoman. With the shelf or two
of books, the escritoire, the few prints, and the
little trinkets and photographs she valued, she
had contrived to make a dainty little nest of it,
and all these simple things gave the place a
peculiar personal stamp. The table was laid
for tea, and the kettle sang on the fire.
"You have had a dreary journey," she said,
as she gave him a chair.
"No, the weather has been unexpectedly
kind," he reassured her. "The sun peeped out
just for one moment. I believe I was the only
person in London that noticed it: the rest of
the world were intent on other things. Have
you been keeping well?"
"You forget I am just back from vacation."
"Of course—I had forgotten," he laughed.
"How did you spend your time?"
[Pg 24]
    "I passed the first three weeks with Aunt
Eleanor, as I told you I should. We were a
big, merry party, and everybody made a great
fuss of your little sister." Again that wistful
smile. "They all spoiled and petted me shamefully."
"Ah, that was good for you."
"I am not so sure about that," she returned
thoughtfully. "I am certainly not used to the
sort of thing, and I really found it restful and
refreshing to go on to old Lady Glynn, who had
me to herself."
"So that's your idea of a holiday—taking care
of paralytic, deaf old people whom everybody
else shuns like the plague." He shook his finger
at her. "And you call it restful and refreshing."
"Service is the greatest of all happiness," she
answered gently. "Even as it is, I'm sadly
afraid I'm a sham and a fraud. I'm not really
a worker—in the same sense as others I know.
They have no fashionable friends with big houses
in the country."
She brewed the tea and gave him his cup.
"Do people inquire much about me?" he
asked, as the uncomfortable thought recurred
to him.
"Certainly not of me," she returned. "You
neglect them, you refuse their invitations, they
never hear a word from you, and naturally they
suppose you wish to be quit of them all. And
so, no doubt, they feel it the proper thing not
    [Pg 25]
to appear to wish to discuss you with your
sister." There was a pause. Both seemed lost
in thought for the moment. "And so you, poor
Walter, have had no holiday at all!"
"Ah, well," he sighed. "I try to content
myself with the thought that I'm saving it up.
One of these days I daresay I shall go off to
Rome or Venice, and recuperate from several
points of view. I daresay a bit of luck will be
coming my way presently, and I'm keen on getting
back to Italy again. I've often planned it
out. A month or so at Paris, a couple of months
in the South of France, three at Rome, and three
at Venice—with a look-in at Naples some time,
of course."
"What a lovely holiday that would be!"
He did not surprise her quick flash of longing.
Both remained pensive.
"But tell me about everybody," he said at last.
"You see I take more interest in them all than
they suppose."
"That's natural enough. After all, Hertfordshire's
your home."
He winced visibly, half sorry that he had set
her mind in that direction. She, however, proceeded
to draw for him various pictures, and he
presently found himself listening with a deeper
eagerness than he had foreseen. She brought
him close again to his own world, uplifted him
in his own eyes: he had almost the sensation of
being restored to a sphere which it had been
    [Pg 26]
more painful to abandon than he had ever
admitted. The minutes passed, bringing him a
warm, happy sense of social comradeship with
his sister. The little fire burned brightly, and
the feeling of the well-ordered nest was fragrant
and exquisite. He felt his bitterness softening
under its influence; a deep peace seemed to
surround him, filling the little haven, radiating
from Mary's wistful face, from her gentle smile
and voice. How thankful he was this terrible
London yet held her sympathy!
"It is a great thing for me to have you to
come to, Mary," he broke in on her suddenly.
"It helps me tremendously."
"Poor Walter!" she breathed. Her eyes
filled with tears.
For a moment both were too moved to speak
again. But abruptly, as with a courage and
firmness long since resolved upon, she looked
straight at him.
"Why don't you give it up, darling? This
art is ruining your life."
He did not seem surprised at this sudden turn
of the conversation, though such a suggestion
had never before fallen from her lips. He took
her words as a cry of despair rather than an
attempt at a stern reckoning.
"Why don't I give it up?" he echoed.
"That's an easy question to ask. The answer
is difficult. But I can't give it up. It is
impossible."
[Pg 27]
    "It is not so impossible as it seems."
"What can I turn to? I am fitted for
nothing."
"Go to the Colonies. Labour on the soil—or
work with hammer and saw."
"I am willing to labour, willing to face anything
in life. But, Mary—the confession of
failure—you don't see how deep, how mad the
pride is in me."
"You have nothing to confess. The whole
world knows you are a failure. They talk
about it openly. They spare me as much as
possible, but I can't shut my ears."
It was a staggering blow. "They despise
me!" he breathed.
Her lips hesitated, clenched together, the
corners convulsed with pain.
"They despise you!"
He found his defence. "Because I have not
succeeded commercially." His voice was full of
scorn. "It matters little that these gross
Philistines misjudge me. They will yet regret
it. I shall yet show them that I am not so self-deceived
as they imagine. I am an artist—art
was born in my blood, art is my whole existence.
I shall stick to it till I fall dead. I ask you,
Mary, to believe in me a little longer."
"Heaven knows I have never wavered in my
belief a moment. But it is not my belief that
can save you. You have made a brave attempt,
but you have been defeated. I am only facing
    [Pg 28]
the simple facts. The present position seems to
me a hopeless one to start from. You have no
means behind you now, so what is there before
you save to go on in the same miserable way as
you have lived the last year or two? I see no
possibility of anything but repetition of the
same unhappy experience—the world is not
going to step out of its way for your sake.
And remember it has already made up its
mind about you."
"Then I have lost your sympathy!" he exclaimed.
He stared gloomily into the fire.
She saw now that the morbid sensibility of
the man who had failed would never face clear,
cold reason, however gently administered.
"No, dear; you have not lost my sympathy.
Please don't think that," she pleaded. "Don't
you see I want to be a real friend to you; don't
you see that you are more to me than your
art?"
"I must fight it out," he insisted. "To-morrow
I am starting a fresh lot of things—to
sell! I have always stood out for the big
accomplishment, but now I offer my labour in
the market. Pretty designs, prettily coloured—Cupids
and pearly clouds and wreaths of
flowers. The dealers will take them. You will
see, Mary, I shall manage to pull through yet."
She shook her head incredulously. "Better
to give it up altogether before it is too late."
"You can't mean it," he exclaimed. "You
    [Pg 29]
have stood by me so long that I can't believe
you are going to turn against me."
"I repeat that I care for you more than for
your art, and I cannot see you sacrificed. No, I
have not turned against you. I have been against
you all this long, unhappy time. To-day I am
your friend for the first time. Listen, darling.
When I got your letter yesterday, I knew that
things were as bad as ever, that you were at
your wits' ends again for money."
He maintained a shamefaced silence, not
daring to make any pretence to the contrary.
She looked straight at him as she continued:
"I am sure you will be the last to think I have
ever considered the few pounds I have been able
to put aside for you—my heart's best affection
has always gone out to you with them. But the
whole of last night I kept awake, and prayed
for strength to refuse you any more money."
He held his head down; he was too abased to
speak.
"Strength has been granted me at last. You
are dear to me, and I will not help to continue
this unhappy state of affairs. Sell off your
studio, try your fortune in the Colonies, and you
will yet pull your life out of the mire."
He rose, and took up his hat. "I daresay
you are right, Mary. But I am an artist. Art
is my life. Outside that there is nothing for me.
Don't think I am ungrateful for all you have
done. Goodbye!"
[Pg 30]
    "Goodbye, darling. Perhaps you will yet
think it over."
He shook his head wearily and turned away,
not seeing that she had held her lips to him.
The next moment he was descending the muddy
staircase, slipping and stumbling on the bare
stone. He was conscious that Mary was standing
in the doorway a moment, but he did not see the
convulsive working of her face, nor know that
as soon as he was out of sight she had thrown
herself on her bed, heart-broken, her body shaken
in a terrible burst of sobbing.
[Pg 31]
In the High Street Wyndham waited impatiently
for an omnibus to take him home
again. Instinctively he turned for refuge to
the bleak studio, from whose loneliness he had
so often been impelled to escape. But it was his
own corner, and all he had. He would not light
his lamp; he would lie there in the gloom till
his pain and self-abasement should have worn
themselves out. Merciful sleep might come;
perhaps—and the idea seemed sweet to him—the
sleep of all sleeps.
So he possessed his spirit as best he could,
while the vehicle lumbered along through the
endless streets; shivering a little in the autumn
dusk as now and then a gust of wind arose.
The sky clouded heavily, and, when finally he
descended, the rain was falling swiftly again.
At last he was at home! He thought of the
studio now with affection, and quickened his
pace feverishly. Then he became aware that a
familiar figure, holding a familiar rush-bag with
a skewer thrust through it, was trudging just
ahead of him in the growing darkness. But he
    [Pg 32]
was not surprised at catching sight of Mr.
Robinson, since it was the regular hour of the
merchant's appearance after his homeward
journey from the City. As usual, Mr. Robinson's
house filled the centre of vision, looming vast at
the cross-roads, and softened in the evening
mist; and for the first time the figure plodding
towards it under the dripping umbrella struck
Wyndham as interesting and strangely human.
Steadily, steadily, Wyndham gained on his
neighbour; then, acting on some vague instinct,
slackened his step so as not to have to pass him
to get to his own door. But just outside the
studio Mr. Robinson slipped, swayed, then came
to the ground heavily. Wyndham at once
hurried forward, and helped him to his feet.
"You are not hurt, I hope?" he inquired.
"I think not," returned the old man. He
leaned against the studio door, whilst Wyndham
took the rush-bag from his clenched fingers,
and gathered up the umbrella from the gutter
into which it had rolled. Mr. Robinson surveyed
his soiled garments ruefully, and shook his head
sadly.
"It is beastly," assented Wyndham.
"It can't be helped," said the old man;
"though mud like this on a new suit of clothes
puts a hard strain on a man's philosophy."
There was a good-natured gleam in his eye and
a brave smile on his face. Wyndham found himself
unexpectedly attracted, and was much concerned
    [Pg 33]
when Mr. Robinson tried to take a step
or two, but was pulled up painfully.
"Pray, don't alarm yourself, sir," said Mr.
Robinson, as Wyndham caught at his arm
solicitously. "I am only a little bruised, and
have had rather a wrench. I must just breathe
for an instant."
"Won't you come into my studio, and rest for
a moment or two?" suggested Wyndham. "I
shall be delighted if you will."
He produced the key from his pocket, turned
it in the lock, and threw open the door. Then
he offered Mr. Robinson the support of his arm.
"It is very kind of you, sir," said the old man,
as he linked his arm in Wyndham's. "My name
is Robinson. I live just up the road. I daresay
you may have noticed me: I have often noticed
you."
"I am enchanted to make your acquaintance,
though I regret the particular circumstances,"
said Wyndham, as they passed through the little
ante-room into the dim interior.
"I cannot share your regret," returned Mr.
Robinson, with a touch of suave conviction.
"No, not even if the accident were more serious,
since I have been afforded the pleasure of knowing
you."
Wyndham was surprised at the sweetness and
old-world courtesy revealed in the old man's
personality. "You are very kind," he said
with a smile. "I hope indeed I am worth so
    [Pg 34]
pretty a sentiment. But please take this arm-chair."
He pushed it forward, then set the rush-bag
down on the table, hastily throwing a serviette
over the litter of his last meal, which he had
not had the energy to clear away, and which
now brusquely offended his fastidiousness. But
as Mr. Robinson, good careful soul, hesitated to
soil the chair, Wyndham got a rag and wiped
away the more lurid splashes from his garments.
Then, whilst the old man rested, Wyndham
trimmed his lamp; and presently the glooms
vanished before a cosy illumination. Mr. Robinson
at once began to scrutinise the studio on
all sides with amusingly deep interest. The
old Normandy presses, the model's throne, the
giant easel, the well-worn Persian carpet, the
hosts of canvasses of all sizes standing with their
faces to the wall, the disorder and informality
everywhere—all seemed to strike for him a note
of youth and gaiety, to animate him with a sense
of a new romantic universe. His face lighted
with pleasure. He gazed up at the lofty roof
and the oak cross-beams that supported it, and
finally his eye rested on the little stairway and
gallery at the far end, now almost lost in the
shadows.
"Is your bedroom up there?" he hazarded,
his naďve interest slipping out on his tongue.
"Yes," smiled Wyndham, as he tackled the
dying fire. "It's the traditional arrangement."
[Pg 35]
    "What a fascinating place you've got here!
It's all a new world to me."
"Ah, it's a very ordinary sort of world—when
once you've settled down to work."
"I have never known an artist before,"
pursued the old man, "and it is all fresh to me.
I think that if I were a youngster again, I
shouldn't at all dislike having a place like this,
and making my home of it. Not that I mean
I should ever have made anything of an artist,"
he added with a smile. "It's the spirit of the
thing that appeals to me. You must be very
happy here."
"Not necessarily," said Wyndham. He saw
the old man's eyes fixed on him gravely. "You
see, I'm not one of your successful artists, and
the years have a way of passing on." He
struggled with the fire, making the sticks blaze,
then piled up the coals unsparingly. Mr. Robinson
was the only person in the world to whom
he had ever admitted failure, but somehow it
did not seem to matter.
The old man gazed at him in frank astonishment.
"Why, you are in the prime of early
manhood!" he exclaimed. "Really it is most
extraordinary to hear a splendid young man
like you complain of the years passing!"
"I'm thirty-three," volunteered Wyndham.
"And an unlucky devil of thirty-three, who has
as much trouble in getting rid of his work as I,
feels old enough in all conscience."
[Pg 36]
    "But you artists have to expect these adverse
experiences," said Mr. Robinson. "Art of
course isn't like other things—it isn't exactly a
business or profession in the ordinary sense, and
so long as a man has the gift, he ought not to
get disheartened. In our business world, of
course, pounds, shillings and pence are everything,
but in the world of art it wouldn't do to
set up a standard of that kind."
Such sentiments on the part of a Philistine
who came home every evening from the City
at six o'clock struck Wyndham speechless.
"The struggle of genius is proverbial," Mr.
Robinson added, before the younger man could
find his tongue; "and genius wouldn't be genius
without it."
"Ah, if I were only a genius!" said Wyndham,
laughing.
"I am sure you are a genius," said the old
man very gravely. "I have often thought
what a clever face yours was. At home we
have often spoken of you."
"I suppose then I must be a conspicuous figure
in the road. I had no idea of it!" Wyndham
laughed again.
"You've been in the neighbourhood some
years now," said Mr. Robinson half apologetically;
"and neighbours naturally notice one
another. Besides, if I may say so, you are quite
unlike the ordinary run of people. You are not
the sort of man one sees in the City."
[Pg 37]
    "You interest me. In what way do I differ
from others?"
"You have the stamp of belonging to leisured
people; it is plain from your walk and bearing,
from your voice and manner of speech. And
then there is something about your clothes even—I
don't quite know what." The old man's
eyes rested on him with a sort of approval and
satisfaction.
Wyndham was amused. "You are really an
original character," he exclaimed. "I like you."
Mr. Robinson smiled with gratification. "I
more than return the compliment, I can assure
you."
"But pray go on," said Wyndham. "I believe
you're a wizard. I must get you to cast my
horoscope."
Mr. Robinson raised his hands. "I don't
think I could manage that," he laughed. "I am
only a quiet observer of my fellow-men. In the
present case it is very easy to see that yours is
the face of a gentleman by birth. There is a
certain composure in your whole style. Whatever
you had to face, you would never have
that appearance that men get in the City—of
wearing themselves out."
"Better to wear out than to rust out," said
Wyndham meditatively. "I rust out."
He was astonished at his own frankness.
But there was a deep pleasure in being natural
for once, in throwing off the cover of sham and
    [Pg 38]
pretence that had characterised his intercourse
with his kind in the past. He did not even
consider it was strange that the person he
should be baring himself to so freely was one
whose existence hitherto he had merely
deigned to notice. But nothing could exceed
Mr. Robinson's amazement at this last profession
of his.
"Rust out!" The old man's eyes opened
wide. "Why, you have done an immense
amount of work!" He waved his hand significantly
towards the army of canvasses ranged
against the walls.
Wyndham affected to be impressed by the
consideration. "Yes," he admitted; "I have
used up a considerable amount of material in
my time, I must admit." He had suddenly
perceived that Mr. Robinson was largely discounting
his ingenuous frankness, and was
really taking his profession of failure, which,
as it happened, he had thrown out in an offhand
way, as rather affectation than literal
truth.
"And no doubt will be using up still larger
amounts in the future." The old man smiled
and rose. "But I am taking up your time!"
"No, indeed," Wyndham assured him. "I
hope you have quite recovered now."
"Oh, quite," returned Mr. Robinson. "I had
altogether forgotten the little accident in the
pleasure of our conversation."
[Pg 39]
    There was a pause. "I am sorry there's no
light," said Wyndham; "else I should show
you some of my work—that is, if you cared
to see it."
The old man looked eager. "Couldn't you
make the lamp do?" he exclaimed. "I'm sure
it would give me a very good idea of your pictures.
But I am presuming on your kindness."
"Oh, no," protested Wyndham.
He began to move about the studio, conscious
of a new energy. Somebody was here to
appreciate him; somebody desired to see his
work, was looking up to him in admiration!
He felt strangely rejuvenated—it was as if he
had taken a dose of some wonderful elixir. He
selected half a dozen of the smaller pictures, and
brought them forward. Then, as he wheeled
the great easel into position, the whim took
him to see how his huge "masterpiece" looked
after all this long interval of time.
For, since he had stood it with its face to the
wall on Lady Betty's wedding-day, he had never
had the heart to glance at it again. Not merely
failure and wasted years were associated with
it, but it stirred memories of the hours he had
spent at Grosvenor Place in the first freshness
of his hopes, when he had worked with the
passion of youth. Then, too, there was the
silent drama that had played itself out in the
depths of his own spirit. Looking back, it
seemed to him that no man could ever have
    [Pg 40]
cherished a more hopeless love, or have encountered
a more inevitable one. Nor had the
lapse of time softened the bitterness of that
strange romantic chapter. Lady Betty's figure
and personality would remain with him as his
ideal of woman for the rest of his life; and he
clung to the memory of his hurt as typical of
his whole fortune.
But though the thought of the picture to-night
inevitably stirred up some of these old
emotions, there was joined to them a sudden
overwhelming curiosity. What would be his
impression at the first glance? Would all its
deficiencies and crudities stand out in relief, and
make him turn away from it in sickness and
loathing? Or would it strike him, however
unfinished it might be, as having yet promise in
it, as justifying some at least of the time—nay,
even life-blood—he had consecrated to it?
"What a huge thing!" ejaculated Mr.
Robinson, as Wyndham tilted it back from
the wall.
"It is tremendous," smiled Wyndham. "I'm
afraid I shall have to ask you to give me a hand
with it."
Together they carried it to the easel, and
Wyndham hoisted it to its old place. "I don't
know whether we shall be able to make head
or tail of it," he said; "but I'll do what I can
with the lamp. As you see, it's a powerful one."
"Of course I don't profess to be a connoisseur
    [Pg 41]
of oil paintings," Mr. Robinson warned him.
"But I know what I like, though I daresay you
will think me extremely benighted."
"No, indeed," protested Wyndham; "I shall
value your opinion highly." He worked away
at the little wheel at the back of the easel as he
inclined the canvas at the most favourable
angle, whilst the old man watched the process
fascinated.
The next moment Wyndham was holding the
big lamp high in the air, and carefully illumining
the surface of the picture. For a
moment everything before his eyes was blurred,
and he could see nothing at all; but he stood
his ground firmly, and gripped the lamp heroically.
And before the mist could clear he heard
Mr. Robinson's voice rise in admiration.
"Wonderful!" exclaimed the old man, his
tone vibrating with an immense conviction; and
at that moment Wyndham received the picture
full on his vision and felt at once he had there a
basis that could be worked up into a splendid
achievement.
"The crowd of strikers with their banner is
the most life-like thing I've ever seen. Wonderful!"
Mr. Robinson gazed and gazed, his interest
overflowing into a running comment. "It's
Hyde Park Corner! Why, of course—there's
the Duke of Wellington's house, and there's
Lord Rothschild's. Marvellous! What a variety
of faces and characters! And the old fellow
    [Pg 42]
there in the corner—what powerful features
full of despair! And the old woman with the
red shawl—she hasn't had a morsel of food, poor
creature, for twenty-four hours, I'll wager.
Why don't you leave her alone, you old ruffian
of a policeman! And then that fashionable lady
in her brougham with her over-fed poodle—what
contempt on her face for all these
artizans! How real everything is—the perspective
is grand! Why, you could take a walk
out there in the distance! Marvellous! It
doesn't need an art education to see that's a
work of genius."
Wyndham stood listening in elation, though,
in his own perception of the work just now, he
felt as aloof from it as if it had sprung from
another's labours. His brain seemed emancipated
from the tangle of its old problems and all
his old flounderings. And as Mr. Robinson continued
his admiring ejaculations, Wyndham put
in now and again a word of explanation,
drawing attention to a point here and there,
though this was at first rather by way of
soliloquy than conversation. But, presently, as
he moved the lamp to and fro, up and down, he
warmed to the occasion; even enlarging on his
pet ideas, and pointing out where he had failed
to realise his own scheme and formula. Mr.
Robinson listened, wholly absorbed and fascinated
by these new horizons that opened before
him. His respect and worship for art was
    [Pg 43]
contagious: Wyndham began to worship it
more himself.
And the younger man grew eloquent, expatiated
on the old art and the new, on
academies and masters, on realism and symbolism,
on plein air and sunlight, on colour and
technique. And as he spoke, he was enchanted
with his own voice. It was splendid to feel
himself speaking again after all this long
suppression—he was realising the strength and
infallibility of his own artistic convictions.
Never before had he felt so sure of his conceptions;
his former humility had only led to
confusion and hesitation. In future, his own
mind should dominate—he would not be blown
about by all these conflicting schools and critics.
He was conscious of standing more vigorously
upright; and, as he enlarged on the picture, he
seemed to get a new and sure hold of it, seeing
more and more the potentiality of a great and
powerful structure that no Academy could dare
refuse to recognise. He saw now that his long
interval of hibernation had not been unfruitful.
And it had made a necessary sharp division
between the two parts of his life—the first,
uncertain, stumbling, unsuccessful; the second,
confident, mature, triumphant.
The picture before him was transformed.
Problems that had baffled him seemed to solve
themselves in a flash. Effects he had vainly
sought through maddening months stood at
    [Pg 44]
once revealed, flowing naturally out of what he
had already set down. His hand longed to be
wielding the brush again.
"But if I may make the remark," interposed
Mr. Robinson at length; "it seems matter for
surprise that a gentleman like you should be
attracted to the choice of such a subject. I
should hardly suppose that you have ever come
into any real contact with labour, and workmen
on strike would therefore scarcely come within
the sphere of your sympathy."
"The artist is of universal sympathy," said
Wyndham gravely, and himself believed it. At
that moment he felt his endless sympathy
spreading itself out, embracing all creation.
"And then it was not only the humanity of the
scene that touched me, and inspired me to
attempt to put it down finely and greatly;
there was also the pure art part as it appealed
to the trained vision—the splendid difficulties to
be vanquished, the opportunities for draughtsmanship
and subtle colour, the sense of far-stretching
space to be produced from only a
narrow gamut of light and shade."
"Marvellous!" echoed Mr. Robinson again.
"But if I may make the remark in my turn,"
said Wyndham, "your sympathy with labour
surprises me equally."
"Why so?" asked Mr. Robinson.
"The natural antagonism between capital and
labour!" smiled Wyndham.
[Pg 45]
    "Oh, I started as a poor boy—right at the
foot of the ladder," explained Mr. Robinson.
"My father was a carpenter. Wages were low
in those days, and prices of all necessaries were
high. I remember in my childhood we had a
pretty hard time of it. In my own firm we
share the profits with all the employees. So
you see I'm rather partial to labour so long as
it's decent and reasonable. When I think of
my own struggles, I like to see every man get
fair opportunities. When a man has no particular
talent—such as myself, for instance—it
is ever so much the harder to go through discouragements.
But, at the worst of times, it
must be a great thing for a gifted man like
yourself to be conscious of his own powers."
"So you set up to have no particular talent!"
explained Wyndham. "You amuse me. Haven't
you made your fortune unaided? I confess that
that seems to me the most difficult thing in the
world—immensely cleverer than anything in
the way of art or painting."
Mr. Robinson laughed. "Now you're making
fun of me."
"I was never more serious in my life," insisted
Wyndham, now wheeling forward a
smaller easel, in order to display the pictures he
had at first selected. "I consider it frightfully
clever to make money."
"My dear sir, fools often make money," Mr.
Robinson assured him.
[Pg 46]
    Wyndham shook his head incredulously.
"Do you care much about this landscape?" he
asked.
"Very much indeed. It is so green and fresh
and airy, and those are grand old trees."
"It's our old home in Hertfordshire. I lost
the property and a modest fortune through a
rascally set of lawyers."
Mr. Robinson's face expressed deep concern.
"Yes, I remember the affair well," he said. "I
remember reading it over the breakfast-table
to my wife and daughter. We saw your name
among the creditors. It was a bad business."
"They had managed all our family concerns
for thirty years."
Wyndham was now wound up to enter into
more personal matters than he had so far
touched upon. As before, he was perfectly
frank, recounting in the intimacy of the moment
all the details of this financial catastrophe. He
spoke freely of his relations in the country, and
of his sister Mary, and the independent way in
which she was earning her bread; passing from
canvas to canvas the while, and breaking off
frequently to discuss the paintings.
At last they had gone through all the selection,
but the unfailing appreciation of his visitor
was so pleasant to the artist that he could not
help bringing forward two or three more, and
then finally another. And still yet another
after!—like the preacher's "one word more."
[Pg 47]
    "I have passed a very happy time here with
you," the old man declared, as Wyndham restored
the lamp to its usual place on the table.
"You see I was right; the occasion was well
worth the accident that brought it about."
"Happily you were not really hurt. So all's
well that ends well."
The old man took hold of his rush-bag. "I
mustn't forget my middle of salmon," he smiled.
"I generally fetch something home for my wife—some
game or fish fresh from the market."
"You make me wish I had a husband in the
City," sighed Wyndham.
Mr. Robinson laughed. "Well, I suppose I
must make up my mind to be off, else my wife
and daughter will be wondering what has
become of me."
Wyndham came forward hurriedly. "I hope
I have not been keeping you," he murmured.
Somehow he did not like being left alone now.
The old man's coming had saved him for the
time being from the clutch of a terrible despair,
and he saw it waiting to descend swiftly on him.
The half-hour of self-respect would vanish like
an illusion.
But Mr. Robinson's voice was breaking in on
his mood again.
"Would it be presuming too much on our
slight acquaintance if I suggested——" The old
man hesitated with an evident shyness that
was very winning.
[Pg 48]
    "Pray suggest anything you like," said
Wyndham.
Thus encouraged, Mr. Robinson launched out
boldly. "Would you come home and dine with
us—quite without ceremony. We're the simplest
of people, but we shall offer you the heartiest of
welcomes."
"That is very kind of you," said Wyndham.
"I should not be deranging your household?"
"I am sure my wife and daughter will be as
delighted to see you as I am. Will you not
come home with me now—in a simple, friendly
way?"
"Since I am to meet ladies," smiled Wyndham,
"I should like to make myself presentable. I
have just been across town, and in this filthy,
murky atmosphere one gets to feel so utterly
unclean."
"Oh, yes; am I not in the same plight
myself?" smiled Mr. Robinson.
Wyndham escorted him to the door, and the
old man again thanked him for the pleasure
the visit had afforded him.
"We dine at half-past seven," was his parting
reminder, and Wyndham, promising faithfully
to be punctual, closed the door after him.
[Pg 49]
But his visitor had no sooner departed than
Wyndham experienced a sharp revulsion of
feeling. How stupid to have accepted this
invitation! His isolation in this suburban
wilderness had always afforded him a certain
satisfaction—he had consistently maintained
his magnificent want of interest in all this
Philistine population. His studio was his
castle, and if he chose to starve therein it was
at least a mitigation of his misery to be able to
do so without the sense of others' eyes prying at
him. And now he had surrendered his privacy.
The indiscretion was really inexplicable! And
he had let his tongue run on so recklessly and
confidentially! He might even have drawn
back at the very last—alleged an engagement,
and cut short the acquaintanceship there and
then. Perhaps it was not yet too late!
In his annoyance he started pacing the length
of the studio. But the great canvas, still
glistening there on the easel, suddenly claimed
his attention again, and brought him to a standstill.
Impulsively he caught up the lamp, and
once more directed its light on to the surface.
    [Pg 50]
The picture took deep hold of him, and he stood
absorbed in it. And somehow Mr. Robinson's
wondering voice began to sound its praises.
"Marvellous!" the old man seemed to be saying.
"It doesn't need an art education to see that's
a work of genius." And as he recalled each
stroke of admiration, he nodded his head in
agreement.
Was not the old man's appreciation of good
augury? Surely it foreshadowed a popular
Academy success. Whatever one's personal
art ideals, it did not detract from their worth
if one could carry them out and please the
crowd at the same time—incidentally, of course—without
deliberate intention. Did not
Moličre first try his comedies on his housekeeper?
Mr. Robinson's tastes were the tastes
of the great public—nay, of even the better
classes that went to the galleries. Like him,
they dwelt entirely on the illustrative aspect of
painting, and were altogether swayed by the
humanity of a picture, by its dramatic or anecdotal
interest. No wonder some of his fellow-craftsmen
had been driven to the opposite
extreme, and tried to rule out humanity altogether.
But the human side of art need not
be necessarily on a low plane, or descend to
mere anecdote. In his hands art should be
the vehicle of real intellect and emotion.
If only he were not forced to do those idiotic
trifles! After holding out so long, to capitulate
    [Pg 51]
absolutely for want of bread! No, he would not
dine with Mr. Robinson—he would starve rather!
"Better to starve than stoop to inferiors!"
he exclaimed, as he set down the lamp again.
How little, indeed, he had eaten all that day!
And with the thought a distressing weakness
came over him. There was a humming at his
temples: the studio disappeared in a mist, then
reappeared oscillating. He was constrained to
steady himself by clutching at the table.
In a minute or two the vertigo passed off,
leaving him with a dull craving for food and
drink. He might make some sort of a meal
from such poor provender as his larder afforded—a
portion of a loaf, the remainder of a tin of
sardines, a hunk of cheese; but somehow the
prospect was singularly uninviting. He might,
indeed, add variety to the store by laying out
his last shilling in the streets adjoining, but the
shilling was too precious, and anyway he had
not the energy to go shopping. There swam up
before him the picture of a well-lighted, comfortable
dining-room with a heavily laden table,
and of a middle of salmon, piping hot, that was
being served with a dainty white sauce. And
then there were hosts of bottles on a mahogany
sideboard: fat, gold-tipped bottles; tall, long-necked
bottles; fantastic twisted bottles. Good
well-cooked food was nourishing him, a delicate
wine was moistening his feverish palate, touching
his whole dull self to a lighter mood.
[Pg 52]
    He had accepted the invitation. The Robinsons
were expecting him, would be troubled and
put out if he did not arrive. He carried the
lamp up to the gallery, and began his preparations.
And then the whim took him to change
his clothes again. Not that he supposed the
Robinsons affected to be fashionable of an evening,
but the pride of the half-starved man rose
in irrational self-assertion.
So he dressed carefully, tying his bow to
perfection, and arranging the set of his waistcoat
fastidiously. It was so long since he had
put on evening clothes, and as he saw himself in
the glass, well set up, and bearing himself
exquisitely, the fact of his poverty seemed
absurd and incredible. His face, too, seemed
to have recovered some of its olden confidence
as he scanned it critically. True the cheeks
were a trifle thin and shrunken, but the lines
of dejection and sadness had lightened at the
new stirring within him.
Then for the first time in all these years he
made his way up the road to the ugly house at
the corner that had stamped itself upon him as
the symbol of all Suburbia, as the stronghold of
a type of life that Bohemia mocked at and
Belgravia waved aside as impossible.
If he had not yet entirely overcome his
distaste, it was at least mitigated by a splendid
sense of condescension.
[Pg 53]
A handsome Phyllis, in cap and apron, opened
the door, and Wyndham stepped into a broad
corridor, carpeted in red, and hung with
popular engravings that he had seen in the
windows of all the carvers and gilders in
London. Next, he was ushered under a
crimson door-hanging into a resplendent
drawing-room, lighted by a dazzling crystal
chandelier, and sensuously warmed by a great
red-hot fire. There was nobody to receive him
yet, and he was left to amuse himself with the
show-books on the tables—padded photograph
albums full of old-fashioned naďve people posing
against rococo backgrounds, collections of views
of the Valley of the Thames and of the Lake
District, and richly bound volumes of Tennyson
and Sir Walter Scott.
The interest of these treasures was soon
exhausted, and Wyndham, sinking into a
remarkably soft arm-chair, impatiently beat
with his foot at a cluster of roses on the
brand-new "Aubusson" carpet. The room
was almost triangular, a large bow window
commanding the vista of the main road, and
    [Pg 54]
pairs of other windows, straight and tall,
overlooking the streets that branched on either
hand. And all these windows were elaborately
draped in a would-be Renaissance style, with
many loops and festoons, and with big gilt
cornices above. And between each pair of them
stood a gilded consol table surmounted by a
mirror that reached to the ceiling. Oval
mirrors with lighted candles in sconces glittered
from several points of vantage, and crimson
couches and the immense piano completed
the tale of splendours.
At length the door opened softly, and Mr.
Robinson entered. Wyndham rose, not displeased
to observe that his host was likewise
in evening clothes; as he had been already
regretting the self-assertion to which he had
yielded.
"Ah, you are in good time," said the old man,
coming forward in his quiet, gentle way, and
shaking hands again. "I am sorry to say that
my wife and daughter are not down yet."
His tone was apologetic, and Wyndham
smiled, readily understanding that the announcement
of a guest to arrive had scared
the ladies to a more elaborate toilette than
usual.
"They were enchanted when I told them you
were coming," Mr. Robinson continued. "As for
commiseration over my fall—not a word!"
The two men had conversed for some few
    [Pg 55]
minutes before the hostess and her daughter
came sweeping into the room; and, as he had
half expected, Wyndham found he knew them
more or less vaguely by sight. Mrs. Robinson
was a tall dame, fully sixty, with gray hair, and
a most amiable expression; stately, even handsome,
in her black silk dress with its tasteful
lace at the throat and wrists. The daughter
who followed rather shyly behind her gave
Wyndham the impression that he was beholding
the most simple, homely person he had ever met;
and this despite the complexity of her costume,
which seemed to be built up almost entirely of
old lace that lay over itself in thick folds and
rich creamy masses. Timidity of temperament
and modesty to the verge of self-distrust were
at once suggested by the almost awkward
constraint of her bearing and the quiet, half-averted
glance of her dark eyes. He could
see that she hardly dared look at him. He
gallantly supposed that she was a year or
two younger than himself, and as he met her
desperately friendly smile (intended for him
but hardly bestowed in his direction) with his
choicest bow, he received a further impression
that was distinctly more favourable than the
first of unrelieved plainness. For, once his eye
had taken in her features, the artist in him was
ready to do justice to her throat and arms,
which were really good: and her dark hair, her
greatest glory, lay in a superb coil, which, with
    [Pg 56]
a surprising touch of coquetry, was set off by
a velvet band and some lilies of the valley.
It was curious that the figure of Lady Betty
should swim up before him just then, as if to
emphasise his real ideal of woman's beauty, and
to make him feel once for all how impossible
it was ever to step down from that standard.
But he could not help smiling covertly at the
thought that the family were making such a
serious business of so casual an invitation—these
toilettes were really so very much more
elaborate than anything he might conceivably
have looked for; though at any rate it reassured
his pride in the fullest degree—evidently, his
frank admissions to Mr. Robinson notwithstanding,
they were not taking him as a poor
devil of an artist, but were looking up to him
with a perfect appreciation of the respect that
was his due.
Wyndham's presentation to the ladies over,
there followed an instant of general embarrassment.
Mrs. Robinson smiled again, and quickly
tried to make conversation.
"How pleasant to become acquainted at last,
after being neighbours so many years!" she
murmured. "And so unexpectedly, too."
"When the unexpected does happen," said
Wyndham, "it generally is delightful. I suppose
that's because most of us in this hard life
get into the habit of expecting only the opposite
sort of thing."
[Pg 57]
    Miss Robinson laughed shyly, whilst her
mother seemed somewhat puzzled.
"They say that the unexpected always happens,"
ventured the younger woman tremulously.
"I'm sure the proverb must be wrong, because
nice things happen so seldom." Her voice was
soft, vibrating with gracious amiability.
"I disagree with Mr. Wyndham," said her
father. "I was not at all expecting to slip
down. When the unexpected happened, I am
bound to say I did not find it delightful."
They all laughed; and then Mrs. Robinson
resumed the interrupted tenour of her discreet,
agreeable way. She herself had often thought
how pleasant it would be to know him; but in
London one could live for ever so many years
and yet know absolutely nothing of one's next-door
neighbour. In the country, of course,
things were different: there etiquette was more
human, and people called of their own accord.
Was Mr. Wyndham exhibiting anything just
now? They had seen pictures of his in the
Academy in past years, and were great admirers
of his. Wyndham was by now too faint and
exhausted to do more than hold his own in a
smiling, conventional way: the splendours of
the room, too, dazzled him to the verge of confusion.
He was thankful when Phyllis appeared
with the announcement that dinner was served;
and Mr. Robinson, giving his arm to his daughter,
led the way across the hall, under another
    [Pg 58]
crimson door-hanging, and into a long dining-room,
wherein was set out a great table with
flowers and fruit and silver. The covers were
laid at one end, which gave the dinner an air
of informality and family intimacy.
A glass of sherry at the start revived
Wyndham considerably, and soon he fell to
conversing at his ease. Presently he found
he was somehow taking the lead, and their
evident respect and admiration for his lightest
word made him clearly perceive that he was
an important and brilliant figure for them.
Such grains of resentment as he still cherished
at having entered on the acquaintanceship were
dying away. Meanwhile the seductive prevision
of material joys that had risen before
him at the studio at that moment of physical
weakness was being literally realised, almost
comically so. There on the immense mahogany
sideboard stood bottles and decanters galore,
and now up came the middle of salmon with a
piquant sauce accompanying it! God! how
delicious it tasted, after all these months of
bread and cheese! Wine gave him inspiration,
and food the strength to live up to the rôle
they were allotting to him. He was good-looking
and knew it; his voice, his bearing,
his choice of words, were alike distinguished;
his experiences were of worlds that were to
them far-seeming and romantic. He was the
sort of hero they had read about in novels—a
    [Pg 59]
handsome guardsman nonchalantly looking
in at a Park Lane dance at midnight, or a
brilliant attaché to an embassy in touch with
wonderful horizons.
Meanwhile the supply of dainty food continued;
a leg of lamb, spinach, fat, luscious
asparagus, a melon from a Southern clime, a
chicken, and the juiciest of French lettuces.
The hock was of the most delicate, the champagne
subtle and sparkling. Even so he felt
himself sparkling in the eyes of the others.
He was the lion to whom all this homage was
his rightful due, holding them fascinated with
his wide knowledge of men and cities, of social
life in European capitals. He drew upon his
wanderings in by-ways known only of artists;
fascinated them with sketches of the art life
of Rome and Paris. Reminiscences bubbled
up of his student days, and with them were
mingled deft touches of Eton and Oxford, and
charming cameos of county life; this last developing
insensibly into discussions of Anglo-Saxon
character, its comparison with the Latin,
relative estimations of intelligence, industry,
ambition. Mr. Robinson here had many shrewd
observations to offer, for they had now wandered
into the domain of affairs. Wyndham
was genuinely interested in his host's experiences,
in his accounts of unusual men of
business from strange, even barbarous parts of
the world, with whom he had had personal
    [Pg 60]
relations. They even touched upon financial
operations; and Wyndham felt perfectly at
ease amid complications in which millions were
bandied about like tennis-balls, and the credit
of banks and States was pawned as simply and
swiftly as he might pawn his own watch. At
last, over the dessert, there was a perceptible
slackening. Wyndham, who so far had taken
care not to let his eye rest on the many heavy-framed
"oil paintings" that hung on the walls,
for fear some discussion of them might thence
arise, was now incautious enough to fix his gaze
markedly on some sheep pasturing just opposite
him. But Mr. Robinson seemed to welcome
the opportunity thus afforded.
"Oh, of course I know you won't find any of
those things worth glancing at," he threw out
with a laugh; and the others chimed in, highly
amused at the thought of the impression "the
things" must be making on their guest.
"Oh, some aren't at all half bad," conceded
Wyndham politely, his eye now promenading
freely. "The girl with the mandoline is laid
in with rather a charming touch, and the fruit-and-flower
piece is really decorative."
"We always considered those two the best,"
declared Mr. Robinson. "I bought them at an
auction in the City, many years ago now—more,
in fact, than I care to remember."
Wyndham still affected to be examining the
collection.
[Pg 61]
    "Now, of course," resumed Mr. Robinson,
"that Highland scene is the merest pot-boiler—a
stream in the middle, a mountain on one
side, and a cow on the other. I've seen hundreds
of them for sale. But it's not likely I
shall ever be taken in again that way, especially
after examining the work I saw at your
studio, Mr. Wyndham."
Wyndham inclined his head smilingly, and
Mr. Robinson duly proceeded to describe to the
others the great masterpiece which that afternoon
he had had the privilege of inspecting.
His memory of the details proved to be extraordinarily
minute, and his face glowed all over
again with the wonder and enthusiasm he had
displayed at the studio. "The figures, the
faces," he wound up, "were simply marvellous.
I can't give you the faintest idea of how magnificent
it all is. I could spend hours looking
at it."
Wyndham could do no less than suggest that
the ladies should come and see the picture for
themselves, though just then a whiff of unpleasant
thoughts urged on him again the imprudence
of such further social developments.
"We shall be only too delighted; it will be
a great pleasure," exclaimed Mrs. Robinson,
and Miss Robinson's eyes shone with unmistakable
excitement.
"We must really take down that Highland
scene, my dear," proceeded Mrs. Robinson,
    [Pg 62]
addressing her husband. "It is altogether too
bad. We ought to have something better in
its place."
It passed through Wyndham's mind that one
of his projected panels would do excellently,
but of course it was far too below the dignity
of the brilliant lion to appear to snatch at the
opportunity of turning a few honest guineas
through the grace of his humble entertainers.
"Let us have the Highland scene down by
all means," said Mr. Robinson. "And I've an
idea! If we can induce Mr. Wyndham to paint
our Alice's portrait, why, then we should have
something first-rate to hang in its place."
Miss Robinson turned fiery red; the quick
glance she flashed at her father was the more
conspicuous. "How splendid!" she exclaimed
breathlessly. Her bosom heaved. Wyndham
was almost painfully aware of the thumping of
her heart.
But he himself was caught quite unprepared.
True that the unexpected had happened again,
but that very quality of the event was in this
instance disconcerting. No doubt they observed
his slight hesitation.
"Of course it would be a great privilege
for us," interposed Mrs. Robinson; "but it
seems to me we are counting without Mr.
Wyndham's authority."
Wyndham inclined his head graciously with
a smile; swiftly master of the situation again,
    [Pg 63]
and improving the occasion with a compliment.
"Oh! I shall be most delighted." He gave his
proposed subject the professional glance that
the occasion authorised. "Miss Robinson will
afford me the opportunity of a most distinguished
piece of portraiture."
Miss Robinson gazed at her plate, nervously
peeling a banana. She had not spoken much
during the dinner, but she had hung on Wyndham's
words with a naďve, unconscious admiration,
which, from a prettier and more brilliant
woman, he would scarcely have passed with so
little a sense of appreciation.
"Thank you for the compliment, Mr. Wyndham,"
she said simply. "I am afraid the
distinction will be due more to your work
than to your sitter."
"No, indeed, Miss Robinson," he protested,
with a suave gravity that made his polished
assurance the more impressive and charming.
"I did not intend any compliment—I spoke
only as the artist." He was rather surprised
that a woman should display so little vanity.
And, in a subtle way, it did not enhance his
estimation of her.
Miss Robinson's banana occupied her more
earnestly than ever; but her mother came to
the rescue by raising the important question
of costume. Wyndham, after further professional
consideration of his client, preferred to
    [Pg 64]
paint Miss Robinson as he saw her now. And
with a ready sense of detail he saw, too, that
certain rings she wore, though he had not
observed them closely at first, would make
excellent spots in a scheme of decoration.
These rings were unusually chosen, and were
more artistic than extravagant. The one on
her right hand was a small, subtle cat's-eye
surrounded by fine pearls. On her left hand
were an aquamarine, and a scarab that shone
like the patina of an ancient bronze. Almost
without a pause he dashed at once at a scheme,
which he elucidated there and then, much to
their overwhelming. He would pose her on
an Empire chair. In a blue and white Oriental
vase on a high stand at the side should be
arranged three tall arum lilies amid some vivid
carnation blossoms. Why, the Nankin bowl on
the mantelpiece was the very thing! The
background of the picture should be vague and
of an olive-grey tone, laid in with free brushwork,
against which the masses of creamy lace
would show deliciously decorative. The great
surmounting coil of hair would give character
to the whole scheme, and the lilies of the valley
in the velvet band afford a final contrast of
lightness and graciousness against the intense
note of the coiffure.
The parents were radiant with pleasure,
though poor Miss Robinson looked more and
more scared each instant. In her trepidation
    [Pg 65]
she could only echo stammeringly the elder
people's wonder at his great skill and cleverness.
The scheme unfolded itself before them
richly beautiful—not one of your dull black
portraits, but a canvas glowing with exquisite
light and colour.
"There, Alice, you ought to be proud of yourself,"
said her father, rallying her good-naturedly
as a parting shot, when the women rose to
retire; and Wyndham attended their exit under
the crimson hanging with his most engaging
air.
Left alone, the men drew their chairs to the
fire, and Mr. Robinson brought forward boxes
of fragrant-smelling cigars, large and rotund.
The atmosphere of comfort enveloped Wyndham
soothingly: the sense of unlimited abundance
seemed a miracle after his long privation.
Fortunately he had not been tempted to have
his glass filled too often: he had appreciated all
these good and luscious things with commendable
moderation, and had been stimulated to brilliancy
without losing cool command of himself.
He lighted his cigar at the little silver smoker's
lamp that just then came in with the coffee,
and, as he puffed, a splendid warm feeling of
well-being took possession of him. He helped
himself to cream and sugar with the masterful
calm and something of the gesture of a stage
hero.
Presently Mr. Robinson raised the subject of
    [Pg 66]
Wyndham's fee for the portrait, approaching
the point apologetically.
"Of course, we could hardly discuss this side
of the matter before my wife and daughter,"
said the old man. "But I must insist on your
accepting a fair remuneration for the work—shall
we say two hundred guineas?"
"To be frank," said Wyndham, "if you had
left it to me, I should hardly have mentioned so
large a sum."
"Naturally a gentleman of your disposition
would think more of the artistic pleasure of
the work than of the money it brought. Still,
in this life money has to be considered. In
all things, sublime or humble, the labourer is
worthy of his hire. I do not for a moment
suggest that the sum I have named in any way
expresses our appreciation of the work, even in
anticipation, and certainly not in any way our
sense of the privilege and honour you are
bestowing upon us."
"I shall endeavour to merit your kind words,"
said Wyndham, not to be outdone in polished
courtesy, though he conceded that, by force of
simple sincerity and good feeling, Mr. Robinson
seemed a past master in the delicate art. "At
any rate," he pursued, "the work is developing
in my mind. The more I dwell upon it, the
better and better I like the scheme, and I shall
work at it enthusiastically from start to finish."
It being thus assumed that two hundred
    [Pg 67]
guineas were to be the artist's reward, Mr.
Robinson seemed by no means loth to wander
from a point which he had approached with
great hesitation and an immense sense of its
difficult delicacy. As yet Wyndham did not
measure the radical change in his personal
situation; nor did he display any undue elation.
But his cool demeanour was no mere pose.
Indeed, he was surprised himself at the ease
with which he was accepting the transaction,
as if it were commonplace in his experience.
But he merely supposed that he was meeting
good fortune with the natural dignity of the
artist—to whom commissions are due as a
matter of right, however long they may be
deferred.
They did not linger in the dining-room, but
joined the ladies after their first cigar; though
not before Mr. Robinson had sedulously inquired
as to his liking for the particular
brand, which, he assured Wyndham, was not
readily obtainable in London, and had made,
him promise to take a box away with him.
In the drawing-room Miss Robinson played
to them, at first tremulously, but gaining confidence
with the experience. She displayed a
degree of trained taste and a certain individual
choice, favouring the tenderer and gentler
works of Mendelssohn and Mozart. She sang
also one or two of Heine's love songs in the
German with a touch of passion and regret,
    [Pg 68]
whilst Wyndham accompanied her; and he himself
wound up the evening in more jovial mood
with a rousing student's song from his old
Munich days.
Their parting with him had almost a touch of
affection; and the final understanding was that
he was to plan out the arrangements for the
sittings, and to communicate with them in
the morning.
He was forgetting his box of cigars at the
end, but Mr. Robinson carefully caught it up
from the hall table, and brought it after him
just as the servant was opening the door.
[Pg 69]
The next morning early Wyndham jumped out
of bed with a bewildered sense of some change
in his life, and it was an instant or two before
his faculties cleared and he remembered his
adventure of the previous evening. His next
thought was one of pleasure that he had at
last carried out his resolution of rising early.
The autumn had developed with unusual
severity, but the morning was intensely clear,
and the studio full of a strong light. He
pushed aside the hanging, and looked down
from the gallery on the familiar scene below.
Ordinarily, on rising, the sight had filled him
with disgust and apathy, but now a freshness
and vigour pervaded him, a new imperious
desire, not merely in his mind but in all his
limbs and muscles, to enter again on the contest
with men. As his thought ran back through
the past intolerable year or two, his inaction
and sloth seemed almost incredible. He saw
himself rising at midday, suffering moral tortures
before the work he was powerless to
begin, letting the barren hours drift away into
    [Pg 70]
the deep, then regretting them passionately.
Was it not all a nightmare from which he
had been curiously released?
He dressed, and, whilst his little kettle was
boiling, took careful stock of his professional
materials. Colours, brushes, varnishes—all
needed renewing; there seemed nothing but
impracticable odds and ends, mere bits of
wreckage from his disastrous life's venture.
Then, too, the filth and disorder all around
him struck him brusquely, stung him to annoyance.
On every surface where dust might
accumulate it lay in serene possession. Wherever
spiders could spin, there the webs hung
thick, amazing and complicated citadels, prodigious
masses and networks.
He felt he could not endure it a day longer.
There must be a thorough physical cleansing
at once. And he must return to the luxury
of a daily bed-maker. This preoccupation with
household things took off the keenest edge of
one's first energy and enthusiasm; he must
reserve himself jealously for his high calling.
As he sipped his coffee he mused over the
little financial difficulties that immediately beset
him. Now that at last he had a valid ground
for appealing to Mary, he felt reluctant;
anxious to bring her only the sense of his
success without alloy. He might explain the
situation to Mr. Robinson, and ask for money
in advance; but that seemed as impolitic as it
    [Pg 71]
was repugnant in this new rapture of fine
upstanding dignity. Payment of the quarter's
rent that was already due could be easily deferred—for
the bare humiliation of making the
request. But he needed something for equipment,
and must face the sacrifice of some of the
older pictures to which he had clung so long,
accepting any sum in exchange, if only shillings.
He still felt no disposition to invest the
accident that had turned the tide for him
with any touch of superstition or romance.
He regarded the whole matter in the same
dry light as at his first acceptance of it the
evening before. He had sat waiting for
clients, and at last they had turned up. But
he did not at all dislike the Robinsons: they
were very much better than the great run of
their class—they had evidently ideals, and
aspired to a higher degree of refinement
than they as yet possessed, or, perhaps, were
capable of possessing. They were neither smug
nor self-satisfied, and, in giving him this work,
they had avoided indulging in any semblance of
bourgeois patronage, whereas other people of
their class, even if well meaning, might easily
have been gross and intolerable.
He had studied his sitter pretty closely. The
profile, as is not unfrequently the case with
"plain" women, had a curious individual interest.
He felt it offered scope for "construction,"
and he could import subtly into the
    [Pg 72]
drawing a certain distinguished sentiment that
was not really in the original, though somehow
it might easily have been there, and, in moments
of enthusiasm on the part of the observer, might
even be conceived to be there. Yes, the profile
was undoubtedly the thing: that way, too, the
great coil of hair could be handled the more
effectively. Indeed, it seemed to him that,
taking into consideration her dark eye with
its soft lashes, and the long shapely arms,
and the exquisite ivory tones of the old lace
dress, the scheme should really turn out, as
he had so promptly put it to Miss Robinson
herself, "a most distinguished piece of portraiture."
He was shrewd enough to understand
the essential shyness of her disposition,
and he felt he might well invest her expression
with some suggestion of this, though it should
come out as a sort of gentle spiritual modesty.
And now his imagination returned to the
contemplation of his own fortunes, and went
soaring skywards. His luck having once
changed, who could say what might not turn
up next? Another sitter might appear, one of
your great heroines, stately and brilliant—a
sort of Lady Betty, in fact: he might as well
admit he had Lady Betty in mind! Such a
portrait, appropriately conceived, would form
a remarkable pendant to this one. Then, too,
he might make another dash at his masterpiece!
Such a display of versatility in the
    [Pg 73]
next year's exhibitions must place his name
on everybody's lips, must surely pave the way
to his reputation not only as a great decorative
portrait painter, but also as a modern of the
moderns, touched to inspiration by all the stress
and striving of his age!
This roseate flight was abruptly disturbed
by the advent of the postman. The rat-tat,
one of the double sort, imperiously summoned
him to the door. Had the "something else"
already turned up? He rather prided himself
on the coolness with which he rose to meet it.
The postman handed him a packet and a letter.
But at a glance he saw that the packet was
a rejected drawing and the letter Mary's, and
he went straight down into the depths again.
He, however, affected a cheerful good morning
to the postman; then, no sooner alone,
tore open the letter, with the bitter taste of
yesterday's scene with his sister full in his
throat. To his astonishment, he pulled out two
five-pound Bank of England notes, and only
a few words accompanied them. "Dearest,"
she wrote,—"Since you left me to-day I have
suffered beyond endurance. That you will
ever forgive me for my harshness I cannot
hope. I am the only soul you have to turn
to, and yet I struck at you as with a whip.
Your face as you turned away will haunt me
for the rest of my life. I have been sobbing
and sobbing, feeling my heart must break.
    [Pg 74]
I ask you to be good to me now, and take this
little money. Darling, don't punish me by
sending it back. Better times are coming
presently, and, if God is good, this little help
now may bring you the best of fortune.—Your
loving sister, Mary."
Wyndham was unnerved; realising to the
full the torture her gentle, sympathetic nature
was inflicting on her. What it must have cost
her to gather up her strength for that critical
interview he could only remotely surmise. Yet
it had failed her after all!
However touched he was by her sweetness,
however much he was moved to respond to
this prostration and surrender, he yet saw
only too clearly that at bottom it was a failure
of strength. The idea of using the money was
singularly distasteful; even though he told
himself he would have his hand cut off rather
than doubt her perfect goodness and sincerity
in sending it.
This necessity of a difficult decision disturbed
the nice cool balance with which he had started
out to face the day. There was nothing for it
but to put aside the letter for the present in
the hope that counsel would come to him later.
And in the meanwhile he went on with his
programme. He tidied his papers, went to
hunt out his old charwoman, and, ultimately
leaving her in possession of the studio, he ran
into town to get his new materials, and look
    [Pg 75]
up the various accessories for the scheme of
the picture.
His first visit was to a shop in Oxford Street,
where he had dealt ever since his student days,
and where he could order what he needed
without immediate payment. A burly man in
a Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers was making
purchases at one of the counters, and his back
seemed not unfamiliar. Wyndham brought out
his list and was going through the various items
with one of the assistants when a heavy hand
was placed on his shoulder, and, turning, he
beheld the big powerful head and pointed beard
of one of the old gang of his Latin Quarter days.
"Sadler!" he exclaimed.
The big head was convulsed with laughter,
and Wyndham's hand wrung in a mighty grip.
"How jolly! I was coming to look you up!
I've just ferreted out your address; you're still
fixed out there at Hampstead?"
"Oh, do come—I shall be delighted," said
Wyndham genially. "Have you been in London
long?"
"Three weeks. After knocking about for five
years—what do you think of that, my boy?
First went all over Spain—made scores of
studies. Gee! First-rate! Cheapest place in
Europe—exchange thirty-five to the sovereign—and
lots of good eating. Went to see a bit
of Velasquez down at Madrid. Gee-rusalem!
And the Titans, stuck up in a funny little
    [Pg 76]
room! You never see anything so fine in
your life."
"Oh, I've been there," smiled Wyndham.
The vigour and enthusiasm of his old friend,
the nasalities of the deep voice, had almost a
complete freshness for him, after the long
interval since their last meeting. He was
pleased at the encounter—it brought him whiffs
of old days of happy comradeship. He felt the
stirring of the war-horse.
"Then I put in a nice couple of years at
Munich; saw some Boecklin. Gee! He's great!"
"I once saw some wretched things of his,
though," said Wyndham. "I remember—at a
modern exhibition at Venice."
"I grant there are one or two rotten ones,"
conceded Sadler; "but they're interesting, if you
take them in the right way—experiments that
failed, though they were fine as he had them
in him. Well—then I did a bit of a tour all
over the shop—came along through Holland—made
cart-loads of sketches; and then I came
right along here. Been getting lots of fun in
London; been round with the boys, and had a
rattling good time. Taking the opportunity,
too, of getting some nice suits of clothes." And
here Sadler turned abruptly from art, and
plunged into sartorial details. His interest
in such matters was astonishing, almost touching.
He revelled in fancy waistcoats and
rioted in tweeds and broadcloths. London was
    [Pg 77]
the only place in the world where you could get
the rakish cut. He, Sadler, had never suspected
what a lovely figure he had, till this latest cutter
had revealed him to himself!
He paused at last for breath.
"Anything particular on with you?" he was
presently impelled to ask, observing that
Wyndham was exercising a marked fastidiousness
in the choice of his canvas.
"A portrait," said Wyndham. "Not a bad
little commission."
"Good!" ejaculated Sadler, his face shining
enthusiastically. "A lady?"
"Yes," answered Wyndham, "and I've rather
a charming scheme."
"Good!" roared Sadler again. "I heard you
hadn't been doing much of late. They were
running your work down—some of the boys,
and I said they were talking rot. We nearly
came to blows about it. I think I fairly shut
them up."
Wyndham had at first winced a little. Then
he felt like shrugging his shoulders. After all,
the past had to be lived down. Besides, Sadler's
championship was genuine and influential.
"That was very kind of you. You always
did stick up for me."
"Don't you mind 'em a bit, my boy. You
just go ahead, and you'll come out at the top
of the tree."
"I'll do my best," said Wyndham, smiling.
[Pg 78]
    "That'll be good enough, I guess," said Sadler.
"Perhaps this portrait will open up other things
for you."
"How so?" inquired Wyndham.
"It all depends on the crowd you strike—I
heard you came a bit of a cropper, and I daresay
you're not too well off now to despise a job
or two—you can always put decent work into
them. Now there's Jim Harley—he struck a
rich middle-class lot ten years ago, rotten out-and-out
Philistines, twenty guineas apiece—and
they've been keeping him going ever since.
Does fifty of 'em a year."
"The prospect hardly tempts me. After all,
the main thing is to get back to big work."
Sadler smiled. "I guess I should be the first
to drag you back again—after a while. But
Jimmy married young. A boy and girl affair.
His wife's family weren't satisfied with his
financial position, and there was a mighty row
at the time. Of course the girl had only her
pretty eyes."
"Ah, you don't approve of idealistic love
affairs."
"Not of that kind. I'm forty, and I've seen
something in my time."
Wyndham had finished his purchases, and was
telling the assistant to send the parcel to his
studio. As they left the shop presently, Sadler
pressed Wyndham very hard to lunch with him
at a particular restaurant he mentioned, and
    [Pg 79]
Wyndham could not do otherwise than accept
the invitation, though he confessed the place
was unknown to him. Whereat Sadler expressed
great astonishment. It was one of the
very few places in London where the food was
fit to eat! Why, the cooking was even better
than at Lavenue's in the Quarter, and that
was saying a great deal. He, Sadler, could
not endure any other place during his sojournings
in London. Wyndham let the dear fellow
gallop on to his heart's content. Sadler was
a fine painter, and in the old days Wyndham
as the junior had sat at his feet, and in the
matter of technique had been greatly indebted
to him. But he had observed with covert
amusement at a very early stage in the acquaintanceship
that Sadler, like so many others in
the hard-working, hand-to-mouth world of the
arts, had an amiable weakness for "being in
the know" anent the good things of life, and
affected a lavishness in public that was off-set
by a sharp economy in the less visible phases of
his existence.
At the restaurant Sadler scrutinised the carte
with the confident eye of a man about town,
grumbled a little, held a fussy colloquy with
the waiter, and finally ordered oysters and
chablis to begin upon, the while a chateaubriand
was being prepared for them.
Over the meal Sadler talked a great deal of
old times. He seemed to have kept himself
    [Pg 80]
well in touch with scores of men they had
known in common, despite scatterings and
vicissitudes. His mind kept leaping across the
world, beating them all out of their lairs for
Wyndham's enlightenment. Did he remember
Pycherley—the biggest duffer of them all?
Well, he had married an heiress on the
strength of his genius, and was painting awful
stuff out in California; and Snyders, who
had shared his studio, had built himself a
Moorish house high up on a mountain-side
overlooking the Gulf of Salerno; a third had
settled down to "black-and-white" in a queer
little creeper-clad house in St. John's Wood; a
fourth was decorating a municipal building at
Toronto. Marlowe was still in the avenue du
Maine, where the fascinating American actress
he had wed had since borne him a sheaf of
daughters: and the beautiful Mrs. Smith they
had known at Fontainebleau, the summer they
had spent there together, had long ago divorced
her husband, and married the Italian sculptor,
in whose studio she had made such sensational
progress. She now exhibited regularly, and
had already received a gold medal of the second
class.
And so the conversation continued—for the
most part about men who were now pretty well
getting on into middle life, whose destinies had
found definite declaration and were visible to all
Wyndham expressed his pleasure that his own
    [Pg 81]
future, on the contrary, still lay wrapped in
mystery; that, though the curtain was full up,
the interest of the drama was by no means
played out.
"You can afford to talk like that, Wyndham,"
shouted Sadler. "What are you? You're only
a boy! But I'm forty, and I tell you I'd give up
the interest of the drama for a safe income, and
think it a damned good bargain. I get along, I
sell my stuff, but I tell you I sweat and groan."
"I admit I should like my old income back
again," said Wyndham; "not for itself, but for
the sake of the splendid freedom to work."
"That's just my point," shouted Sadler.
"What the hell do I care about money for
itself? And I tell you what, my boy, the right
thing for an artist is to marry a woman with
money." He struck the table hard with his big
fist, making the whole restaurant rattle.
Wyndham almost jumped. "Good gracious!
So that's what you were driving at! The idea
to me is perfectly loathsome."
"That's just what I used to think," exclaimed
Sadler. "But you can't go on for ever with
your head in the clouds."
"The thing's so awfully brutal and sordid,"
insisted Wyndham, shuddering visibly. "It
makes my blood run cold."
"You make me tired," snapped Sadler pettishly.
"Where's the sordidness? I don't say
a man ought to run after a fortune—but enough
    [Pg 82]
to steady things. Taking it all round, we artists
have less chance of making money for ourselves
than other men of the same worth; and since
most of us do marry some time or other, we
ought to look to marriage to help our work,
and not to drag it down."
Wyndham was unconvinced. "If you take
away the poetry out of life, the rest of it is too
hideous to bother about. If a man marries to
make himself comfortable, he's no better than
a contented pig wallowing in muck. Rather
than surrender the ideal, I'd give up marriage
altogether, stand by my guns, and die fighting."
"We artists are a damned sentimental lot,"
shouted Sadler. He lifted a juicy morsel to his
mouth. "This chateau's jolly good, isn't it?"
"Excellent," admitted Wyndham.
"Now you see I wasn't exaggerating when I
said it's as good here as at Lavenue's." Sadler
swallowed his mouthful. "We all begin with
your idyllic ideas—Rossetti, Meredith, and all
the rest of it. But I tell you it's hell! You
dig the work out of yourself with sweat, with
blood!" The veins began to swell in Sadler's
mighty forehead. "And when you're not one
of the lucky ones, what does the world do to
help you to work for it?" He had wrought
himself up to a tense excitement, and put the
question with a hoarse shout. "Nothing! It
prints your name in the papers, it talks about
you at dinner parties! Painting is starvation—painting
    [Pg 83]
is death! By the time you've worried
along till you're forty, you begin to see a bit
straight, my boy. Look around you—what do
you see on all sides? You see the best of us
and the luckiest of us fixing up some pretty
little nook here in town or in the country, and
then trying to clear a few hundreds or so by
tempting somebody to buy it for double what
it cost. We begin with ideals, and afterwards
we are glad to come down to the level of the
common speculator. Let us have no delusions
about it—there's nobody keener for necessary
money than we artists when we begin to feel
the years slipping by. I tell you it's hell!"
He gulped down a glass of wine and wiped
his lips.
"I see your point of view," said Wyndham;
"but I detest it. Better to fight to the end,
and stand alone."
"You make me tired," snapped Sadler again.
"There are plenty of women of the right sort
who'd prefer an artist with a name to some
damned bore of a booby who hasn't an idea in
his head. They're not fools, those women, I tell
you. They know there's no money in the
profession; they know you can't get everything
in life. Life's a compromise. You've got to
give and take. And when women have money,
you'll find they understand these things better
than when they haven't. A romantic boy runs
after a rosy-cheeked, bread-and-butter miss
    [Pg 84]
with nothing. The chit gives herself airs,
expects what they call 'an establishment'—the
rotten Philistines!—and then starts out to
please herself in every way, places her whims
and caprices first, and the happiness of the
household nowhere. The brute exacts every
sacrifice, and if she has to make the tiniest
concession, it rankles in her all her life."
Wyndham dissented. The same things might
happen even if the chit were a millionaire.
Sadler dissented in his turn. He insisted that
in woman money and good sense somehow
went together. It was a fact. "Look how
much happier French marriages are; look
how the husband and wife are comrades and
stick together. I tell you the French system
is the best in the world. Every girl brings
her husband a dowry of some kind, and they
both work together for the common good.
When the time comes it is easier to pass on
the money to their own daughter in their turn."
Wyndham contended that these things were
all a matter of temperament. "Even at the
best you'd have to keep your mind very elastic
as to the type of person, whereas, for my own
part," he declared, with the Lady Betty type in
his mind, "I not only hold on to my poetic
standpoint, but there are certain personal ideals
I couldn't possibly surrender."
"If you stick out too much for ideals, you'll
never get anywhere at all," said Sadler.
[Pg 85]
    "There are things one must stick out for,"
insisted Wyndham. "For instance, I could
never marry a woman who wasn't intelligent,
and certainly never one who wasn't beautiful."
"Intelligent—yes. But what is beauty?"
asked Sadler, shrugging his shoulders. "And
if you get a woman too obviously beautiful,
you'll have every man a mile round making
love to her, like flies round a honey-pot. It's
a sort of primitive law of the universe, and
it'll hold good for all time, I suppose."
"Oh, I should chance all that," said Wyndham.
"But what is beauty?" insisted Sadler.
"I know when I see it," laughed Wyndham.
"Give me character," said Sadler. "Unselfishness
and loyalty are the chief points, and a sort
of sweet reasonableness, of course. If a woman's
features aren't quite classical, it's wonderful
what a good dressmaker can do to set them
off. Waiter! Cigarettes!"
When ultimately the waiter brought the bill,
Sadler produced a silver sovereign purse, saw
with unconcealed horror that it contained only
half a sovereign, then felt in his pockets for
loose silver. "It's rather awkward," he said,
pulling the longest of faces. "I'm afraid I
haven't enough left on me after paying for my
colours and materials this morning. I shall
have to ask you to lend me a little."
A flash of surprise, an imperceptible raising of
the eyebrows; then swiftly Wyndham accepted
    [Pg 86]
the situation, and threw down one of Mary's
banknotes. "Sorry I've nothing smaller," he
said, smiling.
"All right, old fellow," said Sadler. "You
pay this time, I'll pay next time."
By the time the waiter brought Wyndham
his change, the conversation had passed on to
the last exhibition of the New English Art
Club.
Wyndham arrived home, after completing all
his business calls, late in the afternoon, and
found that the charwoman had finished her
work, and was replacing the furniture. A not
unpleasant tinge of turpentine permeated the
atmosphere. The oak presses, newly polished
with beeswax, shone and glowed even in the
shadow of the afternoon. For the first time
for months the hearth was clear of ashes and
cinders, and the stone scoured and whitened.
When the woman had gone he devoted a
few minutes to wandering about his domain,
enjoying this new sensation of spotlessness,
appreciating the professional hand, the skill
of which had never before seemed so legitimate
a theme for admiration. Then he sat down
and wrote to Mary as follows:—
 
"My dear little Mary,—Your sweet little
letter came this morning, and at a moment to
be of the greatest service to me. Fortune has
already smiled on me again. For the immediate
    [Pg 87]
present I have a portrait commission for
a couple of hundred guineas! A great fortune—is
it not?—after all these seasons of leanness!
You will guess that I am now ambitious of
getting to grips again with the big picture. I
have taken a deep and engrossing look at it
again, and I see how to resolve all its difficulties,
I daresay, by the spring. I know this
letter will make you happy, so, for Heaven's
sake, don't give another thought to yesterday
afternoon. I have been a great trial to you
for so long, and I want to recognise your
goodness and kindness in the only way I can,
and that is by—succeeding. My heart is in
the work, and your belief in me shall find
justification.
"I am keeping your money; it will remove
my last anxiety and enable me to work at
ease. I want you to come here as soon as I
have made some headway with the new work,
as I should like you to carry away the impression
on your next visit of something real
that has been accomplished.
[Pg 88]
The first sitting was eminently satisfactory.
Miss Robinson and her mother were punctual
to the very stroke of the clock, the new canvas
stood waiting on the smaller easel, and everything
was ready for an immediate start. Wyndham
had been able to obtain on hire a most
lovely Empire chair, with swans' heads for armrests,
and exquisitely mounted with chiselled
garlands. It did not take him long to find his
arrangement, and he saw now how shrewd had
been his idea of the Empire chair. It was remarkable
how Miss Robinson and the chair
composed together: it gave her distinction,
heightened her personality, and the profile at
once seemed to take precisely the quality which
he considered essential to his scheme. Her right
arm rested lightly along the swan's neck, and
the subtle cat's-eye, with its border of tiny
pearls, showed deliciously against the long
hand and fingers that emerged from the lace
lying loosely about the wrist. Her left hand lay
on her lap, and here the ancient green scarab
and the aquamarine made important decorative
    [Pg 89]
spots amid so great a mass of lace-work. The
nankin vase had been sent to the studio during
the morning, so that Wyndham was practically
able to build up his picture before him. Indeed,
so interesting was the result that it promised to
lessen by half the labour of creation.
And, now that he had taken the measure of
the Robinsons, he was easily master of the situation.
They were not merely in his hands as
clients who were availing themselves of his skill;
but surrendered as to one naturally high above
them. In posing Miss Robinson, he had once or
twice given utterance to his satisfaction in so
spontaneous a way that the tremulous sitter
had no easy task to maintain her immobility.
And then the kind and condescending explanations
with which he accompanied the many
little changes and refinements in the arrangement
from moment to moment were so clever
and penetrating! It was really wonderful how
points struck him, and what surprising improvements
he accomplished with a wave of the
hand and imperceptible subtle shiftings of Miss
Robinson's position. At last, after many scrutinisings
of his sitter from varying standpoints he
suddenly expressed the conviction "Splendid!"
Then—"Wait; the left hand slightly forward, I
think; so as to soften the bend of the elbow....
Ah, that's better. Now it couldn't possibly be
improved upon. Don't you think so, Mrs.
Robinson?"
[Pg 90]
    And the mother was as fluttered as her
daughter at this sudden appeal. "Alice looks
lovely," she broke out. "You know so well
how to make the best of people. I've never
seen her so beautiful."
"It's the beautiful accessories that produce
the effect," stammered Alice.
"They certainly produce some effect," conceded
Wyndham. "That is why they are there. But
it's you I'm painting, Miss Robinson. You are
the picture, and the picture will be you—and not
the surroundings."
He had arranged his palette, and fell to with
the brush in earnest, bidding her speak the
moment she felt fatigued. And, indeed, he
insisted on her resting frequently, though she
struggled bravely to keep the spells of work as
long as possible, and confessed to cherishing
ambitions in that direction.
Altogether the ladies were enchanted with
their experience. Like Mr. Robinson, they had
never before visited a studio, and it stirred them
with a sense of play rather than of work,
suggesting to them endless fun and merriment.
Pleased with the promise of the picture itself,
Wyndham chatted to them charmingly. Miss
Robinson, reassured and encouraged by his
gracious suavity, soon felt at her ease, and spoke
more freely than was her wont at any time. A
shade of animation came into her features, and
she was ready to break into a laugh at a jest, or
    [Pg 91]
to listen to a more serious little disquisition
with the intensest absorption. They were not
infrequent these charming little disquisitions of
Wyndham's, and his visitors thought it wonderful
(and told him so with engaging frankness)
that he should be able to go on speaking so
beautifully, and yet never relax his attention
from the painting.
He did not prolong the whole sitting beyond
two hours, when he expressed himself delighted
with this beginning, and offered them tea.
They accepted eagerly. "Will you be making
it, Mr. Wyndham?" they asked, their eyes
shining with amusement.
"Oh, I'm an old hand at it," he assured them.
He threw open a door which they had imagined
to indicate a cupboard. "Kitchen, scullery, and
every kind of domestic office rolled into one," he
explained, and promptly disappeared inside it.
They came peeping in gleefully, fascinated by
the rough white-washed doll's interior with its
miniature dresser, and they watched him fill
his kettle and put together the tea-things.
Then he emerged, set the kettle over the fire,
spread the table with a fresh cloth, and emptied
a large bag of cakes on to a fascinating plate
of old-seeming majolica.
"How nice!" said Miss Robinson, her face
shining with make-believe gluttony.
"There are some chocolate fingers among them—just
the sort you like," said her mother.
[Pg 92]
    "And tiny cream-cakes—just the sort you like,
mamma," returned Alice.
"How much tea do you put in the pot?"
inquired Mrs. Robinson.
"One spoonful for the pot, and one for each
cup," quoted Wyndham promptly. "And I am
always careful to warm the pot first with a little
of the hot water, and, in scalding the leaves, I
am equally careful to catch the water at the
exact moment it boils."
"If only our cook were as careful!" sighed
Mrs. Robinson.
Wyndham asked them if they would like their
tea in the Russian style. They didn't quite know
what it was, but it sounded interesting, so they
said they'd certainly like to try it. Whereupon
he fished out a large lemon, and, cutting it
up, put slices into their cups. They were in
a happy mood. They kept him sternly to the
rôle of host, refusing to spoil the fun by moving
a finger to help him. And when he had completed
all the processes, and poured the tea for
them, they praised its fragrance and delicacy to
the skies, and in a trice he was called upon to
renew the supply. They likewise declared the
cakes delicious, and ate them with affected greed.
Meanwhile he let them see some of his pictures;
showing off his tall, handsome figure, and occasionally
balancing his cup to a nicety, as he
talked and manipulated the canvasses from his
point of vantage. And when tea was over, he
    [Pg 93]
kept them some little time further, whilst he exhibited
his overwhelming masterpiece, which he
had kept to the end with its face turned away
from them. As he wheeled the big easel round,
and the picture came into view, a cry of admiration
broke from their lips. They were indeed
surprised to learn that it was "impossibly" unfinished;
to them it seemed that, if justice were
done, it should go straightway into the National
Gallery. Their pleasure and gratification were
extreme: they made not the least attempt to
hide their sense of the privilege of sitting at his
feet.
And, when they rose to depart, they were
absurdly grateful for the lovely afternoon he
had given them. Still staggering under the
magnificent impression of his brilliancy as an
artist, Mrs. Robinson summoned her courage,
and suggested that, if he hadn't any other engagement
that evening, he might as well dine
with them as dine alone. The argument struck
him as forcible, and he accepted with an unhesitating
simplicity that won her heart still further.
He was thanking her for her kindness, but she
raised her hands in horrified deprecation to
check him.
"Kindness," she cried. "Not at all, Mr.
Wyndham. We know we are not worthy of
the honour you do us."
"Yes, it is very good indeed of you to come,"
chimed in Miss Robinson, as they shook hands.
    [Pg 94]
She smiled at him quite frankly now, and her
soft fingers lingered a friendly moment in his.
He shut the door and turned back into the
studio; then, as the thought struck him for the
first time, his lips murmured almost involuntarily,
"I do believe Miss Robinson's half in love
with me." But he checked himself abruptly.
"Good heavens! what a caddish thing to say."
For, with his innate chivalry, he had certainly
never been addicted to the habit of imagining
that this or that woman was immediately
enamoured of him.
He returned to the portrait, lingered over it
a moment or two, putting in here a stroke, there
a touch or a smear. And somehow the train
of "caddish" thought persisted in his mind;
mastered his will and desire to suppress it.
Suppose Miss Robinson should fall in love with
him! He recognised her worth as a human
being, but instinctively he placed her beyond
a certain pale. It was not with that kind of
woman that one connected the idea of loving or
falling in love; the true type had been fixed for
him once for all. The person, too, perhaps! As
he had all but felt in his discussion of the subject
with Sadler, matrimony was really excluded from
his mind. His business in life was work, achievement—his
spirit was almost one of revenge for
the past.
Yet, suppose she should fall in love with him!
The speculation persisted, and again he tried to
    [Pg 95]
brush it aside. Well, he hoped to goodness that
she would not, and brusquely wielded his paintbrush.
In any case, it was all in the day's work.
Take his own case, for instance! Had he not
suffered atrociously during all the time he had
known Lady Betty? In his bitter poverty he
had hardly dared say even to himself that he
had met the woman of his aspirations!
Thus reflecting, he wheeled forward his
masterpiece again, and worked on it tentatively,
though he did not hope to make serious
headway till he should be able to do some
fresh sketches on the spot, and have a few at
least of the models pose to him over again.
But it was a pleasure to feel himself so eager-spirited
and hopeful. The Academy dare not
refuse it! The picture must establish his reputation!
He went on till the light failed, then, after
reading an hour or two, he dressed for his
engagement with the Robinsons.
He found the family had in no wise relaxed
from the pitch of ceremony to which his first
acquaintanceship had wrought them up. But
he reflected that, however indifferent the point
might be to him, it was just as well they should
feel it the right thing to meet him on his own
plane—as they understood it. Certainly it was
not without its amusing side—the spectacle of a
good honest family stimulated out of their customary
simplicity merely because a starving
    [Pg 96]
artist was to regale himself at their table!
And fare sumptuously again the artist did
with a vengeance!
He ate, too, with the satisfied contemplation
of a good day's work behind him. He had
somehow earned this provender, and the meal
had on that account an extra subtle relish.
Besides, he felt so much more at leisure and at
ease than on the former occasion. Then, his
visit had been an uncertain and not over-willing
experiment; now, he was acclimatised, his
impression of everything was cooler. The
greater self-possession of the family, too, made
the evening distinctly less of an effort for him.
Miss Robinson had largely got the better of her
distressing shyness, and her personality was
more in evidence. In her gentle way she was
rising to fill her important position as daughter
of the house.
Wyndham's impression of the Robinsons was
thus definite and final; as much derived from
their surroundings as from themselves. He
noticed, for example, that the house itself and
everything in it was of an extreme solidity.
Indeed, the substantial walls and solid wood-work
were so unusual in suburban construction,
which was associated in Wyndham's mind with
jerry-building, that he could not help remarking
thereon when he and Mr. Robinson were left to
their coffee and cigars. The old man was
greatly pleased at this piece of discernment
    [Pg 97]
and observation. He explained that he had
had the house built for him twenty years
before, and this solidity represented his dearest
philosophy. He hated nothing so much as a
superficial appearance which affected to be
superior to the underlying reality. "Soundness
and sincerity" had been his motto throughout
his life, and on that principle his prosperity had
been founded. Wyndham grew infected with
this unmetaphysical philosophy. The ground
he had trodden these last years seemed hideously
unstable to look back upon: there was really a
wonderful comfort in feeling himself here,
supported on so sure a flooring, surrounded
by these strong walls, and seated on this
thickly-cut mahogany arm-chair that was
framed to last three generations. The entire
furniture of the house was of the like soundness—even
the crimson couches of the drawing-room
were of a massive build, and the grand
piano, like this great dining-room table, had
the fattest of legs, and was resonant of strength
and durability.
And in tune with all this solidity was the solid
prosperity of Mr. Robinson himself: his banking
account seemed an embodiment of his life-principles,
supporting all this substantiality on
its imperturbable back, like the fabled Buddhistic
tortoise nonchalantly supporting the
world. Wyndham's own existence seemed feeble
by contrast, ready to go down before the merest
    [Pg 98]
puff of wind. He stretched himself luxuriously,
half incredulous, as if to assure himself it was
all no vain imagining; permitted Mr. Robinson
to recharge his glass with port; and lighted
another of those fragrant unpurchasable cigars.
It was so good to savour to the full this sensation
of prodigious security! Here one might
repose one's head: might hear the trump of
doom ring out, and pity the rest of the
universe.
After all, was there not more than a grain of
truth in Sadler's gospel? In boyhood you could
be adventurous; life stretched before you so
endlessly that you could afford to gamble with
it. But, when the years were racing by, you
longed for a little peace, a little happiness. This
constant uncertainty of outlook, this perpetual
wear of heart and brain, how it sapped life
at the very foundation!
To be "safe!" To be solidly established! The
import and significance of the conception sank
deep into him. Sadler was an older man, had
gone through all these phases. "Safety!" No
wonder his friend would not hesitate to barter
romance for all that the magic word doubtless
meant to him.
[Pg 99]
It was this keynote of "safety" that sounded
more in his mind, this appreciation of the stability
and comfort of the house at the corner
that grew upon him as his visits to the Robinsons
continued; for it naturally came to be
the settled thing that he should dine with the
Robinsons on most of the evenings that he was
not engaged elsewhere or otherwise. The argument
at first had been the same simple one that
he might as well join them as dine alone, and
there seemed no reason for refusing their excellent
fare and their admiring society. On the
other hand, as his ever-insistent pride demanded
that they should not suppose he was cut off
from his own world; and as, too, he felt subtly
required to live up to the social rôle which he
fancied they as yet attributed to him, he was
thus stimulated to pick up again some of the old
threads of his existence. He called on remote
aunts in Eaton Square; on retired military
uncles in South Kensington. And as the winter
advanced he began to find a pleasure in renewing
old acquaintanceships, enjoying everybody's
    [Pg 100]
surprise at his turning up again, smiling
and prosperous. It almost amounted to a self-vindication,
and he chuckled in secret, imagining
to himself their confusion.
And since he was emerging from his retirement,
there seemed no longer any reason why
he should not mix again in the art world, and
Sadler, who had come up to his studio on one or
two occasions, induced him to show himself at
some of the clubs. At the same time he began
to cultivate again some of the smaller coteries
of which he had once been so popular a light.
Other men, too, began to look him up, and, best
of all, an editor one day sent him an unhoped-for
commission—half-a-dozen drawings for a
magazine story by a widely-read author.
On the whole he was well satisfied to get back
into the world. It raised, or rather confirmed,
him in his own esteem, and saved him—as he
put it—from attaching too cheap a price to
himself. He was thus able to meet the
Robinsons from a real plane of vantage, and to
purge his mind of that slight consciousness of
charlatanism which had haunted him at the
outset.
Were he not taking ultimate success for
granted, without a renewal of the more bitter
side of the struggle, he would scarcely have
resumed all these old relationships. Yet the
precariousness of the future, summon his coolness
and confidence as he might, was a thing to
    [Pg 101]
be actively, even desperately, reckoned with.
The editor's cheque was a god-send, relieving
him of immediate anxieties, but he dared not
relax his efforts. His mornings were entirely
devoted to the big canvas now, and he rose early
to avail himself of every minute of light during
these short wintry days. He worked with a
passion and a concentration that he had never
yet known. Every fibre of his body bent to the
strain; every drop of his blood seemed to drain
its life into this frenzy to achieve. Withal,
a delightful sense of emancipation from the old
tired vision; a splendid consciousness of some
rich new store that had gathered in him during
the long period he had lain fallow!
Yet he shuddered and grew sick at the possibility
that the Academy might still reject him!
In that case, what had he to build upon beyond
the coming fee for Miss Robinson's portrait? As
the weeks went by, something of a panic began
to overtake him; the future seemed to be
bearing down on him grim and remorseless.
It was then that the well-garnished atmosphere
of the house at the corner seemed more
and more desirable and alluring. The flow
and abundance, the great glowing fires in this
raw winter, the naďve burning of incense at
his altar—all these things wooed him, wrapped
him in a certain balm. Ensconced with Mr.
Robinson, and sipping his after-dinner coffee,
he felt the load of his anxieties falling away
    [Pg 102]
from him, The heavy decanters of cut glass
glowed richly at him—the softness of old
whiskey, the ruby and golden glint of wines,
the clear light of cunning distillations. The
great pineapples, the clusters of grapes, the
baskets of peaches, all the fragrant store of
Nature's bounty set out on a table that yet,
by no stretch of imagination, could be conceived
as "groaning"—all seemed to shine fatter and
finer than at the houses of his society friends.
And here, too, his footing was of an unique,
admirable character. He had his place at the
board practically as a matter of right. They
ranked him as a god; yet felt that the balance
of debt was heavily against them. Whereas,
elsewhere, he was one of a crowd, a merely
casual figure among others not less important
even where he had been most intimate. He
knew that his own world, despite its breeding
and traditions, would yet at bottom despise him
and his art if he could not earn an excellent
livelihood by its practice. But the Robinsons
worshipped him for himself; and money was
almost a vulgarity sullying the high artistic
universe in which he moved and breathed and
had his being.
[Pg 103]
Meanwhile the sittings were progressing in a
manner to gratify the artist beyond his hopes.
Miss Robinson seemed to find some mysterious
inspiration in this decorative scheme, seemed to
fuse into it, to lend herself to design and
draughtmanship. Her face, too, took on subtler
phases, was touched to a measure of nobility!
Her dark eyes shone softly under their long
lashes; her expression was full of goodness and
charity. Wyndham prided himself that he had
put on the canvas something remote from the
lines of ordinary portraiture—a simple soul, a
gentle Lady Bountiful, yet not less dignified
in her way than the heroines of the grand
portraiture.
Mrs. Robinson did not insist on uninterrupted
chaperonage of her daughter; the ladies evinced
little fanaticism on this head. Often they
brought knitting or needle-work with them,
which occupied the mother in a peaceful, old-fashioned
way that Wyndham even found himself
admiring. Sometimes Mrs. Robinson would
appear only towards the end of the sitting,
    [Pg 104]
and sometimes she considerately announced
that Alice would have to come alone for the
next occasion as she herself was otherwise
busy. They both showed a tact and a good
taste in the matter which he fully recognised,
and for which in a way he was grateful.
In the natural resulting intimacy between
artist and sitter, Miss Robinson expanded,
opened out her mind; at first timidly and tentatively,
ultimately with freedom and confidence.
She confessed that her experience of life had
been nothing at all, since she had always lived
in quiet shelter. Her unsophisticated simplicity
was certainly engaging; he could see that she
was a sheet entirely unwritten upon, that her
soul was as naďve and trusting as her outward
being. She was refreshingly a child of nature—no
bewildering complexity here—no shadow of
affectation. She spoke without reserve of the
poverty of her childhood, and admitted that she
had disagreeable qualms of conscience about their
present riches. Was it right to enjoy so much
when one thought of the state of the world
generally? They debated the subject endlessly;
considering it elaborately from every conceivable
standpoint: and his personal authority went far
to allay her disquietude. His theories, backed up
by high philosophy and poetry, fascinated her
with their harmony and originality; he had
such a charming way of arranging the order
of things into a beautiful artist's scheme, whilst
    [Pg 105]
yet his sympathies were deep, true, and universal!
Sometimes he was conscious of his sophistry,
and felt ashamed of it afterwards. Was he
playing a comedy of sentiment? he asked himself.
Well, why not? Men and women made
a careful toilette for an evening party: why
not a spiritual toilette for their sentimental
relations?
The last words of his own thought, startled
him. Then it was a sentimental relation. "By
Jove, I must be careful!" he murmured to
himself. "She's an awfully good soul, and it
isn't fair to either of us." But the next moment
he shrugged his shoulders. Why trouble his
mind at all? Every relation between a man
and a woman who came into such close personal
touch was in a way sentimental—for the time
being! That was only the game of life, and
everybody had to play at it: the main thing
was to bow to the rules. Such temporary
relations might well be made as pleasant as
possible; but, when they were at an end, it
was incumbent on both parties to realise that.
Yet he could not help being increasingly
conscious of his power over her; it was so
pathetically visible. Their conversations were
often amusingly like those of kindly tutor and
obedient, inquiring child; she hanging on his
words in entire self-surrender, as he discoursed
so graciously and brought his points so lightly
    [Pg 106]
and simply within the range of her comprehension.
Sometimes, in following up an explanation,
he would be carried away by the flow of his
own ideas and his personal interest in the
matter, and then he would almost seem to be
addressing an equal in knowledge and experience.
But whenever that happened; whenever,
for example, he had let himself go too far into
the subtle mysteries of technique, he would find
himself regretting the unchecked surrender to
impulse, and remain strangely vexed about it
long afterwards. It was really soaring right
outside her limitations! She was not a Lady
Betty!
Lady Betty was so often in his mind now:
she seemed to have established herself more
definitely there than ever before, as if to keep
him up to the proper pitch in his judgments of
women. He bowed his head low to Lady Betty,
recognised her as his full intellectual equal—in
some aspects his superior. She was brains and
beauty. She was stateliness itself. She was
sunshine and sweetness. What was Miss Robinson
by the side of her? And as he asked himself
the question, an impression of Miss Robinson,
as he had recently come upon her suddenly
in the streets, blotted out the more dignified
version on his own canvas. How plain and
homely she had seemed in her unobtrusive walking-costume;
how insignificant her whole meek
bearing! Yes, that was the true Miss Robinson;
    [Pg 107]
caught photographically in the act of being herself,
and fixed by his vision for always—extinguishing
the gorgeously-dressed person of these
incessant festal evenings no less than his own
artistic edition of her.
In no respect could she claim to come up to
his measure. He appreciated all her virtues,
recognised her exceptional womanhood: by the
side of Lady Betty she was insipid, bourgeoise,
monotonously amiable.
Yet he could never arrive at so harsh a verdict
without relenting at a rebound. "It is curious,"
was his thought, "that in proportion as I get
more friendly with her and really like her, I
yet get harder and harder on her, poor child!
She's a jolly good sort! What a decent world
it would be if only there were ever so many
more women like her!"
And, by way of atonement, his manner at
their next meeting would warm and soften
sensibly; and it came upon him always with a
degree of surprise that, however he might feel
about Miss Robinson theoretically, her actual
society was always pleasant and comrade-like.
[Pg 108]
By mid-December the portrait needed only
the finishing touches, and, at his invitation,
several of his artist-friends came to see it.
Commendation of the work was general,
combined with a certain admiration of the
unknown sitter. Wyndham could not help
feeling that there was much speculation as
to her identity, and he gave himself all the
more credit as an artist for the qualities with
which he had endowed her, and which alone
bestowed upon her this interesting individuality.
Wyndham, who made it a point never to
have his work interrupted, had so arranged
these visits that none of his friends had
stumbled upon the Robinsons. To the not
infrequent query of "Who is she?" he usually
responded, with a half-humorous gleam in his
eye, "She might be Brown or Jones: as a matter
of fact she is Robinson—the daughter of a respectable
citizen of that ilk." Yet what more,
in sober truth, could he tell them about her?
He might have put it differently, but it was
    [Pg 109]
the information he supposed they wanted.
Yet one day he was to learn that this conciseness
had been construed as reserve. Sadler
lounged in one Sunday afternoon, when, as
it happened, Wyndham was awaiting his
sister, whose long-deferred visit had at last
been arranged for that day. And, in the course
of conversation, the visitor soon let slip out
a word that struck Wyndham like a blow.
Sadler had begun by referring to Miss Robinson
as "your friend;" but, presently, as he
still reviewed the painting, out came "your
fiancée."
"My fiancée! What the devil——?"
Sadler apologised; a shrewd meaning smile
clung about his massive jaws. "Of course
everybody understands that it's a secret, but
when you've heard of a thing, it's difficult to
keep it from slipping out, don't y' know."
"This is all too absurd!" Wyndham was
suddenly impelled to laugh.
"What's absurd about it? It seems likely
enough to me; else I shouldn't have believed
it."
"An artist cannot accept a commission
without being engaged to his sitter?" urged
Wyndham indignantly.
"Things have a way of getting about, you
know," maintained Sadler.
"They have indeed," said Wyndham.
"Well, what are you so annoyed at?" shouted
    [Pg 110]
Sadler. "You make me tired. There's nothing
discreditable in being engaged by rumour to
a wealthy and beautiful woman."
Wyndham laughed again. Beautiful! he
thought. If only Sadler had met the everyday
Miss Robinson shopping with her mother in
the Finchley Road!
"Seriously, do you consider her beautiful?"
he asked in a more genial tone, suddenly curious
to hear Sadler's real impression.
"What is beauty?" demanded Sadler. "The
moment you can define it, it ceases to be
beauty. Its essence is elusiveness. A touch,
a flash—and you've got it! The lines here
are not classical, but your Miss Robinson has
distinct individuality. The eyes are fine. She
looks the sort that would stick to a man.
Gee-rusalem! I shouldn't mind having a shot
at her myself. Look here, old fellow, will
you introduce me to her? If there's nothing
in it for you, give me a chance."
"Goodbye," said Wyndham sweetly. "You
won't think me rude, but I've an engagement
in a minute or two."
"Right!" said Sadler. "I'll be off. Goodbye,
Wyndham, old chap. You're a real damned
old swell. Gee-rusalem! you're just great at
getting rid of people."
Left alone, Wyndham gave way to annoyance
again. It was a fine thing! Artists themselves
ought to know better than to indulge in tittle-tattle
    [Pg 111]
of that kind. He worked himself up
into a towering rage. Then Mary rang the
bell, and he had abruptly to recall his graciousness.
It was her first visit to the studio since the
new turn of affairs; her multifarious duties
as worker among the sick and poor after her
day's teaching leaving her so little freedom.
They had of course seen each other in the
interim; for Wyndham had himself looked in at
the "Buildings" in Kensington whenever his
engagements had taken him that way, and he
had been fortunate enough just to catch her
at home for a few moments on several occasions.
The poor girl had been overflowing with
happiness—had not a window on the skies
been opened, too, for her? And though both
had so far delicately avoided all reference
to that old painful interview, she had yet
often been impelled to throw herself at his
feet in contrition. Only she felt that he, in
his great magnanimity, would be hurt by such
an abasement.
When he brought the picture well into the light,
her first exclamation was, "Oh, how beautiful!"
Then she kissed him impulsively.
The tribute gave him more pleasure than
all the professional praise that had been
showered on the portrait.
"What a charming girl! I should like to
know her," were her next words. "She has
    [Pg 112]
such a good face, and I'm sure she's every bit
as beautiful as you've painted her."
Wyndham's vexation at his rumoured
engagement seemed to take wing and be off
into the airs. He even felt a shy pride in Miss
Robinson. "I'm sure you'll like her," he said.
"Shall I arrange a tea here one of these days
before Christmas?"
"That would be lovely." Mary's voice was
full of enthusiasm. "School breaks up in a
day or two, and I shall have so much more
time to myself," she added, still gazing at the
picture.
"Any criticism?"
"None," she returned. "You have caught the
character with rare genius. She is so simple
and unaffected; one could repose absolute trust
in her.... You see," she continued, smiling,
"I feel so strong an interest in her as being the
beginning of your good fortune. I have a sort
of conviction—don't laugh at me, please—that
it has come to stay."
When he poured out her tea, she suddenly
laughed, remembering she had a message for
him which she had forgotten to deliver in the
absorption of contemplating Miss Robinson;
in fact, there was a heap of things she had
wanted to talk over. The most important, at
any rate, was the question of his Christmas
holiday. Aunt Eleanor wanted Mary to spend
the two or three weeks with her, but she was
    [Pg 113]
anxious that Wyndham, too, should join their
little party over the New Year—since she now
understood that he had emerged to some extent
from his austere seclusion. A refusal Aunt
Eleanor would take to heart—she naturally
regarded her own home as his, as the place to
which his mind should spontaneously turn at
such a season.
Wyndham welcomed the invitation. It was
more than two years since he had passed any
time in Hertfordshire, and the visit itself, which
last Christmas he had sullenly avoided, would
afford him the greatest satisfaction. Much as
he appreciated the Robinson housekeeping,
it was a relief to feel definitely that he was
not staying the year-end at his studio, with
no resource save their cordial hospitality.
Mary went off in great elation. "I don't
know when I have felt so happy as to-day,"
she declared, as she kissed him. "I leave my
best love for the work—and for the lady as
well," she added, smiling.
It was arranged on the door-step that they
should travel down to Hertfordshire together,
and Mary insisted he must leave her to look
up the trains, and make all the arrangements.
"It is just the sort of task I enjoy,"
she assured him. "Looking up trains to get
into the country always sends me into a sort
of happy excitement; it is part of the joy of
anticipation."
[Pg 114]
    Wyndham was left, somehow, a greater
admirer of Miss Robinson. He studied her
again in his own picture, and accepted her as
a far finer creature than he had realised—even
allowing for this idealisation of her in paint.
"My feeling against her must be purely morbid,
and it's really too bad when she likes my
society so much!—she has no idea how much
she shows it." Her unsophistication, hitherto a
deficiency, began to take on a certain charm.
How refreshing this womanly simplicity in a
world of showy coquettes and chattering,
feather-headed females! Even Mary, who was
so shrewd and fastidious, had been compelled
to pay her homage. The Robinson family was
charming! What fine old-world courtesy in the
father—many a born aristocrat might well take
a lesson from him! How unassuming, too, the
mother, full of quiet virtues and womanly
excellencies!
And Mary's significant smile remained with
him. Good gracious! was she, too, taking the
sort of thing for granted? This power of suggestion
from every side was annoying: still—it
would not be right to let that prejudice him!
Wyndham paced to and fro feverishly. Why
should he not——?
It was the first time he was impelled to put
the question to himself in clear seeking. Obscure
in his mind these last weeks, it crystallised
itself brusquely—surprised him with its swift
    [Pg 115]
definiteness: but he broke it off, all unprepared
to meet it yet. He had a shamefaced remembrance
of his matrimonial conversation with
Sadler, of the lofty convictions he had then
expressed.
Well, he had spoken honestly, he argued, and
his convictions had changed not a jot. "Only
now that I am face to face with the actual
possibility, I see aspects of the case that then
escaped me. Till now I have always viewed
marriage as the great central fact to which the
whole of life has to converge, from which everything
else takes its significance. Hence it was a
case of the ideal or nothing—there seemed no
other choice. But now I recognise that matrimony
that is not ideal may yet take its place
as an accessory to life, may be accepted as a
good without filling the whole horizon."
He resumed his feverish pacing. Well, why
should he not seize an opportunity which presented
itself so favourably? By the loss of his
money he had become reduced in his own world
to the rank of a mere "detrimental." Had he
not already felt that sufficiently? He laughed
harshly at the memory. No, no, a Lady Betty
he could not hope to marry. Such wondrous
beings did not grow on every bush; nor did life
permit of his setting out in search of one. This
holding out for the perfect ideal only meant
humiliation and sadness in the end. The world—the
hard world of fact—was like that, and
    [Pg 116]
you had to take it as you found it. No folly
could be greater than to forget that life was as
it was, and not as you thought it ought to be!
Yet he vacillated again. Did he really want
to marry at all? Had he not decided—wholly,
absolutely, irrevocably—that his business in life
was work? Though he would never have
spoken of it to another, he was proud in his
heart of his sentimental loyalty to Lady Betty,
and marriage seemed almost an unfaithfulness.
Better perhaps to bend himself sternly to the
task before him!
Yes, but this task before him—unaided, he
could never accomplish it. Let him confess it
now, since he was master again of his full sanity.
He had been beaten, smashed! But for this
timely piece of good fortune all would have
been at an end by now. The Robinson support
once withdrawn, he would not be strong enough
to stand. He had gauged his powers in the
great contest, and, in this moment of supreme
lucidity, he foresaw he must be conquered again.
One portrait could not suffice for the rebuilding
of his future; even on the money side his fee
would be absorbed immediately. And the finishing
of the great picture meant more outlay. To
try to "fake" it without proper models would
be a folly of follies—far better to abandon it
altogether. His blind optimism at the turn of
things had certainly been of benefit to him, had
stimulated him to his best; but with this first
    [Pg 117]
piece of work practically accomplished, the
moment for estimating and facing the situation
with mathematical exactitude had certainly
arrived.
He could not fight the world alone. However
he might desire nothing in life save self-consecration
to work, he could not even achieve
that much without reinforcing his own strength
by means that were unexceptionable and
honourable.
He came to an abrupt stop as the words
swept from his brain. "By Jove, that hits the
nail pretty square!" he murmured, his lips
ashen. Naked and ugly, his primary motive
stood before him as in a mirror. For one clear
moment he saw himself brutally, and shuddered.
"I am not in love with her. If she were dowerless,
I should never have worked myself up to
this stage of appreciation; I should never have
dressed up the Robinson menage to make it
palatable. The portrait would never have
come out like this. I should have dashed in a
brutal modern study of a plain woman, full of
bravura passages. If I am going in for a thing
of this kind, let me at least be honest with
myself."
And then he laughed with the irony of it all.
He, the lover of poesie; he, the fastidious
gourmet in things of the spirit; who had
followed the cult of all that was lyrical and
exquisite; he planned to mate beneath him for
    [Pg 118]
the sake of crude money. Faugh! A vulture
hovering over a heap of carrion!
But the violence of the metaphor brought a
reaction. "Rubbish!" he murmured, and paced
again. The pacing grew into a striding. Up
and down the length of the studio he stamped,
face and eyes working intensely. "I am
exaggerating. I am morbid about it all; I am
rushing to the other extreme. When have I
ever hidden from myself that the thing would
be primarily a means to my great impersonal
end—I may as well admit it has been in my
mind all along! What could be a greater
degradation than my old way of living? Poor
Mary! Why, I owe it to her as a duty to put
an end to all this misery. I'd face anything on
earth now to make up to her for the past!
Besides, the idea is not at all so inhuman as I am
trying to make out. In a mildish sort of way,
of course, I am really fond of Miss Robinson.
Her virtues are a reality! She is plain, I admit—very
plain; but my eye has learnt to see her its
own way—the way of the portrait!"
Brusquely he flung his hesitations from him.
Why should he not marry Miss Robinson? Even
in the driest aspect of the case, the match was
not inequitable. The "crude money"—yes, let
him use the words deliberately—the "crude
money" on her side; on his a full equivalent in
his personal self, his no doubt brilliant career
once sordid matters were disposed of, and a sphere
    [Pg 119]
of existence that was obviously interesting to her.
If he brought no immediate fortune himself,
his future earnings, once he were free to work
without anxiety, might well be considerable.
What was there in the idea to wound his pride?
How absurd his metaphor of the vulture!
And then he turned to dwell again with relief
at the pleasanter aspects of the case. Even if
he were not attaining to passionate poetic
dreams, he would yet be carrying into effect a
charming domestic ideal of peace and tranquillity.
And the very poetry of marriage began
to invest Miss Robinson with something of its
own glamour. He saw her in a bridal veil
holding a big bouquet. His enthusiasm
mounted.
And Mary's voice seemed to echo again in
the studio: "What a charming girl! She has
such a good face, and I'm sure she's every bit
as beautiful as you've painted her." He almost
felt himself blushing in embarrassment; it was
as if he himself were being commended. "She
is so simple and unaffected," went on Mary's
voice with its unmistakable ring of conviction.
"One could repose absolute trust in her."
How shrewd and true was his sister's reading
of the character! Moreover, Mary had confessed
to an almost superstitious thrill at
gazing on the features of the woman who had
been the beginning of his good fortune. Could
he say that he was entirely free from the same
    [Pg 120]
sort of superstitious sentiment? Alice Robinson
had begun his good fortune; why should
she not complete it? If only that confounded
set of fools hadn't started their silly tittle-tattle!
Undoubtedly there was a substratum of truth
and good sense in the views so stoutly and
passionately maintained by Sadler; only Sadler
imagined it was possible to compromise, to step
down from the ideal and yet find great happiness.
He himself would give up the dream of
happiness in the ideal sense: his would be
frankly a case of convenience, though were it
not for the many virtues of Miss Robinson, his
mind would never have become reconciled to it.
No! not even were she as rich as Croesus. He
must do that amount of justice to himself. At
his age he could appreciate the importance of
the rarer qualities of character in his life's mate—loyalty,
modesty, devotion! He would be
making a wise marriage! not a sordid one. He
would be choosing the deep calm of life instead
of the elusive and often mocking flash of superficial
passion and beauty.
And, on his part, he was prepared to be the
best and most dutiful of husbands!
[Pg 121]
When, that same evening, Wyndham was
ushered into the Robinsons' drawing-room, he
was mildly surprised to find a sedate gentleman
there in familiar conversation with the family.
The stranger vibrated with neuter lights; yet
dry, clean lights. Tall spare figure, hair and
close-trimmed beard, tailed morning coat and
sharp-creased trousers, brow and visage, air and
movement—all a chiaroscuro in grey; accentuated
curiously, too, against the host's correct
black and white, and the laces and chiffons and
shimmering brilliance of the ladies.
"My friend, Mr. Shanner," said Mr. Robinson,
introducing them; and Wyndham remembered
at once that the Robinsons had mentioned Mr.
Shanner occasionally as an intimate of the
house who was away in the New World for the
interests of the concern in which he was junior
partner.
But Mr. Shanner, though he shook hands
cordially, yet gave him a swift look up and
down that had something of antagonism in it.
And in Wyndham, too, arose some obscure
    [Pg 122]
enmity, likewise masked by the conventional
friendliness of greeting.
"As I was just telling Mr. Robinson," said
Mr. Shanner, with an obviously forced smile
that yet illumined the man, broke through and
flashed away the greyness for an instant, "I
hadn't the least idea that I was going to
stumble on an evening party. I feel quite out
of it." His voice was full of affable vibrations,
and he smiled again, with a general nod that
indicated all this ceremonial get-up around him.
"I am sure we shall do our best to amuse
you," returned Wyndham, naturally associating
himself with the family, but feeling hopelessly
out of sympathy with the new-comer.
Miss Robinson had reddened as the two men
approached each other, but on her father's
again mentioning that Mr. Shanner was just
back from his tour in the New World, she came
into the conversation bravely, and rose above
her shade of embarrassment.
"Have you ever crossed to America, Mr.
Wyndham?" she asked, smiling at him.
"No," he confessed; "though America has
largely crossed to me."
Mr. Shanner looked puzzled.
"How do you mean—America has crossed to
you, Mr. Wyndham?" he asked.
"Oh, I hope I did not seem to suggest that I
have been a centre of pilgrimage," laughed
Wyndham. "Only, in past years, when I was
    [Pg 123]
running a good deal about the Continent, I
often used to live with New York, Chicago, and
Boston, for considerable periods."
"Mr. Wyndham has often given us charming
sketches of the Americans," chimed in Miss
Robinson.
"Oh, I don't pretend to be much of a hand
at that sort of thing," said Mr. Shanner, with
pleasant humility. "I can only just give my
impressions as a plain observer. But then I'm
a man of affairs, and nothing at all of an artist
or a literary man." Wyndham observed how
careful and honeyed his delivery was; it seemed
to advertise a perpetual self-consciousness of
being a gentleman.
"Mr. Shanner is unduly modest," put in Mr.
Robinson. "His descriptions are most entertaining."
"Well, of course, I can speak of things within
my experience, and make myself fairly clear—in
my own way, of course. But, from all that you
people have been telling me, I shouldn't attempt
to emulate Mr. Wyndham."
Mr. Shanner gave a strange little laugh, full
of insincere echoes; which failed in its implication
of good-fellowship, and only emphasised
the ill-nature it was meant to cover.
Wyndham was not a little bewildered; conscious
of some suppressed excitement in the
man, some ruffling of the ashen chiaroscuro.
This impression was deepened when dinner was
    [Pg 124]
announced, and Mr. Shanner made what was
perilously like a dart to the side of Miss Robinson
and offered his arm. Wyndham stepped
out of their way, bowing as they passed him.
At table Mr. Shanner gave no undue signs
of modesty or self-distrust, but talked about
"things within his experience" with the utmost
unconstraint. An unmistakable note of assurance
animated the honeyed voice, which
soared away occasionally, yet sedulously recollected
itself; drew back within bounds, reverted
to the lesser pitch and the deliberate
pace. Mr. Shanner was at pains to let it be
seen that he was a man of affairs on the grand
scale, one to be ranked with diplomatists and
ambassadors. In the course of business he had
come into contact with exalted personages of
almost every kingdom, and had corresponded
voluminously with some of them. He carried
an assortment of their letters in his pocketbook,
which lay on the table as a perpetual
source of illustration. He spoke of some of
these great ones of the earth with extreme
familiarity—he had been closeted with them
on confidential business, and he flattered himself
he had counted for something in certain
important decisions of policy. And, as he
warmed to the conversation, far from being
"out of it," he was king of the table, his
honeyed words emerged endlessly. There was
a distinct flash of challenge in his occasional
    [Pg 125]
glances at Wyndham—he was not to be overborne
by the presence of any aristocrat on earth.
And not content with all this insistent implication
of his personal importance, he even
related by way of pleasant interlude how, with
ear to one private telephone and mouth to
another, he had smartly seized a sudden opportunity,
and, buying an incoming cargo through
the first telephone and selling it through the
second, had netted twenty thousand pounds for
his firm. Whereas Wyndham amused himself
trying to measure the depths of Mr. Shanner's
contempt should he suspect that the sole resources
of his vis-ŕ-vis were the guineas to be
paid him from Mr. Robinson's treasury.
It was evident, too, that Mr. Shanner was
more familiarly at home in the house than
Wyndham. He called its master "Robinson";
most significant of all, Miss Robinson was Alice
to him. Indeed, his manner, as he sat next to
her, was almost proprietorial; at any rate it
had easy, affectionate suggestions about it.
She, however, had fallen back into a shy constraint;
though she emerged at moments, lifting
her deep-glancing eyes to Wyndham and
flashing him the friendliest of messages.
Wyndham understood by now; knew also that
it was clear to Mr. Shanner that they were
rivals—that a mutual detestation lurked
beneath their pleasant amenities. He had
gathered also that Mr. Shanner meant to show
    [Pg 126]
that he did not concern himself one jot about
the new star that had appeared in the firmament
during his absence. But Wyndham came
off easily the victor, displaying for Mr. Shanner
a charming deference, and pursuing the unruffled
tenour of his entertaining conversation without
manifesting in the slightest degree any of the
emotions that the evening had raised in his
breast. Such perfect unconsciousness of
matters intensely present, Mr. Shanner could
not hope to emulate. It was clear he was uneasily
alive to the contrast—that he had the
growing consciousness of defeat. His note of
self-emphasis rang louder, though smothered
continuously.
The war continued after dinner; Mr. Shanner
eagerly turning the pages of Miss Robinson's
music, and so entirely appropriating her that
Wyndham could scarcely contrive to approach
her during the rest of the evening. However,
Wyndham smilingly kept his place in the background,
disdaining to assert himself or to enter
openly into emulation; though there were opportunities
he, the socially experienced, might
have seized adroitly. After all, why annoy this
admirable, upright gentleman? Even as it was,
poor Mr. Shanner was fated to receive one or
two sharp slashes; as when, in the course of describing
the sittings, Mrs. Robinson let it be
clearly seen that she was not always present to
chaperone her daughter in the studio. At that
    [Pg 127]
moment Mr. Shanner's face was an extraordinary
face to look upon; although he affected to
laugh and smile, and packed even more honey
into his voice. All of which forced sweetness
notwithstanding, it began to be evident that the
topic of the picture, and of Wyndham's work
in general, bored him considerably. At last,
when Mrs. Robinson innocently suggested that
Wyndham should ask him to come to see the
portrait at the studio, he deprecated the idea
with some degree of vehemence. He really
was very busy in the daytime now. Besides,
he added pleasantly, on principle he never cared
to see an article whilst yet on order; time
enough to examine it when it was tendered for
delivery. He smiled meaningly at Wyndham as
if to accentuate that these commercial metaphors
were merely by way of pleasantry.
"And then it's so extremely difficult for an
outsider to get any idea of an unfinished
picture, and of course I don't profess to be a
judge of art in any case, though I know what I
like."
So, if Mr. Wyndham would excuse him, he
added, he would rather wait till the portrait had
come home, and had been hung in the house.
It was not without difficulty that Wyndham
found his opportunity of arranging the little
tea-party at which the ladies were to meet his
sister. Miss Robinson was to give him the final
sitting on the Tuesday; so it was therefore
    [Pg 128]
agreed that the tea should take place on that
day after work was over. The sitter herself
crimsoned deeply at learning that Mary "had
admired her immensely," and her eyes glistened
in a way that showed her pleasure and
rapturous appreciation.
[Pg 129]
The definite figure of Mr. Shanner with his
magnificent appropriation of Miss Robinson
merely impelled Wyndham to smash up this
rival at once and have done with the business.
The evening had obscured all the repugnance
that lay in the depths of him; had stimulated
roseate conceivings of possible felicity.
On the Tuesday he found his opportunity.
Miss Robinson came alone, explaining that her
mother would not appear till the time fixed for
the tea-party. The weather was rigorously
wintry now, and a biting wind blew in as the
door was opened. A new layer of snow had
fallen during the last hour, and Miss Robinson
had come across wrapped in a big, heavy cloak.
He ushered her through the ante-room with a
charming air of solicitude, to which she vibrated
like a struck harp, and gave him the softest and
tenderest intonations of her voice. He helped
her off with the cloak, and hung it away carefully,
the whilst she stooped and warmed her
long hands at the lavishly heaped-up fire. Her
throat and arms now showed at their best, and
    [Pg 130]
her face had some strange, almost mystic
undertone of happiness. As she bent down
there before his eyes, she completely blotted out
the impression of the insignificant plain woman
whom he had suddenly come upon in the streets;
of the everyday Miss Robinson that at one time
had almost become an obsession. At that
moment she was well-nigh the idealised figure
he had painted. Yet there was something even
subtler in her which he had missed, and knew
that he had missed. But, studying his own
work again, he saw that that was just as well;
for the picture existed as a separate creation, a
piece of painting first and foremost, in which
he had exhibited the cleverness of his brush. It
was paint—distinguished, intellectual paint—more
than it was human portraiture; in spite of
all the significance with which he had tried to
invest it. As this new truth dawned upon him,
he kept glancing from sitter to canvas, and from
canvas to sitter, with a strange, surprised interest.
But her hands suddenly arrested his
attention, and he became aware that, for the
first time since he had known her, they were
absolutely bare of rings.
"You have no rings to-day," he remarked, his
voice showing his surprise. "I might have
wanted to touch up the hands."
Her colour deepened unaccountably. "I
thought the hands were finished," she breathed,
all of a flutter. "Shall I go back for them?"
[Pg 131]
    "What a goose it is!" he said lightly, and she
smiled again, as if pleased they were on so
charmingly intimate a footing.
"Shall we not need them?" she asked.
"I think not," he answered, studying the
hands a little. "You were perfectly right; they
had best remain as they are."
She took the pose, and for a minute or two he
worked silently; she maintaining the perfect
stillness that had at first been her cherished
ambition. He was still pondering about her
bare hands and her confusion at his having
observed them, and light came to him. Was it
to show him that no man—not even Mr.
Shanner—had any claim on her? After the
close attentions he had witnessed the other
evening, was she afraid he might infer that
some understanding existed between herself
and Mr. Shanner?—that one of these rings,
even if not a formal pledge, might be his and
worn for his sake? Her neglect of such
favourite trinkets to-day was then to indicate
that no one of them had any special sentimental
interest for her!
"You are sitting perfectly to-day," he
presently remarked. "It doesn't tire you?"
"What an unkind suggestion! I thought I
had got beyond the amateur stage long
ago."
"I'm sorry. You didn't hear, though, the
beginning of my remark."
[Pg 132]
    "I agreed with that," she answered with a sly
humour.
"So that it hadn't to be reckoned. Do you
know all women are like that?"
She considered. His brush made strokes.
"Like what?" she asked at last.
"If you pay them the greatest of tributes,
but are incautious enough to hint the tiniest of
qualifications, the tribute dwindles to nothing,
and they remain tremendously annoyed at the
suggestion of imperfection."
"Am I like that?"
"You were just now."
"I was such a bother and a hindrance to you
when we started," she explained. "I used to
get tired every few minutes. And now at
last, just when I am flattering myself on my
improvement——"
"You take me too seriously," he broke in.
"You were serious," she insisted.
"Serious—yes; in so far as I was afraid
you were tired. I didn't even mean it as a
qualification of my tribute; it was only genuine
concern for you."
"How stupid of me!" she exclaimed.
"I ought to have felt that at once."
There was another spell of silence; he
intensely absorbed in his brush, she obviously
considering.
"I am not really like that," she said at last.
He stood away from the canvas, glanced
    [Pg 133]
critically at certain points, levelled his mahl-stick
at her, took up a rag, and wiped a bit
out. "Like what?" he asked.
"Like women."
"But you are. You see, it is sticking in your
mind." He smiled wickedly.
"You fight too hard," she pleaded.
"I'm sorry," he said remorsefully. "I shall
not do it again."
"Oh, I'm not a bit hurt," she protested.
"I was only thinking the point over."
"I want to hear what you were thinking."
His smile and tone were meaningly affectionate,
as if they would add "little child."
"I meant that I should never really be hurt
by qualifications. I have never been used to
having nice things said to me. I certainly do
not deserve tributes, but I know I deserve all
possible qualifications."
"Oh, if you please! I'll not allow even
Miss Robinson to say such slanderous things
about so valued a friend of mine."
"So I have been slandering a friend of yours!
I'm so sorry. Forgive me."
"I suppose I must—though I find it hard—very
hard."
"I do believe you are paying me a tribute,"
she laughed. "Now for the qualifications.
You shall see how stoical I am."
"Qualifications—none!" He threw down his
brushes and palette, as if to emphasise the
    [Pg 134]
declaration. "I'm tired first," he sang out gaily.
"Let us rest."
"There!" she exclaimed. "What a triumph
for me!"
"But you say it so gently that it is a pleasure
to concede you the victory. You are an ideal foe."
"Oh, if you please, I don't want to be a foe.
... How cold it is!" She stooped and held her
hands again to the fire.
"No, child," he said gently, "of course we
aren't foes. We are very good friends indeed,
aren't we?" He held out his hand, as if to
clench the understanding, so clearly and warmly
acknowledged.
She was all a-flutter again, though, as was her
habit, she covered it up with a smile. "Very
good friends!" she returned, with conviction,
and she put her hand in his, and let it linger
there. "I have always lived reserved and to
myself," she added thoughtfully. "You may
think it strange, but I have never had a friend
before—not even a woman friend."
"I can well understand your shrinking away
from people. No doubt most people would jar
on you."
"It would hurt me if I thought that. I should
not like to despise anybody. I should have
loved to have friends: only I have never had the
gift of making them. Sometimes I am thankful
that I am not brilliant—I might so easily have
become unendurable and full of self-conceit."
[Pg 135]
    "Ah, you are something better than brilliant,"
he exclaimed. "It needs an exceptional spirit
to appreciate you. You are so much out of the
ordinary in every way, in looks——"
"No, no," she interrupted in protest. "I have
no looks. I have no illusions about that."
"Look at your own portrait," he insisted.
"I say it is the kind of beauty it needs a gift
to appreciate. In beauty—as in everything
else—the crowd runs after the obvious and the
commonplace."
"You are the first that ever thought I
possessed good looks. You have given them
to me."
"I have not even done you justice. I have
omitted more than I have suggested. My sister
thinks you are beautiful; all my artist friends
who have seen the picture share her opinion."
She was silent, almost distressed; she could
not meet his gaze, but turned her eyes away.
"It gave me pleasure to hear you appreciated,"
he continued. "You are above conventional
compliments. I withdraw what I said before.
You are not like other women."
Her breath came and went as she listened,
but she smiled bravely.
"At any rate I am not like some women.
I never could take any of the deeper aspects
of life in a merely frivolous spirit. With me
it is a loyal, deep friendship, or nothing."
He took her hand again. "Believe me, dear
    [Pg 136]
child, the friendship on my part is equally
loyal and deep. It is for life."
"For life," she murmured, suddenly grown
pale.
He dashed in, determined to strike home.
"I prize you at your full worth, since I am
one of those who can measure it. I have the
deepest affection for you. I believe I could
make you happy. Don't you understand? I
offer you my whole life—that is, if you think
me worthy."
"Worthy!" she echoed, in dazed distress.
"How can you think me worthy of you!
I have lived in narrow retirement. I am
nothing."
He seized both her hands now. "No more
of this. I ask for your promise."
"I love you with all my heart and soul.
But I am not good enough for you."
"I thought we agreed you were not like
other women, and yet there is this stiff-necked
obstinacy." He drew her nearer to him, and
kissed her on the lips. "It is settled—you are
to be my wife."
His domination seemed to hypnotise her.
"Yes, I will do my best to make you a perfect
wife, dear," she murmured, as if bowing to his
irresistible will.
He held her hands tighter, and looked into
her face as if proudly. She met his look with
glistening eyes: she was deathly pale now, and
    [Pg 137]
her lips, too, were colourless. Then abruptly
she drew her hands from him, and, as if impelled
on some tide of womanhood that rose
in high music above all hesitations, above
the fluttering timidity of her whole life, she
threw her arms round his neck, and kissed his
lips with a long abandonment.
"I am now almost afraid of your sister," she
whispered presently. "I shall feel on my trial."
"But she has fallen in love with you already,"
he reassured her again. "And Mary is the
sweetest and gentlest soul in the world."
"I know I shall love her," she said. Her
head hung down a moment in meditation.
"But let us continue the work now, dear.
I know you wish to have it finished to-day."
But he had little now to add to it, and he
had made his last stroke before the dusk of
the afternoon overtook him.
[Pg 138]
Wyndham's career as an engaged man began
amid a radiance of enthusiasm. When his
prospective mother-in-law arrived for the tea-party,
she was enchanted at the news, declaring,
after the first joyous surprise, that it was the
wish that lay nearest to the hearts of herself
and her husband. And, presently, when Mary
appeared, and was introduced not only to "the
original of the portrait she had so admired,"
but also to "a very sweet Alice" who was to
be her sister, "I guessed it," she broke out,
kissing Miss Robinson impulsively. "I am so
delighted."
Heigh, presto! In a trice the three women
were chatting away like a group of old
neighbours! Wyndham became discreetly busy
with tea-things.
Of course the Robinsons insisted on Mary's
dining with them, and so there was a happy
little reunion in the evening. Mr. Robinson
thrilled visibly with the honour of having Mary
at his board, and he congratulated Wyndham
with pathetic cordiality, his voice husky with
emotion, his eyes streaming with tears.
[Pg 139]
    Such was the auspicious beginning. But the
universe seemed to vibrate to white heat as
a wider population entered into the jubilation.
Mary was the first to spread the news, her
letters reaching the Hertfordshire circle express.
In the twinkling of an eye, as it appeared to
Wyndham, a flood of letters poured through the
slit in his door. He had done that which makes
every man a hero for the moment, and dim
figures with whom he had been out of touch
for endless years started up again on the horizon,
palpitatingly actual, athrob with goodwill. In
the Bohemian world, too, confirmation of the
former rumour was not slow to be noised
abroad, and Sadler hastened to Hampstead
and burst in upon him, the massive head enthusiastically
aglow; declaring that he had never
for a moment taken Wyndham's denial seriously,
and roaring out his congratulations and envy
with an exuberance of virile expletive.
At Aunt Eleanor's the Christmas festivities
were struck in a gayer key in his honour. Odes
of welcome and triumph were in the air. And
he was glad enough to be among his own world
again; living in the way that meant civilisation
to him, and breathing homage and consideration—lionised
by his equals! It was as though the
fatted calf had been killed for him, after his
prodigal riot of penury. He expanded in this
atmosphere of adulation, amid all these manifestations
in honour of the brilliant artist and
    [Pg 140]
the Prince Charming who loved and was loved
idyllically. His engagement seemed to him
now most admirable—the world's sanction had
invested it with warm and pleasant lights.
Certainly nobody deprecated or criticised the
projected alliance; though it was known to be
with middle-class people who were not in
Society, but merely quiet folk of wealth and
respectability. Mary's enthusiasm had gone
a long way in anticipating any possible caste
objections, and the word of approval went round
from one to another in the usual parrot-like
way in which public opinion has formed itself
since creation. There seemed in fact to be a
very conspiracy of approbation. Wyndham had
done wisely; and voices dropped impressively
to dwell on the Robinson millions—with the
obvious implication that that is what wealthy
middle-class people are for—to have the most
promising of their kind promoted into the upper
classes.
But the Robinson fortune, though not inconsiderable,
was not the romantic one of rumour.
Mr. Robinson had already performed his duty
of writing to Wyndham on the financial aspect
of the alliance, and in so charming a way that
Wyndham had at once paid him the tribute
of "jolly decent." Since they had not had
the opportunity of disposing of the subject
viva voce, had said the old man, he conceived it
perhaps to be an obligation on his part to do
    [Pg 141]
so without delaying further; after which these
matters would of course pass entirely into the
realm of Wyndham's private affairs, where he
was well content to leave them. Alice's fortune,
such as it was, had been placed under her own
control absolutely when she had attained the
age of twenty-five, and probably now, with
certain accumulations, amounted to some thirty
thousand pounds. She was a wise and prudent
child, well capable of controlling those money
matters that were naturally distasteful to so
gifted an artist, and in that way he would no
doubt find her a most useful companion. However,
he now left it to him and Alice to plan
out their future together, and wished them
all good luck. At the same time, if Wyndham
had no objection, he would like to give them
as a wedding-present any house they might
fancy, and his wife desired to furnish it or
give them a cheque for that purpose.
Wyndham was in reality deeply moved by so
much considerate kindness and rare delicacy.
He wrote Mr. Robinson a charming note of
acknowledgment; though he touched just briefly
on the main theme, diverging into a chatty
account of his visit, and letting his pen run
on and on till he had covered several sheets.
Each morning during his visit a letter from
Alice awaited him on the breakfast-table. For
a week or two the chant was timorous, uncertain;
of a pitch to soothe his self-complacency,
    [Pg 142]
to stir no ruffle in his holiday mood.
But towards the end of his time she found
herself—she tuned up, and adventured. And
then followed Wyndham's awakening; taking
him with the force of cataclysm, and dashing
him out of his drowsy mood of contentment.
Evidently the poor child was not living in this
world. If her feet touched earth, her head at
any rate was in a heaven of its own. She poured
herself out with a lyric fervour that was like
the song of a lark for rapture. All the years
of her life she had saved herself for this, not
frittered her emotions away in flirtations or
frivolous love-affairs—as the soberer Wyndham
now reflected. Her ideals were as unsullied as
in her childhood. Her spirit soared up with a
tremulous eager joy—without doubts, without
cynicism, with a simple sure faith in love's
paradise. Reserved, shrinking away from men,
her heart yet held rich store of treasure, and
she poured all out at his feet. Timorousness
had vanished; the soul that had woven its
own music in solitude had been translated to a
higher universe. There were no barriers now,
nothing but this joyous, confident life into which
her womanhood had passed at that moment
when, swept onward by the flood, she had
thrown her arms around him.
"Dearest," she wrote, "my whole past life
seems like a half-slumber from which I have
awakened into a world almost too dazzling with
    [Pg 143]
light and joy. Yet who am I that this joy should
have come to me? When I think of the years
when I lived alone with my own thoughts, it
seems wonderful that your love should have
been granted to me. The world is full of pale
ghosts that come and go, not knowing what
life is, and it amuses me to wonder if any of
them will ever turn into real people.
"Oh, my dear love, you are so far, far off.
I want you here, here again with me, happy
that you love me, happy that I love you, wanting
no other life than this with your arms
round me and your heart beating close to me.
And yet I like to think that you are happy amid
your own family, in the place where your
childhood was spent. I love, dear, to dwell on
the thought of your childhood, and fancy I see
you now, a beautiful child in velvet, with a
feather in your hat and a toy sword. And
I see myself a child again, playing with this
fairy little prince in the meadows. How beautiful
if we were children like that! Impossible
does it seem? Yet is anything impossible in
this enchanted world?
"Think of me, dearest, with the deepest and
truest love of your heart, as I am thinking of
you every moment of this wonderful life."
And another time: "It is strange to feel how
everything is transformed since you came into
my life and made me understand what this
great happiness is. I laugh gaily at nothing;
    [Pg 144]
yet tears come into my eyes quickly at unhappiness
or suffering. It seems as if I were born
to love you with a yearning and a passion that
sometimes frighten me, yet which I would
rather die than live without. When I first
loved you, I did not know that this would come,
that I should not be able to imagine it to be
otherwise. The thought is frightful; indeed,
if anything were to happen to change the
present, I think my heart would give one great,
great throb, and all would be over. I draw my
breath hard at the thought; there is a deep
pain at my breast; my teeth are set. But how
morbid I am to-day! how ungrateful for this
splendid gift of your love that has been
bestowed upon me! But somehow I feel
frightened; I don't believe that anybody will be
allowed to keep such happiness on this earth.
So come to me quickly, dearest; you seem so
far, far away from me. I kiss your dear letters,
I wear them near my heart, at night they are
under my pillow. I love you, I love you."
And this heart-cry broke down all the strong
fibre of the man. Poor Alice! He must take
care of such a child; he must cherish her life and
make it perfect! Not in the least detail must
he fail in his duty. Never for a moment must
she think that this was—he flinched now before
the words—an engagement of convenience!
An engagement of convenience! He slipped
away to his room—away from the rest of the
    [Pg 145]
world!—and sat staring into the dusk. He knew
now that he was face to face with the actuality
that lay before him in all its horror. An engagement
of convenience! He would have given the
world to recall it. His eyes saw clear again—the
enthusiasm that swirled and whirled around
him had thus far sustained him: vibrations of
romance had arisen within him, had resounded
with a certain music. But these letters of Alice,
this crescendo series, each soaring beyond the
other, had illumined the horrible poverty of his
own emotion. The freshness of her note was a
revelation and yet an agony to him. If only he
could have piped with half the thrill!
He could see at last that in his specious
reasonings he had somehow assumed a largely
passive attitude on her part. Indeed, egotistically
preoccupied with his own side of the case,
he had scarcely bestowed a thought on hers.
This reality—immense—overpowering—of the
romance in her heart terrified him. He had
given her empty words, and she had given him—love!
And what else, indeed, but empty words
had he to offer her now?—had he to offer her
in the whole long vista of their future? At
the best a studied kindness, an acceptance of
duty. He had entered on a rôle of mockery, and
he knew now he was utterly unfitted to play it.
His whole nature rose and cried aloud in revolt.
[Pg 146]
At the beginning of the New Year Wyndham
hastened back to town, and was soon at his post
striving to adapt himself to the outlook of his
life. He had tried to steel himself to confess the
miserable truth to Alice, to lay it before her
with a fidelity as unswerving as Nature, merciless
both to him and to her. But her letters
continued to shake him, and he had not the
strength to face the inevitable wreckage. To
break was to punish her: to continue was only
to punish himself. His course was obvious: he
must play the game ŕ outrance. Yet he sought
temporarily to escape the actuality by immersing
himself desperately in routine.
So, for the present, his days were mapped out
simply enough. He was up early, for the
winter hours of light were precious. Braced for
a great effort, he found himself drawing on
unexpected stores of vitality; he flung himself
on his masterpiece like a Viking into the męlée
of battle, and had the reward of splendid
conquest. This sense of power, this subjugation
of his material, made his old foiled strivings and
strivings incomprehensible, incredible!
[Pg 147]
    Meanwhile the domesticity of the house at
the corner invaded his studio, and surrounded
him with comforts and attentions that but threw
up the more vividly the issues he sought to preclude.
But he kept stifling down his rebellion;
struggling to accept the position unreservedly,
though sick with the sense of hypocrisy. He
laughingly surrendered to Alice a duplicate key
of the studio in token of their good-fellowship,
and she and her mother devoted themselves to
the loving task of smoothing his path, letting
no point that might ruffle his inspiration elude
their vigilance. Their whole life and activities
seemed to converge to the studio. Mrs. Robinson
kept discreetly in the background, though
her brain planned and her tongue discussed, and
she often went joyfully a-purchasing. Shortly
before one o'clock Alice would march across,
attended by a servant carrying his lunch, of
temptations compact, imprisoned in shining
caskets; and by the time Wyndham was ready
to sit down, his table would be nicely set out,
and the temptations spread to his view.
Many precious minutes were thus saved for
him, and his train of ideas was luxuriously unbroken.
This tact and thoughtfulness was
characteristic of all the devotion that was
cherished on him. Wyndham deeply appreciated
its quality, and despite the pressure—with
sending-in day looming barely three months
ahead—gratitude no less than conscience drove
    [Pg 148]
him to acknowledgement, to contrive that the
artist should not entirely swallow up Miss
Robinson's future husband; though her expectations
were considerately of the slightest. Thus
his negative policy was answering effectively.
With the passage of the days, he found himself
sliding into a lethargy of acquiescence in the
position. The mere physical fatigues of his
labours dulled the unrest within him, and his
brain fermented incessantly with the problems
of masses and values which his great canvas
still pressed upon him. He was glad he found
it possible at last to be accepting all outer things
so calmly. He told himself repeatedly: "Your
revolt is over. You have decided there can be
no break. So be as decent and affectionate as
you can."
Thus his attentions seemed to her gallant
and charming, to hold their touch of poetry.
Flowers and bonbons, a book of verses or a
novel were frequent tributes: after his work
was done they went into town occasionally to
a concert or a theatre, and if his conversation
was of the theme with which his mind was most
saturated, she did not regard that as otherwise
than a compliment.
And so these winter days sped, and January
was running its course. And out of this not unsuccessful
routine there came to him the sense
that his life was very full and singularly
complete. Of perturbation or unforeseen excitement
    [Pg 149]
there was never a thrill. The only
moment that held a flutter for him was when
Mr. Shanner descended on the Robinsons, grey,
decorous, and austere; congratulated the pair
with an ashen smile, in the honeyed accents that
had charmed so many diplomatists; and bestowed
solemn formal attentions on the engaged
lady throughout the evening.
The whole plot of his drama had in verity
been revealed, was Wyndham's frequent reflection;
and with that final comedy-scene the
curtain had seemed to fall, and he knew all
that there was to know.
But his own wretched money affairs were
soon to give him food for pondering. Alice's
portrait had gone home in a splendid frame
to find a temporary resting-place before being
tossed to the Academy; and Mr. Robinson,
though seeing him face to face almost daily,
delicately sent his cheque by post. Wyndham
grasped it with relief: but it proved merely the
illumination that accentuated the darkness. For
overdue rent and many other calls made it melt
away with terrifying swiftness; and Wyndham
had indebted himself to the family jeweller for
presents to Miss Robinson. Impecuniosity approached
him again with no vague menace;
kicked him brutally out of his ostrich-like attitude.
Nevertheless he shrank in terror from
the definite thought of pressing forward the
marriage; though, in the clear light of these
    [Pg 150]
latter self-communings, money was the sole
reason why he had sought it. Not only did he
fear that life of simulation with a sickness
immeasurable: but he foresaw endless money
humiliations at the very outset.
He would fulfil his promise honourably, whatever
the spiritual cost of it! But he could not
face money humiliations in the eyes of his inferiors!
A thousand times "no"! He must
trust, despite all, to his own strength and performance!—he
would do brilliantly with his
pictures in the spring!—he would follow up the
success and conquer London! He waved aside
all his past disasters: he saw his good star in
the ascendant, shining—he fixed his eyes on it
fanatically. It was an irony of ironies that,
after his great surrender, his pride should still
flame up unconquered. Before the moral tragedy
of love yoked to mockery, he might bow his
head in resignation; but Miss Robinson's fortune
loomed up as a ridiculous and contemptible complication
in a situation already nigh impossible.
The metaphor of the vulture was often back
in his mind now! The heap of carrion!—he
had stooped for the sake of it, and it was
now even more loathsome than his former
morbid perception of it. His poverty seemed
suddenly unbearable. In the past he had
endured it. Now, for the first time, he was
ashamed of it.
So he spoke to the Robinsons of a six months'
    [Pg 151]
engagement or thereabouts—which, to their
ideas, was reputable and in order; and then
felt he had time before him to fling down the
gauntlet to fortune again.
But in estimating his resources he had counted
without his new allies. Alice whispered into
her father's ears her conviction that he might
easily influence commissions for her fiancé; and,
after thinking about it, Mr. Robinson felt he
would like to have a try.
A rich, powerful Insurance Corporation had
voted a portrait of its retiring president for the
adornment of its board-room. Mr. Robinson
set to work astutely, and the commission came
to Wyndham. Item, three hundred guineas.
But, before this new portrait had progressed
very far, Wyndham had fascinated his subject—a
tall, white-bearded merchant prince who
sat to him with mysterious insignia, and resplendent
chains and emblems. "A marvellous young
fellow," he confided to Mr. Robinson. "I must
really congratulate you on him—it's a treat to
be in his society. And gifted! That great picture
of Hyde Park Corner is worthy of Raphael."
And for the pleasure of his company, and out
of admiration for his talent, this bluff, good-natured
president had at once arranged for
paintings of himself and his wife for his own
dining-room.
He generously and spontaneously made the
fee seven hundred guineas. "There are two of
    [Pg 152]
us this time, and why should I get off cheaper
than the Insurance Company?" he asked
genially; in a spirit rare enough in the
twentieth century, but nothing out of the way
in the days of the grand patrons. "Besides,
you're worth it," he roared out bluffly. "And
the privilege of going down to posterity in your
society can hardly be appraised at all."
Wyndham relished the compliment, though
wincing inwardly at the thought that the wind
that blew him good came always from the same
quarter: yet in view of other important sitters
he began to think of a more accessible studio.
"Why not a house with the studio?" suggested
the Robinsons. "You could move in
now, and furnish the rooms at your leisure,
so as to have them ready for the marriage."
Wyndham fell in with the idea. He thought
the locality had better be Chelsea, somewhere
near the Embankment; a long distance from
Hampstead, it was true, but an ideal situation
for an artist. Somehow the sense of the distance,
as he lingered on it, was not unacceptable.
Alice flinched. "We could still look after you,"
she murmured bravely.
"Besides, I could easily cut to and fro in a
hansom," put in Wyndham.
So off the old pair started at once on the
quest, drawing some renewal of zestful youth
from its absorbing interest. One day they
reported a stroke of fortune; they had come
    [Pg 153]
upon the ideal thing. The rent was not impossible,
and the tenant could have the option
of purchasing the freehold. The next evening
they took Wyndham to see it—a charming
artist's house in Tite Street, with a broad
frontage and a luxurious and unconventional
interior. On the entrance floor—an unusual
hall and three fine rooms. Above—a great
studio and another excellent room. Below were
the domestic regions with many household
refinements, and bedrooms for the servants.
Wyndham and Alice were enchanted.
Mr. Robinson was anxious to purchase this
property outright as his promised wedding-gift;
but Wyndham, again shrinking inwardly, diplomatically
deferred the project. So the lease
was signed, and the removal at once effected.
Wyndham's belongings were swiftly installed
on the upper floor of the house, at the loss of
only a single day to him; and, leaving him to
his labours, the others, in the enjoyment of their
unlimited leisure, saw that the hall and stairway
were made presentable for callers.
But at this point Wyndham came to a dead
stop with his labour-canvas, to which he had
of late devoted his mornings entirely, keeping
the afternoons for his sitters. He saw that it
was imperative he should now make some fresh
sketches on the spot. But to regain his exact
vision he must have access to the old window in
Grosvenor Place. Yet the very thought of the
    [Pg 154]
house and the memory of those former visits
had a strange shattering effect on him. And
some warning voice rose sternly, bade him not
renew these old associations.
He reasoned the matter out, and hesitation
seemed absurd. For the sake of his picture, it
was essential he should occupy a certain point
of view. Though he had let the acquaintanceship
lapse entirely ever since Lady Betty's
marriage, access to that point of view was no
doubt a simple matter. A mere letter of request,
and the old earl would readily give his permission.
This time he would probably come
and go without seeing anybody at all.
Wyndham sat down to write the letter, the
interest of the composition ousting for the time
his irrational misgivings. He recalled himself
to the earl's recollection, explained that the
picture for which he had made the former
sketches had unavoidably been put aside; but
now that he was at last able to take it up
again he desired to make some fresh sketches,
and begged the use of his old post of vantage for
a few mornings. He concluded with the hope
that the earl was in the best of health, and sent
his respects and remembrances to his daughter,
should the earl be seeing her just then.
It was the merest courtesy on his part to show
he had not forgotten Lady Betty! After all,
their lives were so entirely alien now!
He addressed and stamped the letter; then his
strong instinct against the whole proceeding
    [Pg 155]
reasserted itself. He rose and paced about.
The warning voice said, "Keep away from
Grosvenor Place. No good will come of it."
"But it's absurd," he said aloud. "The thing's
an absolute necessity—I can't throw over the
picture at this stage. My whole artistic future
depends upon it. What harm can possibly arise
from my going there? Lady Betty? Why,
she's a matron by now! And probably not even
in England. And if she were, what is she to me
now? And at any rate I am certainly nothing to
her. If I stumbled up against her the very first
morning I went there, we should still be far as
the poles asunder. She was certainly a wonderful
girl, and I of course fell headlong in love
with her. Put any impressionable fellow with
poetic ideals in the way of a lovely, clever girl
and I suppose he's bound to feel cut up when
somebody else marries her. But it's all as dead
as King John now. I'll go there and do my
work and wind up with a letter of thanks."
He put on his hat and coat, and took up the
letter. "Don't go there," repeated the voice.
"No good will come of it."
"Rubbish!" he said. "I can't chuck up the
picture. It's all right."
He went downstairs and out into Tite Street,
a little confused by all this current of doubt
and reasoning, and by no means absolutely
sure of himself. But, annoyed at realising this,
he began to go forward sturdily, and flung the
letter into the first pillar-box he encountered.
[Pg 156]
As Wyndham read the reply to his letter, it
seemed as if the kind, bluff voice of the old
earl were itself speaking. "A few mornings!
Come along and make your nice little sketches
for the next half-century. We have often
thought of you, and wondered what you were
up to. I think we may say with truth that
we've missed you. This is a dull house now,
and I suppose I'm getting old and dull myself.
At any rate I've many a twinge in the joints,
and am inclined to shut myself up in my library,
though I'm never much of a reader." Then
there was a PS. "Somebody or other tells
me that you are contemplating matrimony.
Well, you're a brave young fellow, and I like
you for it. I congratulate you, and wish you
luck."
As the next morning turned out fairly clear,
Wyndham took his materials with him into
a hansom, and rang the bell at Grosvenor Place
at about ten o'clock. Not only had he decided
that his misgivings were entirely morbid, but
as a matter of course he had been quite open
    [Pg 157]
with the Robinsons about the arrangement.
He had indeed explained to Alice some considerable
time ago that he should in all likelihood
find it necessary to make these fresh
sketches on the very scene of the picture. It did
not seem anything out of the way to her; she
regarded it as a pure matter of work. It was
sufficient that she understood his disappearance
from the studio in the midst of these busy times.
And as he had made it a point that she should
possess a key of the new house just as she
had had one of the old studio, she and her
mother could come and go as they pleased in
his absence, and proceed with their engrossing
business of embellishing his hall and stairway.
But as he set foot in the house at Grosvenor
Place after this long interval of years,
Wyndham could not maintain his reasoned
conviction of the simplicity and insignificance
of the occasion.
He had the very real thrill of embarking on
some extraordinary adventure; even of stepping
outside his own existence—that theatre where
he had been the spectator of his own fate,
whose curtain—fire-proof—had already fallen
on a played-out drama. But here was a strange
theatre, with a curtain to rise, fascinating with
promise of other drama to be revealed; yet
the stillness and the dim light cast some spell
of awe upon him.
[Pg 158]
    A hand seemed to clutch at him and pull
him back out of the house at the last moment.
He was penetrating here against the warning
of his deeper self; his heart beat fast not merely
with the consciousness of imprudence, but of
downright disloyalty to the settled destiny
before which he had bowed his head so profoundly.
The warning voice, too, was stern;
but the sense of daring, of courting and facing
some unknown delicious danger, lured him
forward.
His lordship had already gone across to his
club, the butler informed him; but he had
half-expected Wyndham and had left orders
in case he should present himself. As he followed
the man up to the room he had used
of old, he felt, despite the lofty well of the
staircase, that the air hung heavy in the great
house, muffled and silent with gigantic hangings,
and thick carpets underfoot. Wyndham
stood at the well-known window a leisurely
moment, then arranged a chair or two, and
unpacked his materials. The butler helped him
to open the casement at the side of the bay
and to rearrange the curtain, then asked if
there was anything more he could do for
him.
"Oh, would you get my hat again?" returned
Wyndham, as a current of wintry air flowed
in. He laughed; having forgotten he could not
work uncovered.
[Pg 159]
    When finally the man had complied with his
request, and left him again, Wyndham looked
out on the scene before him, his eye lingering
for a moment on the royal gardens, then trying
to catch the exact view he had painted. But
as yet his mind was in too great a turmoil
to concentrate itself sternly on the business
in hand. "I shall be acclimatised in a minute
or two," he reassured himself. "The atmosphere
of this house is so oppressive—it upset me the
first moment." He stood gratefully inhaling
the fresher draught that streamed against his
face; and when he had calmed down he took
a turn or two about the room, observing it with
interest. He had scarcely received any impression
of it yet, but now he perceived that
it was greatly changed in some respects. A
new fireplace, and a mantel of a dainty cabinet-like
design, replaced the former streaked framework
of marble that had enshrined a great
rococo grate. The double leaf door that led
to some adjoining room had had its hanging
stripped away, and the beauty of panelling
showed naked and unashamed. The former
carpet had gone; there were now soft Eastern
rugs on the floor lying closely side by side, and
covering it entirely. But though the Chippendale
bookcases and the rest of the furniture had been
left untouched, there was somehow a more
intimate personal note about the room; accentuated
perhaps by the trifles and photographs
    [Pg 160]
clustered about the mantelshelf. And then
Wyndham came to an abrupt stop as if some
sheet of flame had flashed by and seared him.
There in the centre of the mantel, next to a tiny
clock shaped like a Gothic arch, stood the silver
easel bearing the framed photograph of his old
Academy picture—his wedding present to Lady
Betty!
Why was it here in this house? he asked
himself, trembling. Had she left it behind
because she esteemed it so lightly? Or was
there perhaps some special significance in the
fact; something his thought groped for wildly
and blindly as if in panic?
He staggered back to the window, astonished
to find how overcome he had been. The air
revived him, and then a new and sterner spirit
came upon him. Was he going to waste his
whole morning by yielding himself to these idle
and futile emotions? Resolutely he prepared
his palette, and bent his mind by force to his
task. He was pleased presently to find how
exactly his eye recovered his scene; he felt he
could almost lay the one he had painted over
this one, and that it would fit like a transfer.
Slowly and carefully he let the view sink into
him, estimating the tones, the masses, the
spaces; peopling it in his mind with all the
figures and accessories that went to build up
his great symbolic representation. Then he set
one of the smaller canvasses on his knee, and
    [Pg 161]
started his note-making. Soon he was absorbed
in the work, glad that he had forced himself to
begin, and that the little wheels of his mind were
turning so smoothly.
At eleven the butler appeared with wine and
sandwiches, moved a little table over near
Wyndham, and set down the tray within reach
of his hand. Wyndham was glad of this
refreshment; he had been in too uncertain a
mood to do more than gulp down his coffee
at breakfast, and the raw air had roused a
craving for some sort of sustenance—a desire
for stimulation rather than a keen hunger. He
swallowed a glass of the wine, then began to
nibble a sandwich slowly; but his mind was
still in his work. He half-knew that the great
folding door at the bottom of the room had
opened, that somebody had entered. But it was
as in a dream, and he did not look up. He
considered his results, then poured more wine,
and was in the act of raising it to his lips. God!
what was this gracious, willowy figure, with the
wonderful sheen on the fresh hair, and the
girlish rounded cheeks! She was smiling at
him, her eyes strangely alight under their long,
soft lashes, her lips half parted; she was
advancing towards him with outstretched
hand. He put back the glass on the table and
rose hastily, holding his sketch suspended from
one hand; but his wits left him and he stared as
at a ghost.
[Pg 162]
    "Lady Betty!" he stammered.
"I am not an apparition," she reassured him;
"but only a simple flesh-and-blood creature.
Won't you put down your picture?" She smiled
again at his embarrassment.
He laughed, and stood the sketch on a chair.
"Your presence certainly startled me," he confessed.
"I had an idea you were thousands
of miles away." They took hands—a good,
comrade-like clasp. "Fortunately the idea was
erroneous."
"Fortunately," she echoed, laughingly capping
his gallantry.
"Oh, but how stupid I am! Forgive me!" He
almost swept the hat from his head. "You see
how I was scared; how ill prepared to cope with
apparitions."
She laughed again. "You are to keep your
hat on," she commanded. "My presence is
easily accounted for; out of sheer restlessness of
spirit I thought I should like to try London
again—I had shunned it like the plague for ever
so long. As all the nice little hotels were full,
I descended on my father here, and practically
appropriated this room."
"I fear I'm an intruder," he stammered.
"You had my permission; it was obtained in
due form. Only I insisted my name was to be
held back. I wanted to play the apparition, and
my father entered into the whim of the thing.
It seems like old times again."
[Pg 163]
    Wyndham tried to transport himself back along
the years. "I wonder whether there's anything
better in life than to repeat the best moments of
the past," he said pensively; "that is, if we can
catch them with all the original magic in them."
He saw her head drop a little; her expression
was full of musing, half-sad and tender. Then
he remembered that things had indeed changed
since those old days, that Lady Betty had a
husband! It was strange, but the apparition,
besides the rest of the mischief, had momentarily
driven the fact from the store of his knowledge.
He had had absolutely the delusion that this was
the brilliant Lady Betty, still unwed, to whom no
suitor might aspire save with yachts and palaces.
"I have been calling you Lady Betty!" he
exclaimed. "The delusion of old times was very
strong."
"Please to keep on with the Lady Betty—I
come back to it so easily. It quite pleased me
when it slipped from your lips. You have
stepped out of the long ago; I step back to
meet you. You must still think of me as
Lady Betty."
"And Lord Lakeden?" he murmured, though
he felt the inquiry was rather a belated courtesy.
She stared at him, her cheeks white, her eyes
growing unnaturally large.
"Your husband—I hope he is well," he explained,
bewildered by this new expression that
seemed to hold mingled amazement and horror.
[Pg 164]
    "My husband!" She laughed—a weird peal
that filled him with a fear as of blinding flashes
to come. "Did you not know? I thought the
whole world knew. I have no husband!"
He looked at her. "I don't understand," he
stammered.
"I really believe you don't," she said, her face
still blanched. "My married life was a short
one. Lord Lakeden met with an accident on the
Alps—the summer before last. He went out
without a guide. The details were in all the
papers. It was one of the sensations of the silly
season." Again a nervous laugh, but more than
ever it was full of unnatural echoes.
Instinctively Wyndham took off his hat again,
and stood with his head bowed. "I am sorry.
My condolences are late, but they are sincere."
"I somehow expected you would write to me
at the time. Hosts and hosts wrote to me—till
my head went dizzy; but never a word from
you." She was speaking with greater command
of herself now, but he felt in her words a world
of reproach.
"I was living as a hermit at the time. I saw
nobody for—shall I say it seemed to me a lifetime—save
the poor old woman who came to
turn out my studio once in every three months
perhaps."
"Ah, you were unhappy!" Her face softened,
telling of a swift, spontaneous sympathy.
"I was nigh starving. I never saw a newspaper
    [Pg 165]
unless by chance; my pennies were too
precious."
"My poor friend!" Her eyes gleamed as if
tears were about to come.
"I played the game up to a certain point with
all my strength, but everything went against me
from every quarter. I know there are men that
would have risen triumphant above all these
evils and difficulties. But I was not one of those
men. I was beaten—smashed—utterly and hopelessly.
I had not the smallest reserve of power
to carry on the fight. I lived cut off from the
world like a man in a tomb. I am ashamed to
think that I kept myself alive——"
"No, no," she interrupted, shivering. "I can't
bear it."
"I am ashamed that I did not die," he persisted.
"It is the truth. It is the first time I
say it either to myself or to another. In order
to live I stepped below myself."
She covered her face with her hands. "I
know you are misjudging. You are harsh with
yourself. I hold to my faith in you."
"I lived on the earnings of my sister, who
stinted herself in food and went shabbily clad
that she might foster my work. Yet, for terrible
months and months, I deceived her. I did no
work. My will was dead. As a man I seemed
to collapse physically and morally."
"You were not responsible. There is a limit to
human endurance. You needed a delicious rest
    [Pg 166]
in some blue sunny place, in one of those earthly
paradises where the orange-trees are golden in
the sun. Your sister's love consecrated her
sacrifice. She saved you for a great future. Her
reward is yet to come."
"You see everything in so sweet a light; I
can only hope that the issue will be as you say.
It is on my future work that I have staked
the redemption of my manhood in my own eyes.
My work! That is where my real heart lies.
Outside of that my life will be a mere appearance."
"But you have somebody else in your life
now," she broke in, pale as death. "We heard
a rumour that you were about to marry. Is it
not true?"
He gasped at the bitter reminder. He hung
his head. "It is true," he breathed.
"Then you have given your affections: you
are happy?"
He wavered for a deep instant, the whilst
her eyes rested on him gravely. "I have given
my affections—I am happy." To himself he
added: "I must be loyal to Alice, if indeed I
have not gone too far already. But Lady Betty
has made me see the truth. I understand now
what I felt only obscurely—I bartered my life
to the Robinsons, kind as they are, that I might
repair the hurt and wrong to Mary."
"I congratulate you from my heart." She
held out her hand again with a wan smile. He
    [Pg 167]
took it limply; feeling he held it on false
pretences, that the sudden check he had put on
his impulsive outpouring had raised a barrier
between them.
"But forgive me for my stupid egotism.
Here am I, a great strapping fellow, pitying
myself because of a very ordinary sort of dismal
failure; more than commonplace by the side
of the great sorrow that came to you."
"Great sorrow!" Again that wild peal of
laughter. "It was a great joy, the greatest joy
I have ever known. When they brought me
the news, I went out into the garden of our
chalet, and, sure that no eyes were upon me, I
danced on the green in the sunlight—with the
blood pulsing so deliciously through my veins.
I was free—I was free! The world seemed so
beautiful! the sky and the mountains so exquisite!
Life was such a gift! I was free—free!"
She stood up straight, all her muscles tense,
her limbs quivering. The pallor had gone; her
face glowed with an exultation that was almost
of triumph. He stood spellbound at her revelation,
unable to find a word.
"Ah, you don't understand what it is to be
free again! Degradation! I tasted it to its
depths. Yours was no degradation! You
know nothing of it. I was tied to a brute—no,
the brutes are decent and lovable. He was
lower—he was lower."
Her voice broke in a sob, though no tears
    [Pg 168]
came. Wyndham was still silent; he would
not seek to penetrate her last reserve. "Don't
think me too horrible," she pleaded. "You are
the only living being to whom I have bared my
soul. You were the one to whom my mind flew
as my friend—I have waited for this moment.
You must not set me down as a monster."
"A monster!" he exclaimed. He was thrown
off his irksome guard, and the instant was fatal!
"Oh, no, no! I shall always hold you for what
you are, for what you have always been to me—a
rare princess!"
"I have always been to you—" she echoed,
then broke off, her bosom heaving, her eyes
flashing out with the full comprehension of his
almost unwitting avowal. Then she went pale
to the lips again. "You never spoke," she
breathed, "and I did not guess."
He realised, half in a daze, that his secret
had escaped him; yet—with swift change of
mood—he was recklessly glad that she understood
at last: even as, standing before her, he,
too, understood at last—reading her distress,
treasuring her implied reproach for its clear
significance, though it put him on his defence.
"I was not even on the footing of a guest in
this house. The very bread that kept me alive
was not my own. It is the law of the world."
"You were wrong. There is no law."
"There is the law of pride," he argued. "We
men do not stoop to happiness, we stoop only
    [Pg 169]
to degradation.... And then I feared to break
the spell," he went on, seeking a lighter strain.
"The wonderful princess would disappear, and
I should be left rubbing my eyes."
"But it was you who disappeared. The
princess thought you shunned her, and she
was left—to weep—"
He hung his head like a broken reed. He had
no longer anything to hide; he had already
sufficiently disclosed to her that his marriage
was to be a loveless one. She would understand
and respect his first desire to keep his true relation
to Alice sacred from her gaze. But Lady
Betty's revelation of tragic experience had swept
him off his feet. He had responded to her
great emotion; had confessed his allegiance to
her through all and despite all. His life seemed
linked to hers with a mystic, enduring passion.
And yet were they not hopelessly sundered?
"'Men must work and women must weep,'"
she quoted. "Ah, well! we never can win our
ideals; life is always a compromise. Perhaps
it's a blessing to see our clear obligations."
"Yes—if one has the strength to turn one's
eyes aside from the dreams; but saddening
otherwise."
"Saddening otherwise," she echoed pensively.
"But I thank you that I am still the wonderful
princess, even after my terrible confession."
He took a step forward, and seized her hand
impulsively.
[Pg 170]
    "Never believe otherwise, no matter what
you may hear of me. Whether this be the last
time I see you or not, whether I fail and be
broken again, my last breath shall proclaim my
allegiance to—the wonderful princess! Listen,
the woman I am marrying is more than goodness
itself. I cannot pretend to match her;
my manhood falls below her womanhood. But
into the inner chamber of my life she can
never enter. Out of loyalty to her I gave you
to understand that I had given my affections.
That is true, but not in the sense I led you to
believe. There is no reason why I should not
be open now; it would be a poor compliment
to you after all this mutual confidence if I could
not bare to you the absolute truth. And the
absolute truth is—I have sold myself for safety,
for the sake of my art, and for the sake of my
sister. It would be unendurable were there not
the mitigation of the esteem I have for the
woman I am marrying, and for the many
qualities of kindness and goodness in that
whole household. But she is not my true mate.
Unlimited as is her virtue in a hundred ways,
she herself is yet limited. My work must find
inspiration entirely apart from her. May I
think of you, princess, as my inspiration?"
"She is a good woman. You must be loyal
to her."
"It would be no disloyalty; I should be
cherishing the ideal."
[Pg 171]
    She was smiling and radiant again. "I can
scarcely stop you—I see it would certainly be
rash to try. Well, goodbye now; I have a
thousand little neglected things crying to me.
And your moments, too, are precious. You will
be here again one of these mornings?"
"To-morrow," he said. "For the present, we
may be friends?"
"Till the tide sweeps us apart."
"The cruel tide!" he murmured. "But you
will always be the wonderful princess," he insisted
again.
"I shall try to be worthy of the title."
She gave him a charming curtsey, flitted
away down the room, threw him yet a smile,
and disappeared behind the panelled door
through which she had come.
[Pg 172]
For some time Wyndham stood with his head
still bowed as Lady Betty's voice lingered in his
ear. Her figure was still there before him, her
lovely girl's face radiant with the smile with
which she had vanished, her slender form in
all its upright grace; a nymph of whom Botticelli
had caught a glimpse on a spring morn
when the world was rediscovering beauty.
He tried to recall the scene that had just been
enacted, and dizzily held it all in a flash. He
and Lady Betty were in love with each other!
The fact that he had always cherished the
thought of her held a deeper significance than
he had known! Throughout all his sufferings—throughout
all her sufferings—an ideal friendship
for each other had subsisted in their
minds. He had supposed her as indifferent as
she was unattainable; that his love was one
of those secret, mocking dramas that sometimes
play themselves out in the souls of men and
women. Yet it was to him that her deepest
thought had turned! She had enshrined him
    [Pg 173]
in her heart! And he lying the whilst in
darkness and misery!
It was precious now—this new sweetness that
had come to him. Sweetness! His thought
broke off at the word. Rather was it a bitter
irony! Lady Betty and he had been cheated
by life. Could he be even sure his eyes would
behold her again? Was she not the soul of
honour and rectitude! For a deep instant they
had been swept towards each other; but at once
her attitude towards his marriage had been
clear and pronounced, and she might even now
be bitterly regretting their meeting.
He sat down at last, and took up his work
again; but his mind was utterly unfitted for
concentration on any task. Better to get back
again to his own studio, he told himself. So he
stowed away his materials in a corner, and
presently slipped downstairs; telling the butler,
whom he met in the hall, that he would be there
again at ten the following day.
At Tite Street men were tacking down a thick
green length of Turkey carpet on his staircase,
and Alice was superintending the operation.
Here was his comfortable future in active
preparation! And already he felt the atmosphere
swallowing him up, claiming him body
and soul.
He stayed a moment on the landing, affecting
an interest in the proceedings. When he turned
into the studio Alice came after him.
[Pg 174]
    "You hardly seem well, dear," she said, observing
him anxiously.
"You surprise me," he returned. "I am not
conscious of any aches or pains," he added, with
an implication of gaiety.
She did not seem convinced. "This malarial
air must have affected you," she insisted.
"I don't say I find it pleasant." He seized
the poker, as if glad to make a diversion, and
stirred the fire energetically. "I'm a little bit
disgusted, too; the day wasn't as clear as I
hoped—there was a good deal of mist about."
"Better luck to-morrow!" she said.
He struck hard at a knob of coal, making a
dreadful clatter. "I hope so, indeed," he answered,
thinking it curious that Alice should
now be expecting him to go to Grosvenor Place
as a matter of course. "At any rate," he added,
as it struck him Alice might reasonably be
hoping for some account of his morning's visit,
"they were kind to me—just as of old. Lady
Lakeden sent me refreshments, and afterwards
came herself to see how things were progressing."
"I suppose Lady Lakeden is a sister of the
earl," she conjectured.
"No, his daughter—a mere girl," he explained,
with the flicker of a laugh. "It was a great
surprise. It is only a few years back that I was
asked to her wedding. After that, I got out of
touch with them, and I did not know she had
    [Pg 175]
lost her husband very soon after the marriage.
He met with an accident on the Alps."
Alice was blanched. "How terrible!" she
whispered.
There was a silence. Wyndham held his
hands to the flame he had been at such pains
to create. He hoped he had satisfied her
interest sufficiently; for, of course, the whole
scene between himself and Lady Betty must be
kept from her inviolate. Was it not for Alice's
own sake and happiness?
"It makes me afraid!" said Alice, breaking
the silence. "Perhaps nobody is allowed to
keep too great a happiness."
He winced. "She was always kind to me,"
he said, evading the train of her reflection. "I
spent many hours at my post in those ancient
times, and there were always unobtrusive
attentions that made my work the easier."
"I should like to know and love her," said
Alice pensively.
Wyndham was silent. Her words startled
and embarrassed him, since he had been taking
it for granted that she and Lady Betty would
never come into contact. Besides, in a way,
Alice had given utterance to more of a thought
than a wish, so that a response hardly seemed
necessary. They lunched together, and Alice
went off soon after, leaving him to receive his
sitters—the president and his wife, who were
both to arrive that afternoon.
[Pg 176]
    "Of course, you won't expect me at Hampstead,"
he reminded her. "You remember I put
my name down for a club dinner to-night."
"Of course I remember," she said. "But I
shall write you a letter instead. Please look for
it when you come home to-night."
But Wyndham did not dine at the club after
all; at the last moment he decided to spend the
evening alone at his studio. It seemed a long
time since he had had a few quiet hours all to
himself. Moreover, it was strangely a boon to
hear no other voices for once, and he lay back
pleasantly in his chair, though conscious of an
uncommon degree of weariness. And, in the
calm and solitude of the studio, intensified by
the echoing of his occasional movements
through the empty rooms beneath him, the
Robinsons seemed indeed a long way off up at
Hampstead there, and for the first time it
seemed a positive bondage to him, this constant
duty of journeying across town to dine with
them.
The nine o'clock post brought the promised
letter from Alice, but from amid the little heap
in the box he picked out another eagerly. The
writing was Lady Betty's. He had never seen
very much of it in the old days, yet he recognised
it at once.
He remembered just then a shrewd dictum of
Schopenhauer—that, if we wished to learn our
real attitude towards any person, we should
    [Pg 177]
watch and estimate our exact emotion at
catching sight of the well-known handwriting
on a letter we are just receiving. He certainly
could not help observing the contrasting emotions
with which he welcomed these two letters.
Alice's, at his first glimpse of it, had given him
a deepened sense of the irrevocable. Yet there
went with this a kind, affectionate thought in
which was a world of appreciation. But he
knew pretty nearly what the letter would
contain; it could well be read at leisure.
He tore open Lady Betty's at once, and read
it feverishly as he stood there in the hall. "MY
DEAR FRIEND," it ran—"My father was so disappointed
when he got home at hearing that
you had been, and had already flown. He
suggests that you should stay to-morrow and
join us at luncheon, and he asks me to bend
your mind well in advance to the contemplation
of such an ordeal—as he seriously considers it.
The present cook doesn't meet with his approval,
but be reassured! It was only a new sauce sent
up one day with pride; but that unfortunate
sauce has since flavoured everything. My father
has naturally imagination; at his age he has
prejudices. Could even a Vatel face the combination?
"And now that I have performed my filial
duty, I will add a few lines for my own pleasure.
I humbly proffer a request. An idea has come
to me that seems most charming—before we
    [Pg 178]
part again! Since you are working here, won't
you make a small sketch of me?—a tiny, typical
thing, hit off all in a dash—and give it to me
as a souvenir of your work? Nothing that
would steal much of your time. I understand
that every moment is precious just now, with
the exhibitions so near, and I wish you not to
do it if you are very pressed. In return I shall
have a souvenir to give you—a strange, strange
thought of mine. Please feel very curious about
what it is to be, for you are certainly not going
to be told till the time comes. Au revoir. Your
friend, BETTY."
Wyndham mounted the stairs again slowly,
and in the studio he re-read these precious lines,
lingering on each individual word, and setting
a marvellous price on it. He was happy yet
terrified at this flash from fairyland into his
strenuous existence.
But her words, "before we part again," rang
in his mind, lurid, persistent. Yes, Lady Betty
would vanish out of his life soon enough; even
though her letter confirmed the respite which
she had indeed seemed to grant that morning,
but which nevertheless—anticipating regret—he
had scarcely ventured to dream of! There could
clearly be no question as to her attitude towards
his marriage; he told himself that even
the crime (flashing splendidly through his brain)
of cutting himself free from the Robinsons
with one heroic stroke in order to throw his
    [Pg 179]
whole life into this wonderful romance would
be futile. Would Lady Betty ever consent to
happiness purchased at such a price?—woo her
as he might!
But this sweet, dainty dream of her brief
companionship—was he called upon to turn
away from it? Surely, no; else she had been
the last to dazzle him with it. Her lead could
be trusted to be beyond reproach. And, however
she regarded it in her heart, would there
not be for him a little of strangely deep happiness;
something to remember always, to leave
a smile on his face at the moment of death?
The charm of the thought won him almost
irresistibly. Lady Betty was his inspiration for
ever; nay, that ideal elusive face would have
been his inspiration even if he had never encountered
her again. The harm—if harm there
was in their meeting again—had been done
irreparably in the past!
All would be over soon enough! What could
emphasise it more than this very letter of hers
he held in his hand? Was it not Lady Betty's
underlying thought in this desire for an exchange
of souvenirs?
All would be over soon enough! Life would
bear them apart, but the touch of sweetness
would remain as an illumination. He could
never be cheated out of that.
What was this souvenir she intended for him—this
"strange, strange thought" of hers?
    [Pg 180]
She had in truth piqued his curiosity, and he
foresaw her delight at his admitting it. What,
indeed, could it be? And, occupied now with
this fascinating speculation, he languidly took
up his other letters, his fingers turning them
over with an extreme indifference. Presently,
with a sudden decision, he broke Alice's envelope,
and began to read her note. Three of the sides
out of four were exactly as he had anticipated,
but towards the end he lighted on a passage
that unnerved him abruptly. "I have been
thinking of your friends in Grosvenor Place.
My heart goes out to Lady Lakeden. How hers
must lie broken and bleeding! To lose a
husband after only a few months of wedded
life! I shut my eyes and try to think that such
a thing cannot happen! And she and her father
have always been so kind to you. My love
for you is so great that I love everybody that
spares one little thought specially for you."
Wyndham threw the letter down. That was
enough; he must sacrifice all to the duties he
had undertaken. He and Lady Betty must not
see each other again. Could he not hear her
dear voice saying, "Life is always a compromise.
Perhaps it's a blessing to see our clear obligations."
Well, he at any rate saw his clear
obligations. He would reply to Lady Betty;
he would enter into the situation in all sincerity.
He would paint her some little thing for the
souvenir, and send it to her, and perhaps she
    [Pg 181]
might care to send him hers in return. His
meeting her to-day and this loving exchange
of gifts would remain in his thought as the
most poetic episode of his life; but an episode
that must speedily be closed.
She would understand and approve. Was
she not the very spirit of chivalry, of honour
and goodness? Since fate had given its decree,
let them both bow to it!
[Pg 182]
But the next morning he dressed with care,
choosing with fastidiousness among his flowing
silk ties, and went off to Grosvenor Place,
stopping only on the way to get a new canvas
for Lady Betty's portrait. It was as if some
great arm had encircled him irresistibly, and
hurried him out of his studio, and jerked him
into a hansom.
The first thing that caught his eye as he
entered the usual room was a travelling easel
opened out at its full length, brass-jointed,
proudly agleam; and he marked his appreciation
of the significance of its presence in equally
significant fashion—by standing the newly-acquired
canvas upon it. Then he installed
himself at his window, and after a little preliminary
fumbling he found himself well under
weigh. At last he had struck the clear, even
light he wanted, and he worked rapidly with
his note-taking till the time the butler appeared
with refreshments.
He sipped his wine, with one eye on the
folding-door and the other maintaining some
    [Pg 183]
interest in the sketches before him. But the
more vigilant eye of the two soon found its
reward. Lady Betty appeared on the very
stroke of noon, and came to him all fresh and
smiling, in sunny contrast to his sense of the
dull wintry universe.
"You seem a trifle thoughtful," she observed.
"I was speculating about the mysterious gift
you promise."
She laughed merrily. "I observe, then, it is
a bargain." She nodded towards the easel.
"I have had a charming idea as well," he said.
"Could you give me two hours a day till the
end of the month?"
"By all means."
"I should like to send you to the Salon."
"That is indeed a charming idea. But you
must not risk your big work," she reminded
him. "That, too, has to be ready in a few
weeks."
"I shall have the whole of March for it
exclusively. I am finishing my portraits this
month."
"Your sketches are satisfactory?"
"One or two mornings more, and I shall have
as much as I need. My difficulty with the
picture all these years has been that I have
had to build it up largely out of my own mind.
My actual scene has of course never really
existed in nature—though once or twice I
managed to catch something of the kind here
    [Pg 184]
on the spot. But that was quite tumultuous
and indiscriminate, whereas I wanted to catch
the essence of the thing."
"You frighten the poor little amateur out of
her wits."
They both laughed. "I had to snatch bits
as best I could. Whilst striving to suggest the
tumult and movement, I yet picked my material
so as to give contrast and symbolism. Then
I had to get my workmen and all the other kinds
of folk to pose separately in the studio. Fortunately
my old studio opened at the back into
a little glass-house, and so I was able to pose the
model as in the open. Naturally with the work
on so huge a scale, I was wrestling with almost
every drawback that could be conceived. It
was no doubt a great mistake to have planned
it at all, but I have learnt lessons I shall never
forget."
"But you have conquered at last."
"Honestly, no. But it will succeed. My first
idea was that the whole scene should be bathed
in sunlight. But this, by throwing a vibration
and glow over everything, would have submerged
the social contrast of Fashion and
Labour—would have made the whole thing
primarily a piece of pure technique, and
weakened its human significance. I did not
want the sunshine to be the motive of the
picture; I wanted the human side to stand out
first, and speak with its full force. I therefore
    [Pg 185]
chose a dull light, so that the smartness of
Fashion glows in relief against the drab tones of
Labour. I am afraid though I am exaggerating
the contrast more than I really like. That,
however, will help it with the great public."
"I don't think I approve of such sentiments.
I want you to strive for the highest."
"That is the future. But here it was a
question of extricating myself from wreckage.
As art it is far from perfect. But its success
will help me to higher things."
"On that ground only we must pass it this
time. But I have been wondering how you will
use these last sketches you have been making."
She examined them attentively awhile. "To me
they are not very intelligible, though I have a
vague idea of their purpose."
"They are mere notes," he explained. "If you
will come here by the window and get the point
of view, I think I can make them perfectly
intelligible."
She came and stood by his side, and one by
one he took up the little canvasses, explaining
his tones and masses and relative values. As he
spoke his words seemed to evoke a strange life
from the blurs and brush marks. A splash of
colour changed before her eyes into an omnibus;
a darker blob into a brougham; vistas and
spaces, buildings and foliage stood revealed
out of chaos. She listened with a pretty
interest, her lips daintily parted, her breath
    [Pg 186]
coming lightly, yet her features composed into
a characteristic stateliness—of which catching a
sudden glimpse as she brushed close to him, he
mentally registered the judgment "surpassingly
fine!" He was glad he had caught that
aspect; it summed her up in a way so perfectly.
There was his Salon picture!
"And while you have been listening I have
been studying you," he confessed, as he placed
the sketches aside.
"I should have thought you knew me by
heart."
"You are not so definite and limited. Beauty
is always flashing surprises on the eye that
can see."
"I think I like that," she said gaily. "I must
bear it in mind.... It's only a toy easel," she
flew off as he drew it forward. "In spite of
its excellent preservation, it is a relic of my
childhood: in the family I was supposed to have
talent, so an aunt gave it to me for a birthday
present, pegs and all, to take into the country
and sketch all sorts of pretty bits. There was
a little stool that went with it."
"It will serve admirably—without the stool,"
he added, with a smile. "I should like you to
stand with the folding-door as a background.
I think we're lucky to have such an interesting
stretch of panelling in the room. We must get
all the light on it we can."
She tripped down the room gaily, and stood as
    [Pg 187]
he indicated. Then he manipulated the blinds
and the curtain till a clear, soft light, melting
gradually into the surrounding greyer tones,
fell on the wood-work, and Lady Betty stood
illuminated with a suggestion of airy phantasm.
"The face a shade more to the left," he
commanded. "There! Now I have caught you
again."
He worked with an appearance of rapidity.
"A very dream of elusiveness!" he exclaimed
presently. "I must seize it whilst I'm in
form."
"Ah, I was just thinking it over," she said
gravely. "I am not sure that I am really
so pleased at being 'elusive.' If my features
are not to be seized, how are they to be
remembered? Definite women have the best
of it—they are less easily forgotten, I
should say."
"That would be true if one had any desire
to remember them," he returned. "But no,"
he corrected himself; "it is not true in any
case. Where there is only one definite set of
features to forget, it is forgotten wholly and
absolutely, once that point is reached. But the
woman with the elusive features has so many
sides that it would take a long time to forget
them all. And then a man is always so
entrancingly occupied calling up her picture.
You let all the fleeting phases float around
you. What more engrossing than to choose
    [Pg 188]
among these rival gleams of loveliness, yet
find them all enchanting and precious?"
"You convince me of the absolute unforgetableness
of the elusive woman," she laughed.
Then, abruptly, she grew grave again.
When he stopped work for that morning,
they both inspected the canvas critically.
"I think I have made the right
beginning—you
see the spirit of the idea is all there."
"With the help of the lesson you gave me
before," she ventured.
"If I continue equally well, we shall find oceans
of time before the end of the month. Wouldn't
it be splendid if the Salon received it!"
She was full of joyous delight at the prospect,
but, glancing at the clock, gave an exclamation
of horror. "We are forgetting lunch!"
A minute or two later Wyndham was shaking
hands with the old earl, who was gazing into his
face with apparently affectionate interest.
"This is very pleasant," said the earl. "Why,
bless my soul, I haven't caught a glimpse of you
for—let me see—three or four years is it?
What has been amiss? Genius starving in a
garret?—eh?"
"Pretty good guess," said Wyndham.
"You look fat enough, and sleek enough,"
laughed the earl. "On the face of things, I
should have taken it that you've done very
much better than I have. Now, if you had had
to put up with my scoundrel of a cook— —"
[Pg 189]
    "There was only one sauce on one occasion,
father."
"So you insist, so you insist. Well, you seem
pretty straight on your feet again, my boy; so
all's well that ends well."
They sat down to table.
"Making lots of nice little pictures?—eh?"
recommenced the earl genially.
"Oh, the one I am making sketches for here is
rather tremendous—the size of a wall!"
"The size of a wall!" echoed the earl. "My
gracious!"
"And now Mr. Wyndham has started a tiny
one of me," put in Lady Betty. "I'm going to
stand to him an hour or two every morning,
and we'll send it to the Salon next month."
"Bless my soul! That'll be a very pretty
little thing."
"It's only one side of me. Mr. Wyndham
thinks I've so many sides, and he selected just
one of them."
"Mr. Wyndham's a genius, but, with all
deference to him, I don't see that you've any
more sides to you than I have or Mr. Wyndham
has. We have each two sides and no more."
He raised his tumbler of egg-and-milk and
whiskey, and drank deeply. The others laughed.
"Oh, Mr. Wyndham thinks I'm so many
persons rolled into one," explained Lady Betty,
"and that you can take your choice."
"Many persons rolled into one! You are!"
    [Pg 190]
said the earl emphatically, setting down his
glass. "Only I never can take my choice.
If Mr. Wyndham has succeeded in doing so,
I offer him my congratulations. Oh, by the
way, talking of congratulations, it is true, I
suppose, that you are going to be married!"
Lady Betty looked down and manipulated
her fish.
"One of these days," said Wyndham lightly.
"There is no date fixed yet."
"Ah," said the earl. "How is your fiancée?"
"Perfectly well," said Wyndham. "First-rate."
"A Miss—er—Llewellyn—wasn't it?"
"Miss Robinson," corrected Wyndham.
"Oh, ah—Miss Robinson! Yes, yes, that was
the name—perfectly!" said the earl. "Mind
you give her my compliments and respects....
By the way, Betty, did I tell you I'm sick of
the climate? We shall have thrown out the
Embankment Bill by the end of the week, and
then I can turn my back on the House. It'll
be Egypt or a voyage to Japan—why, I might
meet Mr. Wyndham on his
honeymoon!—eh?—what?
I'll go across to Cockspur Street this
afternoon, and see what's sailing."
"Shall I come with you, father, and help
you to make up your mind?"
"If you'll be so kind," said the earl. "It was
my intention to suggest that you should
accompany me a great deal further than that,
but I changed my mind just now."
[Pg 191]
    "That is very considerate of you, father."
"Not at all, not at all." The earl made a
movement of deprecation. "You couldn't come
till the end of the month, so I simply make a
virtue of necessity."
"You horrify me, father. You are making
Mr. Wyndham think you are sorry I am
standing to him."
"It's only my fun, little girl. You don't
really suppose I want my own daughter
trotting behind my tail, and keeping her
watchful, charming eye on all my doings.
No, no, no! I had it in mind to suggest your
joining me as a matter of form. You might
have liked it, and I wanted to do the proper
thing. But I'm only too glad of the opportunity
of having you off my hands. Mr.
Wyndham was really providential. Meanwhile
I shall be proud to think of the nice little
picture of you—I beg your pardon, of one side
of you—hanging in the Salon."
"If you take one of the long voyages, I
presume you'll be away some months," ventured
Wyndham.
"Probably till the autumn. I assure you my
daughter long since washed her hands of me.
She carries off her maid and disappears for
years at the time. When I think she's in Paris,
somebody says, 'I saw your daughter last week
at Baden-Baden. How well she's looking!'
When I imagine she's in Baden-Baden, somebody
    [Pg 192]
says, 'I met your daughter at Florence
last week. How well she's looking!' Nowadays
I never speculate as to her whereabouts. I give
her absolutely carte blanche. I'm prepared to
hear and believe anything of her, and what's
more! to approve of it and give her my blessing.
On one point, you will observe, the testimony is
unanimous: 'How well she's looking!' That's
the one settled thing about her—and the sides
of her. For I suppose no two people ever do
see the same side of her." He scrutinised her
beamingly.
"Very well, father. It shall be goodbye till
the autumn. We shall part friends."
"So far as I see at present. We've to get
through the week yet. You'll lunch with us
these days, Mr. Wyndham?"
Wyndham murmured his acceptance, enchanted
at being so cordially recognised as a
friend of the house.
[Pg 193]
Wyndham told Alice of the happy chance that
had presented itself of a dash at Lady Lakeden's
portrait, and held out the possibility of the
Salon's finding a corner for it.
"How delightful!" she exclaimed. "Wouldn't
it be brilliant to be in the Salon as well as
in the Academy?"
"It's just a dainty little study, and of course
I'm doing it for the pure pleasure of the thing.
But the committee may not consider it important
enough for serious consideration, though
that depends on what I make of it. In any
case I'll present it to her afterwards in acknowledgment
of all their past kindness."
"It's the nicest acknowledgment you could
possibly make them. I am so glad you thought
of it." Her approval of the idea was generous
and eager. And she was excitedly interested in
the Grosvenor Place household. She plied him
with questions. Was it an old peerage? Was
there a great country house? Had Lady
Lakeden a brother? Then who was the heir
to the title?—would it pass to a collateral line?
    [Pg 194]
He enlightened her on all these matters, sketching
out for her the grooves which the lives of
such people generally occupied. And he threw
out the reflection that it was lucky indeed the
renewal of his relations with Grosvenor Place
had not been delayed any further. He had gone
back there in the very nick of time, for the
house was going to be shut up; the earl leaving
in a week or so to take a long sea voyage,
whilst Lady Lakeden meditated departure as
soon as the portrait was done. Alice remarked
that they seemed to be fond of roaming about a
great deal, and Wyndham pointed out that
Lady Lakeden and her father were exceptionally
placed, were to a great extent emancipated
from the "swim." The earl had practically
retired from society, and his daughter, as a
young widow, naturally sought distraction in
her own way, though of course she could float
brilliantly back into the world whenever the
mood took her.
Since the portrait was going to the Salon, he
was naturally compelled to tell Alice about it.
But the intense way in which she seemed to be
fixing her eyes on the Grosvenor Place household
disconcerted him beyond measure. This fresh
interest of his had become her interest too; she
had fastened on it out of all proportion to its
visible importance. At uneasy moments he
asked himself if she suspected that something
lay behind this apparently simple and innocent
    [Pg 195]
acquaintanceship; for her insistent and almost
morbid return to the subject on the following
days indicated its amazing hold of her.
Yet, obviously, it was impossible that she
should be cherishing any ideas of that kind.
He flattered himself that his demeanour towards
her, in this trying and difficult period, was
perfect; that he was as tender in all their
relations as if his heart were truly hers. Nay,
he was devoting even more of his leisure to her
than ever before. And for the very reason that
the evening journeys to Hampstead had become
distasteful, he was the more careful that there
should be no falling off in his attendance there.
In no wise could he have betrayed himself to his
affianced wife. No, she could not possibly have
any suspicion of the truth: he was satisfied that
her preoccupation with the Grosvenor Place
household all arose out of womanly sympathy
on her part; that Lady Lakeden's tragic widowhood
had touched the depths of her imagination.
Poor Alice! How simple and trusting her
surface reading of the facts! How ignorant
of the brutal complications, as grotesque as
incredible, in which Nature often wrapped up
human unhappiness!
What a terrible tangle it was for them all!
Were he free now, how gladly would his
princess have placed her hand in his! In the
old days the possible marriage of the brilliant
    [Pg 196]
girl had been hedged around with extraordinary
limitations—to which he too had bowed as to
something in the order of nature. But, as a
widow, she would naturally be expected to
please herself when matrimonially inclined. By
common social understanding, even the noblest
and richest of widows may permit herself a
considerable latitude of choice, and no word
of criticism can lie against her unless she
has travelled rather far out of the conventional
grooves. A marriage between him and
Lady Betty now might raise a flicker of
interest beyond what was usual—considering
his notorious poverty—but it could call down
nobody's censure.
But all this, alas! was but an idle speculation
now. The time sped; the earl bade him goodbye;
and he realised that the end was fast
approaching. The few days that remained to
him of Lady Betty's companionship became
trebly precious, to be counted with despair!
Though only an hour or two out of the twenty-four
was spent in her society, his whole heart
and mind, his whole life, were concentrated there.
Each day he brought her a bunch of lilies of the
valley, which she fixed in her bosom and insisted
he must include in the picture. And during the
enchanted time they were together, they talked
freely and in perfect trust. It was more than a
friendship—more than an exchange of confidences;
it was more than the intimacy of a
    [Pg 197]
soul with itself—for that is not always honest
even at its most courageous moments. In this
free, splendid realm of communion with her, he
stood up in all his manhood: rising to that
simple truth which is yet of the heavens and
the spaces; measuring himself against great
standards; seeing and regretting his egotisms,
vanities, self-deceptions; valuing himself humbly.
The depths of Lady Betty's sympathy were
indeed profound. She could enter into his life,
appreciate motives barely realised by himself,
and, with charming broad humanity, understand
and forgive his actions even when he felt
ashamed of them as unworthy and discreditable.
No comedy of sentiment here—no playing of the
saint on either side; but a noble simplicity, a
serene good faith, a spontaneous self-revelation!
He recounted to her, as naturally as everything
else, the whole history of his acquaintanceship
with the Robinsons. He spared himself
not a detail: how he had first dallied with
temptation, his moment of panic, his specious
reasoning, his ignoble surrender! He laid
himself bare as with a scalpel. Yet of Alice
he spoke always with reverence and loyalty,
dwelling on her devotion, on the little she
needed from him to give her happiness. And
Lady Betty caught his appreciation of her. "I
seem to know and understand her well," she
said. "She is a delicate, untarnished soul. She
seems more real to me than people who have
    [Pg 198]
lived near me all my life. And so her heart
has gone out to me! I feel I could never bear
to meet her—the moment would be too terrible!
Ah, why did you not speak in the old days?"
"I repeat I had not the right. And then I did
not dream I was worth one single thought of
yours."
"I gave you all my thoughts. You were so
serious. You sat with knitted brow, sternly in
your work, and I hardly dared to come near
you. You seemed remote from women; grimly
devoted to your purpose—to triumph or to die!
At poor me you scarcely deigned to look. And
then you disappeared, and I knew you would
not return."
"I disappeared. I left happiness behind me,
and retired into my living tomb."
"My heart bleeds for you." There was a
pause. Her eyes were full of pain. But presently
she broke the silence, as if discovering
some crumb of comfort. "This time at least
you will not be going to privation."
"In my heart of hearts privation is preferable."
"Ah, no. Remember it is the call of duty. It
is the sacrifice we must make for Alice's sake.
She is a good woman. Her life must not be
broken."
"I promise I shall try to make her happy—whatever
the cost. But think how happy we
should have been together, you and I, darling."
"We should have been happy together," she
    [Pg 199]
said in a low voice. "It would have been a
perfect union. But I say again that life is a
compromise. Our demands are great; we have
to accept the little that is granted."
"Yet the door still stands open," he mused.
"We may yet take our fate into our own hands."
"The door stands open, but we turn our backs
upon it."
"We are too strong," he groaned. "I am
tempted to pray for weakness."
She drew herself up, her face alight with a
noble radiance. "Let us both be proud of our
strength. We have set right above everything."
"But suppose we are mistaken—" he urged
tensely.
"We cannot strike her down! No, no, we
must not take away her great happiness—you
have given it to her! I depute you, if you love
me, to guard her welfare—on my behalf and
on your own. Remember, too, she is happy
with so little!"
"I shall be a loyal husband. But, in the
realms that lie outside her penetration, you
have promised that I may cherish the thought
of you as an inspiration."
"To speak to you with my own voice—to help
you to the strength that cannot falter!"
But the end was close upon them. He could
not linger over the picture, even had he wished.
As the last days slipped by his face saddened
visibly. Lady Betty begged him to bear up.
    [Pg 200]
He was so changed in aspect that Alice could
not fail to notice it.
"There is no danger," he returned. "She has
already spoken of it, and I have put it down to
fatigue. She has seen how desperately I have
been working for months on end, and she is
satisfied I need rest."
One day, he ventured to question Lady Betty
about her plans, but she replied that they were
vague. She only knew that she would travel
for the present; she would not make up her
mind as to details till the last moment.
"But even then I should not tell you," she
added, with a wan smile. "Our parting must
be decisive. I shall read of your career, and my
mind shall be always with you in your work;
but I shall not cross your path again. There is
one last thing I suggest. When you have
finished the picture, let us spend the whole of
our last day together."
"I shall set it apart. We shall consecrate it
with our farewell."
"I shall give you the souvenir I promised. I
shall keep it till the end; and then it will be
goodbye."
"Goodbye?" he breathed. "Oh, it is cruel!"
He was shaken again. Some wild rebellion
was rising in him, and vainly Lady Betty tried
to calm him with pleading—even with tears.
But she revealed only the more her own
anguish.
[Pg 201]
    At last she had command of herself again, and
put a stern inflection into her voice.
"For Alice's sake you must conquer yourself.
No, let it be for my sake. I put it as the test of
your love for me. Otherwise I shall believe
that your love is selfish."
"I promise I shall conquer myself, but I must
have time."
"You make me terribly afraid—you may
wound her by a chance word."
"That is impossible. Her mind is serene—no
word of mine shall disturb it."
But Lady Betty's fears were by no means
allayed. She wrote him long letters, imploring
him to keep command of himself, else she would
regret bitterly that they had ever met again.
They had both fought this terrible battle: they
were neither of them emerging unscathed, but
their wounds and hurt were the price of
honourable victory. She was sure of herself;
but was he—the man!—to shrink back when
the supreme moment came? The thought of
loyal duty accomplished would bring equanimity
hereafter.
"Ah, if all were only a dream!" he exclaimed
sadly, as he lay thinking of nights.
And then he would try to believe that he had
not met Lady Betty again, had never even
heard of her since her wedding-day. He had
never made the acquaintance of the Robinsons,
had never set foot in their great ugly house at
    [Pg 202]
the corner. Were not all these things the
fancies of a disordered imagination, and was
he not still here in Hampstead, in his narrow
iron bed up on the gallery? To-morrow he
would jump up and make his miserable breakfast
as usual, would think of working without
being able to raise a hand, and would potter
away the hours. And at six in the evening he
would see his prosperous neighbour from the
City go past with noiseless, gentle step, bearing
a plaited rush-bag with a skewer thrust through
it. Yet what a relief to throw off the illusions
of these latter days, and find himself again as
of old, free of all the tangle; even though the
problem of bread still faced him, and the vista
of hopeless days stretched away endlessly!
Alas! the morning light, filling his panelled
bedroom and revealing to his eyes the many
luxuries of these prosperous days, testified only
too convincingly to the reality of recent developments.
And yet, as he turned up the well-known
Hampstead street of an evening on his way to
the Robinsons, he would still struggle again
to recover the illusion that the old days were
yet. Approaching the house as it loomed in
the near distance through the wintry mist,
he would imagine himself supremely unconcerned
with it. And then he would stop outside
his own former door, and fumble in his
pocket a moment as if to find the key. Like
    [Pg 203]
lessons learnt after the mind is set, all these
later accretions to his existence were ready to
drop away, to have a shadowy relation to him.
It made him realise with astonishment how
easily he might cut the Robinsons out of
his life, and proceed as if he had never known
them. His bond of obligation was more real
to him than the people to whom he was
bound!
He was shrewd enough to see that in his
heart of hearts he was sullenly and perpetually
angry that so much had come to him from so
extraneous a source. Where his own strength
and gifts had failed, these people from a world
that was not his world, either in thought or
mode, had come in and brought him prosperity.
This galling sense of absolute dependence on
the Robinsons seemed the deepest humiliation
he had known. They had given him food when
he was nigh starvation; they had given work
when the prospect of work had vanished—had
showered on him benefits and kindnesses innumerable.
They had restored him to society
and to the world of art and letters. He owed
them the confidence of his bearing before the
world, the manly swing of his step, the pride
of his glance.
That this should be his destiny was horrible!
He rebelled and cried out with all his might.
Oh! to wield the sceptre of destiny himself!—to
shape the evolution of a brilliant career and
    [Pg 204]
merit the crown of a great love by his own
power and performance!
And yet at the back of his troubled mind
there lay in terrible calm the stern determination
to stand by his obligations. His promise
to Lady Betty was in no danger. All this
feverish agitation was but as the surf beating
on a granite shore. He knew that he would
bow his head in resignation; that, after the
parting with Lady Betty, he would settle down
as the most attentive of husbands; acquiescent
of an atmosphere of physical well-being, yet
paradoxically living from hand to mouth, so far
as his deeper life was concerned; thankful for
any morsel of good each day might bring him,
and looking not beyond its horizon.
Alice should have her happiness, never guessing
what turmoil and torture two souls had
voluntarily undergone for her.
[Pg 205]
In the silence and privacy of her room Alice
was sobbing her life away. Like an opium
eater, she had sought magnificent dreams, had
surrendered herself to beautiful illusions, had
duped herself supremely. But the awakening
was fraught with fever and suffering.
On that memorable afternoon when her father
had brought home the wonderful announcement
that Wyndham was to follow him, Alice had
looked at herself in the glass, and though her
favourite dress lay ready for her, she knew
he would not of his own impulse bestow a
second glance upon her.
The evening had come and passed. As by
some enchantment Wyndham had appeared,
was seated at the same table with herself,
engaged in intimate conversation with the
family, left alone to wine and cigars with her
father; rejoining them in the drawing-room,
listening to her playing, singing to her accompaniment!
Then, lo, he was gone; and she was
left to ponder on the swift,surprising turn of
events. After all these years of emotion, the
    [Pg 206]
acquaintanceship was an accomplished fact.
She was to penetrate within his door at last,
to become, for the time being, part of the very
business of his life!
She retired that night still with the sense of
miracle; yet infinitely grateful to her father
for his charming concession to her whim.
And her first subtle move had been crowned
with success! At least there was work where
work was needed so sorely; work, too, that
brought her so near to him, annihilating a
distance she had reconciled herself to think of
as impassable, and opening up potentialities of
service which her fertile wits would not be slow
to seize upon. Would it not be a joy to help
him to a firm footing again, to raise this gifted
life of which she had watched the long slow
sinking! It was miraculous that this privilege
should fall to her! But everything must appear
to flow naturally to him of itself; he should
never suspect that the unseen hand at work
was hers, any more than he should ever know
that this was what she, who loved him, had for
years worked out in fancy.
And she!—she should have no thought but
the unselfish desire of serving him! What
matter if she carried in her heart the cold
conviction that he could never love her—since
all she had dared aspire to had fallen to her lot!
For who was she to cherish vain hopes? She
had not the commonest touch of beauty; she
    [Pg 207]
was hopelessly out of his sphere. She felt
herself appallingly ignorant and inexperienced.
In her easy shelter the years had slipped by in
monotonous quiet. In the world outside there
beat a life that was strenuous, entrancing,
dramatic—the struggle of the realm of affairs,
the pomp and colour of courts and society, the
important events of politics, the field of view
that opened in the novels, or lay spread behind
the footlights of the theatres. Wyndham belonged
to all this brilliant universe, had walked
with firm tread amid it all, breathing its airs
with an assurance born of right and nature. No
poverty could destroy his inalienable privileges,
could render him less by a hair's breadth;
indeed, save for the manifest inconveniences of
the former, poverty or riches seemed irrelevant
on that plane of high humanity; where differences
of fortune were obscured by the highness
of the humanity, however fertile in distinctions
these differences might be in a lower world.
But as the acquaintance ripened, as she tasted
of the gracious intimacy of the long sittings, his
perfect kindness, his chivalry, his constant
solicitude began to undermine the attitude
with which she had embarked on the adventure.
They had become such good friends, and she
could not blind herself to the fact that he was
pressing his personality on her beyond what
mere courtesy and friendliness demanded. But
she still fought to stand firm, and her humility
    [Pg 208]
was her strength. It was even more than her
strength—it read for her his doubts and hesitations.
Not that she crudely supposed that, in his
conduct to her, he was swayed by ulterior
considerations. She saw that he had genuinely
an affection for her, more kind and brotherly
than a lover's affection; she knew that he was
trying to like her better, to raise her in his
estimation far higher than the truth. And
she conceded that his hesitation was natural,
that she was no mate for him, that his world
would openly despise her. No, he must not
marry her for the safety her fortune would
bring him. She would marry only for love,
and, as that she could never win, she would
consequently never marry.
She dreaded now lest the situation should
take a more definite turn, lest he should begin
to woo her in earnest. She wished to be left in
contentment with her deep secret happiness
which could never be effaced from her life. She
had had her way. It was she who had brought
him the succour he needed; she—of whose
existence he had never dreamed, whom he had
often met face to face yet never glanced at. It
was she who had rescued for the world's benefit
this splendid genius that the world had rejected.
This was joy enough. To anything else the end
must be disillusion.
For awhile she lived in terror lest he might
speak. But as the work progressed, and he
    [Pg 209]
became more and more enthusiastic over her
portrait, she could not but fall a victim to
the subtle implication, and begin to believe that
he must really think more of her than she had
ever dared to imagine. It was then that her
stern control of herself began to slip away.
Wilfully she shut her eyes to all that she understood
only too well, and surrendered herself to
the spell and wonder of the vista that opened
before her. It was the best thing that life had
brought her, she told herself, and in an impulse
of pagan desire she was impelled to wring from
it the last drop of passionate happiness it could
afford her. Her love for him reached out into
new depths; the dull, despairing, impossible love
of before became a fever, a frenzy, a great yearning
passion that must pour itself out or kill her.
Then came the supreme moment in which she
let the belief that he loved her seize entire
possession of her. Must he not have for his
mate a woman who would love him and make
him a perfect wife? He was a being apart from
his own world, devoted to serener and higher
ambitions. Had she not seen the glow with
which he expounded his ideas and purposes,
forgetting she was a humble, uninstructed
listener, and surrounding her soul with the
sweet unction of the implied perfect equality?
Perhaps it had dawned upon him at last that
devotion greater than hers the world could not
hold. In his consecration to his high calling he
    [Pg 210]
did not need a wife to figure brilliantly amid
social pleasures and functions, but a helpmeet
whom perhaps he could not so easily find in
those exalted spheres; one who needed no
pleasures for herself, no triumphs; who had no
purposes of her own, no desires, save the
supreme end of self-sacrifice on the altar of
his happiness and achievement. Only a woman
absolutely capable of such self-effacement could
understand the perfect bliss of it. If every man
could find such faithfulness at his own hearth,
how the world would thrive and grow blessed!
And she thanked Heaven for the little fortune
she could bring him, for this precious money to
establish his life on a safe and sure footing.
And when he had spoken at last, she, casting
away the last doubt, had thrown herself headlong
into the dream. With her arms round
him, and her lips to his, she felt that she had
always been destined for this high bliss, that
rendered by contrast the quiet stream of her life
a mockery of life.
The joyous period of intoxication was all too
short. With the sobering of the world to its
work again in the new year, she, too, sobered a
little, and the old questioning revived in her.
Was it really the truth that he loved her?
Where was the note of passion she herself had
poured out so recklessly? His personal magnetism,
his urbane, affectionate friendliness, the
caressing vibrations of his voice, his delicate and
    [Pg 211]
considerate dealing with the gaps of ignorance
she daily revealed—all this held her in an
invincible spell. But the deep, irresistible conviction
for which her heart yearned was unmistakably
absent in his whole relation to her.
Perhaps some terrible struggle was going on
within him. Was he recoiling in terror sometimes
from the thought of the mate he had
chosen? Surely at times he was arguing
himself into acceptance and contentment. What
meant the strange, furtive glances he sometimes
directed at her?—not the soft glances of love, but
glances bewildering, baffling! She watched him
with a supernaturally sensitive insight, appraising
his every expression, following the imagined
see-saw of his doubts and reassurances.
Yet when he had told her of his meeting with
Lady Lakeden again, and of the new portrait
he had engaged upon, no shade of jealousy had
arisen in her. Her sense of the calamity that
had befallen Lady Lakeden was so infinitely
distressing that she could have fallen upon her
knees and prayed. To lose a dear husband after
only a few months of wedded happiness!—what
more crushing grief could a woman's destiny
hold? She shut her eyes and shuddered, as
she tried to realise the depths of its meaning.
It seemed to her that no wife with the least
spark of womanhood could recover from such a
blow; that sorrow and weeping must be her
portion for the rest of her days.
[Pg 212]
    She redoubled her devotion to Wyndham,
suddenly full of fear lest she should have been
betrayed into injustice to him out of mere
morbidity. And her mind lingered gently on
the figure of this other woman whom she had
never seen, but to whom her heart went out in
an impulsive flood of love and pity. If only
she could know her, and let her understand how
deeply she realised her grief! But Wyndham
had made no response to her first involuntary
expression of this desire, and she was too diffident
to recur to the point again. Perhaps if
she waited patiently he might suggest such
a meeting of his own accord. But the days
went, and Wyndham was silent.
And not only silent, but changed. "Yes, yes.
He is changed in a hundred ways," she cried,
"though he does not know he has shown it."
If, for a moment, she had been willing to take
refuge in the belief that over-sensitiveness and
diffidence had been leading her into distrust of
the situation, her eyes were suddenly too wide
open to allow of any further indulgence in
comfort of that kind. There was no mistaking
this unprecedented self-abstraction, the curious,
far-away expression that was almost stereotyped
on his features, the continued inattentiveness
to her words that often required her
to repeat her remarks and not unfrequently
ignored them, so that she was continually
shrinking into herself, too wounded to insist
    [Pg 213]
again. By the side of this, his former attitude,
little as it had satisfied her, seemed impulsive
and passionate!
His face was grave and sad for the most part,
but sometimes it shone with a rapture which
she knew had not been inspired by her! He
was not himself in any way; his smile and
laugh had not the old spontaneous charm.
Every note of his affection rang false. And
yet, in form, his solicitude and loving care for
her remained the same as always. But this
could not blind her; she knew he was trying
his best, but his heart and mind were not with
her. Ah, well, if he cared for anybody, it was
certainly not for her!
"Who has drawn him away from me? Who
has robbed me?—who has robbed me?"
For days she had pondered and pondered, her
mind faltering, her lips dreading to whisper the
name. Wyndham was painting Lady Lakeden.
She was young; she must be interesting and
beautiful.
"He is in love with Lady Lakeden!" It
escaped from her lips at last, and then she
remained ashen—trembling.
Nay, surely he had loved Lady Lakeden in
the old days—loved her secretly and despairingly,
seeing her often, but too poor to woo
her! Moreover, Lady Lakeden had then loved
another. "Yes, yes, that is the truth—the
truth!" she cried; "And now he has been
    [Pg 214]
seeing her again daily, and the old love has
been reborn!"
A pall descended over Alice's spirit. What a
cruel situation! Here was Wyndham pledged
to a woman he could not care for, yet in love
with another whose whole heart was with the
dear husband that had been taken from her.
"He is struggling bravely to be true to me—I
see it all now—he is breaking his heart. It is
my duty to release him from his word—ah! no,
no!" She shuddered and covered her face,
shaken and shaken. "Even if I gave him his
freedom," she argued presently, clinging on to
the wreck with might and main, "it would only
be freedom to find despair. Lady Lakeden
loved her husband. I know she is great and
true. She knows he is mine. I trust her—I
must trust her—I will pray for strength to trust
her. Heaven help me!—Heaven help me!"
A terrible pang of jealousy smote her. Detesting
herself for it, she tried hard to repress
the flood of bitter hatred she felt rising in her
against Lady Lakeden. Poor Lady Lakeden!
She had suffered enough and was blameless.
She could not help it if Wyndham loved her.
An overwhelming curiosity to know what
manner of woman Lady Lakeden was, took
possession of her. Of course, she was young
and beautiful. But what colour were her eyes?
Were they large and deep and brilliant? What
expression had she habitually? What colour
    [Pg 215]
was her hair? And was it abundant? And
how arranged? Was she slim and tall? How
did she dress? And in what costume was
Wyndham painting her? Were not these the
questions that had been a thousand times on
her lips, and yet remained unuttered?
And why had she not asked of him these
questions as clearly and boldly as she had
thought them? Had there been some obscure
suspicion in her mind all along, and she had
feared to embarrass her affianced husband?
Poor Wyndham! She told herself she had
the most perfect understanding of his mind.
She held him in honour as a noble gentleman,
and knew surely that he would fret his heart
away rather than wound her by word or deed.
She would have put her hand in the fire for the
certainty that he would never withdraw from
the compact; that he would go through with
the marriage, and die rather than relax the
effort to simulate perfect happiness in their
after life.
Could she accept such a sacrifice? Could she
spoil his life for him, when she had only meant
to set it straight, and had asked for no greater
privilege? Would that she had been able, by
some miracle, to help him from across the old
impassable distance without coming into his
life at all! It was for her to choose—to keep
him and all that the future with him might
hold, or to tell him frankly that she thought it
    [Pg 216]
best to set him free and return to the simple
paths of her old existence.
But, ah, no, she could not give him up—she
could not give him up! She had possessed his
lips, she had possessed his thought and solicitude.
The echoes of his voice caressed her.
Break with him! She shut her eyes and
shuddered again; her whole soul grew sick,
and she writhed in agony.
[Pg 217]
Calling one day and finding her alone in the
drawing-room, Mr. Shanner, after some moments
of unruffled demeanour and honeyed conversation,
abruptly launched into a piteous outbreak.
"I tell you, Alice, you've made a fine mistake
with that swell of yours," he exclaimed, his eyes
flashing with resentment.
Alice stared at him in deep distress. Ever
since the engagement Mr. Shanner had been all
decorousness and deference. As he broke now
through his ashen shell of propriety, his sedate
person seemed to relapse, to stand limp, a trifle
greyer, a trifle less well trimmed.
"Oh," she gasped at last, "you are under some
misapprehension."
"Come, come, Alice," he said; "don't you
suppose I've two eyes—and wide-open ones,
too?"
"I don't really understand what you're alluding
to, Mr. Shanner," she returned as coldly as
she could find it in her.
"I am alluding to your engagement, of
course," he insisted. His tone showed he was
    [Pg 218]
determined to force the subject on her. "What
do you suppose the fellow is going to marry you
for? Men of his class do not come out of their
way to look for a wife amongst people of our
class. You mustn't mind my not mincing words,
but it's clear to me he doesn't care a fig about
you, and that your money is the attraction.
There, that's plain!"
Alice felt herself turn scarlet. Mr. Shanner
suddenly stood revealed to her—of roughness
and coarseness unendurable.
"I don't understand you," she exclaimed,
feeling she was floundering, and with an acute
sense of her lack of social skill to meet the
contingency and cut short the interview.
"Oh, yes you do, Alice. Only you are too
proud to say so."
"You are mistaken. My intended husband
and I are on the best of terms. I am very much
surprised to hear this from you."
"You mean that for a snubbing, no doubt.
Well, I suppose I brought it on myself." He
smiled uneasily and bit his lip. "Only I did
think that, being so old a friend of the family,
I had the right to give you a word of advice
when the happiness of your life is at stake."
"Oh! please, Mr. Shanner—I'm very sorry,"
she breathed, all gasps and palpitations. "But
really, truly, you're mistaken."
"I have used my eyes and head. I am not
mistaken. Everything's all wrong, and you
    [Pg 219]
know it, Alice. I have been reading it in your
face of late—I tell you you show it. Give up
the swell before things go to the devil."
"I'm sorry, Mr. Shanner," she said, with all
the kindness in her tone that she could muster,
"but if you will get these extraordinary ideas
into your head, I certainly am not going to
fight them."
He smiled wanly, droopingly. "Another snubbing,
I suppose. But you needn't take it in such
ill part. I don't profess to belong to the aristocracy:
I do profess to be a friend, one of the
sort that's to be trusted. And I think you'll
come to recognise that in the long run. Whatever
happens, John Shanner's your friend, and
when the time comes, you'll find him ready to
hand. But I earnestly advise you not to delay.
Throw up all this business before there's
mischief."
Alice smiled bravely. "I repeat that Mr.
Wyndham and myself are on the happiest of
terms, though I am sure you mean your advice
for the kindest."
She took up her stand behind this simple
assertion, so that he could not beat down her
refusal to be drawn into a deeper discussion.
By degrees he pulled together his decorum,
recovered his frigidity, and ultimately retired
with the dignified utterance, "Well, I hope
you are not going to be disillusionised, my
child, but I have my doubts. At any rate, as
    [Pg 220]
I say, I stand by you in any case. Only promise
me one thing, that if ever you find my warning
was not mistaken, you will do me the justice
to admit it."
She thanked him gravely, and assured him
that she fully appreciated his kindness, and
willingly made the promise. She was glad
indeed of the chance of winding up the
interview thus amicably. Yet, when he had
gone, she felt panic-stricken at this revelation
of how openly she had been wearing her heart—as
if veritably on her sleeve. How fortunate
her parents had observed nothing yet! But
they, of course, were taking the perfection of
everything so entirely for granted, and were
so happy themselves over the beautiful romance
which had transformed their household and their
lives, that it was difficult for any suspicion to
enter their heads. Certainly they had never
read any expression in her face save that of
rapture and contentment.
She must try to control herself. If only, like
other women, she were more practised in
assuming a surface self that won acceptance,
that none could penetrate!
But Mr. Shanner was so absolutely in the
right. Was it really worth while going on as at
present? Could anything be more unhappy
than all this uncertainty and perplexity?
Something must be done. Things must come
soon to a crisis.
[Pg 221]
    And then, one morning, some two or three
days before the end of the month she received
a letter from Wyndham, who had dined with
them the evening before, announcing that he
would be absent from the studio the whole day
practically, as he had made club engagements
for the entire afternoon and evening. As, too,
he would be lunching out, it would not be worth
her while to come to the studio at all on that
day. He was sorry he had forgotten to mention
all this when saying goodbye, but he was
scribbling the note immediately on entry, and
in a hurry to catch the post.
This letter gave Alice food for reflection. She
did not attach any significance to the alleged
club engagements; she had never grudged him
the occasional evenings he spent in that way,
since it kept him in touch with the art-world.
But in this present instance there was certainly
a suggestion of anxiety on his part that she
should keep away from the studio over the day.
"Ah—I understand!" she flashed, clenching her
fingers; "Lady Lakeden's portrait is to be
brought there to-day, and he does not wish me
to see it! She is beautiful—beautiful!—he fears
her beauty will sting me to jealousy."
He had never wished her to see the portrait!
Had he not always turned the conversation
whenever she had mentioned it? And only
last night, as if in anticipation of so natural
a desire on her part, he had had to confess
    [Pg 222]
that it was finished, but had added that it was
going straight to Paris, as he preferred to feel
it was safe there in the hands of his agent.
He had thus led her to conclude that the
picture would not be passing through the
studio at all; but, with his letter now before
her, she felt certain that his aim was to get
the portrait framed, to touch it up, and then
send it off without showing it to her.
But she had the right to see it, if she so
desired, she told herself bitterly. If the Salon
accepted it, nothing could prevent her going
to Paris with her mother; though so enterprising
an adventure was quite outside the
habits of their life—a consideration on which
he was counting, perhaps. But the Salon
might not accept it, and in any case two or
three months might elapse before such a
possible visit, and in that time who could say
how things might turn?
Entrance to the studio was a privilege that
had been freely bestowed upon her. He had
not forbidden her to come; he had merely
tried to stop her by suggestion and diplomacy.
But she would not be denied.
She would meet strategy with strategy: she
would take care to arrive late in the evening,
so as to be alone there. In the afternoon, or
earlier in the evening, there was the danger