# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2016
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    Kevin J. Zimmer, A Birder's Guide to North Dakota
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/53307/53307-h/53307-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	whole
# comments:	NA

    by
Kevin J. Zimmer
1979
Distributed by
L & P Press
Box 21604
Denver, CO 80221
This book is dedicated to my parents, Bernard and Mary Zimmer, who presented me with all the opportunities that made this book possible.
The area covered by this guide is so large that I could not possibly
have written it up without the help of many people.
I particularly wish to thank Bob Randall and Frank Kelley, who provided
much of the information used for the Bismarck-Mandan and Grand
Forks areas, respectively; my brother and almost constant field companion
Barry Zimmer, who helped with many suggestions; Kelly Stonecypher,
who provided inspiration and the best kind of moral support; and most
importantly, Jim Lane, whose advice, help, and encouragement made this
book possible.
Many others helped in some way, either with advice and information,
or as field companions. I want to thank the following, and after this has
gone to press I will probably think of others: Milan Alby, Steve Allen, Beth
Anderson, David L. Bartling, William Buresh, Gary A. Eslinger, Palmer
Forness, Ralph Fries, Ann and Bob Gammell, David Goeke, Harold Holt,
Harold Kantrud, Art Lies, Donald E. Lindberg, Jon M. Malcolm, Rebecca
Quanrud, Robert Rollings, Alan K. Trout, Robert Walkin, Dr. Nathaniel
Whitney, Hugh Willoughby, Jim Zimmer, and Bernard and Mary Zimmer.
I would appreciate any suggestions or information for future editions
of this book. All such correspondence should be addressed to: Kevin J.
Zimmer, L & P Press, Box 21604, Denver, Colorado 80221.
NORTH DAKOTA (Quarters are shown bounded
by County Lines, Highways, or Rivers)
North Dakota is a fairly large state (17th among the states in total
land area) but a sparsely populated one (45th). Most of the people live in
rural areas, because there are few cities of any size; even these are, for the
most part, widely scattered. The largest urban area (the tri-city area of
Fargo, West Fargo, and Moorhead, Minnesota) has a combined population
of under 120,000.
Most people visit North Dakota on their way to someplace else. They
rush through because of the lack of big cities and scenic areas. Although it
is true that much of the state is anything but scenic, there is great beauty
awaiting those who explore the prairie, the rolling, wooded hills of the Turtle
Mountains, or the rugged badlands along the Little Missouri River.
Over the years some of the greatest names in ornithology have visited
North Dakota on birding expeditions. At the head of the list is John James
Audubon, who made one of his last painting-and-collecting expeditions
here in 1843. The most celebrated birder ever to visit the state, though, has
to be our twenty-sixth president, Theodore Roosevelt.
Roosevelt established a large cattle-ranching enterprise in the Little
Missouri badlands in 1883. In doing so he established two ranches: the
Maltese Cross Ranch (about seven miles south of Medora) and the Elkhorn
Ranch (about thirty-five miles north of Medora). Although not an ornithologist
in the strictest sense of the word, Roosevelt kept written records of his
bird sightings in the badlands. These records represent some of his most
colorful and interesting writings.
Much of the topography of North Dakota can be traced to the effects of
Wisconsin-age glaciation, particularly in the north and east. Large portions
of these glaciated areas are peppered by countless ponds and lakes. A
frightening number have been drained; nevertheless, these wetlands constitute
one of the most important waterfowl production areas in the
country.
Although North Dakota cannot boast of large mountain ranges like
the states farther west, it is anything but a flat, monotonous state. Much of
the state is characterized by gently rolling prairie. More noticeable hills
and escarpments may be found in the Turtle Mountains, Pembina Hills, on
the south side of Devils Lake, and along stretches of several rivers (notably
the Missouri). Further, beach lines and sandhills left over from the last
ice age provide a somewhat local variation to the level topography of some
areas. The most rugged terrain occurs in the Little Missouri badlands,
which are characterized by numerous steep slopes, severely eroded buttes,
and arroyos.
A large percentage of the state is occupied by agricultural land. This
category includes not only actively farmed land, but also retired croplands,
8
domestic hayfields, fence rows, wood lots (referred to as tree claims),
shelterbelts, orchards, and farmyards. While many of these areas are
almost devoid of wildlife, others provide suitable habitat for a number
of species.
Mixed-grass prairie is the predominant natural habitat, and it supports
the largest numbers of many of the prairie specialties which nest in
the state. Both tall-grass prairie and short-grass prairie also exist locally.
A prairie habitat which is quite limited in the state is the sage-prairie
found in the southwest corner (primarily in the western portions of Bowman
and Slope Counties). Xeric in character, it is composed mostly of buffalo
and blue grama grasses peppered with sage flats and clumps of
prickly pear cactus.
Many prairie areas are punctuated by woody thickets, which host a
number of species that are characteristic of woodland-edge habitats. These
thickets are composed mostly of large shrubs (wolfberry and silverberry
are commonly found) in combination with a few small trees.
Wetlands occupy a major position on the list of habitats. Several
types, ranging from seasonal ponds and prairie marshes to permanent
wood-bordered lakes, are found here. Prairie wetlands are scattered
throughout the state, but are concentrated most densely in a broad belt
through the central and east-central portions. Permanent wood-bordered
ponds and lakes are mostly restricted to the Turtle Mountains.
Often associated with prairie wetlands are extensive wet meadows.
These are of primary interest to the birder because they support large
numbers of desired species such as Yellow Rail, Willow Flycatcher, Sedge
Wren, and Le Conte’s and Sharp-tailed Sparrows.
There are also several large alkaline lakes. Because of the high salinity
of the water and the adjacent salt flats, no emergent plants are found,
so they are not characterized by large numbers of breeding birds. They do
serve as excellent attractions to migrant shorebirds.
Very little of North Dakota is occupied by forest habitat, although it is
locally well-represented. Much of it is found in the form of floodplain
forests along the Red, James, Sheyenne, Souris, Missouri, and Little Missouri
Rivers and their tributaries. In the west the floodplain forests are
dominated, for the most part, by cottonwoods (as is true along large portions
of the Missouri and Little Missouri Rivers) and have a more open
canopy and understory than those of the eastern streams.
In the east bottomland forests are represented by a more diverse plant
community. Among the more common trees are American elm, bur oak,
green ash, basswood, and box elder.
Tracts of upland deciduous forest can be found locally throughout the
state. In the southern and western portions, these are largely restricted to
buttes and bluffs overlooking various rivers. Bur oak, green ash, and quaking
9
aspen are usually the most representative trees. (A good example can
be found at Little Missouri State Park in Dunn County.)
Upland deciduous forests also occur in the northeast. The best examples
are in the Pembina Hills of Pembina and Cavalier Counties. Smaller
tracts can be found on hills and bluffs overlooking many of the larger
lakes such as those around the shores of Devils Lake and Stump Lake. Predominant
trees include bur oak, American elm, quaking aspen, green ash,
box elder, and birch. The well-forested Turtle Mountains are dominated for
the most part by quaking aspen.
Small groves of evergreen forests dot the slopes and draws of the Little
Missouri badlands. These are represented by various species of junipers
and by ponderosa pine.
In addition to the natural habitats there are several artificial ones.
Agricultural areas, the largest group, have already been mentioned. Others
are urban areas—landscaped yards, gardens, golf courses, city parks,
cemeteries, and the almost-sterile downtown streets. Stock ponds, reservoirs,
and drainage ditches also constitute artificial environments. An
interesting man-made habitat (at least from the birder’s view) is the
municipal sewage ponds. These often attract an incredible array of waterfowl
and shorebirds and make excellent birding spots for anyone who can
put up with the smell.
A few years ago the American Birding Association surveyed its
members to determine the 50 “most-wanted” species in North America. Of
these, 9 are to be expected in North Dakota. In decreasing order of priority
they are: Yellow Rail, Snowy Owl, Connecticut Warbler, Bohemian Waxwing,
Baird’s Sparrow, Northern Goshawk, Sprague’s Pipit, Hoary Redpoll,
and Smith’s Longspur. An additional 6 are on the current state list
but are very rare and seldom seen: Boreal Owl, Great Gray Owl, Gyrfalcon,
Hawk Owl, Black-backed Three-toed Woodpecker, and Eurasian Wigeon.
For the most part, North Dakota has an eastern avifauna which
blends almost imperceptibly into a more western one in the extreme western
part of the state. The blend zone is most apparent in the vicinity of Bismarck
in the south-central part of the state. Here the ranges of Indigo and
Lazuli Buntings and Rose-breasted and Black-headed Grosbeaks overlap,
and the birder may see some interesting hybrids.
With few exceptions, the birds of the eastern half (especially along the
Red, James, and Sheyenne Rivers) are the same species found in similar
habitats throughout eastern North America. East begins to give way to
West biologically in the central part. Here, the birder begins to notice the
western species such as Ferruginous and Swainson’s Hawks, Yellow-headed
Blackbird, Lark Bunting, and Chestnut-collared Longspur.
By the time one reaches the badlands on the western edge, it is the
eastern birds which are unusual. Here, there is an abundance of western
species, including Golden Eagle, Prairie Falcon, Sage Grouse, Burrowing
Owl, the red-shafted race of the Common Flicker, Say’s Phoebe, Black-billed
Magpie, Rock Wren, Mountain Bluebird, Lazuli Bunting, Black-headed
Grosbeak, the spotted race of the Rufous-sided Towhee, Brewer’s
Sparrow, and McCown’s Longspur.
Although the breeding birds may vary considerably from one part of
the state to the next, winter species are fairly uniform throughout. Comparatively
few birds stick out the North Dakota winters. Extremely cold
temperatures, little cover, and little open water combine to make this a
somewhat poor state for winter birding. The following species can usually
be found: Rough-legged Hawk; Golden Eagle; Sharp-tailed Grouse; Ringnecked
Pheasant; Gray Partridge; Great Horned, Snowy, and Short-eared
Owls; Mourning Dove; Common Flicker; Hairy and Downy Woodpeckers;
Horned Lark; Black-billed Magpie; American Crow; Blue Jay; Black-capped
Chickadee; White-breasted and Red-breasted Nuthatches; American
Robin; Bohemian and Cedar Waxwings; Northern Shrike; European
Starling; House Sparrow; Western Meadowlark; Red-winged and Rusty
Blackbirds; Evening and Pine Grosbeaks; Purple Finch; Hoary and Common
Redpolls; Pine Siskin; American Goldfinch; Red Crossbill; Northern
Junco (slate-colored race); Lapland Longspur; and Snow Bunting.
The seasons are defined by the following dates: Spring—April 1 to
May 31, Summer—June 1 to August 15, Fall—August 16 to November 20,
and Winter—November 21 to March 31.
Most birders will be interested in breeding populations of marsh and
prairie species. For these it would be best to come in June, preferably during
the first three weeks.
For migration, the timing depends on specifics. Warblers generally
peak about the third week of May and again in mid-September. For waterfowl
April and October are probably best. Shorebirds are usually good anytime
from late April to late October, but the first two weeks of May and the
months of August and September are the most consistent. Shorebirding
can be the most productive kind of birding in July and August.
Few people come to North Dakota in winter for the purpose of birding,
but perhaps more should. Although not abundant, many of the regular
winter birds make good additions to the list. Several northern species that
are uncommon over the rest of the United States are often relatively easy
to find here. This is also the time when the birder can add the most to our
knowledge of North Dakota’s birds. There are relatively few good birders
in the state, and many do not get out in winter as often as they should.
Who knows? You may turn up something extra good, such as a Gyrfalcon
or a Boreal Owl. For the northern owls come after January, when the birds
11
have been pushed south by the colder weather.
North Dakota is a state of extremes when it comes to weather. To say
that the winters are cold would be a gross understatement. Wind-chill factors
commonly reach 50° below zero. (It is not wise to wander far from your
car in such weather. Remember, also, never to sit for any period of time in
your parked car with the heater on and the engine idling. Carbon monoxide
poisoning takes many lives each year in the upper Midwest.) The winters
are long in this part of the country, and just when you think one is
over, along comes another March or April blizzard. As a rule the weather
in spring and fall is pleasant, but be prepared for cold temperatures at all
times. Summer is an altogether different story. Summer temperatures are
often in the 80’s and 90’s, and it doesn’t cool off very much at night.
Summer days and nights are often rather humid. Combined with the high
temperatures, the high humidity can make you feel very uncomfortable.
At times the wind never seems to quit blowing (especially in the winter),
and summer storms can come up fast. Remember, North Dakota is one
of the states occupying the tornado belt. If violent weather hits, head for
shelter immediately. Do not let all of this scare you off; most Dakotans
have been easily surviving such weather for years.
Dress is informal in this rural state. Levis are the rule rather than the
exception. When birding in spring and fall, carry a warm jacket because
the temperature can drop in a hurry. As for winter dress, there is not much
to say other than “get the warmest clothes and foot-gear possible.” It is
next to impossible to overdress for Dakota winters. Other things that could
come in handy in winter are: 1) a shovel (especially if you intend to drive
the back roads), 2) studded tires, 3) booster cables, and 4) a lighter-weight
motor oil for better cold-weather starts. Make sure to winterize your radiator
to at least -30°, and keep more anti-freeze on hand; you may need it.
As a final suggestion, if you own a spotting scope by all means bring
it. There are certainly few activities more frustrating than trying to identify
shorebirds on a distant mud-flat with nothing more than binoculars. A
scope can also come in handy for viewing some of the more elusive prairie
sparrows.
There are plenty of biting insects around, and the mosquitoes can be
downright obnoxious at times (especially if you are sleeping outside).
Carry some kind of insect repellent (except in winter). Liquid repellents
seem to last longer than sprays.
Watch for ticks in brushy areas. No matter how hard you try you will
probably get some anyway. Never pull one off. The proboscis usually
12
breaks, whereupon infection may occur. They are best removed by applying
rubbing alcohol (Some of the more obnoxious ticks seem to get
“bombed” and then hang on for dear life.) or a hot instrument such as a
recently burnt match.
Rattlesnakes do occur in the western part (particularly in the badlands),
although you would be doing well to see one.
The larger towns have many motels, especially along the interstates.
There should be no problem in Bismarck-Mandan, Dickinson, Devils Lake,
Fargo, Grand Forks, Jamestown, Minot, Valley City, and Williston. These
towns are distributed rather evenly over the state. Most of the smaller
towns have at least one motel, but try to arrive early. Motels fill quickly in
summer.
Campers will find plenty of spots. In addition to the commercial campgrounds,
most of the state parks offer camp sites, and some are free. Both
units of the Roosevelt Memorial have good campgrounds.
Following is a list of the state parks:
The main purpose of this guide is to direct the out-of-state birder to the
better spots, although it is hoped that the book will be of use to resident
birders as well. An effort is made to list several good areas in different
parts of the state, if possible, for each of the more sought-after species. The
best spots are shown in bold-faced type. If you are in a hurry, stop only
at these places.
Because of the large area, the state is split into four regions—Southeast,
Southwest, Northwest, and Northeast. The regions are of approximately
equal size and are divided, for the most part, along county lines
without regard for habitat. A minimal time of 2 weeks is suggested to cover
the entire state. Even then you will leave knowing that you have missed a
lot.
In North Dakota the best shorebird spot is often not one mentioned,
but rather a flooded field, which will be great one week and dry the next. In
addition many species change their locations from year to year because of
inconsistent water levels. It would be wise to check with refuge managers
and local birders for up-to-the-minute information on desired species. The
names and addresses of local birders can be obtained by checking the
Christmas Bird Count for the local compiler or by consulting the American
Birding Association Directory ($5.00—ABA Sales, Box 4335, Austin, TX
78765).
In 1973 the American Ornithologists Union (A.O.U.) published a supplement
to its Checklist of North American Birds. This changed the current
names and taxonomic status of many species. A number of birders
have been in an uproar ever since, because many former species are
dropped to sub-specific rank. The A.O.U. has further revised the checklist,
with the promise of even more changes in the future. In addition, the
14
American Birding Association published its own A.B.A. Checklist (Birds
of Continental United States and Canada) in 1975. This follows the taxonomic
order used by the A.O.U. but incorporates some entirely different
names. Because the A.B.A. is the official “listing” organization, its nomenclature
is followed in this book. However, some of the field guides currently
in use do not yet reflect these name changes. The old names affecting
North Dakota birds are included parenthetically below to avoid confusion
for the beginner.
Ruddy Ducks
The southeast sector is probably the least glamorous as far as birders
are concerned. It cannot offer the western specialties of the southwest nor
the northern species of the northeast, and it does not have the reputation
of the northwest for prairie species. Despite these deficits, the southeast
quarter offers some of the best birding in the state.
Contained within its boundaries is some of the finest prairie-pothole
habitat in the country. This is the breeding ground for thousands of ducks
and other marsh species. Adjacent to the countless seasonal and permanent
ponds are broad expanses of mixed-grass prairie, which support large
numbers of Upland Sandpipers, Sprague’s Pipits, Baird’s Sparrows,
Chestnut-collared Longspurs, and other prairie specialities of great interest
to the birder.
This quarter also offers excellent bottomland habitat along portions of
the Red, James, and Sheyenne Rivers. These floodplain forests support an
avifauna typical of eastern deciduous forests, thus making it attractive to
western birders. Large numbers of eastern warblers pass through during
migration, and on good days one may find as many as twenty species (possibly
more).
Marshlands in the southeast corner attract southern species, such as
the Little Blue Heron and King Rail. All in all, the southeast sector offers a
very diverse avifauna, and it should not be ignored by the visiting birder.
FARGO
The city of Fargo (population
53,000—largest in North Dakota) lies
in the highly agricultural Red River
Valley and is separated from Minnesota
only by the river. Birds found
here are basically eastern in nature.
The Red River and its adjacent
woodlands act as a funnel for migrating
passerines and provide food and
cover in winter for the few species
which decide to stick out the long
period of cold weather. Because of this,
wooded areas along the river are the
most productive spots.
Probably the best place along the river is Lindenwood Park, which
can be reached in several ways. Coming from the east, take Interstate 94
west from Moorhead, Minnesota. Turn right on the first exit after crossing
into North Dakota. This leads onto South University Drive. Stay in the far
right lane and turn right at the first signal light onto 18th Avenue South.
Go one block to the park entrance.
Beyond the entrance, the road forks. The right leads through the park.
The left (South Lindenwood Drive) follows the river for 0.8 mile and is usually
better for birding, because it is less crowded and has a greater edge
effect. South Lindenwood Drive is bordered in part on the left by a large
grassy triangle and on the right by a good variety of trees and shrubs
along the river.
Close to 175 species have been recorded here in the past ten years.
Most of the birds are characteristic of the eastern deciduous forest. Exceptions
include the Western Kingbird, Bobolink, Clay-colored Sparrow, and
Savannah Sparrow. All of these can often be seen from May to July in the
grassy triangle. In July the vegetation is cut, and the birds leave.
In migration the park is a mecca for flycatchers, thrushes, vireos,
warblers, and sparrows. All of the eastern Empidonax flycatchers (except
the Acadian) can be found regularly, as can the Olive-sided Flycatcher and
Eastern Phoebe. All of the spot-breasted thrushes except the Wood Thrush
may be seen in good numbers every spring, and even it manages to put in
an appearance each year. Five species of vireos can be seen in spring, the
best of which is the Philadelphia Vireo. Also occurring with regularity are
twenty species of warblers, including Orange-crowned, Cape May, Bay-breasted,
and Connecticut.
Of all the fringillids using the park in migration, the most sought-after
is the Harris’ Sparrow. Fargo lies in its relatively narrow migratory range.
It may be seen (both spring and fall) in good numbers at all parks in the
area.
The following breeding species are shared with most other parks and
wooded habitats in the area: Wood Duck; Black-billed Cuckoo; Mourning
Dove; Great Horned Owl; Common Flicker; Red-headed, Hairy, and
Downy Woodpeckers; Great Crested and Least Flycatchers; Eastern
Pewee; American Crow; Blue Jay; Black-capped Chickadee; White-breasted
Nuthatch; House Wren; Gray Catbird; Brown Thrasher; Cedar
Waxwing; Yellow-throated, Red-eyed, and Warbling Vireos; Yellow
Warbler; Northern Oriole; Rose-breasted Grosbeak; Indigo Bunting; and
Chipping and Song Sparrows.
In winter check for owls, waxwings (Bohemian is common some winters),
grosbeaks (mainly Evening but some Pine), siskins, and crossbills
(both species).
Another productive location is the Riverside Cemetery. To get there
from Lindenwood Park turn left back onto 5th Street South. Go south for
about three blocks to the cemetery on the left. Although it attracts nowhere
near the number of birds that Lindenwood does, you are never bothered by
crowds of people, and it can be good in migration for warblers and
thrushes. Things are usually pretty dead in summer, but in winters when
there is an eruption of northern finches the cemetery is good for Red Crossbills,
Pine Siskins, and Pine Grosbeaks.
Oak Grove Park has essentially the same avifauna as Lindenwood
Park. To reach it from Lindenwood, turn right (north) on 5th Street South
and right on 13th Avenue South at the water treatment plant. Turn left on
4th Street South and go several blocks until you come to the YMCA, on the
left. Turn right at the signal light, and follow the road as it bends around
the river. Continue under the railroad tracks and past the civic center on
Second Street North. Take the first right after the Shakey’s Pizza House
(left side). There should be a sign pointing the way to Oak Grove High
School. After a few blocks the street becomes South Terrace, which leads to
the park just beyond the school gymnasium.
Most of the birds will be the same as those seen at Lindenwood,
although three species—the Common Screech-Owl, Pileated Woodpecker,
and Northern Cardinal—are more easily found here. The owl (seldom
seen) is most often heard calling on summer evenings from the trees across
the river from the athletic field. The woodpecker, which ranges widely
along the river in winter, has nested in the immediate vicinity in recent
years. The Northern Cardinal can be seen almost anywhere along the
river in winter (usually at feeding stations), but it is seen here more than
anywhere else during spring and summer. The Wood Duck and Spotted
Sandpiper seem to prefer this undisturbed stretch of the river.
Another good spot is not far from Oak Grove. From the park backtrack
on South Terrace and turn right on the first street beyond Fossom Hall, or,
if you wish, on the alley just behind it. Turn left on North Terrace, and,
when the street forks, go right on North River Road, which ends at Mickelson
Field. Most of this area has been converted into ball diamonds, but
there is still a strip of trees following the river which can be productive on
early mornings in migration. Walking is easy on the bike trail, so a good
stretch of the river can be readily covered. In the early evening listen for
the Common Screech-Owl, and keep an eye out for Common Nighthawks
and Chimney Swifts cruising over the ball diamonds. Along the open
stretch of the river, look for both Eastern and Western Kingbirds. Check
the banks closely for Wood Duck broods and Spotted Sandpipers. Dead
snags hanging over the water are favorite perches of Belted Kingfishers
and flycatchers.
Try walking north along the river to the dam. There is always some
open water which attracts over-wintering waterfowl, including an occasional
Common Goldeneye. Winter birds here are typical of the ones found
along the Red River in the Fargo area—Great Horned Owl; Pileated,
Hairy, and Downy Woodpeckers; Common Flicker; American Crow; Blue
Jay; Black-capped Chickadee; White-breasted and Red-breasted Nuthatches;
Brown Creeper; Cedar and Bohemian Waxwings; Northern Cardinal;
Evening and Pine Grosbeaks; Purple Finch; American Goldfinch;
Pine Siskin; Red and White-winged Crossbills; Northern Junco; and
White-throated Sparrow.
Keep in mind that although some birds are often easy to find in winter,
their abundance varies drastically from year to year. The resident birds
are fairly stable, but winter visitors, such as the waxwings and finches,
may be everywhere one year and nowhere the next. Keep an eye out for
feeders, which are often the best places to find the northern finches. If you
have time for only one spot in spring, summer, or fall, your best bet is Lindenwood
Park. Under similar conditions in winter try the Riverside
Cemetery.
If you still have not found a Bohemian Waxwing, try driving through
the residential areas, keeping your eyes trained on the tops of bare trees
and on the ground near berry bushes. (It might also be wise to watch the
road from time to time.) The waxwings are especially fond of crab-apples
and highbush cranberries. This bird is very erratic, but in years when it is
common it can be found almost anywhere. Your first look may be of a
group of 20 or more perched high in a tree.
There should be no problem in separating this species from the Cedar
Waxwing, which is smaller and yellower in color. A good field mark for the
Bohemian is the reddish under-tail coverts. In flight the waxwings give a
Starling-like appearance.
If you are here in winter and need a respite from the cold, hop into your
car and try some open-country birding. Some good birds may be found
19
without leaving the warmth of the car. Using this technique, you will
really have to explore on your own. Take any of the main roads out of
Fargo, and go wherever the habitat and the plowed roads lead you. One
area in general that is usually pretty good can be reached by going south
on I-29 for about 6.0 miles from I-94. Then go about three miles west to the
town of Horace, and work your way south and west from there.
A word of caution should be heeded before setting out on back roads.
Snow and mud, which may prevail from December through early April,
can make these roads unfit for travel, especially for a large vehicle such as
a motor home. Many roads are little traveled, and help may be a long time
in coming. Being stranded in a North Dakota snowstorm is no joke.
Birding country roads can be productive from September through
April. At the right time in fall, hawks may be everywhere. On some days in
late September, every other post seems to have a hawk on it. Most will be
Red-tails and Northern Harriers, but watch for Swainson’s and Ferruginous.
If you are really living right, you may even turn up a Peregrine Falcon.
In September and October the fence lines, ditches, and sloughs may
hold a variety of sparrows, such as Savannah, Vesper, Field, American
Tree, Lincoln’s, White-throated, and Harris’. In October and November,
and again in March and April, watch for longspurs, which occur by the
thousands in some fields (look especially around marshy areas in fall).
Check carefully for a Smith’s or a Chestnut-collared, although the vast
majority will be Laplands. Two other birds to look for in October and
November are the Rough-legged Hawk and Short-eared Owl. A few of each
usually winter, but most occur only as late migrants. The owl is somewhat
diurnal and is often seen cruising over the fields like a large, tawny moth.
Few species are found in the open areas in winter, but the ones present
are pretty choice. Large flocks of Snow Buntings will usually be the most
conspicuous birds. Buntings and Horned Larks often feed right along the
road. American Goldfinches and Common Redpolls are often abundant in
weed-filled ditches or in sunflower fields. Check redpoll flocks closely for a
Hoary, which is uncommon, but in good years not especially hard to find.
Color in redpolls varies, so a light-colored bird does not always signify
a Hoary. The best field mark is the unstreaked, white rump. Fortunately,
this species has a habit of holding the wings in such a way that the rump
can be clearly seen.
Gray Partridge are often found in small flocks in the fields. At a distance
they look like large clumps of dirt against the white snow. Rusty
Blackbirds are sometimes encountered around farms. Watch also for
Northern Shrikes, which are usually perched in some conspicuous spot.
This species seems to prefer the sloughs, where there is an abundance of
the mice, voles, and shrews upon which it feeds.
Probably the most sought-after of the winter species is the Snowy Owl.
This bird may be seen right along I-29 on poles and signs. In some years it
20
is almost common, but hard to see if it is out in the middle of a snow-covered
field, where it can look amazingly like another lump of snow-covered
sod. Occasionally, it may linger until early April. When some of
the snow has melted, it is easier to see.
In April and May, flooded fields often make for good shorebirding
with several species present, including large numbers of Lesser Golden
and Black-bellied Plovers and such rarities as the Buff-breasted
Sandpiper.
SEWAGE LAGOONS
For shorebirding, one area stands out—the North Fargo Sewage
Lagoons. Start at the Beef and Bun Drive-In on the corner of 19th Avenue
and North University Drive in Fargo. Turn right on Cass County Road #31
and go past the airport.
At County Road #20 jog left for 0.3 mile, and continue right again on
County Road #31 (gravel surface). Drive 2.5 miles and stop on the right at
the home of Art Lies. Ask for the key to the gate at the lagoons. Make sure
to explain that you are a birder, because illegal shooting has occurred in
the past. Art is a birder and will be able to tip you off to any rare visitors at
the lagoons.
From the house go a mile straight down the road, watching and listening
for Western Kingbirds, Dickcissels, and Clay-colored and Savannah
Sparrows. When the road winds to the right, continue straight at the yield
sign. The dikes on your left can be driven, so continue to the gate, drive
through, and make sure to reclose the lock.
There are six lagoons, and the bird life is different at each. Because the
water levels are constantly changed and controlled, this area is especially
productive during dry summers when the potholes in the area dry up.
Check the ponds with low water levels for shorebirds, pipits, and
longspurs.
Twenty-seven species of shorebirds have been found; most are typical
of similar habitat throughout the area—American Avocet; Lesser Golden
Plover (peak numbers have reached 6500 in late September); Black-bellied
Plover; Semipalmated Plover; Killdeer; Ruddy Turnstone; Marbled Godwit;
Willet; Red Knot; Dunlin; Sanderling; Lesser and Greater Yellowlegs;
Short-billed and Long-billed Dowitchers; Solitary, Spotted, Stilt (often in
large numbers), Pectoral, Baird’s, Least, White-rumped, Semipalmated,
and Western (uncommon) Sandpipers; Common Snipe; and Northern and
Wilson’s Phalaropes.
Both Sprague’s and Water Pipits occur in migration (most commonly
in fall and mostly in October). The latter species is much more common.
Longspurs appear by the thousands in October, especially in the fields and
ditches surrounding the lagoons. Although the majority will be Laplands,
check carefully for Smith’s and Chestnut-collared. Snow Buntings can
often be found by driving the dikes in November.
The ponds with deeper water are the ones to check for ducks and
grebes. Large concentrations occur in April, September, and October,
when close to twenty species of ducks and geese may be found. The geese
are more often seen resting on mud bars or on the dikes than on the water.
Most will be Canadas and Snows (both phases), but a few Greater White-fronteds
are seen. All of the ducks and grebes normal to the area can be
expected, and the lagoons have even managed to attract such rarities (for
this part of the state) as Oldsquaw (very early spring), Greater Scaup (possibly
regular but overlooked), White-winged Scoter, and Red-necked Grebe.
Other species found at the lagoons in the past include Double-crested Cormorant,
Sora, Franklin’s Gull, Bonaparte’s Gull, and Black Tern. The
gulls alone have presented quite a spectacle on different occasions, with
peak numbers of over 30,000 Franklin’s and 200 Bonaparte’s present at
one time.
Make sure to lock the gate on the way out and return the key.
Remember, the accessibility of this area in the future depends upon you.
NORTH FARGO SEWAGE LAGOON
Another fruitful spot for transient shorebirds and waterfowl is the
West Fargo Sewage Lagoons. To reach them, start at the signal light at
Main Avenue and 1st Street in West Fargo. Travel 1.0 mile north, turn left
(west), and continue for 1.0 mile to the lagoons. The water levels are usually
rather high, so shorebirds are not abundant. However, these ponds do
attract a large variety, including some of the larger ones such as Marbled
and Hudsonian Godwits. When the grassy ditches bordering the ponds are
filled with water, it is not unusual to find Common Snipe and Wilson’s
Phalarope.
The main attraction is the number of waterfowl using the lagoons in
migration. April seems to be the best month. The ducks, all in their best
spring plumages, appear to cover the water’s surface. The Lesser Scaup is
usually the most numerous, but several other species vie for second honors.
Mallards, Common Pintails, Gadwall, American Wigeon, Northern Shovelers,
Blue-winged Teal, Redheads, Canvasbacks, Ring-necked Ducks,
Ruddy Ducks, and Common Mergansers are usually common every
spring. Other species occurring in smaller numbers are Green-winged
Teal, Wood Duck, Common Goldeneye, and Bufflehead. The birder who
has the patience to check out all of the ducks present may turn up something
extra-special such as a Greater Scaup, Oldsquaw, White-winged Scoter,
Red-breasted Merganser, or Hooded Merganser. Common Loons;
Eared, Horned, and Pied-billed Grebes; Whistling Swans; Canada, Snow,
and Greater White-fronted Geese; and Northern Harriers also visit the
lagoons at some time.
WEST FARGO SEWAGE LAGOON
RICHLAND COUNTY
To reach what may be the best river-bottom habitat in the southeast
sector, start from the town of Leonard (southern-most Cass County) and go
1.0 mile south on State Highway 18. Turn left (east) on State Highway 46
and go 5.0 miles before turning right (south) on Highway 18 again as it
leaves Highway 46. Drive 4.0 miles and turn right (west). (If you miss the
turn, in another mile you will come to the Sheyenne River.) Go 5.0 miles
and turn left (south). Stay on this road as it begins to follow the river east.
After about 5 miles, you may start birding.
This area is well-wooded with American elm, green ash, bur oak, basswood,
and many other species. There is also a lush under-story. It is typical
of Sheyenne River bottomlands throughout the area with one important
difference: this area is not posted nor fenced. It is one of the few good
stretches still open to the public. The birds are representative of deciduous
forest communities in this sector of the state. Migrants pass through in
large numbers, and, because of the great amount of habitat available, this
area holds one of the highest densities of wintering birds in the state.
Three species could be considered as specialties of the area—Barred
Owl, Pileated Woodpecker, and Scarlet Tanager. All nest in the vicinity.
This is the only area in the state where the Barred Owl is known to nest,
and the other two species are quite restricted as well.
After 7.6 miles turn left (north) at the 4-H sign. After 2.3 miles you will
reach the road on which you entered. Turn right (east) and continue 4.0
miles back to Highway 18.
The Tewaukon National Wildlife Refuge, an area for transient
and nesting waterfowl and marsh species, can be reached by starting just
north of Cayuga at State Highway 11 and going south on County Road #12
through the town. After 4.7 miles you may turn left on a dirt road, which
wraps around Lake Tewaukon. However, you may wish to continue on to
the headquarters (turn left at a sign 5.5 miles south of starting point) to get
a map, bird-list, and current information on birds and road conditions.
There are four large water-areas on the refuge—Lake Tewaukon,
Cutler Marsh, White Lake, and Clouds Lake. All are supplied by the Wild
Rice River and its tributaries. The refuge also contains several hundred
acres of upland terrain dotted with potholes.
Perhaps the most spectacular aspect of the bird life is the numbers of
geese which stop here in migration. Spring flights are greater than those
in fall, with peak populations of over 100,000 geese (mostly Snow Geese of
both color phases) present at one time. In addition, large numbers of ducks
pass through, and several species nest. Eared, Western and Pied-billed
Grebes all nest, and small numbers of American White Pelicans and
Double-crested Cormorants can be seen throughout the summer.
Although the great numbers of geese usually get the most raves from
out-of-staters, there is a more interesting side to the refuge from the North
Dakota birder’s standpoint. It and other similar marshlands in the southeastern
sector draw into the state several species with more southern affinities.
A good example is the Great Egret. A rare migrant and late-summer
visitor over the rest of the state, here, it is fairly common in late summer.
Other species which could fall into such a category include Little Blue
Heron, Cattle and Snowy Egrets, Least Bittern, White-faced Ibis, American
Black Duck, and King Rail. All are decidedly rare, not only here but
throughout the state. Although most occur every year, they are not to be
expected by the visiting birder, but they do show the potential of the area.
Besides attracting all of the common migratory shorebirds, the refuge
can boast of nesting Willets, Marbled Godwits, and Upland Sandpipers.
Soras and Virginia Rails are fairly common in the marshy areas, as are
Marsh and Sedge Wrens. Sharp-tailed and Le Conte’s Sparrows are
uncommon nesters in wet, grassy areas. The Swamp Sparrow (fairly common
in migration) should be watched for in summer, because there are a
few colonies nesting in the county. Yellow-headed Blackbirds are abundant,
and in some years Short-eared Owls nest. Some of the more interesting
upland species include Gray Partridge, Bobolink, Dickcissel, Lark
Bunting, Grasshopper Sparrow, Clay-colored Sparrow, and Chestnut-collared
Longspur.
A nice woodland area may be reached by going west on State Highway
46 from State Highway 32 about four miles west of Enderlin. Go 12.6
miles and turn left (south) at the sign to Little Yellowstone State Park.
This park is not an outstanding birding spot, but it can be good in
spring and fall, and it does offer a pleasant spot to camp. It is well wooded
and therefore good for any of the species typical of this habitat, as well as
for accipiters and owls (Great Horned and Common Screech). Most of the
transient warblers found at Fargo also occur here, although some of the
more marginal eastern species, such as the Northern Parula, are not to be
expected this far west. Large numbers of sparrows frequent the brushier
areas during migration. Some of the more abundant species include White-throated,
White-crowned, Harris’, Lincoln’s, American Tree, and Field
Sparrows.
BARNES COUNTY
Lake Ashtabula, located predominantly in Barnes County, provides
several interesting birding spots. One of the best is around Baldhill Dam.
To reach the dam from Valley City, take Main Street East through the
downtown area. Take the first right (Central Avenue North) after the city
park and follow the signs for Lake Ashtabula, Baldhill Dam, and the Fish
Hatchery. At 12th Street Northeast turn right. After 0.3 mile turn left at a
sign for the dam. Continue for 0.8 mile and turn left after the grain elevator
toward Wesley Acres. After 1.8 miles the fish hatchery will be on your
left.
The Valley City National Fish Hatchery grounds provide prime birding
for woodland passerines, especially during migration. The ponds are
often good in spring and early summer for American White Pelicans,
Double-crested Cormorants, Black and Forster’s Terns, and all of the swallows
found in the state. Later in summer when the ponds are being drawn
down for fish removal, there can be excellent viewing of shorebirds. A display
of captive waterfowl is located on the grounds, where you may drool
over (but not count) Barnacle Geese and others.
After leaving the hatchery, continue north on the same road, keeping
an eye out for Wild Turkeys in the field to your left. These turkeys have
been stocked and restocked by the fish and game department until a sizable
flock has been built up. The most consistent spot along this road for
seeing them is on your left in 2 to 4 miles. The road forks 6.6 miles north of
the hatchery. The left fork winds up at Baldhill Dam. By going straight,
you will come to a recreation area after 0.8 mile. You can get from one spot
to the other by walking the dike.
Yellow-headed Blackbird
The area surrounding the dam contains many diversified habitats.
Almost any type of bird may be found here: grebe, waterfowl, wader, shorebird,
raptor, gallinaceous fowl, gull, tern, or passerine. The grassy hillsides
around the parking lot may harbor Ring-necked Pheasants in any season.
A footbridge over the dam and onto the dike is a good vantage point, providing
a good view of a stretch of the Sheyenne River below the dam. Both
Eastern and Western Kingbirds may be seen on the hillsides leading down
to the river, and as many as six species of swallows (Cliff, Barn, Tree,
Bank, Rough-winged, and Purple Martin) hawk for insects over the river.
The Cliff and Tree are the most numerous. American White Pelicans and
Black-crowned Night Herons can usually be seen fishing directly below
the dam. This is also a good place to check in winter and early spring for
Common Goldeneye and Common Merganser. By scanning the sandbars
farther downstream, you should be able to find several species of shorebirds
during migration. Ring-billed Gulls will be constantly circling overhead
from spring to fall. In spring and fall keep your eyes and ears open
for flocks of geese and Sandhill Cranes flying overhead.
Across the bridge, there are steps down the side of the dike to several
settling ponds which are productive in migration for shorebirds such as
Semipalmated Plover, Baird’s Sandpiper, both species of yellowlegs, and
Marbled and Hudsonian (rare) Godwits. Franklin’s Gulls may be seen in
numbers in spring and fall (especially in October).
If you visit the dam from the recreation area, walk down the side of the
dike and check the river at the first point available. The water ends here in
a quiet pool surrounded by trees and brush. Oftentimes, a Green Heron will
fly as you enter. This has been a consistent spot for it. Black-crowned
Night Herons, Wood Ducks, and Spotted Sandpipers are common along
the river from here to below the dam. In May the brush and trees are often
crawling with warblers. In September and October, the brushy borders are
full of sparrows, including Song, Lincoln’s, White-throated, White-crowned,
and Harris’.
The wooded ravines will usually produce the following nesting species:
Eastern and Western Kingbirds, Great Crested and Least Flycatchers,
Eastern Pewee, Cedar Waxwing, Yellow Warbler, Northern Oriole, Indigo
Bunting, and Rose-breasted Grosbeak.
From the recreation area continue northeast for 2 miles and turn left
(north) on the first intersecting road. After about 2 more miles you will
come to a sign reading “Sundstrom’s Landing Recreational Area”. On the
right across from the sign, a gravel trail leads up the small hill to some
prairie habitat worth investigating. Look for Eastern Bluebird, Dickcissel,
and Grasshopper Sparrow. Clay-colored Sparrows are particularly numerous.
Before birding this spot continue for 0.2 mile to the recreation area to
park your car. For easterners, the bird of most interest is the Western Kingbird,
a sure thing at the recreation area. American White Pelicans can be
seen from the point, and Western Grebes are occasionally found. Check
small wooded ravines in the area for migrant passerines.
One of the best spots in Barnes County for viewing migrating waterfowl
and shorebirds is Hobart Lake National Wildlife Refuge. The
lake can be seen from I-94, about 7.0 miles west of Valley City. However,
there is no place along the interstate to stop and scan. For viewing purposes,
take I-94 west from Valley City and turn right (north) at Exit 1 for
1.4 miles to the lake.
Large numbers of Snow and Canada Geese use the refuge in migration,
and American White Pelicans are usually present during early and
mid-summer. Grebes, shorebirds, and some ducks can be found throughout
the summer. The refuge is especially good for Whistling Swans, with up to
1,000 or more present for several weeks in fall.
Continue past Hobart Lake for 2.9 miles to the Sanborn Waterfowl
Production Area. This marshy area is good for Soras and Virginia Rails,
Marsh Wrens, and, when the water levels are low, shorebirds. Watch also
for Le Conte’s and Sharp-tailed Sparrows. Continue west on Highway 1 for
29
another 3.9 miles to check a large alkaline lake that is excellent for
shorebirds.
A fruitful spot for migrant and breeding passerines is the Clausen
Springs Recreational Area. To reach it, go south on Highway 1 from I-94
for 15.5 miles, turn left (east), and follow the signs to the springs. If you are
coming from the south, go north on Highway 1 for 2.0 miles past Highway
46 (not far from Little Yellowstone State Park), turn right (east), and follow
the signs.
This can be a delightful spot to bird on a hot summer day! There is a
small lake, a pleasant stream, and lots of trees for shade. It is good for all
of the regular migrant flycatchers, warblers, vireos, and sparrows. It also
attracts some interesting breeding birds, one of which is the Orchard Oriole.
This is one of the better spots in the southeastern sector for this species.
Other nesting species include Belted Kingfisher, Western Kingbird,
Least Flycatcher, Eastern Pewee, House Wren, Eastern Bluebird, Yellow
Warbler, Rose-breasted Grosbeak, and Song Sparrow. Clay-colored Sparrows
are common on the grassy hillsides, and the lake occasionally
attracts some ducks or shorebirds.
The best birding area in this county, Arrowwood National Wildlife
Refuge, ranks as one of the best in the state. The starting point is the
north edge of Edmunds (northwest of Jamestown on U.S. Highway 281).
From here, turn right (east) at the refuge sign onto County Road #44. After
5.4 miles you may turn left to the headquarters, or just beyond you may
turn right for the self-guided auto tour.
A visit to the headquarters is suggested, not only for information but
also for some good viewing of waterbirds along the way. In summer look
for Western, Eared, Horned, and Pied-billed Grebes; American White Pelican;
Double-crested Cormorant; numerous ducks; gulls (including an occasional
California); terns; shorebirds; swallows; and blackbirds. Ask at the
office for a map, checklist, and information on desired species and access
to other parts of the refuge.
While here, you may wish to inquire about Chase Lake National Wildlife
Refuge, which is administered from Arrowwood. This lake is of interest
because it has what is reputed to be the largest nesting colony of American
White Pelicans in the world. Large numbers of Double-crested Cormorants
and Ring-billed and California Gulls nest here.
Access is limited in order that people will not disturb the birds. The
only roads leading to the lake are better described as trails and, for the
most part, do not get too close. This is no real loss, because all of the species
here can be found easily elsewhere.
The auto tour at Arrowwood is a must. In summer check the boggy
areas surrounded by weedy fields at the start of the tour for Willow Flycatcher,
30
Marsh and Sedge Wrens, Bobolink, Dickcissel, and Savannah,
Grasshopper, Clay-colored, Le Conte’s (uncommon), and Sharp-tailed
(uncommon) Sparrows. Most of the route traverses fine grasslands dotted
with many species of shrubs, including silverberry and wolfberry. In these
areas watch for Sharp-tailed Grouse, Gray Partridge, Upland Sandpiper,
Sprague’s Pipit, Baird’s Sparrow, and Chestnut-collared Longspur.
Other nesting species include Black-crowned Night Heron; American
Bittern; Gadwall; Common Pintail; Mallard; Green-winged, Blue-winged,
and Cinnamon (rare) Teals; American Wigeon; Northern Shoveler; Wood
Duck; Redhead; Ring-necked Duck; Canvasback; Lesser Scaup; Ruddy
Duck; Swainson’s Hawk; Northern Harrier; Ring-necked Pheasant; Sora;
Virginia Rail; American Coot; Willet; Marbled Godwit; American Avocet;
Wilson’s Phalarope; Forster’s and Black Terns; Long-eared Owl (rare);
Eastern and Western Kingbirds; Black-billed Magpie (uncommon);
Loggerhead Shrike (uncommon); Yellow-headed Blackbird; and Lark
Bunting.
KIDDER COUNTY
The Baird’s Sparrow is rather common in the area surrounding Salt
Alkaline Lake. To reach the lake take the Crystal Springs Exit (#18) off I-94,
drive west on the lateral road along the north side for 1.5 miles, and
turn north. After 1.7 miles you will pass a lake on the right side with a sign
saying “Waterfowl Production Area”. There is another on the left. Salt
Alkaline Lake is 2.7 miles ahead on the left. At 5.0 miles from the freeway,
turn left for a closer look.
Both Salt Alkaline Lake and the lake before it have grassy borders,
which are summer havens for Baird’s Sparrows. In 1976, Burrowing Owls
31
nested in bordering fields and should be watched for again. Also check for
migrant ducks and shorebirds. The mixed-grass prairie along the road is
good for Chestnut-collared Longspur.
A prime spot for Sprague’s Pipit is also within easy reach of I-94 in
Kidder County. Take the Tappen Exit (#46) and drive 4.0 miles north on
County Road #71 to an extensive pond. Check the grassy margins for the
pipit. This area has one of the highest breeding densities in the state. For
best results the entire marshy area should be skirted. To do so drive
another 1.0 mile north, 1.0 mile west, 2.0 miles south, and then 1.0 mile east
back to County Road #71. By walking the appropriate grassy edges, you
should have little problem in finding the bird. Just remember to respect
any “No Trespassing” signs that might be encountered.
Still another great location is the Alkaline Lake Game Area. From
Tappen (Exit #46) go south for 15.0 miles on County Road #71, and turn left
(east) for 2.6 miles to the lake.
This large alkaline lake is a mecca for waterbirds in spring, summer,
and fall. All of the regular grebes of North Dakota occur at one time or
another. The Western Grebe nests in abundance. American White Pelicans
and Double-crested Cormorants can usually be found, because they range
far from their nesting area on Chase Lake. Large numbers of all of the regular
ducks, gulls (watch for California), and terns can be expected from
April to October. This lake is especially good for shorebirds, among them
American Avocet, Semipalmated and Piping (uncommon—nests) Plovers,
both yellowlegs, Willet, Stilt Sandpiper, both dowitchers, Ruddy Turnstone
(rare), Pectoral Sandpiper, Dunlin (rare), Sanderling, all of the peeps,
and Wilson’s and Northern Phalaropes.
The Slade National Wildlife Refuge can be productive for waterbirds,
but it is not outstanding. Skip it if time is limited. To reach the refuge take
Exit #45 (Dawson) from I-94, and turn south on State Highway 3. After 3.0
miles turn left (east) at the sign. On the way you will pass a nice marsh
where large numbers of grebes (especially Eared and Western), ducks,
gulls, and terns congregate. Just 0.3 mile after turning there is a fork. Here
you may go either straight (east) to the headquarters, or right (south)
through a segment of the refuge.
LOGAN COUNTY
Probably the best birding in this county lies in and around Beaver
Lake State Park. From Napoleon, travel south on State Highway 3 for
about eight miles, turn left (east) at the sign, and drive 6.5 miles to Burnstad.
At this point there are two routes. The left (north) goes 2.0 miles to the
park itself. (There are plenty of signs marking the way.) The other goes
south on a dirt road for 1.7 miles to several extensive ponds and marshy
areas.
The lake may be good in migration for loons, grebes, waterfowl, pelicans,
and cormorants. It has a lot of open water that is deep enough to
attract some of the rarer northern ducks such as Oldsquaw, Black Scoter,
or White-winged Scoter. The few trees and brushy tangles should be
checked in spring and fall for passerines, especially sparrows (The Harris’
can be common at times.).
The ponds south of Burnstad can be particularly productive for all
marsh species from spring through fall. Close views may be obtained of
American White Pelicans, Double-crested Cormorants, Great Blue Herons,
Black-crowned Night Herons, American Bitterns, Soras, Virginia Rails,
Black and Forster’s Terns, Marsh Wrens, Common Yellowthroats, Yellow-headed
Blackbirds, and almost any grebe, duck, or shorebird common to
the state.
Black-headed Grosbeak
The southwest sector will be of the most interest to visitors from the
east. While marshlands are generally fewer here, there are still a few areas
that attract large numbers of waterbirds. For the most part, all of the
North Dakota prairie specialties can be found. The uniqueness of this area
lies in its penchant for attracting western species which are marginal in
the state.
Dickcissel
The infrequent water areas (including wooded river bottoms), the
extensive sage prairies, the evergreen forests, and the arid badlands serve
to attract species such as Cinnamon Teal, Prairie Falcon, Golden Eagle,
Sage Grouse, Mountain Plover (accidental), Long-billed Curlew, California
Gull, Burrowing Owl, Poor-will, Lewis’ Woodpecker, Say’s Phoebe, Western
Pewee, Black-billed Magpie, Clark’s Nutcracker, Rock Wren, Sage
Thrasher, Mountain Bluebird, Townsend’s Solitaire, Blue-gray Gnatcatcher
(accidental), Black-headed and Blue Grosbeaks, Lazuli Bunting,
Gray-crowned Rosy Finch, Brewer’s Sparrow, and McCown’s Longspur.
Although some of these species should not be expected by the visitor,
the true degree of regularity of their occurrence is not really known
because of the lack of observers in this area. If you have the spare time for
exploring, do it here. Not only may you turn up an exciting western lifer for
yourself, you may add to our knowledge of the status of certain marginal
species as well.
Water areas (especially large marshes) are relatively few in the
southwestern sector. Probably the best of these is Long Lake National
Wildlife Refuge. To reach it go south on Highway 83 (Exit 40) from I-94
for 12.0 miles before turning left (east) at the sign. Refuge roads lead
around Long Lake and through some good marshes.
During migration, this is one of the best spots in the state. Some of the
more interesting migrants are: Whistling Swan; Canada and Greater
White-fronted Geese; Cinnamon Teal (rare); Common Goldeneye; Bufflehead;
White-winged Scoter (rare); Hooded (rare), Red-breasted (rare), and
Common Mergansers; Golden and Bald Eagles (uncommon); Peregrine
Falcon (rare); Whooping (rare) and Sandhill Cranes; Semipalmated,
Lesser Golden (rare), and Black-bellied (rare) Plovers; Ruddy Turnstone
(rare); both yellowlegs; Hudsonian Godwit (rare); Sanderling (rare); Northern
Phalarope; Solitary, Pectoral, Baird’s, White-rumped, Least, Stilt, and
Semipalmated Sandpipers; Herring, California, and Bonaparte’s Gulls;
Sprague’s Pipit; Le Conte’s (rare), Sharp-tailed (rare—may nest), and
Harris’ Sparrows; and Lapland Longspur.
Although migration is the most exciting time, the refuge should not be
by-passed in summer. Species to be seen then include Horned (uncommon),
Eared, Western, and Pied-billed Grebes; American White Pelican; Double-crested
Cormorant; Black-crowned Night Heron; American Bittern; Mallard;
Gadwall; Common Pintail; Green-winged and Blue-winged Teals;
American Wigeon; Northern Shoveler; Redhead; Canvasback; Lesser
Scaup; Ruddy Duck; Swainson’s, Red-tailed, and Ferruginous Hawks;
Northern Harrier; Sharp-tailed Grouse; Gray Partridge; Virginia Rail;
Sora; American Coot; Piping Plover; Killdeer; Willet; Spotted and Upland
Sandpipers; American Avocet; Wilson’s Phalarope; Ring-billed and Franklin’s
Gulls; Common, Forster’s, and Black Terns; Short-eared Owl; Eastern
and Western Kingbirds; all of the regular swallows; Marsh and Sedge
35
Wrens; Loggerhead Shrike; Bobolink; Western Meadowlark; Yellow-headed,
Red-winged, and Brewer’s Blackbirds; Dickcissel; Lark Bunting;
Grasshopper and Baird’s Sparrows; and Chestnut-collared Longspur.
Another area which is often good is McKenzie Slough. To reach it take
Exit #39 off I-94, and go south through McKenzie. The slough begins just
south of the town. When water levels are high enough, the following nesting
species can be expected: American Bittern, Mallard, Common Pintail,
Blue-winged Teal, Gadwall, Ruddy Duck, American Coot, Pied-billed and
Eared Grebes, Sora, Marsh Wren, Common Yellowthroat, and Red-winged
and Yellow-headed Blackbirds. During migration, this spot attracts many
of the same species found at Long Lake. Chestnut-collared Longspurs nest
in the pastures along this road (south of the slough).
The city of Bismarck (population 34,703) lies on the east side of the
Missouri River in western Burleigh County. Not only is it the state capital,
but also it contains a habitat unique in the region—Missouri River bottomland
forest. At one time almost four hundred miles of this habitat could
be found. It stretched from the South Dakota border in the south-central
part of the state to the Montana border in the northwestern part. The construction
of dams brought about the subsequent flooding of the bottomlands
until the forests had been reduced to a 75-mile stretch between
Bismarck and the Garrison Dam and a few miles from Lake Sakakawea to
the Montana border. Much of what little remains is being cleared for housing
and agriculture.
Nesting species found in this habitat include Red-tailed Hawk; American
Kestrel; Wild Turkey; Mourning Dove; Black-billed Cuckoo; Great
Horned Owl; Common Flicker; Red-headed, Hairy, and Downy Woodpeckers;
Least Flycatcher; Black-capped Chickadee; White-breasted
Nuthatch; Blue Jay; Black-billed Magpie; American Crow; House Wren;
Brown Thrasher; Gray Catbird; American Robin; Veery; Eastern Bluebird
(usually restricted to semi-open areas and adjacent fields); Cedar Waxwing;
Red-eyed, Warbling, and Bell’s (rare) Vireos; Black-and-white
(uncommon) and Yellow Warblers; Ovenbird; Yellow-breasted Chat; American
Redstart; Orchard and Northern Orioles; Common Grackle; Brown-headed
Cowbird; Scarlet Tanager (rare); Black-headed Grosbeak; Indigo
(uncommon) and Lazuli Buntings; American Goldfinch (open areas);
Rufous-sided Towhee; and Chipping, Clay-colored, Field (open areas), and
Song Sparrows.
The woodlands bordering the Missouri River are the best places in the
Bismarck vicinity to look for migrant passerines, such as Red-breasted
Nuthatch; Brown Creeper; Hermit, Swainson’s, and Gray-cheeked
Thrushes; Golden-crowned and Ruby-crowned Kinglets; Black-and-white,
Tennessee, Orange-crowned, Magnolia, Yellow-rumped, Blackpoll, Palm,
and Wilson’s Warblers; Northern Waterthrush; Purple Finch; Northern
Junco; and Harris’, White-crowned, White-throated, Fox, and Lincoln’s
Sparrows. Birds to watch for in winter include Great Horned Owl, Common
36
Flicker, Hairy and Downy Woodpeckers, Blue Jay, Black-billed Magpie
(semi-open areas and margins), Black-capped Chickadee, White-breasted
Nuthatch, American Robin, Purple Finch, American Goldfinch,
Northern Junco, and American Tree Sparrow (open areas). Both species of
waxwings can be found in most years as well.
SIBLEY ISLAND
Typical bottomland habitat can
be found near Sibley Island. To
reach it start at the Bismarck Airport
on the road to the terminal and drive
south on Highway 1804 for 2.1 miles.
Turn right (west) on a surfaced road.
After 0.5 mile you have a choice of continuing
straight (west) or turning left
(south). To reach the best habitat, turn
left and follow the road as it swings to
the left. Go 2.2 miles (.5 mile past the
bend) and turn right at the sign to the
Girl Scout camp.
The road passes through excellent bottomland habitat. This consists
mostly of cottonwood, green ash, box elder, and to a lesser extent American
elm and bur oak. The understory, which is thick in some areas,
includes Wood’s rose, red-osier dogwood, snowberry, bittersweet, and wild
grape.
After birding around the camp, drive all the way to the river. From the
high banks you will have a good vantage point from which to look over the
sandbars for the area’s three specialties—Piping Plovers, Little Terns,
and skinny-dippers. The latter species, although cosmopolitan in range, is
quite rare in North Dakota. (When present they are “hard to miss”.)
The Piping Plover can sometimes be found in good numbers. This is
one of the best areas in the state for them. Likewise, this stretch of the river
is the only known nesting site for the Little Tern in North Dakota. When
looking for them, remember that their locations vary from year to year,
depending on the sandbars. The best way to find them is to check as many
points along the river as possible. A spotting scope would be very useful in
looking for all three aforementioned species.
If you do not get the plover or tern here, backtrack 2.2 miles to the fork
before the Girl Scout camp and turn left (west). Drive 0.5 mile to 12th Street
or 1.5 miles to Washington Street. By taking either south you will eventually
reach the river. The view at the end of Washington Street is better, but
access may be difficult if the river is high. During migration you may want
to check General Sibley Park along Washington Street for passerines.
The city of Mandan lies in Morton County just across the Missouri
River from Bismarck. Most of the birds here are about the same as on the
other side of the river, but there are some important exceptions.
To reach the best spots, take I-94 west to Mandan and turn off onto
Main Street (I-94/Highway 10 Business Loop). Turn left (south) on 6th
Avenue Southeast at the sign to Fort Lincoln State Park. This street
becomes Highway 1806 and leads to most of the better birding spots.
Fort Lincoln State Park (about four miles south of Mandan) is worth a
visit. It is not a particularly good spot for birds, although you will probably
find typical upland species present. The most interesting feature of the
park is its historical significance. There are three important sites: 1) the
Slant Indian Village, which was once occupied by the Mandan Indians, 2)
Fort McKeen Infantry Post, which was occupied by the 6th Infantry, and
3) Fort Abraham Lincoln, home of the colorful George Armstrong Custer
and his famous 7th Cavalry. The two military posts were active in the late
1800’s. The park also offers an interpretive museum, picnic sites, and several
modern camping sites (complete with electrical hook-ups).
Continue south on Highway 1806 for 6.0 miles to the Little Heart
River. Turn left on an unmarked side road just north of the bridge. This
passes under an old railway trestle and through a field of alfalfa and tall
wheat grass. A colony of Sedge Wrens has nested here in recent years. This
area is also dependable for Gray Partridge, Bobolink, American Goldfinch,
Dickcissel, and Grasshopper Sparrow. At the field’s edge and in the
woods look for Cedar Waxwing, Veery, Yellow-breasted Chat, Northern
and Orchard Orioles, Lazuli Bunting, Black-headed Grosbeak, and other
typical bottomland birds.
Several roads lead from Highway 1806 down to the river, some of
which you may want to take in order to look for bottomlands species and
migrants. Some 4.0 miles past the Little Heart River Bridge, a small road
leads left to a good point for Piping Plover and Little Terns.
Another interesting spot is 6.8 miles past the bridge. Here, you will
enter a small badlands with several severely eroded buttes, much like
those in the extreme western part of the state. Watch for Turkey Vulture,
Swainson’s and Ferruginous Hawks, Western Kingbirds, and Say’s
Phoebes (rare; look near old buildings). Rock Wrens can be surprisingly
common. The best way to find them is to park and walk past eroded buttes.
It is just a matter of watching and listening for their distinctive series of
trills.
Rock Wren
A great place for winter birding is the Northern Great Plains
Research Station in Mandan. To reach it, continue west on Main Street
past Highway 1806 and turn left after one mile on Highway 6 (8th Street
Northwest). Cross the railroad trestle and continue on 10th Avenue
Southwest for 0.8 mile to a bridge. Just beyond, turn right at the sign.
These grounds are good for winter birding because of the conifers.
Look for all of the regular winter species and for invaders such as Cedar
and Bohemian Waxwings, Pine Siskins, Purple Finches, Pine (rare) and
Evening Grosbeaks, Red Crossbills, and Golden-crowned Kinglets. The
Townsend’s Solitaire, although rare, has been a fairly frequent visitor in
recent years. The trees are good also for roosting owls. With luck, you may
even turn up a Long-eared Owl.
DUNN COUNTY
Yet another location for migrant and nesting waterbirds is Lake Ilo
National Wildlife Refuge. To reach it, start just south of the town of Killdeer
at Highway 22, go east for 3.0 miles on Highway 200, and turn right at
the sign.
Drive south through the mixed-grass prairie, which is good for Northern
Harrier, Swainson’s Hawk, Ring-necked Pheasant, Sharp-tailed
Grouse, Eastern and Western Kingbirds, Horned Lark, Lark Bunting,
Lark and Grasshopper Sparrows, and Chestnut-collared Longspur. Turn
left (2.0 miles) and bird until the road dead-ends at a farmhouse.
To bird the rest of the refuge, return to Highway 200 and head east
again. Turn right (1.5 miles) toward the recreation area (just before the
cemetery). After 0.3 mile the road forks. Go straight (keeping right) and follow
the road as it heads to the lake and then makes a little square back to
the road on which you entered. By taking this little loop you will get a good
view of Lake Ilo. From this vantage point look for Common Loon (rare
migrant), Western Grebe, American White Pelican, Double-crested Cormorant,
Great Blue Heron (lake edges), Black-crowned Night Heron (lake
edges), ducks and geese, and Sandhill and Whooping (rare) Cranes (migration—lake
edges).
After taking the loop, turn right and drive 0.4 mile. Turn left and
almost immediately swing to the right (at the fishing sign) and head
toward the lake. Turn right at the sign pointing to the headquarters (0.5
40
mile). After 0.8 mile you may do three things: 1) turn right to the headquarters
for information, 2) go straight for a different view of the lake, or 3)
swing left to the slough.
The slough is the best area for birding. After swinging left, proceed for
0.8 mile, turn left, and drive for 1.1 miles past the entire marsh.
Species to be seen from spring to fall include Red-necked (rare),
Horned (uncommon), Eared, Western (uncommon), and Pied-billed Grebes;
Great Blue Heron; Black-crowned Night Heron; American Bittern; Mallard,
Common Pintail; Blue-winged Teal; Northern Shoveler; Gadwall;
American Wigeon; Ruddy Duck; American Coot; Sora; Virginia Rail; Killdeer;
Spotted Sandpiper; Willet; Marbled Godwit; American Avocet; Wilson’s
Phalarope; Black Tern; Belted Kingfisher; Eastern and Western
Kingbirds; Barn, Cliff, and Tree Swallows; Marsh Wren; Common Yellow-throat;
Red-winged, Brewer’s, and Yellow-headed Blackbirds; and Song
and Savannah Sparrows. Many other ducks, shorebirds, and swallows
may be seen as migrants or as occasional summer visitors.
After driving by the marsh, turn right, south for 1.0 mile, and turn
right on a road through a mixed-grass prairie, which is good for Chestnut-collared
Longspurs and possibly for Baird’s Sparrows.
Bowman Haley Dam Refuge
Because of its position in the very southwestern corner of the state,
Bowman County is one of the most exciting to bird. If you are going to find
any truly western vagrants, your chances are better in either this county
or the next two.
The best spot for both waterbirds and grasslands species is Bowman-Haley
Dam National Wildlife Refuge. To reach it go north on U.S.
Highway 85 from the South Dakota border for 5.3 miles, and turn right on
an improved gravel road at a sign saying “Bowman-Haley Dam Recreation
Area”. (This turn-off is about 11 miles south of Highway 12 near Bowman.)
Go 5.0 miles east and turn right (south) at the sign saying “Point
Rec Area 3 Miles”. After 2.0 miles turn left (east).
In the first mile check the roughly-plowed fields for McCown’s Longspurs
in both spring and summer. After 1.3 miles the road becomes narrower
and grassier and begins to loop around the lake. It should still be
passable in all but wet weather. From 1.3 miles until 4.8 miles (where the
road ends at a fence), you will be traversing some excellent grasslands.
Most are mixed-grass prairie, but close to the lake there are tall-grass fields
choked with weeds.
The mixed-grass prairie is good for nesting Sharp-tailed Grouse, Gray
Partridge, Upland Sandpiper, Marbled Godwit, Burrowing Owl, Sprague’s
Pipit (uncommon), Baird’s Sparrow, and Chestnut-collared Longspur. In
the weedy fields where vegetation is taller and thicker, look for Bobolink,
Dickcissel, and Clay-colored, Vesper, Grasshopper, and Savannah
Sparrows.
For a different view of the lake, back-track to Highway 85, turn right
(east), drive 3.0 miles, turn right (south), go 1.9 miles until the road forks,
and swing right toward the marina. After 0.2 mile bear right. This road is
good for birding, and there are picnic sites as well as room to spread your
sleeping bag.
The lake is mostly open water with few marshy areas. It is not particularly
good for nesting waterfowl. Nevertheless, in summer you should be
able to find American White Pelicans; Double-crested Cormorants; Great
Blue Herons; Ring-billed, California, and Franklin’s Gulls; and Black
Terns although only the latter nests. A sprinkling of ducks use the lake in
summer—both those that nest here and those from neighboring marshes.
During migration, check for transient ducks, geese, and shorebirds. Short-eared
Owls nest in the grassy areas.
The wooded ravines, tree lines, and shelterbelts provide habitat for
migrant and nesting passerines. Look for Black-billed Cuckoo, Eastern
and Western Kingbirds, Gray Catbird, Brown Thrasher, Yellow Warbler,
Orchard Oriole, American Goldfinch, and Rufous-sided Towhee (spotted
race).
ROAD FROM RHAME
There are two roads in the western part of Bowman County along
which most of the specialties of the area can be found. The first starts
from the town of Rhame (northwest of Bowman on U.S. Highway 12).
From Rhame go south on a paved road for 6.0 miles. Watch for a power
relay station (Slope Electric Cooperative) on the left, and turn right (west)
on the next road (paved). Start watching the fields and roadsides for
Northern Harrier, Swainson’s and Ferruginous Hawks, Merlin (rare),
Sharp-tailed Grouse, Gray Partridge, Western Kingbird, Loggerhead
Shrike, Lark Bunting, Vesper Sparrow, and McCown’s and Chestnut-collared
Longspurs.
After 5.0 miles the road swings south. Stay with it for 7.0 miles, and
turn right (west) on a dirt road, which starts to zigzag south just beyond a
cattleguard some 2.2 miles ahead. Go 2.8 miles and watch on the right for a
large field peppered with black sage. Check here in summer for Sage
Grouse, Long-billed Curlew, Sage Thrasher (very rare), and Brewer’s and
Lark Sparrows.
Rock Wrens and Belted Kingfishers nest in the eroded buttes by the
stream, and Say’s Phoebes and Cliff Swallows nest under the bridge. Lark
Buntings and Lark Sparrows are rather common.
Rock Wren Habitat near Rhame
A better road for most of these species starts at Marmarth (Slope
County) and runs south to the state line. From the middle of Marmarth
(The St. Charles Hotel should be on your left.), proceed west for 0.4 mile.
Turn left on a gravel road which angles off just before Highway 12 swings
to the right and crosses a bridge over the railroad tracks.
Heading south, you will pass a prairie-dog town on your right after
13.1 miles. This town is not very conspicuous from the road, but it is rather
extensive. Watch for Black-tailed Prairie Dog, Black-footed Ferret (one
was observed here in 1976), Burrowing Owl, and McCown’s Longspur.
The predominant habitat is short-grass prairie with extensive flats of
black and silver sages. Some of the hillsides have lots of junipers. This is
good raptor country. Look for Turkey Vulture, Northern Harrier, Swainson’s
and Ferruginous Hawks, Prairie Falcon, and Golden Eagle. Harding
County (directly south in South Dakota) is known as one of the best areas
in that state for Golden Eagles, so it is possible that many of the eagles
seen in Bowman spill over from Harding.
This road passes through some of the best habitat in the state for Sage
Grouse. Sharp-tailed Grouse are also numerous. The Long-billed Curlew,
although uncommon, is present each year in these sage-covered grasslands.
Other species to look for are Mountain Plover (accidental); Common
Nighthawk; Horned Lark; Loggerhead Shrike; Western Meadowlark; Lark
Bunting; Vesper, Lark, and Brewer’s (common) Sparrows; and Chestnut-collared
and McCown’s Longspurs.
Some 4.8 miles beyond the prairie-dog town, turn left on a dirt road to
the Little Missouri River, where the trees and brush act as a migrant trap.
During migration, it is the natural spot to turn up a western vagrant.
44
Return to the main road and continue south for 2.2 miles to a small bridge
near an eroded butte. Check for Say’s Phoebes and Cliff Swallows. Some
6.0 miles farther there is a larger bridge, where Cliff Swallows nest in good
numbers, and you may find a Belted Kingfisher or a Say’s Phoebe. The
state line is at the end of the bridge.
If you did not find a Sage Grouse in Bowman County, try the road
from Marmarth to Amidon. It is 42 miles long, and takes off from the east
edge of Marmarth, where it is marked by a sign. The best area is the first
six miles, where the sage is thickest. However, it may be worthwhile to
drive the entire road.
While in Marmarth, check the trees in the residential area for nesting
Western Pewees. One place where they have nested in the past is in the cottonwoods
at the Marmarth Picnic Area. Turn left (south) off Highway 12
on the first street west of the St. Charles Hotel, drive 0.2 mile, and swing
right to the small picnic area.
Stewart Lake National Wildlife Refuge is excellent for marshland
and grassland birds. To get there go north from Bowman on U.S. Highway
85. After 12.0 miles turn left (west) by the flying-goose sign. After 3.0 miles
turn right and cross the cattleguard toward the lake.
This refuge is rather small, but in migration the lake attracts all of the
regular ducks, shorebirds, gulls (watch for California), terns, and swallows.
Species which nest in the reedy borders include American Bittern,
Blue-winged Teal, American Coot, Sora, Spotted Sandpiper, Wilson’s Phalarope,
Black Tern, Marsh Wren, Common Yellowthroat, and Red-winged
and Yellow-headed Blackbirds. In the mixed-grass prairie watch in
summer for Northern Harrier; Sharp-tailed Grouse; Upland Sandpiper;
Burrowing Owl; Horned Lark; Sprague’s Pipit; Loggerhead Shrike; Lark
Bunting; Baird’s, Lark, and Grasshopper Sparrows; and Chestnut-collared
Longspur.
BURNING COAL VEIN CAMPGROUND
Evergreen forests are limited in North Dakota, being found primarily
in the badlands of the Little Missouri. Most tracts are dominated by
juniper. However, in north-central Slope County a large tract of several
hundred acres dominated by ponderosa pine borders the Burning Coal
Vein Campground and Columnar Juniper Area.
To reach the area, continue north on Highway 85 from the turn-off to
Stewart Lake for 10 miles and turn left on a gravel road at a sign for the
campground. Go 0.2 mile and turn left. After 1.0 mile turn right. Stay on
this road (follow the signs) for the next 10.2 miles and turn right to the
campgrounds. The turn-off to the picnic area is 1.2 miles up the road.
For the past few miles you will have passed excellent stands of ponderosa
pine. This hilly, forested country is more reminiscent of the Black
Hills of South Dakota than of anything which one might expect to find in
North Dakota. This is the only place in the state where the Yellow-rumped
Warbler (Audubon’s race) nests. It can be found on practically any pine-covered
slope. Its call note, a distinctive “chip”, may be of great use in
locating the bird.
Other species of the pine forests include Sharp-shinned Hawk, Merlin
(rare), Wild Turkey, Mourning Dove, Common Flicker (red-shafted race),
Black-billed Magpie, American Crow, Red-breasted Nuthatch (rare),
Brown-headed Cowbird, Rufous-sided Towhee, and Chipping Sparrow.
Another specialty of the area is the Poor-will, an uncommon breeder,
which is more easily found on the periphery of the forested slopes than in
the middle of them. A good place to watch and listen for it in the evenings
is the area directly surrounding the Columnar Juniper Area (just up the
road from the picnic site). Overlooking the spot is a pull-off which makes a
good vantage point.
Check the brushy tangles at the picnic area for House Wren, Brown
Thrasher, Lazuli Bunting, Rufous-sided Towhee, and Chipping and Lark
Sparrows. Open flats and arid slopes surrounding the pine forest should be
checked for Prairie Falcon and Say’s Phoebe.
Pine Forest
Besides being one of the most scenic, Billings County is one of the
most rewarding to bird. As is the case with Bowman and Slope Counties,
this county is good for western specialties and vagrants.
The two best areas can be reached from the town of Medora. The first
is Sully’s Creek State Park. At the eastern edge of town by a sign for
the park, turn south on East River Road. Keep left at the first fork and
right at the next two. After 2.5 miles you will reach the campground.
This 80-acre park is nestled along the Little Missouri River and contains
a good stand of cottonwoods and willows surrounded by sagebrush
flats and grasslands. There is a high dirt cliff along the eastern edge,
47
where Prairie Falcons sometimes nest and (if you are lucky) Big-horned
Sheep play around.
Sully Creek State Park
Birds are abundant. One can expect to find most of the typical “badlands”
species. Along the river look for Belted Kingfisher, any of the regular
swallows, and migrant waterfowl and shorebirds. The sagebrush flats
are good for Sharp-tailed Grouse, Gray Partridge, and Field Sparrows. In
the cottonwoods and among the tangles of wild rose, snowberry, and currants,
you may find Common Flicker (both red-shafted and yellow-shafted
races, as well as many hybrids), Downy and Hairy Woodpeckers, Eastern
Kingbird, Least and Willow Flycatchers, Western Pewee (rare), Blue Jay,
American Crow, White-breasted Nuthatch, Black-capped Chickadee,
House Wren, Gray Catbird, Brown Thrasher, Cedar Waxwing, Red-eyed
and Warbling Vireos, Yellow and Black-and-white Warblers, Ovenbird,
Yellow-breasted Chat, American Redstart, Northern (Bullock’s) Oriole
(rare), Black-headed Grosbeak, Lazuli Bunting, Rufous-sided Towhee
(spotted form), and Chipping Sparrow. The chat is heard more often than
seen, but “pishing” noises are often effective in bringing this species out
into the open.
The other top spot in Billings County is the South Unit of Theodore
Roosevelt National Memorial, for which the exit is well marked along
I-94. The entrance is at the western edge of Medora (which you may want
to explore). Just inside the park there is a visitors’ center with interpretive
displays and a good selection of books dealing with the natural history of
the area. The 38-mile scenic loop is an excellent drive for seeing the park
and its birds.
There are several prairie-dog towns scattered throughout the park.
The first is 3.1 miles up the scenic loop. Check this and other towns for
Black-tailed Prairie Dog, Burrowing Owl, and Black-billed Magpie. To the
left of the town there is a Sharp-tailed Grouse dancing ground. Look for
performing males.
Black-tailed Prairie Dog
Watch on the left for the turnoff to the Cottonwoods Campground,
which is about 5.4 miles from the visitors’ center. This spot lives up to its
name in that there are many cottonwoods. It is a good place for Common
Flicker, Blue Jay, American Crow, Black-capped Chickadee, Red-eyed and
Warbling Vireos, Northern (Bullock’s) Oriole (rare), Black-headed Grosbeak,
and Lazuli Bunting. In the summer, there are lots of people in addition
to the birds.
A better area can be reached by continuing for 1.0 mile, turning left,
and then immediately right to the picnic area. This spot is not only well-wooded,
but also it has good patches of secondary growth. Look here for
Common Flicker, Willow Flycatcher, Western Pewee, Blue Jay, Black-capped
Chickadee, Gray Catbird, Brown Thrasher, Red-eyed and Warbling
Vireos, Black-and-white and Yellow Warblers, Ovenbird, Yellow-breasted
Chat, American Redstart, Black-headed Grosbeak, Lazuli
Bunting, Rufous-sided Towhee, and Chipping Sparrow.
The Jones Creek Trail (1.3 miles past the picnic area) passes through
vegetation typical of the park. There is also an excellent stand of sage.
Although not many birds are seen along the trail, it is good for Sharp-tailed
Grouse, Rufous-sided Towhee, and Field Sparrow.
Most of the park is occupied by short-grass prairie spotted with occasional
large sagebrush flats. Many of the rolling hills and ravines are
covered with junipers.
In open areas, watch for Swainson’s and Ferruginous Hawks; Prairie
Falcon; Golden Eagle; Sharp-tailed Grouse; Black-billed Magpie; Mountain
Bluebird; Rufous-sided Towhee (brushier areas); Field, Grasshopper,
and Lark Sparrows; McCown’s and Chestnut-collared Longspurs; Bison;
White-tailed Jackrabbit; Mule Deer; Gopher Snake; and Prairie Rattlesnake.
Check in the vicinity of eroded buttes for Poor-will (rare), Say’s
Phoebe, and Rock Wren.
These badlands are fairly good in winter, mainly for raptors and western
vagrants. Look for Northern Goshawk (rare), Rough-legged Hawk,
Prairie Falcon (rare), and Bald (rare) and Golden Eagles. Townsend’s Solitaires
usually winter, and Clark’s Nutcrackers and Gray-crowned Rosy
Finches sometimes wander over. In fact, 200 of the latter species were
found on a recent Medora Christmas Count. Other species found here are
Sharp-tailed Grouse, Ring-necked Pheasant, Great Horned Owl, Hairy and
Downy Woodpeckers, Horned Lark, Black-billed Magpie, Black-capped
Chickadee, White-breasted and Red-breasted (uncommon) Nuthatches,
American Robin, Bohemian and Cedar Waxwings, Northern Shrike, Evening
Grosbeak, Purple Finch, Common Redpoll, and American Tree
Sparrow.
After visiting the park, it is easy to see how Theodore Roosevelt developed
such a keen interest in conservation from having lived here.
Swainson’s Hawk
This sector is known chiefly for its large concentrations of breeding
waterfowl and for its prairie specialties, such as the Baird’s Sparrow. The
density of nesting waterbirds (not just ducks, but also grebes, cormorants,
herons, etc.) is truly spectacular, and the number and abundance of prairie
specialties would warm the heart of any lister. Another dimension to this
sector (in addition to the lakes, potholes, prairie grasslands, and wooded
coulees) is the badlands habitat with many western species at the edge of
their ranges.
Because of the unique blend of habitats, the northwestern sector is
strongly recommended to the visiting birder for top priority. If you are
limited in time, a tour of the North Unit of Theodore Roosevelt National
Park and of the refuges around Kenmare should enable you to see most of
the state’s specialties. While a visit between the months of September and
April could be more profitably spent in some other part of the state, you
could hardly go wrong in visiting here between May and August.
As mentioned, badlands habitat does exist in the northwest sector. Its
easternmost extension is found around the Little Missouri State Park. To
reach it, go north from the town of Killdeer on State Highway 22 for about
17 miles, turn right (east) at the sign for the park, and proceed to the camping
area.
This is still a primitive area, and the campground is not developed. All
trails are for hiking and horseback riding only. If your time is limited,
51
forget this spot and go on to the North unit of Roosevelt Park. However, if
you enjoy the peace and solitude of primitive areas, this is the place for
you.
The park has not been birded much, so it is hard to say what you may
find. Judging from the habitat, almost any badlands-type bird could be
found. Some of the likely ones include Say’s Phoebe, Black-billed Magpie,
Mountain Bluebird, and Lazuli Bunting.
North Unit Roosevelt Memorial
One of the most interesting and unique places to bird in the state has
to be the North Unit of Theodore Roosevelt National Memorial.
Most of the western species which inhabit the south unit can be found here
also, and most birders who have visited both units agree that the north
unit is better. This may be true partly because people-pressure is greater in
the south unit, which lies right along the interstate.
To reach the park, go south from Watford City on U.S. Highway 85 for
about 15 miles and turn right (west) at the sign. The headquarters are at
the entrance.
The most productive birding spot is Squaw Creek Campgrounds,
which is 5.1 miles from the headquarters. There are large trees (mostly cottonwoods)
as well as an ample understory in many places. Breeding species
include Common Flicker (both Red-shafted and Yellow-shafted, as
well as many hybrids), Downy Woodpecker, Willow Flycatcher, Western
Pewee (rare), Black-capped Chickadee, Brown Thrasher, Gray Catbird,
Red-eyed and Warbling Vireos, Black-and-white Warbler, Ovenbird,
Yellow-breasted Chat, American Redstart, Lazuli Bunting, Black-headed
Grosbeak, Rufous-sided Towhee (spotted race), and Field Sparrow (open
52
areas adjacent to the campgrounds). This is one of the most consistent
locations in the state for finding the chat, bunting, and grosbeak. By making
a careful check of the cottonwoods, you should be able to turn up several
Common Nighthawks, which rest on the more horizontal limbs during
the day.
Besides providing good nesting habitat, the wooded areas and thickets
along the river serve to attract numbers of migrants and wintering species.
In winter watch for Northern Goshawk (rare), Ring-necked Pheasant (willow
thickets), Great Horned Owl, Downy and Hairy Woodpeckers, American
Crow, Black-billed Magpie (more-open areas), Black-capped
Chickadee, White-breasted Nuthatch, American Robin, Bohemian and
Cedar Waxwings, Northern Shrike (willow thickets), Evening Grosbeak,
Common Redpoll (willow thickets), and American Tree Sparrow (willow
thickets).
Squaw Creek Campground
The rest of the park is mostly short-grass prairie mixed with large
patches of sage, rolling hills spotted with junipers, and sharply eroded
buttes streaked with colorful veins of clay and mineral deposits. The birds
to be found in the open areas are Swainson’s and Ferruginous Hawks;
Prairie Falcon; American Kestrel; Golden Eagle; Sharp-tailed Grouse;
Black-billed Magpie; Mountain Bluebird; Western Meadowlark; Field,
Grasshopper, and Lark Sparrows; and Chestnut-collared Longspur. The
Say’s Phoebe and Rock Wren should be watched for (and listened for)
around eroded buttes, sharp cuts, and under bridges.
You will probably see few birds in the open areas of the park in winter,
but look for Rough-legged Hawk, Golden Eagle, Sharp-tailed Grouse, Gray
Partridge (prefers cultivated fields), Snowy and Short-eared Owls, Horned
Lark, Black-billed Magpie, Northern Shrike, Western Meadowlark, American
53
Goldfinch, Common Redpoll, and American Tree Sparrow. In early
and mid-November Sandhill Cranes pass over the badlands by the
hundreds.
The park personnel can provide a detailed list of nature trails. One
that merits mention is the Caprock Coulee Nature Trail, which winds
through an area of junipers. Even though you will not be overwhelmed
with birds, the trail is an interesting one. Look for Golden Eagle, Mountain
Bluebird, Rufous-sided Towhee, Field Sparrow, Coyote, and Mule Deer.
This trail is a consistent spot for seeing Mountain Bluebirds. Each year
there are usually a couple of nesting pairs.
Another trail takes off from the Caprock Coulee Trail and leads over
the ridge to a prairie-dog town, where the dogs are much wilder than those
of the roadside colonies. Since the colony is somewhat remote, your chances
are better for finding a Burrowing Owl. At any rate, you should find
Black-billed Magpie, Western Meadowlark, and Field Sparrow.
For a pleasant place to camp, go south on Highway 85 from the park
for 4.8 miles and turn right (west) to the Custer National Forest Summit
Campgrounds (not deluxe but more than adequate). There is a nice scenic
overlook, and you may even find some good birds. Wild Turkeys may be
seen in nearby ravines.
A fine marsh can be found just south of Williston (the second largest
town in the northwestern sector) in northern McKenzie County. From U.S.
Highway 2 just west of town, go south on Highway 85 for 2.3 miles and
cross the Missouri River. For the next couple of miles the road transects
fine marshlands, which should be checked for all of the usual waterbirds.
One of the better locations for transient and breeding waterbirds
and grasslands species is the Audubon National Wildlife
Refuge. To reach it, go north on U.S. Highway 83 from County Road #48
north of Coleharbor for 2.8 miles and turn right (east). After 0.5 mile, turn
left to the headquarters for a map, birdlist, and current information.
This refuge (formerly Snake Creek Refuge) was renamed in honor of
John James Audubon, who made one of his last painting and collecting
expeditions to this area in 1843. About the only thing that has not changed
since he was here is the extremely rich birdlife.
Most of the transient ducks and shorebirds common to the state can be
found in migration. Probably the most exciting migrant is the Whooping
Crane (rare), which occasionally stops on its way to or from the breeding
grounds in Canada. Hundreds of Sandhill Cranes put in an appearance
each spring and fall. Some of the other interesting migrants include
Greater White-fronted Goose, Common Goldeneye, Golden and Bald
Eagles (also in winter), Osprey (rare), Peregrine Falcon (rare), California
Gull (actually a summer visitor), Short-eared Owl (occasionally nests), and
Harris’ Sparrow (tree lines).
Although it is migration that brings the rarities, summer is just as
exciting. Audubon Refuge has a great variety of habitats, including mixed-grass
prairie, open water, marshy bays of the reservoir, prairie potholes,
and salt-grass marshes. This makes for a tremendous diversity of breeding
birds. Some of the more interesting ones are: Horned, Eared, and Western
Grebes; American White Pelican (summers in good numbers but does not
nest); Double-crested Cormorant; Black-crowned Night Heron; American
Bittern; Canada Goose (reintroduced nester); Mallard; Gadwall; Common
Pintail; Blue-winged and Green-winged Teals; American Wigeon; Northern
Shoveler; Redhead; Canvasback; Lesser Scaup; Ruddy Duck; Northern
Harrier; Swainson’s and Ferruginous Hawks; Sharp-tailed Grouse; Ring-necked
Pheasant; Gray Partridge; Sora; Virginia Rail; Upland Sandpiper;
Willet; Marbled Godwit; American Avocet; Wilson’s Phalarope; Ring-billed
and Franklin’s (visitor) Gulls; Common and Black Terns; Black-billed
Cuckoo; Burrowing Owl; Eastern and Western Kingbirds; Marsh Wren;
Brown Thrasher; Sprague’s Pipit; Bobolink; Western Meadowlark; Yellow-headed
Blackbird; Dickcissel; Lark Bunting; Savannah, Grasshopper,
Baird’s, Le Conte’s, Sharp-tailed (rare), Vesper, and Clay-colored Sparrows;
and Chestnut-collared Longspur.
The nearest lodging accommodations are at Garrison and Riverdale.
Coleharbor has service stations and a cafe.
Lostwood National Wildlife Refuge is one of the better ones in the
state. To reach it, start at the northern edge of Stanley, go north from
Highway 2 on Highway 8 for 21.6 miles and turn left (west) at the sign.
From here it is just a short way to the headquarters, where you can pick up
a refuge map and checklist, and obtain up-to-date information about road
conditions and desired species. (The resident dog is dangerous, so exercise
appropriate caution.)
Lostwood consists basically of rolling hills dotted with potholes.
Mixed-grass prairie is the dominant habitat, but there are several shelter-belts
and small woodlots as well as numerous wetlands. The major difference
between Lostwood and other refuges in the northwest sector is the
presence of several alkaline lakes providing attractive habitat for Piping
Plover, American Avocet, and California Gull.
Waterfowl concentrations in spring, summer, and fall border on the
spectacular. The purely transient species are the Greater White-fronted
and Snow Geese, Whistling Swan, Common Goldeneye, Bufflehead, and
Common and Red-breasted Mergansers. The ducks which nest are the Mallard,
Gadwall, Common Pintail, Blue-winged and Green-winged Teals,
American Wigeon, Northern Shoveler, Redhead, Ring-necked Duck, Canvasback,
Lesser Scaup, and Ruddy Duck.
Other waterbirds which summer on the refuge are Horned (uncommon),
Eared, Western, and Pied-billed Grebes; American White Pelican;
55
Double-crested Cormorant; Great Blue Heron; Black-crowned Night
Heron; American Bittern; Virginia Rail; Sora; American Coot; Piping
Plover (alkaline lakes); Spotted Sandpiper; Willet; Marbled Godwit; American
Avocet; Wilson’s Phalarope; California (uncommon visitor), Ring-billed,
and Franklin’s Gulls; and Forster’s, Common, and Black Terns.
Other species to look for around water areas include Short-eared Owl,
Belted Kingfisher, Willow Flycatcher (boggy areas), all of the swallow species
found in the state, Marsh Wren, Sedge Wren (wet meadows), Red-winged
and Yellow-headed Blackbirds, and Le Conte’s and Sharp-tailed
Sparrows (wet grassy areas).
In the prairie areas look for Red-tailed and Swainson’s Hawks; Northern
Harrier; Sharp-tailed Grouse; Gray Partridge; Upland Sandpiper;
Eastern and Western Kingbirds; Horned Lark; Sprague’s Pipit; Loggerhead
Shrike; Bobolink; Western Meadowlark; Lark Bunting; Savannah,
Grasshopper, Baird’s, Vesper, and Clay-colored Sparrows; and Chestnut-collared
Longspur.
WARD COUNTY
There are few avid listers who have not heard about the area surrounding
Kenmare. The town has become famous in birding circles largely
because of the field work done there by Ann and Bob Gammell, and
because of their hospitality in showing off the area’s specialties to visiting
birders. Perhaps the single factor which generated the most publicity
about Kenmare and its birds was the American Birding Association’s first
convention, which was held here in June of 1973. Birders who attended
were astounded by the density and diversity of birds to be found breeding
throughout the prairie-pothole country.
What makes Kenmare so special? For one thing, it is surrounded by
national wildlife refuges. The town itself lies right in the middle of Des
Lacs National Wildlife Refuge. Lostwood Refuge is only a short distance to
the southwest while Upper Souris Refuge is just to the southeast. These
three areas contain almost every major habitat type to be found in the
region, and Kenmare makes a great base for exploring all three. The town
is not large (1,515 people as of 1970), but there are several gas stations,
stores, cafes, and motels.
Des Lacs Refuge
The best birding spot is Des Lacs National Wildlife Refuge. This
large refuge (about 19,000 acres), following the Des Lacs River Valley,
extends from the Canadian border to a point about eight miles south of
Kenmare. The river valley contains both open-water lakes and marshlands.
Bordering the valley is mixed-grass prairie punctuated by numerous
wooded coolees (trenchlike wooded ravines).
Because this refuge is so large, it is here divided into three routes
which cover most of the better areas. Caution: After heavy rain all of these
routes can be almost impassable.
Route #1) Tasker’s Coulee and Refuge Headquarters. This trip
begins in Kenmare. From U.S. Highway 52 go west on Highway 2 (6th
Street Northeast). When it swings right after 1.1 miles, continue straight
on County Road #1 (south). At this point you have been transecting part of
the lake. Watch for Western and Eared Grebes. After 0.4 mile turn left to
the headquarters for a checklist, map, and current information on road
conditions. The wooded area surrounding the buildings may provide good
birding, especially during migration. In summer look for Black-billed
Cuckoo, Great Horned Owl, Common Flicker, Eastern and Western Kingbirds
(margins), Eastern Pewee, Least Flycatcher, House Wren, Brown
Thrasher, Gray Catbird, Cedar Waxwing, Warbling Vireo, Yellow
Warbler, Orchard Oriole, and American Goldfinch (margins).
To reach Tasker’s Coulee return to County Road #1 and continue
south. Bear left on County Road #1A as it heads up the hill. About 1.7 miles
past the turn-off to the headquarters, turn left at the sign saying “Recreation
Area”. After 0.5 mile you will descend into Tasker’s Coulee Recreation
Area.
This coulee is well wooded with American elm, green ash, box elder,
aspen, and several kinds of shrubs—including wild plum.
Many species of birds nest here with a great many more stopping during
migration. Among the nesting species are Cooper’s Hawk, Black-billed
Cuckoo, Great Horned and Long-eared Owls, Common Flicker, Downy
Woodpecker, Eastern Kingbird, Eastern Phoebe, Willow (borders) and
Least Flycatchers, House Wren, Brown Thrasher, Gray Catbird, Veery,
Red-eyed and Warbling Vireos, American Redstart, Ovenbird, Black-and-white
and Yellow Warblers, Northern Oriole, American Goldfinch, Rufous-sided
Towhee (spotted race), and Clay-colored Sparrow.
Route #2) The Old Lake Road. The starting point for this tour is
along County Road #1A at the turn-off to Tasker’s Coulee. Continue from
the turn-off for 2.0 miles and turn left on Ward County Road #4. After 2.8
miles swing to the left. After 6.1 miles on County Road #4 turn left on Highway
52. Turn left again (0.5 mile) on a dirt road marked by a refuge sign.
This will take you along the lake back to Kenmare. It makes for excellent
birding because the lake with its reedy border will be on your left, while to
your right are grassy hillsides peppered with several shrubby thickets. In
the latter habitat watch for Swainson’s Hawk, Eastern Kingbird, Willow
Flycatcher, Brown Thrasher, Gray Catbird, and Clay-colored Sparrow.
The lake itself is especially good for grebes (Western Grebe should be
easy.); American White Pelican; Double-crested Cormorant; ducks and
geese; Black, Forster’s, and Common Terns; and Ring-billed, Franklin’s,
Herring, California, and Bonaparte’s Gulls (the latter three occur only as
uncommon migrants or summer visitors). Large numbers of shorebirds
feed along the open shore or on mudflats during spring migration and
from July to October. Some of the shorebirds to be seen are Semipalmated
58
Plover; Killdeer; Ruddy Turnstone (rare); Lesser Golden Plover (uncommon
to rare); Willet; Greater and Lesser Yellowlegs; Spotted, Solitary, Pectoral,
White-rumped (uncommon), Baird’s, Least, Stilt, and Semipalmated
Sandpipers; Long-billed Dowitcher; Marbled Godwit; American Avocet;
and Wilson’s and Northern Phalaropes. The reedy borders of the lake
should be watched for Great Blue Heron, Black-crowned Night Heron,
American Bittern, Virginia Rail, and Sora. Check the reeds for Marsh
Wren and the taller grass closer to the road for Sedge Wren.
Go 2.0 miles to a small bridge under which dozens of Cliff Swallows
nest. All of the other swallow species found in the state can be seen along
this road. After 7.2 miles you will come out on Central Avenue.
Route #3) Boating Area Road and Sharp-tailed Grouse Photo
Blind. This tour begins at Highways 52 and 2 (6th Street Northeast) in
Kenmare. Turn west on Highway 2. Drive 1.0 mile and turn right (west) on
Ward County Road #2. The grassy marsh on your left can be excellent for
bitterns, rails, swallows, and Black Terns. After 0.7 mile turn right on a
gravel road going north. Cross the railroad tracks, pull over to the side,
and walk the meadow to your right. This area has been good in the past for
Le Conte’s and Sharp-tailed Sparrows. Watch also for Willow Flycatcher,
Common Yellowthroat, Bobolink, and Savannah Sparrow.
Continuing along Upper Des Lacs Lake, you should see all of the
grebes, pelicans, cormorants, ducks, gulls, terns, swallows, and blackbirds
seen on the preceding tour, but this route is not as good for shorebirds or
marsh species. The road is bordered for some way by a wooded area (primarily
second-growth) with all of the normal nesting and migrant
passerines.
After 4.0 miles you will see a boating and picnic area to the right. Just
beyond this, turn left. Turn right at the yield sign (0.8 mile), and then turn
right again on Highway 52 (5.0 miles). After 0.9 mile turn left on a gravel
road and immediately pull off to the right at a dirt road by a gate. (There
should be a small refuge sign on it.) By walking past the gate and following
the trail, you will come to a photo blind overlooking a Sharp-tailed
Grouse dancing ground. During spring as many as 40-60 birds may be seen
displaying. The blind may be used for photography or simple observation.
However, you are required to check with refuge personnel before entering.
To return to Kenmare, continue past the turn-off to the blind for 11.0
miles to Highways 52 and 2.
The bird which brings more birders to Kenmare (and to North Dakota
for that matter) than any other has to be the Baird’s Sparrow. While it can
be found in appropriate habitat over most of the state, there is one place
where it is probably easier to find than in any other—Longspur Pasture,
a privately owned area of mixed-grass prairie encompassing several
acres. To reach it, start at Highway 52 in Kenmare. Turn west on Highway
2, go 1.0 mile, and turn right (northwest) on Ward County Road #2. After
59
about 6.0 miles go straight west on Ward County Road #2A for 3.0 miles to
an old country school-house on your right. Go another 1.5 miles and pull
over just beyond two small tree rows. Longspur Pasture is the fenced,
grassy field on the left (south) (west of the tree rows). Cross the fence to
bird, but remember that this is private land and should be respected as
such. Cattle are sometimes encountered in the pasture.
This quarter-section of relatively unspoiled prairie may not look like
much, but it is one of the most productive spots around for finding the
prairie specialties. Sprague’s Pipit, Baird’s Sparrow, and Chestnut-collared
Longspur are almost a sure thing between mid-May and mid-August
(the longspurs may leave by early August). Other species which
may be encountered are Gray Partridge, Marbled Godwit, Burrowing Owl,
Horned Lark, Western Meadowlark, and Savannah and Grasshopper
Sparrows. Pronghorn Antelope sometimes come to the small waterhole to
drink.
You may have to walk south into the field where the grass gets a little
taller to find the Baird’s Sparrow. It likes to sing from the patches of wolfberry
and silverberry. During the early stages of the nesting season, it is
quite conspicuous. Later in summer singing diminishes, and the bird
becomes a little harder to find. At this time it also seems to stick closer to
the ground. However, you can still get good views by herding it toward a
patch of wolfberry or silverberry. After being flushed a couple of times, the
sparrow will often fly to the shrub and perch in plain view nervously
repeating its call note, which is quite like that of the Savannah Sparrow (a
sharp “chik”).
The Sprague’s Pipit may be slightly harder to see well. It prefers to
stay on the ground where it is difficult to spot because of the grass. When
flushed, it usually flies a short way and drops back into the grass. Unlike
the Baird’s Sparrow, the pipit may be hardest to see when singing because
it sings while on the wing (like a Horned Lark) and sometimes at amazingly
high altitudes. At Longspur Pasture you will often hear its “swishing”
song from overhead without being able to see the bird. Do not be
discouraged by all of this. You may still get a good look at the Sprague’s
Pipit. In spring and early summer it often perches on fence posts or sits
around the muddy edges of the stock pond, where the grass does not obscure
the view.
Longspur Pasture
Still one more large refuge in the northwest sector is Upper Souris
National Wildlife Refuge. Although generally not as productive as
Lostwood or Des Lacs, it is a good spring-through-fall birding location.
The starting point is Foxholm (northwest of Minot on Highway 52). From
the center of town (Miller’s Bar) go 0.7 mile north on U.S. Highway 52 and
turn right on Ward County Road #11 at the flying goose sign. Go 5.6 miles,
turn right, and after 0.8 mile turn left to the headquarters.
The best habitat is marshland behind locked gates. By asking at the
headquarters, you may be able to obtain a key. Besides passing through
marshland, these roads thread brushy pastures and wooded areas.
Some of the species on the marshes include Pied-billed, Eared, Horned,
Western, and Red-necked (uncommon) Grebes; American White Pelican;
Double-crested Cormorant; Great Blue Heron; Black-crowned Night
Heron; American Bittern; all of the ducks, geese, shorebirds, gulls, and
terns normal to the sector; American Coot; Virginia Rail; Sora; all of the
state’s swallows; Marsh Wren; Common Yellowthroat; Yellow-headed,
Red-winged, and Brewer’s Blackbirds; and Song, Sharp-tailed (uncommon),
and Le Conte’s (common) Sparrows.
In the brushy pastures and wooded areas, you may see Eastern Kingbird,
Willow Flycatcher, Least Flycatcher, Eastern Pewee, Sedge Wren
(tall-grass areas), Brown Thrasher, Gray Catbird, Cedar Waxwing, Yellow
Warbler, Bobolink, Northern Oriole, and Song and Clay-colored Sparrows.
These wooded areas are especially productive during migration for transient
passerines.
Upper Souris Refuge
One of the better places is a large alkaline lake near Westby on the
Montana-North Dakota line. To find it, start in the center of town (by the
large grain elevator), and drive east on State Highway 5 for 2.3 miles
before turning left (north) on a gravel road. Watch for Chestnut-collared
Longspurs. After 2.0 miles you should be able to see the south end of the
lake on the left. The main portion will be visible for the next few miles, and
the whole distance should be driven.
This is the site of one of the few active California Gull colonies in
North Dakota. Ring-billed Gulls also nest, so care should be exercised in
identification. Most of the grebes, ducks, waders, and shorebirds common
to the western half of the state can be found—often in good numbers.
Sprague’s Pipits and Baird’s Sparrows should be watched for in grassy
areas.
If you still need McCown’s Longspur, get back on State Highway 5
and head east to Crosby. Check the stubble fields adjacent to the highway
for several miles on all sides of town.
Wilson’s Phalarope
Although the northeast comes last among the chapters, it certainly
does not come last in bird-finding potential. In fact, it may offer the best
birding in the state. All of the waterbirds and grasslands species that
North Dakota is known for may be found in this quarter. In addition it
offers some specialties of its own. Several eastern passerines which occur
in the rest of the state only as migrants nest here. This is the only place
where the Ruffed Grouse is found, and it is here that one is most likely to
find those northern species which rarely visit the state in winter—Saw-whet,
Hawk, Boreal, and Great Gray Owls; Gray Jay; Northern Raven;
and Boreal Chickadee.
The northeast contains a great diversity of habitats. Grasslands and
prairie-potholes are present in ample amounts. The region also contains
agricultural areas, large lakes, sandhills, well-wooded river bottoms, and
rolling hills covered with stands of aspen, birch, and oak and dotted with
small lakes. Indeed, it is a pleasure to bird the relatively cool forests of the
northeast after the badlands and the hot, dry prairies to the west.
Scenic Tour Salyer Refuge
The best birding location in North Dakota may be J. Clark Salyer II
National Wildlife Refuge, nestled along the lower reaches of the Souris
River. It is ideal in that most major habitat types are represented. Included
in its 58,700 acres are vast marshlands; uplands-sandhills; wet, grassy
meadows; mixed-grass prairie, and well-wooded bottomland. The habitats
are so diverse that over 250 species of birds have been recorded, of which
about 125 nest.
To reach the refuge, go north on State Highway 14 from Upham for 2.5
miles and turn right. The headquarters is 0.3 mile ahead. Check for the
usual assortment of checklists, pamphlets, and maps, including one showing
the two public automobile trails. More importantly, you may pick up a
trail-guide for the 22-mile scenic tour, which takes off from the headquarters,
winds through the refuge, and eventually ends back on Highway 14
south of Upham. It traverses most of the major habitats.
The scenic tour passes through some very extensive marshlands
which harbor, in addition to all of the common waterfowl and shorebirds,
Red-necked (uncommon), Horned, Eared, Western, and Pied-billed Grebes;
American White Pelican; Double-crested Cormorant (There is a nesting
colony on the southern portion of the refuge.); Great Blue Heron; Black-crowned
Night Heron; American Bittern; Northern Harrier; Virginia and
Yellow Rails; Sora; American Coot; Ring-billed and Franklin’s Gulls; Forster’s,
Common, and Black Terns; Short-eared Owl; Tree, Bank, Rough-winged,
Barn, and Cliff Swallows; Purple Martin; Marsh and Sedge
Wrens; Common Yellowthroat; Yellow-headed and Red-winged Blackbirds;
and Le Conte’s and Sharp-tailed Sparrows.
Adjacent to many of the marshlands are wet, grassy meadows, which
harbor some of the species found in the marshes and a few of their own,
such as Yellow Rail, Short-eared Owl, Willow Flycatcher, Sedge Wren
(very common), and Savannah, Le Conte’s, Sharp-tailed, and Song Sparrows.
The Yellow Rail is rare but has been turning up with increasing frequency
in the past few years. Because of its accessibility, this refuge is one
of the best places to look for it.
A unique habitat found along the scenic tour is the sandhills. These
tall ridges of sand, now covered by grasses and shrubs, were once a beach
of glacial Lake Souris during the last ice age, about 10,000 years ago. Some
of the birds to be seen while walking the sandhills (or any other open areas
of the refuge) include Red-tailed and Swainson’s Hawks, American Kestrel,
Sharp-tailed Grouse (There is a photo blind near a dancing ground on
the refuge. To use it check with refuge personnel.), Ring-necked Pheasant,
Gray Partridge, Mourning Dove, Common Nighthawk, Common Flicker,
Eastern and Western Kingbirds, Say’s Phoebe (rare), Black-billed Magpie,
American Crow, Mountain Bluebird (Most common as a spring migrant,
but a few nest in the aspens.), Loggerhead Shrike, Brewer’s Blackbird,
Common Grackle, Brown-headed Cowbird, American Goldfinch, Rufous-sided
Towhee, and Vesper, Lark, and Clay-colored Sparrows. Sandhill
Cranes often pass overhead in migration.
One thing which distinguishes J. Clark Salyer from the other refuges
to the west is the large amount of wooded area. Most of it is composed of
American elm, box elder, and green ash in stands on the bottomlands
along the Souris River. However, there are large mixed stands (mostly
aspen) scattered across the uplands. These woodlands (especially those
along the river) are natural migrant traps for transient passerines.
Some of the regular migrants are Olive-sided Flycatcher; Red-breasted
Nuthatch; Brown Creeper; Hermit, Swainson’s, and Gray-cheeked
Thrushes; Golden-crowned and Ruby-crowned Kinglets; Bohemian Waxwing;
Black-and-white, Tennessee, Orange-crowned, Yellow-rumped, Bay-breasted,
Blackpoll, Mourning, and Wilson’s Warblers; Ovenbird;
Northern Waterthrush; Rusty Blackbird; Purple Finch; and Harris’, White-crowned,
White-throated, Fox, and Lincoln’s Sparrows.
Several species nest in these wooded areas. Two of the more interesting
are the Wood Duck and the Hooded Merganser. Both nest either in natural
cavities in trees along the river or in boxes provided by the refuge
personnel. The Wood Duck is fairly common in similar habitat over the
whole eastern half of the state, but this is about the only area where the
Hooded Merganser may be expected.
Other woodland nesting species include Red-tailed and Cooper’s
Hawks; Mourning Dove; Black-billed Cuckoo; Common Screech, Great
Horned, and Long-eared Owls; Belted Kingfisher (along the river); Hairy
and Downy Woodpeckers; Great Crested and Least Flycatchers; Eastern
65
Phoebe; Eastern Pewee; American Crow; Black-capped Chickadee; White-breasted
Nuthatch; House Wren; Gray Catbird; Brown Thrasher; American
Robin; Cedar Waxwing; Yellow-throated, Red-eyed, and Warbling
Vireos; Black-and-white (rare) and Yellow Warblers; American Redstart;
Northern Oriole; Brown-headed Cowbird; Rose-breasted Grosbeak; and
Chipping Sparrow.
Grassland Tour Salyer Refuge
The second tour is the grasslands trail, which crosses 5 miles of mixed-grass
prairie. It is usually passable from May 1 to September 15, but it
should not be driven in wet weather, although you may still walk it. Precise
directions may be obtained from the map at the headquarters, or you
may find it by going east from Newburg (Bottineau County) for about 4
miles and turning north. The trail is marked.
Although not very long, the trail is great for finding the prairie specialties.
Watch for Red-tailed and Swainson’s Hawks; Northern Harrier;
Sharp-tailed Grouse; Gray Partridge; Marbled Godwit; Upland Sandpiper;
Eastern and Western Kingbirds; Horned Lark; Sprague’s Pipit; Loggerhead
Shrike; Bobolink; Western Meadowlark; Dickcissel; Lark Bunting;
Grasshopper, Baird’s, Savannah, Vesper, and Clay-colored Sparrows; and
Lapland (migration), Smith’s (rare—migration), and Chestnut-collared
Longspurs.
BOTTINEAU COUNTY
The city of Bottineau is well-known in North Dakota as the gateway to
the International Peace Garden, which symbolizes our long-standing
friendship with Canada. More importantly to the birder, it is the gateway
to the Turtle Mountains, which are actually low hills dotted with lakes and
potholes surrounded by stands of aspen, poplar, birch, and oak. The west
end of the mountains is just north of Bottineau, from which they extend 35
miles to the east. This popular recreation area is filled in summer with
campers, boaters, fishermen, and water-skiers. The place is not nearly as
crowded in winter, but you will still run across snow-skiers and those
abominations of the north—the snowmobiles.
Most of the birds can be found just by exploring any accessible areas
with good habitat. One specific spot which is usually rewarding is Lake
Metigoshe State Park. To reach it start from 4th Street in Bottineau, go
north on Main Street for 0.8 mile, and turn right at the sign for the park.
Shortly you will pass the North Dakota State School of Forestry on your
right. After 1.0 mile turn left (paved road). In 9.3 miles the road forks. Go
67
straight. This road leads along a large segment of the lake, which is peppered
with resorts. Continue for 4.4 miles, and turn left to the park. Camping
is allowed. There are even showers, which can feel great after a long
day of birding.
The best thing about the park is the excellent nature trail. It stays
close to the lake shore for awhile before cutting back through the middle of
the forest to the campground. The trees and secondary growth along the
way are typical of those found throughout the Turtle Mountains, and so
are the birds. Some of the species to be found in summer include Cooper’s,
Red-tailed, and Broad-winged Hawks; Ruffed Grouse; Black-billed Cuckoo;
Ruby-throated Hummingbird; Yellow-bellied Sapsucker; Hairy and
Downy Woodpeckers; Great Crested, Least, and Willow Flycatchers; Eastern
Pewee; Blue Jay; American Crow; Black-capped Chickadee; White-breasted
Nuthatch; House Wren; Brown Thrasher; Gray Catbird; Veery;
Red-eyed, Warbling, Yellow-throated, and Philadelphia Vireos; Black-and-white,
Yellow, Mourning, and Chestnut-sided Warblers; Northern Waterthrush;
Ovenbird; American Redstart; Northern Oriole; Rose-breasted
Grosbeak; American Goldfinch; Rufous-sided Towhee (eastern form); and
White-throated (rare), Chipping, and Song Sparrows. The real prize has to
be the Philadelphia Vireo. This is one of the few areas in the United States
where this species is known to breed. Most of its breeding range is in
Canada.
If there are not many birds moving, try a Common Screech-owl imitation
or tape. You may be surrounded by complaining birds in a matter of
minutes. Remember to watch the lake for Common Loon, Red-necked
Grebe, Ring-necked Duck, Bufflehead, and Common Goldeneye, all of
which nest in the area.
After finishing the park, return to the main road and continue to the
left around the lake. After 2.1 miles turn left (east) on Highway East 43
toward the Peace Gardens. Go 4.4 miles; turn right at the sign pointing to
Pelican-Sandy Lakes Primitive Recreation Area. This road goes into the
forest for 1.0 mile to an undeveloped area with primitive campsites. There
is plenty of suitable habitat, so you should be able to find most of the birds
that you found at the park, or any you missed. In summer this area will
probably be less crowded, as well.
Lake Metigoshe State Park
Willow Lake National Wildlife Refuge is often productive. To reach it
continue east on Highway East 43 from the turn-off to Pelican-Sandy
Lakes Primitive Recreation Area. After 3.1 miles you will cross the Rolette
County line, which is marked. Go another mile, and turn right (south). The
lake is 1.6 miles ahead on the left. The main attraction is the colony of
Double-crested Cormorants. However, watch for Common Loon, grebes,
American White Pelican (visitor), Great Blue Heron, and several species of
waterfowl.
After checking the lake, backtrack to Highway 43 and head east for
about 13 miles to the Wakopa State Game Management Area. (It may
also be reached by going 0.5 mile north and 8 miles west from the town of
St. John.)
WAKOPA STATE GAME MANAGEMENT AREA
This area is relatively undisturbed, and the birding is great. There are
even walking trails. All of the birds common to the Turtle Mountains can
be found, and this just might be the best place to look for them.
As is the case across the rest of the state, the Turtle Mountains do not
offer a great diversity of winter birds. There are, however, some interesting
possibilities. The large amount of well-wooded habitat combined with a
geographic position on the Canada border makes the mountains a definite
attraction to several rare but exciting northern birds such as Hawk, Great
Gray, Boreal, and Saw-whet Owls; Northern Raven; Gray Jay; Boreal
Chickadee (accidental); and White-winged Crossbill. Although the chances
of finding any of these birds on any given day are slim, the potential is
there. Some may be more regular than is currently thought, because not
enough people bird this area in winter.
Some of the more regular winter visitors and residents here include
Ruffed and Sharp-tailed Grouse; Gray Partridge; Mourning Dove; Great
Horned, Snowy, Long-eared, and Short-eared Owls; Common Flicker;
Hairy and Downy Woodpeckers; Horned Lark; Blue Jay; Black-billed Magpie;
Black-capped Chickadee; White-breasted and Red-breasted
Nuthatches; Brown Creeper; Cedar and Bohemian Waxwings; European
Starling; House Sparrow; Evening and Pine Grosbeaks; Purple Finch;
Pine Siskin; American Goldfinch; Common and Hoary Redpolls; Red
Crossbill; and Snow Bunting. Of course, you will be doing well to find half
of these species on any given trip, because many of them are decidedly cyclic
in their wanderings.
Just as there is no one spot to go in the Turtle Mountains to find all of
the summer residents, there is no one place to be recommended for winter.
Both Lake Metigoshe State Park and Pelican-Sandy Lakes Primitive
Recreation Area are good if road conditions allow entry. Usually, you will
come out ahead by following the plowed roads and the good habitat.
Rush Lake, a large marsh encompassing several thousand acres, is
ideal for viewing waterfowl, shorebirds, and marsh species. To reach it
drive 4.0 miles west from Wales to a point surrounded by marshy inlets
and water-filled ditches. You can drive as far as road conditions permit.
Although there is little open water, you should have excellent birding
from spring through fall. Some of the birds to watch for are Pied-billed and
Eared Grebes; all of the ducks common to the state; Great Blue Heron;
Black-crowned Night Heron; American Bittern; Green Heron; Sora; Virginia
Rail; American Coot; Killdeer; Semipalmated, Lesser Golden, and
Black-bellied Plovers; Ruddy Turnstone; Common Snipe; Willet; Greater
and Lesser Yellowlegs; Short-billed and Long-billed Dowitchers; Spotted,
Solitary, Stilt, Pectoral, White-rumped, Baird’s, Least, Semipalmated, and
Western (rare) Sandpipers; Dunlin; Sanderling; Marbled and Hudsonian
Godwits; American Avocet; Wilson’s and Northern Phalaropes; Ring-billed
and Franklin’s Gulls; Forster’s, Common, and Black Terns; all of the
state’s swallows; Marsh and Sedge Wrens; Common Yellowthroat; Yellow-headed
and Red-winged Blackbirds; and Le Conte’s and Sharp-tailed Sparrows.
Most of the shorebirds appear only as transients, even though many
may be seen throughout the summer.
The northeast sector contains many well-wooded areas. The Turtle
Mountains probably represent the best of these in terms of birdlife; however,
a similar avifauna can be found in the Pembina Hills, which lie predominantly
in eastern Cavalier County and western Pembina County. The
major habitat is upland, deciduous forest, with bur oak, American elm,
quaking aspen, birch, and box elder being some of the predominant trees.
Birding the Pembina Hills is like birding the Turtle Mountains. It is hard
to pick out specific spots because there is so much good habitat.
Most of the birds occurring in the Pembina Hills can also be found in
the deltaic sand area in western Pembina County (situated between the
Pembina and Tongue Rivers). There are many excellent sites.
For the sake of convenience, although not technically correct, all statements
concerning the Pembina Hills made in the following Specialties Section
refer to the area in general including the deltaic sand area.
The best spot for finding species typical of the Pembina Hills is the
Tongue River Game Management Area. To reach it start at the western
of the two intersections of State Highways 5 and 32, and head north on
Highway 32. Turn right (4.0 miles) and continue east to the area. After 2.5
miles you will enter the heavily forested zone. The crisscrossing auto trails
allow good access.
This is a fantastic place. You may even find some Moose, which have
moved into this area in the past few years. Some of the summer residents
71
are Cooper’s, Red-tailed, and Broad-winged Hawks; Ruffed Grouse; Black-billed
Cuckoo; Great Horned Owl; Ruby-throated Hummingbird; Belted
Kingfisher (along the river); Common Flicker; Yellow-bellied Sapsucker;
Downy and Hairy Woodpeckers; Great Crested, Willow, and Least Flycatchers;
Eastern Pewee; Blue Jay; American Crow; Black-capped Chickadee;
White-breasted Nuthatch; House Wren; Gray Catbird; Brown
Thrasher; American Robin; Veery; Cedar Waxwing; Yellow-throated, Red-eyed,
and Warbling Vireos; Black-and-white, Yellow, and Mourning
Warblers; Ovenbird; Northern Waterthrush; American Redstart; Northern
Oriole; Scarlet Tanager; Rose-breasted Grosbeak; Indigo Bunting; American
Goldfinch; Rufous-sided Towhee; and Chipping and Song Sparrows.
In addition to the nesting species, this area attracts a number of
migrants. All species listed for the wooded areas of J. Clark Salyer may
also be found here. However, several of the eastern warblers (such as the
Magnolia, Cape May, Black-throated Green, Blackburnian, Chestnut-sided,
and Connecticut) may be easier to find at Tongue River.
Another good locale is the Gunlogson Arboretum. To reach it start
at the western edge of Cavalier, go west on State Highway 5 for 5.4 miles,
and turn right. The arboretum contains several diverse plant and animal
communities. Most are crossed by the nature trail that leads to a small
marshy area, several small springs, and a portion of the Tongue River. All
of this is surrounded by an impressive array of trees that include willows,
ironwood, alder, elm, oak, ash, and basswood and a lush understory of
ferns, grapevines, and wildflowers.
From the standpoint of habitat and fewer people, the birding is usually
better at the arboretum, but Icelandic State Park is good for migrants.
To reach it continue west on Highway 5 for 0.4 mile and turn right (north)
at the sign.
The Pembina Hills are good also for all of the regular winter species
plus an occasional northern stray such as Northern Raven; Hawk, Great
Gray, Boreal, and Saw-whet Owls; Northern Shrike; and Gray Jay. Many
of the roads are closed in winter. Care should be exercised when driving-conditions
are not known.
Gunlogson Arboretum
Although the northeastern sector is loaded with marshlands, there are
not many along the highly agricultural Red River Valley, which has been
extensively cleared of forests and drained. A few good spots remain. One is
Lake Ardoch, which can be reached by starting at U.S. Highway 81 on the
northern edge of Minto and going east on County Road #15 toward Warsaw.
After 3.4 miles turn right (south) on a gravel road. (It may not be passable
in wet weather.) After 3.8 miles you will see the lake on the right.
Check for grebes, herons, and waterfowl. Walk the marshy areas on
the left for Marsh and Sedge Wrens, and Le Conte’s Sparrow. Continue
straight for another 2.2 miles and turn right on the paved road. In 0.2 mile
a marshy inlet from the lake is on both sides of the road. Check here for
migrant shorebirds. Continue for 1.8 miles to the junction with Highway
81, just north of the town of Ardoch.
PRAIRIE CHICKEN AREAS
There are only a few remnant populations of Greater Prairie Chickens
left in North Dakota. Luckily, the State Fish and Game Department has
managed to buy up most of the areas still frequented by them. Two spots
are in Grand Forks County. Start at the northern side of Manvel (north of
Grand Forks on U.S. Highway 81) and go west on County Road #33. To
reach area number one, go 9.0 miles on County Road #33 and turn left
(south). For the next 3.0 miles you will be crossing suitable sections of long-grass
prairie. To find area number two, backtrack to County Road #33,
cross the road, and go 5.0 miles north. Turn right and for the next 4 miles
watch for the chickens. (This whole area should be marked by Game Management
Area signs.) Dawn is the best time, although you may luck out
and find them in the late afternoon just before sundown. Watch also for
Sharp-tailed Grouse and Upland Sandpiper.
KELLY’S SLOUGH
A good spot for grasslands birds is Kelly’s Pasture, a small prairie
area west of Grand Forks. To get there start at the underpass of I-29, go
west on Highway 2 for 5.7 miles, and turn left (south). Drive 4.0 miles and
pull over to the right. There should be parallel fence rows (several yards
apart) running to the west. Park and walk between the fence lines. Watch
in this grassy area for Sedge Wren and Grasshopper, Le Conte’s, and Clay-colored
Sparrows. After about 6.0 mile the fences will stop at a large grassy
field. To your left (south) there should be a small stockpond surrounded by
reeds. Check the edges for Marsh and Sedge Wrens and Le Conte’s Sparrow.
Be careful at all times not to cross any fence lines on the left (south)
side of the trail, because all are posted.
After checking the stockpond, walk north across the open field, watching
for Sharp-tailed Grouse, Upland Sandpiper, Western Meadowlark,
Grasshopper and Clay-colored Sparrows, and Chestnut-collared Longspur.
At dawn check any rises in the field for dancing grouse. During late
summer and early fall look for Sprague’s Pipit. This species is rare here but
occasionally passes through after breeding. At the north end of this field is
a large stock pen. This marks the end of the area which can be walked.
Return to your car, drive 1.0 mile south, and turn left (east). For the
next few miles, check all of the grassy/brushy fields for Sharp-tailed
Grouse and Gray Partridge. The partridge may be seen almost anywhere,
75
but the grouse is restricted to a few overgrown fields. Some fields have sunflowers,
which may attract a number of winter birds (basically goldfinches,
siskins, redpolls, and Northern Shrike).
There are several great spots near Grand Forks. The best is Kelly’s
Slough. To get to it proceed to the underpass of I-29, go west on Highway 2
for 7.8 miles, and turn right (north). After 3.3 miles stop on the hill overlooking
the slough.
This is a fantastic place for migrant waterfowl, waders, and shorebirds.
Some of the migrants include Common (occasional) and Red-throated
(accidental) Loons; Red-necked (uncommon), Horned, Eared, and
Western Grebes; American White Pelican; Double-crested Cormorant;
Great Egret (rare); Whistling Swan; Canada, Greater White-fronted, and
Snow Geese; Common, Red-breasted (rare), and Hooded (rare) Mergansers;
White-winged Scoter (rare); Redhead; Canvasback; Ring-necked Duck;
Lesser and Greater (rare) Scaup; Common Goldeneye; Bufflehead; Oldsquaw
(rare); Mallard; American Black Duck (rare); Gadwall; American
Wigeon; Common Pintail; Green-winged and Blue-winged Teals; Northern
Shoveler; Wood Duck; Semipalmated, Black-bellied, and Lesser Golden
Plovers; Ruddy Turnstone; Common Snipe; Greater and Lesser Yellowlegs;
Solitary, Pectoral, White-rumped, Baird’s, Least, Stilt, and Semipalmated
Sandpipers; Dunlin; Short-billed and Long-billed Dowitchers;
Hudsonian Godwit; Sanderling; Northern Phalarope; and Herring
(uncommon) and Bonaparte’s (rare) Gulls.
Summer residents are much fewer, but many of the transient species
are present from mid-summer on. Birds found throughout the summer
include Pied-billed Grebe, Great Blue Heron, American Bittern, Ruddy
Duck, Sora, American Coot, American Avocet, Spotted Sandpiper, Willet,
Marbled Godwit, Wilson’s Phalarope, Franklin’s and Ring-billed Gulls,
Black Tern, Marsh and Sedge Wrens, Red-winged and Yellow-headed
Blackbirds, and Le Conte’s Sparrow.
For best results bird the slough on both the east and west sides of the
road. The area to the east is better for rails, Marsh and Sedge Wrens, and
Le Conte’s Sparrows, because there is more emergent vegetation. In fact,
the grassy perimeter to the east end of the slough is full of Marsh Wrens
and Le Conte’s Sparrows. You may have to wade a bit to get good views,
but the water is only a few inches deep throughout most of this grassy
area. A walk along the railroad tracks north of the slough may turn up
Gray Partridge, Upland Sandpiper, and Chestnut-collared Longspur. In
fall watch for Lapland Longspurs along the tracks and over the slough.
Continue north for 1.7 miles and turn right (east). During migration
check for Common Snipe and rails in the ditches on the right. Watch for
Chestnut-collared Longspurs as well. Drive 1.0 mile and turn right again.
Mountain Bluebirds have been found during spring (March 20-30) around
the farm area. Also check the surrounding fields in spring and fall for
Ruddy Turnstones and Buff-breasted Sandpipers. After 0.7 mile the east
76
end of Kelly’s Slough is on the right. At 1.8 miles you may drive west
through the cluster of buildings at Kelly and check the nearby fields for
Black-bellied and Lesser Golden Plovers (migration only). To continue the
tour, turn left (east) at 0.2 mile past Kelly.
Drive east for 2.0 miles to an old, white, country school-house. During
migration check the fields south of the intersection for Marbled and Hudsonian
Godwits. Continue straight east for another mile before turning left
(north). After 0.6 mile pull over to the left. Walk to the northwest (45° to the
left of the road ahead). There is a Sharp-tailed Grouse dancing ground
about 300 yards out. According to Frank Kelley, there is a reasonably good
chance of the grouse being on or near the grounds at daybreak. At other
times they may be anywhere within a two-mile radius. Sprague’s Pipits
and Chestnut-collared Longspurs nest in the same area.
Return south, the same way you came in, and turn left (east). Check
any areas with tall grass in the next few miles for Sedge Wrens and Le
Conte’s Sparrows. After 2.0 miles turn right (south). In spring check fields
to the north and east of the intersection for Ruddy Turnstones and Buff-breasted
Sandpipers. After 0.5 mile, stop at the first of three entrances to
the sewage lagoons. As many as twenty species of shorebirds can often be
seen from the gate. The greatest concentrations occur in mid-August. In
migration large numbers of grebes, ducks, and gulls use the ponds. Look
for the rarer ducks or shorebirds. Check nearby plowed fields for Lesser
Golden Plover (in migration), Buff-breasted Sandpiper (migration), and
Upland Sandpiper (anytime from spring through fall). For different views
stop at the other two gates. Continue for 5.0 miles and turn left (east) onto
Highway 2 to return to Grand Forks.
A good place for woodland birds is Turtle River State Park, one
mile north of Arvilla or about 18 miles west of Grand Forks along Highway
2. The entrance is well marked. This whole area was once covered by
glacial Lake Agassiz. As the lake lowered, the shoreline remained stable
for some time, allowing the wave action to form a prominent beach ridge
along what is now the eastern edge of the park. Here Baird’s Sparrows
occasionally are found in the grassy fields.
Summer residents are Sharp-shinned (rare), Cooper’s (rare), Red-tailed,
and Broad-winged Hawks; Spotted Sandpiper; Black-billed Cuckoo;
Common Screech and Great Horned Owls; Common Nighthawk; Ruby-throated
Hummingbird; Belted Kingfisher; Common Flicker; Yellow-bellied
Sapsucker; Red-headed, Hairy, and Downy Woodpeckers; Great
Crested, Willow, and Least Flycatchers; Eastern Pewee; Blue Jay; American
Crow; Black-capped Chickadee; White-breasted Nuthatch; House
Wren; Gray Catbird; Brown Thrasher; American Robin; Cedar Waxwing;
Yellow-throated, Red-eyed, and Warbling Vireos; Yellow Warbler; Northern
Oriole; Common Grackle; Scarlet Tanager; Rose-breasted Grosbeak;
Indigo Bunting; American Goldfinch; and Chipping, Clay-colored, and
Song Sparrows.
Winter visitors include Northern Goshawk (rare), Barred Owl (rare),
Red-breasted Nuthatch, Brown Creeper, Bohemian Waxwing, Rusty
Blackbird, Evening and Pine Grosbeaks, Purple Finch, Red and White-winged
(rare) Crossbills, Northern Junco, and American Tree, Harris’
(rare), and White-throated (rare) Sparrows. Other winter species which
may be seen in the open areas surrounding the park are Sharp-tailed
Grouse, Gray Partridge, Mourning Dove, Snowy and Short-eared Owls,
Horned Lark, Black-billed Magpie, Western Meadowlark, Common and
Hoary (rare) Redpolls, Lapland Longspur, and Snow Bunting.
The park is at its best in spring when the trees are dripping with
migrant warblers and other passerines, such as Olive-sided Flycatcher;
Hermit, Swainson’s, and Gray-cheeked Thrushes; Veery; Golden-crowned
and Ruby-crowned Kinglets; Yellow-throated, Solitary, and Philadelphia
Vireos; Black-and-white, Tennessee, Orange-crowned, Nashville, Magnolia,
Cape May, Yellow-rumped, Black-throated Green, Blackburnian,
Chestnut-sided, Bay-breasted, Blackpoll, Palm, Connecticut, Mourning,
Wilson’s, and Canada Warblers; Ovenbird; Northern Waterthrush; American
Redstart; Rufous-sided Towhee; and Harris’, White-crowned, White-throated,
Fox, Lincoln’s, and Swamp Sparrows. All of these species occur
in similar habitat throughout the area (especially along the Red River in
Grand Forks).
NELSON COUNTY
Two excellent spots for water and marsh species are Rose Lake
National Wildlife Refuge and Stump Lake National Wildlife
Refuge. To reach them proceed south from Lakota on State Highway 1 for
2.1 miles and turn right (west) on a gravel road. Go 5.0 miles and turn left
(south). Then turn right (west) at 1.0 mile. After 0.8 mile you will reach a
marshy inlet of Rose Lake.
The shallow marsh can be productive in migration and late summer
for shorebirds. In the drier fields watch for Bobolink and Grasshopper
Sparrow. The wetter edges are good for Marsh and Sedge Wrens, Common
Yellowthroat, and Savannah, Le Conte’s, and sometimes Sharp-tailed
Sparrows. The lake attracts migrating waterfowl, shorebirds, gulls, and
terns.
Continue west for 0.3 mile to another marshy area with the same
birds. After 0.8 mile turn left (south) on Nelson County Road #23. Go south
for 8.0 miles and turn left (east). Follow the main road as it swings north
(3.0 miles) and then east (1.0 mile). After another mile turn left (north). In
1.5 miles you will see Stump Lake on both sides of the road.
This large lake has little vegetation around the perimeter, so few ducks
or marsh species actually nest, but some use the area from spring through
fall. You may expect lots of grebes (especially Western), American White
Pelicans, Double-crested Cormorants, and Ring-billed and Franklin’s
Gulls. Occasionally, a Bonaparte’s will put in a late-summer appearance,
and in migration watch for White-winged Scoter and Oldsquaw. In spring
and from mid-July through early October, the shorelines may be covered
with shorebirds. It is a consistent place to find Sanderlings. Piping Plovers
may nest.
Continue on to Highway 1 (3.0 miles). Turn south and go 1.7 miles
before turning right on the road to the recreation area. After 1.3 miles
swing right and continue to Stump Lake Park, a well-wooded area that is
ideal for transient passerines and nesting woodland species.
A rewarding place to look for migrant and nesting woodland birds is
Sully’s Hill National Game Preserve. To reach it start in the town of Devils
Lake, go south from Highway 2 on Highway 20/57 for 12.0 miles, and turn
left at the sign. After 0.6 mile turn left. Go 0.5 mile and turn left again. In
0.2 mile you will cross the cattleguard into the preserve, an area of rolling
hills and uplands habitat. Ask at the headquarters for a list of the birds.
You may either hike the nature trail (1.2 miles), drive the auto trail (4.5
miles), or do both.
The nature trail winds through excellent deciduous-forest habitat that
is good for most of the birds listed under Turtle River State Park. The birds
here go crazy when a tape-recording of a Common Screech-owl is played,
which is a reliable indication that one of these little owls is in residence.
The auto trail goes through a large enclosure, where Bison, Elk, and White-tailed
Deer are allowed to roam freely. Because most of the tour traverses
uplands and dry-land forests, you probably will not see many birds. Western
Grebes, American White Pelicans, and Double-crested Cormorants can
be seen anywhere near Devils Lake itself.
One of the best spots for migrant and nesting waterbirds is Lac Aux
Mortes National Wildlife Refuge (also known as Lake Alice N.W.R.).
To reach it go northwest on U.S. Highway 1 from Devils Lake. After about
13 miles turn right (north) on the road to Penn. Follow this gravel road
through town and past Lake Alice. The road is chained off after 9.2 miles.
The last few passable miles pass directly between Lake Alice and Chain
Lake; you will have water on both sides of the road.
All of the grebes and waterfowl common to this half of the state can be
observed in large numbers. In spring Snow Goose numbers may exceed
200,000. American White Pelicans and Double-crested Cormorants use the
lake throughout the summer, and there are large nesting colonies of Black-crowned
Night Herons and Franklin’s Gulls. Great Blue Herons and
American Bitterns are commonly seen, and Great and Cattle Egrets have
been showing up in late summer for the past several years. The lake also
attracts all of the regular shorebirds, gulls, terns, swallows, and blackbirds.
Check the wet, grassy borders of the road for Marsh and Sedge
Wrens and for Le Conte’s and Sharp-tailed Sparrows.
Listed below are some of the species found in North Dakota that may
be of particular interest to visiting birders. Some may be eastern birds of
interest to western birders. Others may be western birds of interest to eastern
birders. The purpose of the list is to aid finding each species. Therefore,
information is given on abundance, distribution, habitat, and, where possible,
on specific locations where each species may be found.
Common Loon—Uncommon summer resident on permanent, freshwater
lakes in the Turtle Mountains (Bottineau and Rolette Counties). Try
Lake Metigoshe and Sandy Lake. This species is a rare migrant on large
ponds and lakes throughout the rest of the state.
Black-crowned Night Heron
Red-necked Grebe—Uncommon summer resident of larger ponds and
lakes in the northern portion. Most common in the Turtle Mountains and
on J. Clark Salyer Refuge. Also seen with some frequency on Des Lacs (try
the Old Lake Road) and Upper Souris Refuges. Rare breeder and uncommon
to rare migrant over the rest of the state.
Horned Grebe—Fairly common summer resident on ponds and lakes in
the northwest, northeast, and southeast sectors. This species does not nest
in large colonies as do the Western and Eared Grebes; hence, it may be
harder to find. However, it should be fairly easy to see at places such as
Des Lacs, Upper Souris, J. Clark Salyer, Lostwood, Long Lake, and Arrowwood
Refuges.
Eared Grebe—Common summer resident on seasonal and permanent
ponds and lakes over much of the state. Often nests in large colonies. Hard
to miss at such places as Long Lake, Hobart Lake, Arrowwood, Audubon,
Des Lacs, Lostwood, Upper Souris, J. Clark Salyer, and Stump Lake
Refuges.
Western Grebe—Conspicuous and easy-to-find summer resident on scattered
lakes and permanent ponds throughout the northwest, northeast,
and southeast sectors. Usually nests in large colonies, and prefers areas
with lots of open water. Look for it on Devils Lake and on Des Lacs, Lostwood,
Upper Souris, J. Clark Salyer, Arrowwood, Lake Alice, Long Lake,
Alkaline Lake, Stump Lake, and Tewaukon Refuges.
American White Pelican—Hard-to-miss summer resident over most of
the state. Apparently, the only known breeding colony is on Chase Lake,
where there are about 4,000 pairs nesting. Individuals from this colony
(and many others which nest in neighboring states) range far and wide all
summer. Should be easy to find at Des Lacs, Lostwood, Upper Souris, J.
Clark Salyer, Audubon, Arrowwood, Long Lake, Lake Ilo, Bowman-Haley,
and Tewaukon Refuges, as well as at Beaver Lake and Baldhill Dam (Lake
Ashtabula).
Whistling Swan—Fairly common spring and fall migrant throughout.
It can be found on almost any large marsh or lake, including places like
Des Lacs, Upper Souris, Lostwood, J. Clark Salyer, Audubon, Arrowwood,
Long Lake, and Tewaukon Refuges. The best spot is Hobart Lake, where
there are usually hundreds present for several weeks in fall.
Greater White-fronted Goose—Fairly common migrant throughout
the western half; uncommon in the eastern half. Found on marshlands or
grainfields with congregations of Canada and Snow Geese.
Cinnamon Teal—Rare spring-through-April visitor and probable
breeder in marshlands throughout the central and western parts. Occasionally
seen in the southeast corner (Tewaukon).
Wood Duck—Fairly common summer resident of wooded streams, rivers,
ponds, and lakes through the eastern half. Uncommon in the western
82
half at places like Des Lacs, Upper Souris, and Audubon Refuges—except
along the Missouri River below Bismarck, where it is fairly common.
Should be easy to find along the Wild Rice and Red (especially at Fargo)
Rivers, along the Sheyenne River below Baldhill Dam, and at Arrowwood
and J. Clark Salyer Refuges.
White-winged Scoter—Rare migrant on lakes and sewage ponds
throughout. Occasionally nests on lakes in the Turtle Mountains and at
Des Lacs Refuge.
Hooded Merganser—Rare migrant on water areas throughout. Fairly
common summer resident along the woodland-bordered stretch of the Souris
River in Bottineau and McHenry Counties (particularly on J. Clark Salyer
Refuge). Uncommon to rare breeder at Arrowwood Refuge.
Northern Goshawk—Rare winter visitor/resident and migrant in
wooded areas throughout. Some possible areas include the river bottoms of
the James, Red, and Sheyenne Rivers in the southeast; Turtle River Park,
the Pembina Hills, the Turtle Mountains, the Souris River bottomlands in
J. Clark Salyer Refuge, and the forest surrounding Devils Lake in the northeast;
and the Missouri and Little Missouri bottomlands and the wooded
hills of the badlands in the western half. The Turtle Mountains are probably
your best bet.
Broad-winged Hawk—Uncommon to fairly common summer resident
of mature, deciduous forests in the Turtle Mountains and Pembina Hills.
Rare breeder in other areas with similar habitat in the eastern half.
Uncommon migrant through wooded areas of the western half.
Swainson’s Hawk—Common summer resident of prairies and agricultural
areas throughout the western three-fourths of the state. Uncommon
to rare in the eastern one-fourth. Easy to find.
Rough-legged Hawk—Uncommon to fairly common migrant and winter
visitor/resident, in prairies and agricultural areas throughout. Most
often seen in November.
Ferruginous Hawk—Fairly common summer resident of open prairies
throughout the western and southeast-central portions. Not hard to find.
Many people confuse this species with juvenile or light-phase Red-tails.
The best mark for separating the two is probably the large, white windows
on the upper side of the Ferruginous’ wings. Also, when soaring, the Ferruginous
flies with a dihedral (not as pronounced as with the Swainson’s),
as opposed to the more flat-winged pattern of the Red-tailed.
Golden Eagle—Uncommon to fairly common permanent resident of the
badlands along the Little Missouri River. Uncommon to rare winter visitor
throughout. The best areas are the north and south units of the Roosevelt
Memorial (including prairies in between) and on the sage-grasslands of
Slope and Bowman Counties. The road going south from Marmarth can be
especially good. In winter also check Lake Sakakawea, the Missouri River
south of Bismarck, and Audubon Refuge.
Bald Eagle—Rare migrant and winter visitor throughout. A pair nested
along the Missouri River (McLean County) in 1975, for the first nesting
record in several years. In winter it may be found on almost any of the
refuges (most likely Audubon), Lake Sakakawea, or along the Missouri
River.
Prairie Falcon—Uncommon to rare resident of prairies and badlands in
the western quarter. Rare visitor elsewhere. The best areas are the north
and south units of the Roosevelt Memorial and Little Missouri and Sully’s
Creek State Parks.
Ruffed Grouse—Fairly common to uncommon permanent resident of
the Turtle Mountains and Pembina Hills. Can be found almost anywhere
in mature deciduous forests throughout these areas. Try the nature trail at
Lake Metigoshe State Park, the forest surrounding the Pelican-Sandy
Lakes Primitive Recreation Area, the Wakopa and Tongue River Game
Management Areas, and the Gunlogson Arboretum.
Greater Prairie Chicken—Rare permanent resident of remnant tracts
of tall-grass prairie in Grand Forks, Ransom, and Richland Counties. The
booming grounds in Ransom and Richland are on the Sheyenne National
Grasslands. However, many of these spots are hard to find and hard to get
to because of poor roads. Your best bet is on either of the two game management
areas near Manvel in Grand Forks County.
Sharp-tailed Grouse—Common permanent resident over the western
half. Fairly common in the central portion, and uncommon to rare across
the eastern quarter. Found mostly in mixed-grass prairies and abandoned
farm fields. Should be easy to find on the grasslands and sagebrush flats
of both units of the Roosevelt Memorial, on the roads going south from
Marmarth and Rhame, in the sandhills of Ransom and Richland Counties,
in weedy fields along the Missouri River south of Bismarck, and on
Des Lacs, Lostwood, J. Clark Salyer, Audubon, Long Lake, and Arrowwood
Refuges.
Sage Grouse—Uncommon to fairly common resident of sagebrush prairies
in Bowman, Slope, Billings, and Golden Valley Counties. Most common
in the western halves of Slope and Bowman Counties. Try the roads
going south from Marmarth and Rhame, and the road going north from
Marmarth to Amidon. Activity on the dancing grounds usually reaches its
peak in April.
Ring-necked Pheasant—Generally uncommon to fairly common resident
over most of the state. Prefers weedy fields and ditches, shelterbelts,
dry sloughs, and brushy edges of wooded river bottoms. Look for it in
Barnes, Ransom, Richland, Sargent, and Dickey Counties; in the sandhills
on J. Clark Salyer Refuge; around Lake Ilo; along the Missouri River bottoms
near Bismarck; and in the Little Missouri bottomlands of the Roosevelt
Memorial.
Gray Partridge—Fairly common resident over most of the state, becoming
less common in the northeast. Utilizes much the same habitat as the
Ring-necked Pheasant, but is more often found in open prairie areas.
Fairly easy to find, particularly in winter when it is often found in the open
along the roads.
Wild Turkey—Has been introduced in many areas. Has taken hold in
the wooded river bottoms of the Missouri and Sheyenne (locally—around
Valley City) Rivers, and in the Little Missouri badlands, where it occupies
an upland coniferous-forest habitat. In these areas it is a fairly common to
uncommon resident.
Whooping Crane—Rare migrant on its way to and from the nesting
grounds in Canada. At those times it may be seen on almost any of the
refuges in the western and central portions.
Sandhill Crane—Common migrant throughout the western half;
uncommon to rare through much of the eastern half. During migration,
may be found in large concentrations on refuges, in grain fields, or simply
flying through the air in long skeins.
Yellow Rail—Rare and local summer resident of spring-fed sedge fields
in the northern (mostly north-central) portion. Scattered colonies have
been reported in recent years from McLean, Mountrail, Bottineau, and
Benson Counties. Because of its accessibility, J. Clark Salyer Refuge may
offer your best chance of finding it. Check appropriate habitat along the
scenic tour.
Piping Plover—Uncommon summer resident of selected alkaline ponds
and lakes, and occasionally of freshwater lakes, rivers, and impoundments
with open sandy or gravel shores. Watch especially on sandbars
along the Missouri River at Bismarck, and on the alkaline lakes and
potholes of Lostwood Refuge. Other areas include Long Lake Refuge, J.
Clark Salyer Refuge, and the shores of Devils Lake, Stump Lake, and
Alkaline Lake.
Lesser Golden Plover—Fairly common migrant throughout, except in
the southwest sector where it is uncommon to rare. In fall found in large
numbers at places such as Stump Lake, Alkaline Lake, Kelly’s Slough, and
the sewage ponds in Fargo, West Fargo, and Grand Forks. Numbers peak
in September and October. In spring (mostly mid-April) seems to prefer
flooded fields (and even some that are not flooded).
Ruddy Turnstone—Uncommon migrant in the eastern half; rare
migrant throughout the western half. Frequently seen on plowed fields
(especially flooded ones), and on artificial water impoundments such as
sewage ponds, flood-control ponds, and fish-removal ponds. Look for it in
Cass and Grand Forks Counties; at the Grand Forks, Fargo, and West
Fargo sewage ponds; at Kelly’s Slough; Rush, Alkaline, and Stump Lakes;
J. Clark Salyer Refuge; and at the fish hatchery in Valley City.
Long-billed Curlew—An uncommon to rare summer resident of scrub-prairie
and short-grass areas in the extreme southwest corner. Most likely
in Bowman and Slope Counties. Try the roads going south from Marmarth
and Rhame, and the road going north from Marmarth to Amidon.
Upland Sandpiper—Fairly common summer resident of prairie grasslands
and wet meadows throughout. Often seen sitting on fence posts in
spring. Look for it at Bowman-Haley, Stewart Lake, Lake Ilo, Lostwood,
Des Lacs, Upper Souris, J. Clark Salyer, Audubon, Long Lake, Arrowwood,
and Tewaukon Refuges; in the Sheyenne Grasslands of Ransom and
Richland Counties; and around Kelly’s Slough and the prairie-chicken
areas in Grand Forks County. Should be easy to find.
Willet—Fairly common summer resident of prairie potholes, marshes,
and lakes throughout. Easy to find at places such as Bowman-Haley, Lake
Ilo, Lostwood, Des Lacs, Upper Souris, J. Clark Salyer, Audubon, Long
Lake, Arrowwood, Lake Alice, and Tewaukon Refuges; Kelly’s Slough;
Rush Lake; Alkaline Lake; and the marshes around Burnstad.
Red Knot—Very rare migrant through the eastern half. Look for it at
Tewaukon, Kelly’s Slough, and the sewage ponds at Grand Forks, Fargo,
and West Fargo.
White-rumped Sandpiper—Uncommon migrant to water areas
throughout. Look for it at Rush Lake, Kelly’s Slough, Stump Lake, Alkaline
Lake, Hobart Lake, the sewage ponds at Grand Forks, Fargo, and
West Fargo; and on marshes on Long Lake, Des Lacs, Upper Souris, Lostwood,
J. Clark Salyer, Audubon, and Arrowwood Refuges.
Baird’s Sandpiper—Fairly common to uncommon migrant to water
areas and flooded fields throughout. Can be found at all of the areas listed
for the White-rumped Sandpiper.
Dunlin—Uncommon migrant throughout the eastern half; rare in the
west. Found on flooded fields as well as on ponds, lake shores, marshes,
and sewage ponds. Check Rush, Stump, Hobart, and Alkaline Lakes; Lake
Ardoch; Kelly’s Slough; the fish hatchery at Valley City; Tewaukon
Refuge; and the sewage ponds at Grand Forks, Fargo, and West Fargo.
Western Sandpiper—Uncommon to rare migrant throughout. Usually
associates with Least and Semipalmated Sandpipers, but seems to feed
farther out from shore. Difficult to separate from Semipalmated except
when in good spring plumage. Look for it on marshes, lake shores, and
sewage ponds, or wherever you find other species of “peeps”.
Buff-breasted Sandpiper—Very rare migrant over most of the state;
most regular in the northeast. Prefers grassy pastures and plowed fields.
Your best bet is to check the farm areas of Grand Forks County.
Marbled Godwit—Fairly common summer resident of prairie wetlands
throughout. Often seen on grasslands far removed from water (excluding
an occasional stock pond) as at Longspur Pasture. Easy to find at places
86
such as Bowman-Haley, Lake Ilo, Lostwood, Des Lacs, Upper Souris, J.
Clark Salyer, Audubon, Arrowwood, Long Lake, Slade, and Tewaukon
Refuges; Kelly’s Slough; Alkaline Lake; the marshes around Burnstad;
and on the Sheyenne Grasslands of Ransom and Richland Counties.
Hudsonian Godwit—Uncommon to rare migrant to pastures and water
areas throughout (less common in the western half). Try Rush Lake, Lake
Ardoch, Kelly’s Slough, Long Lake and Tewaukon Refuges, and the sewage
ponds at Grand Forks, Fargo, and West Fargo.
American Avocet—Fairly common summer resident of alkaline lakes
and ponds and shallow wetlands throughout (absent as a nesting species
over much of the southwest). Also commonly seen during migration and
throughout the summer on sewage ponds and other areas where it does not
nest. Easy to find at Bowman-Haley, Lostwood, Des Lacs, Upper Souris, J.
Clark Salyer, Audubon, Long Lake, Arrowwood, Stump Lake, and Tewaukon
Refuges; Kelly’s Slough; Alkaline Lake; Rush Lake; Hobart Lake; and
the North Fargo sewage ponds.
Wilson’s Phalarope—Common summer resident of prairie wetlands
throughout. Almost impossible to miss, especially in late summer when it
congregates in large numbers on certain water areas such as Hobart Lake,
Kelly’s Slough, and the North Fargo sewage ponds. Look for it on almost
any of the wildlife refuges, game management areas, and waterfowl production
areas.
Northern Phalarope—Fairly common to uncommon migrant to
wetlands, lakes, and sewage ponds throughout. Look for it in flocks of Wilson’s
Phalarope. In the northwest (around Kenmare) it is more common
and can often be seen in large numbers.
Migrant Shorebirds—In North Dakota the following species can be
considered purely migratory (The species marked by asterisks may be
expected in large numbers.): Semipalmated, Lesser Golden*, and Black-bellied*
Plovers; Ruddy Turnstone; Greater and Lesser* Yellowlegs; Red
Knot; Short-billed and Long-billed Dowitchers*; Dunlin; Solitary, Pectoral*,
White-rumped, Baird’s, Least*, Western, Semipalmated*, Stilt*, and
Buff-breasted Sandpipers; Sanderling; Hudsonian Godwit; and Northern
Phalarope. Remember that some species which breed in one part of the
state may occur only as migrants in other areas. Migrating shorebirds can
be found almost anywhere where there is water. Preferred areas include
sewage ponds, prairie wetlands, flooded fields in agricultural areas,
impounded river areas, and shores of larger lakes. Some specific spots are
Long Lake, Des Lacs, Upper Souris, Lostwood, J. Clark Salyer, and Stump
Lake Refuges; Kelly’s Slough; Rush Lake; Alkaline Lake; Lake Ardoch;
Hobart Lake; the river and settling ponds below Baldhill Dam; the ponds
at the Valley City fish hatchery; and the sewage ponds at Fargo and
Grand Forks. Shorebird migration is usually a continuous movement from
late April through mid-October with peaks during the first two weeks in
May and the entire month of August.
California Gull—Uncommon summer resident of scattered lakes (usually
alkaline) throughout. Occurs over a larger portion of the state as a
summer visitor. There are only a handful of known breeding colonies in
the state. The best known is probably the one at Chase Lake. A more
accessible colony is located near Westby (page 61). Bob Stewart lists these
additional colonies: Stony Lake in Kidder County, East Devils Lake in
Ramsey County, and Lake Williams in McLean County (Breeding Birds of
North Dakota, 1975). Other areas are Bowman-Haley, Audubon, Lostwood,
Des Lacs, Long Lake, and Arrowwood Refuges, and Alkaline Lake.
Franklin’s Gull—Common summer resident of extensive marshlands
throughout the northern half and southeast quarter. Nesting colonies can
be found on Devils Lake, Lake Alice, Stump Lake, marshlands in Sargent County,
and on Long Lake, Upper Souris, and J. Clark Salyer Refuges.
Non-nesting birds can be found almost anywhere that wetlands exist. In
fall it moves south in large concentrations numbering in the tens of
thousands.
Bonaparte’s Gull—Uncommon to rare migrant and post-nesting visitor
to water areas throughout. Most likely in the southeast quarter. Usually
occurs with flocks of Franklin’s Gulls. Try the sewage ponds at Fargo in
late summer, or the marshlands in Sargent and Dickey Counties.
Common Tern—Uncommon and local summer resident of large lakes
and river impoundments at scattered locations in the central and northwest
portions. Look for it on Long Lake, Audubon, Des Lacs, Upper Souris,
and J. Clark Salyer Refuges, and on various lakes in the Turtle Mountains.
The Forster’s Tern is more common. The two species can be separated
by bill color (more reddish in Common, orange in Forster’s), tail color
(white to gray in Common, gray to white in Forster’s—going from the
inside or central tail-feathers out), and color of the primaries (darker in
Common, very white in Forster’s). The latter is probably the best mark.
Little Tern—Uncommon summer resident of sandbars along the Missouri
River near Bismarck. Some years no nesting occurs, because of flooding.
To find this species keep checking exposed sandbars along the river in
the Bismarck-Mandan vicinity. Try first from the ends of 12th and
Washington Streets in Bismarck, or in the vicinity of the Girl Scout camp
southwest of that city.
Black-billed Cuckoo—Uncommon to fairly common summer resident
of woodland margins, shelterbelts, wood lots, prairie thickets, and wooded
coulees throughout. Look for it at Tasker’s Coulee; Sully’s Creek Park; the
south unit of the Roosevelt Memorial; the Missouri River floodplain near
Bismarck; Upper Souris, Des Lacs, and J. Clark Salyer Refuges; Lake
Metigoshe and Icelandic State Parks; the Gunlogson Arboretum; Wakopa
and Tongue River Game Management Areas; Sully’s Hill Game Preserve;
Turtle River Park; Stump Lake Park; and the bottomlands of the James
and Sheyenne Rivers (Stutsman, Barnes, Ransom, and Richland
Counties).
Snowy Owl—Uncommon and irregular winter visitor to open country
throughout. A few of these large arctic wanderers are present every winter.
However, in some winters it may be hard to find while in others it seems to
be almost common. There are no specific spots. Just drive the back-country
roads any time from December through March. A few can usually be found
every winter in Cass County, often right along the roads.
Burrowing Owl—Uncommon summer resident of heavily-grazed
prairie throughout the western three-fourths of the state. Look for it on
Arrowwood, Long Lake, Audubon, Des Lacs, Upper Souris, Lostwood, J.
Clark Salyer, Chase Lake, Lake Ilo, Bowman-Haley, and Stewart Lake
Refuges; Salt Alkaline Lake; prairie-dog towns in both units of the Roosevelt
Memorial; and south of Marmarth.
Barred Owl—Rare resident of Sheyenne River bottomlands in Ransom
and Richland Counties. Occasionally recorded in winter elsewhere in the
eastern half, particularly along the Red River.
Short-eared Owl—Uncommon and cyclic resident of grasslands, wet
meadows, and fallow fields throughout. In some years fairly common, in
others hard to find. An influx of migrants from the north sometimes
appears in November. Look at Bowman-Haley, Lake Ilo, Des Lacs, Upper
Souris, J. Clark Salyer, Arrowwood, Long Lake, and Tewaukon Refuges.
Saw-whet Owl—Rare winter visitor to conifer stands, alder thickets,
and residential areas throughout the eastern half. May be an occasional
summer resident in the Turtle Mountains, Pembina Hills, and on the south
side of Devils Lake (Sully’s Hill Game Preserve).
Poor-will—Uncommon summer resident of brushy slopes and ravines
in the badlands and pine forests of Slope County. Rare in the south unit of
the Roosevelt Memorial. Listen for it near the Columnar Juniper Area.
Chimney Swift—Uncommon to fairly common summer resident of
towns and cities throughout. More common in the eastern half. Look for it
in Fargo, Grand Forks, Devils Lake, Wahpeton, Valley City, Jamestown,
Bismarck-Mandan, Minot, Dickinson, and Williston. Should be fairly easy
to find in most towns and cities along the Red and Sheyenne Rivers.
Ruby-throated Hummingbird—Uncommon summer resident of
deciduous-woods margins in the Turtle Mountains, Pembina Hills, south
side of Devils Lake, and along the Souris (J. Clark Salyer), James (Jamestown),
and Sheyenne (Valley City to Baldhill Dam) Rivers. Occurs elsewhere
throughout the central and eastern portions as an uncommon to
fairly common migrant.
Common Flicker—Common summer resident (a few winter) of open
woodlands throughout. Both races are found, and many interesting and
confusing hybrids occur. The predominant race is the Yellow-shafted. The
Red-shafted race occurs throughout the western half, but is common only
in the Little Missouri badlands.
Pileated Woodpecker—Uncommon to rare resident of mature woodlands
along the Red River in Cass County (and possibly in Grand Forks)
and along the Sheyenne River in Ransom and Richland Counties. More
common along the Red River at Fargo in winter.
Red-headed Woodpecker—Fairly common to uncommon summer resident
of open woodlands and agricultural areas (shelter belts, orchards,
farmyards, etc.) throughout (range in the northwest is limited). Look for it
in Lindenwood Park (Fargo), the Sibley Island area in Bismarck, Sully’s
Creek Park, the Pembina Hills, Turtle River Park, and in the bottomlands
of the James, Red, and Sheyenne Rivers.
Eastern Kingbird—Common summer resident of open areas throughout.
Nests in hedgerows, shelterbelts, woodlots, farmyards, prairie
thickets, and along the edges of extensive woodlands. Commonly seen
perched on barbed-wire fences along the highways. Hard to miss.
Western Kingbird—Common summer resident throughout. Can be
found in much the same habitat as the Eastern. However, the Western is
often found in more wooded areas such as open bottomland forests and
residential areas. Even then it is still basically an edge-habitat species.
Hard to miss.
Great Crested Flycatcher—Fairly common summer resident of mature
deciduous forests throughout the eastern half. Uncommon to rare in the
bottomland forests of the Missouri River near Bismarck-Mandan. Look for
it in places such as J. Clark Salyer Refuge (uncommon), throughout the
Turtle Mountain and Pembina Hills, Turtle River Park, Sully’s Hill Game
Preserve, Stump Lake Park, Little Yellowstone Park, and in the bottomland
forests of the James (Stutsman County), Sheyenne (Barnes, Ransom,
and Richland Counties), and Red (try especially at Lindenwood and Oak
Grove Parks in Fargo) Rivers.
Say’s Phoebe—Uncommon summer resident of badlands, sharply
eroded buttes, and agricultural areas throughout the western half. Rare
east of J. Clark Salyer Refuge. Prefers badlands-type habitat, but also
nests under the eaves of farm buildings and under small bridges. Look for
it in either unit of the Roosevelt Memorial, at Little Missouri and Sully’s
Creek Parks, along the roads going south from Marmarth and Rhame in
Bowman County, along Highway 1806 in the badlands area south of Mandan
(Morton County), and near Kenmare.
Yellow-bellied Flycatcher—Rare migrant in wooded areas throughout
the eastern half. Try the Turtle Mountains, Pembina Hills, Turtle River
State Park, Sully’s Hill Game Preserve, and Lindenwood and Oak Grove
Parks.
Willow Flycatcher—Fairly common to uncommon summer resident of
shelterbelts, prairie thickets and swales, and wood edges. You may hear its
distinctive “FITZ-bew” call often before actually seeing the bird. In areas
90
where the Least Flycatcher is found, song is probably the only safe way to
separate the two, although the Least is seldom found in prairie areas. Look
for the Willow Flycatcher throughout the Turtle Mountains and Pembina
Hills, in edge habitat along the James and Sheyenne Rivers, at Sully’s
Creek Park, and on Bowman-Haley, Lake Ilo, Lostwood, Des Lacs, Upper
Souris, J. Clark Salyer, Arrowwood, and Slade Refuges.
Alder Flycatcher—Uncommon to rare migrant through wooded areas
in the eastern third. May nest in the Pembina Hills. This species was formerly
considered conspecific with the Willow Flycatcher as the Traill’s
Flycatcher. Safely separable from other members of the genus only by
song, which sounds like “fee-BEE-o”.
Least Flycatcher—Common summer resident of deciduous forests and
wooded farm habitats (like orchards and shelterbelts) throughout. Less
common in the western half (with the exception of the Kenmare area).
Look for it at such places as Sully’s Creek Park; the campgrounds in both
units of the Roosevelt Memorial; wooded portions of Lake Ilo, Des Lacs,
Lostwood, Upper Souris, J. Clark Salyer, Arrowwood, and Tewaukon
Refuges; Tasker’s Coulee; throughout the Turtle Mountains and Pembina
Hills; Turtle River Park; Stump Lake Park; Sully’s Hill Game Preserve;
Clausen Springs; and along the bottomland forests of the Missouri, James,
Red, and Sheyenne Rivers.
Eastern Pewee—Common to fairly common summer resident of wooded
areas throughout the eastern two-thirds. Uncommon in the western edge
of this area along the Missouri River at Bismarck, and on wooded portions
of Des Lacs and Upper Souris Refuges. Look for it throughout the Turtle
Mountains and Pembina Hills; on J. Clark Salyer and Tewaukon Refuges;
at Turtle River Park; Stump Lake Park; Sully’s Hill Game Preserve; and
along wooded bottomlands of the James, Sheyenne, and Red (try Lindenwood
and Oak Grove Parks) Rivers.
Western Pewee—Uncommon to rare summer resident of wooded bottomlands
along the Little Missouri River. Look for it in both units of the
Roosevelt Memorial, at Sully’s Creek Park, and in wooded residential
areas of Medora and Marmarth. This species has a harsh call which is
quite different from the “pee-a-wee” of the Eastern Pewee. It can often be
separated by sight as well. The Western has a dusky breast and flanks
with a light “zipper” extending upward to the upper breast something like
an Olive-sided Flycatcher.
Blue Jay—Fairly common permanent resident of deciduous woodlands
west to Bismarck. Uncommon in the southwest quarter and uncommon to
rare in the northwest quarter. Not hard to find in the Turtle Mountains
and Pembina Hills, at Turtle River Park, Stump Lake Park, Sully’s Hill
Game Preserve, Linden wood and Oak Grove Parks in Fargo, Little Yellowstone
Park, Sully’s Creek Park, Little Missouri Park, the campgrounds of
both units of the Roosevelt Memorial, the Sibley Island area at Bismarck,
and in bottomland forests along the James, Red, and Sheyenne Rivers.
Black-billed Magpie—Fairly common permanent resident of wood margins,
prairie thickets, and agricultural areas throughout much of the western
half. Uncommon breeder in the Turtle Mountains and Devils Lake
regions. Uncommon winter visitor over the rest of the state. Easy to find in
both units of the Roosevelt Memorial, Sully’s Creek and Little Missouri
Parks; western Bowman, Slope, and Golden Valley Counties; the Williston
area; and along the Missouri River near Bismarck. Look for it also on Lostwood,
Des Lacs, Upper Souris, and J. Clark Salyer (especially the sandhills)
Refuges. In the east look for it in winter in the Turtle Mountains,
Pembina Hills, on the south side of Devils Lake, Arrowwood Refuge, and
in the Valley City area.
Black-capped Chickadee—Fairly common permanent resident of
deciduous forests throughout. In winter it is commonly seen in residential
areas. Should be easy to find at such places as Sully’s Creek Park, along
the river and in wooded draws in both units of the Roosevelt Memorial,
Upper Souris and J. Clark Salyer Refuges, throughout the Turtle Mountains
and Pembina Hills, Turtle River Park, Stump Lake Park, Sully’s Hill
Game Preserve, and along portions of the Missouri (near Bismarck),
James (Stutsman County), Sheyenne (Barnes, Ransom, and Richland
Counties), and Red (around Fargo) Rivers.
Sedge Wren—Fairly common summer resident of sedge fields, wet meadows,
grassy edges of seasonal ponds, retired croplands, and alfalfa hayfields
in the northwest, northeast, and southeast sectors. Found in the
southwest only in alfalfa fields bordering the Missouri and its tributaries
in Morton County. Look for it at Kelly’s Slough; Rush Lake; Lake Ardoch;
the Little Heart River crossing; Des Lacs, Lostwood, Upper Souris, J.
Clark Salyer, Rose Lake, Lake Alice, Arrowwood, Long Lake, and Tewaukon
Refuges; and in suitable habitat in the Turtle Mountains. Of these, J.
Clark Salyer Refuge may be best.
Rock Wren—Locally fairly common to uncommon summer resident of
eroded buttes and desert-like arroyos in the western half. Look for it in
both units of the Roosevelt Memorial, Sully’s Creek and Little Missouri
Parks, the badlands area south of Mandan on Highway 1806, and in
appropriate habitat along the roads going south from Marmarth and
Rhame.
Gray Catbird—Common summer resident of brushy forest edges, prairie
thickets, and shelterbelts throughout. Easy to find at Sully’s Creek Park,
both units of Roosevelt Memorial, Lake Ilo, Des Lacs, Lostwood, Upper
Souris, J. Clark Salyer, Arrowwood, and Tewaukon Refuges; throughout
the Turtle Mountains and Pembina Hills; at Turtle River Park; Stump
Lake Park; Sully’s Hill Game Preserve; and along the wooded bottomlands
of the James, Missouri, Red, and Sheyenne Rivers.
Brown Thrasher—Common to fairly common summer resident
throughout. Occupies much the same habitat and areas as the Catbird.
Occurs more often in residential areas.
Gray-cheeked Thrush—Fairly common migrant in wooded parks, bottomlands,
hills, coulees, and residential areas throughout most of the
state. Fairly easy to find during May (harder to find in fall) at such places
as Lindenwood Park; Turtle River, Little Yellowstone, and Stump Lake
Parks; Sully’s Hill Game Preserve; Upper Souris, Des Lacs, and J. Clark
Salyer Refuges; throughout the Turtle Mountains and Pembina Hills; and
in wooded bottomlands of the Missouri (at Bismarck), James, Sheyenne,
and Red Rivers.
Eastern Bluebird—Uncommon summer resident of forest edges, sandhills,
orchards, shelterbelts, and agricultural areas throughout (rare in the
southwest quarter). Most common in the southeast corner and in the Turtle
Mountains. Some of the better areas are around Lake Ashtabula and
Clausen Springs in Barnes County, and in the Sheyenne River bottomlands,
sandhills, and grasslands in Ransom and Richland Counties. Try
also appropriate habitat along the James River near Jamestown, and
along the Missouri River near Bismarck and Mandan.
Mountain Bluebird—Fairly common summer resident of scrub prairie,
dry slopes, and wooded coulees in the badlands of the western third.
Uncommon to rare summer resident of forest-edge (usually near aspen
stands) habitats in the Turtle Mountains and on J. Clark Salyer Refuge
(sandhills area). Fairly common to uncommon migrant on prairies and
agricultural areas throughout the remainder of the western half. Rare
early-spring migrant over the rest of the state. Should be fairly easy to find
in both units of the Roosevelt Memorial (especially along the Caprock Coulee
Trail in the north unit), Little Missouri Park, the sandhills area of J.
Clark Salyer Refuge, and throughout the Kenmare area during the second
half of March.
Townsend’s Solitaire—Rare winter visitor/resident of wooded areas
throughout the western half. Prefers deciduous river bottoms (Little Missouri
River), coniferous slopes (badlands), and conifer stands in and
around towns and cities. Look for it anywhere in the badlands or at the
Northern Great Plains Research Station in Mandan.
Sprague’s Pipit—Fairly common but local summer resident of mixed-grass
prairies and grassy lake borders throughout most of the western and
central portions, but uncommon to rare in the eastern third. Uncommon
migrant throughout. Should be easy to find at such places as Des Lacs,
Lostwood, J. Clark Salyer (grasslands tour), Audubon, and Arrowwood
Refuges; Longspur Pasture; and in appropriate habitat over much of
Mountrail, Kidder, and Stutsman Counties.
Bohemian Waxwing—Fairly common but sporadic winter visitor to
wooded habitats and residential areas throughout. In winters when present,
often found in large flocks in bottomland forest, wood lots, city parks,
crab-apple orchards, and residential areas. In fact it can be found anywhere
where there are fruit-bearing trees or shrubs. During non-invasion
years; can be impossible to find.
Northern Shrike—Uncommon winter visitor to prairies, agricultural
areas, and open woodlands throughout. Often hangs out around feeding
stations and picks off smaller birds. One of its favorite habitats is a dry
slough with lots of willow growth. Here it can find an abundance of
shrews, voles, and mice. Likes to perch in conspicuous places.
Bell’s Vireo—Rare and local summer resident of wooded bottomlands
along the Missouri River at Bismarck. Try the Sibley Island area. Has a
very distinctive “hurried-up” song, which is useful in locating this rather
drab bird.
Yellow-throated Vireo—Fairly common to uncommon summer resident
of mature deciduous forests throughout the eastern half. Look for it
throughout the Turtle Mountains and Pembina Hills, on J. Clark Salyer
Refuge, at Stump Lake and Turtle River Parks, Sully’s Hill Game Preserve,
Lindenwood Park, and along bottomland forests of the James (in
Stutsman County) and Sheyenne (in Barnes, Ransom, and Richland
Counties) Rivers.
Red-eyed Vireo—Common summer resident of deciduous forests
throughout. Should be easy to find at such places as Sully’s Creek and Turtle
River Parks; along the river in both units of the Roosevelt Memorial;
Des Lacs, Upper Souris, J. Clark Salyer, and Tewaukon Refuges; throughout
the Turtle Mountains and Pembina Hills; Stump Lake Park; Sully’s
Hill Game Preserve; the Sibley Island area at Bismarck; Lindenwood
Park; and along stretches of the James (Stutsman County), Sheyenne
(Barnes, Ransom, and Richland Counties), and Red Rivers.
Philadelphia Vireo—Uncommon summer resident of aspen forests of
the Turtle Mountains. Look for it at Lake Metigoshe State Park and the
Wakopa Game Management Area. Uncommon migrant through deciduous
woodlands throughout the rest of the eastern half. In migration look
for it at Turtle River and Stump Lake Parks, Sully’s Hill Game Preserve, J.
Clark Salyer Refuge, Lindenwood Park, Icelandic Park, Gunlogson
Arboretum, Tongue River Game Management Area, in all appropriate habitat
in the Pembina Hills, and along the bottomland forests of the James,
Sheyenne, and Red Rivers.
Migrant warblers—Occur in wooded habitats, shelterbelts, and residential
areas throughout. More species and individuals can be found in the
eastern half. The greatest diversity of migrant warblers usually occurs
along the Red River at Fargo, where one may see as many as twenty species
in one day. The species which regularly occur as migrants (some may
nest) over the eastern half of the state include Black-and-white, Tennessee,
Orange-crowned, Nashville, Yellow, Magnolia, Cape May, Yellow-rumped
(Myrtle), Black-throated Green, Blackburnian, Chestnut-sided, Bay-breasted,
Blackpoll, Palm, Connecticut, Mourning, Wilson’s, and Canada
Warblers; Ovenbird; Northern Waterthrush; and American Redstart.
Other species which can be seen in the east but with less regularity are
94
Prothonotary, Golden-winged, Northern Parula, Black-throated Blue, and
Cerulean Warblers. In addition, the Yellow-rumped (Audubon’s) Warbler,
MacGillivray’s Warbler, and Yellow-breasted Chat can be found in the
western half. The peak movements of warblers usually occur in mid-May
and September.
Chestnut-sided Warbler—Uncommon to rare summer resident of
deciduous forest edges and secondary growth in the Turtle Mountains and
Pembina Hills. Fairly common to uncommon migrant throughout the eastern
third; rare farther west.
Ovenbird—Common migrant and fairly common to uncommon summer
resident of mature deciduous forests (especially bottomland forest) in scattered
areas throughout. Look for it in summer along the Little Missouri
River in both units of the Roosevelt Memorial (check the campgrounds and
picnic areas), at Sully’s Creek and Little Missouri Parks, Tasker’s Coulee,
J. Clark Salyer Refuge, throughout the Turtle Mountains and Pembina
Hills, Sully’s Hill Game Preserve, Stump Lake Park, along the Missouri
River at Bismarck (Sibley Island area), and in the bottomland forests of
the Sheyenne River in Ransom and Richland Counties.
Northern Waterthrush—Fairly common to uncommon summer resident
of wood-bordered bogs, swamps, streams, and lakes in the Turtle
Mountains, Pembina Hills, and on the south side of Devils Lake. Fairly
common migrant through similar habitat over most of the state.
Mourning Warbler—Uncommon summer resident of forests containing
an abundance of secondary growth in the Turtle Mountains and Pembina
Hills. Fairly common to uncommon migrant over the remainder of the
eastern half; rare in the western half.
Bobolink—Fairly common summer resident of tall and mid-grass prairies,
alfalfa and other hayfields, and retired croplands throughout. Easy to
find at almost any prairie area. Slightly harder to find in the southwest
quarter but try Bowman-Haley and Lake Ilo Refuges, and meadows and
alfalfa fields along the Missouri River in Morton County.
Western Meadowlark—Common to abundant summer resident (a few
winter) of open country throughout. This is the state bird of North Dakota
and is the only meadowlark present. If you miss this one, you are birding
with your eyes and ears closed!
Yellow-headed Blackbird—Common summer resident of cattail and
bulrush marshes and lake edges throughout. Less common in the southwest
quarter. Hard to miss at such places as Kelly’s Slough, the marshes
around Burnstad, Rush Lake, and Des Lacs, Lostwood, Upper Souris, J.
Clark Salyer, Audubon, Lake Ilo, Bowman-Haley, Long Lake, Slade,
Arrowwood, and Tewaukon Refuges.
Orchard Oriole—Fairly common to uncommon summer resident of
forest edges, farmyards, shelterbelts, orchards, and residential areas
95
throughout the southern half. Uncommon and local in similar habitat
throughout the northern half. Some specific spots include wooded ravines
and bottomland forest edges in the south unit of the Roosevelt Memorial,
Sully’s Creek Park, the residential areas of Kenmare, the wooded area near
the Des Lacs Refuge headquarters, the Sibley Island area at Bismarck,
wooded draws surrounding Lake Ashtabula in Barnes County, and at
Clausen Springs.
Northern Oriole—The predominant race, the Baltimore Oriole, is a
fairly common summer resident of deciduous woodlands, shelterbelts,
farmyards, and residential areas throughout the eastern two-thirds
(uncommon to rare west of Bismarck). Not hard to find. The other race, the
Bullock’s Oriole, is very restricted. It is uncommon and local in riparian
stands of cottonwoods in Billings, Slope, and Bowman Counties. Look for
it at Sully’s Creek Park, in the residential areas of Marmarth and Medora,
along the river and at the campgrounds and picnic grounds in the south
unit of the Roosevelt Memorial, and along wooded portions of the Little
Missouri River south of Marmarth.
Rusty Blackbird—Uncommon migrant and uncommon to rare winter
visitor to bottomland forests, wood lots, and farmyards throughout.
Brewer’s Blackbird—Fairly common summer resident and uncommon
to rare winter visitor of open country throughout. Least common in the
south-central portion. Not hard to find.
Common Grackle—Common to fairly common summer resident and
rare winter visitor of forest edges, farmlands, and residential areas
throughout. Easy to find almost anywhere.
Scarlet Tanager—Uncommon summer resident of mature deciduous
forests throughout the eastern quarter. Rare breeder in the bottomland
forests along the Missouri River at Bismarck. Uncommon migrant
throughout the eastern third. Look for it in the Pembina Hills, at Gunlogson
Arboretum, Stump Lake Park, Turtle River Park, and along the bottomland
forests of the Red, Pembina, Tongue, and Sheyenne (especially in
Ransom and Richland Counties) Rivers.
Northern Cardinal—Uncommon permanent resident of brushy tangles
in wooded areas along the Red River at Fargo. In summer it is easiest to
see at Oak Grove Park. In winter it may be observed at feeding stations
along the river.
Rose-breasted Grosbeak—Fairly common summer resident of mature
deciduous forests throughout the eastern half. Commonly seen in migration
west to Bismarck. Look for it at Oak Grove and Lindenwood Parks in
Fargo, Turtle River and Stump Lake Parks, Sully’s Hill Game Preserve, in
the Turtle Mountains and Pembina Hills, the Gunlogson Arboretum, J.
Clark Salyer and Tewaukon Refuges, Clausen Springs, and in the bottomland
forests of the James, Red, and Sheyenne Rivers.
Black-headed Grosbeak—Fairly common to uncommon summer resident
of mature deciduous forests bordering the Missouri and Little Missouri
Rivers in the western half. Fairly easy to find in the Sibley Island
area at Bismarck, at Sully’s Creek and Little Missouri Parks, in the residential
areas of Medora and Marmarth, and along the river in both units
of the Roosevelt Memorial (especially Squaw Creek campgrounds/picnic
grounds in the north unit).
Blue Grosbeak—Rare spring and summer visitor (and possible breeder)
to forest edges, prairie thickets, shelterbelts, and agricultural areas
throughout. Most likely in the Little Missouri badlands.
Indigo Bunting—Fairly common summer resident of deciduous forests
throughout the eastern third. Uncommon breeder along the Missouri River
at Bismarck. Look for this striking bird throughout the Pembina Hills, at
Turtle River and Stump Lake Parks, Sully’s Hill Game Preserve, Oak
Grove and Linden wood Parks in Fargo, along the Red River from Pembina
County to Richland County, along the James River in Stutsman County,
and in the Sibley Island area at Bismarck. The latter area overlaps the
range of the Lazuli Bunting, and you may see mated pairs and hybrids.
Lazuli Bunting—Fairly common summer resident of deciduous forests
throughout most of the western half. Like the Indigo Bunting, this species
prefers forest edges and semi-open forests to the thickly wooded areas.
Should be easy to find at Sully’s Creek and Little Missouri Parks, along
the river and at the campgrounds and picnic grounds in both units of
Roosevelt Memorial (especially at Squaw Creek campgrounds/picnic
grounds in the north unit), along the river on Upper Souris Refuge, and
along the Missouri River at Bismarck (try the Sibley Island area).
Dickcissel—Fairly common summer resident of prairie grasslands,
alfalfa hayfields, and retired croplands over most of the state. Somewhat
cyclic; common one year and hard to find the next. Much less common in
the northern third. Look for it at Bowman-Haley, Lake Ilo, Long Lake, Des
Lacs (uncommon to rare), J. Clark Salyer, Audubon, Arrowwood, Slade,
Tewaukon, and Rose Lake Refuges; in alfalfa and weedy fields along the
Missouri River at Bismarck-Mandan; around Lake Ashtabula; along the
road to the North Fargo Sewage Lagoons; and along any back roads
through open country in the southeast quarter.
Evening Grosbeak—Fairly common but erratic winter visitor to forests,
wood lots, farmyards, and residential areas throughout. Easiest to see at
feeding stations along river bottoms at such places as Fargo, Grand Forks,
Valley City, Jamestown, Devils Lake, Bismarck, and Mandan. This species
is more regular than some of the other winter visitors from the north,
being present in good numbers during most winters.
Pine Grosbeak—Uncommon and erratic winter visitor to forests, wood
lots, orchards, farmyards, and residential areas over most of the state.
Less common in the southwestern quarter. Look for it at Des Lacs Refuge,
97
throughout the Turtle Mountains and Pembina Hills, at Turtle River Park,
Lindenwood Park and Riverside Cemetery in Fargo, Sully’s Hill Game
Preserve, and along wooded river bottoms (such as the Missouri, James,
Red, and Sheyenne) across the eastern two-thirds.
Gray-crowned Rosy Finch—Occasional winter visitor to open country
in the extreme western part of the state. Most likely in the Little Missouri
badlands. Often found in large flocks. Over the rest of the state single
birds may show up at feeding stations with flocks of juncos.
Hoary Redpoll—Rare and erratic winter visitor to open country and
feeding stations throughout. More common in the eastern half. Usually
found with flocks of Common Redpolls. During invasion years it may be
uncommon from Bismarck east.
Common Redpoll—Common but erratic winter visitor to open country
throughout. Frequents feeding stations in residential areas. Preferred
spots include forest edges, weed-filled ditches, dry sloughs, and sunflower
fields. Some winters totally absent; when present can usually be found in
good numbers almost anywhere.
Red Crossbill—Fairly common but erratic winter visitor to forests,
parks, cemeteries, tree lines, and residential areas throughout. Partial to
plantings of conifers, but may frequent feeding stations in large numbers.
After invasion winters, scattered pairs often nest over much of the state.
During good winters often easier to find in the vicinity of Lindenwood
Park and Riverside Cemetery in Fargo than elsewhere.
White-winged Crossbill—Rare and erratic winter visitor to woodlands
and residential feeding stations throughout. Apparently, more common in
the eastern half. Found in the same habitat as the Red Crossbill.
Lark Bunting—Common to abundant summer resident of sage prairies,
grasslands, weedy fields, and retired croplands throughout the western
two-thirds. Uncommon to rare east of Jamestown. Most abundant in the
southwest sector.
Baird’s Sparrow—Fairly common to uncommon summer resident of
mixed-grass prairies, alfalfa hayfields, and retired croplands throughout
much of the western three-fourths of the state. For the most part rare or
absent east of Stutsman County. The preferred habitat seems to be mixed-grass
prairie dotted with wolfberry and silverberry shrubs. Tall-grass
areas bordering prairie potholes and lakes are also frequented. Some of the
better areas include Bowman-Haley, Lake Ilo, Lostwood, Des Lacs, Upper
Souris, J. Clark Salyer (grasslands tour), Audubon, Arrowwood, and Long
Lake Refuges; Longspur Pasture; and the edges of Salt Alkaline Lake. Of
these, Longspur Pasture is probably the easiest place to find it.
The Baird’s Sparrow has a song consisting of three short “tic”’s followed
by a musical trill, somewhat like the song of the Savannah Sparrow.
The song usually given by the Grasshopper Sparrow is similar in pattern,
98
but has more of an insect-like quality to the trill. The Grasshopper Sparrow
also has a second song, which is also very similar to that of the
Baird’s. With practice you will learn to distinguish between the two, but at
first you will have to see the bird to make sure.
Le Conte’s Sparrow—Fairly common summer resident of sedge fields,
wet meadows and lake borders, alfalfa hayfields, and retired croplands
throughout much of the eastern half. Fairly common in the Kenmare area
as well. This rather shy sparrow often undergoes yearly population fluctuations,
which are dependent upon water levels. During dry years it is
often absent from many of its regular breeding locations. (This is especially
true in the Kenmare area.) Some of the more dependable spots
include Lostwood, Des Lacs, J. Clark Salyer, Arrowwood, Audubon, Lake
Alice, Rose Lake, and Tewaukon Refuges; Kelly’s Slough; Lake Ardoch;
and the area surrounding the Sanborne Waterfowl Production Area in
Barnes County. Of these spots J. Clark Salyer, Kelly’s Slough, and the
Rose Lake area are probably your best bets.
Sharp-tailed Sparrow—Locally fairly common to uncommon summer
resident of sedge fields, wet meadows, and marshes with much emergent
vegetation over much of the eastern half and northwest quarter. Undergoes
frequent fluctuations of breeding populations. Unlike the Le Conte’s,
the Sharp-tailed is more common during dry years. When the water levels
of marshes are lowered, there is more emergent vegetation to utilize as a
nesting habitat. Look for it at such places as Lostwood, Des Lacs, J. Clark
Salyer, Arrowwood, Long Lake, Slade, Lake Alice, Rose Lake, and Tewaukon
Refuges; Rush Lake; the Sanborne Waterfowl Production Area in
Barnes County; and in proper habitat throughout Sargent, Stutsman, Benson,
and Nelson Counties.
American Tree Sparrow—Common migrant and uncommon winter
visitor to weedy fields and ditches, retired croplands, sunflower fields, and
feeding stations throughout. Not hard to find.
Clay-colored Sparrow—Common summer resident of prairie thickets,
shelterbelts, brushy wood margins, and retired croplands throughout. If
you miss this species, you are probably not birding.
Brewer’s Sparrow—Fairly common summer resident of sage prairies
in the southwest corner. Largely restricted to the western portions of Slope
and Bowman Counties. Local populations occur in Billings and Golden Valley Counties.
Easy to find along the road going south from Marmarth.
If you are not familiar with this species, you may have trouble in differentiating
between it and the Clay-colored Sparrow. The songs of the two
species are very different and are the easiest way to tell them apart. The
Clay-colored has a very low buzzy song of short duration. The Brewer’s
has a series of trills.
Field Sparrow—Fairly common summer resident of sage flats, prairie
thickets, brushy ravines, and wood margins in the western half. Uncommon
99
summer resident of sandhills and brushy margins of the Sheyenne
River in Barnes, Ransom, and Richland Counties. Uncommon migrant
elsewhere. Easy to find along the Missouri River at Bismarck, at Sully’s
Creek State Park, and in both units of the Roosevelt Memorial.
Harris’ Sparrow—Common migrant and rare winter visitor to brushy
wood margins, shelterbelts, wood lots, parks, residential areas, and feeding
stations throughout. Not hard to find.
Swamp Sparrow—Uncommon and local summer resident of brushy
bogs scattered throughout the eastern half. Isolated colonies have been
located in Bottineau, Benson, LaMoure, Kidder, Dickey, and Sargent
Counties in recent years (Stewart, Breeding Birds of North Dakota, 1975).
Uncommon migrant through wood-bordered streams, ponds, lakes, and
marshy areas west to about Bismarck.
McCown’s Longspur—Locally fairly common to uncommon summer
resident of short-grass prairies, stubble fields, and summer fallow fields in
the northwest and southwest corners of the state. Look along the roads
going south from Rhame and Marmarth, in the stubble fields around
Bowman-Haley Refuge, in the Kenmare area, in the south unit of the
Roosevelt Memorial, the stubble fields of central McKenzie County, and in
the vicinity of Crosby (Divide County).
Lapland Longspur—Common migrant and uncommon winter visitor to
open country throughout. Can be seen in large flocks around marshy areas
during migration. Some flocks may contain thousands of birds. In winter
look for it along roadsides with Horned Larks and Snow Buntings.
Smith’s Longspur—Rare migrant in open country throughout much of
the eastern two-thirds (more common in the eastern one-fourth). Usually
found in flocks of Lapland Longspurs, but occasionally occurs in large,
pure flocks in the fall, particularly around marshes in the southeast sector.
Try the North Fargo Sewage Lagoons and the waterfowl production areas
near Alice (Cass County).
Chestnut-collared Longspur—Common summer resident of mixed-grass
prairies, short-grass prairies, pastures, stubble fields, fallow fields,
and retired croplands throughout (rare in Steele, Traill, Cass, Ransom,
and Richland Counties). Hard to miss at such places as Bowman-Haley,
Lake Ilo, Stewart Lake, Lostwood, Des Lacs, Upper Souris, J. Clark Salyer
(grasslands tour), Audubon, Long Lake, Arrowwood, and Salde Refuges;
along the roads going south from Marmarth and Rhame; at Longspur Pasture;
and in prairie grasslands.
Snow Bunting—Common winter visitor to open country throughout.
Less common in the southwest corner. Easy to find just by driving any
roads (with the possible exception of interstates) leading through prairies
or agricultural areas. Often seen right along the road feeding with Horned
Larks.
The following charts include all species of wild birds occurring in
North Dakota.
The bar-graphs are designed to give a conservative idea of your chances
of finding a particular species rather than of its abundance. Thus a
large bird such as the Red-tailed Hawk may be shown as “hard to miss”
while a shy, hard-to-identify, or small bird such as the Sharp-tailed Sparrow
may occur in greater numbers, but be shown as “may see.”
Many local birders and others who bird the area frequently were consulted
in determining the status of each bird. Since these people are familiar
with the birds, their songs, habits, and habitats, they are good at
finding the more elusive species. On your first trip to the area, you may
think that some birds are harder to find than is indicated here.
If you are in the RIGHT HABITAT and the RIGHT AREA at the
RIGHT SEASON, you should be able to find the “hard to miss” birds on
nearly every field trip; the “should see” on 3 out of 4 trips; the “may see” on
1 out of 4 trips; and the “lucky to find” on 1 out of 10 trips or even less frequently.
The “how lucky can you get” species occur at very infrequent
intervals or take an expert to identify.
Although “forget it” is the answer that you will probably receive when
inquiring about your chances of seeing a very rare species, do not stop
looking. Adding a rarity to your list is what puts the topping on a trip. If
you are positive of your identification, take careful notes and report your
find to the regional editor of American Birds: Esther M. Serr, 615 8th
Street, Rapid City, S.D. 57701.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Also Available
A Birder’s Guide to
Southeastern Arizona
A Birder’s Guide to
Southern California
A Birder’s Guide to
Eastern Colorado
A Birder’s Guide to
the Rio Grande Valley of Texas
A Birder’s Guide to
the Texas Coast
Order from:
L & P Press
Box 21604
Denver, CO 80221
