# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	I. Zangwill, Dreamers of the Ghetto
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/29875/29875-h/29875-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

From his casement Sabbataï looked up at the silent stars and down at
the swaying sea of faces.
"What if the miracle be not wrought!" he murmured. "If Chelebi refuses
to sacrifice so much of his substance! But they believe on me. It must
be that Jerusalem will be saved, and that I am the Messiah indeed."
At Cairo the pious Master of the Mint received him with ecstasy, and
granted his request ere he had made an end of speaking.
That night Sabbataï wandered away from all his followers, beyond the
moonlit Nile, towards the Great Pyramid, on, on, unto the white
desert, his eyes seeing only inward visions.
"Yea, I am Messiah," he cried at length to the vast night, "I am G—!"
The sudden shelving of the sand made him stumble, and in that instant
he became aware of the Sphinx towering over him, its great granite
Face solemn in the moonlight. His voice died away in an awed whisper.
Long, long he gazed into the great stone eyes.
"Speak!" he whispered. "Thou, Abou-el-Hol, Father of Terror, thou
who broodedst over the silences ere Moses ben Amram led my people from
this land of bondage, shall I not lead them from their dispersal to
their ancient [138]unity in the day when God shall be One, and His Name
One?"
The Sphinx was silent. The white sea of sand stretched away endlessly
with noiseless billows. The Pyramids threw funereal shadows over the
arid waste.
"Yea," he cried, passionately. "My Father hath not deceived me.
Through me, through me flow the streams of grace to recreate and
rekindle. Hath He not revealed it to me, even ere this day of
Salvation for Jerusalem, by the date of my birth, by the ancient
parchment, by the homage of Nathan, by the faith of my brethren and
the rumor of the nations, by my sufferings, by my self-appointed
martyrdoms, by my long, weary years of forced wanderings to and fro
upon the earth, by my loneliness—ah, God—my loneliness!"
The Sphinx brooded solemnly under the brooding stars. Sabbataï's voice
was as the wail of a wind.
"Yea, I will save Israel, I will save the world. Through my holiness
the world shall be a Temple. Sin and evil and pain shall pass. Peace
shall sit under her fig-tree, and swords shall be turned into
pruning-hooks, and gladness and brotherhood shall run through all the
earth, even as my Father declared unto Israel by the mouth of his
prophet Hosea. Yea, I, even I, will allure her and bring her into the
desert, and speak comfortably unto her. And I will give her vineyards
from thence, and the Valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she shall
sing there as in the days of her youth and as in the days when she
came up out of the land of Egypt. And I will say to them which were
not my people, 'Thou art my people'; and they shall say, 'Thou art my
God.'"
The Sphinx was silent. And in that silence there was the voice of dead
generations that had bustled and dreamed and passed away, countless as
the grains of desert sand.
[139]Sabbataï ceased and surveyed the Face in answering silence, his own
face growing as inscrutable.
"We are strong and lonely—thou and I," he whispered at last. But the
Sphinx was silent.
(Here endeth the First Scroll.)
In a little Polish town, early one summer morning, two Jewish women,
passing by the cemetery, saw a spirit fluttering whitely among the
tombs.
They shrieked, whereupon the figure turned, revealing a beautiful girl
in her night-dress, her face, albeit distraught, touched unmistakably
with the hues of life.
"Ah, ye be daughters of Israel!" cried the strange apparition. "Help
me! I have escaped from the nunnery."
"Who art thou?" said they, moving towards her.
"The Messiah's Bride!" And her face shone. They stood rooted to the
soil. A fresh thrill of the supernatural ran through them.
"Nay, come hither," she cried. "See." And she showed them nail-marks
on her naked flesh. "Last night my father's ghostly hands dragged me
from the convent."
At this the women would have run away, but each encouraged the other.
"Poor creature! She is mad," they signed and whispered to each other.
Then they threw a mantle over her.
"Ye will hide me, will ye not?" she said, pleadingly, and her wild
sweetness melted their hearts.
They soothed her and led her homewards by unfrequented byways.
[140]"Where are thy friends, thy parents?"
"Dead, scattered—what know I? O those days of blood!" She shuddered
violently. "Baptism or death! But they were strong. I see a Cossack
dragging my mother along with a thong round her neck. 'Here's a red
ribbon for you, dear,' he cries with laughter; they betrayed us to the
Cossacks, those Greek Christians within our gates—the Zaporogians
dressed themselves like Poles—we open the gates—the gutters run
blood—oh, the agonies of the tortured!—oh! father!"
They hushed her cries. Too well they remembered those terrible days of
the Chmielnicki massacres, when all the highways of Europe were
thronged with haggard Polish Jews, flying from the vengeance of the
Cossack chieftain with his troops of Haidamaks, and a quarter of a
million of Jewish corpses on the battle-fields of Poland were the
blunt Cossack's reply to the casuistical cunning engendered by the
Talmud.
"They hated my father," the strange beautiful creature told them, when
she was calmer. "He was the lessee of the Polish imposts; and in order
that he might collect the fines on Cossack births and marriages, he
kept the keys of the Greek church, and the Pope had to apply to him,
ere he could celebrate weddings or baptisms—they offered to baptize
him free of tax, but he held firm to his faith; they impaled him on a
stake and lashed him—oh, my God! And the good sisters found me
weeping, a little girl, and they took me to the convent and were kind
to me, and spoke to me of Christ. But I would not believe, no, I could
not believe. The psalms and lessons of the synagogue came back to my
lips; in visions of the night I saw my father, blood-stained, but
haloed with light.
"'Be faithful,' he would say, 'be faithful to Judaism. A great destiny
awaits thee. For lo! our long persecution [141]draws to an end, the days
of the Messiah are at hand, and thou shalt be the Messiah's bride,'
And the glory of a great hope came into my life, and I longed to
escape from my prison into the sunlit world. I, the bride of the
cloister!" she cried, and revolt flung roses into her white face.
"Nay, the bride of the Messiah am I, who shall restore joy to the
earth, who shall wipe the tears from off all faces. Last night my
father came to me again, and said, 'Be faithful to Judaism.' Then I
replied, 'If thou wert of a truth my father, thou wouldst cease thy
exhortations, thou wouldst know I would rather die than renounce my
faith, thou wouldst rescue me from these hated walls, and give me unto
my Bridegroom.' Thereupon he said, 'Stretch out thine hand,' and I
stretched out my hand, and I felt an invisible hand clasp it, and when
I awoke I found myself by his grave-side, where ye came upon me. Oh,
take me to the Woman's Bath forthwith, I pray ye, that I may wash off
the years of pollution."
They took her to the Woman's Bath, admiring her marvellous beauty.
"Where is the Messiah?" she asked.
"He is not come yet," they made answer, for the rising up of Sabbataï
was as yet known to but a few disciples.
"Then I will go find Him," she answered.
She wandered to Amsterdam—the capital of Jewry—and thence to
Frankfort-on-the-Main, and thence, southwards, in vain search to
Livorne.
And there in the glory of the Italian sunshine, her ardent, unbalanced
nature, starved in the chilly convent, yielded to passion, for there
were many to love her. But to none would she give herself in marriage.
"I am the Messiah's destined bride," she said, and her wild eyes had
always an air of waiting.
And in the course of years the news of her and of her prophecy
travelled to Sabbataï Zevi, and found him at Cairo the morning after
he had spoken to the Sphinx in the great silences. And to him under
the blue Egyptian sky came an answering throb of romance. The
womanhood that had not moved him in the flesh thrilled him, vaguely
imaged from afar, mystically, spiritually.
"Let her be sent for," he said, and his disciples noted an unwonted
restlessness in the weary weeks while his ambassadors were away.
"Dost think she will come?" he said once to Abraham Rubio.
"What woman would not come to thee?" replied the beggar. "What dainty
is not offered thee? I trow natheless that thou wilt refuse, and that
I shall come in for thy leavings."
Sabbataï smiled faintly.
"What have I to do with women?" he murmured. "But I would fain know
what hath been prophetically revealed to her!"
One afternoon his ambassadors returned, and announced that they had
brought her. She was resting after the journey, and would visit him on
the morrow. He appointed their meeting in the Palace of the
Saraph-Bashi. Then, unable to rest, he mounted the hill of the citadel
and saw an auspicious golden glow over the mosques and houses of
Cairo, illumining even the desert and the Pyramids. He stood watching
the sun sink lower and lower, till suddenly it went out like a snuffed
candle.
On the morrow he left his mean brick dwelling in the Jewry, and
received her alone in a marble-paved chamber in the Palace, the walls
adorned with carvings of flowers and birds, minutely worked, the
ceiling with arabesques formed of thin strips of painted wood, the air
cooled by a fantastic fountain playing into a pool lined with black
and white marbles and red tiling. Lattice-work windows gave on the
central courtyard, and were supplemented by decorative windows of
stained glass, wrought into capricious patterns.
"Peace, O Messiah!" Her smile was dazzling, and there was more of
gaiety than of reverence in her voice. Her white teeth flashed 'twixt
laughing lips. Sabbataï's heart was beating furiously at the sight of
the lady of his dreams. She was clad in shimmering white Italian silk,
which, draped tightly about her bosom, showed her as some gleaming
statue. Bracelets glittered on her white wrists, gems of fire sparkled
among her long, white fingers, a network of pearls was all her
head-dress. Her eyes had strange depths of passion, perfumes breathed
from her skin, lustreless like dead ivory. Not thus came the maidens
of Israel to wedlock, demure, spotless, spiritless, with shorn hair,
priestesses of the ritual of the home.
"Peace, O Melisselda," he replied involuntarily.
"Nay, wherefore Melisselda?" she cried, ascending to the leewán on
which he stood.
"And wherefore Messiah?" he answered.
"I have seen thee in visions—'tis the face, the figure, the prophetic
beauty—But wherefore Melisselda?"
He laughed into her eyes and hummed softly:—
"Ay, that did I, when I washed off the convent. But my name is Sarah."
"Nay, not Sarah, but Saraï—my Princess!" His voice was hoarse and
faltering. This strange new sense of romance that, like a callow-bird,
had been stirring in his breast ever since he had heard of her quest
of him, spread its wings and soared heavenwards. She had been
impure—but her impurity swathed her in mystic seductiveness. The
world's law bound her no more than him—she was free and elemental, a
spirit to match his own; purified perpetually by its own white fire.
She came nearer, and her eyes wrapped him in flame.
"My Prince!" she cried.
He drew backward towards the divan. "Nay, but I must know no woman."
"None but thy true mate," she answered. "Thou hast kept thyself pure
for me even as I have kept myself passionate for thee. Come, thou
shalt make me pure, and I will make thee passionate."
He looked at her wistfully. The cool plash of the fountain was
pleasant in the silence.
"I make thee pure!" he breathed.
"Ay," and she repeated softly:—
"Melisselda!" he whispered.
"Messiah!" she cried, with heaving bosom. "Come, I will teach thee the
joy of life. Together we will rule the world. What! when thou hast
redeemed the world, shall [145]it not rejoice, shall not the morning stars
sing together? My King, my Sabbataï."
Her figure was a queen's, her eyes were stars, her lips a woman's.
"Kiss me!" they pleaded. "Thy long martyrdom is over. Now begins my
mission—to bring thee joy. So hath it been revealed to me."
"Hath it been indeed revealed to thee?" he demanded hoarsely.
"Yea, again and again, in dreams of the night. The bride of the
Messiah—so runs my destiny. Embrace thy bride."
His eyes kindled to hers. He seemed in a circle of dazzling white
flame that exalted and not destroyed.
"Then I am Messiah, indeed," he thought, glowing, and, stooping, he
knew for the first time the touch of a woman's lips.
The Master of the Mint was overjoyed to celebrate the Messiah's
marriage under his own gilded roof. To the few who shook their heads
at the bride's past, Sabbataï made answer that the prophecies must be
fulfilled, and that he; too, had had visions in which he was
commanded, like the prophet Hosea, to marry an unchaste wife. And his
disciples saw that it was a great mystery, symbolizing what the Lord
had spoken through the mouth of Jeremiah: "Again I will build thee and
thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel: thou shalt again be adorned
with thy tabrets and shall go forth in the dances of them that make
merry." So the festivities set in, and the Palace was filled with
laughter and dancing and merrymaking.
And Melisselda inaugurated the reign of joy. Her [146]advent brought many
followers to Sabbataï. Thousands fell under the spell of her beauty,
her queenly carriage, gracious yet gay. A new spirit of romance was
born in ritual-ridden Israel. Men looked upon their wives
distastefully, and the wives caught something of her fire and bearing
and learnt the movement of abandon and the glance of passion. And so,
with a great following, enriched by the beauty of Melisselda and the
gold of the Master of the Mint, Sabbataï returned to redeem Jerusalem.
Jerusalem was intoxicated with joy: the prophecies of Elijah the
Tishbite, known on earth as Nathan of Gaza, were borne on wings of air
to the four corners of the world.
"To the Remnant of the Israelites," he wrote, "Peace without
end. Behold I go to meet the face of our Lord, whose majesty be
exalted, for he is the Sovereign of the King of Kings, whose
empire be enlarged. And now I come to make known unto you that
though ye have heard strange things of our Lord, yet let not
your hearts faint or fear, but rather fortify yourselves in your
Faith because all his actions are miraculous and secret, which
human understanding cannot comprehend, and who can penetrate
into the depth of them? In a brief time all things shall be
manifested to you clearly in their purity, and ye shall know and
consider and be instructed by the Inventor himself. Blessed is
he who can expect and arrive to the Salvation of the true
Messiah, who will speedily publish his Authority and Empire over
us now and for ever.
"Nathan."
In the Holy City the aged Rabbis of the Sacred Colleges alone betrayed
misgivings, fearing that the fine would be annually renewed, and even
the wealth of Chelebi [147]exhausted. Elsewhere, the Jewries were divided
into factions, that fought each other with texts, and set the Word
against the Word. This verse clearly proved the Messiah had come, and
that verse that the signs were not yet fulfilled; and had not Solomon,
the wise king, said that the fool gave belief at once to all
indifferently, while the wise man weighed and considered before
believing? Fiercely waged the battle of texts, and a comet appeared on
behalf of the believers. Demoniacles saw Sabbataï Zevi in heaven with
three crowns, one for Messiah, one for King, and one for Conqueror of
the Peoples. But the Jerusalem Rabbis remaining sceptical, Nathan
proclaimed in an ecstasy that she was no longer the sacred city, the
primacy had passed to Gaza. But Sabbataï was fain to show himself at
Smyrna, his native city, and hither he marched, preceded by apostles
who kindled the communities he was to pass through. Raphael, another
Greek beggar, rhapsodized interminably, and Bloch, a Cabalist from
Germany, a meek, simple soul, had frenzies of fiery inspiration.
Samuel Primo, the untiring secretary, scattered ceaseless letters and
mysterious manifestoes. But to none did Sabbataï himself claim to be
the Messiah—he commanded men not to speak of it till the hour should
come. Yet was his progress one long triumphal procession. At Aleppo
the Jews hastened to meet him with songs and dances; "the gates of joy
are opened," they wrote to Constantinople. At Smyrna itself the exile
was received with delirium, with cries of "Messhiach! Messiah!"
which he would not acknowledge, but to which Melisselda responded with
seductive smiles. His aged father fell upon his neck.
"The souls depart," said Sabbataï, kissing him. "But they return."
He was brought before the Cadi, who demanded a miracle.
[148]"Thou askest a miracle?" said Sabbataï scornfully. "Wouldst see a
pillar of fire?"
The Sabbatians who thronged the audience chamber uttered a cry and
covered their faces with their hands.
"Yea, we see, we see," they shouted; the word was passed to the dense
crowd surging without, and it swayed madly. Husbands ran home to tell
their wives and children, and when Sabbataï left the presence chamber
he was greeted with delirious acclamations.
And while Smyrna was thus seething, and its Jews were preparing
themselves by purification and prayer for the great day, a courier,
dark as a Moor with the sunburn of unresting travel, arrived in the
town with a letter from the Holy City. It was long before he could
obtain audience with Sabbataï, who, with his inmost disciples, was
celebrating a final fast, and meantime the populace was in a ferment
of curiosity, the messenger recounting how he had tramped for weeks
and weeks through the terrible heat to see the face of the Messiah and
kiss his feet and deliver the letter from the holy men of Jerusalem,
who were too poor to pay for his speedier journeying. But when at last
Sabbataï read the letter, his face lit up, though he gave no sign of
the contents. His disciples pressed for its publication, and, after
much excitement, Sabbataï consented that it should be read from the
Al Memor of the synagogue. When they learned that it bore the homage
of repentant Jerusalem, their joy was tumultuous to the point of
tears. Sabbataï threw twenty silver crowns on a salver for the
messenger, and invited others to do the same, so that the happy envoy
could scarce stagger away with his reward.
Nevertheless Sabbataï still delayed to declare himself.
But at last the long silence drew to an end. The great year of 1666
was nigh, before many moons the New Year of [149]the Christians would
dawn. Under the direction of Melisselda men were making sleeved robes
of white satin for the Messiah. And one day, thus arrayed in gleaming
white, at the head of a great procession walking two by two, Sabbataï
Zevi marched to the House of God.
In the gloom of the great synagogue, while the worshippers swayed
ghostly, and the ram's horn sounded shrill and jubilant, Sabbataï,
standing before the Ark, where the Scrolls of the Law stood solemn,
proclaimed himself, amid a tense awe as of heavens opening in
ineffable vistas, the Righteous Redeemer, the Anointed of Israel.
A frenzied shout of joy, broken by sobs, answered him from the vast
assembly.
"Long live our King! Our Messiah!" Many fell prostrate on the ground,
their faces to the floor, kissing it, weeping, screaming, shouting in
ecstatic thankfulness; others rocked to and fro, blinded by their
tears, hoarse with exultation.
"Messhiach! Messhiach!"
"The Kingdom has come!"
"Blessed be the Messiah!"
In the women's gallery there were shrieks and moans: some swooned,
others fell a-prophesying, contorting themselves spasmodically,
uttering wild exclamations; the spirit seized upon little children,
and they waved their arms and shouted frantically.
"Messhiach! Messhiach!"
The long exile of Israel was over—the bitter centuries of the badge
and the byword, slaughter and spoliation; no longer, O God! to cringe
in false humility, the scoff of [150]the street-boy, the mockery of
mankind, penned in Ghettos, branded with the wheel or the cap—but
restored to divine favor as every Prophet had predicted, and uplifted
to the sovereignty of the peoples.
"Messhiach! Messhiach!"
They poured into the narrow streets, laughing, chattering, leaping,
dancing, weeping hysterically, begging for forgiveness of their
iniquities. They fell at Sabbataï feet, women spread rich carpets for
him to tread (though he humbly skirted them), and decked their windows
and balconies with costly hangings and cushions. Some, conscious of
sin that might shut them out from the Kingdom, made for the harbor and
plunged into the icy waters; some dug themselves graves in the damp
soil and buried themselves up to their necks till they were numb and
fainting; others dropped melted wax upon their naked bodies. But the
most common way of mortification was to prick their backs and sides
with thorns and then give themselves thirty-nine lashes. Many fasted
for days upon days and kept Cabalistic watches by night, intoning
Tikkunim (prayers).
And, blent with these penances, festival after festival, riotous,
delirious, whenever Sabbataï Zevi, with his vast train of followers,
and waving a fan, showed himself in the street on his way to a
ceremony or to give Cabalistic interpretations of Scripture in the
synagogue. The shop-keepers of the Jewish bazaar closed their doors,
and followed in the frenzied procession, singing "The right hand of
the Lord is exalted, the right hand bringeth victory," jostling,
fighting, in their anxiety to be touched with the fan and inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven. And over these vast romping crowds, drunk with
faith, Melisselda queened it with her voluptuous smiles and the joyous
abandon of her dancing, and men and women, boys and girls, embraced
and [151]kissed in hysterical frenzy. The yoke of the Law was over, the
ancient chastity forgotten. In the Cabalistic communities of
Thessalonica, where the pious began at once to do penance, some dying
of a seven-days' fast, and others from rolling themselves naked in the
snow, parents hastened to marry young children so that all the unborn
souls which through the constant re-incarnations, necessary to enable
the old sinful souls to work out their Perfection, had not yet been
able to find bodies, might enter the world, and so complete the scheme
of creation. Seven hundred children were thus joined in wedlock.
Business, work was suspended; the wheel of the cloth-workers ceased;
the camels no longer knelt in the Jewish quarter of Smyrna, the Bridge
of Caravans ceased to vibrate with their passing, the shops remained
open only so long as was necessary to clear off the merchandise at any
price; whoso of private persons had any superfluity of household stuff
sold it off similarly, but yet not to Jews, for these were interdicted
from traffic, business being the mark of the unbeliever, and
punishable by excommunication, pecuniary mulcts, or corporeal
chastisements. Everybody prepared for the imminent return to
Palestine, when the heathen should wait at the table of the Saints and
the great Leviathan deck the Messianic board. In the interim the poor
were supported by the rich. In Thessalonica alone four thousand
persons lived on gifts; truly Messianic times for the Abraham Rubios.
In Smyrna the authority of the Cadi was ignored or silenced by purses;
when the Turks complained, the Seraglio swallowed gold on both sides.
The Chacham Aaron de la Papa, being an unbeliever and one of those
who had originally driven him from his birthplace, was removed by
Sabbataï, and Chayim Benvenisti appointed Chacham instead. The noble
Chayim Penya, the one sceptic of importance left in Smyrna, was
wellnigh torn to [152]pieces in the synagogue by the angry multitude, but
when his own daughters went into prophetic trances and saw the glory
of the Kingdom he went over to Sabbataï's side, and reports flew
everywhere that the Messiah's enemies were struck with frenzies and
madness, till, restored by him to their former temper and wits, they
became his friends, worshippers, and disciples. Four hundred other men
and women fell into strange ecstasies, foamed at the mouth, and
recounted their visions of the Lion of Judah, while infants, who could
scarcely stammer out a syllable plainly, repeated the name of
Sabbataï, the Messiah; being possessed, and voices sounding from their
stomachs and entrails. Such reports, bruited through the world by the
foreign ambassadors at Smyrna, the clerks of the English and Dutch
houses, the resident foreigners, and the Christian ministers, excited
a prodigious sensation, thrilling civilized mankind. On the Exchanges
of Europe men took the odds for and against a Jewish kingdom.
Upon the Jews of the world the news that the Messiah had passed from a
far-off aspiration into a reality fell like a thunderbolt; they were
dazed with joy; then they began to prepare for the great journey.
Everywhere self-flagellation, almsgiving, prophetic ecstasies and
trances, the scholars and the mob at one in joyous belief. And
everywhere also profligacy, adultery, incest, through the spread of a
mystical doctrine that the sinfulness of the world could only be
overcome by the superabundance of sin.
Amsterdam and Hamburg—the two wealthiest communities—receiving
constant prophetic messages from Nathan of Gaza, became eager
participators in the coming [153]Kingdom. In the Dutch capital, the houses
of prayer grew riotous with music and dancing, the dwelling-houses
gloomy with penitential rigors. The streets were full of men and women
prophesying spasmodically, the printing presses panted, turning out
new prayer-books with penances and formulæ for the faithful. And in
these Tikkunim, starred with mystic emblems of the Messiah's
dominance, the portrait of Sabbataï appeared side by side with that of
King David. At Hamburg the Jews were borne heavenwards on a wave of
exultation; they snapped their fingers at the Christian tormentor,
refused any longer to come to the compulsory Christian services. Their
own services became pious orgies. Stately Spanish Jews, grave
blue-blooded Portuguese, hitherto smacking of the Castilian hidalgo,
noble seigniors like Manuel Texeira, the friend of a Queen of Sweden,
erudite physicians like Bendito de Castro, president of the
congregation, shed their occidental veneer and might have been seen in
the synagogue skipping like harts upon the mountains, dancing wild
dances with the Holy Scroll clasped to their bosoms.
"Hi diddi hulda hi ti ti!" they carolled in merry meaninglessness.
"Nay, but this is second childhood," quoth the venerable Jacob
Sasportas, chief Rabbi of the English Jews, as he sat in the
presidential pew, an honored visitor at Hamburg. "Surely thy flock is
demented."
De Castro's brow grew black.
"Have a care, or my sheep may turn dog. An they overhear thee, it were
safer for thee even to go back to thy London."
Sasportas shook his head with a humorous twinkle.
"Yea, if Sabbataï will accompany me. An he be Messiah let him face the
Plague, let him come and prophesy in [154]London and outdo Solomon Eagle;
let him heal the sick and disburden the death-carts."
"He should but lay his hands on the sick and they were cured!"
retorted De Castro. "But his mission is not in the isles of the West;
he establisheth the throne in Zion."
"Well for thee not in Hamburg, else would thy revenues dwindle, O wise
physician. But the Plague is wellnigh spent now; if he come now he may
take the credit of the cure."
"Rabbi as thou art, thou art an Epicurean; thou sittest in the seat of
the scorner."
"'Twas thou didst invite me thereto," murmured Sasportas, smiling.
"The Plague is but a sign of the Messianic times, and the Fire that
hath burnt thy dwelling-place is but the castigation for thine
incredulity."
"Yea, there be those who think our royal Charles the Messiah, and
petition him to declare himself," said Sasportas, with his genial
twinkle. "Hath he not also his Melisseldas?"
"Hush, thou blasphemer!" cried De Castro, looking anxiously at the
howling multitude. "But thou wilt live to eat thy words."
"Be it so," said Sasportas, with a shrug of resignation. "I eat
nothing unclean."
But it was vain for the Rabbi of the little western isle to contend by
quip or reason against the popular frenzy. England, indeed, was a
hotbed of Christian enthusiasts awaiting the Jewish Millennium, the
downfall of the Pope and Anti-Christ, and Jews and Christians caught
mutual fire.
From the far North of Scotland came a wonderful report of a ship with
silken sails and ropes, worked by sailors who spoke with one another
in the solemn syllables of [155]the sacred tongue, and flying a flag with
the inscription, "The Twelve Tribes of Israel!" And a strange rumor
told of the march of multitudes from unknown parts into the remote
deserts of Arabia. Fronted with sceptics, believers offered wagers at
ten to one that within two years Sabbataï would be anointed King of
Jerusalem; bills of exchange were drawn in Threadneedle Street upon
the issue.
And, indeed, Sabbataï was already King of the Jews. From all the lands
of the Exile crowds of the devout came to do him homage and tender
allegiance—Turkish Jews with red fez or saffron-yellow turban;
Jerusalem Jews in striped cotton gowns and soft felt hats; Polish Jews
with foxskin caps and long caftans; sallow German Jews, gigantic
Russian Jews, high-bred Spanish Jews; and with them often their wives
and daughters—Jerusalem Jewesses with blue shirts and head-veils,
Egyptian Jewesses with sweeping robes and black head-shawls, Jewesses
from Ashdod and Gaza, with white visors fringed with gold coins,
Polish Jewesses with glossy wigs, Syrian Jewesses with eyelashes black
as though lined with kohl, fat Jewesses from Tunis, with clinging
breeches interwoven with gold and silver.
Daily he held his court, receiving deputations, advices, messengers.
Young men and maidens offered him their lives to do with as he would;
the rich laid their fortunes at his feet, and fought for the honor of
belonging to his body-guard. That abstract deity of the Old
Testament—awful in His love and His hate, without form, without
humanity—had been replaced by a Man, visible, tangible, lovable; and
all the yearning of their souls, all that suppressed longing for a
visual object of worship which had found vent and satisfaction in the
worship of the Bible or the Talmud in its every letter and syllable,
now went out [156]towards their bodily Redeemer. From the Ancient of Days
a new divine being had been given off—the Holy King, the Messiah, the
Primal Man, Androgynous, Perfect, who would harmonize the jarring
chords, restore the spiritual unity of the Universe. Before the love
in his eyes sin and sorrow would vanish as evil vapors; the frozen
streams of grace would flow again.
"I, the Lord your God, Sabbataï Zevi!"
Thus did Secretary Samuel Primo sign the Messianic decrees and
ordinances.
The month of Ab approached—the Messiah's birthday, the day of the
Black Fast, commemorating the fall of the Temples. But Melisselda
protested against its celebration by gloom and penance, and the word
went out to all the hosts of captivity—
"The only and just-begotten Son of God, Sabbataï Zevi, Messiah and
Redeemer of the people of Israel, to all the sons of Israel, Peace!
Since ye have been worthy to behold the great day, and the fulfilment
of God's word to the prophets, let your lament and sorrow be changed
into joy, and your fasts into festivals; for ye shall weep no more.
Rejoice with drums, organs, and music, making of every day a New Moon,
and change the day which was formerly dedicated to sadness and sorrow
into a day of jubilee, because I have appeared; and fear ye naught,
for ye shall have dominion not only over the nations, but over the
creatures also in the depths of the sea."
Thereat arose a new and stranger commotion throughout all the Ghettos,
Jewries, and Mellahs. The more part received the divine message in
uproarious jubilation. The Messiah was come, indeed! Those terrible
twenty-four [157]hours of absolute fasting and passionate prayer—henceforward
to be hours of feasting and merriment! O just and joyous edict! The
Jewish Kingdom was on the eve of restoration—how then longer bewail
its decay!
But the staunchest pietists were staggered, and these the most fervent
of the followers of Sabbataï. What! The penances and prayers of
sixteen hundred years to be swept away! The Yoke of the Torah to be
abolished! Surely true religion rather demanded fresh burdens. What
could more fitly mark the Redemption of the World than new and more
exacting laws, if, indeed, such remained to be invented? True, God
himself was now incarnate on earth—of that they had no doubt. But how
could He wish to do away with the laws deduced from the Holy Book and
accumulated by the zealous labors of so many generations of faithful
Rabbis; how could He set aside the venerated prescriptions of the
Shulchan Aruch of the pious Benjamin Caro (his memory for a
blessing), and all that network of ceremonial and custom for the
zealous maintenance of which their ancestors had so often laid down
their lives? How could He so blaspheme?
And so—in blind passion, unreasoning, obstinate—they clung to their
threatened institutions; in every Jewry they formed little parties for
the defence of Judaism.
What they had prayed for so passionately for centuries had come to
pass. The hopes that they had caught from the Zohar, that they had
nourished and repeated day and night, the promise that sorrow should
be changed into joy and the Law become null and void—here was the
fulfilment. The Messiah was actually incarnate—the Kingdom of the
Jews was at hand. But in their hearts was a vague fear of the dazzling
present, and a blind clinging to the unhappy past.
In the Jewry of Smyrna the Messiah walked on the [158]afternoon of the
abolished fast, and a vast concourse seethed around him, dancing and
singing, with flute and timbrel, harp and drum. Melisselda's voice led
the psalm of praise. Suddenly a whisper ran through the mob that there
were unbelievers in the city, that some were actually fasting and
praying in the synagogue. And at once there was a wild rush. They
found the doors shut, but the voice of wailing was heard from inside.
"Beat in the doors!" cried Isaac Silvera. "What do they within,
profaning the festal day?"
The crowd battered in the doors, they tore up the stones of the street
and darted inside.
The floor was strewn with worshippers, rocking to and fro.
The venerable Aaron de la Papa, shorn of his ancient Rabbinical
prestige, but still a commanding figure, rose from the floor, his
white shroud falling weirdly about him, his face deadly pale from the
long fast.
"Halt!" he cried. "How dare you profane the House of God?"
"Blasphemers!" retorted Silvera. "Ye who pray for what God in His
infinite mercy has granted, do ye mock and deride Him?"
But Solomon Algazi, a hoary-headed zealot, cried out, "My fathers have
fasted before me, and shall I not fast?"
For answer a great stone hurtled through the air, just grazing his
head.
"Give over!" shouted Elias Zevi, one of Sabbataï's brothers. "Be done
with sadness, or thou shalt be stoned to death. Hath not the Lord
ended our long persecution, our weary martyrdom? Cease thy prayer, or
thy blood be on thine own head." Algazi and De la Papa were driven
from the city; the Kofrim, as the heretics were dubbed, were
obnoxious to excommunication. The [159]thunder of the believers silenced
the still small voice of doubt.
And from the Jewries of the world, from Morocco to Sardinia, from
London to Lithuania, from the Brazils to the Indies, one great cry in
one tongue rose up:—"Leshanah Haba Berushalayim—Leshanah Haba Beni
Chorin. Next year in Jerusalem—next year, sons of freedom!"
It was the eve of 1666. In a few days the first sun of the great year
would rise upon the world. The Jews were winding up their affairs,
Israel was strung to fever pitch. The course of the exchanges,
advices, markets, all was ignored, and letters recounting miracles
replaced commercial correspondence.
Elijah the Prophet, in his ancient mantle, had been seen everywhere
simultaneously, drinking the wine-cups left out for him, and sometimes
filling them with oil. He was seen at Smyrna on the wall of a festal
chamber, and welcomed with compliments, orations, and thanksgivings.
At Constantinople a Jew met him in the street, and was reproached for
neglecting to wear the fringed garment and for shaving. At once
fringed garments were reintroduced throughout the Empire, and heads,
though always shaven after the manner of Turks and the East, now
became overgrown incommodiously with hair—even the Piyos, or
earlock, hung again down the side of the face, and its absence served
to mark off the Kofrim.
Sabbataï Zevi, happy in the love of Melisselda, rapt in heavenly joy,
now confidently expecting the miracle that would crown the miracle of
his career, prepared to set out for Constantinople to take the Crown
from the Sultan's [160]head to the sound of music. He held a last solemn
levée at Smyrna, and there, surrounded by his faithful followers, with
Melisselda radiantly enthroned at his side, he proceeded to parcel out
the world among his twenty-six lieutenants.
Of these all he made kings and princes. His brothers came first. Elias
Zevi he named King of Kings, and Joseph Zevi King of the Kings of
Judah.
"Into thee, O Isaac Silvera," said he, "has the soul of David, King of
Israel, migrated. Therefore shalt thou be called King David and shalt
have dominion over Persia. Thou, O Chayim Inegna, art Jeroboam, and
shalt rule over Araby. Thou, O Daniel Pinto, art Hilkiah, and thy
kingdom shall be Italia. To thee, O Matassia Aschenesi, who
reincarnatest Asa, shall be given Barbary, and thou, Mokiah Gaspar, in
whom lives the soul of Zedekiah, shalt reign over England." And so the
partition went on, Elias Azar being appointed Vice-King or Vizier of
Elias Zevi, and Joseph Inernuch Vizier of Joseph Zevi.
"And for me?" eagerly interrupted Abraham Rubio, the beggar from the
Morea.
"I had not forgotten thee," answered Sabbataï. "Art thou not Josiah?"
"True—I had forgotten," murmured the beggar.
"To thee I give Turkey, and the seat of thine empire shall be Smyrna."
"May thy Majesty be exalted for ever and ever," replied King Josiah
fervently. "Verily shall I sit under my own fig-tree."
Portugal fell to a Marrano physician who had escaped from the
Inquisition. Even Sabbataï's old enemy, Chayim Penya, was
magnanimously presented with a kingdom.
"To thee, my well-beloved Raphael Joseph Chelebi of Cairo," wound up
Sabbataï, "in whose palace Melisselda [161]became my Queen, to thee, under
the style of King Joash, I give the realm of Egypt."
The Emperor of the World rose, and his Kings prostrated themselves at
his feet.
"Prepare yourselves," said he. "On the morning of the New Year we set
out."
When he had left the chamber a great hubbub broke out. Wealthy men who
had been disappointed of kingdoms essayed to purchase them from their
new monarchs. The bidding for the Ottoman Empire was particularly
high.
"Away! Flaunt not your money-bags!" cried Abraham Rubio, flown with
new-born majesty. "Know ye not that this Smyrna is our capital city,
and we could confiscate your gold to our royal exchequer? Josiah is
King here." And he took his seat upon the throne vacated by Sabbataï.
"Get ye gone, or the bastinado and the bowstring shall be your
portion."
Punctually with the dawn of the Millennial Year the Turkish Messiah,
with his Queen and his train of Kings, took ship for Constantinople to
dethrone the Grand Turk, the Lord of Palestine. He voyaged in a
two-masted Levantine Saic, the bulk of his followers travelling
overland. Though his object had been diplomatically unpublished,
pompous messages from Samuel Primo had heralded his advent. The day of
his arrival was fixed. Constantinople was in a ferment. The Grand
Vizier gave secret orders for his arrest as a rebel; a band of
Chiauses was sent to meet the Saic in the harbor. But the day came and
went and no Messiah. Instead, thunders and lightnings and rain and
gales and news of wrecks. The wind was northerly, as commonly in the
Hellespont and Propontis, and it [162]seemed as if the Saic must have been
blown out of her course.
The Jews of Constantinople asked news of every vessel. The captain of
a ketch from the Isles of Marmora told them that a chember had cast
anchor in the isles, and a tall man, clothed in white, who bestrode
the deck, being apprised that the islanders were Christians, had
raised his finger, whereupon the church burnt down. When at last the
Jews heard of the safety of Sabbataï's weather—beaten vessel, which
had made for a point on the coast of the Dardanelles, they told how
their Master had ruled the waves and the winds by the mere reading of
the hundred and sixteenth Psalm. But the news of his safety was
speedily followed by the news of his captivity; the Vizier's officers
were bringing him to Constantinople.
It was true; yet his Mussulman captors were not without a sense of the
majesty of their prisoner, for they stopped their journey at Cheknesé
Kutschuk, near the capital, so that he might rest for the Sabbath, and
hither, apprised in advance by messenger, the Sabbatians of
Constantinople hastened with food and money. They still expected to
see their Sovereign arrive with pomp and pageantry, but he came up
miserably on a sorry horse, chains clanking dismally at his feet. Yet
was he in no wise dismayed. "I am like a woman in labor," he said to
his body-guard of Kings, "the redoubling of whose anguish marks the
near deliverance. Ye should laugh merrily, like the Rabbi in the
Talmud when he saw the jackal running about the ruined walls of the
Temple; for till the prophecies are utterly fulfilled the glory cannot
return." And his face shone with conscious deity.
He was placed in a khan with a strong guard. But his worshippers
bought off his chains, and even made for him a kind of throne. On the
Sunday his captors brought him, [163]and him alone, to Constantinople. A
vast gathering of Jews and Turks—a motley-colored medley—awaited him
on the quay; mounted police rode about to keep a path for the
disembarking officers and to prevent a riot. At length, amid clamor
and tumult, Sabbataï set fettered foot on shore.
His sad, noble air, the beauty of his countenance, his invincible
silence, set a circle of mystery around him. Even the Turks had a
moment of awe. A man-god, surely!
The Pacha had sent his subordinate with a guard to transfer him to the
Seraglio. By them he was first hastily conducted into the
custom-house, the guard riding among and dispersing the crowd.
Sabbataï sat upon a chest as majestically as though it were the throne
of Solomon.
But the Sub-Pacha shook off the oppressive emotion with which the
sight of Sabbataï inspired him.
"Rise, traitor," said he, "it is time that thou shouldst receive the
reward of thy treasons and gather the fruit of thy follies." And
therewith he dealt Sabbataï a sounding box of the ear.
His myrmidons, relieved from the tension, exploded in a malicious
guffaw.
Sabbataï looked at the brutal dignitary with sad, steady gaze, then
silently turned the other cheek.
The Sub-Pacha recoiled with an uncanny feeling of the supernatural;
the mockery of the bystanders was hushed.
Sabbataï was conducted by side ways, to avoid the mob, to the Palace
of the Kaimacon, the Deputy-Vizier.
"Art thou the man," cried the Kaimacon, "whom the Jews aver to have
wrought miracles at Smyrna? Now is thy time to work one, for lo! thy
treason shall cost thee dear."
"Miracles!" replied Sabbataï meekly. "I—what am I [164]but a poor Jew,
come to collect alms for my poor brethren in Jerusalem? The Jews of
this great city persuade themselves that my blessing will bring them
God's grace; they flock to welcome me. Can I stay them?"
"Thou art a seditious knave."
"An arrant impostor," put in the Sub-Pacha, "with the airs of a god. I
thought to risk losing my arm when I cuffed him on the ear, but lo!
'tis stronger than ever." And he felt his muscle complacently.
"To gaol with the rogue!" cried the Kaimacon.
Sabbataï, his face and mien full of celestial conviction, was placed
in the loathsome dungeon which served as a prison for Jewish debtors.
For a day or so the Moslems made merry over the disconcerted Jews and
their Messiah. The street-boys ran after the Sabbatians, shouting,
"Gheldi mi? Gheldi mi?" (Is he coming? Is he coming?); the very bark
of the street-dogs sounded sardonic. But soon the tide turned.
Sabbataï's prophetic retinue testified unshaken to their
Master—Messiah because Sufferer. Women and children were rapt in
mystic visions, and miracles took place in the highways. Moses Suriel,
who in fun had feigned to call up spirits, suddenly hearing strange
singing and playing, fell into a foaming fury, and hollow prophecies
issued from him, sublimely eloquent and inordinately rapid, so that on
his recovery he went about crying, "Repent! Repent! I was a mocker and
a sinner. Repent! Repent!" The Moslems themselves began to waver. A
Turkish Dervish, clad in white flowing robes, with a stick in his
hand, preached in the street corners to his countrymen, [165]proclaiming
the Jewish Messiah. "Think ye," he cried, "that to wash your hands
stained with the blood of the poor and full of booty, or to bathe your
feet which have walked in the way of unrighteousness, suffices to
render you clean? Vain imagination! God has heard the prayers of the
poor whom ye despise! He will raise the humble and abash the proud."
Bastinadoed in vain several times, he was at last brought before the
Cadi, who sent him to the Timar-Hané, the mad-house. But the doctors
testified that he was sound, and he was again haled before the Cadi,
who threatened him with death if he did not desist. "Kill me," said
the Dervish pleadingly, "and ye will deliver me from the spirits which
possess me and drive me to prophesy." Impressed, the Cadi dismissed
him, and would have laden him with silver, but the Dervish refused and
went his rhapsodical way. And in the heavens a comet flamed.
Soon Sabbataï had a large Turkish following. The Jews already in the
debtors' dungeon hastened to give him the best place, and made a rude
throne for him. He became King of the Prison. Thousands surged round
the gates daily to get a glimpse of him. The keeper of the prison did
not fail to make his profit of their veneration, and instead of the
five aspres which friends of prisoners had to pay for the privilege
of a visit, he charged a crown, and grew rapidly rich. Some of the
most esteemed Jews attended a whole day before Sabbataï in the
Oriental postures of civility and service—eyes cast down, bodies
bending forward, and hands crossed on their breasts. Before these
visitors, who came laden with gifts, Sabbataï maintained an equally
sublime silence; sometimes he would point to the chapter of Genesis
recounting how Joseph issued from his dungeon to become ruler of
Egypt.
"How fares thy miserable prisoner?" casually inquired the Kaimacon of
his Sub-Pacha one day.
[166]"Miserable prisoner, Sire!" ejaculated the Sub-Pacha. "Nay, happy and
glorious Monarch! The prison is become a palace. Where formerly
reigned perpetual darkness, incessant wax tapers burn; in what was a
sewer of filth and dung, one breathes now only amber, musk, aloe-wood,
otto of roses, and every perfume; where men perished of hunger now
obtains every luxury; the crumbs of Sabbataï's table suffice for all
his fellow-prisoners."
The Deputy-Vizier was troubled, and cast about for what to do.
Meantime the fame of Sabbataï grew. It was said that every night a
light appeared over his head, sometimes in stars, sometimes as an
olive bough. Some English merchants in Galata visited him to complain
of their Jewish debtors at Constantinople, who had ceased to traffic
and would not discharge their liabilities. Sabbataï took up his quill
and wrote:
"To you the Nation of Jews who expect the appearance of the Messiah
and the Salvation of Israel, Peace without end. Whereas we are
informed that ye are indebted to several of the English nation: It
seemeth right unto us to order you to make satisfaction to these your
just debts: which if you refuse to do, and not obey us herein, know ye
that then ye are not to enter with us into our Joys and Dominions."
The debts were instantly paid, and the glory of the occupant of the
debtors' prison waxed greater still. The story of his incarceration
and of the homage paid him, even by Mussulmans, spread through the
world. What! The Porte—so prompt to slay, the maxim of whose polity
was to have the Prince served by men he could raise without envy and
destroy without danger—the Turk, ever ready with the cord and the
sack, the sword and the bastinado, dared not put to death a rebel, the
vaunted dethroner of the Sultan. A miracle and a Messiah indeed!
But the Kaimacon was embarking for the war with Crete; in his absence
he feared to leave Sabbataï in the capital. The prisoner was therefore
transferred to the abode of State prisoners, the Castle of the
Dardanelles at Abydos, with orders that he was to be closely confined,
and never to go outside the gates. But, under the spell of some
strange respect, or in the desire to have a hold upon them, too, the
Kaimacon allowed his retinue of Kings to accompany him, likewise his
amanuensis, Samuel Primo, and his consort, Melisselda.
The news of his removal to better quarters did not fail to confirm the
faith of the Sabbatians. It was reported, moreover, that the
Janissaries sent to take him fell dead at a word from his mouth, and
being desired to revive them he consented, except in the case of some
who, he said, were not true Turks. Then he went of his own accord to
the Castle, but the shackles they laid on his feet fell from him,
converted into gold with which he gratified his true and faithful
believers, and, spite of steel bars and iron locks, he was seen to
walk through the streets with a numerous attendance. Nor did the
Sabbatians fail to find mystic significance in the fact that their
Messiah arrived at his new prison on the Eve of Passover—of the
anniversary of Freedom.
Sabbataï at once proceeded to kill the Paschal lamb for himself and
his followers, and eating thereof with the fat, in defiance of
Talmudic Law, he exclaimed:—"Blessed be God who hath restored that
which was forbidden."
To the Tower of Strength, as the Sabbatians called the castle at
Abydos, wherein the Messiah held his Court, [168]streamed treasure-laden
pilgrims from Poland, Germany, Italy, Vienna, Amsterdam, Cairo,
Morocco, thinking by the pious journey to become worthy of seeing his
face; and Sabbataï gave them his benediction, and promised them
increase of their stores and enlargement of their possessions in the
Holy Land. The ships were overburdened with passengers; freights rose.
The natives grew rich by accommodating the pilgrims, the castellan
(interpreting liberally the Kaimacon's instructions to mean that
though the prisoner might not go out visitors might come in) by
charging them fifteen to thirty marks for admission to the royal
precincts. A shower of gold poured into Abydos. Jew, Moslem,
Christian—the whole world wondered, and half of it believed. The
beauty and gaiety of Melisselda witched the stubbornest sceptics.
Men's thoughts turned to "The Tower of Strength," from the far ends of
the world. Never before in human history had the news of a Messiah
travelled so widely in his own lifetime. To console those who could
not make the pilgrimage to him or to Jerusalem, Sabbataï promised
equal indulgence and privilege to all who should pray at the tombs of
their mothers. His initials, S.Z., were ornamentally inscribed in
letters of gold over almost every synagogue, with a crown on the wall,
in the circle of which was the ninety-first Psalm, and a prayer for
him was inserted in the liturgy: "Bless our Lord and King, the holy
and righteous Sabbataï Zevi, the Messiah of the God of Jacob."
The Ghettos began to break up. Work and business dwindled in the most
sceptical. In Hungary the Jews commenced to demolish their houses. The
great commercial centres, which owed their vitality to the Jews, were
paralyzed. The very Protestants wavered in their Christianity.
Amsterdam, under the infection of Jewish enthusiasm, effervesced with
joy. At Hamburg, despite the [169]epistolary ironies of Jacob Sasportas,
the rare Kofrim, or Anti-Sabbatians, were forced, by order of
Bendito de Castro, to say Amen to the Messianic prayer. At Livorne
commerce dried up. At Venice there were riots, and the Kofrim were
threatened with death. In Moravia the Governor had to interfere to
calm the tumult. At Salee, in Algeria, the Jews so openly displayed
their conviction of their coming dominance that the Emir decreed a
persecution of them. At Smyrna, on the other hand, a Chacham who
protested to the Cadi against the vagaries of his brethren, was, by
the power of their longer purse, shaved of his beard and condemned to
the galleys.
Three months of princely wealth and homage for Sabbataï had passed. In
response to the joyous inspiration of Melisselda, he had abandoned all
his ascetic habits, and lived the life of a king, ruling a world never
again to be darkened with sin and misery. The wine sparkled and
flowed, the choicest dishes adorned the banqueting-table, flowers and
delicate odors made grateful the air, and the beautiful maidens of
Israel danced voluptuously before him, shooting out passionate glances
from under their long eyelashes. The fast of the seventeenth of Tammuz
came round. Sabbataï abolished it, proclaiming that on that day the
conviction that he was the Messiah had been borne in upon him. The
ninth of Ab—the day of his Nativity—was again turned from a fast to
a festival, the royal edict, promulgated throughout the world, quoting
the exhortation of Zephaniah: "Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion;
for lo I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, saith the Lord."
Detailed prescriptions as to the order of the services and the
psalmody accompanied the edict.
And in this supreme day of jubilation and merrymaking, of majesty and
splendor, crowned with the homage and [170]benison of his race,
deputations of which came from all climes and soils to do honor to his
nativity, the glory of Sabbataï culminated.
(Here endeth the Second Scroll.)
In the hour of his triumph, two Poles, who had made the pious
pilgrimage, told him of a new Prophet who had appeared in far-off
Lemberg, one Nehemiah Cohen, who announced the advent of the Kingdom,
but not through Sabbataï Zevi.
That night, when his queen and his courtiers were sleeping, Sabbataï
wrestled sore with himself in his lonely audience-chamber. The spectre
of self-doubt—long laid to rest by music and pageantry—was raised
afresh by this new and unexpected development. It was a rude reminder
that this pompous and voluptuous existence was, after all, premature,
that the Kingdom had yet to be won.
"O my Father in Heaven!" he prayed, falling upon his face. "Thou hast
not deceived me. Tell me that this Prophet is false, I beseech Thee,
that it is through me that Thy Kingdom is to be established on earth.
I await the miracle. The days of the great year are nigh gone, and lo!
I languish here in mock majesty. A sign! A sign!"
"Sabbataï!" A ravishing voice called his name. He looked up.
Melisselda stood in the doorway, come from her chamber as lightly clad
as on that far-off morning in the cemetery.
There was a strange rapt expression in her face, and, [171]looking closer,
he saw that her laughing eyes were veiled in sleep.
"It is the sign," he muttered in awe.
He sprang to his feet and took her white hand, that burnt his own, and
she led him back to her chamber, walking unerringly.
"It is the sign," he murmured, "the sign that Melisselda hath truly
led me to the Kingdom of Joy."
But in the morning he awoke still troubled. The meaning of the sign
seemed less clear than in the silence of the night; the figure of the
new Prophet loomed ominous.
When the Poles went back they bore a royal letter, promising the
Polish Jews vengeance on the Cossacks, and commanding Nehemiah to come
to the Messiah with all speed.
The way was long, but by the beginning of September Nehemiah arrived
in Abydos. He was immediately received in private audience. He bore
himself independently.
"Peace to thee, Sabbataï."
"Peace to thee, Nehemiah. I desired to have speech with thee; men say
thou deniest me."
"That do I. How should Messiah—Messiah of the House of David, appear
and not his forerunner, Messiah of the House of Ephraim, as our holy
books foretell?" Sabbataï answered that the Ben Ephraim had already
appeared, but he could not convince Nehemiah, who proved highly
learned in the Hebrew, the Syriac, and the Chaldean, and argued point
by point and text by text. The first Messiah was to be a preacher of
the Law, poor, despised, a servant of the second. Where was he to be
found?
Three days they argued, but Nehemiah still went about repeating his
rival prophecies. The more zealous of the Sabbatians, angry at the
pertinacious and pugnacious [172]casuist, would have done him a mischief,
but the Prophet of Lemberg thought it prudent to escape to Adrianople.
Here in revenge he sought audience with the Kaimacon.
"Treason, O Mustapha, treason!" he announced. He betrayed the
fantastic designs upon the Sultan's crown, still cherished by Sabbataï
and known to all but the Divan; the Castellan of Abydos, for the sake
of his pocket, having made no report of the extraordinary doings at
the Castle.
Nehemiah denounced Sabbataï as a lewd person, who endeavored to
debauch the minds of the Jews and divert them from their honest course
of livelihood and obedience to the Grand Seignior. And, having thus
avenged himself, the Prophet of Lemberg became a Mohammedan.
A Chiaus was at once dispatched to the Sultan, and there was held a
Council. The problem was grave. To execute Sabbataï—beloved as he was
by Jew and Turk alike—would be but to perpetuate the new sect. The
Mufti Vanni—a priestly enthusiast—proposed that they should induce
him to follow in the footsteps of Nehemiah, and come over to Islam.
The suggestion seemed not only shrewd, but tending to the greater
glory of Mohammed, the one true Prophet. An aga set out forthwith for
Abydos. And so one fine day when the Castle of the Dardanelles was
besieged by worshippers, when the Tower of Strength was gay with
brightly clad kings, and filled with pleasant plants and odors and the
blended melodies of instruments and voices, a body of moustachioed
Janissaries flashed upon the scene, dispersing the crowd with their
long wands; they seized the Messiah and his queen, and brought them to
Adrianople.
The Hakim Bashi, the Sultan's physician, who as a Jew-Turk himself,
was thought to be the fittest to approach Sabbataï, laid the decision
of the Grand Seignior before him on the evening of his arrival at
Adrianople. The released prisoner was lodged with mocking splendor in
a commodious apartment in the palace, overlooking the river, and lay
upon a luxurious divan, puffing at a chibouque with pretended calm.
"What reverences is it customary to make to the Grand Seignior?" he
asked, with affected nonchalance, when the first salutations with the
physician had been exchanged. "I would not be wanting in the forms
when I appear before his exalted majesty."
"An end to the farce, Sabbataï Zevi!" said the Hakim Bashi, sternly.
"The Sultan demands of thee not posturings, but a miracle."
"Have not miracles enough been witnessed?" asked Sabbataï, in a low
tone.
"Too many," returned the ex-Jew drily. "Yet if thou wouldst save thy
life there needs another."
"What miracle?"
"That thou turn Turk!" And a faint smile played about the physician's
lips.
There was a long silence. Sabbataï's own lips twitched, but not with
humor. The regal radiance of Abydos had died out of his face, but its
sadness was rather of misery than the fine melancholy of yore.
"And if I refuse this miracle?"
"Thou must give us a substitute. The Mufti Vanni suggests that thou be
stript naked and set as a mark for the archers; if thy flesh and skin
are proof like armor, we [174]shall recognize thee as the Messiah indeed,
and the person designed by Allah for the dominions and greatnesses to
which thou dost pretend."
"And if I refuse this miracle, too?"
"Then the stake waits at the gate of the seraglio to compel thee,"
thundered the Hakim Bashi; "thou shalt die with tortures. The mercy of
decapitation shall be denied thee, for thou knowest well Mohammedans
will not pollute their swords with the blood of a Jew. Be advised by
me, Sabbataï," he continued, lowering his tone. "Become one of us.
After all, the Moslem are but the posterity of Hagar. Mohammed is but
the successor of Moses. We recognize the One God who rules the heavens
and the earth, we eat not swine-flesh. Thou canst Messiah it in a
white turban as well as in a black," he ended jocosely.
Sabbataï winced. "Renegade!" he muttered.
"Ay, and an excellent exchange," quoth the physician. "The Sultan is a
generous paymaster, may his shadow never grow less. He giveth thee
till the morn to decide—Turk or martyr? With burning torches attached
to thy limbs thou art to be whipped through the streets with fiery
scourges in the sight of the people—such is the Sultan's decree. He
is a generous paymaster. After all, what need we pretend—between
ourselves, two Jews, eh?" And he winked drolly. "The sun greets
Mohammed every morn, say these Turks. Let to-morrow's greet another
Mohammedan."
Sabbataï sprang up with an access of majesty.
"Dog of an unbeliever! Get thee gone!"
"Till to-morrow! The Sultan will give thee audience to-morrow," said
the Hakim Bashi imperturbably, and, making a mock respectful
salutation, he withdrew from the apartment.
Melisselda had been dosing in an inner chamber after the [175]fatigue of
the journey, but the concluding thunders of the duologue had aroused
her, and she heard the physician's farewell words. She now parted the
hangings and looked through at Sabbataï, her loveliness half-framed,
half-hidden by the tapestry. Her face was wreathed in a heavenly
smile.
"Sabbataï!" she breathed.
He turned a frowning gaze upon her. "Thou art merry!" he said
bitterly.
"Is not the hour come?" she cried joyously.
"Yea, the hour is come," he murmured.
"The hour of thy final trial and triumph! The longed-for hour of thy
appearance before the Sultan, when thou wilt take the crown from his
head and place it on—"
Instead of completing the sentence, she ran to take his head to her
bosom. But he repulsed her embracing arms. She drew back in
consternation. It was the first time she had known him rough, not only
with her, but with any creature.
"Leave me! Leave me!" he cried huskily.
"Nay, thou needest me." And her forgiving arms spread towards him in
fresh tenderness.
He looked at her without moving to meet them.
"Ay, I need thee," he said pathetically. "Therefore," and his voice
rose firm again, "leave me to myself."
"Thou hast become a stranger," she said tremulously. "I do not
understand thee."
"Would thou hadst ever been a stranger, that I had never understood
thee."
"Sabbataï, thou ravest."
"I have come to my senses. O my God! my God!" and he fell a-weeping on
the divan.
Melisselda's alarm grew greater.
"Rouse thyself, they will hear thee."
[176]"Let them hear. God hears me not."
"Hears thee not? Thou art He!"
"I God!" He laughed bitterly. "Thou believest that! Thou who knowest
me man!"
"I know thee all divine. I have worshipped thee in joy. Art thou not
Messiah?"
"Messiah! Who cannot save myself!"
"Who can hurt thee? Who hath ever hurt thee from thy youth up? The
Angels watch over thy footsteps. Is not thy life one long miracle?"
He shook his head hopelessly. "All this year I have waited the
miracle—all those weary months in the dungeon of Constantinople, in
the Castle of Abydos—but what sure voice hath spoken? To-morrow I
shall be disembowelled, lashed with fiery scourges—who knows what
these dogs may do?"
"Hush! hush!"
"Ah, thou fearest for me!" he cried, in perverse triumph. "Thou
knowest I am but mortal man!"
The roses of her beautiful cheek had faded, but she spoke,
unflinching.
"Nay, I believe on thee still. I followed thee to thy prison,
unwitting it would turn into a palace. I follow thee to thy torture
to-morrow, trusting it will be the crowning miracle and the fiery
scourges will turn into angels' feathers. It is the word of Zechariah
fulfilled. 'In that day will I make the governors of Judah like an
hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheaf.'"
His eyes grew humid as he looked up at her. "Yea, Melisselda, thou
hast been true and of good courage. And now, when I am alone, when the
shouts of the faithful have died away, when the King of the World lies
here alone in darkness and ashes, thou hast faith still?"
[177]"Ay, I believe—'tis but a trial, the final trial of my faith."
She smiled at him confidently; hope quickened within him. "If this
were but a trial, the final trial of my faith!" he murmured. "But
no—ere that white strip of moon rises again in the heavens I shall be
a mangled corpse, the feast of wolves, unless—I have prayed for a
sign—oh, how I have prayed, and now—ah, see! A star is falling. O my
God, that this should be the end of my long martyrdom! But the
punishment of my arrogance is greater than I can bear. God, God, why
didst Thou send me those divine-seeming whispers, those long, long
thoughts that thrilled my soul? Why didst Thou show me the sin of
Israel and his suffering, the sorrow and evil of the world, inspiring
me to redeem and regenerate?" His breast swelled with hysteric sobs.
"My Sabbataï!" Melisselda's warm arms were round him. He threw her off
with violence. "Back, back!" he cried. "I understand the sign; I
understand at last. 'Tis through thee that I have forfeited the divine
grace."
"Through me?" she faltered.
"Yea; thy lips have wooed mine away from prayer, thine arms have drawn
me down from the steeps of righteousness. Thou hast made me unfaithful
to my bride, the Law. For nigh forty years I lived hard and lonely,
steeped my body in ice and snow, lashed myself—ay, lashed myself, I
who now fear the lash—till the blood ran from a dozen wounds, and
now, O God! O God! Woman, thou hast polluted me! I have lost the
divine spirit. It hath gone out from me; it will incarnate itself in
another, in a nobler. Once I was Messiah, now I am man."
"I?—I took from thee the divine spirit!"
She looked at him in all the flush of her beauty, grown insolent
again.
[178]He sprang up, he fell upon her breast, he kissed her lips madly.
"Nay, nay, thou hast shown it me! Love! Love! 'tis Love that breathes
through all things, that lifts the burden of life. But for thee I
should have passed away, unknowing the glory of manhood. I am a man—a
man rejoicing in his strength! O my starved youth! why did I not
behold thee earlier?" Tears of self-pity rolled down his ashen cheek.
"O my love! my love! my lost youth! Give me back my youth, O God! Who
am I, to save? A man; yea, a man, glorying in manhood. Ah! happy are
they who lead the common fate of men, happy in love, in home, in
children; woe for those who would climb, who would torture and deny
themselves, who would save humanity? From what? If they have Love,
have they not all? It is God, it is the Kingdom. It is the Kingdom.
Come, let us live—I a man, thou a woman!"
"But a Mussulman!"
"What imports? God is everywhere. Was not our Maimonides—he at whose
tomb we worship in Tiberias—himself once a Mussulman? Did he not say
that if it be to save our lives naught is forbidden?"
He moved to take her in his arms, but this time it was she that drew
back. Her eyes flashed.
"Nay, as a man, I love thee not. Thou art divine or naught; God or
Impostor!"
"Melisselda!" She ignored his stricken cry.
"Nay, this ordeal hath endured long enough," she replied sternly.
"Confess, I have been proof."
"I am neither God nor Impostor," he said brokenly. "Ah! say not that
thou canst not love me as a man. When thou didst first come to bless
my life I had not yet declared myself Messiah."
"Who knows what I thought then? A wild girl, crazed [179]by the convent,
by the blood shed before my childish eyes, I came to thee full of
lawless passions and fantastic dreams. But as I lived with thee, as I
saw the beauty of thy thought, thy large compassion, the purity of thy
life amid temptations that made me jealous as a woman of Damascus,
then I knew thee a God indeed."
"Nay, when I knew thee I knew myself man. But as our followers grew,
as faith and fortune trod in my footsteps, my blasphemous dream
revived; I believed in thy vision of the Kingdom. When I divided the
world I thought myself Messiah indeed. But as I sat on my throne at
Abydos, with worshippers from the world's end kissing my feet, a
hollow doubt came over me, a sense of dream, and hollow voices echoed
ever in my ear, asking, 'Art thou Messiah? Art thou Messiah? Art thou
Messiah?' I strove to drown them in the festive song; but in the
stillness of the night, when thou wast sleeping at my side, the voices
came back, and they cried mockingly, 'Man! Man! Man!' And when
Nehemiah came—"
"Man!" interrupted Melisselda impatiently. "Cease to cozen me. Have I
not known men? Ay, who more? Their weaknesses, their vanities, their
lewdnesses—enough! To-morrow thou shalt assert the God."
He threw himself back on the divan and sighed wearily. "Leave me,
Melisselda. Go to thy rest; to-night I must keep vigil alone.
Perchance it is my last night on earth."
Her countenance lit up. "Yea, to-morrow comes the Kingdom of Heaven."
And smiling ineffable trust, she stooped down and lightly kissed his
hair, then glided from the room.
And in his sleepless brain and racked soul went on, through that
unending night, the terrible tragedy of doubt, tempered by spells of
spasmodic prayer. A God, or a Man? A Messiah undergoing his Father's
last [180]temptation; or a martyr on the eve of horrible death? And if the
victim of a monstrous self-delusion, what mattered whether one lived
out one's years of shame as Jew or Mussulman? Nobler, perhaps, to die,
and live as an heroic memory—but then to leave Melisselda! To leave
her warm breast and the sunlight and the green earth, and all that
beauty of the world and of human life to which his eyes had only been
unsealed after a lifetime of self-torturing blindness?
"O God! O God!" he cried, "wherefore hast Thou mocked and abandoned
me?"
Early in the forenoon the light touch of a loved hand upon his
shoulder roused him from deeps of reverie.
He uplifted a white, haggard face. Melisselda stood before him in all
her dazzling freshness, like a radiant spirit come to chase the demons
of the night. The ancient Spanish song came into his mind, and the
sweet, sad melody vibrated in his soul.
His eyes filled with tears—the divine dreams of youth stirred faintly
within him.
"Is it Peace with thee?" she asked.
His head drooped again on his breast.
"From the casement I saw the sun rise over the [181]Maritza," he said,
"kindling the sullen waters, but my faith is still gray and dead. Nay,
rather there came into my mind the sublime poem of Moses Ibn Ezra of
Granada: 'Thy days are delusive dreams and thy life as yon cloud of
morning: whilst it tarries over thy tabernacle thou may'st remain
therein, but at its ascent thou art dissolved and removed unto a place
unknown to thee,' This is the end, Melisselda, the end of my great
delusion. What am I but a man, with a man's pains and errors and
self-deceptions, a man's life that blooms but once as a rose and fades
while the thorn endures?" The ineffable melancholy of his accents
subdued her to silence: for the moment the music of his voice, his sad
brooding eyes, the infinite despair of his attitude swayed her to a
mood akin to his own. "Verily it was for me," he went on, "that the
Sephardic poet sang—
"'Reflect on the labor thou didst undergo under the sun, night and
day, without intermission; labor which thou knowest well to be without
profit; for, verily in these many years thou hast walked after vanity
and become vain. Thou wast a keeper of vineyards, but thine own
vineyard thou hast not kept; whilst the Eyes of the Eternal run to and
fro to see if the vine hath flourished, whether the tender grapes
appear, and, lo! all was grown over with thorns; nettles had covered
the face thereof. Thou hast grown old and gray, thou hast strayed but
not returned.' Yea, I have strayed, but is the gate closed for return?
To be a man—only a man—how great that is!" His voice died away, and
with it the sweet, soothing spell. Fire glowed in Melisselda's breast,
heaving her bosom, shooting sparks from her eyes.
"Nay, if thou art only a man, thou art not even a man. My love is
dead."
As he shrank beneath her contempt, another stanza of [182]his ancient song
sang itself involuntarily in his brain. Never had he seen her thus.
But her mouth was a rose. Ah, God, the pity of it, to leave the rose
for the crown of thorns!
"Melisselda!" he cried, with a sob. "Have pity on me."
The door opened; two of the Imperial Guards appeared.
"Thou slayest me," he said in Hebrew.
"I worship thee," she answered him, in the same sacred tongue. Her
face took on its old confident smile.
"But I am a man."
Once again her lids were steel bows.
"Then die like a man! Thinkst thou I would share thy humiliation? If I
am to be a Moslem's bride, let me be the Sultan's. If I am not to
share the Messiah's throne, let me share an Emperor's. Thy Spanish
song made me an Emperor's daughter—I will be an Emperor's consort."
And she laughed wantonly.
The guards advanced timidly with visible awe. Melisselda's swiftly
flashing face changed suddenly. She drew him to her breast.
"My King!" she murmured. "'Twas cruel to tempt my faith thus." Then
releasing him, she cried, "Go to thy Kingdom."
He drew himself up; the fire in her eyes flashed into his own.
"The Sultan summons thee," said one of the guards reverently.
[183]"I am ready," he said, calmly adjusting the folds of his black mantle.
Melisselda was left alone. The slow moments wore on, tense and
terrible. Little by little the radiant faith died out of her face.
Half an hour went by, and cold serpents of doubt began to coil about
her own heart.
What if Sabbataï were only a man after all? With frenzied rapidity she
reviewed the past; now she glowed with effulgent assurances of his
divinity, the homage of his people, the awe of Turk and Christian,
Rabbis and sages at his feet, the rich and the great struggling to
kiss his fan, the treasures poured into his unwilling palms; now she
shivered with hideous suggestions and remembrances of frailty and
mortal ineptitude. And as her faith faltered, as the exaltation, with
which she had inspired him, ebbed away, alarm for his safety began to
creep into her soul, till at last it was as a flood sweeping her in
his traces. And the more her fears swelled the more she realized how
much she had grown to love him, with his sad, dark, smooth-skinned
beauty, the soft, almost magnetic touch of his hand. Messiah or man,
she loved him: he was right. What if she had sent him to his death! A
cold, sick horror crept about her limbs. Perhaps he had dared to put
his divinity to the test, and the ribald Turk was even now gloating
over the screams of the wretched self-deluded man. Oh, fool that she
had been to drive him to the stake and the fiery scourge. If divine,
then to turn Turk were part of the plan of Salvation; if human, he
would at least be spared an agonized death. The bloody visions of her
childhood came back to her, fire coursed in her fevered veins. She
snatched up a mantilla and threw it over her shoulders, then dashed
from the chamber. Her houri-like beauty in that palace of hidden
moon-faces, her breathless explanation that the Sultan had summoned
her to join her [184]husband, carried her past breathless guards, through
door after door, past the black eunuchs of the seraglio and the white
eunuchs of the royal apartment, till through the interstices of purple
hangings she had a far-off glimpse of the despot in his great imperial
turban, sitting on his high, narrow throne, his officers around him. A
page stopped her rudely. Faintness overcame her.
"Mehmed Effendi," called the page.
Dizzy, her tongue scarcely under control, she tried to proffer to the
tall door-keeper who parted the hangings her request for admission.
But he held out his arms to catch her swaying form, and then, as in
some monstrous dream, something familiar seemed to her to waft from
the figure, despite the white turban and the green mantle, and the
next instant, as with the pain of a stab, she recognized Sabbataï.
"What masquerade is this?" her white lips whispered in indignant
revulsion as she struggled from his hold.
"My lord, the Sultan, hath made me his door-keeper—Capigi Bashi
Otorak," he replied deprecatingly. "He is merciful and forgiving. May
Allah exalt his dominion. The salary is large; he is a generous
paymaster. I testify that there is no God but God. I testify that
Mohammed is God's prophet." He caught the swooning Melisselda in his
arms and covered her face with kisses.
News travelled slowly in those days. A week later, while Agi Mehmed
Effendi and his wife Fauma Kadin (born Sarah and still called
Melisselda by her adoring husband, the Sultan's door-keeper) were
receiving instruction in the Moslem religion from the exultant Mufti
Vanni, a great Synod of Jews, swept to Amsterdam by the mighty wave
[185]of faith and joy, Rabbis and scholars and presidents of colleges, were
drawing up a letter of homage to the Messiah. And while the Grand
Seignior was meditating the annihilation of all the Jews of the
Ottoman Empire for their rebellious projects, with the forced
conversion of the orphaned children to Islam, the Jews of the world
were celebrating—for what they thought the last time—the Day of
Atonement, and five times during that long fast-day did the weeping
worshippers, rocking to and fro in their grave-clothes, passionately
pronounce the blessing over Sabbataï Zevi, the Messiah of Israel.
Nor did the fame and memory of him perish for generations; nor the
dreamers of the Jewry cease to cherish the faith in him, many
following him in adopting the white turban of Islam.
But by what ingenious cabalistic sophistries, by what yearning
fantasies—fit to make the angels weep—his unhappy followers,
obstinate not to lose the great white hope that had come to illumine
the gloom of the Jewries, explained away his defection; what sects and
counter-sects his appostasy gave birth to, and what new prophets
arose—a guitar-playing gallant of Madrid, a tobacco dealer of
Pignerol, a blue-blooded Christian millionaire of Copenhagen—to
nourish that great pathetic hope (which still lives on) long after
Sabbataï himself, after who knows what new spasms of self-mystification
and hypocrisy, what renewed aspirations after his old greatness and his
early righteousness, what fresh torment of soul and body, died on the
Day of Atonement, a lonely white-haired exile in a little Albanian
town, where no brother Jew dwelt to close his eyelids or breathe
undying homage into his dying ears—is it not written in the chronicles
of the Ghetto?
(Here endeth the Third and Last Scroll.)
As the lean, dark, somewhat stooping passenger, noticeable among the
blonde Hollanders by his noble Spanish face with its black eyebrows
and long curly locks, stepped off the trekschuyt on to the
canal-bank at s' Gravenhage, his abstracted gaze did not at first take
in the scowling visages of the idlers, sunning themselves as the
tow-boat came in. He was not a close observer of externals, and though
he had greatly enjoyed the journey home from Utrecht along the quaint
water-way between green walls of trees and hedges, with occasional
glimpses of flat landscapes and windmills through rifts, his sense of
the peace of Nature was wafted from the mass, from a pervasive
background of greenness and flowing water; he was not keenly aware of
specific trees, of linden, or elm, or willow, still less of the
aquatic plants and flowers that carpeted richly the surface of the
canal.
Even when, pursuing broodingly his homeward path through the handsome
streets of the Hague, he became at last conscious of a certain
ill-will in the faces he met, he did not at first connect it with
himself, but with the general bellicose excitement of the populace.
Although the young Prince of Orange had rewarded their insurrectionary
election of him to the Stadtholdership by redeeming them from the
despair to which the French invasion and the English fleet [187]had
reduced them, although since his famous "I will die in the last
ditch," Holland no longer strove to commit suicide by opening its own
sluices, yet the unloosed floods of popular passion were only
partially abated. A stone that grazed his cheek and plumped against
the little hand-bag that held his all of luggage, startled him to
semi-comprehension.
They were for him, then, these sullen glances. Cries of "Traitor!"
"Godless gallows-bird!" "Down with the damned renegade!" dispelled
what doubt remained. A shade of melancholy deepened the expression of
the sweet, thoughtful mouth; then, as by volition, the habitual look
of pensive cheerfulness came back, and he walked on, unruffled.
So it had leaked out, even in his own town—where an anonymous prophet
should be without dishonor—that he was the author of the infamous
Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, the "traitor to State and Church" of
refuting pamphleteers, the bogey of popular theology. In vain, then,
had his treatise been issued with "Hamburg" on the title-page. In vain
had he tried to combine personal peace with impersonal thought, to
confine his body to a garret and to diffuse his soul through the
world. The forger of such a thunderbolt could not remain hid from the
eyes of Europe. Perhaps the illustrious foreigners and the beautiful
bluestockings who climbed his stairs—to the detriment of his day's
work in grinding lenses—had set the Hague scenting sulphur. More
probably the hot-headed young disciples to whom he had given oral or
epistolary teaching had enthusiastically betrayed him into fame—or
infamy. It had always been thus, he mused, even in those early
half-forgotten days when he was emancipating himself from the Ghetto,
and half-shocked admirers no less than heresy-hunters bore to the ears
of the Beth-din his dreadful [188]rejection of miracle and ceremony. Poor
Saul Morteira! How his ancient master must have been pained to
pronounce the Great Ban, though nothing should have surprised him in a
pupil so daring of question, even at fifteen. And now that he had
shaken off the Ghetto, or rather been shaken off by it, he had
scandalized no less shockingly that Christendom to which the Ghetto
had imagined him apostatizing: he had fearlessly contradicted every
system of the century, the ruling Cartesian philosophy no less than
the creed of the Church, and his plea for freedom of thought had
illustrated it to the full. True, the Low Countries, when freed from
the Spanish rack, had nobly declared for religious freedom, but at a
scientific treatment of the Bible as sacred literature even Dutch
toleration must draw the line, unbeguiled by the appeal to the State
to found itself on true religion and ignore the glossing theologians.
"What evil can be imagined greater for a State than that honorable
men, because they have thoughts of their own and cannot act a lie, are
sent as culprits into exile or led to the scaffold?" Already the
States-General had attached the work containing this question and
forbidden its circulation: now apparently persecution was to reach him
in person, Christendom supplementing what he had long since suffered
from the Jewry. He thought of the fanatical Jew whose attempt to stab
him had driven him to live on the outskirts of Amsterdam even before
the Jews had persuaded the civil magistrates to banish him from their
"new Jerusalem," and in a flash of bitterness the picturesque
Portuguese imprecations of the Rabbinic tribunal seemed to him to be
bearing fruit. "According to the decision of the angels and the
judgment of the saints, with the sanction of the Holy God and the
whole congregation, we excommunicate, expel, curse, and execrate
Baruch de Espinoza before the holy books.... Cursed be he by day, and
[189]cursed be he by night; cursed be he when he lieth down, and cursed be
he when he riseth up; cursed be he when he goeth out, and cursed be he
when he cometh in. May God never forgive him! His anger and His
passion shall be kindled against this man, on whom rest all the curses
and execrations which are written in the Holy Scriptures...." Had the
words been lurking at the back of his mind, when he was writing the
Tractatus? he asked himself, troubled to find them still in his
memory. Had resentment colored the Jewish sections? Had his hot
Spanish blood kept the memory of the dagger that had tried to spill
it? Had suffering biassed the impersonality of his intellect? "This
compels me to nothing which I should not otherwise have done," he had
said to his Mennonite friend when the sentence reached him in the
Oudekirk Road. But was it so? If he had not been cut off from his
father and his brothers and sisters, and the friends of childhood,
would he have treated the beauties of his ancestral faith with so
grudging a sympathy? The doubt disturbed him, revealing once more how
difficult was self-mastery, absolute surrender to absolute Truth.
Never had he wavered under persecution like Uriel Acosta—at whose
grave in unholy ground he had stood when a boy of eight,—but had it
not wrought insidiously upon his spirit?
"Alas!" thought he, "the heaviest burden that men can lay upon us, is
not that they persecute us with their hatred and scorn, but that they
thus plant hatred and scorn in our souls. That is what does not let us
breathe freely or see clearly." Retrospect softened the odiousness of
his Jewish persecutors; they were but children of a persecuting age,
and it was indeed hard for a community of refugees from Spain and
Portugal to have that faith doubted for which they or their fathers
had given up wealth and country. Even at the hour of his Ban the
[190]pyres of the Inquisition were flaming with Jewish martyrs, and his
fellow-scholars were writing Latin verses to their sacred memories.
And should the religion which exacted and stimulated such sacrifices
be set aside by one providentially free to profess it? How should they
understand that a martyr's death proved faith, not truth? Well, well,
if he had not sufficiently repaid his brethren's hatred with love, it
was no good being sorry, for sorrow was an evil, a passing to lesser
perfection, diminished vitality. Let him rather rejoice that the real
work of his life—his Ethica, which he was working out on pure
geometrical principles—would have no taint of personality, would be
without his name, and would not even be published till death had
removed the last possibility of personal interest in its fortunes.
"For," as he was teaching in the book itself, "those who desire to aid
others by counsel or deed to the common enjoyment of the chief good
shall in no wise endeavor themselves that a doctrine be called after
them."
Another stone and a hoot of derision from a gang of roughs reminded
him that death might not wait for the finishing of his work.
"Strange," he reflected, "that they who cannot even read should so run
to damn." And then his thoughts recurred to that horrible day not a
year ago when the brutal mob had torn to pieces the noblest men in the
realm—his friends, the brothers De Witt. He could scarcely retain his
tears even now at the memory of the martyred patriots, whose
ignominiously gibbeted bodies the police had only dared remove in the
secrecy of the small hours. It was hard even for the philosopher to
remember that the brutes did but express the essence of their being,
even as he expressed his. Nevertheless Reason did not demand that
theirs should destroy his: the reverse sooner, had he the power. So,
turning the corner of the street, [191]he slipped into his favorite
book-shop in the Spuistraat and sought at once safety and delectation
among the old folios and the new Latin publications and the beautiful
productions of the Elzevirs of Amsterdam.
"Hast thou Stoupe's Religion des Hollandois?" he asked, with a
sudden thought.
"Inquire elsewhere," snapped the bookseller surlily.
"Et tu, Brute!" said Spinoza, smiling. "Dost thou also join the hue
and cry? Methinks heresy should nourish thy trade. A wilderness of
counterblasts, treatises, tractlets, pasquinades—the more the
merrier, eh?"
The bookseller stared. "Thou to come in and ask for Stoupe's book?
'Tis—'tis—brazen!"
Spinoza was perplexed. "Brazen? Is it because he talks of me in it?"
"Heer Spinoza," said the bookseller solemnly, "thy Cartesian
commentary has brought me a many pence, and if thou thyself hast
browsed more than bought, thou wast welcome to take whatever thou
couldst carry away in that long head of thine. But to serve thee now
is more than I dare, with the populace so wrought up against thee.
What! Didst thou think thy doings in Utrecht would not penetrate
hither?"
"My doings in Utrecht!"
"Ay, in the enemy's headquarters—betraying us to the periwigs!"
Spinoza was taken aback. This was even more serious than he had
thought. It was for supposed leaning to the French that the De Witts
had been massacred. Political odium was even more sinister than
theological. Perhaps he had been unwise to accept in war-time the
Prince of Condé's flattering invitation to talk philosophy. To get to
the French camp with the Marshal's safe-conduct had been easy enough:
to get back to his own headquarters bade fair [192]to be another matter.
But then why had the Dutch authorities permitted him to go? Surely
such unique confidence was testimonial enough.
"Oh, but this is absurd!" he said. "Every burgher in Den Haag knows
that I am a good republican, and have never had any aim but the honor
and welfare of the State. Besides, I did not even see Condé. He had
been called away, and I would not wait his return."
"Ay, but thou didst see Luxemburg; thou wast entertained by Colonel
Stoupe, of the Swiss regiment."
"True, but he is theologian as well as soldier."
"He did not offer to bribe thee?"
"Ay, he did," said Spinoza, smiling. "He offered me a pension—"
The bookseller plugged his ears. "'Sh! I will not know. I'll have no
hand in thy murder."
"Nay, but it will interest thee as a bookseller. The pension was to be
given me by his royal master if I would dedicate a book to his august
majesty."
"And thou refusedst?"
"Naturally. Louis Quatorze has flatterers enough."
The bookseller seized his hands and wrung them with tears. "I told
them so, I told them so. What if they did see these French gentry
visiting thee? Political emissaries forsooth! As well fear for the
virtue of the ladies of quality who toil up his stairs, quoth I. They
do but seek further explications of their Descartes. Ah, France may
have begotten a philosopher, but it requires Holland to shelter him, a
Dutchman to understand him. That musked gallant a spy! Why, that was
D'Hénault, the poet. How do I know? Well, when a man inquires for
D'Hénault's poems and is half-pleased because I have the book, and
half-annoyed because he must needs buy it—! An epicurean rogue by his
lip, a true son of the Muses. [193]And suppose there is a letter from
England, quoth I, with the seal of the Royal Society!"
"Is there a letter from England?"
"Thou hast not been to thy lodging? That Royal Society, quoth I, is a
learned body—despite its name—and hath naught to do with King
Charles and the company he keeps. 'Tis they who egg him on to fight
us, the hussies!"
Spinoza smiled. "It must be from my good friend Oldenburg, the
secretary."
"'Tis what I told them. He was in my shop when he was here—"
"Asking for his book?"
"Nay, for thine." And the bookseller's smile answered Spinoza's. "He
bade me despatch copies of the Principia Philosophiae Cartesianae to
sundry persons of distinction. I would to Heaven thou wouldst write a
new book!"
"Heaven may not share thy view," murmured Spinoza, who was just
turning over the pages of an attack on his "new book," and reading of
himself as "a man of bold countenance, fanatical, and estranged from
all religion."
"A good book thou hast there," said the bookseller. "By Musæus, the
Jena Professor. The Tractatus Theologico-Politicus ad Veritatis
Lancem Examinatus—weighed in Truth's balance, indeed. A title that
draws. They say 'tis the best of all the refutations of the pernicious
and poisonous Tractate."
"Of which I see sundry copies here masked in false titles."
"'Sh! Forbidden fruit is always in demand. But so long as I supply the
antidote too—"
"Needs fruit an antidote?"
"Poisoned apples of Knowledge offered by the serpent."
"A serpent indeed," said Spinoza, reading the Antidote aloud. "'He has
left no mental faculty, no cunning, no [194]art untried in order to
conceal his fabrication beneath a brilliant veil, so that we may with
good reason doubt whether among the great number of those whom the
devil himself has hired for the destruction of all human and divine
right, there is one to be found who has been more zealous in the work
of corruption than this traitor who was born to the great injury of
the church and to the harm of the state.' How he bruises the serpent's
head, this theology professor!" he cried; "how he lays him dead on his
balance of Truth!" To himself he thought: "How the most ignorant are
usually the most impudent and the most ready to rush into print!" He
had a faint prevision of how his name—should it really leak out,
despite all his precautions—would come to stand for atheism and
immorality, a catchword of ill-omen for a century or two; but he
smiled on, relying upon the inherent reasonableness and rightness of
the universe.
"Wilt take the book?" said the bookseller.
"Nay, 'tis not by such tirades that Truth is advanced. But hast thou
the Refutation by Lambert Velthuysen?"
The bookseller shook his head.
"That is worth a hundred of this. Prithee get that and commend it to
thy clients, for Velthuysen wields a formidable dialectic by which
men's minds may be veritably stimulated."
On his homeward way dark looks still met him, but he faced them with
cheerful, candid gaze. At the end of the narrow Spuistraat the affairs
of the broad market-place engrossed popular attention, and the
philosopher threaded his way unregarded among the stalls and the
canvas-covered Zeeland waggons, and it was not till he reached the
Paviljoensgracht—where he now sits securely in stone, pencilling a
thought as enduring—that he encountered fresh difficulty. There, at
his own street door, under the [195]trees lining the canal-bank, his
landlord, Van der Spijck, the painter—usually a phlegmatic figure
haloed in pipe-clouds—congratulated him excitedly on his safe return,
but refused him entry to the house. "Here thou canst lodge no more."
"Here I lodge to-night," said Spinoza quietly, "if there be any law in
Holland."
"Law! The folk will take the law into their own hands. My windows will
be broken, my doors battered in. And thou wilt be murdered and thrown
into the canal."
His lodger laughed. "And wherefore? An honest optician murdered! Go
to, good friend!"
"If thou hadst but sat at home, polishing thy spy-glasses instead of
faring to Utrecht! Customarily thou art so cloistered in that the
goodwife declares thou forgettest to eat for three days together—and
certes there is little thou canst eat when thou goest not abroad to
buy provision! What devil must drive thee on a long journey in this
hour of heat and ferment? Not that I believe a word of thy turning
traitor—I'd sooner believe my mahl-stick could turn serpent like
Aaron's rod—but in my house thou shalt not be murdered."
"Reassure thyself. The whole town knows my business with Stoupe; at
least I told my bookseller, and 'tis only a matter of hours."
"Truly he is a lively gossip."
"Ay," said Spinoza drily. "He was even aware that a letter from the
Royal Society of England awaits me."
Van der Spijck reddened. "I have not opened it," he cried hastily.
"Naturally. But the door thou mayst open."
The painter hesitated. "They will drag thee forth, as they dragged the
De Witts from the prison."
[196]Spinoza smiled sadly. "And on that occasion thou wouldst not let me
out; now thou wilt not let me in."
"Both proofs that I have more regard for thee than thou for thyself.
If I had let thee dash out to fix up on the public wall that
denunciation thou hadst written of the barbarian mob, there had been
no life of thine to risk to-day. Fly the town, I beseech thee, or find
thicker walls than mine. Thou knowest I would shelter thee had I the
power; do not our other lodgers turn to thee in sickness and sorrow to
be soothed by thy talk? Do not our own little ones love and obey thee
more than their mother and me? But if thou wert murdered in our house,
how dreadful a shock and a memory to us all!"
"I know well your love for me," said Spinoza, touched. "But fear
nothing on my account: I can easily justify myself. There are people
enough, and of chief men in the country too, who well know the motives
of my journey. But whatever comes of it, so soon as the crowd make the
least noise at your door, I will go out and make straight for them,
though they should serve me as they have done the unhappy De Witts."
Van der Spijck threw open the door. "Thy word is an oath!"
On the stairs shone the speckless landlady, a cheerful creature in
black cap and white apron, her bodice laced with ornamental green and
red ribbons. She gave a cry of joy, and flew to meet him, broom in
hand. "Welcome home, Heer Spinoza! How glad the little ones will be
when they get back from school! There's a pack of knaves been
slandering thee right and left; some of them tried to pump Henri, but
we sent them away with fleas in their ears—eh, Henri?"
Henri smiled sheepishly.
"Most pertinacious of all was a party of three—an old [197]man and his
daughter and a young man. They came twice, very vexed to find thee
away, and feigning to be old friends of thine from Amsterdam; at least
not the young man—his lament was to miss the celebrated scholar he
had been taken to see. A bushel of questions they asked, but not many
pecks did they get out of me."
A flush had mantled upon Spinoza's olive cheek. "Did they give any
name?" he asked with unusual eagerness.
"It ends in Ende—that stuck in my memory."
"Van den Ende?"
"Or suchlike."
"The daughter was—beautiful?"
"A goddess!" put in the painter.
"Humph!" said the vrouw. "Give me the young man. A cold marble
creature is not my idea of a goddess."
"'Tis a Greek goddess," said Spinoza with labored lightness. "They are
indeed old friends of mine—saving the young man, who is doubtless a
pupil of the old. He is a very learned philologist, this Dr. van den
Ende: he taught me Latin—"
"And Greek goddesses," flashed the vrouw affectionately.
Spinoza tried to say something, but fell a-coughing instead, and began
to ascend to his room. He was agitated: and it was his principle to
quit society whenever his emotions threatened to exceed philosophical
moderation.
"Wait! I have thy key," cried the goodwife, pursuing him. "And oh!
what dust in thy room! No wonder thou art troubled with a phthisis!"
"Thou didst not arrange anything?" he cried in alarm.
"A flick with a feather-brush, as I took in thy letters—no more; my
hand itched to be at thy papers, but see! not one is in order!"
She unlocked his door, revealing a little room in which [198]books and
papers mingled oddly with the bedroom furniture and the tools and
bench of his craft. There were two windows with shabby red curtains.
On nails hung a few odd garments, one of which, the doublet anciently
pierced by the fanatic's dagger, merely served as a memento, though
not visibly older than the rest of his wardrobe. "Who puts a mediocre
article into a costly envelope?" was the philosopher's sartorial
standpoint. Over the mantel (on which among some old pipes lay two
silver buckles, his only jewellery) was pinned a charcoal sketch of
Masaniello in shirt-sleeves, with a net on his shoulder, done by
Spinoza himself, and obviously with his own features as model: perhaps
in some whimsical moment when he figured himself as an intellectual
revolutionary. A portfolio that leaned against a microscope contained
black and white studies of some of his illustrious visitors, which
caught happily their essential features without detail. The few other
wall-pictures were engravings by other hands. Spinoza sat down on his
truckle-bed with a great sigh of content.
"Desideratoque acquiescimus lecto," he murmured. Then his eye roving
around: "My spiders' webs are gone!" he groaned.
"I could not disarrange aught in sweeping them away!" deprecated the
goodwife.
"Thou hast disarranged me! I have learnt all my wisdom from watching
spiders!" he said, smiling.
"Nay, thou jestest."
"In no wise. The spider and the fly—the whole of life is there. 'Tis
through leaving them out that the theologies are so empty. Besides,
who will now catch the flies for my microscope?"
"I will not believe thou wouldst have the poor little flies caught by
the great big spiders. Never did I understand [199]what Pastor Cordes
prated of turning the other cheek till I met thee."
"Nay, 'tis not my doctrine. Mine is the worship of joy. I hold that
the effort to preserve our being is virtue."
"But thou goest to church sometimes?"
"To hear a preacher."
"A strange motive." She added musingly: "Christianity is not then
true?"
"Not true for me."
"Then if thou canst not believe in it, I will not."
Spinoza smiled tenderly. "Be guided by Dr. Cordes, not by me."
The goodwife was puzzled. "Dost thou then think I can be saved in Dr.
Cordes' doctrine?" she asked anxiously.
"Yes, 'tis a very good doctrine, the Lutheran; doubt not thou wilt be
saved in it, provided thou livest at peace with thy neighbors."
Her face brightened. "Then I will be guided by thee."
Spinoza smiled. Theology demanded perfect obedience, he thought, even
as philosophy demanded perfect knowledge, and both alike were saving;
for the believing mob, therefore, to which Religion meant subversion
of Reason, speculative opinions were to be accounted pious or impious,
not as they were true or false, but as they confirmed or shook the
believer's obedience.
Refusing her solicitous offers of a warm meal, and merely begging her
to buy him a loaf, he began to read his arrears of letters, picking
them up one after another with no eagerness but with calm interest.
His correspondence was varied. Some of it was taken up with criticisms
of his thought—products of a leisurely age when the thinkers of
Europe were a brotherhood, calling to each other across the dim
populations; some represented the more deferential doubts of disciples
or the elegant misunderstandings of [200]philosophic dilettanti, some his
friendly intercourse with empirical physicists like Boyle or like
Huyghens, whose telescope had enlarged the philosopher's universe and
the thinker's God; there was an acknowledgment of the last scholium
from the young men's society of Amsterdam—"Nil volentibus
arduum,"—to which he sent his Ethica in sections for discussion;
the metropolis which had banished him not being able to keep out his
thought. There was the usual demand for explanations of difficulties
from Blyenbergh, the Dort merchant and dignitary, accompanied this
time by a frightened yearning to fly back from Reason to Revelation.
And the letter with the seal of the Royal Society proved equally
faint-hearted, Oldenburg exhorting him not to say anything in his next
book to loosen the practice of virtue. "Dear Heinrich!" thought
Spinoza. "How curious are men! All these years since first we met at
Rijnburg he has been goading and spurring me on to give my deepest
thought to the world. 'Twas always, 'Cast out all fear of stirring up
against thee the pigmies of the time—Truth before all—let us spread
our sails to the wind of true Knowledge.' And now the tune is, 'O pray
be careful not to give sinners a handle!' Well, well, so I am not to
tell men that the highest law is self-imposed; that there is no virtue
even in virtues that do not express the essence of one's being. Oh,
and I am to beware particularly of telling them their wills are not
free, and that they only think so because they are conscious of their
desires, but not of the causes of them. I fear me even Oldenburg does
not understand that virtue follows as necessarily from adequate
knowledge as from the definition of a triangle follows that its angles
are equal to two right angles. I am, I suppose, also to let men
continue to think that the planetary system revolves round them, and
that thunders and lightnings wait upon their [201]wrong-doing. Oldenburg
has doubtless been frighted by the extravagances of the restored
Court. But 'tis not my teachings will corrupt the gallants of
Whitehall. Those who live best by Revelation through Tradition must
cling to it, but Revelation through Reason is the living testament of
God's word, nor so liable as the dead letter to be corrupted by human
wickedness. Strange that it is thought no crime to speak unworthily of
the mind, the true divine light, no impiety to believe that God would
commit the treasure of the true record of Himself to any substance
less enduring than the human heart."
A business letter made a diversion. It concerned the estate of the
deceased medical student, Simon De Vries, a devoted disciple, who
knowing himself doomed to die young, would have made the Master his
heir, had not Spinoza, by consenting to a small annual subsidy,
persuaded him to leave his property to his brother. The grateful heir
now proposed to increase Spinoza's allowance to five hundred florins.
"How unreasonable people are!" mused the philosopher again. "I agreed
once for all to accept three hundred, and I will certainly not be
burdened with a stuiver more."
His landlady here entered with the loaf, and Spinoza, having paid and
entered the sum in his household account-book, cut himself a slice,
adding thereto some fragments of Dutch cheese from a package in his
hand-bag.
"Thou didst leave some wine in the bottle," she reminded him.
"Let it grow older," he answered. "My book shows more than two pints
last month, and my journey was costly. To make both ends meet I shall
have to wriggle," he added jestingly, "like the snake that tries to
get its tail in its mouth." He cut open a packet, discovering that a
friend had sent him some conserve of red roses from [202]Amsterdam. "Now
am I armed against fever," he said blithely. Then, with a remembrance,
"Pray take some up to our poor Signore. I had forgotten to inquire!"
"Oh, he is out teaching again, thanks to thee. He hath set up a candle
for thee in his church."
A tender smile twitched the philosopher's lip, as the door closed.
A letter from Herr Leibnitz set him wondering uneasily what had taken
the young German Crichton from Frankfort, and what he was about in
Paris. They had had many a discussion in this little lodging, but he
was not yet sure of the young man's single-mindedness. The contents of
the letter were, however, unexpectedly pleasing. For it concerned not
the philosopher but the working-man. Even his intimates could not
quite sympathize with his obstinate insistence on earning his living
by handicraft—a manual activity by which the excommunicated Jew was
brother to the great Rabbis of the Talmud; they could not understand
the satisfaction of the craftsman, nor realize that to turn out his
little lenses as perfectly as possible was as essential a part of his
life as that philosophical activity which alone interested them. That
his prowess as an optician should be invoked by Herr Leibnitz gave him
a gratification which his fame as a philosopher could never evoke. The
only alloy was that he could not understand what Leibnitz wanted.
"That rays from points outside the optic axis may be united exactly in
the same way as those in the optic axis, so that the apertures of
glasses may be made of any size desired without impairing distinctness
of vision!" He wrinkled his brow and fell to making geometrical
diagrams on the envelope, but neither his theoretical mathematics nor
his practical craftsmanship could grapple with so obscure a request,
and he forgot to eat while he pondered. He consulted his own treatise
[203]on the Rainbow, but to no avail. At length in despair he took up the
last letter, to find a greater surprise awaiting him. A communication
from Professor Fabritius, it bore an offer from the Elector Palatine
of a chair at the University of Heidelberg. The fullest freedom in
philosophy was to be conceded him: the only condition that he should
not disturb the established religion.
His surprise passed rapidly into mistrust. Was this an attempt on the
part of Christianity to bribe him? Was the Church repeating the
tactics of the Synagogue? It was not so many years since the
messengers of the congregation had offered him a pension of a thousand
florins not to disturb its "established religion." Fullest freedom
in philosophy, forsooth! How was that to be reconciled with impeccable
deference to the ruling religion? A courtier like Descartes might
start from the standpoint of absolute doubt and end in a pilgrimage to
Our Lady of Loretto; but for himself, who held miracles impossible,
and if possible irrelevant, there could be no such compromise with a
creed whose very basis was miracle. True, there was a sense in which
Christ might be considered os Dei—the mouth of God,—but it was not
the sense in which the world understood it, the world which
caricatured all great things, which regarded piety and religion, and
absolutely all things related to greatness of soul, as burdens to be
laid aside after death, toils to be repaid by a soporific beatitude;
which made blessedness the prize of virtue instead of the synonym of
virtue. Nay, nay, not even the unexpected patronage of the Most Serene
Carl Ludwig could reconcile his thoughts with popular theology.
How curious these persistent attempts of friend and foe alike to
provide for his livelihood, and what mistaken reverence his persistent
rejections had brought him! People could not lift their hands high
enough in admiration [204]because he followed the law of his nature,
because he preferred a simple living, simply earned, while for
criminals who followed equally the laws of their nature they had anger
rather than pity. As well praise the bee for yielding honey or the
rose for making fragrant the air. Certainly his character had more of
honey than of sting, of rose than of thorn; humility was an
unnecessary addition to the world's suffering; but that he did not
lack sting or thorn, his own sisters had discovered when they had
tried to keep their excommunicated brother out of his patrimony. How
puzzled Miriam and Rebekah had been by his forcing them at law to give
up the money and then presenting it to them. They could not see that
to prove the outcast Jew had yet his legal rights was a duty; the
money itself a burden. Yes, popular ethics was sadly to seek, and
involuntarily his hand stretched itself out and lovingly possessed
itself of the ever-growing manuscript of his magnum opus. His eye
caressed those serried concatenated propositions, resolving and
demonstrating the secret of the universe; the indirect outcome of his
yearning search for happiness, for some object of love that endured
amid the eternal flux, and in loving which he should find a perfect
and eternal joy. Riches, honor, the pleasures of sense—these held no
true and abiding bliss. The passion with which van den Ende's daughter
had agitated him had been wisely mastered, unavowed. But in the
Infinite Substance he had found the object of his search: the
necessary Eternal Being in and through whom all else existed, among
whose infinite attributes were thought and extension, that made up the
one poor universe known to man; whom man could love without desiring
to be loved in return, secure in the consciousness he was not outside
the Divine order. His book, he felt, would change theology to
theonomy, even as Copernicus and Kepler and Galileo had changed
astrology [205]to astronomy. This chain of thoughts, forged link by link,
without rest, without hurry, as he sat grinding his glasses, day by
day, and year by year: these propositions, laboriously polished like
his telescope and microscope lenses, were no less designed for the
furtherance and clarification of human vision.
And yet not primarily vision. The first Jew to create an original
philosophy, he yet remained a Jew in aiming not at abstract knowledge,
but at concrete conduct: and was most of all a Jew in his proclamation
of the Unity. He would teach a world distraught and divided by
religious strife the higher path of spiritual blessedness; bring it
the Jewish greeting—Peace. But that he was typical—even by his very
isolation—of the race that had cast him out, he did not himself
perceive, missing by his static philosophy the sense of historical
enchainment, and continuous racial inspiration.
As, however, he glanced to-day over the pages of Part Three, "The
Origin and Nature of the Affects," he felt somehow out of tune with
this bloodless vivisection of human emotions, this chain of
quasi-mathematical propositions with their Euclidean array of data and
scholia, marshalling passions before the cold throne of intellect. The
exorcised image of Klaartje van den Ende—raised again by the
landlady's words—hovered amid the demonstrations. He caught gleams of
her between the steps. Her perfect Greek face flashed up and vanished
as in coquetry, her smile flickered. How learned she was, how wise,
how witty, how beautiful! And the instant he allowed himself to muse
thus, she appeared in full fascination, skating superbly on the frozen
canals, or smiling down at him from the ancient balustrade of the
window (surely young Gerard Dou must have caught an inspiration from
her as he passed by). What happy symposia at her father's house, when
[206]the classic world was opening for the first time to the gaze of the
clogged Talmud-student, and the brilliant cynicism of the old doctor
combined with the larger outlook of his Christian fellow-pupils to
complete his emancipation from his native environment. After the dead
controversies of Hillel and Shammai in old Jerusalem, how freshening
these live discussions as to whether Holland should have sheltered
Charles Stuart from the regicide Cromwell, or whether the
doelen-stuk of Rembrandt van Rijn were as well painted as Van
Ravosteyn's. In the Jewish quarter, though Rembrandt lived in it,
interest had been limited to the guldens earned by dirty old men in
sitting to him. What ardor, too, for the newest science, what worship
of Descartes and deprecation of the philosophers before him! And then
the flavor of romance—as of their own spices—wafted from the talk
about the new Colonies in the Indies! Good God! had it been so wise to
quench the glow of youth, to slip so silently to forty year? He had
allowed her to drop out of his life—this child so early grown to
winning womanhood—she was apparently dead for him, yet this sudden
idea of her proximity had revitalized her so triumphantly that the
philosopher wondered at the miracle, or at his own powers of
self-deception.
And who was this young man?
Had he analyzed love correctly? He turned to Proposition xxxiii. "If
we love a thing which is like ourselves we endeavor as much as
possible to make it love us in return." His eye ran over the proof
with its impressive summing-up. "Or in other words (Schol. Prop,
xiii., pt. 3), we try to make it love us in return." Unimpeachable
logic, but was it true? Had he tried to make Klaartje love him in
return? Not unless one counted the semi-conscious advances of
wit-combats and intellectual confidences as she grew up! But had he
succeeded? No, [207]impossible, and his spirits fell, and mounted again to
note how truly their falling corroborated—by converse reasoning—his
next Proposition. "The greater the affect with which we imagine that a
beloved object is affected towards us, the greater will be our
self-exaltation," No, she had never given him cause for
self-exaltation, though occasionally it seemed as if she preferred his
talk to that of even the high-born, foppish youths sent by their sires
to sit at her father's feet.
In any case perhaps it was well he had given her maidenly modesty no
chance of confession. Marriage had never loomed as a possibility for
him—the life of the thinker must needs shrink from the complications
and prejudices engendered by domestic happiness: the intellectual love
of God more than replaced these terrestrial affections.
But now a sudden conviction that nothing could replace them, that they
were of the essence of personality, wrapped him round as with flame.
Some subtle aroma of emotion like the waft of the orange-groves of
Burgos in which his ancestors had wandered thrilled the son of the
mists and marshes. Perhaps it was only the conserve of red roses. At
any rate that was useless in this fever.
He took up his tools resolutely, but he could not work. He fell back
on his rough sketch for a lucid Algebra, but his lucid formulæ were a
blur. He went downstairs and played with the delighted children and
listened to the landlady's gossip, throwing her a word or two of
shrewd counsel on the everyday matters that came up. Presently he
asked her if the van den Endes had told her anything of their plans.
"Oh, they were going to stay at Scheveningen for the bathing. The
second time they came up from there."
His heart leapt. "Scheveningen! Then they are practically here."
[208]"If they have not gone back to Amsterdam."
"True," he said, chilled.
"But why not go see? Henri tramped ten miles for me every Sunday."
Spinoza turned away. "No, they are probably gone back. Besides, I know
not their address."
"Address? At Scheveningen! A village where everybody's business can be
caught in one net."
Spinoza was ascending the stairs. "Nay, it is too late."
Too late in sad verity! What had a philosopher of forty year to do
with love?
Back in his room he took up a lens, but soon found himself re-reading
his aphorism on Marriage. "It is plain that Marriage is in accordance
with Reason, if the desire is engendered not merely by external form,
but by a love of begetting children and wisely educating them; and if,
in addition, the love both of the husband and wife has for its cause
not external form merely, but chiefly liberty of mind." Assuredly, so
far as he was concerned, the desire of children, who might be more
rationally and happily nurtured than himself, had some part in his
rare day-dreams, and it was not merely the noble form but also the
noble soul he divined in Klaartje van den Ende that had stirred his
pulses and was now soliciting him to a joy which like all joys would
mark the passage to a greater perfection, a fuller reality. And in
sooth how holy was this love of woman he allowed himself to feel for a
moment, how easily passing over into the greater joy—the higher
perfection—the love of God!
Why should he not marry? Means were easily to hand! He had only to
accept from his rich disciples what was really the wage of tuition,
though hitherto like the old Rabbis he had preferred to teach for
Truth's sole sake. After all Carl Ludwig offered him ample freedom in
philosophizing.
[209]But he beat down the tempting images and sought relief in the problem
posited by Leibnitz. In vain: his manuscript still lay open,
Proposition xxxv. was under his eye.
"If I imagine that an object beloved by me is united to another person
by the same, or by a closer bond of friendship than that by which I
myself alone held the object, I shall be affected with hatred towards
the beloved object itself and shall envy that other person."
Who was the young man?
He clenched his teeth: he had, then, not yet developed into the free
man, redeemed by Reason from the bondage of the affects whose mechanic
workings he had analyzed so exhaustively. He was, then, still as far
from liberty of mind as the peasant who has never taken to pieces the
passions that automatically possess him. If this fever did not leave
him, he must try blood-letting on himself, as though in a tertian. He
returned resolutely to his work. But when he had ground and polished
for half an hour, and felt soothed, "Why should I not go to
Scheveningen all the same?" he asked himself. Why should he miss the
smallest chance of seeing his old friends who had taken the trouble to
call on him twice?
Yes, he would walk to the hamlet and ponder the optical problem, and
the terms in which to refuse the Elector Palatine's offer. He set out
at once, forgetting the dangers of the streets and in reality lulling
suspicion by his fearless demeanor. The afternoon was closing somewhat
mistily, and an occasional fit of coughing reminded him he should have
had more than a falling collar round his throat and a thicker doublet
than his velvet. He thought of going back for his camelot cloak, but
he was now outside the north-west gate, so, lighting his pipe, he
trudged along the pleasant new-paved road that led betwixt the
avenues [210]of oak and lime to Scheveningen. He had little eye for the
beautiful play of color-shades among the glooming green perspectives
on either hand, scarcely noted the comely peasant-women with their
scarlet-lined cloaks and glittering "head-irons," who rattled by,
packed picturesquely in carts. Half-way to the hamlet the brooding
pedestrian was startled to find his hand in the cordial grip of the
very man he had gone out to see.
"Salve, O Benedicte," joyously cried the fiery-eyed veteran. "I had
despaired of ever setting eyes again on thy black curls!" Van den
Ende's own hair tossed under his wide-brimmed tapering hat as wildly
as ever, though it was now as white as his ruff, his blood seemed to
beat as boisterously, and a few minutes' conversation sufficed to show
Spinoza that the old pedagogue's soul was even more unchanged than his
body. The same hilarious atheism, the same dogmatic disbelief, the
same conviction of human folly combined as illogically, as of yore,
with schemes of perfect states: time seemed to have mellowed no
opinion, toned down no crudity. He was coming, he said, to make a last
hopeless call on his famous pupil, the others were working. The
others—he explained—were his little Klaartje and his newest pupil,
Kerkkrinck, a rich and stupid youth, but honest and good-hearted
withal. He had practically turned him over to Klaartje, who was as
good a guide to the Humanities as himself—more especially for the
stupid. "She was too young in thy time, Benedict," concluded the old
man jocosely.
Benedict thought that she was too young now to be left instructing
good-hearted young men, but he only said, "Yes, I daresay I was
stupid. One should cut one's teeth on Latin conjugations, and I was
already fourteen with a full Rabbinical diploma before I was even
aware there was such a person as Cicero in history."
[211]"And now thou writest Ciceronian Latin. Shake not thy head—'tis a
compliment to myself, not to thee. What if thou art sometimes more
exact than elegant—fancy what a coil of Hebrew cobwebs I had to sweep
out of that brain-pan of thine ere I transformed thee from Baruch to
Benedict."
"Nay, some of the webs were of silk. I see now how much Benedict owes
to Baruch. The Rabbinical gymnastic is no ill-training, though
unmethodic. Maimonides de-anthropomorphises God, the Cabalah grapples,
if confusedly, with the problem of philosophy."
"Thou didst not always speak so leniently of thy ancient learning.
Methinks thou hast forgotten thy sufferings and the catalogue of
curses. I would shut thee up a week with Moses Zacut, and punish you
both with each other's society. The room should be four cubits square,
so that he should be forced to disobey the Ban and be within four
cubits of thee."
"Thou forgettest to reckon with the mathematics," laughed Spinoza. "We
should fly to opposite ends of the diagonal and achieve five and two
third cubits of separation."
"Ah, fuzzle me not with thy square roots. I was never a calculator."
"But Moses Zacut was not so unbearable. I mind me he also learnt Latin
under thee."
"Ay, and now spits out to see me. Fasted forty days for his sin in
learning the devil's language."
"What converted him?"
"That Turkish mountebank, I imagine."
"Sabbata Zevi?"
"Yes; he still clings to him though the Messiah has turned Mohammedan.
He has published Five Evidences of the Faith, expounding that his
Redeemer's design is to bring [212]over the Mohammedans to Judaism. Ha!
ha! What a lesson in the genesis of religions! The elders who
excommunicated thee have all been bitten—a delicious revenge for
thee. Ho! ho! What fools these mortals be, as the English poet says. I
long to shake our Christians and cry, 'Nincompoops, Jack-puddings,
feather-heads, look in the eyes of these Jews and see your own silly
selves.'"
"'Tis not the way to help or uplift mankind," said Spinoza mildly.
"Men should be imbued with a sense of their strength, not of their
weakness."
"In other words," laughed the doctor, "the way to uplift men is to
appeal to the virtues they do not possess."
"Even so," assented Spinoza, unmoved. "The virtues they may come to
possess. Men should be taught to look on noble patterns, not on mean."
"And what good will that do? Moses Zacut had me and thee to look on,"
chuckled the old man. "No, Benedict, I believe with Solomon, 'Answer a
fool according to his folly,' Thou art too half-hearted—thou deniest
God like a serving-man who says his master is out—thou leavest a hope
he may be there all the while. One should play bowls with the holy
idols."
Spinoza perceived it was useless to make the old man understand how
little their ideas coincided. "I would rather uplift than overturn,"
he said mildly.
The old sceptic laughed: "A wonder thou art not subscribing to uplift
the Third Temple," he cried. "So they call this new synagogue they are
building in Amsterdam with such to-do."
"Indeed? I had not heard of it. If I could hope it were indeed the
Third Temple," and a mystic light shone in his eyes, "I would
subscribe all I had."
"Thou art the only Christian I have ever known!" said [213]van den Ende,
half mockingly, half tenderly. "And thou art a Jew."
"So was Christ."
"True, one forgets that. But the rôles are becoming nicely reversed.
Thou forgivest thine enemies, and in Amsterdam 'tis the Jews who are
going to the Christians to borrow money for this synagogue of theirs!"
"How is the young juffrouw?" asked Spinoza at last.
"Klaartje! She blooms like a Jan de Heem flowerpiece. This rude air
has made a rose of my lily. Her cheeks might have convinced the
imbeciles who took away their practice from poor old Dr. Harvey. One
can see her blood circulating. By the way, thy old crony, Dr. Ludwig
Meyer, bade me give thee his love."
"Dost think she will remember me?"
"Remember thee, Benedict? Did she not send me to thee to-day? Thy name
is ever on those rosy lips of hers—to lash dull pupils withal. How
thou didst acquire half the tongues of Europe in less time that they
master τύπτω." Spinoza allowed his standing desire to cough
to find satisfaction. He turned his head aside and held his hand
before his mouth. "We quarrel about thy Tractatus—she and I—for of
course she recognized thine olden argumentations just as I recognized
my tricks of style."
"She reads me then?"
"As a Lutheran his Bible. 'Twas partially her hope of threshing out
certain difficulties with thee that decided us on Scheveningen. I do
not say that the forest which poor Paul Potter painted was not a rival
attraction."
A joy beyond the bounds of Reason was swelling the philosopher's
breast. Unconsciously his step quickened. He encouraged his companion
to chatter more about his daughter, how van Ter Borch had made of her
one of his masterpieces in white satin, how she herself dabbled
[214]daintily in all the fine arts, but the old man diverged irrevocably
into politics, breathed fire and fury against the French, spoke of his
near visit to Paris on a diplomatic errand, and, growing more
confidential, hinted of a great scheme, an insurrection in Normandy,
Admiral Tromp to swoop down on Quillebœuf, a Platonic republic to
be reared on the ruins of the French monarchy. Had Spinoza seen the
shadow of a shameful death hovering over the spirited veteran, had he
foreknown that the poor old gentleman—tool of two desperate roués
and a femme galante,—was to be executed in Paris for this very
conspiracy, the words that sounded so tediously in his ear would have
taken on a tragic dignity.
They approached the village, whose huts loomed solemnly between the
woods and the dunes in the softening twilight. The van den Endes were
lodged with the captain of a fishing-smack in a long, narrow wooden
house with sloping mossy tiles and small-paned windows. The old man
threw open the door of the little shell-decorated parlor and peered
in. "Klaartje!" his voice rang out. A parrot from the Brazils
screamed, but Spinoza only heard the soft "Yes, father," that came
sweetly from some upper region.
"Guess whom I've brought thee?"
"Benedict!" She flew down, a vision of loveliness and shimmering silk
and white pearls. Spinoza's hand trembled in hers that gleamed snowily
from the ruffled half-sleeve; the soft warmth burnt away philosophy.
They exchanged the commonplaces of the situation.
"But where is Kerkkrinck?" said the doctor.
"At his toilette." She exchanged a half-smile with Spinoza, who
thrilled deliciously.
"Then I'll go make mine," cried her father. "We sup in half an hour,
Benedict. Thou'lt stay, we go to-morrow. [215]'Tis the last supper." And,
laughing as if he had achieved a blasphemy, and unconscious of the
shadow of doom, the gay old freethinker disappeared.
As Klaartje spoke of his book with sparkling eyes, and discussed
points in a low, musical voice, something crude and elemental flamed
in the philosopher, something called to him to fuse himself with the
universal life more tangibly than through the intellect. His doubts
and vacillations fled: he must speak now, or the hour and the mood
would never recur. If he could only drag the conversation from the
philosophical. By a side door it escaped of itself into the personal;
her father did not care to take her with him to Paris, spoke of
possible dangers, and hinted it was time she was off his hands. There
seemed a confession trembling in her laughing eye. It gave him courage
to seize her fingers, to falter a request that she would come to
him—to Heidelberg! The brightness died suddenly out of her face: it
looked drawn and white.
After a palpitating silence she said, "But thou art a Jew!"
He was taken aback, he let her fingers drop. From his parched throat
came the words, "But thou art—no Christian."
"I know—but nevertheless—oh, I never dreamed of anything of this
with thee—'twas all of the brain, the soul."
"Soul and body are but one fact."
"Women are not philosophers. I—" She stopped. Her fingers played
nervously with the pearl necklace that rose and fell on her bosom. He
found himself noting its details, wondering that she had developed
such extravagant tastes. Then, awaking to her distress, he said
quietly, "Then there is no hope for me?"
Her face retained its look of pain.
[216]"Not ever? You could never—?" His cough shook him.
"If there had been no other," she murmured, and her eyes drooped
half-apologetically towards the necklace.
The bitterness of death was in his soul. He had a sudden ironic sense
of a gap in his mathematical philosophy. He had fathomed the secret of
Being, had analyzed and unified all things from everlasting to
everlasting, yet here was an isolated force—a woman's will—that
stood obstinately between him and happiness. He seemed to visualize
it, behind her serious face, perversely mocking.
The handle of the door turned, and a young man came in. He was in the
pink of fashion—a mantle of Venetian silk disposed in graceful folds
about his handsome person, his neckcloth of Flanders lace, his
knee-breeches of satin, his shoes gold-buckled, his dagger jewelled.
Energy flashed from his eye, vigor radiated from his every movement.
"Ah, Diedrich!" she cried, as her face lit up with more than relief.
"Here is Heer Spinoza at last. This is Heer Kerkkrinck!"
"Spinoza!" A thrill of awe was in the young man's voice, the reverence
of the consciously stupid for the great brains of the earth. He did
not take Spinoza's outstretched hand in his but put it to his lips.
The lonely thinker and the happy lover stood thus for an instant,
envying and admiring each other. Then Spinoza said cordially, "And now
that I have had the pleasure of meeting Heer Kerkkrinck I must hurry
back to town ere the road grows too dark."
"But father expects thee to sup with us," murmured Klaartje.
"'Tis a moonless night, and footpads may mistake me for a Jew." He
smiled. "Make my apologies to the doctor."
[217]It was indeed a moonless night, but he did not make for the highroad.
Instinctively he turned seawards.
A slight mist brooded over the face of all things, adding to the
night, blurring the village to a few gleams of fire. On the broad
sandy beach he could just see the outlines of the boats and the
fishing-nets. He leaned against the gunwale of a pink, inhaling the
scents of tar and brine, and watching the apparent movement seawards
of some dark sailing-vessel which, despite the great red anchor at his
feet, seemed to sail outwards as each wave came in.
The sea stretched away, soundless, moveless, and dark, save where it
broke in white foam at his feet; near the horizon a pitch-black wall
of cloud seemed to rise sheer from the water and join the gray sky
that arched over the great flat spaces. And in the absence of stars,
the earth itself seemed to gain in vastness and mystery, its own
awfulness, as it sped round, unlessened by those endless perspectives
of vaster planets. And from the soundless night and sea and sky, and
from those austere and solemn stretches of sand and forest, wherein
forms and colors were lost in a brooding unity, there came to Spinoza
a fresh uplifting sense of the infinite, timeless Substance, to love
and worship which was exaltation and ecstasy. The lonely thinker
communed with the lonely Being.
"Though He slay me," his heart whispered, "yet will I trust in Him."
Yea, though the wheels of things had passed over his body, it was
still his to rejoice in the eternal movement that brought happiness to
others.
Others! How full the world was of existences, each perfect after its
kind, the laws of God's nature freely producing every conception of
His infinite intellect. In man alone how many genera, species,
individuals—from saints to criminals, from old philosophers to
gallant young livers, [218]all to be understood, none to be hated. And man
but a fraction of the life of one little globe, that turned not on
man's axis, nor moved wholly to man's ends. This sea that stretched
away unheaving was not sublimely dead—even to the vulgar
apprehension—but penetrated with quivering sensibility, the exquisite
fresh feeling of fishes darting and gliding, tingling with life in fin
and tail, chasing and chased, zestfully eating or swiftly eaten: in
the air the ecstasy of flight, on the earth the happy movements of
animals, the very dust palpitating pleasurably with crawling and
creeping populations, the soil riddled with the sluggish
voluptuousness of worms; each tiniest creature a perfect expression of
the idea of its essence, individualized by its conatus, its effort to
persist in existence on its own lines, though in man alone the
potentiality of entering through selfless Reason into the intellectual
ecstasy of the love with which God loves Himself—to be glad of the
strength of the lion and the grace of the gazelle and the beauty of
the woman who belongs to another. Blessings on the happy lovers,
blessings on all the wonderful creation, praise, praise to the Eternal
Being whose modes body forth the everlasting pageant.
Beginningless æons before his birth It had been—the great pageant to
whose essence Being belonged—endless æons after his ephemeral passing
It would still throb and glow, still offer to the surrendered human
soul the supreme uplift. He had but a moment to contemplate It, yet to
understand Its essence, to know the great laws of Its workings, to see
It sub specie aeternitatis, was to partake of Its eternity. There
was no need to journey either in space or time to discover Its
movement, everywhere the same, as perfect in the remotest past as in
the farthest future, by no means working—as the vulgar imagined—to a
prospective perfection; everywhere educed from the same [219]enduring
necessities of the divine freedom. Progress! As illusory as the
movement of yon little vessel that, anchored stably, seemed always
sailing out towards the horizon.
And so in that trance of adoration, in that sacred Glory, in that
rapturous consciousness that he had fought his last fight with the
enslaving affects, there formed themselves in his soul—white heat at
one with white light—the last sentences of his great work:—
"We see, then, what is the strength of the wise man, and by how much
he surpasses the ignorant who is driven forward by lust alone. For the
ignorant man is not only agitated by eternal causes in many ways, and
never enjoys true peace of soul, but lives also ignorant, as it were,
both of God and of things, and as soon as he ceases to suffer, ceases
also to be. On the other hand, the wise man is scarcely ever moved in
his mind, but being conscious by a certain eternal necessity of
himself, of God, and of things, never ceases to be, and always enjoys
true peace of soul. If the way which leads hither seem very difficult,
it can nevertheless be found. It must indeed be difficult since it is
so seldom discovered: for if salvation lay ready to hand and could be
discovered without great labor, how could it be possible that it
should be neglected almost by everybody? But all noble things are as
difficult as they are rare."
So ran the words that were not to die.
Suddenly a halo on the upper edge of the black cloud heralded the
struggling through of the moon: she shot out a crescent, reddish in
the mist, then labored into her full orb, wellnigh golden as the sun.
Spinoza started from his reverie: his doublet was wet with dew, he
felt the mist in his throat. He coughed: then it was as if the salt of
the air had got into his mouth, [220]and as he spat out the blood, he knew
he would not remain long sundered from the Eternal Unity.
But there is nothing on which a free man will meditate less than on
death. Desirous to write down what was in his mind, Spinoza turned
from the sea and pursued his peaceful path homewards.
Now that I have come to the close of my earthly days, and that the
higher circles will soon open to me, whereof I have learned the
secrets from my revered Master—where there is neither eating nor
drinking, but the pious sit crowned and delight themselves with the
vision of the Godhead—I would fain leave some chronicle, in these
confused and evil days, of him whom I have loved best on earth, for he
came to teach man the true life and the true worship. To him, the ever
glorious and luminous Israel Baal Shem, the one true Master of the
Name, I owe my redemption from a living death. For he found me buried
alive under a mountain of ashes, and he drew me out and kindled the
ashes to fire, so that I cheered myself thereat. And since now the
flame is like to go out again, and the Master's teaching to be choked
and concealed beneath that same ash-mountain, I pray God that He
inspire my unready quill to set down a true picture of the Man and his
doctrine.
Of my own history I do not know that it is needful to tell very much.
My grandfather came to Poland from Vienna, whence he had been expelled
with all the Jews of the Arch-Duchy, to please the Jesuit-ridden
Empress Margaret, who thus testified her gratitude to Heaven for her
recovery from an accident that had befallen her at a court [222]ball. I
have heard the old man tell how trumpeters proclaimed in the streets
the Emperor's edict, and how every petition proved as futile as the
great gold cup and the silver jug and basin presented by the Jews to
the Imperial couple as they came out of church, after the thanksgiving
ceremony.
It was an ill star that guided my grandfather's feet towards Poland.
The Jews of Poland had indeed once been paramount in Europe, but the
Cossack massacres and the disruption of the kingdom had laid them low,
and they spawned beggars who wandered through Europe, preaching and
wheedling with equal hyper-subtlety. My father at any rate escaped
mendicancy, for he managed to obtain a tiny farm in the north-east of
Lithuania, though what with the exactions of the Prince of the estate,
and the brutalities of the Russian regiments quartered in the
neighborhood, his life was bitter as the waters of Marah. The room in
which I was born constituted our whole hut, which was black as a
charred log within and without, and never saw the sunlight save
through rents in the paper which covered the crossed stripes of pine
that formed the windows. In winter, when the stove heated the hovel to
suffocation, and the wind and rain drove back the smoke through the
hole in the roof that served for chimney, the air was almost as
noxious to its human inhabitants as the smoke to the vermin in the
half-washed garments that hung across poles. We sat at such times on
the floor, not daring to sit higher, for fear of suffocation in the
denser atmosphere hovering over us; and I can still feel the drip,
drip, on my head, of the fat from the sausages that hung a-drying. In
a corner of this living and sleeping room stood the bucket of clean
water, and alongside it the slop-pail and the pail into which my
father milked the cow. Poor old cow! She was quite like one of the
[223]family, and often lingered on in the room after being milked.
My mother kneaded bread with the best, and was as pious as she was
deft, never omitting to throw the Sabbath dough in the fire. Not that
her prowess as a cook had much opportunity, for our principal fare was
corn-bread, mixed with bran and sour cabbage and red beets, which lay
stored on the floor in tubs. Here we all lived together—my
grandfather, my parents, my brother and sister; not so unhappy,
especially on Sabbaths and festivals, when we ate fish cooked with
butter in the evening, and meat at dinnertime, washed down with mead
or spirits. We children—and indeed our elders—were not seldom kicked
and cudgelled by the Russian soldiers, when they were in liquor, but
we could be merry enough romping about ragged and unwashed, and our
real life was lived in the Holy Land, with patriarchs, kings, and
prophets, and we knew that we should return thither some day, and
inherit Paradise.
Once, I remember, the Princess, the daughter of our Prince, being
fatigued while out hunting, came to rest herself in our mean hut, with
her ladies and her lackeys, all so beautiful and splendid, and
glittering with gold and silver lace. I stared at the Princess with
her lovely face and rich dress, as if my eyes would burst from their
sockets. "O how beautiful!" I ejaculated at last, with a sob.
"Little fool!" whispered my father soothingly. "In the world to come
the Princess will kindle the stove for us."
I was struck dumb with a medley of feelings. What! such happiness in
store for us—for us, who were now buffeted about by drunken Cossacks!
But then—the poor Princess! How she would soil her splendid dress,
lighting our fire! My eyes filled with tears at the sight of her
beautiful face, that seemed so unconscious of the shame waiting for
it. I felt I would get up early, and do her task for her [224]secretly.
Now I have learnt from my Master the mysteries of the World-To-Come,
and I thank the Name that there is a sphere in heaven for princesses
who do no wrong.
My brother and I did not get nearer heaven by our transference to
school, for the Cheder was a hut little larger than and certainly as
smoky as our own, where a crowd of youngsters of all ages sat on hard
benches or on the bare earth, according to the state of the upper
atmosphere. The master, attired in a dirty blouse, sat unflinchingly
on the table, so as to dominate the whole school-room, and between his
knees he held a bowl, in which, with a gigantic pestle, he brayed
tobacco into snuff. The only work he did many a day was to beat some
child black and blue, and sometimes in a savage fit of rage he would
half wring off a boy's ear, or almost gouge out an eye. The rest of
the teaching was done by the ushers—each in his corner—who were no
less vindictive, and would often confiscate to their own consumption
the breakfasts and lunches we brought with us. What wonder if our only
heaven was when the long day finished, or when Sabbath brought us a
whole holiday, and new moon a half.
Of the teaching I acquired here, and later in the Beth-Hamidrash—for
I was destined by my grandfather for a Rabbi—my heart is too heavy to
speak. Who does not know the arid wilderness of ceremonial law, the
barren hyper-subtleties of Talmudic debate, which in my country had
then reached the extreme of human sharpness in dividing hairs; the
dead sea fruit of learning, unquickened by living waters? And who will
wonder if my soul turned in silent longing in search of green
pastures, and panted for the water-brooks, and if my childish spirit
found solace in the tales my grandfather told me in secret of Sabbataï
Zevi, the Son of God? For my grandfather was at heart a Shab
(Sabbatian). Though Sabbataï Zevi had turned [225]Turk, the honest veteran
was one of those invincibles who refused to abandon their belief in
this once celebrated Messiah, and who afterwards transferred their
allegiance to the successive Messiahs who reincarnated him, even as he
had reincarnated King David. For the new Sabbatian doctrine of the
Godhead, according to which the central figure of its Trinity found
successive reincarnation in a divine man, had left the door open for a
series of prophets who sprang up, now in Tripoli, now in Turkey, now
in Hungary. I must do my grandfather the justice to say that his
motives were purer than those of many of the sect, whose chief
allurement was probably the mystical doctrine of free love, and the
Adamite life: for the poor old man became more a debauchee of pain
than of pleasure, inflicting upon himself all sorts of penances, to
hasten the advent of the kingdom of God on earth. He denied himself
food and sleep, rolled himself in snow, practised fumigations and
conjurations and self-flagellations, so as to overthrow the legion of
demons who, he said, barred the Messiah's advent. Sometimes he
terrified me by addressing these evil spirits by their names, and
attacking them in a frenzy of courage, smashing windows and stoves in
his onslaught till he fell down in a torpor of exhaustion. And, though
he was so advanced in years, my father could not deter him from
joining in the great pilgrimage that, under Judah the Saint, set out
for Palestine, to await the speedy redemption of Israel. Of this Judah
the Saint, who boldly fanned the embers of the Sabbatian heresy into
fierce flame, I have a vivid recollection, because, against all
precedent, he mounted the gallery of the village synagogue to preach
to the women. I remember that he was clad in white satin, and held
under his arm a scroll of the law, whose bells jingled as he walked;
but what will never fade from my recollection is the passion of his
words, his wailing over our sins, his [226]profuse tears. Lad as I was, I
was wrought up to wish to join this pilgrimage, and it was with bitter
tears of twofold regret that I saw my grandfather set out on that
disastrous expedition, the leader of which died on the very day of its
arrival in Jerusalem.
My own Sabbatian fervor did not grow cold for a long time, and it was
nourished by my study of the Cabalah. But, although ere I lay down my
pen I shall have to say something of the extraordinary resurgence of
this heresy in my old age, and of the great suffering which it caused
my beloved Master, the Baal Shem, yet Sabbatianism did not really play
much part in my early life, because such severe measures were taken
against it by the orthodox Rabbis that it seemed to be stamped out,
and I myself, as I began to reflect upon it, found it inconceivable
that a Jewish God should turn Turk: as well expect him to turn
Christian. But indirectly this redoubtable movement entered largely
into my life by way of the great Eibeschütz-Emden controversy. For it
will not be stale in the memory of my readers that this lamentable
controversy, which divided and embittered the Jews of all Europe,
which stirred up Kings and Courts, originated in the accusation
against the Chief Rabbi of the Three Communities that the amulets
which he—the head of the orthodox tradition—wrote for women in
childbirth, were tainted with the Sabbatian heresy. So bitter and
widespread were the charges and counter-charges, that at one moment
every Jewish community in Europe stood excommunicated by the Chief
Rabbis of one side or the other—a ludicrous position, whereof the
sole advantage was that it brought the Ban into contempt and disuse.
It was not likely that a controversy so long-standing and so
impassioned would fail to permeate Poland; and, indeed, among us the
quarrel, introduced as it was by Baruch Yavan, who was agent to
[227]Bruhl, the Saxon Minister, raged in its most violent form. Every fair
and place of gathering became a battle-field for the rival partisans.
Bribery, paid spies, treachery, and violence—all the poisonous fruits
of warfare—flourished, and the cloud of controversy seems to overhang
all my early life.
Although I penetrated deeply into the Cabalah, I could never become a
practical adept in the Mysteries. I thought at the time it was because
I had not the stamina to carry out the severer penances, and was no
true scion of my grandsire. I have still before me the gaunt,
emaciated figure of the Saint, whom I found prostrate in our outhouse.
I brought him to by unbuttoning his garment at the throat (thus
discovering his hair shirt), but in vain did I hasten to bring him all
sorts of refreshments. He let nothing pass his lips. I knew this man
by repute. He had already performed the penance of Kana, which
consisted in fasting daily for six years, and avoiding in his nightly
breakfast whatever comes from a living being, be it flesh, fish, milk,
or honey. He had likewise practised the penance of Wandering, never
staying two days in the same place. I ran to fetch my father to force
the poor man to eat, but when I returned the obstinate ascetic was
gone. We followed his track, and found him lying dead on the road. We
afterwards learnt that even his past penances had not pacified his
conscience, and he wished to observe the penance of Weighing, which
proportions specific punishments to particular sins. But, finding by
careful calculation that his sins were too numerous to be thus atoned
for, he had decided to starve himself to death. Although, as I say, I
had not the strength for such asceticism, I admired it from afar. I
pored over the Zohar and the Gates of Light and the Tree of Life
(a work considered too holy to be printed), and I puzzled myself with
the mysteries of [228]the Ten Attributes, and the mystic symbolism of
God's Beard, whereof every hair is a separate channel of Divine grace;
and once I came to comical humiliation from my conceit that I had
succeeded by force of incantations in becoming invisible. As this was
in connection with my wife, who calmly continued looking at me and
talking to me long after I thought I had disappeared, I am reminded to
say something of this companion of my boyish years. For, alas! it was
she that presently disappeared from my vision, being removed by God in
her fifteenth year; so that I, who—being a first-born son, and
allowed by the State to found a family—had been married to her by our
fathers when I was nine and she was eight, had not much chance of
offspring by her; and, indeed, it was in the bearing of our first
child—a still-born boy—that she died, despite the old family amulet
originally imported from Metz and made by Rabbi Eibeschütz. When,
after her death, it was opened by a suspicious partisan of Emden, sure
enough it contained a heretical inscription: "In the name of the God
of Israel, who dwelleth in the adornment of His might, and in the name
of His anointed Sabbataï Zevi, through whose wounds healing is come to
us, I adjure all spirits and demons not to injure this woman." I need
not say how this contributed to the heat of the controversy in our own
little village; and I think, indeed, it destroyed my last tincture of
Sabbatianism. Looking back now from the brink of the grave, I see how
all is written in the book of fate: for had not my Peninah been taken
from me, or had I accepted one of the many daughters that were offered
me in her stead, I should not have been so free to set out on the
pilgrimage to my dear Master, by whom my life has been enriched and
sanctified beyond its utmost deserving.
At first, indeed, the loss of Peninah, to whom I had become quite
attached—for she honored my studies and [229]earned our bread, and was
pious even to my mother's liking—threw me into a fit of gloomy
brooding. My longing for the living waters and the green
pastures—partially appeased by Peninah's love as she grew up—revived
and became more passionate. I sought relief in my old Cabalistic
studies, and essayed again to perform incantations, thinking in some
vague way that now that I had a dear friend among the dead, she would
help me to master the divine mysteries. Often I summoned up her form,
but when I strove to clasp it, it faded away, so that I was left
dubious whether I had succeeded. I had wild fits of weeping both by
day and night, not of grief for Peninah, but because I seemed somehow
to live in a great desert of sand. But even had I known what I
desired, I could not have opened my heart to my father-in-law (in
whose house, many versts from my native village, I continued to
reside), for he was a good, plain man, who expected me to do
posthumous honor to his daughter by my Rabbinical renown. I was indeed
long since qualified as a Rabbi, and only waited for some reputable
post.
But a Rabbi I was never to be. For it was then that the luminous
shadow of the Baal Shem fell upon my life.
There came to our village one winter day a stranger who had neither
the air of a Schnorrer (beggar) nor of an itinerant preacher; nor,
from the brief time he spent at the Beth-Hamidrash, where I sat
pursuing droningly my sterile studies, did he appear to be a scholar.
He was a lean, emaciated, sickly young man, but his eyes had the fire
of a lion's, and his glance was as a god's. When he spoke his voice
pierced you, and when he was silent his [230]presence filled the room.
From Eliphaz the Pedlar (who knew everything but the Law) I learnt at
last that he was an emissary of Rabbi Baer, the celebrated chief of
the Chassidim (the pious ones).
"The Chassidim!" I cried. "They died out with Judah the Saint."
"Nay, this is a new order. Have you not heard of the Baal Shem?"
Now, from time to time I had heard vague rumors of a new
wonder-working saint who had apparently succeeded far better with
Cabalah than I, and had even gathered a following, but the new and
obscure movement had not touched our out-of-the-way village, which was
wholly given over to the old Sabbatian controversy, and so my
knowledge of it was but shadowy. I thought it better to feign absolute
ignorance, and thus draw out the Pedlar.
"Why, the Baal Shem by much penance has found out the Name of God,"
said he; "and by it he works his will on earth and in heaven, so that
there is at times confusion in the other world."
"And is his name Rabbi Baer?"
"No; Rabbi Baer is a very learned man who has joined him, and whom,
with the other superiors of the Order, he has initiated, so that they,
too, work wonders. I chanced with this young man on the road, and he
told me that his sect therefore explains the verse in the Psalms, 'Sing
unto God a new song; His praise is in the congregation of Saints,' in
the following wise: Since God surpasses every finite being, His praise
must surpass the praise of every such being. Hitherto the praise of Him
consisted in ascribing miracles to Him, and the knowledge of the hidden
and the future. But since all this is now within the capacity of the
saints of the Order, the Almighty has no longer any pre-eminence over
them in respect of the [231]supernatural—'His praise is in the
congregation of the saints,'—and therefore it is necessary to find for
Him some new praise—'Sing unto God a new song'—suitable to Him
alone."
The almost blasphemous boldness of this conception, which went in a
manner further even than the Cabalah or the Sabbatians, startled me,
as much as the novelty of the exegesis fascinated me.
"And this young man here—can he rule the upper and lower worlds?" I
asked eagerly, mindful of my own miserable failures.
"Assuredly he can rule the lower worlds," replied Eliphaz, with a
smile. "For to that I can bear witness, seeing that I have stayed with
him in a town where there is a congregation of Chassidim, which was in
his hands as putty in the glazier's. For, you see, he travels from
place to place to instruct his inferiors in the society. The elders of
the congregations, venerable and learned men, trembled like spaniels
before him. A great scholar who would not accept his infallibility,
was thrown into such terror by his menacing look that he fell into a
violent fever and died. And this I witnessed myself."
"But there are no Chassidim in our place," said I, trembling myself,
half with excitement, half with sympathetic terror. "What comes he to
do here?"
"Why, but there are Chassidim, and there will be more—" He stopped
suddenly. "Nay, I spoke at random."
"You spoke truly," said I sternly. "But speak on—do not fear me."
"You are a Rabbi designate," he said, shaking his head.
"What of it?"
"Know you not that everywhere the Rabbis fight desperately against the
new Order, that they curse and excommunicate its members."
[232]"Wherefore?"
"I do not know. These things are too high for me. Unless it be that
this Rabbi Baer has cut out of the liturgy the Piutim (Penitential
Poems), and likewise prays after the fashion of the Portuguese Jews."
"Nay," I said, laughing. "If you were not such a man-of-the-earth, you
would know that to cut out one line of one prayer is enough to set all
the Rabbis excommunicating."
"Ay," said he; "but I know also that in some towns where the Chassidim
are in the ascendant, they depose their Rabbis and appoint a minion of
Baer instead."
"Ha! so that is what the young man is after," said I.
"I didn't say so," said the Pedlar nervously. "I merely tell
you—though I should not have said anything—what the young man told
me to beguile the way."
"And to gain you over," I put in.
"Nay," laughed Eliphaz; "I feel no desire for Perfection, which is the
catchword of these gentry."
Thus put upon the alert, I was easily able to detect a secret meeting
of Chassidim (consisting of that minimum of ten which the sect, in
this following the orthodox practice, considers sufficient nucleus for
a new community), and to note the members of the conventicle as they
went in and out again.
With some of these I spake privily, but though I allayed their qualms
and assured them I was no spy but an anxious inquirer after Truth,
desiring nothing more vehemently than Perfection, yet either they
would not impart to me the true secrets of the Order, or they lacked
intelligence to make clear to me its special doctrine. Nevertheless,
of the personality of the Founder they were willing to speak, and I
shall here set down the story of his life as I learnt it at the first
from these simple enthusiasts. It may be [233]that, as I write, my pen
unwittingly adds episodes or colors that sank into my mind afterwards,
but to the best of my power I will set down here the story as it was
told me, and as it passed current then—nay, what say I?—as it passes
current now in the Chassidic communities.
Rabbi Eliezer, the Baal Shem's father, lived in Moldavia, and in his
youth he was captured by the Tartars, but his wife escaped. He was
taken to a far country where no Jew lived, and was sold to a Prince.
He soon found favor with his master by dint of faithful service, and
was made steward of his estates. But mindful of the God of Israel, he
begged the Prince to excuse him from work on Saturdays, which the
Prince, without understanding, granted. Still the Rabbi was not happy.
He prepared to take flight, but a vision appeared to him, bidding him
tarry a while longer with the Tartars. Now it happened that the Prince
desired some favor from the Viceroy's counsellor, so he gave the Rabbi
to the counsellor as a bribe.
Rabbi Eliezer soon found favor with his new master. He was given a
separate chamber to live in, and was exempt from manual labor, save
that when the counsellor came home he had to go to meet him with a
vessel of water to wash his feet, according to the custom of the
nobility. Hence Rabbi Eliezer had time to serve his God.
It came to pass that the King had to go to war, so he sent for the
counsellor, but the counsellor was unable to give any advice to the
point, and the King dismissed him in a rage. When the Rabbi went out
to meet him with the vessel of water, he kicked it over wrathfully.
Whereupon the Rabbi asked him why he was in such poor spirits. The
[234]counsellor remained dumb, but the Rabbi pressed him, and then he
unbosomed himself.
"I will pray to God," said Rabbi Eliezer, "that the right plan of
campaign may be revealed to me."
When his prayer was answered he communicated the heavenly counsel to
his master, who hastened joyfully to the King. The King was equally
rejoiced at the plan.
"Such counsel cannot come from a human being," he said. "It must be
from the lips of a magician."
"Nay," said the counsellor; "it is my slave who has conceived the
plan."
The King forthwith made the slave an officer in his personal retinue.
One day the monarch wished to capture a fort with his ships, but night
was drawing in, and he said—
"It is too late. We shall remain here over night, and to-morrow we
shall make our attack."
But the Rabbi was told from Heaven that the fort was almost
impregnable in the daytime. "Send against it at once," he advised the
King, "a ship full of prisoners condemned to death, and promise them
their lives if they capture the fort, for they, having nothing to
lose, are the only men for a forlorn hope."
His advice was taken, and the desperadoes destroyed the fort. Then the
King saw that the Rabbi was a godly man, and on the death of his
Viceroy he appointed him in his stead, and married him to the late
Viceroy's daughter.
But the Rabbi, remembering his marriage vows and his duty to the house
of Israel, made her his wife only in name. One day when they were
sitting at table together, she asked him, "Why art thou so distant
towards me?"
"Swear," he answered, "that thou wilt never tell a soul, and thou
shalt hear the truth."
On her promising, he told her that he was a Jew. Thereupon she sent
him away secretly, and gave him gold [235]and jewels, of which, however,
he was robbed on his journey home.
After he had returned to his joyful wife, who, though she had given
him up for dead, had never ceased to mourn for him, an angel appeared
unto him and said, "By reason of thy good deeds, and thy unshaken
fidelity to the God of Israel throughout all thy sufferings and
temptations, thou shalt have a son who will be a light to enlighten
the eyes of all Israel. Therefore shall his name be Israel, for in him
shall the words of scripture be fulfilled! 'Thou art my servant
Israel, in whom I will be glorified.'"
But the Rabbi and his wife grew older and older, and there was no son
born unto them. But when they were a hundred years old, the woman
conceived and bore a son, who was called Israel, and afterwards known
of men as the Master of the Name—the Baal Shem. And this was in the
mystic year 5459, whereof the properties of the figures are most
wonderful, inasmuch as the five which is the symbol of the Pentagon is
the Key of the whole, and comes also from subtracting the first two
from the last two, and whereas the first multiplied by the third is
the square of five, so is the second multiplied by the fourth the
square of six, and likewise the first added to the third is ten, which
is the number of the Commandments, and the second added to the fourth
is thirteen, which is the number of the Creeds. And even according to
the Christians who count this year as 1700, it is the beginning of a
new era.
The child's mother died soon after he was weaned, and Rabbi Eliezer
was not long in following her to the grave. On his death-bed he took
the child in his arms, and blessed him, saying, "Though I am denied
the blessing of bringing thee up, always think of God and fear not,
for he will ever be with thee." So saying, he gave up the ghost.
[236]Now the people of Ukop in Bukowina, where the Master was born, though
they knew nothing of his glorious destiny, yet carefully tended him
for the sake of his honored father. They engaged for him a teacher of
the Holy Law, but though in the beginnings he seemed to learn with
rare ease, he often slipped away into the forest that bordered the
village, and there his teacher would find him after a long search,
sitting fearlessly in some leafy glade. His dislike for the customary
indoor studies became so marked that at last he was set down as
stupid, and allowed to follow his own vagrant courses. No one
understood that the spirits of Heaven were his teachers.
As he grew older, he was given a post as assistant to the
school-master, but his office was not to teach—how could such an
ignorant lad teach?—but to escort the children from their homes to
the synagogue and thence to the school. On the way he taught them
solemn hymns, which he had composed and which he sang with them, and
the sweet voices of the children reached Heaven. And God was as
pleased with them as with the singing of the Levites in the Temple,
and it was a pleasing time in Heaven. But Satan, fearing lest his
power on earth would thereby be lessened, disguised himself as a
werwolf, which used to appear before the childish procession and put
it to flight. The parents thereupon kept their children at home, and
the services of song were silenced. But Israel, recalling his father's
dying counsel, persuaded the parents to entrust the children to him
once more. Again the werwolf bounded upon the singing children, but
Israel routed him with his club.
In his fourteenth year the supposed unlettered Israel was appointed
caretaker in the Beth-Hamidrash, where the scholars considered him the
proverbial ignoramus who "spells Noah with seven mistakes." He dozed
about the [237]building all day and got a new reputation for laziness, but
at night when the school-room was empty and the students asleep,
Israel took down the Holy Books; and all the long night he pored over
the sacred words. Now it came to pass that, in a far-off city, a
certain holy man, Rabbi Adam, who had in his possession celestial
manuscripts (which had only before him been revealed to Abraham our
Father, and to Joshua, the son of Nun) told his son on his death-bed
that he was unworthy to inherit them. But he was to go to the town of
Ukop and deliver them to a certain man named Israel whom he would find
there, and who would instruct him, if he proved himself fit. After his
father's death the son duly journeyed to Ukop and lodged with the
treasurer of the synagogue, who one day asked him the purpose of his
visit.
"I am in search of a wife," said he.
At once many were the suitors for his hand, and finally he agreed with
a rich man to bestow it on his daughter. After the wedding he pursued
his search for the heir to the manuscripts, and, on seeing the
caretaker of the Beth-Hamidrash, concluded he must be the man. He
induced his father-in-law to have a compartment partitioned off in the
school, wherein he could study by himself, and to monopolize the
services of the caretaker to attend upon him.
But when the student fell asleep, Israel began to study according to
his wont; and when he fell asleep, his employer took one page of the
mystic manuscript and placed it near him. When Israel woke up and saw
the page he was greatly moved, and hid it. Next day the man again
placed a page near the sleeping Israel, who again hid it on awaking.
Then was the man convinced that he had found the inheritor of the
spiritual secrets, and he told him the whole story and offered all the
manuscripts on condition [238]Israel should become his teacher. Israel
assented, on condition that he should outwardly remain his attendant
as before, and that his celestial knowledge should not be bruited
abroad. The man now asked his father-in-law to give him a room outside
the town, as his studies demanded still more solitude. He needed none
but Israel to attend him. His father-in-law gave him all he asked for,
rejoicing to have found so studious a son-in-law. As their secret
studies grew deeper, the pupil begged his master to call down the
Archangel of the Law for him to study withal. But Rabbi Israel
dissuaded him, saying the incantation was a very dangerous one, the
slightest mistake might be fatal. After a time the man returned to the
request, and his master yielded. Both fasted from one week's end to
the other and purified themselves, and then went through all the
ceremony of summoning the Archangel of the Law, but at the crucial
moment of the invocation Rabbi Israel cried out, "We have made a slip.
The Angel of Fire is coming instead. He will burn up the town. Run and
tell the people to quit their dwellings and snatch up their most
precious things."
Thus did Rabbi Israel's pupil leap to consideration in the town, being
by many considered a man of miracles, and the saviour of their lives
and treasures. But he still hankered after the Archangel of the Law,
and again induced Rabbi Israel to invoke him. Again they purified and
prepared themselves, but Rabbi Israel cried out—
"Alas! death has been decreed us, unless we remain awake all this
night."
They sat, mutually vigilant against sleep, but at last towards dawn
the fated man's eyelids closed, and he fell into that sleep from which
there could be no waking.
So the Baal Shem departed thence, and settled in a little town near
Brody, and became a teacher of children, in his [239]love for the little
ones. Small was his wage and scanty his fare, and the room in which he
lodged he could only afford because it was haunted. When the Baal Shem
entered to take possession, the landlord peeping timidly from the
threshold saw a giant Cossack leaning against the mantelpiece. But as
the new tenant advanced, the figure of the Cossack dwindled and
dwindled, till at last the dwarf disappeared.
Though Israel did not yet reveal himself, being engaged in wrestling
with the divine mysteries, and having made oath in the upper spheres
not to use the power of the Name till he was forty years old save
four, and though outwardly he was clad in coarse garments and broken
boots, yet all his fellow-townsmen felt the purity and probity that
seemed to emanate from him. He was seen to perform ablutions far
oftener than of custom; and in disputes men came to him as umpire, nor
was even the losing party ever dissatisfied with his decision. When
there was no rain and the heathen population had gone in a sacred
procession, with the priests carrying their gods, all in vain, Israel
told the Rabbi to assemble the Jewish congregation in the synagogue
for a day of fasting and prayer. The heathen asked them why the
service lasted so long that day, and, being told, they laughed
mockingly. "What! shall your God avail when we have carried ours in
vain?" But the rain fell that day.
And so the fame of Israel grew and reached some people even in Brody.
One day in that great centre of learning the learned Rabbi Abraham,
having a difference with a man, was persuaded by the latter to make a
journey to Rabbi Israel for arbitration. When they appeared before
him, the Baal Shem knew by divine light that Rabbi Abraham's daughter
would be his wife. However, he said nothing but [240]delivered adequate
judgment, according to Maimonides. So delighted was the old Rabbi with
this stranger's learning that he said:
"I have a daughter who has been divorced. I should love to marry thee
to her."
"I desire naught better," said the Baal Shem, "for I know her soul is
noble. But I must make it a condition that in the betrothal contract
no learned titles are appended to my name. Let it be simply Israel the
son of Eliezer."
While returning to Brody, Rabbi Abraham died. Now his son, Rabbi
Gershon, was the chief of the Judgment Counsel, and a scholar of great
renown; and when he found among the papers of his dead father a deed
of his sister's betrothal to a man devoid of all titles of learning he
was astonished and shocked.
He called his sister to him: "Art thou aware thou art betrothed
again?" said he.
"Nay," she replied; "how so?"
"Our father—peace be upon him—hath betrothed thee to one Israel the
son of Eliezer."
"Is it so? Then I must needs marry him."
"Marry him! But who is this Israel?"
"How should I know?"
"But he is a man of the earth. He hath not one single title of honor."
"What our father did was right."
"What?" persisted the outraged brother; "thou, my sister, of so
renowned a family, who couldst choose from the most learned young men,
thou wouldst marry so far beneath thee."
"So my father hath arranged."
"Well, thank Heaven, thou wilt never discover who and where this
ignoramus of an Israel is."
[241]"There is a date on the contract," said his sister calmly; "at the
stipulated time my husband will come and claim me."
When the appointed wedding-day drew nigh, the Baal Shem intimated to
the people of his town that he was going to leave them. They begged
him to remain with their children, and offered him a higher wage. But
he refused and left the place. And when he came near to Brody, he
disguised himself as a peasant in a short jacket and white girdle. And
he appeared at the door of the House of Judgment while Rabbi Gershon
was deciding a high matter. When the Judge caught sight of him, he
imagined it was a poor man asking alms. But the peasant said he had a
secret to reveal to him. The Judge took him into another room, where
Israel showed him his copy of the betrothal contract. Rabbi Gershon
went home in alarm and told his sister that the claimant was come.
"Whatever our father—peace be upon him—did was right," she replied;
"perchance pious children will be the offspring of this union." Rabbi
Gershon, still smarting under this dishonor to the family, reluctantly
fixed the wedding-day. Before the ceremony Israel sought a secret
interview with his bride, and revealed himself and his mission to her.
"Many hardships shall we endure together, humble shall be our
dwelling, and by the sweat of our brow shall we earn our bread. Thou
who art the daughter of a great Rabbi, and reared in every luxury,
hast thou courage to face this future with me?"
"I ask no better," she replied. "I had faith in my father's judgment,
and now am I rewarded."
The Baal Shem's voice trembled with tenderness. "God bless thee," he
said. "Our sufferings shall be but for a time."
[242]After the wedding Rabbi Gershon wished to instruct his new
brother-in-law, who had, of course, taken up his abode in his house.
But the Baal Shem feigned to be difficult of understanding, and at
length, in despair, the Judge went stormily to his sister and cried
out: "See how we are shamed and disgraced through thy husband, who
argues ignorantly against our most renowned teachers. I cannot endure
the dishonor any longer. Look thou, sister mine, I give thee the
alternative—either divorce this ignoramus or let me buy thee a horse
and cart and send you both packing from the place."
"We will go," she said simply.
They jogged along in their cart till they came far from Jews and
remote even from men. And there in a lonely spot, on one of the spurs
of the Carpathian Mountains, honeycombed by caves and thick with
trees, the couple made their home. Here Israel gave himself up to
prayer and contemplation. For his livelihood he dug lime in the
ravines, and his wife took it in the horse and cart, and sold it in
the nearest town, bringing back flour. When the Baal Shem was not
fasting, which was rarely, he mixed this flour with water and earth,
and baked it in the sun. That was his only fare. What else needed
he—he, whose greatest joy was to make holy ablutions in the mountain
waters, or to climb the summits of the mountains and to wander about
wrapt in the thought of God? Once the robbers who lurked in the caves
saw him approaching a precipice, his ecstatic gaze heavenwards. They
halloed to him, but his ears were lent to the celestial harmonies.
Then they held their breath, waiting for him to be dashed to pieces.
But the opposite mountain came to him. And then the two mountains
separated, re-uniting again for his return. After this the robbers
revered him as a holy man, and they, too, brought him their disputes.
And the Baal [243]Shem did not refuse the office,—"For," said he, "even
amid the unjust, justice must rule." But one of the gang whom he had
decided against sought to slay him as he slept. An invisible hand held
back the axe as it was raised to strike the fatal blow, and belabored
the rogue soundly, till he fell prone, covered with blood.
Thus passed seven years of labor and spiritual vision. And the Baal
Shem learned the language of birds and beasts and trees, and the
healing properties of herbs and simples; and he redeemed souls that
had been placed for their sins in frogs and toads and loathsome
creatures of the mountains.
But at length Rabbi Gershon was sorry for his sister, and repented him
of his harshness. He sought out the indomitable twain, and brought
them back to Brody, and installed them in an apartment near him, and
made the Baal Shem his coachman. But his brother-in-law soon disgusted
him again, for, one day, when they were driving together, and Rabbi
Gershon had fallen asleep, the Baal Shem, whose pure thoughts had
ascended on high, let the vehicle tumble into a ditch. "This fellow is
good neither for heaven nor earth," cried Rabbi Gershon.
He again begged his sister to get a divorce, but she remained
steadfast and silent. In desperation Rabbi Gershon asked a friend of
his, Rabbi Mekatier, to take Israel to a mad woman, who told people
their good and bad qualities, and whose stigmatization, he thought,
might have an effect upon his graceless brother-in-law. The
audience-chamber of the possessed creature was crowded, and, as each
visitor entered, a voice issued from her lips greeting them according
to their qualities. As Rabbi Mekatier came in: "Welcome, holy and pure
one," she cried, and so to many others. The Baal Shem entered last.
"Welcome, Rabbi Israel," cried the voice; "thou deemest I fear thee,
but I fear thee [244]not. For I know of a surety that thou hast been sworn
in Heaven not to make use of the Name, not till thy thirty-sixth
year."
"Of what speakest thou?" asked the people in bewilderment.
Then the woman repeated what she had said, but the people understood
her not. And she went on repeating the words. At length Rabbi Israel
rebuked her sharply.
"Silence, or I will appoint a Council of Judgment who will empower me
to drive thee out of this woman. I ask thee, therefore, to depart from
this woman of thine own accord, and we will pray for thee."
So the spirit promised to depart.
Then the Baal Shem said: "Who art thou?"
"I cannot tell thee now," replied the spirit. "It will disgrace my
children who are in the room. If they depart, I will tell thee."
Thereupon all the people departed in haste and spread the news that
Israel could cast out devils. The respect for him grew, but Rabbi
Gershon was incredulous, saying such things could only be done by a
scholar; and, becoming again out of patience with this ignorant
incubus upon his honorable house, he bought his sister a small inn in
a village far away on the border of a forest. While his wife managed
the inn, the Baal Shem built himself a hut in the forest and retired
there to study the Law day and night; only on the Sabbath did he go
out, dressed in white, and many ablutions did he make, as becomes the
pure and the holy.
It was here that he reached his thirty-sixth year, but still he did
not reveal himself, for he had not meditated sufficiently nor found
out his first apostles. But in his forty-second year he began freely
to speak and to gather disciples, wandering about Podolia and
Wallachia, and [245]teaching by discourse and parable, crossing streams by
spreading his mantle upon the waters, and saving his disciples from
freezing in the wintry frosts by touching the trees with his
finger-tips, so that they burnt without being consumed.
And now he was become the chief of a mighty sect, that ramified
everywhere, and the head of a school of prophets and wonder-workers to
whom he had unveiled the secret of the Name.
So strange and marvellous a story, so full of minute detail, and for
the possible truth of which my Cabalistic studies had prepared me,
roused in me again the ever-smouldering hope of becoming expert in
these traditional practices of our nation. Why should not I, like
other Rabbis, have the key of the worlds? Why should not I, too,
fashion a fine fat calf on the Friday and eat it for my Sabbath meal?
or create a soulless monster to wait upon me hand and foot? The
Talmudical subtleties had kept me long enough wandering in a blind
maze. I would go forth in search of light. I would gird up my loins
and take my staff in my hand and seek the fountain-head of wisdom, the
great Master of the Name himself; I would fall at his feet and beseech
him to receive me among his pupils.
Travelling was easy enough:—in every town a Beth-Hamidrash into which
the wanderer would first make his way; in every town hospitable
entertainers who would board and lodge a man of learning like myself,
rejoicing at the honor. Even in the poorest villages I might count
upon black bread and sheep's cheese and a bed of fir branches. But
when I came to make inquiries I found [246]that the village in Volhynia,
which Rabbi Baer had made his centre, was far nearer than the forest
where the Master, remote and inaccessible, retired to meditate after
his missionary wanderings; nay, that my footsteps must needs pass
through this Mizricz, the political stronghold of Chassidism. This
discovery did not displease me, for I felt that thus I should reach
the Master better prepared. In my impatience I could scarcely wait for
the roads to become passable, and it was still the skirt of winter
when, with a light heart and a wild hope, I set my face for the wild
ravines of Severia and the dreary steppes of the Ukraine. Very soon I
came into parts where the question of the Chassidim was alive and
burning, and indeed into towns where it had a greater living interest
than the quarrel of the amulets. And in these regions the rumor of the
Baal Shem began to thicken. There was not a village of log-houses but
buzzed with its own miracle. Everywhere did I hear of healings of the
sick and driving out of demons and summoning of spirits, and the face
of the Master shining.
Of these strange stories I will set down but two. The Master and his
retinue were riding on a journey, and came to a strange road. His
disciples did not know the way, and the party went astray and wandered
about till Wednesday night, when they put up at an inn. In the morning
the host asked who they were.
"I am a wandering preacher," replied the Baal Shem. "And I wish to get
to the capital before the Sabbath, for I have heard that the richest
man in the town is marrying there on the Friday, and perchance I may
preach at the wedding."
"That thou wilt never do," said the innkeeper, "for the capital is a
week's journey."
The Master smiled. "Our horses are good," he said.
[247]The innkeeper shook his head: "Impossible, unless you fly through the
air," he said. But, presently remembering that he himself had to go
some leagues on the road to the capital, he begged permission to join
the party, which was cheerfully given.
The Master then retired to say his morning prayers, and gave orders
for breakfast and dinner.
"But why art thou delaying?" inquired the innkeeper. "How can you
arrive for Sabbath?"
The Baal Shem did not, however, abate one jot of his prayers, and it
was not till eve that they set out. All through the night they
travelled, and in the morning the innkeeper found himself, to his
confusion, not where he had reckoned to part with the others, but in
the environs of the capital. The Baal Shem took up his quarters in a
humble district, while the dazed innkeeper wandered about the streets
of the great city, undecided what to do. All at once he heard screams
and saw a commotion, and people began to run to and fro; and then he
saw men carrying a beautiful dead girl in bridal costume, and in the
midst of them one, who by his Sabbath garments and his white shoes was
evidently the bridegroom, mazed and ghastly pale. He heard people
telling one another that death had seized her as she stood under the
canopy, before the word could be said or the glass broken that should
have made her the wife of the richest man in the capital. The
innkeeper ran towards them and he said—
"Do not despair. Last night I was hundreds of miles from here. I came
here with a great wonder-worker. Mayhap he will be able to help you."
The bridegroom went with him to seek out the Baal Shem at the far end
of the town, and offered a vast sum for the restoration of his
beloved.
"Nay, keep thy money," said the Master. And he fared [248]back with the
twain to see the corpse, which had been laid in an apartment.
As soon as he had looked upon the face of the bride he said: "Let a
grave be dug; and let the washers prepare her for the tomb. And then
let her be reclad in her marriage vestments. I will go to the
graveyard and await her coming."
When her body was brought, he told the bearers to lay her in the
grave, earth to earth. The onlookers wept to see how, for once, that
shroud which every bride wore over her fur robe was become a fitting
ornament, and how the marvellous fairness of the dead face, crowned
with its myrtle garlands, gleamed through the bridal veil. The Master
placed two stalwart men with their faces towards the grave, and bade
them, the instant they noted any change in her face, take her out.
Then he leaned upon his staff and gazed at the dead face. And those
who were near said his face shone with a heavenly light of pity; but
his brow was wrinkled as though in grave deliberation. The moments
passed, but the Master remained as motionless as she in the grave. And
all the people stood around in awed suspense, scarce daring to
whisper. Suddenly a slight flush appeared in the dead face. The Baal
Shem gave a signal, the two men lifted out the bride from the raw
earth, and he cried: "Get on with the wedding," and walked away.
"Nay, come with us," besought the weeping bridegroom, falling at his
feet and kissing the hem of his garment. "Who but thou should perform
the ceremony?"
So the throng swept back towards the synagogue with many rejoicings
and songs, and the extinguished torches were relighted, and the music
struck up again, and the bride walked, escorted by her friends,
seemingly unconscious that this was not the same joyous procession
which [249]had set out in the morning, or that she had already stood under
the canopy. But, when they were arrived in the synagogue courtyard,
and the Baal Shem began the ceremony, then as she heard his voice, a
strange light of recollection leapt into her face. She tore off her
veil and cried, "This is the man that drew me out of the cold grave."
"Be silent," reprimanded the Master sternly, and proceeded with the
wedding formulæ. At the wedding feast, the bride's friends asked her
what she had seen and heard in the tomb. Whereupon she gave them the
explanation of the whole matter. The former wife of her rich
bridegroom was the bride's aunt, and when she fell ill and knew she
would die, she felt that he would assuredly marry this young girl—his
ward,—who was brought up in his house. She became madly jealous, and,
calling her husband to her death-bed, she made him take an oath not to
marry the girl. Nor would she trust him till he had sworn with his
right hand in hers and his left hand in the girl's. After the wife's
death neither of the parties to this oath kept faith, but wished to
marry the other. Wherefore as they stood under the canopy at the
marriage celebration the dead wife, seen only of the bride, killed
her. While she was lying in the grave, the Baal Shem was occupied in
weighing the matter, both she and the jealous woman having to state
their case; and he decided that the living were in the right, and had
only given their promise to the dead wife by force and out of
compassion. And so he exclaimed, "Get on with the wedding!" The memory
of this trial in the world of spirits had clean passed from her till
she heard the Master's voice beginning to read the marriage service,
when she cried out, and tore off her veil to see him plainly.
The Baal Shem spent the Sabbath in the capital; and on [250]Sunday he was
escorted out of the town with a great multitude doing him honor. And
afterwards it was found that all the sick people, whose names happened
to be scribbled by their relatives on the grave-stone which his robe
had brushed, recovered. Nor could this be entirely owing to the merits
of him who lay below, pious man though he was.
On the Tuesday night the Baal Shem and his disciples came to an inn,
where he found the host sitting sadly in a room ablaze festally with
countless candles and crowded with little boys, rocking themselves to
and fro with prayer.
"Can we lodge here for the night?" asked the Baal Shem.
"Nay," answered the host dejectedly.
"Why art thou sad? Perchance I can help thee," said the Baal Shem.
"To-night, as thou seest, is watch-night," said the man; "for
to-morrow my latest-born is to be circumcised. This is my fifth child,
and all the others have died suddenly at midnight, although up to then
there has been no sign of sickness. I know not why Lilith should have
such a grudge against my progeny. But so it is, the devil's mother,
she kills them every one, despite the many charms and talismans hung
round my wife's bed. Every day since the birth, these children have
come to say the Shemang and the ninety-first psalm. And to-night the
elders are coming to watch and study all night. But I fear they will
not cheat Lilith of her prey. Therefore am I not in the humor to lodge
strangers."
"Let the little ones go home; they are falling asleep," said the
Master. "And let them tell their fathers to stay at home in their
beds. My pupils and I will watch and pray."
[251]So said, so done. The Baal Shem told off two of his men to hold a sack
open at the cradle of the child, and he instructed the rest of his
pupils to study holy law ceaselessly, and on no account to let their
eyelids close, though he himself designed to sleep. Should anything
fall into the sack the two men were to close it forthwith and then
awaken him. With a final caution to his disciples not to fall asleep,
the Master withdrew to his chamber. The hours drew on. Naught was
heard save the droning of the students and the sough of the wind in
the forest. At midnight the flames of the candles wavered violently,
though no breath of wind was felt within the hot room. But the
watchers shielding the flames with their hands strove to prevent them
being extinguished. Nevertheless they all went out, and a weird gloom
fell upon the room, the firelight throwing the students' shadows
horribly on the walls and ceiling. Their blood ran cold. But one,
bolder than the rest, snatching a brand from the hearth, relit the
candles. As the last wick flamed again, a great black cat fell into
the sack. The two men immediately tied up the mouth of it and went to
rouse the Baal Shem.
"Take two cudgels," said he, "and thrash the sack as hard as you can."
After they had given it a sound drubbing, he bade them unbind the sack
and throw it into the street. And so the day dawned, and all was well
with the child. That day they performed the ceremony of Initiation
with great rejoicing, and the Baal Shem was made godfather or
Sandek. But before the feasting began, the father of the child
begged the Baal Shem to tarry, "for," said he, "I must needs go first
to the lord of the soil and take him a gift of wine. For he is a cruel
tyrant, and will visit it upon me if I fail to pay him honor on this
joyous occasion."
"Go in peace," said the Baal Shem.
[252]When the man arrived at the seigneur's house, the lackeys informed him
that their master was ill, but had left instructions that he was to be
told when the gift was brought. The man waited, and the seigneur
ordered him to be admitted, and received him very affably, asking him
how business was, and if he had guests at his inn.
"Ay, indeed," answered the innkeeper; "there is staying with me a very
holy man who is from Poland, and he delivered my child from death."
"Indeed!" said the seigneur, with interest, and the man thereupon told
him the whole story.
"Bring me this stranger," commanded the seigneur; "I would speak with
him."
The innkeeper went home very much perturbed.
"Why so frightened an air?" the Baal Shem asked him.
"The seigneur desires thee to go to him. I fear he will do thee a
mischief. I beseech thee, depart at once, and I will tell him thou
hadst already gone."
"I will go to him," said the Baal Shem.
He was ushered into the sick-room. As soon as the seigneur had
dismissed his lackeys he sat up in bed, thus revealing black-and-blue
marks in his flesh, and sneered vengefully—
"Doubtless thou thinkest thyself very cunning to have caught me
unawares."
"Would I had come before thou hadst killed the other four," replied
the Baal Shem.
"Ho! ho!" hissed the magician; "so thou feelest sure thou art a
greater wizard than I. Well, I challenge thee to the test."
"I have no desire to contend with thee," replied the Baal Shem calmly;
"I am no wizard. I have only the power of the Holy Name."
[253]"Bah! My witchcraft against thy Holy Name," sneered the wizard.
"The Name must be vindicated," said the Baal Shem. "I accept thy
challenge. This day a month I will assemble my pupils. Do thou and thy
brethren gather together your attendant spirits. And thou shalt learn
that there is a God."
In a month's time the Baal Shem with all his pupils met the wizard
with his fellows in an open field; and there, under the blue circle of
Heaven, the Baal Shem made two circles around himself and one in
another place around his pupils, enjoining them to keep their eyes
fixed on his face, and, if they noticed any change in it, immediately
to begin crying the Penitential Prayer. The arch-wizard also made a
circle for himself and his fellow-wizards at the other end of the
field, and commenced his attack forthwith. He sent against the Baal
Shem swarms of animals, which swept towards the circle with clamorous
fury. But when they came to the first circle, they vanished. Then
another swarm took their place—and another—and then another—lions,
tigers, leopards, wolves, griffins, unicorns, and unnameable
creatures, all dashing themselves into nothingness against the holy
circle. Thus it went on all the long day, every instant seeing some
new bristling horde vomited and swallowed up again.
Towards twilight the arch-magician launched upon the Baal Shem a herd
of wild boars, spitting flames; and these at last passed beyond the
first circle. Then the pupils saw a change come over the Baal Shem's
face, and they began to wail the Penitential Prayer.
Still the boars sped on till they reached the second circle. Then they
vanished. Three times the wizard launched his boars, the flames of
their jaws lighting up the gathering dusk, but going out like blown
candles at the second [254]circle. Then said the wizard, "I have done my
all." He bowed his head. "Well, I know one glance of thine eyes will
kill me. I bid life farewell."
"Nay, look up," said the Baal Shem; "had I wished to kill thee, thou
wouldst long ago have been but a handful of ashes spread over this
field. But I wish to show thee that there is a God above us. Come,
lift up thine eyes to Heaven."
The wizard raised his eyes towards the celestial circle, in which the
first stars were beginning to twinkle. Then two thorns came and took
out his eyes. Till his death was he blind; but he saw that there was a
God in Heaven.
Of Rabbi Baer I heard on my way nothing but eulogies, and his miracles
were second only to those of his Master. He was a great man in Israel,
a scholar profound as few. Even the enemies of the Chassidim—and they
were many and envenomed—admitted his learning, and complained that
his defection to the sect had greatly strengthened and drawn grave
disciples to this ignorant movement. For, according to them, the Baal
Shem was as unlettered as he gave himself out to be, nor did they
credit the story of his followers that all his apparent ignorance was
due to his celestial oath not to reveal himself till his thirty-sixth
year. As for the followers, they were esteemed simply a set of lewd,
dancing fanatics; and, of a truth, a prayer-service I succeeded in
witnessing in one town considerably chilled my hopes. For the
worshippers shouted, beat their breasts, struck their heads against
the wall, tugged at their ear-curls, leaped aloft with wild yells and
even foamed at the mouth, nor could I see any sublime idea behind
these [255]maniacal manifestations. They had their own special Zaddik
(Saint) here, whom they vaunted as even greater than Baer.
"He talks with angels," one told me.
"How know you that?" I said sceptically.
"He himself admits it."
"But suppose he lies!"
"What! A man who talks with angels be capable of a lie!"
I did not pause to point out to him that this reasoning violated even
Talmudical logic, for I feared if I received the doctrine from such
mouths I should lose all my enthusiasm ere reaching the fountain-head,
and hereafter in my journeyings I avoided hunting out the members of
the sect, even as I strove to dismiss from my mind the malicious
inuendoes and denunciations of their opponents, who said it was not
without reason this sect had arisen in a country where only the eldest
son in a Jewish family was allowed by the State to marry. I would keep
my mind clear and free from prepossessions on either side. And thus at
last, after many weary days and adventures which it boots not to
recall here, such as the proposals of marriage made to me by some of
my hosts—and they householders in Israel, albeit unillumined—I
arrived at the goal of the first stage of my journey, the village of
Mizricz.
I scarcely stayed to refresh myself after my journey, but hastened
immediately to Rabbi Baer's house, which rose regal and lofty on a
wooded eminence overlooking the river as it foamed through the
mountain gullies on its way to the Dnieper. I crossed the broad
pine-bridge without a second glance at the rushing water, but to my
acute disappointment when I reached the great house I was not
admitted. I was told that the Saint could not be seen of mortal eye
till the Sabbath, being, I gathered, in a mystic transport. [256]It was
then Wednesday. Mine was not the only disappointment, for the door was
besieged by a curious rabble of pilgrims of both sexes, some come from
very far, some on foot and in rags, some in well-appointed equipages.
One of the latter—a beautiful, richly dressed woman—by no means took
her exclusion with good grace, bidding her coachman knock again and
again at the door, and endeavoring to bribe the door-keeper with
grocery, wine, and finally gold; but all in vain. I entered into
conversation with members of the crowd, and discovered that some came
for cures, and some for charms, and some for divine interpositions in
their worldly affairs. One man, I found, desired that the price of
wheat might go up, and another that it might fall. Another desired a
husband for his elderly daughter, already nineteen. And an old couple
were in great distress at the robbery of their jewels, and were sure
the Saint would discover the thief and recover the booty. I found but
one, who, like me, came from a consuming desire to hear new doctrine
for the soul. And so I was to have the advantage of them, I learnt,
not without chuckling; for whereas I should receive my wish on the
Sabbath, being invited to attend "the Supper of the Holy Queen," these
worldly matters could not be attended to till the Sunday. I whiled
away the intervening days as patiently as I could, exploring the
beautiful environs beyond the Saint's house, further than which nobody
ever seemed to penetrate; and, indeed, it was but seldom that I had
heard of a Jew's making the blessing over lofty mountains or beautiful
trees. Perhaps because our country was for the most part only a great
swamp. But often had I occasion in these walks to say, "Blessed art
thou, O Lord our God, who hast such things in Thy world." I scarcely
ever saw a human creature, which somehow comforted and uplifted me.
Only once were my meditations interrupted, [257]and that by a shout which
startled me, and just enabled me to get out of the way of an elegant,
glittering carriage drawn by two white horses, in which a
stout-looking man lolled luxuriously, smoking a hookah. My prayerful
mood was broken, and I fell upon worldly thoughts of riches and ease.
On Friday night I ate with an elder of the Chassidim, who heard of my
interest in his order, but whom I could not get to understand that I
was come to examine, not to accept unquestioningly. I plied him with
questions as to the ideas of his sect, but he for his part could make
nothing clear to me except the doctrine of self-annihilation in
prayer, by which the devout worshipper was absorbed into the Godhead;
a doctrine from which flowed naturally the abrogation of stated hours
of prayer, since the mood of absorption could not be had at command.
Sometimes, indeed, silence was the better prayer, and this was the
true explanation of the Talmudical saying: "If speech is worth one
piece of silver, silence is worth two." And this, likewise, was the
meaning of the verse in 2 Kings ch. iii. v. 15: "When the minstrel
played, the spirit of God came upon him." That is to say, when the
minstrel became an instrument and uttered music, it was because the
spirit of God played upon him. So long as a man is self-active, he
cannot receive the Holy Ghost.
The text in Kings seemed to me rather wrenched from its context in the
fashion already nauseous to me in the orthodox schools, but as I had
never in my life had such moments of grace as in my mountain-walks, I
expressed so hearty an acquiescence in the doctrine itself—shocking
to the orthodox mind trained in elaborate codification of the
time-limits of the dawn-prayer or the westering-service—that mine
host was more persuaded than ever I meant to become a Chassid.
[258]"There is no rite," said he reassuringly. "That you desire Perfection
suffices to ensure your reception into our order. At the Supper of the
Holy Queen you will not be asked as to your past life, or your sins,
because your heart is to the Saint as an open scroll, as you will
discover when you have the bliss to see him face to face, for though
he will address all the pilgrims in a body, yet you will find
particular references designed only for you."
"But he has never heard of me before!"
"These things would be hard for one who preaches to his own glory. But
he who lets the spirit play upon him is wiser than all the preachers."
With beating heart I entered the Saint's house on the long-expected
Sabbath. I was ushered, with many other men, into a dining-room,
richly carpeted and tapestried, with a large oak table, laid for about
a score. A liveried attendant, treading with hushed footsteps,
imparted to us his own awe, and, scarcely daring to whisper, we
awaited the great man. At last he appeared, tall and majestic, in a
flowing caftan of white satin, cut so as to reveal his bare breast.
His shoes were white, and even the snuff-box he toyed with was equally
of the color of grace. As I caught my first glimpse of his face, I
felt it was strangely familiar, but where or when I had seen it I
could not recall, and the thought of this haunted the back of my mind
throughout.
"Peace be to you," he said to each in turn. We breathed back
respectful response, and took our seats at the table. The same solemn
silence reigned during the meal, which was wound up by Kuggol
(Sabbath-pudding). By this time the room was full of new-comers, who
had gradually dropped in for the levée, and who swarmed about the
table, anxious for the merest crumb of the pudding. And great was the
bliss on the faces of those who succeeded in snatching a morsel, as
though it secured them Paradise.
[259]When this unseemly scramble was over, the Saint—who, leaning his brow
on his hands, had appeared not to notice these proceedings—struck up
a solemn hymn-tune. Then he put his hands over his eyes, as if lost in
an ecstasy; after which he suddenly began to call out our names,
coupled with the places we came from, astonishing us all in turn. Each
guest, when thus cried, responded with a verse from the Scriptures.
When it came to my turn, I was so taken aback by the Saint's knowledge
of me that I could not think of a verse. But at last, blushing and
confused, I fell back upon my name-verse, which began with my initial
to help me to remember my name (for so I had been taught) when the
angel should demand it of me in my tomb. To my astonishment the Saint
then began to deliver a discourse upon all these texts, so ingeniously
dovetailed that one would have sworn no better texts could have been
selected. "Verily have they spoken the truth of this man's learning,"
I thought, with a glow. Nor did this marvellous oration fail to evince
that surprising knowledge of my past—even down to my dead wife—which
mine host had predicted. I left this wonder-worker's house exalted and
edified, though all I remember now of the discourse was the novel
interpretation of the passage in the Mishna: "Let the honor of thy
neighbor be as dear to thee as thine own."
"Thine own," said Baer, "means the honor thou doest to thyself; to
take pleasure in the which were ridiculous. As little pleasure should
the wise man take in his neighbor's honor—that is, in the honor which
his neighbor doeth him." This seemed rather inconsistent with his own
pomp, and I only appreciated the sentiment months later.
After this discourse was quite over, a member of the sect arrived.
"Why so late?" he was asked.
"My wife was confined," he said shamefacedly. Facetiously uproarious
congratulations greeted him.
[260]"Boy or girl?" cried many voices.
"Girl," he said more shamefacedly.
"A girl!" cried the Saint, in indignant accents. "You ought to be
whipped."
Immediately the company with great glee set upon the unfortunate man,
tumbled him over, and gave him an hilarious but hearty drubbing. I
looked at the Saint in astonishment. His muscles were relaxed in a
grin, and I had another flash of elusive recollection of his face. But
ere I could fix it, he stopped the horse-play.
"Come, brethren," he said, "let us serve the Lord with gladness," and
he trolled forth a jocund hymn.
On the next day, with mingled feelings, I again sought the Zaddik's
doorway, through which was pouring the stream of those who had waited
so long; but access to the holy man was still not easy. In the spacious
antechamber sat the Saint's scribe, at a table round which the crowd
clustered, each explaining his or her want, which the scribe scribbled
upon a scrap of paper for them to take in to the Saint. I listened to
the instructions of the clamorous applicants. "I, Rachel, daughter of
Hannah, wish to have children," ran the request of the beautiful rich
woman whose coachman had knocked so persistently; and her gratuity to
the scribe seemed to be of gold. I myself paid only a few kreutzer, and
simply desired—and was alone in desiring—"Perfection." There was
another money-receiving man at the Rabbi's door; but I followed in the
golden wake of the rich lady, and was just in time to witness the
parting gratitude of the vociferous old couple to whom the Rabbi had
restored their jewels. The Saint, with no signs of satisfaction at his
miraculous success, gravely dismissed the garrulous couple, and took
the folded paper which the beautiful woman handed him, and which he did
not even open, placing it to his forehead and turning his eyes
heavenwards.
[261]"You wish to have a child," he said.
The woman started. "O thou man of God!" she cried, falling at his
feet.
The Saint placed his hand reassuringly upon her hair. And at this
moment something in his expression at length unsealed my eyes, and I
recognized, with a pang of pain, the man who had driven past me in that
elegant equipage, lolling luxuriously and smoking his hookah. I was so
perturbed that I fled unceremoniously from the audience-chamber.
Perfection, indeed! Here was a teacher of humility who sat throned amid
tapestries, a preacher of righteousness who, when he feigned to be
absorbed in God, was wallowing in his carriage! Yea, these Rabbis of
the Chassidim were whitewashed sepulchres; and, as the orthodox
communities did not fail of such, it seemed a waste of energy to go out
of the fold in search of more. All that I had heard against the sect on
my route swept back into my mind, and I divided its members into rogues
and dupes. And in this bitter mood a dozen little threads flew together
and knitted themselves into a web of wickedness. I told myself that the
hamlet must be full of Baer's spies, and that my host himself had
cunningly extracted from me the facts of my history; and as for the
restored jewels, I felt sure his own men had stolen them. I slung my
knapsack across my shoulder and started for home.
But I had not made many hundred yards when my mood softened. I
remembered the wonderful sermon, with its manipulation of texts Rabbi
Baer could not have foreseen, and bethought myself that he was indeed
a Prince in Israel, and that King David and Solomon the Wise had not
failed to live in due magnificence. "And after all," mused I, "'tis
innocent enough to drive by the river-side. Who knows but even thus is
his absorption in God accomplished? [262]Do not they who smoke this
tobacco aver that it soothes and purifies the soul?"
Besides, who but a fool, I reflected further, would slink back to his
starting-point, his goal unvisited? I had seen the glory of the
disciple, let me gaze upon the glory of the Master, and upon the
purple splendors of his court.
And so I struck out again for Miedziboz, though by a side-path, so as
to avoid the village of Baer.
It was April ere I began to draw near my destination. The roads were
still muddy and marshy; but in that happy interval between the winter
gray and the summer haze the breath of spring made the world
beautiful. The Stri river sparkled, even the ruined castles looked
gay, while the pleasure-grounds of the lords of the soil filled the
air with sweet scents. One day, as I was approaching a village up a
somewhat steep road, a little gray-haired man driving a wagon holding
some sacks of flour passed me, whistling cheerfully. We gave each
other the "Peace" salutation, knowing ourselves brother Jews, if only
by our furred caps and ear-curls. Presently, in pity of his beast, I
saw him jump down and put his shoulder to the wheel; but he had not
made fifty paces when his horse slipped and fell. I hastened up to
help him extricate the animal; and before we had succeeded in setting
the horse on his four feet again, the driver's cheeriness under
difficulties had made me feel quite friendly towards him.
"Satan is evidently bent upon disturbing my Passover," Said he, "for
this is the second time that I have tried to get my Passover flour
home. My good wife told me that we had nothing to eat for the
festival, so I felt I must give [263]myself a counsel. Out I went with my
slaughtering-knife into the villages on the north—no, don't be
alarmed, not to kill the inhabitants, but to slaughter their Passover
poultry."
"You are a Shochet (licensed killer)," said I.
"Yes," said he; "among other things. It would be an intolerable
profession," he added reflectively, "were it not for the thought that
since the poor birds have to be killed, they are better off in my
hands. However, as I was saying, I killed enough poultry to buy
Passover flour; but before I got it home the devil sent such a deluge
that it was all spoilt. I took my knife again and went out into the
southern villages, and now, here am I in another quandary. I only hope
I sha'nt have to kill my horse too."
"No, I don't think he is damaged," said I, as the event proved.
When I had helped this good-natured little man and his horse to the
top of the hill, he invited me to jump into the cart if my way lay in
his direction.
"I am in search of the Baal Shem," I explained.
"Indeed," said he; "he is easily to be found."
"What, do you know the Baal Shem?" I cried excitedly.
He seemed amused at my agitation. His black eyes twinkled. "Why,
everybody in these parts knows the Baal Shem," said he.
"How shall I find him, then?" I asked.
He shrugged his shoulders. "You have but to step up into my cart."
"May your strength increase!" I cried gratefully; "you are going in
his direction?"
He nodded his head.
I climbed up the wheel and plumped myself down between two
flour-sacks. "Is it far?" I asked.
[264]He smiled. "Nay, if it was far I should scarcely have asked you up."
Then we both fell silent. For my part, despite the jolting of the
vehicle, the lift was grateful to my spent limbs, and the blue sky and
the rustling leaves and the near prospect of at last seeing the Baal
Shem contributed to lull me into a pleasant languor. But my torpor was
not so deep as that into which my new friend appeared to fall, for
though as we approached a village another vehicle dashed towards us,
my shouts and the other driver's cries only roused him in time to
escape losing a wheel.
"You must have been thinking of a knotty point of Torah (Holy Law),"
said I.
"Knotty point," said he, shuddering; "it is Satan who ties those
knots."
"Oho," said I, "though a Shochet, you do not seem fond of rabbinical
learning."
"Where there is much study," he replied tersely, "there is little
piety."
At this moment, appositely enough, we passed by the village
Beth-Hamidrash, whence loud sounds of "pilpulistic" (wire-drawn)
argument issued. The driver clapped his palms over his ears.
"It is such disputants," he cried with a grimace, "who delay the
redemption of Israel from exile."
"How so?" said I.
"Satan induces these Rabbis," said he, "to study only those portions
of our holy literature on which they can whet their ingenuity. But
from all writings which would promote piety and fear of God he keeps
them away."
I was delighted and astonished to hear the Shochet thus deliver
himself, but before I could express my acquiescence, his attention was
diverted by a pretty maiden who came along driving a cow.
[265]"What a glorious creature!" said he, while his eyes shone.
"Which?" said I laughingly. "The cow?"
"Both," he retorted, looking back lingeringly.
"I understand now what you mean by pious literature," I said
mischievously: "the Song of Solomon."
He turned on me with strange earnestness, as if not perceiving my
irony. "Ay, indeed," he cried; "but when the Rabbis do read it, they
turn it into a bloodless allegory, Jewish demons as they are! What is
the beauty of yonder maiden but an emanation from the divine? The more
beautiful the body, the more shiningly it leads us to the thought of
God."
I was much impressed with this odd fellow, whom I perceived to be an
original.
"But that's very dangerous doctrine," said I; "by parity of reasoning
you would make the lust of the flesh divine."
"Everything is divine," said he.
"Then feasting would be as good for the soul as fasting."
"Better," said the driver curtly.
I was disconcerted to find such Epicurean doctrines in a district
where, but for my experience of Baer, I should have expected to see
the ascetic influence of the Baal Shem predominant. "Then you're not a
follower of the Baal Shem?" said I tentatively.
"No, indeed," said he, laughing.
He had got me into such sympathy with him—for there was a curious
attraction about the man—that I felt somehow that, even if the Baal
Shem were an ascetic, I should still gain nothing from him, and that
my long journey would have been made in vain, the green pastures and
the living waters being still as far off as ever from my droughty
soul.
We had now passed out of the village and into a thick [266]pine-wood with
a path scarcely broad enough for the cart. Of a sudden the silence
into which we again fell was broken by piercing screams for "Help"
coming from a copse on the right. Instantly the driver checked the
horse, jumped to the ground, and drew a long knife from his girdle.
"'Tis useful to be a Shochet." he said grimly, as he darted among
the bushes.
I followed in his footsteps and a strange sight burst upon us. A
beautiful woman was struggling with two saturnine-visaged men dressed
as Rabbis in silken hose and mantles. One held her arms pinned to her
sides, while the other was about to plunge a dagger into her heart.
"Hold!" cried the Shochet.
The would-be assassin fell back, a startled look on his narrow
fanatical face.
"Let the woman go!" said the driver sternly.
In evident consternation the other obeyed. The woman fell forward,
half-fainting, and the driver caught her.
"Be not afraid," he said. "And you, murderers, down at my feet and
thank me that I have saved you your portion in the World-To-Come."
"Nay, you have lost it to us," said the one with the dagger. "For it
was the vengeance of Heaven we were about to execute. Know that this
is our sister, whom we have discovered to be a wanton creature, that
must bring shame upon our learned house and into our God-fearing town.
Whereupon we and her husband held a secret Beth-Din, and resolved,
according to the spirit of our ancient Law, that this plague-spot must
be cleansed out from Israel for the glory of the Name."
"The glory of the Name!" repeated the driver, and his eyes flamed.
"What know you of the glory of the Name?"
Both brothers winced before the passion of his words. [267]They looked at
each other strangely and uneasily, but answered nothing.
"How dare you call any Jewess a plague-spot?" went on the driver. "Is
any sin great enough to separate us irredeemably from God, who is in
all things? Pray for your sister if you will, but do not dare to sit
in judgment upon a fellow-creature!"
The woman burst into loud sobs and fell at his feet.
"They are right! they are right!" she cried. "I am a wicked creature.
It were better to let me perish."
The driver raised her tenderly. "Nay, in that instant you repented,"
he said, "and one instant's repentance wins back God. Henceforward you
shall live without sin."
"What! you would restore her to Brody?" cried the elder brother—"to
bring the wrath of Heaven upon so godly a town. Be you who you may,
saint or devil, that is beyond your power. Her husband assuredly will
not take her back. With her family she cannot live."
"Then she shall live with mine," said the Shochet. "My daughter
dwells in Brody. I will take her to her. Go your ways."
They stood disconcerted. Presently the younger said: "How know we
are not leaving her to greater shame?"
The old man's face grew terrible.
"Go your ways," he repeated.
They slunk off, and I watched them get into a two-horsed carriage,
which I now perceived on the other side of the copse. I ran forward to
give an arm to the woman, who was again half-fainting.
"Said I not," said the old man musingly, "that even the worst sinners
are better than these Rabbis? So blind are they in the arrogance of
their self-conceit, so darkened by their pride, that their very
devotion to the Law becomes a vehicle for their sin."
[268]We helped the woman gently into the cart. I climbed in, but the old
man began to walk with the horse, holding its bridle, and reversing
its direction.
"Aren't you jumping up?" I asked.
"We are going up now, instead of down," he said, smiling. "Brody sits
high, in the seat of the scornful."
A pang of shame traversed my breast. What! I was riding and this fine
old fellow was walking! But ere I could offer to get down, a new
thought increased my confusion. I, who was bent on finding the Baal
Shem, was now off on a side-adventure to Brody. And yet I was loath to
part so soon with my new friend. And besides, I told myself, Brody was
well worth a visit. The reputation of its Talmudical schools was
spread over the kingdom, and although I shared the old man's
repugnance to them my curiosity was alert. And even on the Baal Shem's
account I ought to go there. For I remembered now that his early life
had had many associations with the town, and that it was his wife's
birthplace. So I said, "How far is Brody?"
"Ten miles," he said.
"Ten miles!" I repeated in horror.
"Ten miles," he said musingly, "and ten years since I set foot in
Brody."
I jumped down. "'Tis I must walk, not you," I said.
"Nay," said he good-humoredly. "I perceive neither of us can walk.
Those sacks must play Jonah. Out with them."
"No," I said.
"Yes," he insisted, laughing. "Did I not say Satan was determined to
spoil my Passover? The third time I shall have better luck perhaps."
I protested against thus causing him so much loss, and offered to go
and find the Baal Shem alone, but he rolled [269]out the flour-bags,
laughing, leaving one for the woman to lie against.
"But your wife will be expecting them," I remarked, as the cart
proceeded with both of us in our seats.
"She will be expecting me, too," he said, smiling ruefully. "However,
she has faith in God. Never yet have we lacked food. Surely He who
feedeth the ravens—" He broke off with a sudden thought, leapt down,
and ran back.
"What is it?" I said.
I saw him draw out his knife again and slit open the sacks. "The birds
shall keep Passover," he called out merrily.
The woman was still sobbing as he climbed to his place, but he
comforted her with his genial and heterodox philosophy.
"'Tis a device of Satan," he said, "to drive us to despondency, so as
to choke out the God-spark in us. Your sin is great, but your Father
in Heaven awaits you, and will rejoice as a King rejoices over a
princess redeemed from captivity. Every soul is a whole Bible in
itself. Yours contains Sarah and Ruth as well as Jezebel and Michal.
Hitherto you have developed the Jezebel in you; strive now to develop
the Sarah." With such bold consolations he soothed her, till the
monotonous movement of the cart sent her into a blessed sleep. Then he
took out a pipe and, begging permission of me, lighted it. As the
smoke curled up his face became ecstatic.
"I think," he observed musingly, "that God is more pleased with this
incense of mine than with all the prayers of all the Rabbis."
This shocked even me, fascinated though I was. Never had I met such a
man in all Israel. I shook my head in half-serious reproof. "You are a
sinner," I said.
[270]"Nay, is not smoking pleasurable? To enjoy aright aught in God's
creation is to praise God. Even so, is not to pray the greatest of all
pleasures?"
"To pray?" I repeated wonderingly. "Nay, methinks it is a heavy burden
to get through our volumes of prayer."
"A burden!" cried the old man. "A burden to enter into relation with
God, to be reabsorbed into the divine unity. Nay, 'tis a bliss as of
bridegroom with bride. Whoso does not feel this joy of union—this
divine kiss—has not prayed."
"Then have I never prayed," I said.
"Then 'tis you that are the sinner," he retorted, laughing.
His words struck me into a meditative silence. It was towards twilight
when our oddly-encountered trio approached the great Talmudical
centre. To my surprise a vast crowd seemed to be waiting at the gates.
"It is for me," said the woman hysterically, for she had now awakened.
"My brothers have told the elders. They will kill you. O save
yourself."
"Peace, peace," said the old man, puffing his pipe.
As we came near we heard the people shouting, and nearer still made
out the sounds. Was it? Yes, I could not be mistaken. "The Baal Shem!
The Baal Shem!"
My heart beat violently. What a stroke of luck was this! "The Baal
Shem is there!" I cried exultantly.
The woman grew worse. "The Baal Shem!" she shrieked. "He is a holy
man. He will slay us with a glance."
"Peace, my beautiful creature," said the driver. "You are more likely
to slay him with a glance."
This time his levity grated on me. I peered eagerly towards the gates,
striving to make out the figure of the mighty Saint!
[271]The dense mob swayed tumultuously. Some of the people ran towards our
cart. Our horse had to come to a stand-still. In a trice a dozen hands
had unharnessed him, there was an instant of terrible confusion in
which I felt that violence was indeed meditated, then I found our cart
being drawn forward as in triumph by contesting hands, while in my
ears thundered from a thousand throats, "The Baal Shem! The Baal
Shem!" Suddenly I looked with an incredible suspicion at the old man,
smoking imperturbably at my side.
"'Tis indeed a change for Brody," he said, with a laugh that was half
a sob.
A faintness blotted out the whole strange scene—the town-gates, the
eager faces, the gesticulating figures, the houses, the frightened
woman at my side.
It was the greatest surprise of my life.
A chaos of images clashed in my mind. I saw the mystic figure of the
mighty Master of the Name standing in the cemetery judging betwixt the
souls of the dead; I saw him in the upper world amid the angels; I saw
him serene in the centre of his magic circle, annihilating with his
glance the flaming hordes of demon boars; and even as the creatures
shattered themselves into nothingness against the circle, so must
these sublime visions vanish before this genial old man. And yet my
disillusion was not all empty. There were still the cheers to exalt
me, there was still my strange companion, to whose ideas I had already
vibrated, and whose face was now transfigured to my imagination,
gaining much of what the visionary figure had lost. And, amid all the
tumult of the moment, there [272]sang in my breast the divine assurance
that here at last were the living waters, here the green pastures.
"Master," I cried frantically, as I seized his hand and kissed it.
"My son," he said tenderly. "Those murderers have evidently informed
the townspeople of my coming."
"It is well," said I, "I rejoice to witness your triumph over a town
so rabbi-ridden."
"Nay, speak not of my triumph," reproved the Master. "Thank God for
the change in them, if change there be. It should be indifferent to
man whether he be praised or blamed, loved or hated, reputed to be the
wisest of mankind or the greatest of fools."
"They wish you to address them, Master," I cried, as the cheers
continued. He smiled.
"Doubtless—a sermon full of hair-splitting exegesis and devil's webs.
I pray you descend and see that my horse be not stolen."
I sprang down with alacrity to obey this his first wish, and,
scrambling on the animal, had again a view of the sea of faces, all
turned towards the Baal Shem. From the excited talk of the crowd, I
gathered that the Baal Shem had just performed one of his greatest
miracles. Two brothers had been journeying with their sister in the
woods, and had been attacked by robbers. They had been on the point of
death when the Baal Shem miraculously appeared, and by merely
mentioning the Name, had caused the robbers to sink into the earth
like Korah. The sister being too terrified to return with her
brothers, the Baal Shem undertook to bring her to Brody himself in his
own celestial chariot, which, to those not initiated into the higher
mysteries, appeared like an ordinary cart.
Meantime the Master had refilled his pipe. "Is that my old friend
David," he cried, addressing one with a cobbler's apron; "and how is
business?"
[273]The cobbler, abashed by this unexpected honor, flushed and stammered:
"God is good."
"A sorry answer, David; God would be as good if he sent you a-begging.
Ha, ha!" he went on cheerily, "I see Joseph the innkeeper has waxed
more like a barrel than ever. Peace be to you, Joseph! Have you learnt
to read yet? No! Then you are still the wisest man in the town."
By this time some of the Rabbis and magnates in the forefront of the
crowd had begun to look sullen at being ignored, but even more
pointedly than he ignored these pillars of the commonweal, did the
Baal Shem ignore his public reception, continuing to exchange
greetings with humble old acquaintances, and finally begging the men
between the shafts either to give place again to his horse or to draw
him to his daughter's house, whither he had undertaken to convey the
woman they saw (who all this time had sat as one in a dream). But on
the cries for a sermon persisting, he said:
"Friends, I cannot preach to you, more than my horse yonder.
Everything preaches. Call nothing common or profane; by God's presence
all things are holy. See there are the first stars. Is it not a
glorious world? Enjoy it; only fools and Rabbis speak of the world as
vanity or emptiness. But just as a lover sees even in the jewels of
his beloved only her own beauty, so in stars and waters must we see
only God." He fell a-puffing again at his pipe, but the expectant
crowd would not yet divide for his passage. "Ye fools," he said
roughly, "you would make me as you have made the Law and the world, a
place for stopping at, when all things are but on the way to God.
There was once a King," he went on, "who built himself a glorious
palace. The King was throned in the centre of what seemed a maze of
winding corridors. In the entrance—halls was [274]heaped much gold and
silver, and here the folk were content to stay, taking their fill of
pleasure. At last the vizier had compassion upon them and called out
to them: 'All these treasures and all these walls and corridors do not
in truth exist at all. They are magical illusions. Push forward
bravely and you shall find the King.'"
But as the crowd still raged about disappointed, pleading for a
miracle, the Baal Shem whistled, and his horse flew towards him so
suddenly that I nearly fell off, and the crowd had to separate in
haste. A paralytic cripple dropped his crutch in a flurry and fell
a-running, quite cured.
"A miracle! a miracle!" cried a hundred voices. "God be praised!"
The shout was taken up all down the street, and eager spectators
surrounded the joyous cripple, interrogating him and feeling his
limbs.
"You see, you see!" I heard them say to each other. "There is
witchcraft even in his horse!"
As the animal came towards the shafts the human drawers scattered
hastily. I hitched the wagon to and we drove through the throng that
begged the Baal Shem's blessing. But he only waved them off smilingly.
"Bless one another by your deeds," he cried from time to time. "Then
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob will bless you." And so we came to the
Ring-Place, and through it, into the structure we sought—a tall
two-storied stone building.
When we arrived at his daughter's house we found that she rented only
an apartment, so that none of us but the woman could be lodged, though
we were entertained with food and wine. After supper, when the iron
shutters were closed, the Baal Shem's daughter—a beautiful black-eyed
girl—danced with such fire and fervor that her crimson head-cloth
nearly dropped off, and I, being now in a [275]cheerful mood, fell to
envying her husband, who for his part conversed blithely with the
rescued woman. In the middle of the gaiety the Baal Sham retired to a
corner, observing he wished to say his Mincha prayer, and bidding us
continue our merriment and not regard him.
"Mincha!" I ejaculated unthinkingly, "why, it is too late."
"Would you give a child regulations when he may speak to his Father?"
rebuked the Baal Shem.
So I went on talking with his daughter, but of a sudden a smile curved
my lips at the thought of how the foolish makers of legends had
feigned his praying to be so fraught with occult operations that he
who looked at him might die. I turned and stole a glance at him.
Then to my amaze, as I caught sight of his face, I realized for the
first time that he was, indeed, as men called him, the Master of
Divine Secrets. There were on his brow great spots of perspiration,
and, as if from agony, tears trickled down his cheeks, but his eyes
were upturned and glazed, and his face was as that of a dead man
without soul, only it seemed to me that the nimbus of which men spoke
was verily round his head. His form, too, which was grown rigid,
appeared strangely taller. One hand grasped the corner of the dresser.
I turned away my eyes quickly, fearing lest they should be smitten
with blindness. I know not how many minutes passed before I heard a
great sigh, and, turning, saw the Baal Shem's figure stirring and
quivering, and in another moment he was facing me with a beaming
smile. "Well, my son, do you feel inclined for bed?"
His question recalled to me how much I had gone through that day, and
though I was in no hurry to leave this pleasant circle, yet I replied
his wish was law to me. Whereupon he said, to my content, that he
would tarry yet [276]another quarter of an hour. When we set out for the
inn of Joseph where our horse and cart had preceded us, it was ten
o'clock, but there was still a crowd outside the house, many of the
great iron doors adown the street were still open, and men and women
pressed forward to kiss the hem of the Master's garment.
On our walk I begged him to tell me what he had seen during his
prayers.
"I made a soul-ascension," said he simply, "and saw more wonderful
things than I have seen since I came to divine knowledge. Praise to
the Unity!"
"Can I see such things?" said I breathlessly, as all I had learnt of
Cabalah and all my futile attempts to work miracles came rushing back
to me.
"No—not you."
I felt chilled, but he went on: "Not you—the you must be
obliterated. You must be reabsorbed in the Unity."
"But how?"
"Concentrate your thought on God. Forget yourself."
"I will try, dear Master," said I. "But tell me what you saw."
"What I saw and learnt up there it is impossible to communicate by
word of mouth."
But I entreated him sore, and ere we had parted for the night he
delivered himself as follows, speaking of these divine things in
Hebrew:—
"I may only relate what I witnessed when I descended to the lower
Paradise. I saw there ever so many souls both of living and of dead
people, known and unknown to me, without measure and number, coming
and going from one world to the other, by means of the Pillar which is
known to those who know Grace. Great was the joy which the bodily
breath can neither narrate nor the bodily ear hear. Many very wicked
people came back in repentance, [277]and all their sins were forgiven
them, because this was a season of great Grace in Heaven. I wondered
indeed that so many were received. They all begged and entreated me to
come up with them to the higher regions, and on account of the great
rejoicing I saw amongst them I consented. Then I asked for my heavenly
teacher to go with me because the danger of ascending such upper
worlds is great, where I have never been since I exist. I thus
ascended from grade to grade till I came into the Temple of the
Messiah, in which the Messiah teaches Torah with all the Tanaim and
the Zaddikim and the Seven Shepherds; and there I saw a great
rejoicing. I did not know what this rejoicing meant. I thought at
first that this rejoicing might perhaps be on account of my speedy
death. But they made known to me that I shall not die yet, because
there is great rejoicing in Heaven when I make celestial unions below
by their holy teaching. But what the rejoicing meant, I still did not
know. I asked, 'When will the Master come?' I was answered: 'When thy
teaching shall be known and revealed to the world, and thy springs
shall spread abroad that which I have taught thee, and that which thou
hast received here, and when all men will be able to make unions and
ascensions like thee. Then all the husks of worldly evil will
disappear, and it will be a time of Grace and Salvation.' I wondered
very much, and I felt great sorrow because the time was to be so long
delayed. Because when can this be? But in this my last ascent three
words that be mighty charms and three heavenly names I learnt. They
are easy to learn and to explain. This cooled my mind. I believe that
through them people of my genius will reach soon my degree, but I have
no permission to reveal them. I have been praying at least for
permission to teach them to you, but I must keep to my oath. But this
I make known to you, and God will [278]help you. Let your ways be directed
towards God, let them not turn away from Him. When you pray and study,
in every word and utterance of your lips direct your mind to
unification, because in every letter there are worlds and souls and
Deity. The letters unify and become a word, and afterwards unify in
the Deity, wherefore try to have your soul absorbed in them, so that
all universes become unified, which causes an infinite joy and
exaltation. If you understand the joy of bride and bridegroom a little
and in a material way, how much more ecstatic is the unification of
this celestial sort! O the wondrous day when Evil shall at last be
worked out of the universe, and God be at one with His creation. May
He be your help!"
I sat a while in dazed wonder.
"Dear Master," said I at last, "you to whom are unveiled the secrets
of all the universes, cannot you read my future?"
"Yes," he said. I looked at him breathlessly. "You will always be
faithful to me," he said slowly.
My eyes filled with tears. I kissed his hand.
"And you will marry my daughter."
My heart beat: "Which?"
"She whom you have just seen."
"But she is married," I said, as the blood swirled deliciously in my
veins.
"Her husband will give her a bill of divorcement."
"And what will become of him?"
"He will marry the woman we have saved. And she, too, will win many
souls."
"But how know you?" I whispered, half incredulous.
"So it is borne in upon me," said the Baal Shem, smiling.
And so indeed after many days it came to pass. And so ended this first
strange day with the beloved Master, whose light shines through the
worlds.
It is now many years since I first saw the Baal Shem, and as many
since I laid him in his grave, yet every word he spake to me is
treasured up in my heart as gold, yea, as fine gold. But the hand of
age is heavy upon me, and lest I may not live to complete even this
briefer story, I shall set down here but the rough impression of his
doctrine left in my mind, hoping to devote a separate volume to these
conversations with my divine Master. And this is the more necessary,
as I said, since every day the delusions and impostures of those who
use his name multiply and grow ranker. Even in his own day, the
Master's doctrine was already, as you will have seen, sufficiently
distorted by souls smaller than his own, and by the refraction of
distance—for how should a true image of him pass from town to town,
by forest and mountain, throughout all that vast empire? The Master's
life alone made clear to me what I had failed to gather from his
followers. Just as their delirious dancings and shrieks and spasms
were abortive attempts to produce his prayer-ecstasy, so in all things
did they but caricature him. But now that he is dead, and these
extravagances are no longer to be checked by his living example, so
monstrous are the deeds wrought and the things taught in his name,
that though the Chassidim he founded are become—despite every
persecution by the orthodox Jews, despite the scourging of their
bodies and the setting of them in the stocks, despite the
excommunication of our order and the closing of our synagogues, and
the burning of our books—a mighty sect throughout the length and the
breadth of Central Europe, yet have I little pleasure in them, little
joy in the spread of the teaching to which I devoted my life. And
sometimes—now that my [280]Master's face no longer shines consolingly
upon me, save in dream and memory—I dare to wonder if the world is
better for his having lived. And indeed at times I find myself
sympathizing with our chief persecutor, the saintly and learned Wilna
Gaon.
And first, since there are now, alas! followers of his who in their
perverted straining after simplicity of existence wander about naked
in the streets, and even attend to the wants of nature in public, let
me testify that though the Master considered the body and all its
functions holy, yet did he give no countenance to such exaggerations;
and though in his love for the sun and the water and bodily purity—to
him a celestial symbol—he often bathed in retired streams, yet was he
ever clad becomingly in public; and though he regarded not money, yet
did he, when necessary, strive to earn it by work, not lolling about
smoking and vaunting his Perfection, pretending to be meditating upon
God, while others span and toiled for him.
For in his work too, my Master lived in the hourly presence of God;
and of the patriarchs and the prophets, the great men of Israel, the
Tanaim and the Amoraim, and all who had sought to bring God's Kingdom
upon earth, that God and Creation, Heaven and Earth, might be at one,
and the Messiah might come and the divine peace fall upon all the
world. And when he prayed and wept for the sins of his people, his
spirit ascended to the celestial spheres and held converse with the
holy ones, but this did not puff him up with vanity as it doth those
who profess to-day to make soul-ascensions, an experience of which I
for my own part, alas! have never yet been deemed worthy. For when he
returned to earth the Baal Shem conducted himself always like a simple
man who had never left his native hamlet, whereas these heavenly
travellers feign to despise this lower world, nay, some in their
conceit and arrogance lose their [281]wits and give out that they have
already been translated and are no longer mortal. My Master did,
indeed, hope to be translated in his lifetime like Elijah, for he once
said to me, weeping—'twas after we returned from his wife's
funeral—"Now that my wife is dead I shall die too. Such a saint might
have carried me with her to Heaven. She followed me unquestioningly
into the woods, lived without society, summer and winter, endured pain
and labor for me, and but for her faith in me I should have achieved
naught." No man reverenced womankind more than the Master; in this, as
in so much, his life became a model to mine, and his dear daughter
profited by the lesson her father had taught me. We err grievously in
disesteeming our women: they should be our comrades not our slaves,
and our soul-ascensions—to speak figuratively—should be made in
their loving companionship.
My Master believed that the breath of God vivified the universe,
renewing daily the work of creation, and that hence the world of
everyday was as inspired as the Torah, the one throwing light on the
other. The written Law must be interpreted in every age in accordance
with the ruling attribute of God—for God governs in every age by a
different attribute, sometimes by His Love, sometimes by His Power,
sometimes by His Beauty. "It is not the number of ordinances that we
obey that brings us into union with God," said the Master; "one
commandment fulfilled in and through love of Him is as effective as
all." But this did not mean that the other commandments were to be
disregarded, as some have deduced; nor that one commandment should be
made the centre of life, as has been done by others. For, though the
Zaddik, who gave his life to helping his neighbor's or his enemy's ass
lying under its burden, as enjoined in Exodus xxiii. 5, was not
unworthy of admiration—indeed he was my own disciple, and desired
[282]thus to commemorate the circumstances of my first meeting with the
Baal Shem,—yet he who made it his speciality never to tell the
smallest falsehood was led into greater sin. For when his fame was so
bruited that it reached even the Government officers, they, suspecting
the Jews of the town of smuggling, said they would withdraw the charge
if the Saint would declare his brethren innocent. Whereupon he prayed
to God to save him from his dilemma by sending him death, and lo! when
the men came to fetch him to the law-court, they found him dead. But a
true follower of the Master should have been willing to testify for
truth's sake even against his brethren, and in my humble judgment his
death was not a deliverance, but a punishment from on high.
Had, moreover, the Saint practised the Humility—which my Master put as
the first of the three cardinal virtues—he would not have deemed it so
fatal to tell a lie once; for who can doubt there was in him more
spiritual pride in his own record than pure love of truth? And had he
practised the second of the three cardinal virtues—Cheerfulness—he
would have known that God can redeem a man even from the sin of lying.
And had he practised the third—Enkindlement—he would never have
narrowed himself to one commandment, and that a negative one—not to
lie. For where there is a living flame in the heart, it spreads to all
the members.
"Service is its own reward, its own joy," said the Baal Shem. "No man
should bend his mind on not doing sin: his day should be too full of
joyous service." The Messianic Age would be, my Master taught, when
every man did what was right and just of mere natural impulse, not
even remembering that he was doing right, still less being uplifted on
that account, for no man is proud because he walks or sleeps. Then
would Righteousness be incarnate [283]in the world, and the devil finally
defeated, and every man would be able to make celestial unions and
soul-ascensions.
Many sufferings did the Baal Shem endure in the years that I was with
him. Penury and persecution were often his portion, and how his wife's
death wounded him I have already intimated. But it was the revival of
the Sabbatian heresy by Jacob Frank that caused him the severest
perturbation. This Frank, who was by turns a Turk, a Jew, and a
Catholic, played the rôle of successor of Zevi, as Messiah, ordered
his followers to address him as the Holy Lord, and, later, paraded his
beautiful daughter, Eve, as the female Godhead. Much of what my
grandfather had told me of the first Pretender was repeated, save that
as the first had made alliance with the Mohammedans, so the second
coquetted with the Christians. Hence those public disputations,
fostered by the Christians, in which the Frankists did battle with the
Talmudists, and being accredited the victors, exulted in seeing the
sacred books of the Rabbis confiscated. When a thousand copies of the
Talmud were thrown into a great pit at Kammieniec, and burned by the
hangman, the Baal Shem shed tears, and joined in the fast-day for the
burning of the Torah. For despite his detestation of the devil's
knots, he held that the Talmud represented the oral law which
expressed the continuous inspiration of the leaders of Israel, and
that to rely on the Bible alone was to worship the mummy of religion.
Nor did he grieve less over the verbal tournament of the Talmudists
and Frankists in the Cathedral of Lemberg, when the Polish nobility
and burghers bought entrance tickets at high prices. "The devil, not
God, is served by religious disputations," said the Master. And when
at last the Frankists were baptized in their thousands, and their
Messiah in pompous Turkish robes paraded the town in a chariot drawn
by six horses, and surrounded by Turkish [284]guards, the Baal Shem was
more pleased than grieved at this ending. When these Jewish Catholics,
however, came to grief, and, on the incarceration of Frank by the
Polish Inquisition, were reduced to asking alms at church-doors, the
Baal Shem was alone in refusing to taunt them for still gazing
longingly towards "the gate of Rome," as they mystically called the
convent of Czenstochow, in which Frank lay imprisoned. And when their
enemies said they had met with their desert, the Baal Shem said:
"There is no sphere in Heaven where the soul remains a shorter time
than in the sphere of merit, there is none where it abides longer than
in the sphere of love." Much also in these troublous times did the
Baal Shem suffer from his sympathy with the sufferings of Poland, in
its fratricidal war, when the Cossacks hung up together a nobleman, a
Jew, a monk, and a dog, with the inscription: "All are equal."
Although these Cossacks, and later on the Turks, who, in the guise of
friends of Poland, turned the Southern provinces into deserts, rather
helped than hindered the cause of his followers by diverting their
persecutors, the Baal Shem palpitated with pity for all—dogs, monks,
noblemen, and Jews. But, howsoever he suffered, the serene cheerful
faith on which these were but dark shadows, never ceased altogether to
shine in his face. Even on his death-bed his three cardinal virtues
were not absent. For no man could face the Angel of Death more
cheerfully, or anticipate more glowingly the absorption into the
Divine, and as for Humility, "O Vanity! vanity!" were his dying words;
"even in this hour of death thou darest approach me with thy
temptations. 'Bethink thee, Israel, what a grand funeral procession
will be thine because thou hast been so wise and good,' O Vanity,
vanity, beshrew thee."
Now although I was his son-in-law, and was with him in [285]this last
hour, it is known of all men that not I, but Rabbi Baer, was appointed
by him to be his successor. For although my acquaintance with the Baal
Shem did not tend to increase my admiration for his chief disciple, I
never expressed my full mind on the subject to the Master, for he had
early enjoined on me that the obverse side of the virtue of Humility
is to think highly of one's fellow-man. "He who loves the Father, God,
will also love the children."
But, inasmuch as he abhorred profitless learning, and all study for
study's sake that does not lead to the infinite light, I did venture
to ask him why he had allowed Baer, the Scholar, to go about as his
lieutenant and found communities in his name.
"Because," he said with beautiful simplicity, "I saw that I had sinned
in making ignorance synonymous with virtue. There are good men even
among the learned—men whose hearts are uncorrupted by their brains.
Baer was such a one, and since he had great repute among the learned I
saw that the learned who would not listen to a simple man would listen
to him."
Now, before I say aught else on this point, let this saying of the
Master serve to rebuke his graceless followers who despise the learned
while they themselves have not even holiness, and who boast of their
ignorance as though it guaranteed illumination; but as to Rabbi Baer I
will boldly say that it would have been better for the world and the
Baal Shem's teachings had I been appointed to hand them down. For Baer
made of the Master's living impulse a code and a creed which grew
rigid and dead. And he organized his followers by external
signs—noisy praying, ablutions, white Sabbath robes, and so forth—so
that the spirit died and the symbols remained, and now of the tens of
thousands who call themselves Chassidim and pray the prayers and
perform the ceremonies and wear the robes, [286]there are not ten that
have the faintest notion of the Master's teaching. For spirit is
volatile and flies away, but symbol is solid and is handed down
religiously from generation to generation. But the greatest abuse has
come from the doctrine of the Zaddik. Perhaps the logic of Baer is
sound, that if God, as the Master taught, is in all things, then is
there so much of Him in certain chosen men that they are themselves
divine. I do not doubt that the Master himself was akin to divinity,
for though he did not profess to perform miracles, pretending that
such healing as he wrought was by virtue of his knowledge of herbs and
simples, and saying jestingly that the Angel of Healing goes with the
good physician, nor ever admitting to me that he had done battle with
demons and magicians save figuratively; yet was there in him a strange
power, which is not given to men, of soothing and redeeming by his
mere touch, so that, laid upon the brow—as I can personally
testify—his hands would cure headache and drive out ill-humors. And I
will even believe that there was of this divinity in Rabbi Baer. But
whereas the Baal Shem veiled his divinity in his manhood, Baer strove
to veil his manhood in his divinity, and to eke out his power by arts
and policies, the better to influence men and govern them, and gain of
their gold for his further operations. Yet the lesson of his history
to me is, that if Truth is not great enough to prevail alone, she
shall not prevail by aid of cunning. For finally there will come men
who will manifest the cunning without the Truth. So at least it has
been here. First the Baal Shem, the pure Zaddik, then Rabbi Baer, the
worldly Zaddik, and then a host of Zaddikim, many of them having only
the outward show of Sainthood. For since our otherwise great sect is
split up into a thousand little sects, each boasting its own
Zaddik—superior to all the others, the only true Intermediary
[287]between God and Man, the sole source of blessing and fount of
Grace—and each lodging him in a palace (to which they make
pilgrimages at the Festivals as of yore to the Temple) and paying him
tribute of gold and treasure; it is palpable that these sorry Saints
have themselves brought about these divisions for their greater glory
and profit. And I weep the more over this spoliation of my Chassidim,
because there is so much perverted goodness among them, so much
self-sacrifice for one another in distress, and such faithful
obedience to the Zaddik, who everywhere monopolizes the service and
the worship which should be given to God. Alas! that a movement which
began with such pure aspiration, which was to the souls of me and so
many other young students as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land, that a doctrine which opened out to young Israel such spiritual
vistas and transcendent splendors of the Godhead, should end in such
delusions and distortions.
Woe is me! Is it always to be thus with Israel? Are we to struggle out
of one slough only to sink into another? But these doubts dishonor the
Master. Let me be humbler in judging others, cheerfuller in looking
out upon the future, more enkindling towards the young men who are
growing up around me, and who may yet pass on the torch of the Master.
For them let me recall the many souls he touched to purer flame; let
me tell them of those who gave up posts and dignities to spread his
gospel and endured hunger and scorn. And let me not forget to mention
Rabbi Lemuel, the lover of justice, who once when his wife set out for
the Judgment House in a cause against her maidservant set out with her
too.
"I need you not to speak for me," she said, in ill-humor; "I can plead
my own cause."
"Nay, it is not for thee I go to speak," he answered mildly; "it is
the cause of thy servant I go to plead—she [288]who hath none to defend
her." And, bursting into tears, he repeated the verse of Job: "If I
did despise the cause of my manservant or of my maidservant, when they
contended with me, what shall I do when God riseth up?"
These and many such things, both of learned men and of simple, I hope
yet to chronicle for the youths of Israel. But above all let the
memory of the Master himself be to them a melody and a blessing: he
whose life taught me to understand that the greatest man is not he who
dwells in the purple, amid palaces and courtiers, hedged and guarded,
and magnified by illusive pomp, but he who, talking cheerfully with
his fellows in the market-place, humble as though he were
unworshipped, and poor as though he were unregarded, is divinely
enkindled, so that a light shines from him whereby men recognize the
visible presence of God.
Happy burghers of Berlin in their Sunday best trooped through the
Rosenthaler gate in the cool of the August evening for their customary
stroll in the environs: few escaped noticing the recumbent ragged
figure of a young man, with a long dirty beard, wailing and writhing
uncouthly just outside the gate: fewer inquired what ailed him.
He answered in a strange mixture of jargons, blurring his meaning
hopelessly with scraps of Hebrew, of Jewish-German, of Polish, of
Russian and mis-punctuating it with choking sobs and gasps. One good
soul after another turned away helpless. The stout roll of Hebrew
manuscript the swarthy, unkempt creature clutched in his hand grew
grimier with tears. The soldiers on guard surveyed him with
professional callousness.
Only the heart of the writhing wretch knew its own bitterness, only
those tear-blinded eyes saw the pitiful panorama of a penurious Jew's
struggle for Culture. For, nursed in a narrow creed, he had dreamt the
dream of Knowledge. To know—to know—was the passion that consumed
him: to understand the meaning of life and the causes of things.
[290]He saw himself a child again in Poland, in days of comparative
affluence, clad in his little damask suit, shocking his father with a
question at the very first verse of the Bible, which they began to
read together when he was six years old, and which held many a box on
the ear in store for his ingenuous intellect. He remembered his early
efforts to imitate with chalk or charcoal the woodcuts of birds or
foliage happily discovered on the title-pages of dry-as-dust Hebrew
books; how he used to steal into the unoccupied, unfurnished
manor-house and copy the figures on the tapestries, standing in
midwinter, half-frozen, the paper in one hand, the pencil in the
other; and how, when these artistic enthusiasms were sternly if
admiringly checked by a father intent on siring a Rabbi, he relieved
the dreary dialectics of the Talmud—so tedious to a child
uninterested in divorce laws or the number of white hairs permissible
in a red cow—by surreptitious nocturnal perusal of a precious store
of Hebrew scientific and historical works discovered in an old
cupboard in his father's study. To this chamber, which had also served
as the bedroom in which the child slept with his grandmother, the
young man's thoughts returned with wistful bitterness, and at the
image of the innocent little figure poring over the musty volumes by
the flickering firelight in the silence of the night, the mass of rags
heaved yet more convulsively. How he had enjoyed putting on fresh wood
after his grandmother had gone to bed, and grappling with the
astronomical treatise, ignoring the grumblings of the poor old lady
who lay a-cold for want of him. Ah, the lonely little boy was, indeed,
in Heaven, treading the celestial circles—and by stealth, which made
it all the sweeter. But that armillary sphere he had so ably made for
himself out of twisted rods had undone him: his grandmother, terrified
by the child's interest in these mystic convolutions, had betrayed
[291]the magical instrument to his father. Other episodes of the long
pursuit of Knowledge—not to be impeded even by flogging pedagogues,
diverted but slightly by marriage at the age of eleven,—crossed his
mind. What ineffable rapture the first reading of Maimonides had
excited, The Guide of the Perplexed supplying the truly perplexed
youth with reasons for the Jewish fervor which informed him. How he
had reverenced the great mediæval thinker, regarding him as the ideal
of men, the most inspired of teachers. Had he not changed his own name
to Maimon to pattern himself after his Master, was not even now his
oath under temptation: "I swear by the reverence which I owe my great
teacher, Rabbi Moses ben Maimon, not to do this act?"
But even Maimonides had not been able to allay his thirst. Maimonides
was an Aristotelian, and the youth would fain drink at the
fountain-head. He tramped a hundred and fifty miles to see an old
Hebrew book on the Peripatetic philosophy. But Hebrew was not enough;
the vast realm of Knowledge, which he divined dimly, must lie in other
languages. But to learn any other language was pollution to a Jew, to
teach a Jew any other was pollution to a Christian.
In his facile comprehension of German and Latin books, he had long
since forgotten his first painful steps: now in his agony they
recurred to mock him. He had learnt these alien alphabets by observing
in some bulky Hebrew books that when the printers had used up the
letters of the Hebrew alphabet to mark their sheets, they started
other and foreign alphabets. How he had rejoiced to find that by help
of his Jewish jargon he could worry out the meaning of some torn
leaves of an old German book picked up by chance.
The picture of the innkeeper's hut, in which he had once [292]been
family-tutor, flew up irrelevantly into his mind—he saw himself
expounding a tattered Pentateuch to a half-naked brood behind the
stove, in a smoky room full of peasants sitting on the floor guzzling
whisky, or pervaded by drunken Russian soldiery hacking the bedsteads
or throwing the glasses in the faces of the innkeeper and his wife.
Poor Polish Jews, cursed by poverty and tyranny! Who could be blamed
for consoling himself with liquor in such a home? Besides, when one
was paid only five thalers, one owed it to oneself not to refuse a
dram or so. And then there came up another one-room home in which a
youth with his eyes and hair had sat all night poring over Cabalistic
books, much to the inconvenience of the newly married Rabbi, who had
consented to teach him this secret doctrine. For this had been his
Cabalistic phase, when he dreamed of conjurations and spells and the
Mastership of the Name. A sardonic smile twitched the corners of his
lips, as he remembered how the poor Rabbi and his pretty wife, after
fruitless hints, had lent him the precious tomes to be rid of his
persistent all-night sittings, and the smile lingered an instant
longer as he recalled his own futile attempts to coerce the
supernatural, either by the incantations of the Cabalists or the
prayer-ecstasy he had learnt later from the Chassidim.
Yes, he had early discovered that all this Cabalistic mysticism was
only an attempt at a scientific explanation of existence, veiled in
fable and allegory. But the more reasonable he pronounced the Cabalah
to be, the more he had irritated the local Cabalists who refused to
have their "divine science" reduced to "reason." And so,
disillusioned, he had rebounded to "human study," setting off on a
pilgrimage in the depth of winter to borrow out-of-date books on
optics and physics, and making more enemies by his obtrusive knowledge
of how dew came and how [293]lightning. It was not till—on the strength
of a volume of Anatomical tables and a Medical dictionary—he
undertook cures, that he had discovered the depths of his own
ignorance, achieving only the cure of his own conceit. And it was then
that Germany had begun to loom before his vision—a great, wonderful
country where Truth dwelt, and Judaism was freer, grander. Yes, he
would go to Germany and study medicine and escape this asphyxiating
atmosphere.
His sobs, which had gradually subsided, revived at the thought of that
terrible journey. First, the passage to Königsberg, accorded him by a
pious merchant: then the voyage to Stettin, paid for by those young
Jewish students who, beginning by laughing at his ludicrous accent in
reading Herr Mendelssohn's Phœdon—the literary sensation of the
hour that had dumfoundered the Voltaireans—had been thunderstruck by
his instantaneous translation of it into elegant Hebrew, and had
unanimously advised him to make his way to Berlin. Ah, but what a
voyage! Contrary winds that protracted the journey to five weeks
instead of two, the only other passenger an old woman who comforted
herself by singing hymns, his own dialect and the Pomeranian German of
the crew mutually unintelligible, his bed some hard stuffed bags,
never anything warm to eat, and sea-sickness most of the time. And
then, when set down safely on shore, without a pfennig or even a sound
pocket to hold one, he had started to walk to Frankfort, oh, the
wretched feeling of hopelessness that had made him cast himself down
under a lime-tree in a passion of tears! Why had he resumed hope, why
had he struggled on his way to Berlin, since this fate awaited him,
this reception was to be meted him? To be refused admission as a rogue
and a vagabond, to be rejected of his fellow-Jews, to be hustled out
of his dream-city by the overseer of the Jewish gate-house!
[294]Woe! Woe! Was this to be the end of his long aspiration? A week ago he
had been so happy. After parting with his last possession, an iron
spoon, for a glass of sour beer, he had come to a town where his
Rabbinical diploma—to achieve that had been child's play to
him—procured him the full honors of the position, despite his rags.
The first seat in the synagogue had been given the tramp, and the
wealthy president had invited him to his Sabbath dinner and placed him
between himself and his daughter, a pretty virgin of twelve,
beautifully dressed. Through his wine-glass the future had looked
rosy, and his learned eloquence glowed responsively, but he had not
been too drunk to miss the wry faces the girl began to make, nor to be
suddenly struck dumb with shame as he realised the cause. Lying on the
straw of inn-stables in garments one has not changed for seven weeks
does not commend even a Rabbi to a dainty maiden. The spell of good
luck was broken, and since then the learned tramp had known nothing
but humiliation and hunger.
The throb of elation at the sight of the gate of Berlin had been
speedily subdued by the discovery that he must bide in the poorhouse
the Jews had built there till the elders had examined him. And there
he had herded all day long with the sick and cripples and a lewd
rabble, till evening brought the elders and his doom—a point-blank
refusal to allow him to enter the city and study medicine.
Why? Why? What had they against him? He asked himself the question
between his paroxysms. And suddenly, in the very midst of explaining
his hard case to a new passer-by, the answer came to him and still
further confused his explanations. Yes, it must have been that wolf in
Rabbi's clothing he had talked to that morning in the poorhouse! the
red-bearded reverend who had lent so sympathetic an ear to the tale of
his life in Poland, his journey [295]hither; so sympathetic an eye to his
commentary on the great Maimonides' Guide of the Perplexed. The vile
spy, the base informer! He had told the zealots of the town of the
new-comer's heretical mode of thinking. They had shut him out, as one
shuts out the plague.
So this was the free atmosphere, the grander Judaism he had yearned
for. The town which boasted of the far-famed Moses Mendelssohn, of the
paragon of wisdom and tolerance, was as petty as the Rabbi-ridden
villages whose dust he had shaken off. A fierce anger against the Jews
and this Mendelssohn shook him. This then was all he had gained by
leaving his wife and children that he might follow only after Truth!
Perhaps herein lay his punishment. But no! He was not to blame for
being saddled with a family. Marriage at eleven could by no stretch of
sophism be called a voluntary act. He recalled the long, sordid,
sensational matrimonial comedy of which he had been the victim; the
keen competition of the parents of daughters for the hand of so
renowned an infant prodigy, who could talk theology as crookedly as a
graybeard. His own boyish liking for Pessel, the rich rent-farmer's
daughter, had been rudely set aside when her sister fell down a cellar
and broke her leg. Solomon must marry the damaged daughter, the
rent-farmer had insisted to the learned boy's father, who had replied
as pertinaciously, "No, I want the straight-legged sister."
The poor young man writhed afresh at the thought of his father's
obstinacy. True, Rachael had a hobble in her leg, but as he had
discovered years later when a humble tutor in her family, she was an
amiable creature, and as her father had offered to make him joint heir
to his vast fortune, he would have been settled for life, wallowing in
luxury and learning. But no! his father was bent upon [296]having Pessel,
and so he, Solomon, had been beggared by his father's fastidious
objection to a dislocated bone.
Alas, how misfortune had dogged him! There was that wealthy scholar of
Schmilowitz who fell in love with his fame, and proposed for him by
letter without ever having seen him. What a lofty epistle his father
had written in reply, a pastiche of Biblical verses and Talmudical
passages, the condition of consent neatly quoted from "The Song of
Solomon," "Thou, O Solomon, must have a thousand pieces of silver, and
those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred!" A dowry of a thousand
guldens for the boy, and two hundred for the father! The terms of the
Canticles had been accepted, his father had journeyed to Schmilowitz,
seen his daughter-in-law, and drawn up the marriage-contract. The two
hundred guldens for himself had been paid him on the nail, and he had
even insisted on having four hundred.
In vain, "Here is your letter," the scholar had protested, "you only
asked for two hundred."
"True," he had replied; "but that was only not to spoil the beautiful
quotation."
How joyously he had returned home with the four hundred guldens for
himself, the wedding-presents for his little Solomon—a cap of black
velvet trimmed with gold lace, a Bible bound in green velvet with
silver clasps, and the like.
The heart-broken tramp saw the innocent boy that had once been he,
furtively strutting about in his velvet cap, rehearsing the
theological disputation he was to hold at the wedding-table, and
sniffing the cakes and preserves his mother was preparing for the
feast, what time the mail was bringing the news of the sudden death of
the bride from small-pox.
At the moment he had sorrowed as little for his unseen [297]bride as his
father, who, having made four hundred guldens by his son in an
honorable way, might now hope to make another four hundred. "The cap
and the silver-clasped Bible are already mine," the child had told
himself, "and a bride will also not be long wanting, while my
wedding-disputation can serve me again." The mother alone had been
inconsolable, cakes and preserves being of a perishable nature,
especially when there is no place to hide them from the secret attacks
of a disappointed bridegroom. Only now did poor Maimon realize how his
life had again missed ease! For he had fallen at last into the hands
of the widow of Nesvig, with a public-house in the outskirts and an
only daughter. Merely moderately prosperous but inordinately
ambitious, she had dared to dream of this famous wonder-child for her
Sarah. Refusal daunted her not, nor did she cease her campaign till,
after trying every species of trick and manœuvre and
misrepresentation, every weapon of law and illegality, she had carried
home the reluctant bridegroom. By what unscrupulous warfare she had
wrested him from his last chance of wealth, flourishing a prior
marriage-contract in the face of the rich merchant who unluckily
staying the night in her inn, had proudly shown her the document which
betrothed his daughter to the renowned Solomon! The boy's mother dying
at this juncture, the widow had not shrunk from obtaining from the
law-courts an attachment on the dead body, by which its interment was
interdicted till the termination of the suit. In vain the rich
merchant had kidnapped the bridegroom in his carriage at dead of
night, the boy was pursued and recaptured, to lead a life of constant
quarrel with his mother-in-law, and exchange flying crockery at
meal-times; to take refuge in distant tutorships, and in the course of
years, after begetting several children, to drift further and further,
and finally disappear beyond the frontier.
[298]Poor Sarah! He thought of her now with softness. A likeable wench
enough, active and sensible, if with something of her mother's
pertinacity. No doubt she was still the widow's right hand in the
public-house. Ah, how handsome she had looked that day when the
drunken Prince Radziwil, in his mad freak at the inn, had set
approving eyes upon her: "Really a pretty young woman! Only she ought
to get a white chemise." A formula at which the soberer gentlemen of
his train had given her the hint to clear out of the way.
Now in his despair, the baffled Pilgrim of Knowledge turned yearningly
to her image, wept weakly at the leagues that separated him from all
who cared for him. How was David growing up—his curly-haired
first-born; child of his fourteenth year? He must be nearly ten by
now, and in a few years he would be confirmed and become "A Son of the
Commandment." A wave of his own early religious fervor came over him,
bringing with it a faint flavor of festival dishes and far-away echoes
of synagogue tunes. Fool, fool, not to be content with the Truth that
contented his fathers, not to rest in the bosom of the wife God had
given him. Even his mother-in-law was suffused with softer tints
through the mist of tears. She at least appreciated him, had fought
tooth and nail for him, while these gross Berliners—! He clenched his
fists in fury: the full force of the injustice came home to him
afresh; his palms burnt, his brow was racked with shooting pains. His
mind wandered off again to Prince Radziwil and to that day in the
public-house. He saw this capricious ruler marching to visit, with all
the pomp of war, a village not four miles from his residence; first
his battalions of infantry, artillery and cavalry, then his body-guard
of volunteers from the poor nobility, then his kitchen-wagons, then
his bands of music, then his royal coach in which he snored, overcome
[299]by Hungarian wine, lastly his train of lackeys. Then he saw his Serene
Highness thrown on his mother-in-law's dirty bed, booted and spurred;
for his gentlemen, as they passed the inn, had thought it best to give
his slumbers a more comfortable posture. Here, surrounded by valets,
pages, and negroes, he had snored on all night, while the indomitable
widow cooked her meals and chopped her wood in the very room as usual.
And here, in a sooty public-house, with broken windows, and rafters
supported by undressed tree-stems, on a bed swarming with insects—the
prince had awoke, and, naught perturbed, when the thing was explained,
had bidden his menials prepare a banquet on the spot.
Poor Maimon's parched mouth watered now as he thought of that mad
bacchanal banquet of choice wines and dishes, to which princes and
lords had sat down on the dirty benches of the public-house. Goblets
were drained in competition to the sound of cannon, and the judges who
awarded the prize to the Prince, were presented by him with estates
comprising hundreds of peasants. Maimon began to shout in imitation of
the cannon, in imagination he ran amuck in a synagogue, as he had seen
the prince do, smashing and wrecking everything, tearing the Holy
Scrolls from the Ark and trampling upon them. Yes, they deserved it,
the cowardly bigots. Down with the law, to hell with the Rabbis.
A-a-a-h! He would grind the phylacteries under his heel—thus. And
thus! And—
The soldiers perceiving he was in a violent fever, summoned the Jewish
overseer, who carried him back into the poorhouse.
Maimon awoke the next morning with a clear and lively mind, and soon
understood that he was sick. "God be thanked," he thought joyfully,
"now I shall remain here some days, during which not only shall I eat
but I may hope to prevail upon some kindly visitor to protect me.
Perhaps if I can manage to send a message to Herr Mendelssohn, he will
intercede for me. For a scholar must always have bowels of compassion
for a scholar."
These roseate expectations were rudely dusked: the overseer felt
Maimon's pulse and his forehead, and handing him his commentary on the
Guide of the Perplexed, convoyed him politely without the gate.
Maimon made no word of protest, he was paralyzed.
"What now, O Guide of the Perplexed?" he cried, stonily surveying his
hapless manuscript. "O Moses, son of Maimon, thou by whom I have sworn
so oft, canst thou help me now? See, my pockets are as empty as the
heads of thy adversaries."
He turned out his pockets, and lo! several silver pieces fell out and
rolled merrily in the roadway. "A miracle!" he shouted. Then he
remembered that the elders had dismissed him with them, and that
overcome by his sentence he had put them mechanically away. Yes, he
had been treated as a mere beggar. A faint flush of shame tinged his
bristly cheek at the thought. True, he had partaken of the hospitality
of strangers, but that was the due meed of his position as Rabbi, as
the free passages to Königsberg and Stettin were tributes to his
learning. Never had he absolutely fallen to schnorring (begging). He
shook his fist at the city. He would fling their money in their
faces—some day. Thus swearing, he repocketed the coins, [301]took the
first turning that he met, and abandoned himself to chance. In the
mean inn in which he halted for refreshment he was glad to encounter a
fellow-Jew and one in companionable rags.
Maimon made inquiries from him about the roads and whither they led,
and gathered with some surprise that his companion was a professional
Schnorrer.
"Are not you?" asked the beggar, equally surprised.
"Certainly not!" cried Maimon angrily.
"What a waste of good rags!" said the Schnorrer.
"What a waste of good muscle!" retorted Maimon; for the beggar was a
strapping fellow in rude health. "If I had your shoulders I should
hold my head higher on them."
The Schnorrer shrugged them. "Only fools work. What has work brought
you? Rags. You begin with work and end with rags. I begin with rags
and end with meals."
"But have you no self-respect?" cried Maimon, in amaze. "No morality?
No religion?"
"I have as much religion as any Schnorrer on the road," replied the
beggar, bridling up. "I keep my Sabbath."
"Yes, indeed," said Maimon, smiling, "our sages say, Rather keep thy
Sabbath as a week-day than beg; you say, Rather keep thy week-day as a
Sabbath than be dependent on thyself." To himself he thought, "That is
very witty: I must remember to tell Lapidoth that." And he called for
another glass of whisky.
"Yes; but many of our sages, meseems, are dependent on their
womankind. I have dispensed with woman; must I therefore dispense with
support likewise?"
Maimon was amused and shocked in one. He set down his whisky,