# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_6393:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2009
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Emile Zola, The Downfall
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13851/13851-h/13851-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Gaude, the bugler, with his darkly mysterious air, as of a man who has had
      troubles of which he does not care to speak, sounded the call for evening
      muster with a glorious fanfare; but there was no necessity for sounding
      taps that night, the camp was immediately enveloped in profound silence.
      And when he had verified the names and seen that none of his half-section
      were missing, Sergeant Sapin, with his thin, sickly face and his pinched
      nose, softly said:
    

      “There will be one less to-morrow night.”
     

      Then, as he saw Jean looking at him inquiringly, he added with calm
      conviction, his eyes bent upon the blackness of the night, as if reading
      there the destiny that he predicted:
    

      “It will be mine; I shall be killed to-morrow.”
     

      It was nine o'clock, with promise of a chilly, uncomfortable night, for a
      dense mist had risen from the surface of the river, so that the stars were
      no longer visible. Maurice shivered, where he lay with Jean beneath a
      hedge, and said they would do better to go and seek the shelter of the
      tent; the rest they had taken that day had left them wakeful, their joints
      seemed stiffer and their bones sorer than before; neither could sleep.
      They envied Lieutenant Rochas, who, stretched on the damp ground and
      wrapped in his blanket, was snoring like a trooper, not far away. For a
      long time after that they watched with interest the feeble light of a
      candle that was burning in a large tent where the colonel and some
      officers were in consultation. All that evening M. de Vineuil had
      manifested great uneasiness that he had received no instructions to guide
      him in the morning. He felt that his regiment was too much “in the air,”
       too much advanced, although it had already fallen back from the exposed
      position that it had occupied earlier in the day. Nothing had been seen of
      General Bourgain-Desfeuilles, who was said to be ill in bed at the Hotel
      of the Golden Cross, and the colonel decided to send one of his officers
      to advise him of the danger of their new position in the too extended line
      of the 7th corps, which had to cover the long stretch from the bend in the
      Meuse to the wood of la Garenne. There could be no doubt that the enemy
      would attack with the first glimpse of daylight; only for seven or eight
      hours now would that deep tranquillity remain unbroken. And shortly after
      the dim light in the colonel's tent was extinguished Maurice was amazed to
      see Captain Beaudoin glide by, keeping close to the hedge, with furtive
      steps, and vanish in the direction of Sedan.
    

      The darkness settled down on them, denser and denser; the chill mists rose
      from the stream and enshrouded everything in a dank, noisome fog.
    

      “Are you asleep, Jean?”
     

      Jean was asleep, and Maurice was alone. He could not endure the thought of
      going to the tent where Lapoulle and the rest of them were slumbering; he
      heard their snoring, responsive to Rochas' strains, and envied them. If
      our great captains sleep soundly the night before a battle, it is like
      enough for the reason that their fatigue will not let them do otherwise.
      He was conscious of no sound save the equal, deep-drawn breathing of that
      slumbering multitude, rising from the darkening camp like the gentle
      respiration of some huge monster; beyond that all was void. He only knew
      that the 5th corps was close at hand, encamped beneath the rampart, that
      the 1st's line extended from the wood of la Garenne to la Moncelle, while
      the 12th was posted on the other side of the city, at Bazeilles; and all
      were sleeping; the whole length of that long line, from the nearest tent
      to the most remote, for miles and miles, that low, faint murmur ascended
      in rhythmic unison from the dark, mysterious bosom of the night. Then
      outside this circle lay another region, the realm of the unknown, whence
      also sounds came intermittently to his ears, so vague, so distant, that he
      scarcely knew whether they were not the throbbings of his own excited
      pulses; the indistinct trot of cavalry plashing over the low ground, the
      dull rumble of gun and caisson along the roads, and, still more marked,
      the heavy tramp of marching men; the gathering on the heights above of
      that black swarm, engaged in strengthening the meshes of their net, from
      which night itself had not served to divert them. And below, there by the
      river's side, was there not the flash of lights suddenly extinguished, was
      not that the sound of hoarse voices shouting orders, adding to the dread
      suspense of that long night of terror while waiting for the coming of the
      dawn?
    

      Maurice put forth his hand and felt for Jean's; at last he slumbered,
      comforted by the sense of human companionship. From a steeple in Sedan
      came the deep tones of a bell, slowly, mournfully, tolling the hour; then
      all was blank and void.
    

      
 

 
    

      Weiss, in the obscurity of his little room at Bazeilles, was aroused by a
      commotion that caused him to leap from his bed. It was the roar of
      artillery. Groping about in the darkness he found and lit a candle to
      enable him to consult his watch: it was four o'clock, just beginning to be
      light. He adjusted his double eyeglass upon his nose and looked out into
      the main street of the village, the road that leads to Douzy, but it was
      filled with a thick cloud of something that resembled dust, which made it
      impossible to distinguish anything. He passed into the other room, the
      windows of which commanded a view of the Meuse and the intervening
      meadows, and saw that the cause of his obstructed vision was the morning
      mist arising from the river. In the distance, behind the veil of fog, the
      guns were barking more fiercely across the stream. All at once a French
      battery, close at hand, opened in reply, with such a tremendous crash that
      the walls of the little house were shaken.
    

      Weiss's house was situated near the middle of the village, on the right of
      the road and not far from the Place de l'Eglise. Its front, standing back
      a little from the street, displayed a single story with three windows,
      surmounted by an attic; in the rear was a garden of some extent that
      sloped gently downward toward the meadows and commanded a wide panoramic
      view of the encircling hills, from Remilly to Frenois. Weiss, with the
      sense of responsibility of his new proprietorship strong upon him, had
      spent the night in burying his provisions in the cellar and protecting his
      furniture, as far as possible, against shot and shell by applying
      mattresses to the windows, so that it was nearly two o'clock before he got
      to bed. His blood boiled at the idea that the Prussians might come and
      plunder the house, for which he had toiled so long and which had as yet
      afforded him so little enjoyment.
    

      He heard a voice summoning him from the street.
    

      “I say, Weiss, are you awake?”
     

      He descended and found it was Delaherche, who had passed the night at his
      dyehouse, a large brick structure, next door to the accountant's abode.
      The operatives had all fled, taking to the woods and making for the
      Belgian frontier, and there was no one left to guard the property but the
      woman concierge, Francoise Quittard by name, the widow of a mason; and she
      also, beside herself with terror, would have gone with the others had it
      not been for her ten-year-old boy Charles, who was so ill with typhoid
      fever that he could not be moved.
    

      “I say,” Delaherche continued, “do you hear that? It is a promising
      beginning. Our best course is to get back to Sedan as soon as possible.”
     

      Weiss's promise to his wife, that he would leave Bazeilles at the first
      sign of danger, had been given in perfect good faith, and he had fully
      intended to keep it; but as yet there was only an artillery duel at long
      range, and the aim could not be accurate enough to do much damage in the
      uncertain, misty light of early morning.
    

      “Wait a bit, confound it!” he replied. “There is no hurry.”
     

      Delaherche, too, was curious to see what would happen; his curiosity made
      him valiant. He had been so interested in the preparations for defending
      the place that he had not slept a wink. General Lebrun, commanding the
      12th corps, had received notice that he would be attacked at daybreak, and
      had kept his men occupied during the night in strengthening the defenses
      of Bazeilles, which he had instructions to hold in spite of everything.
      Barricades had been thrown up across the Douzy road, and all the smaller
      streets; small parties of soldiers had been thrown into the houses by way
      of garrison; every narrow lane, every garden had become a fortress, and
      since three o'clock the troops, awakened from their slumbers without beat
      of drum or call of bugle in the inky blackness, had been at their posts,
      their chassepots freshly greased and cartridge boxes filled with the
      obligatory ninety rounds of ammunition. It followed that when the enemy
      opened their fire no one was taken unprepared, and the French batteries,
      posted to the rear between Balan and Bazeilles, immediately commenced to
      answer, rather with the idea of showing they were awake than for any other
      purpose, for in the dense fog that enveloped everything the practice was
      of the wildest.
    

      “The dyehouse will be well defended,” said Delaherche. “I have a whole
      section in it. Come and see.”
     

      It was true; forty and odd men of the infanterie de marine had been posted
      there under the command of a lieutenant, a tall, light-haired young
      fellow, scarcely more than a boy, but with an expression of energy and
      determination on his face. His men had already taken full possession of
      the building, some of them being engaged in loopholing the shutters of the
      ground-floor windows that commanded the street, while others, in the
      courtyard that overlooked the meadows in the rear, were breaching the wall
      for musketry. It was in this courtyard that Delaherche and Weiss found the
      young officer, straining his eyes to discover what was hidden behind the
      impenetrable mist.
    

      “Confound this fog!” he murmured. “We can't fight when we don't know where
      the enemy is.” Presently he asked, with no apparent change of voice or
      manner: “What day of the week is this?”
     

      “Thursday,” Weiss replied.
    

      “Thursday, that's so. Hanged if I don't think the world might come to an
      end and we not know it!”
     

      But just at that moment the uninterrupted roar of the artillery was
      diversified by a brisk rattle of musketry proceeding from the edge of the
      meadows, at a distance of two or three hundred yards. And at the same time
      there was a transformation, as rapid and startling, almost, as the stage
      effect in a fairy spectacle: the sun rose, the exhalations of the Meuse
      were whirled away like bits of finest, filmiest gauze, and the blue sky
      was revealed, in serene limpidity, undimmed by a single cloud. It was the
      exquisite morning of a faultless summer day.
    

      “Ah!” exclaimed Delaherche, “they are crossing the railway bridge. See,
      they are making their way along the track. How stupid of us not to have
      blown up the bridge!”
     

      The officer's face bore an expression of dumb rage. The mines had been
      prepared and charged, he averred, but they had fought four hours the day
      before to regain possession of the bridge and then had forgot to touch
      them off.
    

      “It is just our luck,” he curtly said.
    

      Weiss was silent, watching the course of events and endeavoring to form
      some idea of the true state of affairs. The position of the French in
      Bazeilles was a very strong one. The village commanded the meadows, and
      was bisected by the Douzy road, which, turning sharp to the left, passed
      under the walls of the Chateau, while another road, the one that led to
      the railway bridge, bent around to the right and forked at the Place de
      l'Eglise. There was no cover for any force advancing by these two
      approaches; the Germans would be obliged to traverse the meadows and the
      wide, bare level that lay between the outskirts of the village and the
      Meuse and the railway. Their prudence in avoiding unnecessary risks was
      notorious, hence it seemed improbable that the real attack would come from
      that quarter. They kept coming across the bridge, however, in deep masses,
      and that notwithstanding the slaughter that a battery of mitrailleuses,
      posted at the edge of the village, effected in their ranks, and all at
      once those who had crossed rushed forward in open order, under cover of
      the straggling willows, the columns were re-formed and began to advance.
      It was from there that the musketry fire, which was growing hotter, had
      proceeded.
    

      “Oh, those are Bavarians,” Weiss remarked. “I recognize them by the braid
      on their helmets.”
     

      But there were other columns, moving to the right and partially concealed
      by the railway embankment, whose object, it seemed to him, was to gain the
      cover of some trees in the distance, whence they might descend and take
      Bazeilles in flank and rear. Should they succeed in effecting a lodgment
      in the park of Montivilliers, the village might become untenable. This was
      no more than a vague, half-formed idea, that flitted through his mind for
      a moment and faded as rapidly as it had come; the attack in front was
      becoming more determined, and his every faculty was concentrated on the
      struggle that was assuming, with every moment, larger dimensions.
    

      Suddenly he turned his head and looked away to the north, over the city of
      Sedan, where the heights of Floing were visible in the distance. A battery
      had just commenced firing from that quarter; the smoke rose in the bright
      sunshine in little curls and wreaths, and the reports came to his ears
      very distinctly. It was in the neighborhood of five o'clock.
    

      “Well, well,” he murmured, “they are all going to have a hand in the
      business, it seems.”
     

      The lieutenant of marines, who had turned his eyes in the same direction,
      spoke up confidently:
    

      “Oh! Bazeilles is the key of the position. This is the spot where the
      battle will be won or lost.”
     

      “Do you think so?” Weiss exclaimed.
    

      “There is not the slightest doubt of it. It is certainly the marshal's
      opinion, for he was here last night and told us that we must hold the
      village if it cost the life of every man of us.”
     

      Weiss slowly shook his head, and swept the horizon with a glance; then in
      a low, faltering voice, as if speaking to himself, he said:
    

      “No—no! I am sure that is a mistake. I fear the danger lies in
      another quarter—where, or what it is, I dare not say—”
     

      He said no more. He simply opened wide his arms, like the jaws of a vise,
      then, turning to the north, brought his hands together, as if the vise had
      closed suddenly upon some object there.
    

      This was the fear that had filled his mind for the last twenty-four hours,
      for he was thoroughly acquainted with the country and had watched narrowly
      every movement of the troops during the previous day, and now, again,
      while the broad valley before him lay basking in the radiant sunlight, his
      gaze reverted to the hills of the left bank, where, for the space of all
      one day and all one night, his eyes had beheld the black swarm of the
      Prussian hosts moving steadily onward to some appointed end. A battery had
      opened fire from Remilly, over to the left, but the one from which the
      shells were now beginning to reach the French position was posted at
      Pont-Maugis, on the river bank. He adjusted his binocle by folding the
      glasses over, the one upon the other, to lengthen its range and enable him
      to discern what was hidden among the recesses of the wooded slopes, but
      could distinguish nothing save the white smoke-wreaths that rose
      momentarily on the tranquil air and floated lazily away over the crests.
      That human torrent that he had seen so lately streaming over those hills,
      where was it now—where were massed those innumerable hosts? At last,
      at the corner of a pine wood, above Noyers and Frenois, he succeeded in
      making out a little cluster of mounted men in uniform—some general,
      doubtless, and his staff. And off there to the west the Meuse curved in a
      great loop, and in that direction lay their sole line of retreat on
      Mezieres, a narrow road that traversed the pass of Saint-Albert, between
      that loop and the dark forest of Ardennes. While reconnoitering the day
      before he had met a general officer who, he afterward learned, was Ducrot,
      commanding the 1st corps, on a by-road in the valley of Givonne, and had
      made bold to call his attention to the importance of that, their only line
      of retreat. If the army did not retire at once by that road while it was
      still open to them, if it waited until the Prussians should have crossed
      the Meuse at Donchery and come up in force to occupy the pass, it would be
      hemmed in and driven back on the Belgian frontier. As early even as the
      evening of that day the movement would have been too late. It was asserted
      that the uhlans had possession of the bridge, another bridge that had not
      been destroyed, for the reason, this time, that some one had neglected to
      provide the necessary powder. And Weiss sorrowfully acknowledged to
      himself that the human torrent, the invading horde, could now be nowhere
      else than on the plain of Donchery, invisible to him, pressing onward to
      occupy Saint-Albert pass, pushing forward its advanced guards to
      Saint-Menges and Floing, whither, the day previous, he had conducted Jean
      and Maurice. In the brilliant sunshine the steeple of Floing church
      appeared like a slender needle of dazzling whiteness.
    

      And off to the eastward the other arm of the powerful vise was slowly
      closing in on them. Casting his eyes to the north, where there was a
      stretch of level ground between the plateaus of Illy and of Floing, he
      could make out the line of battle of the 7th corps, feebly supported by
      the 5th, which was posted in reserve under the ramparts of the city; but
      he could not discern what was occurring to the east, along the valley of
      the Givonne, where the 1st corps was stationed, its line stretching from
      the wood of la Garenne to Daigny village. Now, however, the guns were
      beginning to thunder in that direction also; the conflict seemed to be
      raging in Chevalier's wood, in front of Daigny. His uneasiness was owing
      to reports that had been brought in by peasants the day previous, that the
      Prussian advance had reached Francheval, so that the movement which was
      being conducted at the west, by way of Donchery, was also in process of
      execution at the east, by way of Francheval, and the two jaws of the vise
      would come together up there at the north, near the Calvary of Illy,
      unless the two-fold flanking movement could be promptly checked. He knew
      nothing of tactics or strategy, had nothing but his common sense to guide
      him; but he looked with fear and trembling on that great triangle that had
      the Meuse for one of its sides, and for the other two the 7th and 1st
      corps on the north and east respectively, while the extreme angle at the
      south was occupied by the 12th at Bazeilles—all the three corps
      facing outward on the periphery of a semicircle, awaiting the appearance
      of an enemy who was to deliver his attack at some one point, where or when
      no one could say, but who, instead, fell on them from every direction at
      once. And at the very center of all, as at the bottom of a pit, lay the
      city of Sedan, her ramparts furnished with antiquated guns, destitute of
      ammunition and provisions.
    

      “Understand,” said Weiss, with a repetition of his previous gesture,
      extending his arms and bringing his hands slowly together, “that is how it
      will be unless your generals keep their eyes open. The movement at
      Bazeilles is only a feint—”
     

      But his explanation was confused and unintelligible to the lieutenant, who
      knew nothing of the country, and the young man shrugged his shoulders with
      an expression of impatience and disdain for the bourgeois in spectacles
      and frock coat who presumed to set his opinion against the marshal's.
      Irritated to hear Weiss reiterate his view that the attack on Bazeilles
      was intended only to mask other and more important movements, he finally
      shouted:
    

      “Hold your tongue, will you! We shall drive them all into the Meuse, those
      Bavarian friends of yours, and that is all they will get by their precious
      feint.”
     

      While they were talking the enemy's skirmishers seemed to have come up
      closer; every now and then their bullets were heard thudding against the
      dyehouse wall, and our men, kneeling behind the low parapet of the
      courtyard, were beginning to reply. Every second the report of a chassepot
      rang out, sharp and clear, upon the air.
    

      “Oh, of course! drive them into the Meuse, by all means,” muttered Weiss,
      “and while we are about it we might as well ride them down and regain
      possession of the Carignan road.” Then addressing himself to Delaherche,
      who had stationed himself behind the pump where he might be out of the way
      of the bullets: “All the same, it would have been their wisest course to
      make tracks last night for Mezieres, and if I were in their place I would
      much rather be there than here. As it is, however, they have got to show
      fight, since retreat is out of the question now.”
     

      “Are you coming?” asked Delaherche, who, notwithstanding his eager
      curiosity, was beginning to look pale in the face. “We shall be unable to
      get into the city if we remain here longer.”
     

      “Yes, in one minute I will be with you.”
     

      In spite of the danger that attended the movement he raised himself on
      tiptoe, possessed by an irresistible desire to see how things were
      shaping. On the right lay the meadows that had been flooded by order of
      the governor for the protection of the city, now a broad lake stretching
      from Torcy to Balan, its unruffled bosom glimmering in the morning
      sunlight with a delicate azure luster. The water did not extend as far as
      Bazeilles, however, and the Prussians had worked their way forward across
      the fields, availing themselves of the shelter of every ditch, of every
      little shrub and tree. They were now distant some five hundred yards, and
      Weiss was impressed by the caution with which they moved, the dogged
      resolution and patience with which they advanced, gaining ground inch by
      inch and exposing themselves as little as possible. They had a powerful
      artillery fire, moreover, to sustain them; the pure, cool air was vocal
      with the shrieking of shells. Raising his eyes he saw that the Pont-Maugis
      battery was not the only one that was playing on Bazeilles; two others,
      posted half way up the hill of Liry, had opened fire, and their
      projectiles not only reached the village, but swept the naked plain of la
      Moncelle beyond, where the reserves of the 12th corps were, and even the
      wooded slopes of Daigny, held by a division of the 1st corps, were not
      beyond their range. There was not a summit, moreover, on the left bank of
      the stream that was not tipped with flame. The guns seemed to spring
      spontaneously from the soil, like some noxious growth; it was a zone of
      fire that grew hotter and fiercer every moment; there were batteries at
      Noyers shelling Balan, batteries at Wadelincourt shelling Sedan, and at
      Frenois, down under la Marfee, there was a battery whose guns, heavier
      than the rest, sent their missiles hurtling over the city to burst among
      the troops of the 7th corps on the plateau of Floing. Those hills that he
      had always loved so well, that he had supposed were planted there solely
      to delight the eye, encircling with their verdurous slopes the pretty,
      peaceful valley that lay beneath, were now become a gigantic, frowning
      fortress, vomiting ruin and destruction on the feeble defenses of Sedan,
      and Weiss looked on them with terror and detestation. Why had steps not
      been taken to defend them the day before, if their leaders had suspected
      this, or why, rather, had they insisted on holding the position?
    

      A sound of falling plaster caused him to raise his head; a shot had grazed
      his house, the front of which was visible to him above the party wall. It
      angered him excessively, and he growled:
    

      “Are they going to knock it about my ears, the brigands!”
     

      Then close behind him there was a little dull, strange sound that he had
      never heard before, and turning quickly he saw a soldier, shot through the
      heart, in the act of falling backward. There was a brief convulsive
      movement of the legs; the youthful, tranquil expression of the face
      remained, stamped there unalterably by the hand of death. It was the first
      casualty, and the accountant was startled by the crash of the musket
      falling and rebounding from the stone pavement of the courtyard.
    

      “Ah, I have seen enough, I am going,” stammered Delaherche. “Come, if you
      are coming; if not, I shall go without you.”
     

      The lieutenant, whom their presence made uneasy, spoke up:
    

      “It will certainly be best for you to go, gentlemen. The enemy may attempt
      to carry the place at any moment.”
     

      Then at last, casting a parting glance at the meadows, where the Bavarians
      were still gaining ground, Weiss gave in and followed Delaherche, but when
      they had gained the street he insisted upon going to see if the fastening
      of his door was secure, and when he came back to his companion there was a
      fresh spectacle, which brought them both to a halt.
    

      At the end of the street, some three hundred yards from where they stood,
      a strong Bavarian column had debouched from the Douzy road and was
      charging up the Place de l'Eglise. The square was held by a regiment of
      sailor-boys, who appeared to slacken their fire for a moment as if with
      the intention of drawing their assailants on; then, when the close-massed
      column was directly opposite their front, a most surprising maneuver was
      swiftly executed: the men abandoned their formation, some of them stepping
      from the ranks and flattening themselves against the house fronts, others
      casting themselves prone upon the ground, and down the vacant space thus
      suddenly formed the mitrailleuses that had been placed in battery at the
      farther end poured a perfect hailstorm of bullets. The column disappeared
      as if it had been swept bodily from off the face of the earth. The
      recumbent men sprang to their feet with a bound and charged the scattered
      Bavarians with the bayonet, driving them and making the rout complete.
      Twice the maneuver was repeated, each time with the same success. Two
      women, unwilling to abandon their home, a small house at the corner of an
      intersecting lane, were sitting at their window; they laughed approvingly
      and clapped their hands, apparently glad to have an opportunity to behold
      such a spectacle.
    

      “There, confound it!” Weiss suddenly said, “I forgot to lock the cellar
      door! I must go back. Wait for me; I won't be a minute.”
     

      There was no indication that the enemy contemplated a renewal of their
      attack, and Delaherche, whose curiosity was reviving after the shock it
      had sustained, was less eager to get away. He had halted in front of his
      dyehouse and was conversing with the concierge, who had come for a moment
      to the door of the room she occupied in the rez-de-chaussee.
    

      “My poor Francoise, you had better come along with us. A lone woman among
      such dreadful sights—I can't bear to think of it!”
     

      She raised her trembling hands. “Ah, sir, I would have gone when the
      others went, indeed I would, if it had not been for my poor sick boy. Come
      in, sir, and look at him.”
     

      He did not enter, but glanced into the apartment from the threshold, and
      shook his head sorrowfully at sight of the little fellow in his clean,
      white bed, his face exhibiting the scarlet hue of the disease, and his
      glassy, burning eyes bent wistfully on his mother.
    

      “But why can't you take him with you?” he urged. “I will find quarters for
      you in Sedan. Wrap him up warmly in a blanket, and come along with us.”
     

      “Oh, no, sir, I cannot. The doctor told me it would kill him. If only his
      poor father were alive! but we two are all that are left, and we must live
      for each other. And then, perhaps the Prussians will be merciful; perhaps
      they won't harm a lone woman and a sick boy.”
     

      Just then Weiss reappeared, having secured his premises to his
      satisfaction. “There, I think it will trouble them some to get in now.
      Come on! And it is not going to be a very pleasant journey, either; keep
      close to the houses, unless you want to come to grief.”
     

      There were indications, indeed, that the enemy were making ready for
      another assault. The infantry fire was spluttering away more furiously
      than ever, and the screaming of the shells was incessant. Two had already
      fallen in the street a hundred yards away, and a third had imbedded
      itself, without bursting, in the soft ground of the adjacent garden.
    

      “Ah, here is Francoise,” continued the accountant. “I must have a look at
      your little Charles. Come, come, you have no cause for alarm; he will be
      all right in a couple of days. Keep your courage up, and the first thing
      you do go inside, and don't put your nose outside the door.” And the two
      men at last started to go.
    

      “Au revoir, Francoise.”
     

      “Au revoir, sirs.”
     

      And as they spoke, there came an appalling crash. It was a shell, which,
      having first wrecked the chimney of Weiss's house, fell upon the sidewalk,
      where it exploded with such terrific force as to break every window in the
      vicinity. At first it was impossible to distinguish anything in the dense
      cloud of dust and smoke that rose in the air, but presently this drifted
      away, disclosing the ruined facade of the dyehouse, and there, stretched
      across the threshold, Francoise, a corpse, horribly torn and mangled, her
      skull crushed in, a fearful spectacle.
    

      Weiss sprang to her side. Language failed him; he could only express his
      feelings by oaths and imprecations.
    

      “Nom de Dieu! Nom de Dieu!”
     

      Yes, she was dead. He had stooped to feel her pulse, and as he arose he
      saw before him the scarlet face of little Charles, who had raised himself
      in bed to look at his mother. He spoke no word, he uttered no cry; he
      gazed with blazing, tearless eyes, distended as if they would start from
      their sockets, upon the shapeless mass that was strange, unknown to him;
      and nothing more.
    

      Weiss found words at last: “Nom de Dieu! they have taken to killing
      women!”
     

      He had risen to his feet; he shook his fist at the Bavarians, whose
      braid-trimmed helmets were commencing to appear again in the direction of
      the church. The chimney, in falling, had crushed a great hole in the roof
      of his house, and the sight of the havoc made him furious.
    

      “Dirty loafers! You murder women, you have destroyed my house. No, no! I
      will not go now, I cannot; I shall stay here.”
     

      He darted away and came running back with the dead soldier's rifle and
      ammunition. He was accustomed to carry a pair of spectacles on his person
      for use on occasions of emergency, when he wished to see with great
      distinctness, but did not wear them habitually out of respect for the
      wishes of his young wife. He now impatiently tore off his double eyeglass
      and substituted the spectacles, and the big, burly bourgeois, his overcoat
      flapping about his legs, his honest, kindly, round face ablaze with wrath,
      who would have been ridiculous had he not been so superbly heroic,
      proceeded to open fire, peppering away at the Bavarians at the bottom of
      the street. It was in his blood, he said; he had been hankering for
      something of the kind ever since the days of his boyhood, down there in
      Alsace, when he had been told all those tales of 1814. “Ah! you dirty
      loafers! you dirty loafers!” And he kept firing away with such eagerness
      that, finally, the barrel of his musket became so hot it burned his
      fingers.
    

      The assault was made with great vigor and determination. There was no
      longer any sound of musketry in the direction of the meadows. The
      Bavarians had gained possession of a narrow stream, fringed with willows
      and poplars, and were making preparations for storming the houses, or
      rather fortresses, in the Place de l'Eglise. Their skirmishers had fallen
      back with the same caution that characterized their advance, and the wide
      grassy plain, dotted here and there with a black form where some poor
      fellow had laid down his life, lay spread in the mellow, slumbrous
      sunshine like a great cloth of gold. The lieutenant, knowing that the
      street was now to be the scene of action, had evacuated the courtyard of
      the dyehouse, leaving there only one man as guard. He rapidly posted his
      men along the sidewalk with instructions, should the enemy carry the
      position, to withdraw into the building, barricade the first floor, and
      defend themselves there as long as they had a cartridge left. The men
      fired at will, lying prone upon the ground, and sheltering themselves as
      best they might behind posts and every little projection of the walls, and
      the storm of lead, interspersed with tongues of flame and puffs of smoke,
      that tore through that broad, deserted, sunny avenue was like a downpour
      of hail beaten level by the fierce blast of winter. A woman was seen to
      cross the roadway, running with wild, uncertain steps, and she escaped
      uninjured. Next, an old man, a peasant, in his blouse, who would not be
      satisfied until he saw his worthless nag stabled, received a bullet square
      in his forehead, and the violence of the impact was such that it hurled
      him into the middle of the street. A shell had gone crashing through the
      roof of the church; two others fell and set fire to houses, which burned
      with a pale flame in the intense daylight, with a loud snapping and
      crackling of their timbers. And that poor woman, who lay crushed and
      bleeding in the doorway of the house where her sick boy was, that old man
      with a bullet in his brain, all that work of ruin and devastation,
      maddened the few inhabitants who had chosen to end their days in their
      native village rather than seek safety in Belgium. Other bourgeois, and
      workingmen as well, the neatly attired citizen alongside the man in
      overalls, had possessed themselves of the weapons of dead soldiers, and
      were in the street defending their firesides or firing vengefully from the
      windows.
    

      “Ah!” suddenly said Weiss, “the scoundrels have got around to our rear. I
      saw them sneaking along the railroad track. Hark! don't you hear them off
      there to the left?”
     

      The heavy fire of musketry that was now audible behind the park of
      Montivilliers, the trees of which overhung the road, made it evident that
      something of importance was occurring in that direction. Should the enemy
      gain possession of the park Bazeilles would be at their mercy, but the
      briskness of the firing was in itself proof that the general commanding
      the 12th corps had anticipated the movement and that the position was
      adequately defended.
    

      “Look out, there, you blockhead!” exclaimed the lieutenant, violently
      forcing Weiss up against the wall; “do you want to get yourself blown to
      pieces?”
     

      He could not help laughing a little at the queer figure of the big
      gentleman in spectacles, but his bravery had inspired him with a very
      genuine feeling of respect, so, when his practiced ear detected a shell
      coming their way, he had acted the part of a friend and placed the
      civilian in a safer position. The missile landed some ten paces from where
      they were and exploded, covering them both with earth and debris. The
      citizen kept his feet and received not so much as a scratch, while the
      officer had both legs broken.
    

      “It is well!” was all he said; “they have sent me my reckoning!”
     

      He caused his men to take him across the sidewalk and place him with his
      back to the wall, near where the dead woman lay, stretched across her
      doorstep. His boyish face had lost nothing of its energy and
      determination.
    

      “It don't matter, my children; listen to what I say. Don't fire too
      hurriedly; take your time. When the time comes for you to charge, I will
      tell you.”
     

      And he continued to command them still, with head erect, watchful of the
      movements of the distant enemy. Another house was burning, directly across
      the street. The crash and rattle of musketry, the roar of bursting shells,
      rent the air, thick with dust and sulphurous smoke. Men dropped at the
      corner of every lane and alley; corpses scattered here and there upon the
      pavement, singly or in little groups, made splotches of dark color,
      hideously splashed with red. And over the doomed village a frightful
      uproar rose and swelled, the vindictive shouts of thousands, devoting to
      destruction a few hundred brave men, resolute to die.
    

      Then Delaherche, who all this time had been frantically shouting to Weiss
      without intermission, addressed him one last appeal:
    

      “You won't come? Very well! then I shall leave you to your fate. Adieu!”
     

      It was seven o'clock, and he had delayed his departure too long. So long
      as the houses were there to afford him shelter he took advantage of every
      doorway, of every bit of projecting wall, shrinking at every volley into
      cavities that were ridiculously small in comparison with his bulk. He
      turned and twisted in and out with the sinuous dexterity of the serpent;
      he would never have supposed that there was so much of his youthful
      agility left in him. When he reached the end of the village, however, and
      had to make his way for a space of some three hundred yards along the
      deserted, empty road, swept by the batteries on Liry hill, although the
      perspiration was streaming from his face and body, he shivered and his
      teeth chattered. For a minute or so he advanced cautiously along the bed
      of a dry ditch, bent almost double, then, suddenly forsaking the
      protecting shelter, burst into the open and ran for it with might and
      main, wildly, aimlessly, his ears ringing with detonations that sounded to
      him like thunder-claps. His eyes burned like coals of fire; it seemed to
      him that he was wrapt in flame. It was an eternity of torture. Then he
      suddenly caught sight of a little house to his left, and he rushed for the
      friendly refuge, gained it, with a sensation as if an immense load had
      been lifted from his breast. The place was tenanted, there were men and
      horses there. At first he could distinguish nothing. What he beheld
      subsequently filled him with amazement.
    

      Was not that the Emperor, attended by his brilliant staff? He hesitated,
      although for the last two days he had been boasting of his acquaintance
      with him, then stood staring, open-mouthed. It was indeed Napoleon III.;
      he appeared larger, somehow, and more imposing on horseback, and his
      mustache was so stiffly waxed, there was such a brilliant color on his
      cheeks, that Delaherche saw at once he had been “made up” and painted like
      an actor. He had had recourse to cosmetics to conceal from his army the
      ravages that anxiety and illness had wrought in his countenance, the
      ghastly pallor of his face, his pinched nose, his dull, sunken eyes, and
      having been notified at five o'clock that there was fighting at Bazeilles,
      had come forth to see, sadly and silently, like a phantom with rouged
      cheeks.
    

      There was a brick-kiln near by, behind which there was safety from the
      rain of bullets that kept pattering incessantly on its other front and the
      shells that burst at every second on the road. The mounted group had
      halted.
    

      “Sire,” someone murmured, “you are in danger—”
     

      But the Emperor turned and motioned to his staff to take refuge in the
      narrow road that skirted the kiln, where men and horses would be sheltered
      from the fire.
    

      “Really, Sire, this is madness. Sire, we entreat you—”
     

      His only answer was to repeat his gesture; probably he thought that the
      appearance of a group of brilliant uniforms on that deserted road would
      draw the fire of the batteries on the left bank. Entirely unattended he
      rode forward into the midst of the storm of shot and shell, calmly,
      unhurriedly, with his unvarying air of resigned indifference, the air of
      one who goes to meet his appointed fate. Could it be that he heard behind
      him the implacable voice that was urging him onward, that voice from
      Paris: “March! march! die the hero's death on the piled corpses of thy
      countrymen, let the whole world look on in awe-struck admiration, so that
      thy son may reign!”—could that be what he heard? He rode forward,
      controlling his charger to a slow walk. For the space of a hundred yards
      he thus rode forward, then halted, awaiting the death he had come there to
      seek. The bullets sang in concert with a music like the fierce autumnal
      blast; a shell burst in front of him and covered him with earth. He
      maintained his attitude of patient waiting. His steed, with distended eyes
      and quivering frame, instinctively recoiled before the grim presence who
      was so close at hand and yet refused to smite horse or rider. At last the
      trying experience came to an end, and the Emperor, with his stoic
      fatalism, understanding that his time was not yet come, tranquilly
      retraced his steps, as if his only object had been to reconnoiter the
      position of the German batteries.
    

      “What courage, Sire! We beseech you, do not expose yourself further—”
     

      But, unmindful of their solicitations, he beckoned to his staff to follow
      him, not offering at present to consult their safety more than he did his
      own, and turned his horse's head toward la Moncelle, quitting the road and
      taking the abandoned fields of la Ripaille. A captain was mortally
      wounded, two horses were killed. As he passed along the line of the 12th
      corps, appearing and vanishing like a specter, the men eyed him with
      curiosity, but did not cheer.
    

      To all these events had Delaherche been witness, and now he trembled at
      the thought that he, too, as soon as he should have left the brick works,
      would have to run the gauntlet of those terrible projectiles. He lingered,
      listening to the conversation of some dismounted officers who had remained
      there.
    

      “I tell you he was killed on the spot; cut in two by a shell.”
     

      “You are wrong, I saw him carried off the field. His wound was not severe;
      a splinter struck him on the hip.”
     

      “What time was it?”
     

      “Why, about an hour ago—say half-past six. It was up there around la
      Moncelle, in a sunken road.”
     

      “I know he is dead.”
     

      “But I tell you he is not! He even sat his horse for a moment after he was
      hit, then he fainted and they carried him into a cottage to attend to his
      wound.”
     

      “And then returned to Sedan?”
     

      “Certainly; he is in Sedan now.”
     

      Of whom could they be speaking? Delaherche quickly learned that it was of
      Marshal MacMahon, who had been wounded while paying a visit of inspection
      to his advanced posts. The marshal wounded! it was “just our luck,” as the
      lieutenant of marines had put it. He was reflecting on what the
      consequences of the mishap were likely to be when an estafette
      dashed by at top speed, shouting to a comrade, whom he recognized:
    

      “General Ducrot is made commander-in-chief! The army is ordered to
      concentrate at Illy in order to retreat on Mezieres!”
     

      The courier was already far away, galloping into Bazeilles under the
      constantly increasing fire, when Delaherche, startled by the strange
      tidings that came to him in such quick succession and not relishing the
      prospect of being involved in the confusion of the retreating troops,
      plucked up courage and started on a run for Balan, whence he regained
      Sedan without much difficulty.
    

      The estafette tore through Bazeilles on a gallop, disseminating the
      news, hunting up the commanders to give them their instructions, and as he
      sped swiftly on the intelligence spread among the troops: Marshal MacMahon
      wounded, General Ducrot in command, the army falling back on Illy!
    

      “What is that they are saying?” cried Weiss, whose face by this time was
      grimy with powder. “Retreat on Mezieres at this late hour! but it is
      absurd, they will never get through!”
     

      And his conscience pricked him, he repented bitterly having given that
      counsel the day before to that very general who was now invested with the
      supreme command. Yes, certainly, that was yesterday the best, the only
      plan, to retreat, without loss of a minute's time, by the Saint-Albert
      pass, but now the way could be no longer open to them, the black swarms of
      Prussians had certainly anticipated them and were on the plain of
      Donchery. There were two courses left for them to pursue, both desperate;
      and the most promising, as well as the bravest, of them was to drive the
      Bavarians into the Meuse, and cut their way through and regain possession
      of the Carignan road.
    

      Weiss, whose spectacles were constantly slipping down upon his nose,
      adjusted them nervously and proceeded to explain matters to the
      lieutenant, who was still seated against the wall with his two stumps of
      legs, very pale and slowly bleeding to death.
    

      “Lieutenant, I assure you I am right. Tell your men to stand their ground.
      You can see for yourself that we are doing well. One more effort like the
      last, and we shall drive them into the river.”
     

      It was true that the Bavarians' second attack had been repulsed. The
      mitrailleuses had again swept the Place de l'Eglise, the heaps of corpses
      in the square resembled barricades, and our troops, emerging from every
      cross street, had driven the enemy at the point of the bayonet through the
      meadows toward the river in headlong flight, which might easily have been
      converted into a general rout had there been fresh troops to support the
      sailor-boys, who had suffered severely and were by this time much
      distressed. And in Montivilliers Park, again, the firing did not seem to
      advance, which was a sign that in that quarter, also, reinforcements,
      could they have been had, would have cleared the wood.
    

      “Order your men to charge them with the bayonet, lieutenant.”
     

      The waxen pallor of death was on the poor boy-officer's face; yet he had
      strength to murmur in feeble accents:
    

      “You hear, my children; give them the bayonet!”
     

      It was his last utterance; his spirit passed, his ingenuous, resolute face
      and his wide open eyes still turned on the battle. The flies already were
      beginning to buzz about Francoise's head and settle there, while lying on
      his bed little Charles, in an access of delirium, was calling on his
      mother in pitiful, beseeching tones to give him something to quench his
      thirst.
    

      “Mother, mother, awake; get up—I am thirsty, I am so thirsty.”
     

      But the instructions of the new chief were imperative, and the officers,
      vexed and grieved to see the successes they had achieved thus rendered
      nugatory, had nothing for it but to give orders for the retreat. It was
      plain that the commander-in-chief, possessed by a haunting dread of the
      enemy's turning movement, was determined to sacrifice everything in order
      to escape from the toils. The Place de l'Eglise was evacuated, the troops
      fell back from street to street; soon the broad avenue was emptied of its
      defenders. Women shrieked and sobbed, men swore and shook their fists at
      the retiring troops, furious to see themselves abandoned thus. Many shut
      themselves in their houses, resolved to die in their defense.
    

      “Well, I am not going to give up the ship!” shouted Weiss, beside
      himself with rage. “No! I will leave my skin here first. Let them come on!
      let them come and smash my furniture and drink my wine!”
     

      Wrath filled his mind to the exclusion of all else, a wild, fierce desire
      to fight, to kill, at the thought that the hated foreigner should enter
      his house, sit in his chair, drink from his glass. It wrought a change in
      all his nature; everything that went to make up his daily life—wife,
      business, the methodical prudence of the small bourgeois—seemed
      suddenly to become unstable and drift away from him. And he shut himself
      up in his house and barricaded it, he paced the empty apartments with the
      restless impatience of a caged wild beast, going from room to room to make
      sure that all the doors and windows were securely fastened. He counted his
      cartridges and found he had forty left, then, as he was about to give a
      final look to the meadows to see whether any attack was to be apprehended
      from that quarter, the sight of the hills on the left bank arrested his
      attention for a moment. The smoke-wreaths indicated distinctly the
      position of the Prussian batteries, and at the corner of a little wood on
      la Marfee, over the powerful battery at Frenois, he again beheld the group
      of uniforms, more numerous than before, and so distinct in the bright
      sunlight that by supplementing his spectacles with his binocle he could
      make out the gold of their epaulettes and helmets.
    

      “You dirty scoundrels, you dirty scoundrels!” he twice repeated, extending
      his clenched fist in impotent menace.
    

      Those who were up there on la Marfee were King William and his staff. As
      early as seven o'clock he had ridden up from Vendresse, where he had had
      quarters for the night, and now was up there on the heights, out of reach
      of danger, while at his feet lay the valley of the Meuse and the vast
      panorama of the field of battle. Far as the eye could reach, from north to
      south, the bird's-eye view extended, and standing on the summit of the
      hill, as from his throne in some colossal opera box, the monarch surveyed
      the scene.
    

      In the central foreground of the picture, and standing out in bold relief
      against the venerable forests of the Ardennes, that stretched away on
      either hand from right to left, filling the northern horizon like a
      curtain of dark verdure, was the city of Sedan, with the geometrical lines
      and angles of its fortifications, protected on the south and west by the
      flooded meadows and the river. In Bazeilles houses were already burning,
      and the dark cloud of war hung heavy over the pretty village. Turning his
      eyes eastward he might discover, holding the line between la Moncelle and
      Givonne, some regiments of the 12th and 1st corps, looking like diminutive
      insects at that distance and lost to sight at intervals in the dip of the
      narrow valley in which the hamlets lay concealed; and beyond that valley
      rose the further slope, an uninhabited, uncultivated heath, of which the
      pale tints made the dark green of Chevalier's Wood look black by contrast.
      To the north the 7th corps was more distinctly visible in its position on
      the plateau of Floing, a broad belt of sere, dun fields, that sloped
      downward from the little wood of la Garenne to the verdant border of the
      stream. Further still were Floing, Saint-Menges, Fleigneux, Illy, small
      villages that lay nestled in the hollows of that billowing region where
      the landscape was a succession of hill and dale. And there, too, to the
      left was the great bend of the Meuse, where the sluggish stream,
      shimmering like molten silver in the bright sunlight, swept lazily in a
      great horseshoe around the peninsula of Iges and barred the road to
      Mezieres, leaving between its further bank and the impassable forest but
      one single gateway, the defile of Saint-Albert.
    

      It was in that triangular space that the hundred thousand men and five
      hundred guns of the French army had now been crowded and brought to bay,
      and when His Prussian Majesty condescended to turn his gaze still further
      to the westward he might perceive another plain, the plain of Donchery, a
      succession of bare fields stretching away toward Briancourt, Marancourt,
      and Vrigne-aux-Bois, a desolate expanse of gray waste beneath the clear
      blue sky; and did he turn him to the east, he again had before his eyes,
      facing the lines in which the French were so closely hemmed, a vast level
      stretch of country in which were numerous villages, first Douzy and
      Carignan, then more to the north Rubecourt, Pourru-aux-Bois, Francheval,
      Villers-Cernay, and last of all, near the frontier, Chapelle. All about
      him, far as he could see, the land was his; he could direct the movements
      of the quarter of a million of men and the eight hundred guns that
      constituted his army, could master at a glance every detail of the
      operations of his invading host. Even then the XIth corps was pressing
      forward toward Saint-Menges, while the Vth was at Vrigne-aux-Bois, and the
      Wurtemburg division was near Donchery, awaiting orders. This was what he
      beheld to the west, and if, turning to the east, he found his view
      obstructed in that quarter by tree-clad hills, he could picture to himself
      what was passing, for he had seen the XIIth corps entering the wood of
      Chevalier, he knew that by that time the Guards were at Villers-Cernay.
      There were the two arms of the gigantic vise, the army of the Crown Prince
      of Prussia on the left, the Saxon Prince's army on the right, slowly,
      irresistibly closing on each other, while the two Bavarian corps were
      hammering away at Bazeilles.
    

      Underneath the King's position the long line of batteries, stretching with
      hardly an interval from Remilly to Frenois, kept up an unintermittent
      fire, pouring their shells into Daigny and la Moncelle, sending them
      hurtling over Sedan city to sweep the northern plateaus. It was barely
      eight o'clock, and with eyes fixed on the gigantic board he directed the
      movements of the game, awaiting the inevitable end, calmly controlling the
      black cloud of men that beneath him swept, an array of pigmies, athwart
      the smiling landscape.
    

      
 
    

      In the dense fog up on the plateau of Floing Gaude, the bugler, sounded
      reveille at peep of day with all the lung-power he was possessed of, but
      the inspiring strain died away and was lost in the damp, heavy air, and
      the men, who had not had courage even to erect their tents and had thrown
      themselves, wrapped in their blankets, upon the muddy ground, did not
      awake or stir, but lay like corpses, their ashen features set and rigid in
      the slumber of utter exhaustion. To arouse them from their trance-like
      sleep they had to be shaken, one by one, and, with ghastly faces and
      haggard eyes, they rose to their feet, like beings summoned, against their
      will, back from another world. It was Jean who awoke Maurice.
    

      “What is it? Where are we!” asked the younger man. He looked affrightedly
      around him, and beheld only that gray waste, in which were floating the
      unsubstantial forms of his comrades. Objects twenty yards away were
      undistinguishable; his knowledge of the country availed him not; he could
      not even have indicated in which direction lay Sedan. Just then, however,
      the boom of cannon, somewhere in the distance, fell upon his ear. “Ah! I
      remember; the battle is for to-day; they are fighting. So much the better;
      there will be an end to our suspense!”
     

      He heard other voices around him expressing the same idea. There was a
      feeling of stern satisfaction that at last their long nightmare was to be
      dispelled, that at last they were to have a sight of those Prussians whom
      they had come out to look for, and before whom they had been retreating so
      many weary days; that they were to be given a chance to try a shot at
      them, and lighten the load of cartridges that had been tugging at their
      belts so long, with never an opportunity to burn a single one of them.
      Everyone felt that, this time, the battle would not, could not be avoided.
    

      But the guns began to thunder more loudly down at Bazeilles, and Jean bent
      his ear to listen.
    

      “Where is the firing?”
     

      “Faith,” replied Maurice, “it seems to me to be over toward the Meuse; but
      I'll be hanged if I know where we are.”
     

      “Look here, youngster,” said the corporal, “you are going to stick close
      by me to-day, for unless a man has his wits about him, don't you see, he
      is likely to get in trouble. Now, I have been there before, and can keep
      an eye out for both of us.”
     

      The others of the squad, meantime, were growling angrily because they had
      nothing with which to warm their stomachs. There was no possibility of
      kindling fires without dry wood in such weather as prevailed then, and so,
      at the very moment when they were about to go into battle, the inner man
      put in his claim for recognition, and would not be denied. Hunger is not
      conducive to heroism; to those poor fellows eating was the great, the
      momentous question of life; how lovingly they watched the boiling pot on
      those red-letter days when the soup was rich and thick; how like children
      or savages they were in their wrath when rations were not forthcoming!
    

      “No eat, no fight!” declared Chouteau. “I'll be blowed if I am going to
      risk my skin to-day!”
     

      The radical was cropping out again in the great hulking house-painter, the
      orator of Belleville, the pothouse politician, who drowned what few
      correct ideas he picked up here and there in a nauseous mixture of
      ineffable folly and falsehood.
    

      “Besides,” he went on, “what good was there in making fools of us as they
      have been doing all along, telling us that the Prussians were dying of
      hunger and disease, that they had not so much as a shirt to their back,
      and were tramping along the highways like ragged, filthy paupers!”
     

      Loubet laughed the laugh of the Parisian gamin, who has experienced the
      various vicissitudes of life in the Halles.
    

      “Oh, that's all in my eye! it is we fellows who have been catching it
      right along; we are the poor devils whose leaky brogans and tattered
      toggery would make folks throw us a copper. And then those great victories
      about which they made such a fuss! What precious liars they must be, to
      tell us that old Bismarck had been made prisoner and that a German army
      had been driven over a quarry and dashed to pieces! Oh yes, they fooled us
      in great shape.”
     

      Pache and Lapoulle, who were standing near, shook their heads and clenched
      their fists ominously. There were others, also, who made no attempt to
      conceal their anger, for the course of the newspapers in constantly
      printing bogus news had had most disastrous results; all confidence was
      destroyed, men had ceased to believe anything or anybody. And so it was
      that in the soldiers, children of a larger growth, their bright dreams of
      other days had now been supplanted by exaggerated anticipations of
      misfortune.
    

      “Pardi!” continued Chouteau, “the thing is accounted for easily
      enough, since our rulers have been selling us to the enemy right from the
      beginning. You all know that it is so.”
     

      Lapoulle's rustic simplicity revolted at the idea.
    

      “For shame! what wicked people they must be!”
     

      “Yes, sold, as Judas sold his master,” murmured Pache, mindful of his
      studies in sacred history.
    

      It was Chouteau's hour of triumph. “Mon Dieu! it is as plain as the
      nose on your face. MacMahon got three millions and each of the other
      generals got a million, as the price of bringing us up here. The bargain
      was made at Paris last spring, and last night they sent up a rocket as a
      signal to let Bismarck know that everything was fixed and he might come
      and take us.”
     

      The story was so inanely stupid that Maurice was disgusted. There had been
      a time when Chouteau, thanks to his facundity of the faubourg, had
      interested and almost convinced him, but now he had come to detest that
      apostle of falsehood, that snake in the grass, who calumniated honest
      effort of every kind in order to sicken others of it.
    

      “Why do you talk such nonsense?” he exclaimed. “You know very well there
      is no truth in it.”
     

      “What, not true? Do you mean to say it is not true that we are betrayed?
      Ah, come, my aristocratic friend, perhaps you are one of them, perhaps you
      belong to the d—d band of dirty traitors?” He came forward
      threateningly. “If you are you have only to say so, my fine gentleman, for
      we will attend to your case right here, and won't wait for your friend
      Bismarck, either.”
     

      The others were also beginning to growl and show their teeth, and Jean
      thought it time that he should interfere.
    

      “Silence there! I will report the first man who says another word!”
     

      But Chouteau sneered and jeered at him; what did he care whether he
      reported him or not! He was not going to fight unless he chose, and they
      need not try to ride him rough-shod, because he had cartridges in his box
      for other people beside the Prussians. They were going into action now,
      and what discipline had been maintained by fear would be at an end: what
      could they do to him, anyway? he would just skip as soon as he thought he
      had enough of it. And he was profane and obscene, egging the men on
      against the corporal, who had been allowing them to starve. Yes, it was
      his fault that the squad had had nothing to eat in the last three days,
      while their neighbors had soup and fresh meat in plenty, but “monsieur”
       had to go off to town with the “aristo” and enjoy himself with the girls.
      People had spotted 'em, over in Sedan.
    

      “You stole the money belonging to the squad; deny it if you dare, you bougre
      of a belly-god!”
     

      Things were beginning to assume an ugly complexion; Lapoulle was doubling
      his big fists in a way that looked like business, and Pache, with the
      pangs of hunger gnawing at his vitals, laid aside his natural douceness
      and insisted on an explanation. The only reasonable one among them was
      Loubet, who gave one of his pawky laughs and suggested that, being
      Frenchmen, they might as well dine off the Prussians as eat one another.
      For his part, he took no stock in fighting, either with fists or firearms,
      and alluding to the few hundred francs that he had earned as substitute,
      added:
    

      “And so, that was all they thought my hide was worth! Well, I am not going
      to give them more than their money's worth.”
     

      Maurice and Jean were in a towering rage at the idotic onslaught, talking
      loudly and repelling Chouteau's insinuations, when out from the fog came a
      stentorian voice, bellowing:
    

      “What's this? what's this? Show me the rascals who dare quarrel in the
      company street!”
     

      And Lieutenant Rochas appeared upon the scene, in his old kepi,
      whence the rain had washed all the color, and his great coat, minus many
      of its buttons, evincing in all his lean, shambling person the extreme of
      poverty and distress. Notwithstanding his forlorn aspect, however, his
      sparkling eye and bristling mustache showed that his old time confidence
      had suffered no impairment.
    

      Jean spoke up, scarce able to restrain himself. “Lieutenant, it is these
      men, who persist in saying that we are betrayed. Yes, they dare to assert
      that our generals have sold us—”
     

      The idea of treason did not appear so extremely unnatural to Rochas's
      thick understanding, for it served to explain those reverses that he could
      not account for otherwise.
    

      “Well, suppose they are sold, is it any of their business? What concern is
      it of theirs? The Prussians are there all the same, aren't they? and we
      are going to give them one of the old-fashioned hidings, such as they
      won't forget in one while.” Down below them in the thick sea of fog the
      guns at Bazeilles were still pounding away, and he extended his arms with
      a broad, sweeping gesture: “Hein! this is the time that we've got
      them! We'll see them back home, and kick them every step of the way!”
     

      All the trials and troubles of the past were to him as if they had not
      been, now that his ears were gladdened by the roar of the guns: the delays
      and conflicting orders of the chiefs, the demoralization of the troops,
      the stampede at Beaumont, the distress of the recent forced retreat on
      Sedan—all were forgotten. Now that they were about to fight at last,
      was not victory certain? He had learned nothing and forgotten nothing; his
      blustering, boastful contempt of the enemy, his entire ignorance of the
      new arts and appliances of war, his rooted conviction that an old soldier
      of Africa, Italy, and the Crimea could by no possibility be beaten, had
      suffered no change. It was really a little too comical that a man at his
      age should take the back track and begin at the beginning again!
    

      All at once his lantern jaws parted and gave utterance to a loud laugh. He
      was visited by one of those impulses of good-fellowship that made his men
      swear by him, despite the roughness of the jobations that he frequently
      bestowed on them.
    

      “Look here, my children, in place of quarreling it will be a great deal
      better to take a good nip all around. Come, I'm going to treat, and you
      shall drink my health.”
     

      From the capacious pocket of his capote he extracted a bottle of brandy,
      adding, with his all-conquering air, that it was the gift of a lady. (He
      had been seen the day before, seated at the table of a tavern in Floing
      and holding the waitress on his lap, evidently on the best of terms with
      her.) The soldiers laughed and winked at one another, holding out their
      porringers, into which he gayly poured the golden liquor.
    

      “Drink to your sweethearts, my children, if you have any and don't forget
      to drink to the glory of France. Them's my sentiments, so vive la joie!”
     

      “That's right, Lieutenant. Here's to your health, and everybody else's!”
     

      They all drank, and their hearts were warmed and peace reigned once more.
      The “nip” had much of comfort in it, in the chill morning, just as they
      were going into action, and Maurice felt it tingling in his veins, giving
      him cheer and a sort of what is known colloquially as “Dutch courage.” Why
      should they not whip the Prussians? Have not battles their surprises? has
      not history embalmed many an instance of the fickleness of fortune? That
      mighty man of war, the lieutenant, added that Bazaine was on the way to
      join them, would be with them before the day was over: oh, the information
      was positive; he had it from an aid to one of the generals; and although,
      in speaking of the route the marshal was to come by, he pointed to the
      frontier of Belgium, Maurice yielded to one of those spasmodic attacks of
      hopefulness of his, without which life to him would not have been worth
      living. Might it not be that the day of reckoning was at hand?
    

      “Why don't we move, Lieutenant?” he made bold to ask. “What are we waiting
      for?”
     

      Rochas made a gesture, which the other interpreted to mean that no orders
      had been received. Presently he asked:
    

      “Has anybody seen the captain?”
     

      No one answered. Jean remembered perfectly having seen him making for
      Sedan the night before, but to the soldier who knows what is good for
      himself, his officers are always invisible when they are not on duty. He
      held his tongue, therefore, until happening to turn his head, he caught
      sight of a shadowy form flitting along the hedge.
    

      “Here he is,” said he.
    

      It was Captain Beaudoin in the flesh. They were all surprised by the
      nattiness of his appearance, his resplendent shoes, his well-brushed
      uniform, affording such a striking contrast to the lieutenant's pitiful
      state. And there was a finicking completeness, moreover, about his toilet,
      greater than the male being is accustomed to bestow upon himself, in his
      scrupulously white hands and his carefully curled mustache, and a faint
      perfume of Persian lilac, which had the effect of reminding one in some
      mysterious way of the dressing room of a young and pretty woman.
    

      “Hallo!” said Loubet, with a sneer, “the captain has recovered his
      baggage!”
     

      But no one laughed, for they all knew him to be a man with whom it was not
      well to joke. He was stiff and consequential with his men, and was
      detested accordingly; a pete sec, to use Rochas's expression. He
      had seemed to regard the early reverses of the campaign as personal
      affronts, and the disaster that all had prognosticated was to him an
      unpardonable crime. He was a strong Bonapartist by conviction; his
      prospects for promotion were of the brightest; he had several important
      salons looking after his interests; naturally, he did not take kindly to
      the changed condition of affairs that promised to make his cake dough. He
      was said to have a remarkably fine tenor voice, which had helped him no
      little in his advancement. He was not devoid of intelligence, though
      perfectly ignorant as regarded everything connected with his profession;
      eager to please, and very brave, when there was occasion for being so,
      without superfluous rashness.
    

      “What a nasty fog!” was all he said, pleased to have found his company at
      last, for which he had been searching for more than half an hour.
    

      At the same time their orders came, and the battalion moved forward. They
      had to proceed with caution, feeling their way, for the exhalations
      continued to rise from the stream and were now so dense that they were
      precipitated in a fine, drizzling rain. A vision rose before Maurice's
      eyes that impressed him deeply; it was Colonel de Vineuil, who loomed
      suddenly from out the mist, sitting his horse, erect and motionless, at
      the intersection of two roads—the man appearing of preternatural
      size, and so pale and rigid that he might have served a sculptor as a
      study for a statue of despair; the steed shivering in the raw, chill air
      of morning, his dilated nostrils turned in the direction of the distant
      firing. Some ten paces to their rear were the regimental colors, which the
      sous-lieutenant whose duty it was to bear them had thus early taken from
      their case and proudly raised aloft, and as the driving, vaporous rack
      eddied and swirled about them, they shone like a radiant vision of glory
      emblazoned on the heavens, soon to fade and vanish from the sight. Water
      was dripping from the gilded eagle, and the tattered, shot-riddled
      tri-color, on which were embroidered the names of former victories, was
      stained and its bright hues dimmed by the smoke of many a battlefield; the
      sole bit of brilliant color in all the faded splendor was the enameled
      cross of honor that was attached to the cravate.
    

      Another billow of vapor came scurrying up from the river, enshrouding in
      its fleecy depths colonel, standard, and all, and the battalion passed on,
      whitherward no one could tell. First their route had conducted them over
      descending ground, now they were climbing a hill. On reaching the summit
      the command, halt! started at the front and ran down the column; the men
      were cautioned not to leave the ranks, arms were ordered, and there they
      remained, the heavy knapsacks forming a grievous burden to weary
      shoulders. It was evident that they were on a plateau, but to discern
      localities was out of the question; twenty paces was the extreme range of
      vision. It was now seven o'clock; the sound of firing reached them more
      distinctly, other batteries were apparently opening on Sedan from the
      opposite bank.
    

      “Oh! I,” said Sergeant Sapin with a start, addressing Jean and Maurice, “I
      shall be killed to-day.”
     

      It was the first time he had opened his lips that morning; an expression
      of dreamy melancholy had rested on his thin face, with its big, handsome
      eyes and thin, pinched nose.
    

      “What an idea!” Jean exclaimed; “who can tell what is going to happen him?
      Every bullet has its billet, they say, but you stand no worse chance than
      the rest of us.”
     

      “Oh, but me—I am as good as dead now. I tell you I shall be killed
      to-day.”
     

      The near files turned and looked at him curiously, asking him if he had
      had a dream. No, he had dreamed nothing, but he felt it; it was there.
    

      “And it is a pity, all the same, because I was to be married when I got my
      discharge.”
     

      A vague expression came into his eyes again; his past life rose before
      him. He was the son of a small retail grocer at Lyons, and had been petted
      and spoiled by his mother up to the time of her death; then rejecting the
      proffer of his father, with whom he did not hit it off well, to assist in
      purchasing his discharge, he had remained with the army, weary and
      disgusted with life and with his surroundings. Coming home on furlough,
      however, he fell in love with a cousin and they became engaged; their
      intention was to open a little shop on the small capital which she would
      bring him, and then existence once more became desirable. He had received
      an elementary education; could read, write, and cipher. For the past year
      he had lived only in anticipation of this happy future.
    

      He shivered, and gave himself a shake to dispel his revery, repeating with
      his tranquil air:
    

      “Yes, it is too bad; I shall be killed to-day.”
     

      No one spoke; the uncertainty and suspense continued. They knew not
      whether the enemy was on their front or in their rear. Strange sounds came
      to their ears from time to time from out the depths of the mysterious fog:
      the rumble of wheels, the deadened tramp of moving masses, the distant
      clatter of horses' hoofs; it was the evolutions of troops, hidden from
      view behind the misty curtain, the batteries, battalions, and squadrons of
      the 7th corps taking up their positions in line of battle. Now, however,
      it began to look as if the fog was about to lift; it parted here and there
      and fragments floated lightly off, like strips of gauze torn from a veil,
      and bits of sky appeared, not transparently blue, as on a bright summer's
      day, but opaque and of the hue of burnished steel, like the cheerless
      bosom of some deep, sullen mountain tarn. It was in one of those brighter
      moments when the sun was endeavoring to struggle forth that the regiments
      of chasseurs d'Afrique, constituting part of Margueritte's division, came
      riding by, giving the impression of a band of spectral horsemen. They sat
      very stiff and erect in the saddle, with their short cavalry jackets,
      broad red sashes and smart little kepis, accurate in distance and
      alignment and managing admirably their lean, wiry mounts, which were
      almost invisible under the heterogeneous collection of tools and camp
      equipage that they had to carry. Squadron after squadron they swept by in
      long array, to be swallowed in the gloom from which they had just emerged,
      vanishing as if dissolved by the fine rain. The truth was, probably, that
      they were in the way, and their leaders, not knowing what use to put them
      to, had packed them off the field, as had often been the case since the
      opening of the campaign. They had scarcely ever been employed on scouting
      or reconnoitering duty, and as soon as there was prospect of a fight were
      trotted about for shelter from valley to valley, useless objects, but too
      costly to be endangered.
    

      Maurice thought of Prosper as he watched them. “That fellow, yonder, looks
      like him,” he said, under his breath. “I wonder if it is he?”
     

      “Of whom are you speaking?” asked Jean.
    

      “Of that young man of Remilly, whose brother we met at Osches, you
      remember.”
     

      Behind the chasseurs, when they had all passed, came a general officer and
      his staff dashing down the descending road, and Maurice recognized the
      general of their brigade, Bourgain-Desfeuilles, shouting and gesticulating
      wildly. He had torn himself reluctantly from his comfortable quarters at
      the Hotel of the Golden Cross, and it was evident from the horrible temper
      he was in that the condition of affairs that morning was not satisfactory
      to him. In a tone of voice so loud that everyone could hear he roared:
    

      “In the devil's name, what stream is that off yonder, the Meuse or the
      Moselle?”
     

      The fog dispersed at last, this time in earnest. As at Bazeilles the
      effect was theatrical; the curtain rolled slowly upward to the flies,
      disclosing the setting of the stage. From a sky of transparent blue the
      sun poured down a flood of bright, golden light, and Maurice was no longer
      at a loss to recognize their position.
    

      “Ah!” he said to Jean, “we are on the plateau de l'Algerie. That village
      that you see across the valley, directly in our front, is Floing, and that
      more distant one is Saint-Menges, and that one, more distant still, a
      little to the right, is Fleigneux. Then those scrubby trees on the
      horizon, away in the background, are the forest of the Ardennes, and there
      lies the frontier—”
     

      He went on to explain their position, naming each locality and pointing to
      it with outstretched hand. The plateau de l'Algerie was a belt of reddish
      ground, something less than two miles in length, sloping gently downward
      from the wood of la Garenne toward the Meuse, from which it was separated
      by the meadows. On it the line of the 7th corps had been established by
      General Douay, who felt that his numbers were not sufficient to defend so
      extended a position and properly maintain his touch with the 1st corps,
      which was posted at right angles with his line, occupying the valley of la
      Givonne, from the wood of la Garenne to Daigny.
    

      “Oh, isn't it grand, isn't it magnificent!”
     

      And Maurice, revolving on his heel, made with his hand a sweeping gesture
      that embraced the entire horizon. From their position on the plateau the
      whole wide field of battle lay stretched before them to the south and
      west: Sedan, almost at their feet, whose citadel they could see
      overtopping the roofs, then Balan and Bazeilles, dimly seen through the
      dun smoke-clouds that hung heavily in the motionless air, and further in
      the distance the hills of the left bank, Liry, la Marfee, la Croix-Piau.
      It was away toward the west, however, in the direction of Donchery, that
      the prospect was most extensive. There the Meuse curved horseshoe-wise,
      encircling the peninsula of Iges with a ribbon of pale silver, and at the
      northern extremity of the loop was distinctly visible the narrow road of
      the Saint-Albert pass, winding between the river bank and a beetling,
      overhanging hill that was crowned with the little wood of Seugnon, an
      offshoot of the forest of la Falizette. At the summit of the hill, at the
      carrefour of la Maison-Rouge, the road from Donchery to
      Vrigne-aux-Bois debouched into the Mezieres pike.
    

      “See, that is the road by which we might retreat on Mezieres.”
     

      Even as he spoke the first gun was fired from Saint-Menges. The fog still
      hung over the bottom-lands in shreds and patches, and through it they
      dimly descried a shadowy body of men moving through the Saint-Albert
      defile.
    

      “Ah, they are there,” continued Maurice, instinctively lowering his voice.
      “Too late, too late; they have intercepted us!”
     

      It was not eight o'clock. The guns, which were thundering more fiercely
      than ever in the direction of Bazeilles, now also began to make themselves
      heard at the eastward, in the valley of la Givonne, which was hid from
      view; it was the army of the Crown Prince of Saxony, debouching from the
      Chevalier wood and attacking the 1st corps, in front of Daigny village;
      and now that the XIth Prussian corps, moving on Floing, had opened fire on
      General Douay's troops, the investment was complete at every point of the
      great periphery of several leagues' extent, and the action was general all
      along the line.
    

      Maurice suddenly perceived the enormity of their blunder in not retreating
      on Mezieres during the night; but as yet the consequences were not clear
      to him; he could not foresee all the disaster that was to result from that
      fatal error of judgment. Moved by some indefinable instinct of danger, he
      looked with apprehension on the adjacent heights that commanded the
      plateau de l'Algerie. If time had not been allowed them to make good their
      retreat, why had they not backed up against the frontier and occupied
      those heights of Illy and Saint-Menges, whence, if they could not maintain
      their position, they would at least have been free to cross over into
      Belgium? There were two points that appeared to him especially
      threatening, the mamelon of Hattoy, to the north of Floing on the
      left, and the Calvary of Illy, a stone cross with a linden tree on either
      side, the highest bit of ground in the surrounding country, to the right.
      General Douay was keenly alive to the importance of these eminences, and
      the day before had sent two battalions to occupy Hattoy; but the men,
      feeling that they were “in the air” and too remote from support, had
      fallen back early that morning. It was understood that the left wing of
      the 1st corps was to take care of the Calvary of Illy. The wide expanse of
      naked country between Sedan and the Ardennes forest was intersected by
      deep ravines, and the key of the position was manifestly there, in the
      shadow of that cross and the two lindens, whence their guns might sweep
      the fields in every direction for a long distance.
    

      Two more cannon shots rang out, quickly succeeded by a salvo; they
      detected the bluish smoke rising from the underbrush of a low hill to the
      left of Saint-Menges.
    

      “Our turn is coming now,” said Jean.
    

      Nothing more startling occurred just then, however. The men, still
      preserving their formation and standing at ordered arms, found something
      to occupy their attention in the fine appearance made by the 2d division,
      posted in front of Floing, with their left refused and facing the Meuse,
      so as to guard against a possible attack from that quarter. The ground to
      the east, as far as the wood of la Garenne, beneath Illy village, was held
      by the 3d division, while the 1st, which had lost heavily at Beaumont,
      formed a second line. All night long the engineers had been busy with pick
      and shovel, and even after the Prussians had opened fire they were still
      digging away at their shelter trenches and throwing up epaulments.
    

      Then a sharp rattle of musketry, quickly silenced, however, was heard
      proceeding from a point beneath Floing, and Captain Beaudoin received
      orders to move his company three hundred yards to the rear. Their new
      position was in a great field of cabbages, upon reaching which the captain
      made his men lie down. The sun had not yet drunk up the moisture that had
      descended on the vegetables in the darkness, and every fold and crease of
      the thick, golden-green leaves was filled with trembling drops, as
      pellucid and luminous as brilliants of the fairest water.
    

      “Sight for four hundred yards,” the captain ordered.
    

      Maurice rested the barrel of his musket on a cabbage that reared its head
      conveniently before him, but it was impossible to see anything in his
      recumbent position: only the blurred surface of the fields traversed by
      his level glance, diversified by an occasional tree or shrub. Giving Jean,
      who was beside him, a nudge with his elbow, he asked what they were to do
      there. The corporal, whose experience in such matters was greater, pointed
      to an elevation not far away, where a battery was just taking its
      position; it was evident that they had been placed there to support that
      battery, should there be need of their services. Maurice, wondering
      whether Honore and his guns were not of the party, raised his head to
      look, but the reserve artillery was at the rear, in the shelter of a
      little grove of trees.
    

      “Nom de Dieu!” yelled Rochas, “will you lie down!”
     

      And Maurice had barely more than complied with this intimation when a
      shell passed screaming over him. From that time forth there seemed to be
      no end to them. The enemy's gunners were slow in obtaining the range,
      their first projectiles passing over and landing well to the rear of the
      battery, which was now opening in reply. Many of their shells, too, fell
      upon the soft ground, in which they buried themselves without exploding,
      and for a time there was a great display of rather heavy wit at the
      expense of those bloody sauerkraut eaters.
    

      “Well, well!” said Loubet, “their fireworks are a fizzle!”
     

      “They ought to take them in out of the rain,” sneered Chouteau.
    

      Even Rochas thought it necessary to say something. “Didn't I tell you that
      the dunderheads don't know enough even to point a gun?”
     

      But they were less inclined to laugh when a shell burst only ten yards
      from them and sent a shower of earth flying over the company; Loubet
      affected to make light of it by ordering his comrades to get out their
      brushes from the knapsacks, but Chouteau suddenly became very pale and had
      not a word to say. He had never been under fire, nor had Pache and
      Lapoulle, nor any member of the squad, in fact, except Jean. Over eyes
      that had suddenly lost their brightness lids flickered tremulously; voices
      had an unnatural, muffled sound, as if arrested by some obstruction in the
      throat. Maurice, who was sufficiently master of himself as yet, endeavored
      to diagnose his symptoms; he could not be afraid, for he was not conscious
      that he was in danger; he only felt a slight sensation of discomfort in
      the epigastric region, and his head seemed strangely light and empty;
      ideas and images came and went independent of his will. His recollection
      of the brave show made by the troops of the 2d division made him hopeful,
      almost to buoyancy; victory appeared certain to him if only they might be
      allowed to go at the enemy with the bayonet.
    

      “Listen!” he murmured, “how the flies buzz; the place is full of them.”
       Thrice he had heard something that sounded like the humming of a swarm of
      bees.
    

      “That was not a fly,” Jean said, with a laugh. “It was a bullet.”
     

      Again and again the hum of those invisible wings made itself heard. The
      men craned their necks and looked about them with eager interest; their
      curiosity was uncontrollable—would not allow them to remain quiet.
    

      “See here,” Loubet said mysteriously to Lapoulle, with a view to raise a
      laugh at the expense of his simple-minded comrade, “when you see a bullet
      coming toward you you must raise your forefinger before your nose—like
      that; it divides the air, and the bullet will go by to the right or left.”
     

      “But I can't see them,” said Lapoulle.
    

      A loud guffaw burst from those near.
    

      “Oh, crickey! he says he can't see them! Open your garret windows, stupid!
      See! there's one—see! there's another. Didn't you see that one? It
      was of the most beautiful green.”
     

      And Lapoulle rolled his eyes and stared, placing his finger before his
      nose, while Pache fingered the scapular he wore and wished it was large
      enough to shield his entire person.
    

      Rochas, who had remained on his feet, spoke up and said jocosely:
    

      “Children, there is no objection to your ducking to the shells when you
      see them coming. As for the bullets, it is useless; they are too
      numerous!”
     

      At that very instant a soldier in the front rank was struck on the head by
      a fragment of an exploding shell. There was no outcry; simply a spurt of
      blood and brain, and all was over.
    

      “Poor devil!” tranquilly said Sergeant Sapin, who was quite cool and
      exceedingly pale. “Next!”
     

      But the uproar had by this time become so deafening that the men could no
      longer hear one another's voice; Maurice's nerves, in particular, suffered
      from the infernal charivari. The neighboring battery was banging
      away as fast as the gunners could load the pieces; the continuous roar
      seemed to shake the ground, and the mitrailleuses were even more
      intolerable with their rasping, grating, grunting noise. Were they to
      remain forever reclining there among the cabbages? There was nothing to be
      seen, nothing to be learned; no one had any idea how the battle was going.
      And was it a battle, after all—a genuine affair? All that
      Maurice could make out, projecting his eyes along the level surface of the
      fields, was the rounded, wood-clad summit of Hattoy in the remote
      distance, and still unoccupied. Neither was there a Prussian to be seen
      anywhere on the horizon; the only evidence of life were the faint, blue
      smoke-wreaths that rose and floated an instant in the sunlight. Chancing
      to turn his head, he was greatly surprised to behold at the bottom of a
      deep, sheltered valley, surrounded by precipitous heights, a peasant
      calmly tilling his little field, driving the plow through the furrow with
      the assistance of a big white horse. Why should he lose a day? The corn
      would keep growing, let them fight as they would, and folks must live.
    

      Unable longer to control his impatience, the young man jumped to his feet.
      He had a fleeting vision of the batteries of Saint-Menges, crowned with
      tawny vapors and spewing shot and shell upon them; he had also time to
      see, what he had seen before and had not forgotten, the road from
      Saint-Albert's pass black with minute moving objects—the swarming
      hordes of the invader. Then Jean seized him by the legs and pulled him
      violently to his place again.
    

      “Are you crazy? Do you want to leave your bones here?”
     

      And Rochas chimed in:
    

      “Lie down, will you! What am I to do with such d——d rascals,
      who get themselves killed without orders!”
     

      “But you don't lie down, lieutenant,” said Maurice.
    

      “That's a different thing. I have to know what is going on.”
     

      Captain Beaudoin, too, kept his legs like a man, but never opened his lips
      to say an encouraging word to his men, having nothing in common with them.
      He appeared nervous and unable to remain long in one place, striding up
      and down the field, impatiently awaiting orders.
    

      No orders came, nothing occurred to relieve their suspense. Maurice's
      knapsack was causing him horrible suffering; it seemed to be crushing his
      back and chest in that recumbent position, so painful when maintained for
      any length of time. The men had been cautioned against throwing away their
      sacks unless in case of actual necessity, and he kept turning over, first
      on his right side, then on the left, to ease himself a moment of his
      burden by resting it on the ground. The shells continued to fall around
      them, but the German gunners did not succeed in getting the exact range;
      no one was killed after the poor fellow who lay there on his stomach with
      his skull fractured.
    

      “Say, is this thing to last all day?” Maurice finally asked Jean, in sheer
      desperation.
    

      “Like enough. At Solferino they put us in a field of carrots, and there we
      stayed five mortal hours with our noses to the ground.” Then he added,
      like the sensible fellow he was: “Why do you grumble? we are not so badly
      off here. You will have an opportunity to distinguish yourself before the
      day is over. Let everyone have his chance, don't you see; if we should all
      be killed at the beginning there would be none left for the end.”
     

      “Look,” Maurice abruptly broke in, “look at that smoke over Hattoy. They
      have taken Hattoy; we shall have plenty of music to dance to now!”
     

      For a moment his burning curiosity, which he was conscious was now for the
      first time beginning to be dashed with personal fear, had sufficient to
      occupy it; his gaze was riveted on the rounded summit of the mamelon,
      the only elevation that was within his range of vision, dominating the
      broad expanse of plain that lay level with his eye. Hattoy was too far
      distant to permit him to distinguish the gunners of the batteries that the
      Prussians had posted there; he could see nothing at all, in fact, save the
      smoke that at each discharge rose above a thin belt of woods that served
      to mask the guns. The enemy's occupation of the position, of which General
      Douay had been forced to abandon the defense, was, as Maurice had
      instinctively felt, an event of the gravest importance and destined to
      result in the most disastrous consequences; its possessors would have
      entire command of all the surrounding plateau. This was quickly seen to be
      the case, for the batteries that opened on the second division of the 7th
      corps did fearful execution. They had now perfected their range, and the
      French battery, near which Beaudoin's company was stationed, had two men
      killed in quick succession. A quartermaster's man in the company had his
      left heel carried away by a splinter and began to howl most dismally, as
      if visited by a sudden attack of madness.
    

      “Shut up, you great calf!” said Rochas. “What do you mean by yelling like
      that for a little scratch!”
     

      The man suddenly ceased his outcries and subsided into a stupid silence,
      nursing his foot in his hand.
    

      And still the tremendous artillery duel raged, and the death-dealing
      missiles went screaming over the recumbent ranks of the regiments that lay
      there on the sullen, sweltering plain, where no thing of life was to be
      seen beneath the blazing sun. The crashing thunder, the destroying
      hurricane, were masters in that solitude, and many long hours would pass
      before the end. But even thus early in the day the Germans had
      demonstrated the superiority of their artillery; their percussion shells
      had an enormous range, and exploded, with hardly an exception, on reaching
      their destination, while the French time-fuse shells, with a much shorter
      range, burst for the most part in the air and were wasted. And there was
      nothing left for the poor fellows exposed to that murderous fire save to
      hug the ground and make themselves as small as possible; they were even
      denied the privilege of firing in reply, which would have kept their mind
      occupied and given them a measure of relief; but upon whom or what were
      they to direct their rifles? since there was not a living soul to be seen
      upon the entire horizon!
    

      “Are we never to have a shot at them? I would give a dollar for just one
      chance!” said Maurice, in a frenzy of impatience. “It is disgusting to
      have them blazing away at us like this and not be allowed to answer.”
     

      “Be patient; the time will come,” Jean imperturbably replied.
    

      Their attention was attracted by the sound of mounted men approaching on
      their left, and turning their heads they beheld General Douay, who,
      accompanied by his staff, had come galloping up to see how his troops were
      behaving under the terrible fire from Hattoy. He appeared well pleased
      with what he saw and was in the act of making some suggestions to the
      officers grouped around him, when, emerging from a sunken road, General
      Bourgain-Desfeuilles also rode up. This officer, though he owed his
      advancement to “influence” was wedded to the antiquated African routine
      and had learned nothing by experience, sat his horse with great composure
      under the storm of projectiles. He was shouting to the men and
      gesticulating wildly, after the manner of Rochas: “They are coming, they
      will be here right away, and then we'll let them have the bayonet!” when
      he caught sight of General Douay and drew up to his side.
    

      “Is it true that the marshal is wounded, general?” he asked.
    

      “It is but too true, unfortunately. I received a note from Ducrot only a
      few minutes ago, in which he advises me of the fact, and also notifies me
      that, by the marshal's appointment, he is in command of the army.”
     

      “Ah! so it is Ducrot who is to have his place! And what are the orders
      now?”
     

      The general shook his head sorrowfully. He had felt that the army was
      doomed, and for the last twenty-four hours had been strenuously
      recommending the occupation of Illy and Saint-Menges in order to keep a
      way of retreat open on Mezieres.
    

      “Ducrot will carry out the plan we talked of yesterday: the whole army is
      to be concentrated on the plateau of Illy.”
     

      And he repeated his previous gesture, as if to say it was too late.
    

      His words were partly inaudible in the roar of the artillery, but Maurice
      caught their significance clearly enough, and it left him dumfounded by
      astonishment and alarm. What! Marshal MacMahon wounded since early that
      morning, General Ducrot commanding in his place for the last two hours,
      the entire army retreating to the northward of Sedan—and all these
      important events kept from the poor devils of soldiers who were
      squandering their life's blood! and all their destinies, dependent on the
      life of a single man, were to be intrusted to the direction of fresh and
      untried hands! He had a distinct consciousness of the fate that was in
      reserve for the army of Chalons, deprived of its commander, destitute of
      any guiding principle of action, dragged purposelessly in this direction
      and in that, while the Germans went straight and swift to their
      preconcerted end with mechanical precision and directness.
    

      Bourgain-Desfeuilles had wheeled his horse and was moving away, when
      General Douay, to whom a grimy, dust-stained hussar had galloped up with
      another dispatch, excitedly summoned him back.
    

      “General! General!”
     

      His voice rang out so loud and clear, with such an accent of surprise,
      that it drowned the uproar of the guns.
    

      “General, Ducrot is no longer in command; de Wimpffen is chief. You know
      he reached here yesterday, just in the very thick of the disaster at
      Beaumont, to relieve de Failly at the head of the 5th corps—and he
      writes me that he has written instructions from the Minister of War
      assigning him to the command of the army in case the post should become
      vacant. And there is to be no more retreating; the orders now are to
      reoccupy our old positions, and defend them to the last.”
     

      General Bourgain-Desfeuilles drank in the tidings, his eyes bulging with
      astonishment. “Nom de Dieu!” he at last succeeded in ejaculating,
      “one would like to know—But it is no business of mine, anyhow.” And
      off he galloped, not allowing himself to be greatly agitated by this
      unexpected turn of affairs, for he had gone into the war solely in the
      hope of seeing his name raised a grade higher in the army list, and it was
      his great desire to behold the end of the beastly campaign as soon as
      possible, since it was productive of so little satisfaction to anyone.
    

      Then there was an explosion of derision and contempt among the men of
      Beaudoin's company. Maurice said nothing, but he shared the opinion of
      Chouteau and Loubet, who chaffed and blackguarded everyone without mercy.
      “See-saw, up and down, move as I pull the string! A fine gang they were,
      those generals! they understood one another; they were not going to pull
      all the blankets off the bed! What was a poor devil of a soldier to do
      when he had such leaders put over him? Three commanders in two hours'
      time, three great numskulls, none of whom knew what was the right thing to
      do, and all of them giving different orders! Demoralized, were they? Good
      Heavens, it was enough to demoralize God Almighty himself, and all His
      angels!” And the inevitable accusation of treason was again made to do
      duty; Ducrot and de Wimpffen wanted to get three millions apiece out of
      Bismarck, as MacMahon had done.
    

      Alone in advance of his staff General Douay sat on his horse a long time,
      his gaze bent on the distant positions of the enemy and in his eyes an
      expression of infinite melancholy. He made a minute and protracted
      observation of Hattoy, the shells from which came tumbling almost at his
      very feet; then, giving a glance at the plateau of Illy, called up an
      officer to carry an order to the brigade of the 5th corps that he had
      borrowed the day previous from General de Wimpffen, and which served to
      connect his right with the left of General Ducrot. He was distinctly heard
      to say these words:
    

      “If the Prussians should once get possession of the Calvary it would be
      impossible for us to hold this position an hour; we should be driven into
      Sedan.”
     

      He rode off and was lost to view, together with his escort, at the
      entrance of the sunken road, and the German fire became hotter than
      before. They had doubtless observed the presence of the group of mounted
      officers; but now the shells, which hitherto had come from the front,
      began to fall upon them laterally, from the left; the batteries at
      Frenois, together with one which the enemy had carried across the river
      and posted on the peninsula of Iges, had established, in connection with
      the guns on Hattoy, an enfilading fire which swept the plateau de
      l'Algerie in its entire length and breadth. The position of the company
      now became most lamentable; the men, with death in front of them and on
      their flank, knew not which way to turn or which of the menacing perils to
      guard themselves against. In rapid succession three men were killed
      outright and two severely wounded.
    

      It was then that Sergeant Sapin met the death that he had predicted for
      himself. He had turned his head, and caught sight of the approaching
      missile when it was too late for him to avoid it.
    

      “Ah, here it is!” was all he said.
    

      There was no terror in the thin face, with its big handsome eyes; it was
      only pale; very pale and inexpressibly mournful. The wound was in the
      abdomen.
    

      “Oh! do not leave me here,” he pleaded; “take me to the ambulance, I
      beseech you. Take me to the rear.”
     

      Rochas endeavored to silence him, and it was on his brutal lips to say
      that it was useless to imperil two comrades' lives for one whose wound was
      so evidently mortal, when his better nature made its influence felt and he
      murmured:
    

      “Be patient for a little, my poor boy, and the litter-bearers will come
      and get you.”
     

      But the wretched man, whose tears were now flowing, kept crying, as one
      distraught that his dream of happiness was vanishing with his trickling
      life-blood:
    

      “Take me away, take me away—”
     

      Finally Captain Beaudoin, whose already unstrung nerves were further
      irritated by his pitiful cries, called for two volunteers to carry him to
      a little piece of woods a short way off where a flying ambulance had been
      established. Chouteau and Loubet jumped to their feet simultaneously,
      anticipating the others, seized the sergeant, one of them by the
      shoulders, the other by the legs, and bore him away on a run. They had
      gone but a little way, however, when they felt the body becoming rigid in
      the final convulsion; he was dying.
    

      “I say, he's dead,” exclaimed Loubet. “Let's leave him here.”
     

      But Chouteau, without relaxing his speed, angrily replied:
    

      “Go ahead, you booby, will you! Do you take me for a fool, to leave him
      here and have them call us back!”
     

      They pursued their course with the corpse until they came to the little
      wood, threw it down at the foot of a tree, and went their way. That was
      the last that was seen of them until nightfall.
    

      The battery beside them had been strengthened by three additional guns;
      the cannonade on either side went on with increased fury, and in the
      hideous uproar terror—a wild, unreasoning terror—filled
      Maurice's soul. It was his first experience of the sensation; he had not
      until now felt that cold sweat trickling down his back, that terrible
      sinking at the pit of the stomach, that unconquerable desire to get on his
      feet and run, yelling and screaming, from the field. It was nothing more
      than the strain from which his nervous, high-strung temperament was
      suffering from reflex action; but Jean, who was observing him narrowly,
      detected the incipient crisis in the wandering, vacant eyes, and seizing
      him with his strong hand, held him down firmly at his side. The corporal
      lectured him paternally in a whisper, not mincing his words, but employing
      good, vigorous language to restore him to a sense of self-respect, for he
      knew by experience that a man in panic is not to be coaxed out of his
      cowardice. There were others also who were showing the white feather,
      among them Pache, who was whimpering involuntarily, in the low, soft voice
      of a little baby, his eyes suffused with tears. Lapoulle's stomach
      betrayed him and he was very ill; and there were many others who also
      found relief in vomiting, amid their comrade's loud jeers and laughter,
      which helped to restore their courage to them all.
    

      “My God!” ejaculated Maurice, ghastly pale, his teeth chattering. “My
      God!”
     

      Jean shook him roughly. “You infernal coward, are you going to be sick
      like those fellows over yonder? Behave yourself, or I'll box your ears.”
     

      He was trying to put heart into his friend by gruff but friendly speeches
      like the above, when they suddenly beheld a dozen dark forms emerging from
      a little wood upon their front and about four hundred yards away. Their
      spiked helmets announced them to be Prussians; the first Prussians they
      had had within reach of their rifles since the opening of the campaign.
      This first squad was succeeded by others, and in front of their position
      the little dust clouds that rose where the French shells struck were
      distinctly visible. It was all very vivid and clear-cut in the transparent
      air of morning; the Germans, outlined against the dark forest, presented
      the toy-like appearance of those miniature soldiers of lead that are the
      delight of children; then, as the enemy's shells began to drop in their
      vicinity with uncomfortable frequency, they withdrew and were lost to
      sight within the wood whence they had come.
    

      But Beaudoin's company had seen them there once, and to their eyes they
      were there still; the chassepots seemed to go off of their own accord.
      Maurice was the first man to discharge his piece; Jean, Pache, Lapoulle
      and the others all followed suit. There had been no order given to
      commence firing, and the captain made an attempt to check it, but desisted
      upon Rochas's representation that it was absolutely necessary as a measure
      of relief for the men's pent-up feelings. So, then, they were at liberty
      to shoot at last, they could use up those cartridges that they had been
      lugging around with them for the last month, without ever burning a single
      one! The effect on Maurice in particular was electrical; the noise he made
      had the effect of dispelling his fear and blunting the keenness of his
      sensations. The little wood had resumed its former deserted aspect; not a
      leaf stirred, no more Prussians showed themselves; and still they kept on
      blazing away as madly as ever at the immovable trees.
    

      Raising his eyes presently Maurice was startled to see Colonel de Vineuil
      sitting his big horse at no great distance, man and steed impassive and
      motionless as if carved from stone, patient were they under the leaden
      hail, with face turned toward the enemy. The entire regiment was now
      collected in that vicinity, the other companies being posted in the
      adjacent fields; the musketry fire seemed to be drawing nearer. The young
      man also beheld the regimental colors a little to the rear, borne aloft by
      the sturdy arm of the standard-bearer, but it was no longer the phantom
      flag that he had seen that morning, shrouded in mist and fog; the golden
      eagle flashed and blazed in the fierce sunlight, and the tri-colored silk,
      despite the rents and stains of many a battle, flaunted its bright hues
      defiantly to the breeze. Waving in the breath of the cannon, floating
      proudly against the blue of heaven, it shone like an emblem of victory.
    

      And why, now that the day of battle had arrived, should not victory perch
      upon that banner? With that reflection Maurice and his companions kept on
      industriously wasting their powder on the distant wood, producing havoc
      there among the leaves and twigs.
    

      
 
    

      Sleep did not visit Henriette's eyes that night. She knew her husband to
      be a prudent man, but the thought that he was in Bazeilles, so near the
      German lines, was cause to her of deep anxiety. She tried to soothe her
      apprehensions by reminding herself that she had his solemn promise to
      return at the first appearance of danger; it availed not, and at every
      instant she detected herself listening to catch the sound of his footstep
      on the stair. At ten o'clock, as she was about to go to bed, she opened
      her window, and resting her elbows on the sill, gazed out into the night.
    

      The darkness was intense; looking downward, she could scarce discern the
      pavement of the Rue des Voyards, a narrow, obscure passage, overhung by
      old frowning mansions. Further on, in the direction of the college, a
      smoky street lamp burned dimly. A nitrous exhalation rose from the street;
      the squall of a vagrant cat; the heavy step of a belated soldier. From the
      city at her back came strange and alarming sounds: the patter of hurrying
      feet, an ominous, incessant rumbling, a muffled murmur without a name that
      chilled her blood. Her heart beat loudly in her bosom as she bent her ear
      to listen, and still she heard not the familiar echo of her husband's step
      at the turning of the street below.
    

      Hours passed, and now distant lights that began to twinkle in the open
      fields beyond the ramparts excited afresh her apprehensions. It was so
      dark that it cost her an effort of memory to recall localities. She knew
      that the broad expanse that lay beneath her, reflecting a dim light, was
      the flooded meadows, and that flame that blazed up and was suddenly
      extinguished, surely it must be on la Marfee. But never, to her certain
      knowledge, had there been farmer's house or peasant's cottage on those
      heights; what, then, was the meaning of that light? And then on every
      hand, at Pont-Maugis, Noyers, Frenois, other fires arose, coruscating
      fitfully for an instant and giving mysterious indication of the presence
      of the swarming host that lay hidden in the bosom of the night. Yet more:
      there were strange sounds and voices in the air, subdued murmurings such
      as she had never heard before, and that made her start in terror; the
      stifled hum of marching men, the neighing and snorting of steeds, the
      clash of arms, hoarse words of command, given in guttural accents; an evil
      dream of a demoniac crew, a witch's sabbat, in the depths of those unholy
      shades. Suddenly a single cannon-shot rang out, ear-rending, adding fresh
      terror to the dead silence that succeeded it. It froze her very marrow;
      what could it mean? A signal, doubtless, telling of the successful
      completion of some movement, announcing that everything was ready, down
      there, and that now the sun might rise.
    

      It was about two o'clock when Henriette, forgetting even to close her
      window, at last threw herself, fully dressed, upon her bed. Her anxiety
      and fatigue had stupefied her and benumbed her faculties. What could ail
      her, thus to shiver and burn alternately, she who was always so calm and
      self-reliant, moving with so light a step that those about her were
      unconscious of her existence? Finally she sank into a fitful, broken
      slumber that brought with it no repose, in which was present still that
      persistent sensation of impending evil that filled the dusky heavens. All
      at once, arousing her from her unrefreshing stupor, the firing commenced
      again, faint and muffled in the distance, not a single shot this time, but
      peal after peal following one another in quick succession. Trembling, she
      sat upright in bed. The firing continued. Where was she? The place seemed
      strange to her; she could not distinguish the objects in her chamber,
      which appeared to be filled with dense clouds of smoke. Then she
      remembered: the fog must have rolled in from the near-by river and entered
      the room through the window. Without, the distant firing was growing
      fiercer. She leaped from her bed and ran to the casement to listen.
    

      Four o'clock was striking from a steeple in Sedan, and day was breaking,
      tingeing the purplish mists with a sickly, sinister light. It was
      impossible to discern objects; even the college buildings, distant but a
      few yards, were undistinguishable. Where could the firing be, mon Dieu!
      Her first thought was for her brother Maurice; for the reports were so
      indistinct that they seemed to her to come from the north, above the city;
      then, listening more attentively, her doubt became certainty; the
      cannonading was there, before her, and she trembled for her husband. It
      was surely at Bazeilles. For a little time, however, she suffered herself
      to be cheered by a ray of hope, for there were moments when the reports
      seemed to come from the right. Perhaps the fighting was at Donchery, where
      she knew that the French had not succeeded in blowing up the bridge. Then
      she lapsed into a condition of most horrible uncertainty; it seemed to be
      now at Donchery, now at Bazeilles; which, it was impossible to decide,
      there was such a ringing, buzzing sensation in her head. At last the
      feeling of suspense became so acute that she felt she could not endure it
      longer; she must know; every nerve in her body was quivering with
      the ungovernable desire, so she threw a shawl over her shoulders and left
      the house in quest of news.
    

      When she had descended and was in the street Henriette hesitated a brief
      moment, for the little light that was in the east had not yet crept
      downward along the weather-blackened house-fronts to the roadway, and in
      the old city, shrouded in opaque fog, the darkness still reigned
      impenetrable. In the tap-room of a low pot-house in the Rue au Beurre,
      dimly lighted by a tallow candle, she saw two drunken Turcos and a woman.
      It was not until she turned into the Rue Maqua that she encountered any
      signs of life: soldiers slinking furtively along the sidewalk and hugging
      the walls, deserters probably, on the lookout for a place in which to
      hide; a stalwart trooper with despatches, searching for his captain and
      knocking thunderously at every door; a group of fat burghers, trembling
      with fear lest they had tarried there too long, and preparing to crowd
      themselves into one small carriole if so be they might yet reach Bouillon,
      in Belgium, whither half the population of Sedan had emigrated within the
      last two days. She instinctively turned her steps toward the
      Sous-Prefecture, where she might depend on receiving information, and her
      desire to avoid meeting acquaintances determined her to take a short cut
      through lanes and by-ways. On reaching the Rue du Four and the Rue des
      Laboureurs, however, she found an obstacle in her way; the place had been
      pre-empted by the ordnance department, and guns, caissons, forges were
      there in interminable array, having apparently been parked away in that
      remote corner the day before and then forgotten there. There was not so
      much as a sentry to guard them. It sent a chill to her heart to see all
      that artillery lying there silent and ineffective, sleeping its neglected
      sleep in the concealment of those deserted alleys. She was compelled to
      retrace her steps, therefore, which she did by passing through the Place
      du College to the Grande-Rue, where in front of the Hotel de l'Europe she
      saw a group of orderlies holding the chargers of some general officers,
      whose high-pitched voices were audible from the brilliantly lighted dining
      room. On the Place du Rivage and the Place Turenne the crowd was even
      greater still, composed of anxious groups of citizens, with women and
      children interspersed among the struggling, terror-stricken throng,
      hurrying in every direction; and there she saw a general emerge from the
      Hotel of the Golden Cross, swearing like a pirate, and spur his horse off
      up the street at a mad gallop, careless whom he might overturn. For a
      moment she seemed about to enter the Hotel de Ville, then changed her
      mind, and taking the Rue du Pont-de-Meuse, pushed on to the
      Sous-Prefecture.
    

      Never had Sedan appeared to her in a light so tragically sinister as now,
      when she beheld it in the livid, forbidding light of early dawn, enveloped
      in its shroud of fog. The houses were lifeless and silent as tombs; many
      of them had been empty and abandoned for the last two days, others the
      terrified owners had closely locked and barred. Shuddering, the city awoke
      to the cares and occupations of the new day; the morning was fraught with
      chill misery in those streets, still half deserted, peopled only by a few
      frightened pedestrians and those hurrying fugitives, the remnant of the
      exodus of previous days. Soon the sun would rise and send down its
      cheerful light upon the scene; soon the city, overwhelmed in the
      swift-rising tide of disaster, would be crowded as it had never been
      before. It was half-past five o'clock; the roar of the cannon, caught and
      deadened among the tall dingy houses, sounded more faintly in her ears.
    

      At the Sous-Prefecture Henriette had some acquaintance with the
      concierge's daughter, Rose by name, a pretty little blonde of refined
      appearance who was employed in Delaherche's factory. She made her way at
      once to the lodge; the mother was not there, but Rose received her with
      her usual amiability.
    

      “Oh! dear lady, we are so tired we can scarcely stand; mamma has gone to
      lie down and rest a while. Just think! all night long people have been
      coming and going, and we have not been able to get a wink of sleep.”
     

      And burning to tell all the wonderful sights that she had been witness to
      since the preceding day, she did not wait to be questioned, but ran on
      volubly with her narrative.
    

      “As for the marshal, he slept very well, but that poor Emperor! you can't
      think what suffering he has to endure! Yesterday evening, do you know, I
      had gone upstairs to help give out the linen, and as I entered the
      apartment that adjoins his dressing-room I heard groans, oh, such
      groans! just like someone dying. I thought a moment and knew it must be
      the Emperor, and I was so frightened I couldn't move; I just stood and
      trembled. It seems he has some terrible complaint that makes him cry out
      that way. When there are people around he holds in, but as soon as he is
      alone it is too much for him, and he groans and shrieks in a way to make
      your hair stand on end.”
     

      “Do you know where the fighting is this morning?” asked Henriette,
      desiring to check her loquacity.
    

      Rose dismissed the question with a wave of her little hand and went on
      with her narrative.
    

      “That made me curious to know more, you see, and I went upstairs four or
      five times during the night and listened, and every time it was just the
      same; I don't believe he was quiet an instant all night long, or got a
      minute's sleep. Oh! what a terrible thing it is to suffer like that with
      all he has to worry him! for everything is upside down; it is all a most
      dreadful mess. Upon my word, I believe those generals are out of their
      senses; such ghostly faces and frightened eyes! And people coming all the
      time, and doors banging and some men scolding and others crying, and the
      whole place like a sailor's boarding-house; officers drinking from bottles
      and going to bed in their boots! The Emperor is the best of the whole lot,
      and the one who gives least trouble, in the corner where he conceals
      himself and his suffering!” Then, in reply to Henriette's reiterated
      question: “The fighting? there has been fighting at Bazeilles this
      morning. A mounted officer brought word of it to the marshal, who went
      immediately to notify the Emperor. The marshal has been gone ten minutes,
      and I shouldn't wonder if the Emperor intends to follow him, for they are
      dressing him upstairs. I just now saw them combing him and plastering his
      face with all sorts of cosmetics.”
     

      But Henriette, having finally learned what she desired to know, rose to
      go.
    

      “Thank you, Rose. I am in somewhat of a hurry this morning.”
     

      The young girl went with her to the street door, and took leave of her
      with a courteous:
    

      “Glad to have been of service to you, Madame Weiss. I know that anything
      said to you will go no further.”
     

      Henriette hurried back to her house in the Rue des Voyards. She felt quite
      certain that her husband would have returned, and even reflected that he
      would be alarmed at not finding her there, and hastened her steps in
      consequence. As she drew near the house she raised her eyes in the
      expectation of seeing him at the window watching for her, but the window,
      wide open as she had left it when she went out, was vacant, and when she
      had run up the stairs and given a rapid glance through her three rooms, it
      was with a sinking heart that she saw they were untenanted save for the
      chill fog and continuous roar of the cannonade. The distant firing was
      still going on. She went and stood for a moment at the window; although
      the encircling wall of vapor was not less dense than it had been before,
      she seemed to have a clearer apprehension, now that she had received oral
      information, of the details of the conflict raging at Bazeilles, the
      grinding sound of the mitrailleuses, the crashing volleys of the French
      batteries answering the German batteries in the distance. The reports
      seemed to be drawing nearer to the city, the battle to be waxing fiercer
      and fiercer with every moment.
    

      Why did not Weiss return? He had pledged himself so faithfully not to
      outstay the first attack! And Henriette began to be seriously alarmed,
      depicting to herself the various obstacles that might have detained him:
      perhaps he had not been able to leave the village, perhaps the roads were
      blocked or rendered impassable by the projectiles. It might even be that
      something had happened him, but she put the thought aside and would not
      dwell on it, preferring to view things on their brighter side and finding
      in hope her safest mainstay and reliance. For an instant she harbored the
      design of starting out and trying to find her husband, but there were
      considerations that seemed to render that course inadvisable: supposing
      him to have started on his return, what would become of her should she
      miss him on the way? and what would be his anxiety should he come in and
      find her absent? Her guiding principle in all her thoughts and actions was
      her gentle, affectionate devotedness, and she saw nothing strange or out
      of the way in a visit to Bazeilles under such extraordinary circumstances,
      accustomed as she was, like an affectionate little woman, to perform her
      duty in silence and do the thing that she deemed best for their common
      interest. Where her husband was, there was her place; that was all there
      was about it.
    

      She gave a sudden start and left the window, saying:
    

      “Monsieur Delaherche, how could I forget—”
     

      It had just come to her recollection that the cloth manufacturer had also
      passed the night at Bazeilles, and if he had returned would be able to
      give her the intelligence she wanted. She ran swiftly down the stairs
      again. In place of taking the more roundabout way by the Rue des Voyards,
      she crossed the little courtyard of her house and entered the passage that
      conducted to the huge structure that fronted on the Rue Maqua. As she came
      out into the great central garden, paved with flagstones now and retaining
      of its pristine glories only a few venerable trees, magnificent
      century-old elms, she was astonished to see a sentry mounting guard at the
      door of a carriage-house; then it occurred to her that she had been told
      the day before that the camp chests of the 7th corps had been deposited
      there for safe keeping, and it produced a strange impression on her mind
      that all the gold, millions, it was said to amount to, should be lying in
      that shed while the men for whom it was destined were being killed not far
      away. As she was about to ascend the private staircase, however, that
      conducted to the apartment of Gilberte, young Madame Delaherche, she
      experienced another surprise in an encounter that startled her so that she
      retraced her steps a little way, doubtful whether it would not be better
      to abandon her intention, and go home again. An officer, a captain, had
      crossed her path, as noiselessly as a phantom and vanishing as swiftly,
      and yet she had had time to recognize him, having seen him in the past at
      Gilberte's house in Charleville, in the days when she was still Madame
      Maginot. She stepped back a few steps in the courtyard and raised her eyes
      to the two tall windows of the bedroom, the blinds of which were closed,
      then dismissed her scruples and entered.
    

      Upon reaching the first floor, availing herself of that privilege of old
      acquaintanceship by virtue of which one woman often drops in upon another
      for an unceremonious early morning chat, she was about to knock at the
      door of the dressing-room, but apparently someone had left the room
      hastily and failed to secure the door, so that it was standing ajar, and
      all she had to do was give it a push to find herself in the dressing room,
      whence she passed into the bedroom. From the lofty ceiling of the latter
      apartment depended voluminous curtains of red velvet, protecting the large
      double bed. The warm, moist air was fragrant with a faint perfume of
      Persian lilac, and there was no sound to break the silence save a gentle,
      regular respiration, scarcely audible.
    

      “Gilberte!” said Henriette, very softly.
    

      The young woman was sleeping peacefully, and the dim light that entered
      the room between the red curtains of the high windows displayed her
      exquisitely rounded head resting upon a naked arm and her profusion of
      beautiful hair straying in disorder over the pillow. Her lips were parted
      in a smile.
    

      “Gilberte!”
     

      She slightly moved and stretched her arms, without opening her eyes.
    

      “Yes, yes; good-by. Oh! please—” Then, raising her head and
      recognizing Henriette: “What, is it you! How late is it?”
     

      When she learned that it had not yet struck six she seemed disconcerted,
      assuming a sportive air to hide her embarrassment, saying it was unfair to
      come waking people up at such an hour. Then, to her friend, questioning
      her about her husband, she made answer:
    

      “Why, he has not returned; I don't look for him much before nine o'clock.
      What makes you so eager to see him at this hour of the morning?”
     

      Henriette's voice had a trace of sternness in it as she answered, seeing
      the other so smiling, so dull of comprehension in her happy waking.
    

      “I tell you there has been fighting all the morning at Bazeilles, and I am
      anxious about my husband.”
     

      “Oh, my dear,” exclaimed Gilberte, “I assure you there is not the
      slightest reason for your feeling so. My husband is so prudent that he
      would have been home long ago had there been any danger. Until you see him
      back here you may rest easy, take my word for it.”
     

      Henriette was struck by the justness of the argument; Delaherche, it was
      true, was distinctly not a man to expose himself uselessly. She was
      reassured, and went and drew the curtains and threw back the blinds; the
      tawny light from without, where the sun was beginning to pierce the fog
      with his golden javelins, streamed in a bright flood into the apartment.
      One of the windows was part way open, and in the soft air of the spacious
      bedroom, but now so close and stuffy, the two women could hear the sound
      of the guns. Gilberte, half recumbent, her elbow resting on the pillow,
      gazed out upon the sky with her lustrous, vacant eyes.
    

      “So, then, they are fighting,” she murmured. Her chemise had slipped
      downward, exposing a rosy, rounded shoulder, half hidden beneath the
      wandering raven tresses, and her person exhaled a subtle, penetrating
      odor, the odor of love. “They are fighting, so early in the morning, mon
      Dieu! It would be ridiculous if it were not for the horror of it.”
     

      But Henriette, in looking about the room, had caught sight of a pair of
      gauntlets, the gloves of a man, lying forgotten on a small table, and she
      started perceptibly. Gilberte blushed deeply, and extending her arms with
      a conscious, caressing movement, drew her friend to her and rested her
      head upon her bosom.
    

      “Yes,” she almost whispered, “I saw that you noticed it. Darling, you must
      not judge me too severely. He is an old friend; I told you all about it at
      Charleville, long ago, you remember.” Her voice sank lower still; there
      was something that sounded very like a laugh of satisfaction in her tender
      tones. “He pleaded so with me yesterday that I would see him just once
      more. Just think, this morning he is in action; he may be dead by this.
      How could I refuse him?” It was all so heroic and so charming, the
      contrast was so delicious between war's stern reality and tender
      sentiment; thoughtless as a linnet, she smiled again, notwithstanding her
      confusion. Never could she have found it in her heart to drive him from
      her door, when circumstances all were propitious for the interview. “Do
      you condemn me?”
     

      Henriette had listened to her confidences with a very grave face. Such
      things surprised her, for she could not understand them; it must be that
      she was constituted differently from other women. Her heart that morning
      was with her husband, her brother, down there where the battle was raging.
      How was it possible that anyone could sleep so peacefully and be so gay
      and cheerful when the loved ones were in peril?
    

      “But think of your husband, my dear, and of that poor young man as well.
      Does not your heart yearn to be with them? You do not reflect that their
      lifeless forms may be brought in and laid before your eyes at any moment.”
     

      Gilberte raised her adorable bare arm before her face to shield her vision
      from the frightful picture.
    

      “O Heaven! what is that you say? It is cruel of you to destroy all the
      pleasure of my morning in this way. No, no; I won't think of such things.
      They are too mournful.”
     

      Henriette could not refrain from smiling in spite of her anxiety. She was
      thinking of the days of their girlhood, and how Gilberte's father, Captain
      de Vineuil, an old naval officer who had been made collector of customs at
      Charleville when his wounds had incapacitated him for active service,
      hearing his daughter cough and fearing for her the fate of his young wife,
      who had been snatched from his arms by that terrible disease, consumption,
      had sent her to live at a farm-house near Chene-Populeux. The little maid
      was not nine years old, and already she was a consummate actress—a
      perfect type of the village coquette, queening it over her playmates,
      tricked out in what old finery she could lay hands on, adorning herself
      with bracelets and tiaras made from the silver paper wrappings of the
      chocolate. She had not changed a bit when, later, at the age of twenty,
      she married Maginot, the inspector of woods and forests. Mezieres, a dark,
      gloomy town, surrounded by ramparts, was not to her taste, and she
      continued to live at Charleville, where the gay, generous life, enlivened
      by many festivities, suited her better. Her father was dead, and with a
      husband whom, by reason of his inferior social position, her friends and
      acquaintances treated with scant courtesy, she was absolutely mistress of
      her own actions. She did not escape the censure of the stern moralists who
      inhabit our provincial cities, and in those days was credited with many
      lovers; but of the gay throng of officers who, thanks to her father's old
      connection and her kinship to Colonel de Vineuil, disported themselves in
      her drawing-room, Captain Beaudoin was the only one who had really
      produced an impression. She was light and frivolous—nothing more—adoring
      pleasure and living entirely in the present, without the least trace of
      perverse inclination; and if she accepted the captain's attentions, it is
      pretty certain that she did it out of good-nature and love of admiration.
    

      “You did very wrong to see him again,” Henriette finally said, in her
      matter-of-fact way.
    

      “Oh! my dear, since I could not possibly do otherwise, and it was only for
      just that once. You know very well I would die rather than deceive my new
      husband.”
     

      She spoke with much feeling, and seemed distressed to see her friend shake
      her head disapprovingly. They dropped the subject, and clasped each other
      in an affectionate embrace, notwithstanding their diametrically different
      natures. Each could hear the beating of the other's heart, and they might
      have understood the tongues those organs spoke—one, the slave of
      pleasure, wasting and squandering all that was best in herself; the other,
      with the mute heroism of a lofty soul, devoting herself to a single
      ennobling affection.
    

      “But hark! how the cannon are roaring,” Gilberte presently exclaimed. “I
      must make haste and dress.”
     

      The reports sounded more distinctly in the silent room now that their
      conversation had ceased. Leaving her bed, the young woman accepted the
      assistance of her friend, not caring to summon her maid, and rapidly made
      her toilet for the day, in order that she might be ready to go downstairs
      should she be needed there. As she was completing the arrangement of her
      hair there was a knock at the door, and, recognizing the voice of the
      elder Madame Delaherche, she hastened to admit her.
    

      “Certainly, dear mother, you may come in.”
     

      With the thoughtlessness that was part of her nature, she allowed the old
      lady to enter without having first removed the gauntlets from the table.
      It was in vain that Henriette darted forward to seize them and throw them
      behind a chair. Madame Delaherche stood glaring for some seconds at the
      spot where they had been with an expression on her face as if she were
      slowly suffocating. Then her glance wandered involuntarily from object to
      object in the room, stopping finally at the great red-curtained bed, the
      coverings thrown back in disorder.
    

      “I see that Madame Weiss has disturbed your slumbers. Then you were able
      to sleep, daughter?”
     

      It was plain that she had had another purpose in coming there than to make
      that speech. Ah, that marriage that her son had insisted on contracting,
      contrary to her wish, at the mature age of fifty, after twenty years of
      joyless married life with a shrewish, bony wife; he, who had always until
      then deferred so to her will, now swayed only by his passion for this gay
      young widow, lighter than thistle-down! She had promised herself to keep
      watch over the present, and there was the past coming back to plague her.
      But ought she to speak? Her life in the household was one of silent
      reproach and protest; she kept herself almost constantly imprisoned in her
      chamber, devoting herself rigidly to the observances of her austere
      religion. Now, however, the wrong was so flagrant that she resolved to
      speak to her son.
    

      Gilberte blushingly replied, without an excessive manifestation of
      embarrassment, however:
    

      “Oh, yes, I had a few hours of refreshing sleep. You know that Jules has
      not returned—”
     

      Madame Delaherche interrupted her with a grave nod of her head. Ever since
      the artillery had commenced to roar she had been watching eagerly for her
      son's return, but she was a Spartan mother, and concealed her gnawing
      anxiety under a cloak of brave silence. And then she remembered what was
      the object of her visit there.
    

      “Your uncle, the colonel, has sent the regimental surgeon with a note in
      pencil, to ask if we will allow them to establish a hospital here. He
      knows that we have abundance of space in the factory, and I have already
      authorized the gentlemen to make use of the courtyard and the big
      drying-room. But you should go down in person—”
     

      “Oh, at once, at once!” exclaimed Henriette, hastening toward the door.
      “We will do what we can to help.”
     

      Gilberte also displayed much enthusiasm for her new occupation as nurse;
      she barely took the time to throw a lace scarf over her head, and the
      three women went downstairs. When they reached the bottom and stood in the
      spacious vestibule, looking out through the main entrance, of which the
      leaves had been thrown wide back, they beheld a crowd collected in the
      street before the house. A low-hung carriage was advancing slowly along
      the roadway, a sort of carriole, drawn by a single horse, which a
      lieutenant of zouaves was leading by the bridle. They took it to be a
      wounded man that they were bringing to them, the first of their patients.
    

      “Yes, yes! This is the place; this way!”
     

      But they were quickly undeceived. The sufferer recumbent in the carriole
      was Marshal MacMahon, severely wounded in the hip, who, his hurt having
      been provisionally cared for in the cottage of a gardener, was now being
      taken to the Sous-Prefecture. He was bareheaded and partially divested of
      his clothing, and the gold embroidery on his uniform was tarnished with
      dust and blood. He spoke no word, but had raised his head from the pillow
      where it lay and was looking about him with a sorrowful expression, and
      perceiving the three women where they stood, wide eyed with horror, their
      joined hands resting on their bosom, in presence of that great calamity,
      the whole army stricken in the person of its chief at the very beginning
      of the conflict, he slightly bowed his head, with a faint, paternal smile.
      A few of those about him removed their hats; others, who had no time for
      such idle ceremony, were circulating the report of General Ducrot's
      appointment to the command of the army. It was half-past seven o'clock.
    

      “And what of the Emperor?” Henriette inquired of a bookseller, who was
      standing at his door.
    

      “He left the city near an hour ago,” replied the neighbor. “I was standing
      by and saw him pass out at the Balan gate. There is a rumor that his head
      was taken off by a cannon ball.”
     

      But this made the grocer across the street furious. “Hold your tongue,” he
      shouted, “it is an infernal lie! None but the brave will leave their bones
      there to-day!”
     

      When near the Place du College the marshal's carriole was lost to sight in
      the gathering crowd, among whose numbers the most strange and
      contradictory reports from the field of battle were now beginning to
      circulate. The fog was clearing; the streets were bright with sunshine.
    

      A hail, in no gentle terms, was heard proceeding from the courtyard: “Now
      then, ladies, here is where you are wanted, not outside!”
     

      They all three hastened inside and found themselves in presence of Major
      Bouroche, who had thrown his uniform coat upon the floor, in a corner of
      the room, and donned a great white apron. Above the broad expanse of, as
      yet, unspotted white, his blazing, leonine eyes and enormous head, with
      shock of harsh, bristling hair, seemed to exhale energy and determination.
      So terrible did he appear to them that the women were his most humble
      servants from the very start, obedient to his every sign, treading on one
      another to anticipate his wishes.
    

      “There is nothing here that is needed. Get me some linen; try and see if
      you can't find some more mattresses; show my men where the pump is—”
     

      And they ran as if their life was at stake to do his bidding; were so
      active that they seemed to be ubiquitous.
    

      The factory was admirably adapted for a hospital. The drying-room was a
      particularly noticeable feature, a vast apartment with numerous and lofty
      windows for light and ventilation, where they could put in a hundred beds
      and yet have room to spare, and at one side was a shed that seemed to have
      been built there especially for the convenience of the operators: three
      long tables had been brought in, the pump was close at hand, and a small
      grass-plot adjacent might serve as ante-chamber for the patients while
      awaiting their turn. And the handsome old elms, with their deliciously
      cool shade, roofed the spot in most agreeably.
    

      Bouroche had considered it would be best to establish himself in Sedan at
      the commencement, foreseeing the dreadful slaughter and the inevitable
      panic that would sooner or later drive the troops to the shelter of the
      ramparts. All that he had deemed it necessary to leave with the regiment
      was two flying ambulances and some “first aids,” that were to send him in
      the casualties as rapidly as possible after applying the primary
      dressings. The details of litter-bearers were all out there, whose duty it
      was to pick up the wounded under fire, and with them were the ambulance
      wagons and fourgons of the medical train. The two
      assistant-surgeons and three hospital stewards whom he had retained,
      leaving two assistants on the field, would doubtless be sufficient to
      perform what operations were necessary. He had also a corps of dressers
      under him. But he was not gentle in manner and language, for all he did
      was done impulsively, zealously, with all his heart and soul.
    

      “Tonnerre de Dieu! how do you suppose we are going to distinguish
      the cases from one another when they begin to come in presently? Take a
      piece of charcoal and number each bed with a big figure on the wall
      overhead, and place those mattresses closer together, do you hear? We can
      strew some straw on the floor in that corner if it becomes necessary.”
     

      The guns were barking, preparing his work for him; he knew that at any
      moment now the first carriage might drive up and discharge its load of
      maimed and bleeding flesh, and he hastened to get all in readiness in the
      great, bare room. Outside in the shed the preparations were of another
      nature: the chests were opened and their contents arranged in order on a
      table, packages of lint, bandages, compresses, rollers, splints for
      fractured limbs, while on another table, alongside a great jar of cerate
      and a bottle of chloroform, were the surgical cases with their
      blood-curdling array of glittering instruments, probes, forceps,
      bistouries, scalpels, scissors, saws, an arsenal of implements of every
      imaginable shape adapted to pierce, cut, slice, rend, crush. But there was
      a deficient supply of basins.
    

      “You must have pails, pots, jars about the house—something that will
      hold water. We can't work besmeared with blood all day, that's certain.
      And sponges, try to get me some sponges.”
     

      Madame Delaherche hurried away and returned, followed by three women
      bearing a supply of the desired vessels. Gilberte, standing by the table
      where the instruments were laid out, summoned Henriette to her side by a
      look and pointed to them with a little shudder. They grasped each other's
      hand and stood for a moment without speaking, but their mute clasp was
      eloquent of the solemn feeling of terror and pity that filled both their
      souls. And yet there was a difference, for one retained, even in her
      distress, the involuntary smile of her bright youth, while in the eyes of
      the other, pale as death, was the grave earnestness of the heart which,
      one love lost, can never love again.
    

      “How terrible it must be, dear, to have an arm or leg cut off!”
     

      “Poor fellows!”
     

      Bouroche had just finished placing a mattress on each of the three tables,
      covering them carefully with oil-cloth, when the sound of horses' hoofs
      was heard outside and the first ambulance wagon rolled into the court.
      There were ten men in it, seated on the lateral benches, only slightly
      wounded; two or three of them carrying their arm in a sling, but the
      majority hurt about the head. They alighted with but little assistance,
      and the inspection of their cases commenced forthwith.
    

      One of them, scarcely more than a boy, had been shot through the shoulder,
      and as Henriette was tenderly assisting him to draw off his greatcoat, an
      operation that elicited cries of pain, she took notice of the number of
      his regiment.
    

      “Why, you belong to the 106th! Are you in Captain Beaudoin's company?”
     

      No, he belonged to Captain Bonnaud's company, but for all that he was well
      acquainted with Corporal Macquart and felt pretty certain that his squad
      had not been under fire as yet. The tidings, meager as they were, sufficed
      to remove a great load from the young woman's heart: her brother was alive
      and well; if now her husband would only return, as she was expecting every
      moment he would do, her mind would be quite at rest.
    

      At that moment, just as Henriette raised her head to listen to the
      cannonade, which was then roaring with increased viciousness, she was
      thunderstruck to see Delaherche standing only a few steps away in the
      middle of a group of men, to whom he was telling the story of the
      frightful dangers he had encountered in getting from Bazeilles to Sedan.
      How did he happen to be there? She had not seen him come in. She darted
      toward him.
    

      “Is not my husband with you?”
     

      But Delaherche, who was just then replying to the fond questions of his
      wife and mother, was in no haste to answer.
    

      “Wait, wait a moment.” And resuming his narrative: “Twenty times between
      Bazeilles and Balan I just missed being killed. It was a storm, a regular
      hurricane, of shot and shell! And I saw the Emperor, too. Oh! but he is a
      brave man!—And after leaving Balan I ran—”
     

      Henriette shook him by the arm.
    

      “My husband?”
     

      “Weiss? why, he stayed behind there, Weiss did.”
     

      “What do you mean, behind there?”
     

      “Why, yes; he picked up the musket of a dead soldier, and is fighting away
      with the best of them.”
     

      “He is fighting, you say?—and why?”
     

      “He must be out of his head, I think. He would not come with me, and of
      course I had to leave him.”
     

      Henriette gazed at him fixedly, with wide-dilated eyes. For a moment no
      one spoke; then in a calm voice she declared her resolution.
    

      “It is well; I will go to him.”
     

      What, she, go to him? But it was impossible, it was preposterous!
      Delaherche had more to say of his hurricane of shot and shell. Gilberte
      seized her by the wrists to detain her, while Madame Delaherche used all
      her persuasive powers to convince her of the folly of the mad undertaking.
      In the same gentle, determined tone she repeated:
    

      “It is useless; I will go to him.”
     

      She would only wait to adjust upon her head the lace scarf that Gilberte
      had been wearing and which the latter insisted she should accept. In the
      hope that his offer might cause her to abandon her resolve Delaherche
      declared that he would go with her at least as far as the Balan gate, but
      just then he caught sight of the sentry, who, in all the turmoil and
      confusion of the time, had been pacing uninterruptedly up and down before
      the building that contained the treasure chests of the 7th corps, and
      suddenly he remembered, was alarmed, went to give a look and assure
      himself that the millions were there still. In the meantime Henriette had
      reached the portico and was about to pass out into the street.
    

      “Wait for me, won't you? Upon my word, you are as mad as your husband!”
     

      Another ambulance had driven up, moreover, and they had to wait to let it
      pass in. It was smaller than the other, having but two wheels, and the two
      men whom it contained, both severely wounded, rested on stretchers placed
      upon the floor. The first one whom the attendants took out, using the most
      tender precaution, had one hand broken and his side torn by a splinter of
      shell; he was a mass of bleeding flesh. The second had his left leg
      shattered; and Bouroche, giving orders to extend the latter on one of the
      oil-cloth-covered mattresses, proceeded forthwith to operate on him,
      surrounded by the staring, pushing crowd of dressers and assistants.
      Madame Delaherche and Gilberte were seated near the grass-plot, employed
      in rolling bandages.
    

      In the street outside Delaherche had caught up with Henriette.
    

      “Come, my dear Madame Weiss, abandon this foolhardy undertaking. How can
      you expect to find Weiss in all that confusion? Most likely he is no
      longer there by this time; he is probably making his way home through the
      fields. I assure you that Bazeilles is inaccessible.”
     

      But she did not even listen to him, only increasing her speed, and had now
      entered the Rue de Menil, her shortest way to the Balan gate. It was
      nearly nine o'clock, and Sedan no longer wore the forbidding, funereal
      aspect of the morning, when it awoke to grope and shudder amid the despair
      and gloom of its black fog. The shadows of the houses were sharply defined
      upon the pavement in the bright sunlight, the streets were filled with an
      excited, anxious throng, through which orderlies and staff officers were
      constantly pushing their way at a gallop. The chief centers of attraction
      were the straggling soldiers who, even at this early hour of the day, had
      begun to stream into the city, minus arms and equipments, some of them
      slightly wounded, others in an extreme condition of nervous excitation,
      shouting and gesticulating like lunatics. And yet the place would have had
      very much its every-day aspect, had it not been for the tight-closed
      shutters of the shops, the lifeless house-fronts, where not a blind was
      open. Then there was the cannonade, that never-ceasing cannonade, beneath
      which earth and rocks, walls and foundations, even to the very slates upon
      the roofs, shook and trembled.
    

      What between the damage that his reputation as a man of bravery and
      politeness would inevitably suffer should he desert Henriette in her time
      of trouble, and his disinclination to again face the iron hail on the
      Bazeilles road, Delaherche was certainly in a very unpleasant predicament.
      Just as they reached the Balan gate a bevy of mounted officers, returning
      to the city, suddenly came riding up, and they were parted. There was a
      dense crowd of people around the gate, waiting for news. It was all in
      vain that he ran this way and that, looking for the young woman in the
      throng; she must have been beyond the walls by that time, speeding along
      the road, and pocketing his gallantry for use on some future occasion, he
      said to himself aloud:
    

      “Very well, so much the worse for her; it was too idiotic.”
     

      Then the manufacturer strolled about the city, bourgeois-like desirous to
      lose no portion of the spectacle, and at the same time tormented by a
      constantly increasing feeling of anxiety. How was it all to end? and would
      not the city suffer heavily should the army be defeated? The questions
      were hard ones to answer; he could not give a satisfactory solution to the
      conundrum when so much depended on circumstances, but none the less he was
      beginning to feel very uneasy for his factory and house in the Rue Maqua,
      whence he had already taken the precaution to remove his securities and
      valuables and bury them in a place of safety. He dropped in at the Hotel
      de Ville, found the Municipal Council sitting in permanent session, and
      loitered away a couple of hours there without hearing any fresh news,
      unless that affairs outside the walls were beginning to look very
      threatening. The army, under the pushing and hauling process, pushed back
      to the rear by General Ducrot during the hour and a half while the command
      was in his hands, hauled forward to the front again by de Wimpffen, his
      successor, knew not where to yield obedience, and the entire lack of plan
      and competent leadership, the incomprehensible vacillation, the
      abandonment of positions only to retake them again at terrible cost of
      life, all these things could not fail to end in ruin and disaster.
    

      From there Delaherche pushed forward to the Sous-Prefecture to ascertain
      whether the Emperor had returned yet from the field of battle. The only
      tidings he gleaned here were of Marshal MacMahon, who was said to be
      resting comfortably, his wound, which was not dangerous, having been
      dressed by a surgeon. About eleven o'clock, however, as he was again going
      the rounds, his progress was arrested for a moment in the Grande-Rue,
      opposite the Hotel de l'Europe, by a sorry cavalcade of dust-stained
      horsemen, whose jaded nags were moving at a walk, and at their head he
      recognized the Emperor, who was returning after having spent four hours on
      the battle-field. It was plain that death would have nothing to do with
      him. The big drops of anguish had washed the rouge from off those painted
      cheeks, the waxed mustache had lost its stiffness and drooped over the
      mouth, and in that ashen face, in those dim eyes, was the stupor of one in
      his last agony. One of the officers alighted in front of the hotel and
      proceeded to give some friends, who were collected there, an account of
      their route, from la Moncelle to Givonne, up the entire length of the
      little valley among the soldiers of the 1st corps, who had already been
      pressed back by the Saxons across the little stream to the right bank; and
      they had returned by the sunken road of the Fond de Givonne, which was
      even then in such an encumbered condition that had the Emperor desired to
      make his way to the front again he would have found the greatest
      difficulty in doing so. Besides, what would it have availed?
    

      As Delaherche was drinking in these particulars with greedy ears a loud
      explosion shook the quarter. It was a shell, which had demolished a
      chimney in the Rue Sainte-Barbe, near the citadel. There was a general
      rush and scramble; men swore and women shrieked. He had flattened himself
      against the wall, when another explosion broke the windows in a house not
      far away. The consequences would be dreadful if they should shell Sedan;
      he made his way back to the Rue Maqua on a keen run, and was seized by
      such an imperious desire to learn the truth that he did not pause below
      stairs, but hurried to the roof, where there was a terrace that commanded
      a view of the city and its environs.
    

      A glance of the situation served to reassure him; the German fire was not
      directed against the city; the batteries at Frenois and la Marfee were
      shelling the Plateau de l'Algerie over the roofs of the houses, and now
      that his alarm had subsided he could even watch with a certain degree of
      admiration the flight of the projectiles as they sailed over Sedan in a
      wide, majestic curve, leaving behind them a faint trail of smoke upon the
      air, like gigantic birds, invisible to mortal eye and to be traced only by
      the gray plumage shed by their pinions. At first it seemed to him quite
      evident that what damage had been done so far was the result of random
      practice by the Prussian gunners: they were not bombarding the city yet;
      then, upon further consideration, he was of opinion that their firing was
      intended as a response to the ineffectual fire of the few guns mounted on
      the fortifications of the place. Turning to the north he looked down from
      his position upon the extended and complex system of defenses of the
      citadel, the frowning curtains black with age, the green expanses of the
      turfed glacis, the stern bastions that reared their heads at geometrically
      accurate angles, prominent among them the three cyclopean salients, the
      Ecossais, the Grand Jardin, and la Rochette, while further to the west, in
      extension of the line, were Fort Nassau and Fort Palatinat, above the
      faubourg of Menil. The sight produced in him a melancholy impression of
      immensity and futility. Of what avail were they now against the powerful
      modern guns with their immense range? Besides, the works were not manned;
      cannon, ammunition, men were wanting. Some three weeks previously the
      governor had invited the citizens to organize and form a National Guard,
      and these volunteers were now doing duty as gunners; and thus it was that
      there were three guns in service at Palatinat, while at the Porte de Paris
      there may have been a half dozen. As they had only seven or eight rounds
      to each gun, however, the men husbanded their ammunition, limiting
      themselves to a shot every half hour, and that only as a sort of salve to
      their self-respect, for none of their missiles reached the enemy; all were
      lost in the meadows opposite them. Hence the enemy's batteries, disdainful
      of such small game, contemptuously pitched a shell at them from time to
      time, out of charity, as it were.
    

      Those batteries over across the river were objects of great interest to
      Delaherche. He was eagerly scanning the heights of la Marfee with his
      naked eye, when all at once he thought of the spy-glass with which he
      sometimes amused himself by watching the doings of his neighbors from the
      terrace. He ran downstairs and got it, returned and placed it in position,
      and as he was slowly sweeping the horizon and trees, fields, houses came
      within his range of vision, he lighted on that group of uniforms, at the
      angle of a pine wood, over the main battery at Frenois, of which Weiss had
      caught a glimpse from Bazeilles. To him, however, thanks to the excellence
      of his glass, it would have been no difficult matter to count the number
      of officers of the staff, so distinctly he made them out. Some of them
      were reclining carelessly on the grass, others were conversing in little
      groups, and in front of them all stood a solitary figure, a spare,
      well-proportioned man to appearances, in an unostentatious uniform, who
      yet asserted in some indefinable way his masterhood. It was the Prussian
      King, scarce half finger high, one of those miniature leaden toys that
      afford children such delight. Although he was not certain of this identity
      until later on the manufacturer found himself, by reason of some
      inexplicable attraction, constantly returning to that diminutive puppet,
      whose face, scarce larger than a pin's head, was but a pale point against
      the immense blue sky.
    

      It was not midday yet, and since nine o'clock the master had been watching
      the movements, inexorable as fate, of his armies. Onward, ever onward,
      they swept, by roads traced for them in advance, completing the circle,
      slowly but surely closing in and enveloping Sedan in their living wall of
      men and guns. The army on his left, that had come up across the level
      plain of Donchery, was debouching still from the pass of Saint-Albert and,
      leaving Saint-Menges in its rear, was beginning to show its heads of
      columns at Fleigneux; and, in the rear of the XIth corps, then sharply
      engaged with General Douay's force, he could discern the Vth corps,
      availing itself of the shelter of the woods and advancing stealthily on
      Illy, while battery upon battery came wheeling into position, an
      ever-lengthening line of thundering guns, until the horizon was an
      unbroken ring of fire. On the right the army was now in undisputed
      possession of the valley of the Givonne; the XIIth corps had taken la
      Moncelle, the Guards had forced the passage of the stream at Daigny,
      compelling General Ducrot to seek the protection of the wood of la
      Garenne, and were pushing up the right bank, likewise in full march upon
      the plateau of Illy. Their task was almost done; one effort more, and up
      there at the north, among those barren fields, on the very verge of the
      dark forests of the Ardennes, the Crown Prince of Prussia would join hands
      with the Crown Prince of Saxony. To the south of Sedan the village of
      Bazeilles was lost to sight in the dense smoke of its burning houses, in
      the clouds of dun vapor that rose above the furious conflict.
    

      And tranquilly, ever since the morning, the King had been watching and
      waiting. An hour yet, two hours, it might be three, it mattered not; it
      was only a question of time. Wheel and pinion, cog and lever, were working
      in harmony, the great engine of destruction was in motion, and soon would
      have run its course. In the center of the immense horizon, beneath the
      deep vault of sunlit sky, the bounds of the battlefield were ever becoming
      narrower, the black swarms were converging, closing in on doomed Sedan.
      There were fiery reflexions in the windows of the city; to the left, in
      the direction of the Faubourg de la Cassine, it seemed as if a house was
      burning. And outside the circle of flame and smoke, in the fields no
      longer trodden by armed men, over by Donchery, over by Carignan, peace,
      warm and luminous, lay upon the land; the bright waters of the Meuse, the
      lusty trees rejoicing in their strength, the broad, verdant meadows, the
      fertile, well-kept farms, all rested peacefully beneath the fervid noonday
      sun.
    

      Turning to his staff, the King briefly called for information upon some
      point. It was the royal will to direct each move on the gigantic
      chessboard; to hold in the hollow of his hand the hosts who looked to him
      for guidance. At his left, a flock of swallows, affrighted by the noise of
      the cannonade, rose high in air, wheeled, and vanished in the south.
    

      
 
    

      Between the city and Balan, Henriette got over the ground at a good, round
      pace. It was not yet nine o'clock; the broad footpath, bordered by gardens
      and pretty cottages, was as yet comparatively free, although as she
      approached the village it began to be more and more obstructed by flying
      citizens and moving troops. When she saw a great surge of the human tide
      advancing on her she hugged the walls and house-fronts, and by dint of
      address and perseverance slipped through, somehow. The fold of black lace
      that half concealed her fair hair and small, pale face, the sober gown
      that enveloped her slight form, made her an inconspicuous object among the
      throng; she went her way unnoticed by the by-passers, and nothing retarded
      her light, silent steps.
    

      At Balan, however, she found the road blocked by a regiment of infanterie
      de marine. It was a compact mass of men, drawn up under the tall trees
      that concealed them from the enemy's observation, awaiting orders. She
      raised herself on tiptoe, and could not see the end; still, she made
      herself as small as she could and attempted to worm her way through. The
      men shoved her with their elbows, and the butts of their muskets made
      acquaintance with her ribs; when she had advanced a dozen paces there was
      a chorus of shouts and angry protests. A captain turned on her and roughly
      cried:
    

      “Hi, there, you woman! are you crazy? Where are you going?”
     

      “I am going to Bazeilles.”
     

      “What, to Bazeilles?”
     

      There was a shout of laughter. The soldiers pointed at her with their
      fingers; she was the object of their witticisms. The captain, also,
      greatly amused by the incident, had to have his joke.
    

      “You should take us along with you, my little dear, if you are going to
      Bazeilles. We were there a short while ago, and I am in hope that we shall
      go back there, but I can tell you that the temperature of the place is
      none too cool.”
     

      “I am going to Bazeilles to look for my husband,” Henriette declared, in
      her gentle voice, while her blue eyes shone with undiminished resolution.
    

      The laughter ceased; an old sergeant extricated her from the crowd that
      had collected around her, and forced her to retrace her steps.
    

      “My poor child, you see it is impossible to get through. Bazeilles is no
      place for you. You will find your husband by and by. Come, listen to
      reason!”
     

      She had to obey, and stood aside beneath the trees, raising herself on her
      toes at every moment to peer before her, firm in her resolve to continue
      her journey as soon as she should be allowed to pass. She learned the
      condition of affairs from the conversation that went on around her. Some
      officers were criticising with great acerbity the order for the
      abandonment of Bazeilles, which had occurred at a quarter-past eight, at
      the time when General Ducrot, taking over the command from the marshal,
      had considered it best to concentrate the troops on the plateau of Illy.
      What made matters worse was, that the valley of the Givonne having fallen
      into the hands of the Germans through the premature retirement of the 1st
      corps, the 12th corps, which was even then sustaining a vigorous attack in
      front, was overlapped on its left flank. Now that General de Wimpffen had
      relieved General Ducrot, it seemed that the original plan was to be
      carried out. Orders had been received to retake Bazeilles at every cost,
      and drive the Bavarians into the Meuse. And so, in the ranks of that
      regiment that had been halted there in full retreat at the entrance of the
      village and ordered to resume the offensive, there was much bitter
      feeling, and angry words were rife. Was ever such stupidity heard of? to
      make them abandon a position, and immediately tell them to turn round and
      retake it from the enemy! They were willing enough to risk their life in
      the cause, but no one cared to throw it away for nothing!
    

      A body of mounted men dashed up the street and General de Wimpffen
      appeared among them, and raising himself erect on his stirrups, with
      flashing eyes, he shouted, in ringing tones:
    

      “Friends, we cannot retreat; it would be ruin to us all. And if we do have
      to retreat, it shall be on Carignan, and not on Mezieres. But we shall be
      victorious! You beat the enemy this morning; you will beat them again!”
     

      He galloped off on a road that conducted to la Moncelle. It was said that
      there had been a violent altercation between him and General Ducrot, each
      upholding his own plan, and decrying the plan of the other—one
      asserting that retreat by way of Mezieres had been impracticable all that
      morning; the other predicting that, unless they fell back on Illy, the
      army would be surrounded before night. And there was a great deal of
      bitter recrimination, each taxing the other with ignorance of the country
      and of the situation of the troops. The pity of it was that both were
      right.
    

      But Henriette, meantime, had made an encounter that caused her to forget
      her project for a moment. In some poor outcasts; stranded by the wayside,
      she had recognized a family of honest weavers from Bazeilles, father,
      mother, and three little girls, of whom the largest was only nine years
      old. They were utterly disheartened and forlorn, and so weary and footsore
      that they could go no further, and had thrown themselves down at the foot
      of a wall.
    

      “Alas! dear lady,” the wife and mother said to Henriette, “we have lost
      our all. Our house—you know where our house stood on the Place de
      l'Eglise—well, a shell came and burned it. Why we and the children
      did not stay and share its fate I do not know—”
     

      At these words the three little ones began to cry and sob afresh, while
      the mother, in distracted language, gave further details of the
      catastrophe.
    

      “The loom, I saw it burn like seasoned kindling wood, and the bed, the
      chairs and tables, they blazed like so much straw. And even the clock—yes,
      the poor old clock that I tried to save and could not.”
     

      “My God! my God!” the man exclaimed, his eyes swimming with tears, “what
      is to become of us?”
     

      Henriette endeavored to comfort them, but it was in a voice that quavered
      strangely.
    

      “You have been preserved to each other, you are safe and unharmed; your
      three little girls are left you. What reason have you to complain?”
     

      Then she proceeded to question them to learn how matters stood in
      Bazeilles, whether they had seen her husband, in what state they had left
      her house, but in their half-dazed condition they gave conflicting
      answers. No, they had not seen M. Weiss. One of the little girls, however,
      declared that she had seen him, and that he was lying on the ground with a
      great hole in his head, whereon the father gave her a box on the ear,
      bidding her hold her tongue and not tell such lies to the lady. As for the
      house, they could say with certainty that it was intact at the time of
      their flight; they even remembered to have observed, as they passed it,
      that the doors and windows were tightly secured, as if it was quite
      deserted. At that time, moreover, the only foothold that the Bavarians had
      secured for themselves was in the Place de l'Eglise, and to carry the
      village they would have to fight for it, street by street, house by house.
      They must have been gaining ground since then, though; all Bazeilles was
      in flames by that time, like enough, and not a wall left standing, thanks
      to the fierceness of the assailants and the resolution of the defenders.
      And so the poor creatures went on, with trembling, affrighted gestures,
      evoking the horrid sights their eyes had seen and telling their dreadful
      tale of slaughter and conflagration and corpses lying in heaps upon the
      ground.
    

      “But my husband?” Henriette asked again.
    

      They made no answer, only continued to cover their face with their hands
      and sob. Her cruel anxiety, as she stood there erect, with no outward sign
      of weakness, was only evinced by a slight quivering of the lips. What was
      she to believe? Vainly she told herself the child was mistaken; her mental
      vision pictured her husband lying there dead before her in the street with
      a bullet wound in the head. Again, that house, so securely locked and
      bolted, was another source of alarm; why was it so? was he no longer in
      it? The conviction that he was dead sent an icy chill to her heart; but
      perhaps he was only wounded, perhaps he was breathing still; and so sudden
      and imperious was the need she felt of flying to his side that she would
      again have attempted to force her passage through the troops had not the
      bugles just then sounded the order for them to advance.
    

      The regiment was largely composed of raw, half-drilled recruits from
      Toulon, Brest, and Rochefort, men who had never fired a shot, but all that
      morning they had fought with a bravery and firmness that would not have
      disgraced veteran troops. They had not shown much aptitude for marching on
      the road from Rheims to Mouzon, weighted as they were with their
      unaccustomed burdens, but when they came to face the enemy their
      discipline and sense of duty made themselves felt, and notwithstanding the
      righteous anger that was in their hearts, the bugle had but to sound and
      they returned to brave the fire and encounter the foe. Three several times
      they had been promised a division to support them; it never came. They
      felt that they were deserted, sacrificed; it was the offering of their
      life that was demanded of them by those who, having first made them
      evacuate the place, were now sending them back into the fiery furnace of
      Bazeilles. And they knew it, and they gave their life, freely, without a
      murmur, closing up their ranks and leaving the shelter of the trees to
      meet afresh the storm of shell and bullets.
    

      Henriette gave a deep sigh of relief; at last they were about to move! She
      followed them, with the hope that she might enter the village unperceived
      in their rear, prepared to run with them should they take the
      double-quick. But they had scarcely begun to move when they came to a halt
      again. The projectiles were now falling thick and fast; to regain
      possession of Bazeilles it would be necessary to dispute every inch of the
      road, occupying the cross-streets, the houses and gardens on either side
      of the way. A brisk fire of musketry proceeded from the head of the
      column, the advance was irregular, by fits and starts, every petty
      obstacle entailed a delay of many minutes. She felt that she would never
      attain her end by remaining there at the rear of the column, waiting for
      it to fight its way through, and with prompt decision she bent her course
      to the right and took a path that led downward between two hedges to the
      meadows.
    

      Henriette's plan now was to reach Bazeilles by those broad levels that
      border the Meuse. She was not very clear about it in her mind, however,
      and continued to hasten onward in obedience to that blind instinct which
      had originally imparted to her its impulse. She had not gone far before
      she found herself standing and gazing in dismay at a miniature ocean which
      barred her further progress in that direction. It was the inundated
      fields, the low-lying lands that a measure of defense had converted into a
      lake, which had escaped her memory. For a single moment she thought of
      turning back; then, at the risk of leaving her shoes behind, she pushed
      on, hugging the bank, through the water that covered the grass and rose
      above her ankles. For a hundred yards her way, though difficult, was not
      impracticable; then she encountered a garden-wall directly in her front;
      the ground fell off sharply, and where the wall terminated the water was
      six feet deep. Her path was closed effectually; she clenched her little
      fists and had to summon up all her resolution to keep from bursting into
      tears. When the first shock of disappointment had passed over she made her
      way along the enclosure and found a narrow lane that pursued a tortuous
      course among the scattered houses. She believed that now her troubles were
      at an end, for she was acquainted with that labyrinth, that tangled maze
      of passages, which, to one who had the key to them, ended at the village.
    

      But the missiles seemed to be falling there even more thickly than
      elsewhere. Henriette stopped short in her tracks and all the blood in her
      body seemed to flow back upon her heart at a frightful detonation, so
      close that she could feel the wind upon her cheek. A shell had exploded
      directly before her and only a few yards away. She turned her head and
      scrutinized for a moment the heights of the left bank, above which the
      smoke from the German batteries was curling upward; she saw what she must
      do, and when she started on her way again it was with eyes fixed on the
      horizon, watching for the shells in order to avoid them. There was method
      in the rash daring of her proceeding, and all the brave tranquillity that
      the prudent little housewife had at her command. She was not going to be
      killed if she could help it; she wished to find her husband and bring him
      back with her, that they might yet have many days of happy life together.
      The projectiles still came tumbling frequently as ever; she sped along
      behind walls, made a cover of boundary stones, availed herself of every
      slight depression. But presently she came to an open space, a bit of
      unprotected road where splinters and fragments of exploded shells lay
      thick, and she was watching behind a shed for a chance to make a dash when
      she perceived, emerging from a sort of cleft in the ground in front of
      her, a human head and two bright eyes that peered about inquisitively. It
      was a little, bare-footed, ten-year-old boy, dressed in a shirt and ragged
      trousers, an embryonic tramp, who was watching the battle with huge
      delight. At every report his small black beady eyes would snap and
      sparkle, and he jubilantly shouted:
    

      “Oh my! aint it bully!—Look out, there comes another one! don't
      stir! Boom! that was a rouser!—Don't stir! don't stir!”
     

      And each time there came a shell he dived to the bottom of his hole, then
      reappeared, showing his dirty, elfish face, until it was time to duck
      again.
    

      Henriette now noticed that the projectiles all came from Liry, while the
      batteries at Pont-Maugis and Noyers were confining their attention to
      Balan. At each discharge she could see the smoke distinctly, immediately
      afterward she heard the scream of the shell, succeeded by the explosion.
      Just then the gunners afforded them a brief respite; the bluish haze above
      the heights drifted slowly away upon the wind.
    

      “They've stopped to take a drink, you can go your money on it,” said the
      urchin. “Quick, quick, give me your hand! Now's the time to skip!”
     

      He took her by the hand and dragged her along with him, and in this way
      they crossed the open together, side by side, running for dear life, with
      head and shoulders down. When they were safely ensconced behind a stack
      that opportunely offered its protection at the end of their course and
      turned to look behind them, they beheld another shell come rushing through
      the air and alight upon the shed at the very spot they had occupied so
      lately. The crash was fearful; the shed was knocked to splinters. The
      little ragamuffin considered that a capital joke, and fairly danced with
      glee.
    

      “Bravo, hit 'em agin! that's the way to do it!—But it was time for
      us to skip, though, wasn't it?”
     

      But again Henriette struck up against insurmountable obstacles in the
      shape of hedges and garden-walls, that offered absolutely no outlet. Her
      irrepressible companion, still wearing his broad grin and remarking that
      where there was a will there was a way, climbed to the coping of a wall
      and assisted her to scale it. On reaching the further side they found
      themselves in a kitchen garden among beds of peas and string-beans and
      surrounded by fences on every side; their sole exit was through the little
      cottage of the gardener. The boy led the way, swinging his arms and
      whistling unconcernedly, with an expression on his face of most profound
      indifference. He pushed open a door that admitted him to a bedroom, from
      which he passed on into another room, where there was an old woman,
      apparently the only living being upon the premises. She was standing by a
      table, in a sort of dazed stupor; she looked at the two strangers who thus
      unceremoniously made a highway of her dwelling, but addressed them no
      word, nor did they speak a word to her. They vanished as quickly as they
      had appeared, emerging by the exit opposite their entrance upon an alley
      that they followed for a moment. After that there were other difficulties
      to be surmounted, and thus they went on for more than half a mile, scaling
      walls, struggling through hedges, availing themselves of every short cut
      that offered, it might be the door of a stable or the window of a cottage,
      as the exigencies of the case demanded. Dogs howled mournfully; they had a
      narrow escape from being run down by a cow that was plunging along, wild
      with terror. It seemed as if they must be approaching the village,
      however; there was an odor of burning wood in the air, and momentarily
      volumes of reddish smoke, like veils of finest gauze floating in the wind,
      passed athwart the sun and obscured his light.
    

      All at once the urchin came to a halt and planted himself in front of
      Henriette.
    

      “I say, lady, tell us where you're going, will you?”
     

      “You can see very well where I am going; to Bazeilles.”
     

      He gave a low whistle of astonishment, following it up with the shrill
      laugh of the careless vagabond to whom nothing is sacred, who is not
      particular upon whom or what he launches his irreverent gibes.
    

      “To Bazeilles—oh, no, I guess not; I don't think my business lies
      that way—I have another engagement. Bye-bye, ta-ta!”
     

      He turned on his heel and was off like a shot, and she was none the wiser
      as to whence he came or whither he went. She had found him in a hole, she
      had lost sight of him at the corner of a wall, and never was she to set
      eyes on him again.
    

      When she was alone again Henriette experienced a strange sensation of
      fear. He had been no protection to her, that scrubby urchin, but his
      chatter had been a distraction; he had kept her spirits up by his way of
      making game of everything, as if it was all one huge raree show. Now she
      was beginning to tremble, her strength was failing her, she, who by nature
      was so courageous. The shells no longer fell around her: the Germans had
      ceased firing on Bazeilles, probably to avoid killing their own men, who
      were now masters of the village; but within the last few minutes she had
      heard the whistling of bullets, that peculiar sound like the buzzing of a
      bluebottle fly, that she recognized by having heard it described. There
      was such a raging, roaring clamor rising to the heavens in the distance,
      the confused uproar of other sounds was so violent, that in it she failed
      to distinguish the report of musketry. As she was turning the corner of a
      house there was a deadened thud close at her ear, succeeded by the sound
      of falling plaster, which brought her to a sudden halt; it was a bullet
      that had struck the facade. She was pale as death, and asked herself if
      her courage would be sufficient to carry her through to the end; and
      before she had time to frame an answer, she received what seemed to her a
      blow from a hammer upon her forehead, and sank, stunned, upon her knees.
      It was a spent ball that had ricocheted and struck her a little above the
      left eyebrow with sufficient force to raise an ugly contusion. When she
      came to, raising her hands to her forehead, she withdrew them covered with
      blood. But the pressure of her fingers had assured her that the bone
      beneath was uninjured, and she said aloud, encouraging herself by the
      sound of her own voice:
    

      “It is nothing, it is nothing. Come, I am not afraid; no, no! I am not
      afraid.”
     

      And it was the truth; she arose, and from that time walked amid the storm
      of bullets with absolute indifference, like one whose soul is parted from
      his body, who reasons not, who gives his life. She marched straight
      onward, with head erect, no longer seeking to shelter herself, and if she
      struck out at a swifter pace it was only that she might reach her
      appointed end more quickly. The death-dealing missiles pattered on the
      road before and behind her; twenty times they were near taking her life;
      she never noticed them. At last she was at Bazeilles, and struck
      diagonally across a field of lucerne in order to regain the road, the main
      street that traversed the village. Just as she turned into it she cast her
      eyes to the right, and there, some two hundred paces from her, beheld her
      house in a blaze. The flames were invisible against the bright sunlight;
      the roof had already fallen in in part, the windows were belching dense
      clouds of black smoke. She could restrain herself no longer, and ran with
      all her strength.
    

      Ever since eight o'clock Weiss, abandoned by the retiring troops, had been
      a self-made prisoner there. His return to Sedan had become an
      impossibility, for the Bavarians, immediately upon the withdrawal of the
      French, had swarmed down from the park of Montivilliers and occupied the
      road. He was alone and defenseless, save for his musket and what few
      cartridges were left him, when he beheld before his door a little band of
      soldiers, ten in number, abandoned, like himself, and parted from their
      comrades, looking about them for a place where they might defend
      themselves and sell their lives dearly. He ran downstairs to admit them,
      and thenceforth the house had a garrison, a lieutenant, corporal and eight
      men, all bitterly inflamed against the enemy, and resolved never to
      surrender.
    

      “What, Laurent, you here!” he exclaimed, surprised to recognize among the
      soldiers a tall, lean young man, who held in his hand a musket, doubtless
      taken from some corpse.
    

      Laurent was dressed in jacket and trousers of blue cloth; he was helper to
      a gardener of the neighborhood, and had lately lost his mother and his
      wife, both of whom had been carried off by the same insidious fever.
    

      “And why shouldn't I be?” he replied. “All I have is my skin, and I'm
      willing to give that. And then I am not such a bad shot, you know, and it
      will be just fun for me to blaze away at those rascals and knock one of
      'em over every time.”
     

      The lieutenant and the corporal had already begun to make an inspection of
      the premises. There was nothing to be done on the ground floor; all they
      did was to push the furniture against the door and windows in such a way
      as to form as secure a barricade as possible. After attending to that they
      proceeded to arrange a plan for the defense of the three small rooms of
      the first floor and the open attic, making no change, however, in the
      measures that had been already taken by Weiss, the protection of the
      windows by mattresses, the loopholes cut here and there in the slats of
      the blinds. As the lieutenant was leaning from the window to take a survey
      of their surroundings, he heard the wailing cry of a child.
    

      “What is that?” he asked.
    

      Weiss looked from the window, and, in the adjoining dyehouse, beheld the
      little sick boy, Charles, his scarlet face resting on the white pillow,
      imploringly begging his mother to bring him a drink: his mother, who lay
      dead across the threshold, beyond hearing or answering. With a sorrowful
      expression he replied:
    

      “It is a poor little child next door, there, crying for his mother, who
      was killed by a Prussian shell.”
     

      “Tonnerre de Dieu!” muttered Laurent, “how are they ever going to
      pay for all these things!”
     

      As yet only a few random shots had struck the front of the house. Weiss
      and the lieutenant, accompanied by the corporal and two men, had ascended
      to the attic, where they were in better position to observe the road, of
      which they had an oblique view as far as the Place de l'Eglise. The square
      was now occupied by the Bavarians, but any further advance was attended by
      difficulties that made them very circumspect. A handful of French
      soldiers, posted at the mouth of a narrow lane, held them in check for
      nearly a quarter of an hour, with a fire so rapid and continuous that the
      dead bodies lay in piles. The next obstacle they encountered was a house
      on the opposite corner, which also detained them some time before they
      could get possession of it. At one time a woman, with a musket in her
      hands, was seen through the smoke, firing from one of the windows. It was
      the abode of a baker, and a few soldiers were there in addition to the
      regular occupants; and when the house was finally carried there was a
      hoarse shout: “No quarter!” a surging, struggling, vociferating throng
      poured from the door and rolled across the street to the dead-wall
      opposite, and in the raging torrent were seen the woman's skirt, the
      jacket of a man, the white hairs of the grandfather; then came the crash
      of a volley of musketry, and the wall was splashed with blood from base to
      coping. This was a point on which the Germans were inexorable; everyone
      caught with arms in his hands and not belonging to some uniformed
      organization was shot without the formality of a trial, as having violated
      the law of nations. They were enraged at the obstinate resistance offered
      them by the village, and the frightful loss they had sustained during the
      five hours' conflict provoked them to the most atrocious reprisals. The
      gutters ran red with blood, the piled dead in the streets formed
      barricades, some of the more open places were charnel-houses, from whose
      depths rose the death-rattle of men in their last agony. And in every
      house that they had to carry by assault in this way men were seen
      distributing wisps of lighted straw, others ran to and fro with blazing
      torches, others smeared the walls and furniture with petroleum; soon whole
      streets were burning, Bazeilles was in flames.
    

      And now Weiss's was the only house in the central portion of the village
      that still continued to hold out, preserving its air of menace, like some
      stern citadel determined not to yield.
    

      “Look out! here they come!” shouted the lieutenant.
    

      A simultaneous discharge from the attic and the first floor laid low three
      of the Bavarians, who had come forward hugging the walls. The remainder of
      the body fell back and posted themselves under cover wherever the street
      offered facilities, and the siege of the house began; the bullets pelted
      on the front like rattling hail. For nearly ten minutes the fusillade
      continued without cessation, damaging the stucco, but not doing much
      mischief otherwise, until one of the men whom the lieutenant had taken
      with him to the garret was so imprudent as to show himself at a window,
      when a bullet struck him square in the forehead, killing him instantly. It
      was plain that whoever exposed himself would do so at peril of his life.
    

      “Doggone it! there's one gone!” growled the lieutenant. “Be careful, will
      you; there's not enough of us that we can afford to let ourselves be
      killed for the fun of it!”
     

      He had taken a musket and was firing away like the rest of them from
      behind the protection of a shutter, at the same time watching and
      encouraging his men. It was Laurent, the gardener's helper, however, who
      more than all the others excited his wonder and admiration. Kneeling on
      the floor, with his chassepot peering out of the narrow aperture of a
      loophole, he never fired until absolutely certain of his aim; he even told
      in advance where he intended hitting his living target.
    

      “That little officer in blue that you see down there, in the heart.—That
      other fellow, the tall, lean one, between the eyes.—I don't like the
      looks of that fat man with the red beard; I think I'll let him have it in
      the stomach.”
     

      And each time his man went down as if struck by lightning, hit in the very
      spot he had mentioned, and he continued to fire at intervals, coolly,
      without haste, there being no necessity for hurrying himself, as he
      remarked, since it would require too long a time to kill them all in that
      way.
    

      “Oh! if I had but my eyes!” Weiss impatiently exclaimed. He had broken his
      spectacles a while before, to his great sorrow. He had his double
      eye-glass still, but the perspiration was rolling down his face in such
      streams that it was impossible to keep it on his nose. His usual calm
      collectedness was entirely lost in his over-mastering passion; and thus,
      between his defective vision and his agitated nerves, many of his shots
      were wasted.
    

      “Don't hurry so, it is only throwing away powder,” said Laurent. “Do you
      see that man who has lost his helmet, over yonder by the grocer's shop?
      Well, now draw a bead on him,—carefully, don't hurry. That's
      first-rate! you have broken his paw for him and made him dance a jig in
      his own blood.”
     

      Weiss, rather pale in the face, gave a look at the result of his
      marksmanship.
    

      “Put him out of his misery,” he said.
    

      “What, waste a cartridge! Not, much. Better save it for another of 'em.”
     

      The besiegers could not have failed to notice the remarkable practice of
      the invisible sharpshooter in the attic. Whoever of them showed himself in
      the open was certain to remain there. They therefore brought up
      re-enforcements and placed them in position, with instructions to maintain
      an unremitting fire upon the roof of the building. It was not long before
      the attic became untenable; the slates were perforated as if they had been
      tissue paper, the bullets found their way to every nook and corner,
      buzzing and humming as if the room had been invaded by a swarm of angry
      bees. Death stared them all in the face if they remained there longer.
    

      “We will go downstairs,” said the lieutenant. “We can hold the first floor
      for awhile yet.” But as he was making for the ladder a bullet struck him
      in the groin and he fell. “Too late, doggone it!”
     

      Weiss and Laurent, aided by the remaining soldiers, carried him below,
      notwithstanding his vehement protests; he told them not to waste their
      time on him, his time had come; he might as well die upstairs as down. He
      was still able to be of service to them, however, when they had laid him
      on a bed in a room of the first floor, by advising them what was best to
      do.
    

      “Fire into the mass,” he said; “don't stop to take aim. They are too
      cowardly to risk an advance unless they see your fire begin to slacken.”
     

      And so the siege of the little house went on as if it was to last for
      eternity. Twenty times it seemed as if it must be swept away bodily by the
      storm of iron that beat upon it, and each time, as the smoke drifted away,
      it was seen amid the sulphurous blasts, torn, pierced, mangled, but erect
      and menacing, spitting fire and lead with undiminished venom from each one
      of its orifices. The assailants, furious that they should be detained for
      such length of time and lose so many men before such a hovel, yelled and
      fired wildly in the distance, but had not courage to attempt to carry the
      lower floor by a rush.
    

      “Look out!” shouted the corporal, “there is a shutter about to fall!”
     

      The concentrated fire had torn one of the inside blinds from its hinges,
      but Weiss darted forward and pushed a wardrobe before the window, and
      Laurent was enabled to continue his operations under cover. One of the
      soldiers was lying at his feet with his jaw broken, losing blood freely.
      Another received a bullet in his chest, and dragged himself over to the
      wall, where he lay gasping in protracted agony, while convulsive movements
      shook his frame at intervals. They were but eight, now, all told, not
      counting the lieutenant, who, too weak to speak, his back supported by the
      headboard of the bed, continued to give his directions by signs. As had
      been the case with the attic, the three rooms of the first floor were
      beginning to be untenable, for the mangled mattresses no longer afforded
      protection against the missiles; at every instant the plaster fell in
      sheets from the walls and ceiling, and the furniture was in process of
      demolition: the sides of the wardrobe yawned as if they had been cloven by
      an ax. And worse still, the ammunition was nearly exhausted.
    

      “It's too bad!” grumbled Laurent; “just when everything was going so
      beautifully!”
     

      But suddenly Weiss was struck with an idea.
    

      “Wait!”
     

      He had thought of the dead soldier up in the garret above, and climbed up
      the ladder to search for the cartridges he must have about him. A wide
      space of the roof had been crushed in; he saw the blue sky, a patch of
      bright, wholesome light that made him start. Not wishing to be killed, he
      crawled over the floor on his hands and knees, then, when he had the
      cartridges in his possession, some thirty of them, he made haste down
      again as fast his legs could carry him.
    

      Downstairs, as he was sharing his newly acquired treasure with the
      gardener's lad, a soldier uttered a piercing cry and sank to his knees.
      They were but seven; and presently they were but six, a bullet having
      entered the corporal's head at the eye and lodged in the brain.
    

      From that time on, Weiss had no distinct consciousness of what was going
      on around him; he and the five others continued to blaze away like
      lunatics, expending their cartridges, with not the faintest idea in their
      heads that there could be such a thing as surrender. In the three small
      rooms the floor was strewn with fragments of the broken furniture. Ingress
      and egress were barred by the corpses that lay before the doors; in one
      corner a wounded man kept up a pitiful wail that was frightful to hear.
      Every inch of the floor was slippery with blood; a thin stream of blood
      from the attic was crawling lazily down the stairs. And the air was scarce
      respirable, an air thick and hot with sulphurous fumes, heavy with smoke,
      filled with an acrid, nauseating dust; a darkness dense as that of night,
      through which darted the red flame-tongues of the musketry.
    

      “By God's thunder!” cried Weiss, “they are bringing up artillery!”
     

      It was true. Despairing of ever reducing that handful of madmen, who had
      consumed so much of their time, the Bavarians had run up a gun to the
      corner of the Place de l'Eglise, and were putting it into position;
      perhaps they would be allowed to pass when they should have knocked the
      house to pieces with their solid shot. And the honor there was to them in
      the proceeding, the gun trained on them down there in the square, excited
      the bitter merriment of the besieged; the utmost intensity of scorn was in
      their gibes. Ah! the cowardly bougres, with their artillery!
      Kneeling in his old place still, Laurent carefully adjusted his aim and
      each time picked off a gunner, so that the service of the piece became
      impossible, and it was five or six minutes before they fired their first
      shot. It ranged high, moreover, and only clipped away a bit of the roof.
    

      But the end was now at hand. It was all in vain that they searched the
      dead men's belts; there was not a single cartridge left. With vacillating
      steps and haggard faces the six groped around the room, seeking what heavy
      objects they might find to hurl from the windows upon their enemies. One
      of them showed himself at the casement, vociferating insults, and shaking
      his fist; instantly he was pierced by a dozen bullets; and there remained
      but five. What were they to do? go down and endeavor to make their escape
      by way of the garden and the meadows? The question was never answered, for
      at that moment a tumult arose below, a furious mob came tumbling up the
      stairs: it was the Bavarians, who had at last thought of turning the
      position by breaking down the back door and entering the house by that
      way. For a brief moment a terrible hand-to-hand conflict raged in the
      small rooms among the dead bodies and the debris of the furniture. One of
      the soldiers had his chest transfixed by a bayonet thrust, the two others
      were made prisoners, while the attitude of the lieutenant, who had given
      up the ghost, was that of one about to give an order, his mouth open, his
      arm raised aloft.
    

      While these things were occurring an officer, a big, flaxen-haired man,
      carrying a revolver in his hand, whose bloodshot eyes seemed bursting from
      their sockets, had caught sight of Weiss and Laurent, both in their
      civilian attire; he roared at them in French:
    

      “Who are you, you fellows? and what are you doing here?”
     

      Then, glancing at their faces, black with powder-stains, he saw how
      matters stood, he heaped insult and abuse on them in guttural German, in a
      voice that shook with anger. Already he had raised his revolver and was
      about to send a bullet into their heads, when the soldiers of his command
      rushed in, seized Laurent and Weiss, and hustled them out to the
      staircase. The two men were borne along like straws upon a mill-race
      amidst that seething human torrent, under whose pressure they were hurled
      from out the door and sent staggering, stumbling across the street to the
      opposite wall amid a chorus of execration that drowned the sound of their
      officers' voices. Then, for a space of two or three minutes, while the big
      fair-haired officer was endeavoring to extricate them in order to proceed
      with their execution, an opportunity was afforded them to raise themselves
      erect and look about them.
    

      Other houses had taken fire; Bazeilles was now a roaring, blazing furnace.
      Flames had begun to appear at the tall windows of the church and were
      creeping upward toward the roof. Some soldiers who were driving a
      venerable lady from her home had compelled her to furnish the matches with
      which to fire her own beds and curtains. Lighted by blazing brands and fed
      by petroleum in floods, fires were rising and spreading in every quarter;
      it was no longer civilized warfare, but a conflict of savages, maddened by
      the long protracted strife, wreaking vengeance for their dead, their heaps
      of dead, upon whom they trod at every step they took. Yelling, shouting
      bands traversed the streets amid the scurrying smoke and falling cinders,
      swelling the hideous uproar into which entered sounds of every kind:
      shrieks, groans, the rattle of musketry, the crash of falling walls. Men
      could scarce see one another; great livid clouds drifted athwart the sun
      and obscured his light, bearing with them an intolerable stench of soot
      and blood, heavy with the abominations of the slaughter. In every quarter
      the work of death and destruction still went on: the human brute
      unchained, the imbecile wrath, the mad fury, of man devouring his brother
      man.
    

      And Weiss beheld his house burn before his eyes. Some soldiers had applied
      the torch, others fed the flame by throwing upon it the fragments of the
      wrecked furniture. The rez-de-chaussee was quickly in a blaze, the
      smoke poured in dense black volumes from the wounds in the front and roof.
      But now the dyehouse adjoining was also on fire, and horrible to relate,
      the voice of little Charles, lying on his bed delirious with fever, could
      be heard through the crackling of the flames, beseeching his mother to
      bring him a draught of water, while the skirts of the wretched woman who,
      with her disfigured face, lay across the door-sill, were even then
      beginning to kindle.
    

      “Mamma, mamma, I am thirsty! Mamma, bring me a drink of water—”
     

      The weak, faint voice was drowned in the roar of the conflagration; the
      cheering of the victors rose on the air in the distance.
    

      But rising above all other sounds, dominating the universal clamor, a
      terrible cry was heard. It was Henriette, who had reached the place at
      last, and now beheld her husband, backed up against the wall, facing a
      platoon of men who were loading their muskets.
    

      She flew to him and threw her arms about his neck.
    

      “My God! what is it! They cannot be going to kill you!”
     

      Weiss looked at her with stupid, unseeing eyes. She! his wife, so long the
      object of his desire, so fondly idolized! A great shudder passed through
      his frame and he awoke to consciousness of his situation. What had he
      done? why had he remained there, firing at the enemy, instead of returning
      to her side, as he had promised he would do? It all flashed upon him now,
      as the darkness is illuminated by the lightning's glare: he had wrecked
      their happiness, they were to be parted, forever parted. Then he noticed
      the blood upon her forehead.
    

      “Are you hurt?” he asked. “You were mad to come—”
     

      She interrupted him with an impatient gesture.
    

      “Never mind me; it is a mere scratch. But you, you! why are you here? They
      shall not kill you; I will not suffer it!”
     

      The officer, who was endeavoring to clear the road in order to give the
      firing party the requisite room, came up on hearing the sound of voices,
      and beholding a woman with her arms about the neck of one of his
      prisoners, exclaimed loudly in French:
    

      “Come, come, none of this nonsense here! Whence come you? What is your
      business here?”
     

      “Give me my husband.”
     

      “What, is he your husband, that man? His sentence is pronounced; the law
      must take its course.”
     

      “Give me my husband.”
     

      “Come, be rational. Stand aside; we do not wish to harm you.”
     

      “Give me my husband.”
     

      Perceiving the futility of arguing with her, the officer was about to give
      orders to remove her forcibly from the doomed man's arms when Laurent, who
      until then had maintained an impassive silence, ventured to interfere.
    

      “See here, Captain, I am the man who killed so many of your men; go ahead
      and shoot me—that will be all right, especially as I have neither
      chick nor child in all the world. But this gentleman's case is different;
      he is a married man, don't you see. Come, now, let him go; then you can
      settle my business as soon as you choose.”
     

      Beside himself with anger, the captain screamed:
    

      “What is all this lingo? Are you trying to make game of me? Come, step out
      here, some one of you fellows, and take away this woman!”
     

      He had to repeat his order in German, whereon a soldier came forward from
      the ranks, a short stocky Bavarian, with an enormous head surrounded by a
      bristling forest of red hair and beard, beneath which all that was to be
      seen were a pair of big blue eyes and a massive nose. He was besmeared
      with blood, a hideous spectacle, like nothing so much as some fierce,
      hairy denizen of the woods, emerging from his cavern and licking his
      chops, still red with the gore of the victims whose bones he has been
      crunching.
    

      With a heart-rending cry Henriette repeated:
    

      “Give me my husband, or let me die with him.”
     

      This seemed to cause the cup of the officer's exasperation to overrun; he
      thumped himself violently on the chest, declaring that he was no
      executioner, that he would rather die than harm a hair of an innocent
      head. There was nothing against her; he would cut off his right hand
      rather than do her an injury. And then he repeated his order that she be
      taken away.
    

      As the Bavarian came up to carry out his instructions Henriette tightened
      her clasp on Weiss's neck, throwing all her strength into her frantic
      embrace.
    

      “Oh, my love! Keep me with you, I beseech you; let me die with you—”
     

      Big tears were rolling down his cheeks as, without answering, he
      endeavored to loosen the convulsive clasp of the fingers of the poor
      creature he loved so dearly.
    

      “You love me no longer, then, that you wish to die without me. Hold me,
      keep me, do not let them take me. They will weary at last, and will kill
      us together.”
     

      He had loosened one of the little hands, and carried it to his lips and
      kissed it, working all the while to make the other release its hold.
    

      “No, no, it shall not be! I will not leave thy bosom; they shall pierce my
      heart before reaching thine. I will not survive—”
     

      But at last, after a long struggle, he held both the hands in his. Then he
      broke the silence that he had maintained until then, uttering one single
      word:
    

      “Farewell, dear wife.”
     

      And with his own hands he placed her in the arms of the Bavarian, who
      carried her away. She shrieked and struggled, while the soldier, probably
      with intent to soothe her, kept pouring in her ear an uninterrupted stream
      of words in unmelodious German. And, having freed her head, looking over
      the shoulder of the man, she beheld the end.
    

      It lasted not five seconds. Weiss, whose eye-glass had slipped from its
      position in the agitation of their parting, quickly replaced it upon his
      nose, as if desirous to look death in the face. He stepped back and placed
      himself against the wall, and the face of the self-contained, strong young
      man, as he stood there in his tattered coat, was sublimely beautiful in
      its expression of tranquil courage. Laurent, who stood beside him, had
      thrust his hands deep down into his pockets. The cold cruelty of the
      proceeding disgusted him; it seemed to him that they could not be far
      removed from savagery who could thus slaughter men before the eyes of
      their wives. He drew himself up, looked them square in the face, and in a
      tone of deepest contempt expectorated:
    

      “Dirty pigs!”
     

      The officer raised his sword; the signal was succeeded by a crashing
      volley, and the two men sank to the ground, an inert mass, the gardener's
      lad upon his face, the other, the accountant, upon his side, lengthwise of
      the wall. The frame of the latter, before he expired, contracted in a
      supreme convulsion, the eyelids quivered, the mouth opened as if he was
      about to speak. The officer came up and stirred him with his foot, to make
      sure that he was really dead.
    

      Henriette had seen the whole: the fading eyes that sought her in death,
      the last struggle of the strong man in agony, the brutal boot spurning the
      corpse. And while the Bavarian still held her in his arms, conveying her
      further and further from the object of her love, she uttered no cry; she
      set her teeth, in silent fury, into what was nearest: a human hand, it
      chanced to be. The soldier gave vent to a howl of anguish and dashed her
      to the ground; raising his uninjured fist above her head he was on the
      point of braining her. And for a moment their faces were in contact; she
      experienced a feeling of intensest loathing for the monster, and that
      blood-stained hair and beard, those blue eyes, dilated and brimming with
      hate and rage, were destined to remain forever indelibly imprinted on her
      memory.
    

      In after days Henriette could never account distinctly to herself for the
      time immediately succeeding these events. She had but one desire: to
      return to the spot where her loved one had died, take possession of his
      remains, and watch and weep over them; but, as in an evil dream, obstacles
      of every sort arose before her and barred the way. First a heavy infantry
      fire broke out afresh, and there was great activity among the German
      troops who were holding Bazeilles; it was due to the arrival of the
      infanterie de marine and other regiments that had been despatched from
      Balan to regain possession of the village, and the battle commenced to
      rage again with the utmost fury. The young woman, in company with a band
      of terrified citizens, was swept away to the left into a dark alley. The
      result of the conflict could not remain long doubtful, however; it was too
      late to reconquer the abandoned positions. For near half an hour the
      infantry struggled against superior numbers and faced death with splendid
      bravery, but the enemy's strength was constantly increasing, their
      re-enforcements were pouring in from every direction, the roads, the
      meadows, the park of Montivilliers; no force at our command could have
      dislodged them from the position, so dearly bought, where they had left
      thousands of their bravest. Destruction and devastation now had done their
      work; the place was a shambles, disgraceful to humanity, where mangled
      forms lay scattered among smoking ruins, and poor Bazeilles, having
      drained the bitter cup, went up at last in smoke and flame.
    

      Henriette turned and gave one last look at her little house, whose floors
      fell in even as she gazed, sending myriads of little sparks whirling gayly
      upward on the air. And there, before her, prone at the wall's foot, she
      saw her husband's corpse, and in her despair and grief would fain have
      returned to him, but just then another crowd came up and surged around
      her, the bugles were sounding the signal to retire, she was borne away,
      she knew not how, among the retreating troops. Her faculty of
      self-guidance left her; she was as a bit of flotsam swept onward by the
      eddying human tide that streamed along the way. And that was all she could
      remember until she became herself again and found she was at Balan, among
      strangers, her head reclined upon a table in a kitchen, weeping.
    

      
 
    

      It was nearly ten o'clock up on the Plateau de l'Algerie, and still the
      men of Beaudoin's company were resting supine, among the cabbages, in the
      field whence they had not budged since early morning. The cross fire from
      the batteries on Hattoy and the peninsula of Iges was hotter than ever; it
      had just killed two more of their number, and there were no orders for
      them to advance. Were they to stay there and be shelled all day, without a
      chance to see anything of the fighting?
    

      They were even denied the relief of discharging their chassepots. Captain
      Beaudoin had at last put his foot down and stopped the firing, that
      senseless fusillade against the little wood in front of them, which seemed
      entirely deserted by the Prussians. The heat was stifling; it seemed to
      them that they should roast, stretched there on the ground under the
      blazing sky.
    

      Jean was alarmed, on turning to look at Maurice, to see that he had
      declined his head and was lying, with closed eyes, apparently inanimate,
      his cheek against the bare earth. He was very pale, there was no sign of
      life in his face.
    

      “Hallo there! what's the matter?”
     

      But Maurice was only sleeping. The mental strain, conjointly with his
      fatigue, had been too much for him, in spite of the dangers that menaced
      them at every moment. He awoke with a start and stared about him, and the
      peace that slumber had left in his wide-dilated eyes was immediately
      supplanted by a look of startled affright as it dawned on him where he
      was. He had not the remotest idea how long he had slept; all he knew was
      that the state from which he had been recalled to the horrors of the
      battlefield was one of blessed oblivion and tranquillity.
    

      “Hallo! that's funny; I must have been asleep!” he murmured. “Ah! it has
      done me good.”
     

      It was true that he suffered less from that pressure about his temples and
      at his heart, that horrible constriction that seems as if it would crush
      one's bones. He chaffed Lapoulle, who had manifested much uneasiness since
      the disappearance of Chouteau and Loubet and spoke of going to look for
      them. A capital idea! so he might get away and hide behind a tree, and
      smoke a pipe! Pache thought that the surgeons had detained them at the
      ambulance, where there was a scarcity of sick-bearers. That was a job that
      he had no great fancy for, to go around under fire and collect the
      wounded! And haunted by a lingering superstition of the country where he
      was born, he added that it was unlucky to touch a corpse; it brought
      death.
    

      “Shut up, confound you!” roared Lieutenant Rochas. “Who is going to die?”
     

      Colonel de Vineuil, sitting his tall horse, turned his head and gave a
      smile, the first that had been seen on his face that morning. Then he
      resumed his statue-like attitude, waiting for orders as impassively as
      ever under the tumbling shells.
    

      Maurice's attention was attracted to the sick-bearers, whose movements he
      watched with interest as they searched for wounded men among the
      depressions of the ground. At the end of a sunken road, and protected by a
      low ridge not far from their position, a flying ambulance of first aid had
      been established, and its emissaries had begun to explore the plateau. A
      tent was quickly erected, while from the hospital van the attendants
      extracted the necessary supplies; compresses, bandages, linen, and the few
      indispensable instruments required for the hasty dressings they gave
      before dispatching the patients to Sedan, which they did as rapidly as
      they could secure wagons, the supply of which was limited. There was an
      assistant surgeon in charge, with two subordinates of inferior rank under
      him. In all the army none showed more gallantry and received less
      acknowledgment than the litter-bearers. They could be seen all over the
      field in their gray uniform, with the distinctive red badge on their cap
      and on their arm, courageously risking their lives and unhurriedly pushing
      forward through the thickest of the fire to the spots where men had been
      seen to fall. At times they would creep on hands and knees: would always
      take advantage of a hedge or ditch, or any shelter that was afforded by
      the conformation of the ground, never exposing themselves unnecessarily
      out of bravado. When at last they reached the fallen men their painful
      task commenced, which was made more difficult and protracted by the fact
      that many of the subjects had fainted, and it was hard to tell whether
      they were alive or dead. Some lay face downward with their mouths in a
      pool of blood, in danger of suffocating, others had bitten the ground
      until their throats were choked with dry earth, others, where a shell had
      fallen among a group, were a confused, intertwined heap of mangled limbs
      and crushed trunks. With infinite care and patience the bearers would go
      through the tangled mass, separating the living from the dead, arranging
      their limbs and raising the head to give them air, cleansing the face as
      well as they could with the means at their command. Each of them carried a
      bucket of cool water, which he had to use very savingly. And Maurice could
      see them thus engaged, often for minutes at a time, kneeling by some man
      whom they were trying to resuscitate, waiting for him to show some sign of
      life.
    

      He watched one of them, some fifty yards away to the left, working over
      the wound of a little soldier from the sleeve of whose tunic a thin stream
      of blood was trickling, drop by drop. The man of the red cross discovered
      the source of the hemorrhage and finally checked it by compressing the
      artery. In urgent cases, like that of the little soldier, they rendered
      these partial attentions, locating fractures, bandaging and immobilizing
      the limbs so as to reduce the danger of transportation. And the
      transportation, even, was an affair that called for a great deal of
      judgment and ingenuity; they assisted those who could walk, and carried
      others, either in their arms, like little children, or pickaback when the
      nature of the hurt allowed it; at other times they united in groups of
      two, three, or four, according to the requirements of the case, and made a
      chair by joining their hands, or carried the patient off by his legs and
      shoulders in a recumbent posture. In addition to the stretchers provided
      by the medical department there were all sorts of temporary makeshifts,
      such as the stretchers improvised from knapsack straps and a couple of
      muskets. And in every direction on the unsheltered, shell-swept plain they
      could be seen, singly or in groups, hastening with their dismal loads to
      the rear, their heads bowed and picking their steps, an admirable
      spectacle of prudent heroism.
    

      Maurice saw a pair on his right, a thin, puny little fellow lugging a
      burly sergeant, with both legs broken, suspended from his neck; the sight
      reminded the young man of an ant, toiling under a burden many times larger
      than itself; and even as he watched them a shell burst directly in their
      path and they were lost to view. When the smoke cleared away the sergeant
      was seen lying on his back, having received no further injury, while the
      bearer lay beside him, disemboweled. And another came up, another toiling
      ant, who, when he had turned his dead comrade on his back and examined
      him, took the sergeant up and made off with his load.
    

      It gave Maurice a chance to read Lapoulle a lesson.
    

      “I say, if you like the business, why don't you go and give that man a
      lift!”
     

      For some little time the batteries at Saint-Menges had been thundering as
      if determined to surpass all previous efforts, and Captain Beaudoin, who
      was still tramping nervously up and down before his company line, at last
      stepped up to the colonel. It was a pity, he said, to waste the men's
      morale in that way and keep their minds on the stretch for hours and
      hours.
    

      “I can't help it; I have no orders,” the colonel stoically replied.
    

      They had another glimpse of General Douay as he flew by at a gallop,
      followed by his staff. He had just had an interview with General de
      Wimpffen, who had ridden up to entreat him to hold his ground, which he
      thought he could promise to do, but only so long as the Calvary of Illy,
      on his right, held out; Illy once taken, he would be responsible for
      nothing; their defeat would be inevitable. General de Wimpffen averred
      that the 1st corps would look out for the position at Illy, and indeed a
      regiment of zouaves was presently seen to occupy the Calvary, so that
      General Douay, his anxiety being relieved on that score, sent Dumont's
      division to the assistance of the 12th corps, which was then being hard
      pushed. Scarcely fifteen minutes later, however, as he was returning from
      the left, whither he had ridden to see how affairs were looking, he was
      surprised, raising his eyes to the Calvary, to see it was unoccupied;
      there was not a zouave to be seen there, they had abandoned the plateau
      that was no longer tenable by reason of the terrific fire from the
      batteries at Fleigneux. With a despairing presentiment of impending
      disaster he was spurring as fast as he could to the right, when he
      encountered Dumont's division, flying in disorder, broken and tangled in
      inextricable confusion with the debris of the 1st corps. The latter,
      which, after its retrograde movement, had never been able to regain
      possession of the posts it had occupied in the morning, leaving Daigny in
      the hands of the XIIth Saxon corps and Givonne to the Prussian Guards, had
      been compelled to retreat in a northerly direction across the wood of
      Garenne, harassed by the batteries that the enemy had posted on every
      summit from one end of the valley to the other. The terrible circle of
      fire and flame was contracting; a portion of the Guards had continued
      their march on Illy, moving from east to west and turning the eminences,
      while from west to east, in the rear of the XIth corps, now masters of
      Saint-Menges, the Vth, moving steadily onward, had passed Fleigneux and
      with insolent temerity was constantly pushing its batteries more and more
      to the front, and so contemptuous were they of the ignorance and impotence
      of the French that they did not even wait for the infantry to come up to
      support their guns. It was midday; the entire horizon was aflame,
      concentrating its destructive fire on the 7th and 1st corps.
    

      Then General Douay, while the German artillery was thus preparing the way
      for the decisive movement that should make them masters of the Calvary,
      resolved to make one last desperate attempt to regain possession of the
      hill. He dispatched his orders, and throwing himself in person among the
      fugitives of Dumont's division, succeeded in forming a column which he
      sent forward to the plateau. It held its ground for a few minutes, but the
      bullets whistled so thick, the naked, treeless fields were swept by such a
      tornado of shot and shell, that it was not long before the panic broke out
      afresh, sweeping the men adown the slopes, rolling them up as straws are
      whirled before the wind. And the general, unwilling to abandon his
      project, ordered up other regiments.
    

      A staff officer galloped by, shouting to Colonel de Vineuil as he passed
      an order that was lost in the universal uproar. Hearing, the colonel was
      erect in his stirrups in an instant, his face aglow with the gladness of
      battle, and pointing to the Calvary with a grand movement of his sword:
    

      “Our turn has come at last, boys!” he shouted. “Forward!”
     

      A thrill of enthusiasm ran through the ranks at the brief address, and the
      regiment put itself in motion. Beaudoin's company was among the first to
      get on its feet, which it did to the accompaniment of much good-natured
      chaff, the men declaring they were so rusty they could not move; the
      gravel must have penetrated their joints. The fire was so hot, however,
      that by the time they had advanced a few feet they were glad to avail
      themselves of the protection of a shelter trench that lay in their path,
      along which they crept in an undignified posture, bent almost double.
    

      “Now, young fellow, look out for yourself!” Jean said to Maurice; “we're
      in for it. Don't let 'em see so much as the end of your nose, for if you
      do they will surely snip it off, and keep a sharp lookout for your legs
      and arms unless you have more than you care to keep. Those who come out of
      this with a whole skin will be lucky.”
     

      Maurice did not hear him very distinctly; the words were lost in the
      all-pervading clamor that buzzed and hummed in the young man's ears. He
      could not have told now whether he was afraid or not; he went forward
      because the others did, borne along with them in their headlong rush,
      without distinct volition of his own; his sole desire was to have the
      affair ended as soon as possible. So true was it that he was a mere drop
      in the on-pouring torrent that when the leading files came to the end of
      the trench and began to waver at the prospect of climbing the exposed
      slope that lay before them, he immediately felt himself seized by a
      sensation of panic, and was ready to turn and fly. It was simply an
      uncontrollable instinct, a revolt of the muscles, obedient to every
      passing breath.
    

      Some of the men had already faced about when the colonel came hurrying up.
    

      “Steady there, my children. You won't cause me this great sorrow; you
      won't behave like cowards. Remember, the 106th has never turned its back
      upon the enemy; will you be the first to disgrace our flag?”
     

      And he spurred his charger across the path of the fugitives, addressing
      them individually, speaking to them, of their country, in a voice that
      trembled with emotion.
    

      Lieutenant Rochas was so moved by his words that he gave way to an
      ungovernable fit of anger, raising his sword and belaboring the men with
      the flat as if it had been a club.
    

      “You dirty loafers, I'll see whether you will go up there or not! I'll
      kick you up! About face! and I'll break the jaw of the first man that
      refuses to obey!”
     

      But such an extreme measure as kicking a regiment into action was
      repugnant to the colonel.
    

      “No, no, lieutenant; they will follow me. Won't you, my children? You
      won't let your old colonel fight it out alone with the Prussians! Up there
      lies the way; forward!”
     

      He turned his horse and left the trench, and they did all follow, to a
      man, for he would have been considered the lowest of the low who could
      have abandoned their leader after that brave, kind speech. He was the only
      one, however, who, while crossing the open fields, erect on his tall
      horse, was cool and unconcerned; the men scattered, advancing in open
      order and availing themselves of every shelter afforded by the ground. The
      land sloped upward; there were fully five hundred yards of stubble and
      beet fields between them and the Calvary, and in place of the correctly
      aligned columns that the spectator sees advancing when a charge is ordered
      in field maneuvers, all that was to be seen was a loose array of men with
      rounded backs, singly or in small groups, hugging the ground, now crawling
      warily a little way on hands and knees, now dashing forward for the next
      cover, like huge insects fighting their way upward to the crest by dint of
      agility and address. The enemy's batteries seemed to have become aware of
      the movement; their fire was so rapid that the reports of the guns were
      blended in one continuous roar. Five men were killed, a lieutenant was cut
      in two.
    

      Maurice and Jean had considered themselves fortunate that their way led
      along a hedge behind which they could push forward unseen, but the man
      immediately in front of them was shot through the temples and fell back
      dead in their arms; they had to cast him down at one side. By this time,
      however, the casualties had ceased to excite attention; they were too
      numerous. A man went by, uttering frightful shrieks and pressing his hands
      upon his protruding entrails; they beheld a horse dragging himself along
      with both thighs broken, and these anguishing sights, these horrors of the
      battlefield, affected them no longer. They were suffering from the
      intolerable heat, the noonday sun that beat upon their backs and burned
      like hot coals.
    

      “How thirsty I am!” Maurice murmured. “My throat is like an ash barrel.
      Don't you notice that smell of something scorching, a smell like burning
      woolen?”
     

      Jean nodded. “It was just the same at Solferino; perhaps it is the smell
      that always goes with war. But hold, I have a little brandy left; we'll
      have a sup.”
     

      And they paused behind the hedge a moment and raised the flask to their
      lips, but the brandy, instead of relieving their thirst, burned their
      stomach. It irritated them, that nasty taste of burnt rags in their
      mouths. Moreover they perceived that their strength was commencing to fail
      for want of sustenance and would have liked to take a bite from the half
      loaf that Maurice had in his knapsack, but it would not do to stop and
      breakfast there under fire, and then they had to keep up with their
      comrades. There was a steady stream of men coming up behind them along the
      hedge who pressed them forward, and so, doggedly bending their backs to
      the task before them, they resumed their course. Presently they made their
      final rush and reached the crest. They were on the plateau, at the very
      foot of the Calvary, the old weather-beaten cross that stood between two
      stunted lindens.
    

      “Good for our side!” exclaimed Jean; “here we are! But the next thing is
      to remain here!”
     

      He was right; it was not the pleasantest place in the world to be in, as
      Lapoulle remarked in a doleful tone that excited the laughter of the
      company. They all lay down again, in a field of stubble, and for all that
      three men were killed in quick succession. It was pandemonium let loose up
      there on the heights; the projectiles from Saint-Menges, Fleigneux, and
      Givonne fell in such numbers that the ground fairly seemed to smoke, as it
      does at times under a heavy shower of rain. It was clear that the position
      could not be maintained unless artillery was dispatched at once to the
      support of the troops who had been sent on such a hopeless undertaking.
      General Douay, it was said, had given instructions to bring up two
      batteries of the reserve artillery, and the men were every moment turning
      their heads, watching anxiously for the guns that did not come.
    

      “It is absurd, ridiculous!” declared Beaudoin, who was again fidgeting up
      and down before the company. “Who ever heard of placing a regiment in the
      air like this and giving it no support!” Then, observing a slight
      depression on their left, he turned to Rochas: “Don't you think,
      Lieutenant, that the company would be safer there?”
     

      Rochas stood stock still and shrugged his shoulders. “It is six of one and
      half a dozen of the other, Captain. My opinion is that we will do better
      to stay where we are.”
     

      Then the captain, whose principles were opposed to swearing, forgot
      himself.
    

      “But, good God! there won't a man of us escape! We can't allow the men to
      be murdered like this!”
     

      And he determined to investigate for himself the advantages of the
      position he had mentioned, but had scarcely taken ten steps when he was
      lost to sight in the smoke of an exploding shell; a splinter of the
      projectile had fractured his right leg. He fell upon his back, emitting a
      shrill cry of alarm, like a woman's.
    

      “He might have known as much,” Rochas muttered. “There's no use his making
      such a fuss over it; when the dose is fixed for one, he has to take it.”
     

      Some members of the company had risen to their feet on seeing their
      captain fall, and as he continued to call lustily for assistance, Jean
      finally ran to him, immediately followed by Maurice.
    

      “Friends, friends, for Heaven's sake do not leave me here; carry me to the
      ambulance!”
     

      “Dame, Captain, I don't know that we shall be able to get so far,
      but we can try.”
     

      As they were discussing how they could best take hold to raise him they
      perceived, behind the hedge that had sheltered them on their way up, two
      stretcher-bearers who seemed to be waiting for something to do, and
      finally, after protracted signaling, induced them to draw near. All would
      be well if they could only get the wounded man to the ambulance without
      accident, but the way was long and the iron hail more pitiless than ever.
    

      The bearers had tightly bandaged the injured limb in order to keep the
      bones in position and were about to bear the captain off the field on what
      children call a “chair,” formed by joining their hands and slipping an arm
      of the patient over each of their necks, when Colonel de Vineuil, who had
      heard of the accident, came up, spurring his horse. He manifested much
      emotion, for he had known the young man ever since his graduation from
      Saint-Cyr.
    

      “Cheer up, my poor boy; have courage. You are in no danger; the doctors
      will save your leg.”
     

      The captain's face wore an expression of resignation, as if he had
      summoned up all his courage to bear his misfortune manfully.
    

      “No, my dear Colonel; I feel it is all up with me, and I would rather have
      it so. The only thing that distresses me is the waiting for the inevitable
      end.”
     

      The bearers carried him away, and were fortunate enough to reach the hedge
      in safety, behind which they trotted swiftly away with their burden. The
      colonel's eyes followed them anxiously, and when he saw them reach the
      clump of trees where the ambulance was stationed a look of deep relief
      rose to his face.
    

      “But you, Colonel,” Maurice suddenly exclaimed, “you are wounded too!”
     

      He had perceived blood dripping from the colonel's left boot. A projectile
      of some description had carried away the heel of the foot-covering and
      forced the steel shank into the flesh.
    

      M. de Vineuil bent over his saddle and glanced unconcernedly at the
      member, in which the sensation at that time must have been far from
      pleasurable.
    

      “Yes, yes,” he replied, “it is a little remembrance that I received a
      while ago. A mere scratch, that don't prevent me from sitting my horse—”
       And he added, as he turned to resume his position to the rear of his
      regiment: “As long as a man can stick on his horse he's all right.”
     

      At last the two batteries of reserve artillery came up. Their arrival was
      an immense relief to the anxiously expectant men, as if the guns were to
      be a rampart of protection to them and at the same time demolish the
      hostile batteries that were thundering against them from every side. And
      then, too, it was in itself an exhilarating spectacle to see the
      magnificent order they preserved as they came dashing up, each gun
      followed by its caisson, the drivers seated on the near horse and holding
      the off horse by the bridle, the cannoneers bolt upright on the chests,
      the chiefs of detachment riding in their proper position on the flank.
      Distances were preserved as accurately as if they were on parade, and all
      the time they were tearing across the fields at headlong speed, with the
      roar and crash of a hurricane.
    

      Maurice, who had lain down again, arose and said to Jean in great
      excitement:
    

      “Look! over there on the left, that is Honore's battery. I can recognize
      the men.”
     

      Jean gave him a back-handed blow that brought him down to his recumbent
      position.
    

      “Lie down, will you! and make believe dead!”
     

      But they were both deeply interested in watching the maneuvers of the
      battery, and never once removed their eyes from it; it cheered their heart
      to witness the cool and intrepid activity of those men, who, they hoped,
      might yet bring victory to them.
    

      The battery had wheeled into position on a bare summit to the left, where
      it brought up all standing; then, quick as a flash, the cannoneers leaped
      from the chests and unhooked the limbers, and the drivers, leaving the gun
      in position, drove fifteen yards to the rear, where they wheeled again so
      as to bring team and limber face to the enemy and there remained,
      motionless as statues. In less time than it takes to tell it the guns were
      in place, with the proper intervals between them, distributed into three
      sections of two guns each, each section commanded by a lieutenant, and
      over the whole a captain, a long maypole of a man, who made a terribly
      conspicuous landmark on the plateau. And this captain, having first made a
      brief calculation, was heard to shout:
    

      “Sight for sixteen hundred yards!”
     

      Their fire was to be directed upon a Prussian battery, screened by some
      bushes, to the left of Fleigneux, the shells from which were rendering the
      position of the Calvary untenable.
    

      “Honore's piece, you see,” Maurice began again, whose excitement was such
      that he could not keep still, “Honore's piece is in the center section.
      There he is now, bending over to speak to the gunner; you remember Louis,
      the gunner, don't you? the little fellow with whom we had a drink at
      Vouziers? And that fellow in the rear, who sits so straight on his
      handsome chestnut, is Adolphe, the driver—”
     

      First came the gun with its chief and six cannoneers, then the limber with
      its four horses ridden by two men, beyond that the caisson with its six
      horses and three drivers, still further to the rear were the prolonge,
      forge, and battery wagon; and this array of men, horses and materiel
      extended to the rear in a straight unbroken line of more than a hundred
      yards in length; to say nothing of the spare caisson and the men and
      beasts who were to fill the places of those removed by casualties, who
      were stationed at one side, as much as possible out of the enemy's line of
      fire.
    

      And now Honore was attending to the loading of his gun. The two men whose
      duty it was to fetch the cartridge and the projectile returned from the
      caisson, where the corporal and the artificer were stationed; two other
      cannoneers, standing at the muzzle of the piece, slipped into the bore the
      cartridge, a charge of powder in an envelope of serge, and gently drove it
      home with the rammer, then in like manner introduced the shell, the studs
      of which creaked faintly in the spirals of the rifling. When the primer
      was inserted in the vent and all was in readiness, Honore thought he would
      like to point the gun himself for the first shot, and throwing himself in
      a semi-recumbent posture on the trail, working with one hand the screw
      that regulated the elevation, with the other he signaled continually to
      the gunner, who, standing behind him, moved the piece by imperceptible
      degrees to right or left with the assistance of the lever.
    

      “That ought to be about right,” he said as he arose.
    

      The captain came up, and stooping until his long body was bent almost
      double, verified the elevation. At each gun stood the assistant gunner,
      waiting to pull the lanyard that should ignite the fulminate by means of a
      serrated wire. And the orders were given in succession, deliberately, by
      number:
    

      “Number one, Fire! Number two, Fire!”
     

      Six reports were heard, the guns recoiled, and while they were being
      brought back to position the chiefs of detachment observed the effect of
      the shots and found that the range was short. They made the necessary
      correction and the evolution was repeated, in exactly the same manner as
      before; and it was that cool precision, that mechanical routine of duty,
      without agitation and without haste, that did so much to maintain the morale
      of the men. They were a little family, united by the tie of a common
      occupation, grouped around the gun, which they loved and reverenced as if
      it had been a living thing; it was the object of all their care and
      attention, to it all else was subservient, men, horses, caisson,
      everything. Thence also arose the spirit of unity and cohesion that
      animated the battery at large, making all its members work together for
      the common glory and the common good, like a well-regulated household.
    

      The 106th had cheered lustily at the completion of the first round; they
      were going to make those bloody Prussian guns shut their mouths at last!
      but their elation was succeeded by dismay when it was seen that the
      projectiles fell short, many of them bursting in the air and never
      reaching the bushes that served to mask the enemy's artillery.
    

      “Honore,” Maurice continued, “says that all the other pieces are popguns
      and that his old girl is the only one that is good for anything. Ah, his
      old girl! He talks as if she were his wife and there were not another like
      her in the world! Just notice how jealously he watches her and makes the
      men clean her off! I suppose he is afraid she will overheat herself and
      take cold!”
     

      He continued rattling on in this pleasant vein to Jean, both of them
      cheered and encouraged by the cool bravery with which the artillerymen
      served their guns; but the Prussian batteries, after firing three rounds,
      had now got the range, which, too long at the beginning, they had at last
      ciphered down to such a fine point that their shells were landed
      invariably among the French pieces, while the latter, notwithstanding the
      efforts that were made to increase their range, still continued to place
      their projectiles short of the enemy's position. One of Honore's
      cannoneers was killed while loading the piece; the others pushed the body
      out of their way, and the service went on with the same methodical
      precision, with neither more nor less haste. In the midst of the
      projectiles that fell and burst continually the same unvarying rhythmical
      movements went on uninterruptedly about the gun; the cartridge and shell
      were introduced, the gun was pointed, the lanyard pulled, the carriage
      brought back to place; and all with such undeviating regularity that the
      men might have been taken for automatons, devoid of sight and hearing.
    

      What impressed Maurice, however, more than anything else, was the attitude
      of the drivers, sitting straight and stiff in their saddles fifteen yards
      to the rear, face to the enemy. There was Adolphe, the broad-chested, with
      his big blond mustache across his rubicund face; and who shall tell the
      amount of courage a man must have to enable him to sit without winking and
      watch the shells coming toward him, and he not allowed even to twirl his
      thumbs by way of diversion! The men who served the guns had something to
      occupy their minds, while the drivers, condemned to immobility, had death
      constantly before their eyes, and plenty of leisure to speculate on
      probabilities. They were made to face the battlefield because, had they
      turned their backs to it, the coward that so often lurks at the bottom of
      man's nature might have got the better of them and swept away man and
      beast. It is the unseen danger that makes dastards of us; that which we
      can see we brave. The army has no more gallant set of men in its ranks
      than the drivers in their obscure position.
    

      Another man had been killed, two horses of a caisson had been
      disemboweled, and the enemy kept up such a murderous fire that there was a
      prospect of the entire battery being knocked to pieces should they persist
      in holding that position longer. It was time to take some step to baffle
      that tremendous fire, notwithstanding the danger there was in moving, and
      the captain unhesitatingly gave orders to bring up the limbers.
    

      The risky maneuver was executed with lightning speed; the drivers came up
      at a gallop, wheeled their limber into position in rear of the gun, when
      the cannoneers raised the trail of the piece and hooked on. The movement,
      however, collecting as it did, momentarily, men and horses on the battery
      front in something of a huddle, created a certain degree of confusion, of
      which the enemy took advantage by increasing the rapidity of their fire;
      three more men dropped. The teams darted away at breakneck speed,
      describing an arc of a circle among the fields, and the battery took up
      its new position some fifty or sixty yards more to the right, on a gentle
      eminence that was situated on the other flank of the 106th. The pieces
      were unlimbered, the drivers resumed their station at the rear, face to
      the enemy, and the firing was reopened; and so little time was lost
      between leaving their old post and taking up the new that the earth had
      barely ceased to tremble under the concussion.
    

      Maurice uttered a cry of dismay, when, after three attempts, the Prussians
      had again got their range; the first shell landed squarely on Honore's
      gun. The artilleryman rushed forward, and with a trembling hand felt to
      ascertain what damage had been done his pet; a great wedge had been
      chipped from the bronze muzzle. But it was not disabled, and the work went
      on as before, after they had removed from beneath the wheels the body of
      another cannoneer, with whose blood the entire carriage was besplashed.
    

      “It was not little Louis; I am glad of that,” said Maurice, continuing to
      think aloud. “There he is now, pointing his gun; he must be wounded,
      though, for he is only using his left arm. Ah, he is a brave lad, is
      little Louis; and how well he and Adolphe get on together, in spite of
      their little tiffs, only provided the gunner, the man who serves on foot,
      shows a proper amount of respect for the driver, the man who rides a
      horse, notwithstanding that the latter is by far the more ignorant of the
      two. Now that they are under fire, though, Louis is as good a man as
      Adolphe—”
     

      Jean, who had been watching events in silence, gave utterance to a
      distressful cry:
    

      “They will have to give it up! No troops in the world could stand such a
      fire.”
     

      Within the space of five minutes the second position had become as
      untenable as was the first; the projectiles kept falling with the same
      persistency, the same deadly precision. A shell dismounted a gun,
      fracturing the chase, killing a lieutenant and two men. Not one of the
      enemy's shots failed to reach, and at each discharge they secured a still
      greater accuracy of range, so that if the battery should remain there
      another five minutes they would not have a gun or a man left. The crushing
      fire threatened to wipe them all out of existence.
    

      Again the captain's ringing voice was heard ordering up the limbers. The
      drivers dashed up at a gallop and wheeled their teams into place to allow
      the cannoneers to hook on the guns, but before Adolphe had time to get up
      Louis was struck by a fragment of shell that tore open his throat and
      broke his jaw; he fell across the trail of the carriage just as he was on
      the point of raising it. Adolphe was there instantly, and beholding his
      prostrate comrade weltering in his blood, jumped from his horse and was
      about to raise him to his saddle and bear him away. And at that moment,
      just as the battery was exposed flank to the enemy in the act of wheeling,
      offering a fair target, a crashing discharge came, and Adolphe reeled and
      fell to the ground, his chest crushed in, with arms wide extended. In his
      supreme convulsion he seized his comrade about the body, and thus they
      lay, locked in each other's arms in a last embrace, “married” even in
      death.
    

      Notwithstanding the slaughtered horses and the confusion that that
      death-dealing discharge had caused among the men, the battery had rattled
      up the slope of a hillock and taken post a few yards from the spot where
      Jean and Maurice were lying. For the third time the guns were unlimbered,
      the drivers retired to the rear and faced the enemy, and the cannoneers,
      with a gallantry that nothing could daunt, at once reopened fire.
    

      “It is as if the end of all things were at hand!” said Maurice, the sound
      of whose voice was lost in the uproar.
    

      It seemed indeed as if heaven and earth were confounded in that hideous
      din. Great rocks were cleft asunder, the sun was hid from sight at times
      in clouds of sulphurous vapor. When the cataclysm was at its height the
      horses stood with drooping heads, trembling, dazed with terror. The
      captain's tall form was everywhere upon the eminence; suddenly he was seen
      no more; a shell had cut him clean in two, and he sank, as a ship's mast
      that is snapped off at the base.
    

      But it was about Honore's gun, even more than the others, that the
      conflict raged, with cool efficiency and obstinate determination. The
      non-commissioned officer found it necessary to forget his chevrons for the
      time being and lend a hand in working the piece, for he had now but three
      cannoneers left; he pointed the gun and pulled the lanyard, while the
      others brought ammunition from the caisson, loaded, and handled the rammer
      and the sponge. He had sent for men and horses from the battery reserves
      that were kept to supply the places of those removed by casualties, but
      they were slow in coming, and in the meantime the survivors must do the
      work of the dead. It was a great discouragement to all that their
      projectiles ranged short and burst almost without exception in the air,
      inflicting no injury on the powerful batteries of the foe, the fire of
      which was so efficient. And suddenly Honore let slip an oath that was
      heard above the thunder of the battle; ill-luck, ill-luck, nothing but
      ill-luck! the right wheel of his piece was smashed! Tonnerre de Dieu!
      what a state she was in, the poor darling! stretched on her side with a
      broken paw, her nose buried in the ground, crippled and good for nothing!
      The sight brought big tears to his eyes, he laid his trembling hand upon
      the breech, as if the ardor of his love might avail to warm his dear
      mistress back to life. And the best gun of them all, the only one that had
      been able to drop a few shells among the enemy! Then suddenly he conceived
      a daring project, nothing less than to repair the injury there and then,
      under that terrible fire. Assisted by one of his men he ran back to the
      caisson and secured the spare wheel that was attached to the rear axle,
      and then commenced the most dangerous operation that can be executed on a
      battlefield. Fortunately the extra men and horses that he had sent for
      came up just then, and he had two cannoneers to lend him a hand.
    

      For the third time, however, the strength of the battery was so reduced as
      practically to disable it. To push their heroic daring further would be
      madness; the order was given to abandon the position definitely.
    

      “Make haste, comrades!” Honore exclaimed. “Even if she is fit for no
      further service we'll carry her off; those fellows shan't have her!”
     

      To save the gun, even as men risk their life to save the flag; that was
      his idea. And he had not ceased to speak when he was stricken down as by a
      thunderbolt, his right arm torn from its socket, his left flank laid open.
      He had fallen upon his gun he loved so well, and lay there as if stretched
      on a bed of honor, with head erect, his unmutilated face turned toward the
      enemy, and bearing an expression of proud defiance that made him beautiful
      in death. From his torn jacket a letter had fallen to the ground and lay
      in the pool of blood that dribbled slowly from above.
    

      The only lieutenant left alive shouted the order: “Bring up the limbers!”
     

      A caisson had exploded with a roar that rent the skies. They were obliged
      to take the horses from another caisson in order to save a gun of which
      the team had been killed. And when, for the last time, the drivers had
      brought up their smoking horses and the guns had been limbered up, the
      whole battery flew away at a gallop and never stopped until they reached
      the edge of the wood of la Garenne, nearly twelve hundred yards away.
    

      Maurice had seen the whole. He shivered with horror, and murmured
      mechanically, in a faint voice:
    

      “Oh! poor fellow, poor fellow!”
     

      In addition to this feeling of mental distress he had a horrible sensation
      of physical suffering, as if something was gnawing at his vitals. It was
      the animal portion of his nature asserting itself; he was at the end of
      his endurance, was ready to sink with hunger. His perceptions were dimmed,
      he was not even conscious of the dangerous position the regiment was in
      now it no longer was protected by the battery. It was more than likely
      that the enemy would not long delay to attack the plateau in force.
    

      “Look here,” he said to Jean, “I must eat—if I am to be
      killed for it the next minute, I must eat.”
     

      He opened his knapsack and, taking out the bread with shaking hands, set
      his teeth in it voraciously. The bullets were whistling above their heads,
      two shells exploded only a few yards away, but all was as naught to him in
      comparison with his craving hunger.
    

      “Will you have some, Jean?”
     

      The corporal was watching him with hungry eyes and a stupid expression on
      his face; his stomach was also twinging him.
    

      “Yes, I don't care if I do; this suffering is more than I can stand.”
     

      They divided the loaf between them and each devoured his portion
      gluttonously, unmindful of what was going on about them so long as a crumb
      remained. And it was at that time that they saw their colonel for the last
      time, sitting his big horse, with his blood-stained boot. The regiment was
      surrounded on every side; already some of the companies had left the
      field. Then, unable longer to restrain their flight, with tears standing
      in his eyes and raising his sword above his head:
    

      “My children,” cried M. de Vineuil, “I commend you to the protection of
      God, who thus far has spared us all!”
     

      He rode off down the hill, surrounded by a swarm of fugitives, and
      vanished from their sight.
    

      Then, they knew not how, Maurice and Jean found themselves once more
      behind the hedge, with the remnant of their company. Some forty men at the
      outside were all that remained, with Lieutenant Rochas as their commander,
      and the regimental standard was with them; the subaltern who carried it
      had furled the silk about the staff in order to try to save it. They made
      their way along the hedge, as far as it extended, to a cluster of small
      trees upon a hillside, where Rochas made them halt and reopen fire. The
      men, dispersed in skirmishing order and sufficiently protected, could hold
      their ground, the more that an important calvary movement was in
      preparation on their right and regiments of infantry were being brought up
      to support it.
    

      It was at that moment that Maurice comprehended the full scope of that
      mighty, irresistible turning movement that was now drawing near
      completion. That morning he had watched the Prussians debouching by the
      Saint-Albert pass and had seen their advanced guard pushed forward, first
      to Saint-Menges, then to Fleigneux, and now, behind the wood of la
      Garenne, he could hear the thunder of the artillery of the Guard, could
      behold other German uniforms arriving on the scene over the hills of
      Givonne. Yet a few moments, it might be, and the circle would be complete;
      the Guard would join hands with the Vth corps, surrounding the French army
      with a living wall, girdling them about with a belt of flaming artillery.
      It was with the resolve to make one supreme, desperate effort, to try to
      hew a passage through that advancing wall, that General Margueritte's
      division of the reserve cavalry was massing behind a protecting crest
      preparatory to charging. They were about to charge into the jaws of death,
      with no possibility of achieving any useful result, solely for the glory
      of France and the French army. And Maurice, whose thoughts turned to
      Prosper, was a witness of the terrible spectacle.
    

      What between the messages that were given him to carry and their answers,
      Prosper had been kept busy since daybreak spurring up and down the plateau
      of Illy. The cavalrymen had been awakened at peep of dawn, man by man,
      without sound of trumpet, and to make their morning coffee had devised the
      ingenious expedient of screening their fires with a greatcoat so as not to
      attract the attention of the enemy. Then there came a period when they
      were left entirely to themselves, with nothing to occupy them; they seemed
      to be forgotten by their commanders. They could hear the sound of the
      cannonading, could descry the puffs of smoke, could see the distant
      movements of the infantry, but were utterly ignorant of the battle, its
      importance, and its results. Prosper, as far as he was concerned, was
      suffering from want of sleep. The cumulative fatigue induced by many
      nights of broken rest, the invincible somnolency caused by the easy gait
      of his mount, made life a burden. He dreamed dreams and saw visions; now
      he was sleeping comfortably in a bed between clean sheets, now snoring on
      the bare ground among sharpened flints. For minutes at a time he would
      actually be sound asleep in his saddle, a lifeless clod, his steed's
      intelligence answering for both. Under such circumstances comrades had
      often tumbled from their seats upon the road. They were so fagged that
      when they slept the trumpets no longer awakened them; the only way to
      rouse them from their lethargy and get them on their feet was to kick them
      soundly.
    

      “But what are they going to do, what are they going to do with us?”
       Prosper kept saying to himself. It was the only thing he could think of to
      keep himself awake.
    

      For six hours the cannon had been thundering. As they climbed a hill two
      comrades, riding at his side, had been struck down by a shell, and as they
      rode onward seven or eight others had bit the dust, pierced by rifle-balls
      that came no one could say whence. It was becoming tiresome, that slow
      parade, as useless as it was dangerous, up and down the battlefield. At
      last—it was about one o'clock—he learned that it had been
      decided they were to be killed off in a somewhat more decent manner.
      Margueritte's entire division, comprising three regiments of chasseurs
      d'Afrique, one of chasseurs de France, and one of hussars, had been drawn
      in and posted in a shallow valley a little to the south of the Calvary of
      Illy. The trumpets had sounded: “Dismount!” and then the officers' command
      ran down the line to tighten girths and look to packs.
    

      Prosper alighted, stretched his cramped limbs, and gave Zephyr a friendly
      pat upon the neck. Poor Zephyr! he felt the degradation of the
      ignominious, heartbreaking service they were subjected to almost as keenly
      as his master; and not only that, but he had to carry a small arsenal of
      stores and implements of various kinds: the holsters stuffed with his
      master's linen and underclothing and the greatcoat rolled above, the
      stable suit, blouse, and overalls, and the sack containing brushes,
      currycomb, and other articles of equine toilet behind the saddle, the
      haversack with rations slung at his side, to say nothing of such trifles
      as side-lines and picket-pins, the watering bucket and the wooden basin.
      The cavalryman's tender heart was stirred by a feeling of compassion, as
      he tightened up the girth and looked to see that everything was secure in
      its place.
    

      It was a trying moment. Prosper was no more a coward than the next man,
      but his mouth was intolerably dry and hot; he lit a cigarette in the hope
      that it would relieve the unpleasant sensation. When about to charge no
      man can assert with any degree of certainty that he will ride back again.
      The suspense lasted some five or six minutes; it was said that General
      Margueritte had ridden forward to reconnoiter the ground over which they
      were to charge; they were awaiting his return. The five regiments had been
      formed in three columns, each column having a depth of seven squadrons;
      enough to afford an ample meal to the hostile guns.
    

      Presently the trumpets rang out: “To horse!” and this was succeeded almost
      immediately by the shrill summons: “Draw sabers!”
     

      The colonel of each regiment had previously ridden out and taken his
      proper position, twenty-five yards to the front, the captains were all at
      their posts at the head of their squadrons. Then there was another period
      of anxious waiting, amid a silence heavy as that of death. Not a sound,
      not a breath, there, beneath the blazing sun; nothing, save the beating of
      those brave hearts. One order more, the supreme, the decisive one, and
      that mass, now so inert and motionless, would become a resistless tornado,
      sweeping all before it.
    

      At that juncture, however, an officer appeared coming over the crest of
      the hill in front, wounded, and preserving his seat in the saddle only by
      the assistance of a man on either side. No one recognized him at first,
      but presently a deep, ominous murmur began to run from squadron to
      squadron, which quickly swelled into a furious uproar. It was General
      Margueritte, who had received a wound from which he died a few days later;
      a musket-ball had passed through both cheeks, carrying away a portion of
      the tongue and palate. He was incapable of speech, but waved his arm in
      the direction of the enemy. The fury of his men knew no bounds; their
      cries rose louder still upon the air.
    

      “It is our general! Avenge him, avenge him!”
     

      Then the colonel of the first regiment, raising aloft his saber, shouted
      in a voice of thunder:
    

      “Charge!”
     

      The trumpets sounded, the column broke into a trot and was away. Prosper
      was in the leading squadron, but almost at the extreme right of the right
      wing, a position of less danger than the center, upon which the enemy
      always naturally concentrate their hottest fire. When they had topped the
      summit of the Calvary and began to descend the slope beyond that led
      downward into the broad plain he had a distinct view, some two-thirds of a
      mile away, of the Prussian squares that were to be the object of their
      attack. Beside that vision all the rest was dim and confused before his
      eyes; he moved onward as one in a dream, with a strange ringing in his
      ears, a sensation of voidness in his mind that left him incapable of
      framing an idea. He was a part of the great engine that tore along,
      controlled by a superior will. The command ran along the line: “Keep touch
      of knees! Keep touch of knees!” in order to keep the men closed up and
      give their ranks the resistance and rigidity of a wall of granite, and as
      their trot became swifter and swifter and finally broke into a mad gallop,
      the chasseurs d'Afrique gave their wild Arab cry that excited their wiry
      steeds to the verge of frenzy. Onward they tore, faster and faster still,
      until their gallop was a race of unchained demons, their shouts the
      shrieks of souls in mortal agony; onward they plunged amid a storm of
      bullets that rattled on casque and breastplate, on buckle and scabbard,
      with a sound like hail; into the bosom of that hailstorm flashed that
      thunderbolt beneath which the earth shook and trembled, leaving behind it,
      as it passed, an odor of burned woolen and the exhalations of wild beasts.
    

      At five hundred yards the line wavered an instant, then swirled and broke
      in a frightful eddy that brought Prosper to the ground. He clutched Zephyr
      by the mane and succeeded in recovering his seat. The center had given
      way, riddled, almost annihilated as it was by the musketry fire, while the
      two wings had wheeled and ridden back a little way to renew their
      formation. It was the foreseen, foredoomed destruction of the leading
      squadron. Disabled horses covered the ground, some quiet in death, but
      many struggling violently in their strong agony; and everywhere dismounted
      riders could be seen, running as fast as their short legs would let them,
      to capture themselves another mount. Many horses that had lost their
      master came galloping back to the squadron and took their place in line of
      their own accord, to rush with their comrades back into the fire again, as
      if there was some strange attraction for them in the smell of gunpowder.
      The charge was resumed; the second squadron went forward, like the first,
      at a constantly accelerated rate of speed, the men bending upon their
      horses' neck, holding the saber along the thigh, ready for use upon the
      enemy. Two hundred yards more were gained this time, amid the thunderous,
      deafening uproar, but again the center broke under the storm of bullets;
      men and horses went down in heaps, and the piled corpses made an
      insurmountable barrier for those who followed. Thus was the second
      squadron in its turn mown down, annihilated, leaving its task to be
      accomplished by those who came after.
    

      When for the third time the men were called upon to charge and responded
      with invincible heroism, Prosper found that his companions were
      principally hussars and chasseurs de France. Regiments and squadrons, as
      organizations, had ceased to exist; their constituent elements were drops
      in the mighty wave that alternately broke and reared its crest again, to
      swallow up all that lay in its destructive path. He had long since lost
      distinct consciousness of what was going on around him, and suffered his
      movements to be guided by his mount, faithful Zephyr, who had received a
      wound in the ear that seemed to madden him. He was now in the center,
      where all about him horses were rearing, pawing the air, and falling
      backward; men were dismounted as if torn from their saddle by the blast of
      a tornado, while others, shot through some vital part, retained their seat
      and rode onward in the ranks with vacant, sightless eyes. And looking back
      over the additional two hundred yards that this effort had won for them,
      they could see the field of yellow stubble strewn thick with dead and
      dying. Some there were who had fallen headlong from their saddle and
      buried their face in the soft earth. Others had alighted on their back and
      were staring up into the sun with terror-stricken eyes that seemed
      bursting from their sockets. There was a handsome black horse, an
      officer's charger, that had been disemboweled, and was making frantic
      efforts to rise, his fore feet entangled in his entrails. Beneath the
      fire, that became constantly more murderous as they drew nearer, the
      survivors in the wings wheeled their horses and fell back to concentrate
      their strength for a fresh onset.
    

      Finally it was the fourth squadron, which, on the fourth attempt, reached
      the Prussian lines. Prosper made play with his saber, hacking away at
      helmets and dark uniforms as well as he could distinguish them, for all
      was dim before him, as in a dense mist. Blood flowed in torrents; Zephyr's
      mouth was smeared with it, and to account for it he said to himself that
      the good horse must have been using his teeth on the Prussians. The clamor
      around him became so great that he could not hear his own voice, although
      his throat seemed splitting from the yells that issued from it. But behind
      the first Prussian line there was another, and then another, and then
      another still. Their gallant efforts went for nothing; those dense masses
      of men were like a tangled jungle that closed around the horses and riders
      who entered it and buried them in its rank growths. They might hew down
      those who were within reach of their sabers; others stood ready to take
      their place, the last squadrons were lost and swallowed up in their vast
      numbers. The firing, at point-blank range, was so furious that the men's
      clothing was ignited. Nothing could stand before it, all went down; and
      the work that it left unfinished was completed by bayonet and musket butt.
      Of the brave men who rode into action that day two-thirds remained upon
      the battlefield, and the sole end achieved by that mad charge was to add
      another glorious page to history. And then Zephyr, struck by a musket-ball
      full in the chest, dropped in a heap, crushing beneath him Prosper's right
      thigh; and the pain was so acute that the young man fainted.
    

      Maurice and Jean, who had watched the gallant effort with burning
      interest, uttered an exclamation of rage.
    

      “Tonnerre de Dieu! what bravery wasted!”
     

      And they resumed their firing from among the trees of the low hill where
      they were deployed in skirmishing order. Rochas himself had picked up an
      abandoned musket and was blazing away with the rest. But the plateau of
      Illy was lost to them by this time beyond hope of recovery; the Prussians
      were pouring in upon it from every quarter. It was somewhere in the
      neighborhood of two o'clock, and their great movement was accomplished;
      the Vth corps and the Guards had effected their junction, the investment
      of the French army was complete.
    

      Jean was suddenly brought to the ground.
    

      “I am done for,” he murmured.
    

      He had received what seemed to him like a smart blow of a hammer on the
      crown of his head, and his kepi lay behind him with a great furrow
      plowed through its top. At first he thought that the bullet had certainly
      penetrated the skull and laid bare the brain; his dread of finding a
      yawning orifice there was so great that for some seconds he dared not
      raise his hand to ascertain the truth. When finally he ventured, his
      fingers, on withdrawing them, were red with an abundant flow of blood, and
      the pain was so intense that he fainted.
    

      Just then Rochas gave the order to fall back. The Prussians had crept up
      on them and were only two or three hundred yards away; they were in danger
      of being captured.
    

      “Be cool, don't hurry; face about and give 'em another shot. Rally behind
      that low wall that you see down there.”
     

      Maurice was in despair; he knew not what to do.
    

      “We are not going to leave our corporal behind, are we, lieutenant?”
     

      “What are we to do? he has turned up his toes.”
     

      “No, no! he is breathing still. Take him along!”
     

      Rochas shrugged his shoulders as if to say they could not bother
      themselves for every man that dropped. A wounded man is esteemed of little
      value on the battlefield. Then Maurice addressed his supplications to
      Lapoulle and Pache.
    

      “Come, give me a helping hand. I am not strong enough to carry him
      unassisted.”
     

      They were deaf to his entreaties; all they could hear was the voice that
      urged them to seek safety for themselves. The Prussians were now not more
      than a hundred yards from them; already they were on their hands and
      knees, crawling as fast as they could go toward the wall.
    

      And Maurice, weeping tears of rage, thus left alone with his unconscious
      companion, raised him in his arms and endeavored to lug him away, but he
      found his puny strength unequal to the task, exhausted as he was by
      fatigue and the emotions of the day. At the first step he took he reeled
      and fell with his burden. If only he could catch sight of a
      stretcher-bearer! He strained his eyes, thought he had discovered one
      among the crowd of fugitives, and made frantic gestures of appeal; no one
      came, they were left behind, alone. Summoning up his strength with a
      determined effort of the will he seized Jean once more and succeeded in
      advancing some thirty paces, when a shell burst near them and he thought
      that all was ended, that he, too, was to die on the body of his comrade.
    

      Slowly, cautiously, Maurice picked himself up. He felt his body, arms, and
      legs; nothing, not a scratch. Why should he not look out for himself and
      fly, alone? There was time left still; a few bounds would take him to the
      wall and he would be saved. His horrible sensation of fear returned and
      made him frantic. He was collecting his energies to break away and run,
      when a feeling stronger than death intervened and vanquished the base
      impulse. What, abandon Jean! he could not do it. It would be like
      mutilating his own being; the brotherly affection that had bourgeoned and
      grown between him and that rustic had struck its roots down into his life,
      too deep to be slain like that. The feeling went back to the earliest
      days, was perhaps as old as the world itself; it was as if there were but
      they two upon earth, of whom one could not forsake the other without
      forsaking himself, and being doomed thenceforth to an eternity of
      solitude. Molded of the same clay, quickened by the same spirit, duty
      imperiously commanded to save himself in saving his brother.
    

      Had it not been for the crust of bread he ate an hour before under the
      Prussian shells Maurice could never have done what he did; how he
      did it he could never in subsequent days remember. He must have hoisted
      Jean upon his shoulders and crawled through the brush and brambles,
      falling a dozen times only to pick himself up and go on again, stumbling
      at every rut, at every pebble. His indomitable will sustained him, his
      dogged resolution would have enabled him to bear a mountain on his back.
      Behind the low wall he found Rochas and the few men that were left of the
      squad, firing away as stoutly as ever and defending the flag, which the
      subaltern held beneath his arm. It had not occurred to anyone to designate
      lines of retreat for the several army corps in case the day should go
      against them; owing to this want of foresight every general was at liberty
      to act as seemed to him best, and at this stage of the conflict they all
      found themselves being crowded back upon Sedan under the steady,
      unrelaxing pressure of the German armies. The second division of the 7th
      corps fell back in comparatively good order, while the remnants of the
      other divisions, mingled with the debris of the 1st corps, were already
      streaming into the city in terrible disorder, a roaring torrent of rage
      and fright that bore all, men and beasts, before it.
    

      But to Maurice, at that moment, was granted the satisfaction of seeing
      Jean unclose his eyes, and as he was running to a stream that flowed near
      by, for water with which to bathe his friend's face, he was surprised,
      looking down on his right into a sheltered valley that lay between rugged
      slopes, to behold the same peasant whom he had seen that morning, still
      leisurely driving the plow through the furrow with the assistance of his
      big white horse. Why should he lose a day? Men might fight, but none the
      less the corn would keep on growing; and folks must live.
    

      
 
    

      Up on his lofty terrace, whither he had betaken himself to watch how
      affairs were shaping, Delaherche at last became impatient and was seized
      with an uncontrollable desire for news. He could see that the enemy's
      shells were passing over the city and that the few projectiles which had
      fallen on the houses in the vicinity were only responses, made at long
      intervals, to the irregular and harmless fire from Fort Palatinat, but he
      could discern nothing of the battle, and his agitation was rising to fever
      heat; he experienced an imperious longing for intelligence, which was
      constantly stimulated by the reflection that his life and fortune would be
      in danger should the army be defeated. He found it impossible to remain
      there longer, and went downstairs, leaving behind him the telescope on its
      tripod, turned on the German batteries.
    

      When he had descended, however, he lingered a moment, detained by the
      aspect of the central garden of the factory. It was near one o'clock, and
      the ambulance was crowded with wounded men; the wagons kept driving up to
      the entrance in an unbroken stream. The regular ambulance wagons of the
      medical department, two-wheeled and four-wheeled, were too few in number
      to meet the demand, and vehicles of every description from the artillery
      and other trains, prolonges, provision vans, everything on wheels
      that could be picked up on the battlefield, came rolling up with their
      ghastly loads; and later in the day even carrioles and market-gardeners'
      carts were pressed into the service and harnessed to horses that were
      found straying along the roads. Into these motley conveyances were huddled
      the men collected from the flying ambulances, where their hurts had
      received such hasty attention as could be afforded. It was a sight to move
      the most callous to behold the unloading of those poor wretches, some with
      a greenish pallor on their face, others suffused with the purple hue that
      denotes congestion; many were in a state of coma, others uttered piercing
      cries of anguish; some there were who, in their semi-conscious condition,
      yielded themselves to the arms of the attendants with a look of deepest
      terror in their eyes, while a few, the minute a hand was laid on them,
      died of the consequent shock. They continued to arrive in such numbers
      that soon every bed in the vast apartment would have its occupant, and
      Major Bouroche had given orders to make use of the straw that had been
      spread thickly upon the floor at one end. He and his assistants had thus
      far been able to attend to all the cases with reasonable promptness; he
      had requested Mme. Delaherche to furnish him with another table, with
      mattress and oilcloth cover, for the shed where he had established his
      operating room. The assistant would thrust a napkin saturated with
      chloroform to the patient's nostrils, the keen knife flashed in the air,
      there was the faint rasping of the saw, barely audible, the blood spurted
      in short, sharp jets that were checked immediately. As soon as one subject
      had been operated on another was brought in, and they followed one another
      in such quick succession that there was barely time to pass a sponge over
      the protecting oilcloth. At the extremity of the grass plot, screened from
      sight by a clump of lilac bushes, they had set up a kind of morgue whither
      they carried the bodies of the dead, which were removed from the beds
      without a moment's delay in order to make room for the living, and this
      receptacle also served to receive the amputated legs, and arms, whatever
      debris of flesh and bone remained upon the table.
    

      Mme. Delaherche and Gilberte, seated at the foot of one of the great
      trees, found it hard work to keep pace with the demand for bandages.
      Bouroche, who happened to be passing, his face very red, his apron white
      no longer, threw a bundle of linen to Delaherche and shouted:
    

      “Here! be doing something; make yourself useful!”
     

      But the manufacturer objected. “Oh! excuse me; I must go and try to pick
      up some news. One can't tell whether his neck is safe or not.” Then,
      touching his lips to his wife's hair: “My poor Gilberte, to think that a
      shell may burn us out of house and home at any moment! It is horrible.”
     

      She was very pale; she raised her head and glanced about her, shuddering
      as she did so. Then, involuntarily, her unextinguishable smile returned to
      her lips.
    

      “Oh, horrible, indeed! and all those poor men that they are cutting and
      carving. I don't see how it is that I stay here without fainting.”
     

      Mme. Delaherche had watched her son as he kissed the young woman's hair.
      She made a movement as if to part them, thinking of that other man who
      must have kissed those tresses so short a time ago; then her old hands
      trembled, she murmured beneath her breath:
    

      “What suffering all about us, mon Dieu! It makes one forget his
      own.”
     

      Delaherche left them, with the assurance that he would be away no longer
      than was necessary to ascertain the true condition of affairs. In the Rue
      Maqua he was surprised to observe the crowds of soldiers that were
      streaming into the city, without arms and in torn, dust-stained uniforms.
      It was in vain, however, that he endeavored to slake his thirst for news
      by questioning them; some answered with vacant, stupid looks that they
      knew nothing, while others told long rambling stories, with the maniacal
      gestures and whirling words of one bereft of reason. He therefore
      mechanically turned his steps again toward the Sous Prefecture as the
      likeliest quarter in which to look for information. As he was passing
      along the Place du College two guns, probably all that remained of some
      battery, came dashing up to the curb on a gallop, and were abandoned
      there. When at last he turned into the Grande Rue he had further evidence
      that the advanced guards of the fugitives were beginning to take
      possession, of the city; three dismounted hussars had seated themselves in
      a doorway and were sharing a loaf of bread; two others were walking their
      mounts up and down, leading them by the bridle, not knowing where to look
      for stabling for them; officers were hurrying to and fro distractedly,
      seemingly without any distinct purpose. On the Place Turenne a lieutenant
      counseled him not to loiter unnecessarily, for the shells had an
      unpleasant way of dropping there every now and then; indeed, a splinter
      had just demolished the railing about the statue of the great commander
      who overran the Palatinate. And as if to emphasize the officer's advice,
      while he was making fast time down the Rue de la Sous Prefecture he saw
      two projectiles explode, with a terrible crash, on the Pont de Meuse.
    

      He was standing in front of the janitor's lodge, debating with himself
      whether it would be best to send in his card and try to interview one of
      the aides-de-camp, when he heard a girlish voice calling him by name.
    

      “M. Delaherche! Come in here, quick; it is not safe out there.”
     

      It was Rose, his little operative, whose existence he had quite forgotten.
      She might be a useful ally in assisting him to gain access to
      headquarters; he entered the lodge and accepted her invitation to be
      seated.
    

      “Just think, mamma is down sick with the worry and confusion; she can't
      leave her bed, so, you see, I have to attend to everything, for papa is
      with the National Guards up in the citadel. A little while ago the Emperor
      left the building—I suppose he wanted to let people see he is not a
      coward—and succeeded in getting as far as the bridge down at the end
      of the street. A shell alighted right in front of him; one of his
      equerries had his horse killed under him. And then he came back—he
      couldn't do anything else, could he, now?”
     

      “You must have heard some talk of how the battle is going. What do they
      say, those gentlemen upstairs?”
     

      She looked at him in surprise. Her pretty face was bright and smiling,
      with its fluffy golden hair and the clear, childish eyes of one who
      bestirred herself among her multifarious duties, in the midst of all those
      horrors, which she did not well understand.
    

      “No, I know nothing. About midday I sent up a letter for Marshal MacMahon,
      but it could not be given him right away, because the Emperor was in the
      room. They were together nearly an hour, the Marshal lying on his bed, the
      Emperor close beside him seated on a chair. That much I know for certain,
      because I saw them when the door was opened.”
     

      “And then, what did they say to each other?”
     

      She looked at him again, and could not help laughing.
    

      “Why, I don't know; how could you expect me to? There's not a living soul
      knows what they said to each other.”
     

      She was right; he made an apologetic gesture in recognition of the
      stupidity of his question. But the thought of that fateful conversation
      haunted him; the interest there was in it for him who could have heard it!
      What decision had they arrived at?
    

      “And now,” Rose added, “the Emperor is back in his cabinet again, where he
      is having a conference with two generals who have just come in from the
      battlefield.” She checked herself, casting a glance at the main entrance
      of the building. “See! there is one of them, now—and there comes the
      other.”
     

      He hurried from the room, and in the two generals recognized Ducrot and
      Douay, whose horses were standing before the door. He watched them climb
      into their saddles and gallop away. They had hastened into the city, each
      independently of the other, after the plateau of Illy had been captured by
      the enemy, to notify the Emperor that the battle was lost. They placed the
      entire situation distinctly before him; the army and Sedan were even then
      surrounded on every side; the result could not help but be disastrous.
    

      For some minutes the Emperor continued silently to pace the floor of his
      cabinet, with the feeble, uncertain step of an invalid. There was none
      with him save an aide-de-camp, who stood by the door, erect and mute. And
      ever, to and fro, from the window to the fireplace, from the fireplace to
      the window, the sovereign tramped wearily, the inscrutable face now drawn
      and twitching spasmodically with a nervous tic. The back was bent, the
      shoulders bowed, as if the weight of his falling empire pressed on them
      more heavily, and the lifeless eyes, veiled by their heavy lids, told of
      the anguish of the fatalist who has played his last card against destiny
      and lost. Each time, however, that his walk brought him to the half-open
      window he gave a start and lingered there a second. And during one of
      those brief stoppages he faltered with trembling lips:
    

      “Oh! those guns, those guns, that have been going since the morning!”
     

      The thunder of the batteries on la Marfee and at Frenois seemed, indeed,
      to resound with more terrific violence there than elsewhere. It was one
      continuous, uninterrupted crash, that shook the windows, nay, the very
      walls themselves; an incessant uproar that exasperated the nerves by its
      persistency. And he could not banish the reflection from his mind that, as
      the struggle was now hopeless, further resistance would be criminal. What
      would avail more bloodshed, more maiming and mangling; why add more
      corpses to the dead that were already piled high upon that bloody field?
      They were vanquished, it was all ended; then why not stop the slaughter?
      The abomination of desolation raised its voice to heaven: let it cease.
    

      The Emperor, again before the window, trembled and raised his hands to his
      ears, as if to shut out those reproachful voices.
    

      “Oh, those guns, those guns! Will they never be silent!”
     

      Perhaps the dreadful thought of his responsibilities arose before him,
      with the vision of all those thousands of bleeding forms with which his
      errors had cumbered the earth; perhaps, again, it was but the
      compassionate impulse of the tender-hearted dreamer, of the well-meaning
      man whose mind was stocked with humanitarian theories. At the moment when
      he beheld utter ruin staring him in the face, in that frightful whirlwind
      of destruction that broke him like a reed and scattered his fortunes in
      the dust, he could yet find tears for others. Almost crazed at the thought
      of the slaughter that was mercilessly going on so near him, he felt he had
      not strength to endure it longer; each report of that accursed cannonade
      seemed to pierce his heart and intensified a thousandfold his own private
      suffering.
    

      “Oh, those guns, those guns! they must be silenced at once, at once!”
     

      And that monarch who no longer had a throne, for he had delegated all his
      functions to the Empress regent, that chief without an army, since he had
      turned over the supreme command to Marshal Bazaine, now felt that he must
      once more take the reins in his hand and be the master. Since they left
      Chalons he had kept himself in the background, had issued no orders,
      content to be a nameless nullity without recognized position, a cumbrous
      burden carried about from place to place among the baggage of his troops,
      and it was only in their hour of defeat that the Emperor reasserted itself
      in him; the one order that he was yet to give, out of the pity of his
      sorrowing heart, was to raise the white flag on the citadel to request an
      armistice.
    

      “Those guns, oh! those guns! Take a sheet, someone, a tablecloth, it
      matters not what! only hasten, hasten, and see that it is done!”
     

      The aide-de-camp hurried from the room, and with unsteady steps the
      Emperor continued to pace his beat, back and forth, between the window and
      the fireplace, while still the batteries kept thundering, shaking the
      house from garret to foundation.
    

      Delaherche was still chatting with Rose in the room below when a
      non-commissioned officer of the guard came running in and interrupted
      them.
    

      “Mademoiselle, the house is in confusion, I cannot find a servant. Can you
      let me have something from your linen closet, a white cloth of some kind?”
     

      “Will a napkin answer?”
     

      “No, no, it would not be large enough. Half of a sheet, say.”
     

      Rose, eager to oblige, was already fumbling in her closet.
    

      “I don't think I have any half-sheets. No, I don't see anything that looks
      as if it would serve your purpose. Oh, here is something; could you use a
      tablecloth?”
     

      “A tablecloth! just the thing. Nothing could be better.” And he added as
      he left the room: “It is to be used as a flag of truce, and hoisted on the
      citadel to let the enemy know we want to stop the fighting. Much obliged,
      mademoiselle.”
     

      Delaherche gave a little involuntary start of delight; they were to have a
      respite at last, then! Then he thought it might be unpatriotic to be
      joyful at such a time, and put on a long face again; but none the less his
      heart was very glad and he contemplated with much interest a colonel and
      captain, followed by the sergeant, as they hurriedly left the
      Sous-Prefecture. The colonel had the tablecloth, rolled in a bundle,
      beneath his arm. He thought he should like to follow them, and took leave
      of Rose, who was very proud that her napery was to be put to such use. It
      was then just striking two o'clock.
    

      In front of the Hotel de Ville Delaherche was jostled by a disorderly mob