# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# ISO_639-3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2019
# mode:	written
# genre_(broad):	fiction
# genre_(narrow):	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:    Chuang Tzu, Chuang Tzu
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/59709/59709-h/59709-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

    All loved each other equally.
"The administration of Yao diverted the affections
of the people into particular channels. If
a man slew the slayer of his parents, nobody
blamed him.
Filial affection began to predominate.
[187]
"The administration of Shun brought a spirit
of rivalry among the people. Children were born
after ten months' gestation; when five months
old, they could speak; and ere they were three
years of age,
Including gestation.
could already tell one person from another. And
so early death came into the world.
A veritable anti-climax, hopelessly unworthy of either
Lao Tzŭ or Chuang Tzŭ.
"The administration of Yü wrought a change
in the hearts of the people. Individuality prevailed,
and force was called into play. Killing robbers
was not accounted murder; and throughout
the empire people became sub-divided into classes.
There was great alarm on all sides, and the Confucianists
and the Mihists arose. At first the
relationships were duly observed; but what about
the women of to-day?
Meaning that in the olden days men could not marry
before thirty, women before twenty, whereas now the
State is cursed with early marriages. Or, according
to Dr. Legge's view of a famous passage in the
Book of Rites, that formerly it was shameful in men
and women not to be married at the age of thirty
and twenty, respectively, whereas now the State is
cursed with late marriages.
"Let me tell you. The government of the
Three Kings and Five Rulers was so only in name.
In reality, it was utter confusion. The wisdom of[188]
the Three Kings was opposed to the brilliancy of
the sun and moon above, destructive of the energy
of land and water below, and subversive of the
influence of the four seasons between.
More repetition. See ch. x. ad fin.
That wisdom is more harmful than a hornet's tail,
preventing the very animals from putting themselves
into due relation with the conditions of
their existence—and yet they call themselves Sages!
Is not their shamelessness shameful indeed?"
At this Tzŭ Kung became ill at ease.
The whole of the above episode may without
hesitation be written off as a feeble forgery.
Confucius said to Lao Tzŭ, "I arranged the Six
Canons of Poetry, History, Rites, Music, Changes,
and Spring and Autumn. I spent much time over
them, and I am well acquainted with their purport.
I used them in admonishing seventy-two rulers,
by discourses on the wisdom of ancient sovereigns
and illustrations from the lives of Chou and Shao.
Yet not one ruler has in any way adopted my suggestions.
Alas that man should be so difficult to
persuade, and wisdom so difficult to illustrate."
"It is well for you, Sir," replied Lao Tzŭ, "that
you did not come across any real ruler of mankind.
Your Six Canons are but the worn-out foot-prints
of ancient Sages. And what are foot-prints? Why,
the words you now utter are as it were foot-prints.
Foot-prints are made by the shoe: they are not the
shoe itself.
[189]
"Fish-hawks gaze at each other with motionless
eyes,—and their young are produced. The male
of a certain insect chirps with the wind while the
female chirps against it,—and their offspring is
produced. There is another animal which, being
an hermaphrodite, produces its own offspring.
Nature cannot be changed. Destiny cannot be
altered. Time cannot stop. Tao cannot be obstructed.
Once attain to Tao, and there is nothing
which you cannot accomplish. Without it, there
is nothing which you can accomplish."
For three months after this Confucius did not
leave his house. Then he again visited Lao Tzŭ
and said, "I have attained. Birds lay eggs, fish
spawn, insects undergo metamorphosis, and mammals
suckle their young.
Lit. "when a younger brother comes, the elder
cries,"—from which may be inferred the meaning
in the translation.
The whole sentence signifies that every development
proceeds according to fixed laws. It is useless to try
to do anything. Nature is always self-similar.
For a long time I have not been enlightened. And
he who is not enlightened himself,—how should
he enlighten others?"
Lao Tzŭ said, "Ch'iu, you have attained!"
"The style of this chapter," says Lin Hsi Chung,
"gives it a foremost place among the 'outside'
essays of Chuang Tzŭ. But the insertion of that
dialogue between Confucius and Lao Tzŭ on charity
and duty towards one's neighbour is like eking out a
sable robe with a dog's tail."
Self-Conceit.
Argument:—Would-be sages—The vanity of effort—Method of the true
Sage—Passivity the key—The soul and mortality—Re-absorption into
the immortal.
Self-conceit and assurance, which lead
men to quit society, and be different from
their fellows, to indulge in tall talk and abuse
of others,—these are nothing more than personal
over-estimation, the affectation of recluses and
those who have done with the world and have
closed their hearts to mundane influences.
Preaching of charity and duty to one's neighbour,
of loyalty and truth, of respect, of economy,
and of humility,—this is but moral culture, affected
by would-be pacificators and teachers of mankind,
and by scholars at home or abroad.
Preaching of meritorious services, of fame, of
ceremonial between sovereign and minister, of due
relationship between upper and lower classes,—this
is mere government, affected by courtiers or
patriots who strive to extend the boundaries of
their own State and to swallow up the territory of
others.
Living in marshes or in wildernesses, and passing[191]
one's days in fishing—this is mere inaction, affected
by wanderers who have turned their backs upon the
world and have nothing better to do.
Exhaling and inhaling,
The "breathing" theory. See ch. vi., ad init.
getting rid of the old and assimilating the new,
stretching like a bear and craning like a bird,—
As these creatures are supposed to do in order to
get good air into their systems.
—this is but valetudinarianism, affected by professors
of hygiene and those who try to preserve
the body to the age of P'êng Tsu.
See ch. i.
But in self-esteem without self-conceit, in moral
culture without charity and duty to one's neighbour,
in government without rank and fame, in
retirement without solitude, in health without
hygiene,—there we have oblivion absolute coupled
with possession of all things; an infinite calm
which becomes an object to be attained by all.
Such is the Tao of the universe, such is the
virtue of the Sage. Wherefore it has been said,
"In tranquillity, in stillness, in the unconditioned,
in inaction, we find the levels of the universe, the
very constitution of Tao."
Almost verbatim from ch. xiii, p. 158, where the
passage appears as part of Chuang Tzŭ's own text,
and not as a quotation from any other author.
Wherefore it has been said, "The Sage is a[192]
negative quantity, and is consequently in a state
of passivity. Being passive he is in a state of
repose. And where passivity and repose are, there
sorrow and anxiety do not enter, and foul influences
do not collect. And thus his virtue is
complete and his spirituality unimpaired."
Wherefore it has been said, "The birth of the
Sage is the will of God; his death is but a modification
of existence. In repose, he shares the
passivity of the Yin; in action, the energy of the
Yang. He will have nothing to do with happiness,
and so has nothing to do with misfortune.
Each of which proceeds from the other in an endless
chain.
He must be influenced ere he will respond. He
must be urged ere he will move. He must be
compelled ere he will arise. Ignoring the future
and the past, he resigns himself to the laws of
God.
"And therefore no calamity comes upon him,
nothing injures him, no man is against him, no
spirit punishes him. He floats through life to
rest in death. He has no anxieties; he makes no
plans. His honour does not make him illustrious.
His good faith reflects no credit upon himself.
It is all God's, as part of the great scheme.
His sleep is dreamless, his awaking without pain.
His spirituality is pure,
Without desires.
and his soul vigorous. Thus unconditioned and[193]
in repose, he is a partaker of the virtue of
God."
Wherefore it has been said, "Sorrow and happiness
are the heresies
Evil influences.
of virtue; joy and anger lead astray from Tao;
love and hate cause the loss of virtue. The heart
unconscious of sorrow and happiness,—that is
perfect virtue. One, without change,—that is
perfect repose. Without any obstruction,—that is
the perfection of the unconditioned. Holding no
relations with the external world,—that is perfection
of the negative state. Without blemish of any
kind,—that is the perfection of purity."
Wherefore it has been said, "If the body toils
without rest, it dies. If the mind is employed
without ceasing, it becomes wearied; and being
wearied, its power is gone."
Pure water is by nature clear. If untouched, it
is smooth. If dammed, it will not flow, neither
will it be clear. It is an emblem of the virtue of
God. Wherefore it has been said, "Pure, without
admixture; uniform, without change; negative,
without action; moved, only at the will of God;—such
would be the spirituality nourished according
to Tao."
Those who possess blades from Kan
The Wu State.
or Yüeh, keep them carefully in their scabbards,
and do not venture to use them. For they are[194]
precious in the extreme. The spirit spreads forth
on all sides: there is no point to which it does
not reach, attaining heaven above, embracing earth
beneath. Influencing all creation, its form cannot
be portrayed. Its name is then Of-God.
Such is man's spiritual existence before he is born
into the world of mortals.
The Tao of the pure and simple consists in
preserving spirituality. He who preserves his
spirituality and loses it not, becomes one with that
spirituality. And through that unity the spirit
operates freely, and comes into due relationship
with God.
Returning after its brief career on earth, to the
eternity whence it came.
A vulgar saying has it, "The masses value
money; honest men, fame; virtuous men, resolution;
and Sages, the soul."
Thus, the pure is that in which there is nothing
mixed; the simple is that which implies no injury
to the spirituality. And he who can keep the pure
and simple within himself,—he is a divine man.
It requires but scant acumen to relegate this chapter
to the limbo of forgeries. Lin Hsi Chung thinks it
is probably from the hand of the unknown artist who
is responsible for ch. xiii.
Exercise of Faculties.
Argument:—Tao unattainable by mundane arts—To be reached through
repose—The world's infancy—The reign of peace—Government sets
in—Tao declines—The true Sages of old—Their purity of aim.
Those who exercise their faculties in mere
worldly studies, hoping thereby to revert to
their original condition; and those who sink their
aspirations in mundane thoughts, hoping thereby
to reach enlightenment;—these are the dullards of
the earth.
The ancients, in cultivating Tao, begat knowledge
out of repose. When born, this knowledge
was not applied to any purpose; and so it may be
said that out of knowledge they begat repose.
Knowledge and repose thus mutually producing
each other, harmony and order were developed.
Virtue is harmony; Tao is order.
Virtue all-embracing,—hence charity. Tao all-influencing,—hence
duty to one's neighbour. From
the establishment of these two springs loyalty.
Then comes music, an expression of inward purity
and truth; followed by ceremonial, or sincerity expressed
in ornamental guise. If music and
ceremonial are ill regulated, the empire is plunged[196]
into confusion. And to attempt to correct others
while one's own virtue is clouded, is to set one's
own virtue a task for which it is inadequate, the
result being that the natural constitution of the
object will suffer.
Primeval man enjoyed perfect tranquillity
throughout life. In his day, the Positive and
Negative principles were peacefully united; spiritual
beings gave no trouble; the four seasons
followed in due order; nothing suffered any injury;
death was unknown; men had knowledge, but no
occasion to use it. This may be called perfection
of unity.
All things, all conditions, were One.
At that period, nothing was ever made so; but everything
was so.
By and by, virtue declined. Sui Jen
The Prometheus of China.
and Fu Hsi
See ch. vi.
ruled the empire. There was still natural adaptation,
Of man to his surroundings.
but the unity was gone.
The tide of coercion had set in.
A further decline in virtue. Shên Nung
The inventor of agriculture.
and Huang Ti
The Yellow Emperor. See ch. vi.
[197]
ruled the empire. There was peace, but the natural
adaptation was gone.
Again virtue declined. Yao and Shun ruled the
empire. Systems of government and moral reform
were introduced. Man's original integrity was
scattered. Goodness led him astray from Tao;
But for goodness, evil could not exist.
his actions imperilled his virtue.
As opposed to inaction.
Then he discarded natural instinct and took up
with the intellectual. Mind was pitted against mind,
but it was impossible thus to settle the empire. So
art and learning were added. But art obliterated
the original constitution, and learning overwhelmed
mind; upon which confusion set in, and man was
unable to revert to his natural instincts, to the
condition in which he at first existed.
Thus it may be said that the world destroys Tao,
and that Tao destroys the world. And the world
and Tao thus mutually destroying each other, how
can the men of Tao elevate the world, and how can
the world elevate Tao? Tao cannot elevate the
world; neither can the world elevate Tao. Though
the Sages were not to dwell on mountain and in
forest, their virtue would still be hidden;—hidden,
but not by themselves.
Those of old who were called retired scholars,
were not men who hid their bodies, or kept back
their words, or concealed their wisdom. It was
that the age was not suitable for their mission. If[198]
the age was suitable and their mission a success
over the empire, they simply effaced themselves in
the unity which prevailed. If the age was unsuitable
and their mission at failure, they fell back upon
their own resources and waited. Such is the way to
preserve oneself.
Those of old who preserved themselves, did not
ornament their knowledge with rhetoric. They did
not exhaust the empire with their knowledge.
They did not exhaust virtue. They kept quietly
to their own spheres, and reverted to their natural
instincts. What then was left for them to do?
Tao does not deal with detail. Virtue does not
take cognizance of trifles. Trifles injure virtue;
detail injures Tao. Wherefore it has been said,
"Self-reformation is enough." He whose happiness
is complete has attained his desire.
Of old, attainment of desire did not mean office.
It meant that nothing could be added to the sum of
happiness. But now it does mean office, though
office is external and is not a part of oneself. That
which is adventitious, comes. Coming, you cannot
prevent it; going, you cannot arrest it. Therefore,
not to look on office as the attainment of desire, and
not because of poverty to become a toady, but to be
equally happy under all conditions,—this is to be
without sorrow.
But now-a-days, both having and not having
Office.
are causes of unhappiness. From which we may[199]
infer that even happiness is not exempt from
sorrow.
A reductio ad absurdum.
Wherefore it has been said, "Those who over-estimate
the external and lose their natural instincts
in worldliness,—these are the people of topsy-turvydom."
We are left in the dark as to the authorship of the
numerous quotations in this and the preceding
chapter. It is, however, a point of minor importance,
neither chapter having the slightest claim to
be regarded as the genuine work of Chuang Tzŭ.
Autumn Floods.
Argument:—Greatness and smallness always relative—Time and space
infinite—Abstract dimensions do not exist—Their expression is
concrete—Terms are not absolute—Like causes produce unlike
effects—In the unconditioned alone can the absolute exist—The only
absolute is Tao—Illustrations.
[This chapter is supplementary to chapter ii. It is the most popular
of all, and has earned for its author the sobriquet of "Autumn
Floods."]
It was the time of autumn floods. Every stream
poured into the river, which swelled in its
turbid course. The banks receded so far from one
another that it was impossible to tell a cow from a
horse.
Then the Spirit of the River laughed for joy that
all the beauty of the earth was gathered to himself.
Down with the stream he journeyed east, until he
reached the ocean. There, looking eastwards and
seeing no limit to its waves, his countenance
changed. And as he gazed over the expanse, he
sighed and said to the Spirit of the Ocean, "A
vulgar proverb says that he who has heard but part
of the truth thinks no one equal to himself. And
such a one am I.
"When formerly I heard people detracting from[201]
the learning of Confucius or underrating the heroism
of Poh I,
See ch. vi.
I did not believe. But now that I have looked
upon your inexhaustibility—alas for me had I not
reached your abode, I should have been for ever a
laughing-stock to those of comprehensive enlightenment!"
The Spirit of a paltry river learns that the ripple of
his rustic stream is scarcely the murmur of the
world.
To which the Spirit of the Ocean replied, "You
cannot speak of ocean to a well-frog,—the creature
of a narrower sphere. You cannot speak of ice to
a summer insect,—the creature of a season. You
cannot speak of Tao to a pedagogue: his scope is
too restricted. But now that you have emerged
from your narrow sphere and have seen the great
ocean, you know your own insignificance, and I can
speak to you of great principles.
"There is no body of water beneath the canopy
of heaven which is greater than ocean. All streams
pour into it without cease, yet it does not overflow.
It is constantly being drained off, yet it is never
empty. Spring and autumn bring no change;
floods and droughts are equally unknown. And
thus it is immeasurably superior to mere rivers and
brooks,—though I would not venture to boast on
this account, for I get my shape from the universe,
my vital power from the Yin and Yang. In the[202]
universe I am but as a small stone or a small tree
on a vast mountain. And conscious thus of my
own insignificance, what is there of which I can
boast?
"The Four Seas,—are they not to the universe
but like puddles in a marsh? The Middle Kingdom,—is
it not to the surrounding ocean like a tare-seed
in a granary? Of all the myriad created things,
man is but one. And of all those who inhabit the
land, live on the fruit of the earth, and move about
in cart and boat, an individual man is but one. Is
not he, as compared with all creation, but as the
tip of a hair upon a horse's skin?
"The succession of the Five Rulers, the contentions
of the Three Kings, the griefs of the philanthropist,
the labours of the administrator, are but
this and nothing more.
Sc. ambition.
Poh I refused the throne for fame's sake. Confucius
discoursed to get a reputation for learning. This
over-estimation of self on their part, was it not very
much your own in reference to water?"
"Very well," replied the Spirit of the River, "am
I then to regard the universe as great and the tip of
a hair as small?"
"Not at all," said the Spirit of the Ocean.
"Dimensions are limitless; time is endless. Conditions
are not invariable; terms are not final.
Thus, the wise man looks into space, and does not
regard the small as too little, nor the great as too[203]
much; for he knows that there is no limit to
dimension. He looks back into the past, and does
not grieve over what is far off, nor rejoice over what
is near; for he knows that time is without end.
Space infinite has been illustrated by Locke by a
centre from which you can proceed for ever in all
directions. Time infinite, by a point in a line from
which you can proceed backwards and forwards for
ever.
He investigates fulness and decay, and does not
rejoice if he succeeds, nor lament if he fails; for he
knows that conditions are not invariable.
Fulness and decay are the inevitable precursors of
each other.
He who clearly apprehends the scheme of existence,
does not rejoice over life, nor repine at death; for he
knows that terms are not final.
Life and death are but links in an endless chain.
"What man knows is not to be compared with
what he does not know. The span of his existence
is not to be compared with the span of his non-existence.
With the small to strive to exhaust the
great, necessarily lands him in confusion, and he
does not attain his object. How then should one
be able to say that the tip of a hair is the ne plus
ultra of smallness, or that the universe is the ne
plus ultra of greatness?"
These predicates are abstract terms, which are not
names of real existences but of relations, states, or
conditions of existences; not things, but conditions
of things.
[204]
"Dialecticians of the day," replied the Spirit of
the River, "all say that the infinitesimally small
has no form, and that the infinitesimally great
is beyond all measurement. Is that so?"
"If we regard greatness as compared with that
which is small," said the Spirit of the Ocean,
"there is no limit to it; and if we regard smallness
as compared with that which is great, it eludes
our sight.
That is, if we proceed from the concrete to the
abstract. Given a large or a small thing, there is
no limit to the smallness or greatness with which
each may be respectively compared.
The infinitesimal is a subdivision of the small; the
colossal is an extension of the great. In this sense
the two fall into different categories.
"Both small and great things must equally
possess form. The mind cannot picture to itself a
thing without form, nor conceive a form of unlimited
dimensions. The greatness of anything
may be a topic of discussion, or the smallness of
anything may be mentally realized. But that
which can be neither a topic of discussion nor be
realized mentally, can be neither great nor small.
"Therefore, the truly great man, although he
does not injure others, does not credit himself with
charity and mercy.
These are natural to him.
He seeks not gain, but does not despise his followers
who do. He struggles not for wealth, but does[205]
not take credit for letting it alone. He asks help
from no man, but takes no credit for his self-reliance,
neither does he despise those who seek
preferment through friends. He acts differently
from the vulgar crowd, but takes no credit for his
exceptionality; nor because others act with the
majority does he despise them as hypocrites. The
ranks and emoluments of the world are to him no
cause for joy; its punishments and shame no cause
for disgrace. He knows that positive and negative
cannot be distinguished,
What is positive under certain conditions will be
negative under others. These terms are in fact
identical. See ch. ii.
that great and small cannot be defined.
They are infinite.
"I have heard say, the man of Tao has no reputation;
perfect virtue acquires nothing; the truly
great man ignores self;—this is the height of self-discipline."
Clause 2 of the above quotation appears with variations
in ch. xxxviii of the Tao-Te-Ching. The
variations settle the correctness of the rendering
already given in The Remains of Lao Tzŭ, p. 26.
"But how then," asked the Spirit of the River,
"are the internal and external extremes of value
and worthlessness, of greatness and smallness, to be
determined?"
With no standard of measurement.
"From the point of view of Tao," replied the
Spirit of the Ocean, "there are no such extremes[206]
of value or worthlessness. Men individually value
themselves and hold others cheap. The world
collectively withholds from the individual the right
of appraising himself.
"If we say that a thing is great or small because
it is relatively great or small, then there is nothing
in all creation which is not great, nothing which is
not small. To know that the universe is but as a
tare-seed, and that the tip of a hair is a mountain,—this
is the expression of relativity.
"If we say that something exists or does not
exist, in deference to the function it fulfils or does
not fulfil, then there is nothing which does not
exist, nothing which does exist. To know that east
and west are convertible and yet necessary terms,—this
is the due adjustment of functions.
Any given point is of course east in relation to west,
west in relation to east. Absolutely, it may be said
that its westness does not exclude its eastness; or,
that it is neither east nor west.
"If we say that anything is good or evil because
it is either good or evil in our eyes, then there is
nothing which is not good, nothing which is not
evil. To know that Yao and Chieh were both good
and both evil from their opposite points of view,—this
is the expression of a standard.
"Of old Yao abdicated in favour of Shun, and the
latter ruled. Kuei abdicated in favour of Chih,
and the latter failed.
Kuei was a prince of the Yen State, who was humbugged
into imitating the glorious example of Yao[207]
and abdicating in favour of his minister Chih.
Three short years of power landed the latter in all
the horrors of a general revolution.
T'ang and Wu
See ch. xii.
got the empire by fighting. By fighting, Poh Kung
lost it.
A revolutionary leader who, on the failure of his
scheme, ended his life by strangulation. See the
Tso Chuan, 16th year of Duke Ai.
From which it may be seen that the rationale of abdicating
or fighting, of acting like Yao or like Chieh,
must be determined according to the opportunity,
and may not be regarded as a constant quantity.
"A battering-ram can knock down a wall, but it
cannot repair the breach.
This sentence has sorely puzzled all commentators.
Different things are differently applied.
"Ch'ih-Chi and Hua Liu could travel 1,000 li in
one day, but for catching rats they were not equal
to a wild cat.
Two of the eight famous steeds of Muh Wang, a
semi-historical ruler of old.
Different animals possess different aptitudes.
"An owl can catch fleas at night, and see the tip
of a hair, but if it comes out in the daytime its
eyes are so dazzled it cannot see a mountain.
Different creatures are differently constituted.
"Thus, as has been said, those who would have
right without its correlative, wrong; or good[208]
government without its correlative, misrule,—they
do not apprehend the great principles of the universe
nor the conditions to which all creation is
subject. One might as well talk of the existence of
heaven without that of earth, or of the negative
principle without the positive, which is clearly
absurd. Such people, if they do not yield to argument,
must be either fools or knaves.
"Rulers have abdicated under different conditions,
dynasties have been continued under different
conditions. Those who did not hit off a favourable
time and were in opposition to their age,—they were
called usurpers. Those who did hit off the right
time and were in harmony with their age,—they
were called patriots. Fair and softly, my River
friend; what should you know of value and worthlessness,
of great and small?"
It is therefore quite unnecessary to teach you where
to fix the limits of that of which you know nothing.
"In this case," replied the Spirit of the River,
"what am I to do and what am I not to do? How
am I to arrange my declinings and receivings, my
takings-hold and my lettings-go?"
"From the point of view of Tao," said the Spirit
of the Ocean, "value and worthlessness are like
slopes and plains.
A slope to-day may be a plain to-morrow.
To consider either as absolutely such would involve
great injury to Tao. Few and many are like giving
and receiving presents. These must not be regarded[209]
from one side, or there will be great confusion to
Tao.
It would be unfair only to regard, from the receiver's
standpoint, the amount given. The intention of the
giver must also be taken into the calculation.
Be discriminating, as the ruler of a State whose
administration is impartial. Be dispassionate, as
the worshipped deity whose dispensation is impartial.
Be expansive, like the points of the compass,
to whose boundlessness no limit is set. Embrace
all creation, and none shall be more sheltered than
another. This is the unconditioned. And where
all things are equal, how can we have the long and
the short?
"Tao is without beginning, without end. Other
things are born and die. They are impermanent;
and now for better, now for worse, they are ceaselessly
changing form. Past years cannot be recalled:
time cannot be arrested. The succession of states
is endless; and every end is followed by a new
beginning. Thus it may be said that man's duty to
his neighbour is embodied in the eternal principles
of the universe.
All he has to do is to be.
"The life of man passes by like a galloping
horse, changing at every turn, at every hour. What
should he do, or what should he not do, other than
let his decomposition go on?"
"If this is the case," retorted the Spirit of the
River, "pray what is the value of Tao?"
[210]
"Those who understand Tao," answered the
Spirit of the Ocean, "must necessarily apprehend
the eternal principles above mentioned and be
clear as to their application. Consequently, they
do not suffer any injury from without.
They never oppose, but let all things take their
course.
"The man of perfect virtue cannot be burnt by
fire, nor drowned in water, nor hurt by frost or sun,
nor torn by wild bird or beast. Not that he makes
light of these; but that he discriminates between
safety and danger. Happy under prosperous and
adverse circumstances alike, cautious as to what
he discards and what he accepts;—nothing can
harm him.
Plato taught that it was impossible to make a slave
of a wise man, meaning that the latter by virtue of
his mental endowment would rise superior to mere
physical thrall. "A wise and just man," said he,
"could be as happy in a state of slavery as in a state
of freedom."
"Therefore it has been said that the natural
abides within, the artificial without. Virtue abides
in the natural. Knowledge of the action of the
natural and of the artificial has its root in the
natural, its development in virtue. And thus,
whether in motion or at rest, whether in expansion
or in contraction, there is always a reversion to the
essential and to the ultimate."
Those eternal principles which embody all human
obligations.
[211]
"What do you mean," enquired the Spirit of the
River, "by the natural and the artificial?"
"Horses and oxen," answered the Spirit of the
Ocean, "have four feet. That is the natural. Put
a halter on a horse's head, a string through a
bullock's nose,—that is the artificial.
"Therefore it has been said, do not let the artificial
obliterate the natural; do not let will obliterate
destiny; do not let virtue be sacrificed to fame.
Diligently observe these precepts without fail, and
thus you will revert to the divine."
If man does not set himself in opposition to God, the
result will be Tao.
The walrus envies the centipede;
Its many legs and nimble gait.
the centipede envies the snake;
Which moves without legs.
the snake envies the wind;
Which moves far more quickly even without body.
the Wind envies the eye;
Which travels even without moving.
the eye envies the mind;
Which can comprehend the whole universe, past and
present alike.
The walrus said to the centipede, "I hop about
on one leg, but not very successfully. How do you
manage all these legs you have?"
[212]
"Walrus" is of course an analogue. But for the one
leg, the description given by a commentator of the
creature mentioned in the text applies with significant
exactitude.
"I don't manage them," replied the centipede.
"Have you never seen saliva? When it is ejected,
the big drops are the size of pearls, the small ones
like mist. They fall promiscuously on the ground
and cannot be counted. And so it is that my
mechanism works naturally, without my being conscious
of the fact."
The centipede said to the snake, "With all my
legs I do not move as fast as you with none. How
is that?"
"One's natural mechanism," replied the snake,
"is not a thing to be changed. What need have I
for legs?"
The snake said to the wind, "I can manage to
wriggle along, but I have a form. Now you come
blustering down from the north sea to bluster away
to the south sea, and you seem to be without form.
How is that?"
"'Tis true," replied the wind, "that I bluster as
you say; but any one who can point at me or kick
at me, excels me.
As I cannot do as much to them.
On the other hand, I can break huge trees and
destroy large buildings. That is my strong point.
Out of all the small things in which I do not
excel I make one great one in which I do excel.[213]
And to excel in great things is given only to the
Sages."
Everything has its own natural qualifications. What
is difficult to one is easy to another.
No illustration is given of the "eye" and "mind."
"'Tis the half-length portrait," says Lin Hsi Chung,
"of a beautiful girl;"—which is ingenious if not
sound.
When Confucius visited K'uang, the men of
Sung surrounded him closely.
This is a mistake. "K'uang" was in the Wei
State, and it was by the men of Wei that Confucius
was surrounded.
Yet he went on playing and singing to his guitar
without ceasing.
"How is it, Sir," enquired Tzŭ Lu, "that you
are so cheerful?"
See p. 165. Tzŭ Lu would have been the first to
be cheerful himself.
"Come here," replied Confucius, "and I will
tell you. For a long time I have been struggling
against failure, but in vain. Fate is against me.
For a long time I have been seeking success, but in
vain. The hour has not come.
"In the days of Yao and Shun, no man throughout
the empire was a failure, though no one was
conscious of the gain. In the days of Chieh and
Chou, no man throughout the empire was a success,
though no one was conscious of the loss. The times
and circumstances were adapted accordingly.
[214]
"To travel by water and not avoid sea-serpents
and dragons,—this is the courage of the fisherman.
To travel by land and not avoid the rhinoceros and
the tiger,—this is the courage of hunters. When
bright blades cross, to look on death as on life,—this
is the courage of the hero. To know that
failure is fate and that success is opportunity, and
to remain fearless in great danger,—this is the
courage of the Sage. Yu! rest in this. My destiny
is cut out for me."
Shortly afterwards, the captain of the troops
came in and apologised, saying, "We thought you
were Yang Hu; consequently we surrounded you.
We find we have made a mistake." Whereupon he
again apologised and retired.
Yang Hu was "wanted" by the people of Wei, and
it appears that Confucius was unfortunately like him
in feature. But the whole episode is clearly the
interpolation of a forger.
Kung Sun Lung
A philosopher of the Chao State, whose treatise on
the "hard and white" etc. is said to be still extant.
See ch. ii.
said to Mou of Wei, "When young I studied the
Tao of the ancient Sages. When I grew up I
knew all about the practice of charity and duty to
one's neighbour, the identification of like and unlike,
the separation of hardness and whiteness, and about
making the not-so so, and the impossible possible.
I vanquished the wisdom of all the philosophies. I[215]
exhausted all the arguments that were brought
against me. I thought that I had indeed reached
the goal. But now that I have heard Chuang Tzŭ,
I am lost in astonishment at his grandeur. I know
not whether it is in arguing or in knowledge that I
am not equal to him. I can no longer open my
mouth. May I ask you to impart to me the
secret?"
Kung Tzŭ Mou leant over the table and sighed.
Then he looked up to heaven, and smiling replied,
saying, "Have you never heard of the frog in the
old well?—The frog said to the turtle of the eastern
sea, 'Happy indeed am I! I hop on to the rail
around the well. I rest in the hollow of some broken
brick. Swimming, I gather the water under my
arms and shut my mouth. I plunge into the mud,
burying my feet and toes; and not one of the
cockles, crabs, or tadpoles I see around me are my
match. [Fancy pitting the happiness of an old well
against all the water of Ocean!] Why do you not
come, Sir, and pay me a visit?'
"Now the turtle of the eastern sea had not got
its left leg down ere its right had already stuck fast,
so it shrank back and begged to be excused. It then
described the sea, saying, 'A thousand li would
not measure its breadth, nor a thousand fathoms its
depth. In the days of the Great Yü, there were nine
years of flood out of ten; but this did not add to
its bulk. In the days of T'ang, there were seven
years out of eight of drought; but this did not
narrow its span. Not to be affected by duration of[216]
time, not to be affected by volume of water,—such
is the great happiness of the eastern sea.'
To be impervious to external influences.
"At this the well-frog was considerably astonished,
and knew not what to say next. And for one
whose knowledge does not reach to the positive-negative
domain,
Where contraries are identical.
to attempt to understand Chuang Tzŭ, is like a
mosquito trying to carry a mountain, or an ant to
swim a river,—they cannot succeed. And for one
whose knowledge does not reach to the abstrusest
of the abstruse, but is based only upon such
victories as you have enumerated,—is not he like
the frog in the well?
"Chuang Tzŭ moves in the realms below while
soaring to heaven above. For him north and south
do not exist; the four points are gone; he is engulphed
in the unfathomable. For him east and
west do not exist. Beginning with chaos, he has
gone back to Tao; and yet you think you are going
to examine his doctrines and meet them with argument!
This is like looking at the sky through a
tube, or pointing at the earth with an awl,—a small
result.
The area covered by an awl's point being infinitesimal.
"Have you never heard how the youth of Shou-ling
went to study at Han-tan? They did not learn[217]
what they wanted at Han-tan, and forgot all they
knew before into the bargain, so that they returned
home in disgrace. And you, if you do not go away,
you will forget all you know, and waste your time
into the bargain."
Kung Sun Lung's jaw dropped; his tongue
clave to his palate; and he slunk away.
Another spurious episode, as is evident from its
general weakness, not to mention repetitions of
figures and allusions taken from other chapters.
Chuang Tzŭ was fishing in the P'u when the
prince of Ch'u sent two high officials to ask him to
take charge of the administration of the Ch'u State.
Chuang Tzŭ went on fishing, and without turning
his head said, "I have heard that in Ch'u there
is a sacred tortoise which has been dead now
some three thousand years. And that the prince
keeps this tortoise carefully enclosed in a chest
on the altar of his ancestral temple. Now would
this tortoise rather be dead and have its remains
venerated, or be alive and wagging its tail in the
mud?"
"It would rather be alive," replied the two
officials, "and wagging its tail in the mud."
"Begone!" cried Chuang Tzŭ. "I too will wag
my tail in the mud."
Hui Tzŭ was prime minister in the Liang State.
Chuang Tzŭ went thither to visit him.
Some one remarked, "Chuang Tzŭ has come.
He wants to be minister in your place."
[218]
Thereupon Hui Tzŭ was afraid, and searched
all over the State
With warrants.
for three days and three nights to find him.
Then Chuang Tzŭ went to see Hui Tzŭ, and
said, "In the south there is a bird. It is a kind of
phœnix. Do you know it? It started from the
south sea to fly to the north sea. Except on the
wu-t'ung tree,
Eleococca verrucosa. Williams.
it would not alight. It would eat nothing but the
fruit of the bamboo, drink nothing but the purest
spring water. An owl which had got the rotten
carcass of a rat, looked up as the phœnix flew by,
and screeched.
To warn it off.
Are you not screeching at me over your kingdom of
Liang?"
Chuang Tzŭ and Hui Tzŭ had strolled on to the
bridge over the Hao, when the former observed,
"See how the minnows are darting about! That is
the pleasure of fishes."
"You not being a fish yourself," said Hui Tzŭ,
"how can you possibly know in what consists the
pleasure of fishes?"
"And you not being I," retorted Chuang Tzŭ,
"how can you know that I do not know?"
"If I, not being you, cannot know what you[219]
know," urged Hui Tzŭ, "it follows that you, not
being a fish, cannot know in what consists the
pleasure of fishes."
"Let us go back," said Chuang Tzŭ, "to your
original question. You asked me how I knew in
what consists the pleasure of fishes. Your very
question shows that you knew I knew.
For you asked me how I knew.
I knew it from my own feelings on this bridge."
From my own feelings above the bridge I infer those
of the fishes below.
Perfect Happiness.
Argument:—The uncertainty of human happiness—What the world aims
at is physical well-being—This is not profitable even to the body—In
inaction alone is true happiness to be found—Inaction the rule of
the material universe—Acquiescence in whatever our destiny may
bring forth—Illustrations.
[This chapter is supplementary to chapter vi.]
Is perfect happiness to be found on earth, or not?
Are there those who can enjoy life, or not? If
so, what do they do, what do they affect, what do
they avoid, what do they rest in, accept, reject, like,
and dislike?
What the world esteems comprises wealth, rank,
old age, and goodness of heart. What it enjoys
comprises comfort, rich food, fine clothes, beauty, and
music. What it does not esteem comprises poverty,
want of position, early death, and evil behaviour.
What it does not enjoy comprises lack of comfort
for the body, lack of rich food for the palate, lack of
fine clothes for the back, lack of beauty for the eye,
and lack of music for the ear. If men do not get
these, they are greatly miserable. Yet from the
point of view of our physical frame, this is folly.
Physically we can, and most of us do, get along
very well without these extras.
[221]
Wealthy people who toil and moil, putting together
more money than they can possibly use,—from
the point of view of our physical frame, is not
this going beyond the mark?
Officials of rank who turn night into day in their
endeavours to compass the best ends;—from the
point of view of our physical frame, is not this a
divergence?
Man is born to sorrow, and what misery is theirs
whose old age with dulled faculties only means
prolonged sorrow! From the point of view of our
physical frame, this is going far astray.
Patriots are in the world's opinion admittedly
good. Yet their goodness does not enable them to
enjoy life;
Patriotism has been illustrated in China by countless
heroic deeds, associated always with the death of the
hero concerned.
and so I know not whether theirs is veritable goodness
or not. If the former, it does not enable them
to enjoy life; if the latter, it at any rate enables
them to cause others to enjoy theirs.
It has been said, "If your loyal counsels are
not attended to, depart quietly without resistance."
Thus, when Tzŭ Hsü
The famous Wu Yüan, 6th century B.C., whose
opposition to his sovereign led to his own disgrace
and death.
resisted, his physical frame perished; yet had he
not resisted, he would not have made his name. Is
there then really such a thing as this goodness, or not?
[222]
As to what the world does and the way in which
people are happy now, I know not whether such
happiness be real happiness or not. The happiness
of ordinary persons seems to me to consist in slavishly
following the majority, as if they could not
help it. Yet they all say they are happy.
"The general average of mankind are not only
moderate in intellect, but also in inclinations: they
have no tastes or wishes strong enough to incline
them to do anything unusual." Mill's Essay on
Liberty.
But I cannot say that this is happiness or that it is
not happiness. Is there then, after all, such a thing
as happiness?
I make true pleasure to consist in inaction,
which the world regards as great pain. Thus it
has been said, "Perfect happiness is the absence of
happiness;
The non-existence of any state or condition necessarily
includes the non-existence of its correlate.
If we do not have happiness, we are at once exempt
from misery; and such a negative state is a state of
"perfect happiness."
perfect renown is the absence of renown."
Now in this sublunary world of ours it is impossible
to assign positive and negative absolutely.
Nevertheless, in inaction they can be so assigned.
Perfect happiness and preservation of life are to be
sought for only in inaction.
Let us consider. Heaven does nothing; yet it
is clear. Earth does nothing; yet it enjoys repose.[223]
From the inaction of these two proceed all the
modifications of things. How vast, how infinite is
inaction, yet without source! How infinite, how
vast, yet without form!
The endless varieties of things around us all
spring from inaction. Therefore it has been said,
"Heaven and earth do nothing, yet there is nothing
which they do not accomplish." But among men,
who can attain to inaction?
Lin Hsi Chung condemns the whole of the above
exordium as too closely reasoned for Chuang Tzŭ,
with his rugged, elliptical style.
When Chuang Tzŭ's wife died, Hui Tzŭ went to
condole. He found the widower sitting on the
ground, singing, with his legs spread out at a right
angle, and beating time on a bowl.
"To live with your wife," exclaimed Hui Tzŭ,
"and see your eldest son grow up to be a man, and
then not to shed a tear over her corpse,—this would
be bad enough. But to drum on a bowl, and sing;
surely this is going too far."
"Not at all," replied Chuang Tzŭ. "When she
died, I could not help being affected by her death.
Soon, however, I remembered that she had already
existed in a previous state before birth, without
form, or even substance; that while in that unconditioned
condition, substance was added to spirit;
that this substance then assumed form; and that
the next stage was birth. And now, by virtue of a
further change, she is dead, passing from one phase[224]
to another like the sequence of spring, summer,
autumn, and winter. And while she is thus lying
asleep in Eternity, for me to go about weeping and
wailing would be to proclaim myself ignorant of
these natural laws. Therefore I refrain."
A hunchback and a one-legged man were looking
at the tombs of departed heroes, on the K'un-lun
Mountains, where the Yellow Emperor rests. Suddenly,
ulcers broke out upon their left elbows, of a
very loathsome description.
"Do you loathe this?" asked the hunchback.
"Not I," replied the other, "why should I?
Life is a loan with which the borrower does but add
more dust and dirt to the sum total of existence.
Life and death are as day and night; and while
you and I stand gazing at the evidences of mortality
around us, if the same mortality overtakes me,
why should I loathe it?"
Chuang Tzŭ one day saw an empty skull,
bleached, but still preserving its shape. Striking it
with his riding whip, he said, "Wert thou once
some ambitious citizen whose inordinate yearnings
brought him to this pass?—some statesman who
plunged his country in ruin and perished in the
fray?—some wretch who left behind him a legacy
of shame?—some beggar who died in the pangs of
hunger and cold? Or didst thou reach this state
by the natural course of old age?"
When he had finished speaking, he took the[225]
skull, and placing it under his head as a pillow,
went to sleep. In the night, he dreamt that the
skull appeared to him and said, "You speak well,
Sir; but all you say has reference to the life of
mortals, and to mortal troubles. In death there
are none of these. Would you like to hear about
death?"
Chuang Tzŭ having replied in the affirmative, the
skull began:—"In death, there is no sovereign
above, and no subject below. The workings of the
four seasons are unknown. Our existences are
bounded only by eternity. The happiness of a king
among men cannot exceed that which we enjoy."
Chuang Tzŭ, however, was not convinced, and said,
"Were I to prevail upon God to allow your body
to be born again, and your bones and flesh to be
renewed, so that you could return to your parents,
to your wife, and to the friends of your youth,—would
you be willing?"
At this, the skull opened its eyes wide and knitted
its brows and said, "How should I cast aside
happiness greater than that of a king, and mingle
once again in the toils and troubles of mortality?"
Reminding us strangely of Hamlet.
When Yen Yüan
See p. 179.
went eastwards to the Ch'i State, Confucius was sad.
Tzŭ Kung arose and said, "Is it, Sir, because Hui
Yen Yüan's personal name.
has gone east to Ch'i that you are sad?"
[226]
"A good question," replied Confucius. "There
is a saying by Kuan Chung
Prime Minister to Duke Huan of the Ch'i State,
7th century B.C.
of old which I highly esteem: 'Small bags won't hold
big things; short ropes won't reach down deep
wells.' Thus, destiny is a pre-arrangement, just as
form has its limitations. From neither, to neither,
can you either take away or add. And I fear lest
Hui, on his visit to the prince of Ch'i, should
preach the Tao of Yao and Shun, and dwell on the
words of Sui Jen and Shên Nung. The prince will
then search within himself, but will not find. And
not finding, he will doubt. And when a man doubts,
he will kill.
Lit. "he will die." But the verb "to die" is often
used in the sense of "to make to die;" and this seems
to be the only available sense here.
"Besides, have you not heard that of old when a
sea-bird alighted outside the capital of Lu, the
prince went out to receive it, and gave it wine in the
temple, and had the Chiu Shao
Music composed by the legendary Emperor Shun.
played to amuse it, and a bullock slaughtered to
feed it? But the bird was dazed and too timid to
eat or drink anything; and in three days it was
dead. This was treating the bird like oneself, and
not as a bird would treat a bird. Had he treated it
as a bird would have treated a bird, he would have[227]
put it to roost in a deep forest, to wander over a
plain, to swim in a river or lake, to feed upon fish,
to fly in order, and to settle leisurely. When the bird
was already terrified at human voices, fancy adding
music! Play the Hsien Ch'ih
Music of the Yellow Emperor.
or the Chiu Shao in the wilds of Tung-t'ing, and
birds will fly away, beasts will take themselves off,
and fishes will dive down below. But men will
collect to hear.
See p. 244.
"Water, which is life to fishes, is death to man.
Being differently constituted, their likes and dislikes
are different. Therefore the Sages of the
past favoured not uniformity of skill or of occupation.
Reputation was commensurate with reality;
means were adapted to the end. This was called a
due relationship with others coupled with advantage
to oneself."
Several sentences of the above are clearly in imitation
of parts of ch. ii. The whole episode is beyond
doubt a forgery.
Lieh Tzŭ, being on a journey, was eating by the
roadside, when he saw an old skull. Plucking a
blade of grass, he pointed at it and said, "Only you
and I know that there is no such thing as life and
no such thing as death.
Lit. "that you have never died nor lived."
[228]
Are you really at peace? Or am I really happy?
Who can say whether what we call death may not
after all be life, and life death?
"Certain germs, falling upon water, become
duckweed. When they reach the junction of the
land and the water, they become lichen. Spreading
up the bank, they become the dog-tooth violet.
Reaching rich soil, they become wu-tsu, the root of
which becomes grubs, while the leaves comes from
butterflies, or hsü. These are changed into insects,
born in the chimney corner, which look like skeletons.
Their name is ch'ü-to. After a thousand
days, the ch'ü-to becomes a bird, called Kan-yü-ku,
the spittle of which becomes the ssŭ-mi. The
ssŭ-mi becomes a wine fly, and that comes from
an i-lu. The huang-k'uang produces the chiu-yu
and the mou-jui produces the glow-worm. The
yang-ch'i grafted to an old bamboo which has for a
long time put forth no shoots, produces the ch'ing-ning,
which produces the leopard, which produces
the horse, which produces man.
"Then man goes back into the great Scheme,
from which all things come and to which all things
return."
Such is the eternal round, marked by the stages
which we call life and death.
Many of the names in the above paragraph have
not been identified even by Chinese commentators.
On all counts then they may safely be left where
they are.
The Secret of Life.
Argument:—The soul is from God—Man's body its vehicle—The soul
quickening the body is life—Care of the internal and of the external
must be simultaneous—In due nourishment of both is Tao.
[This chapter is supplementary to chapter iii.]
Those who understand the conditions of life
devote no attention to things which life
cannot accomplish. Those who understand the
conditions of destiny devote no attention to things
over which knowledge has no control.
For the due nourishment of our physical frames,
certain things are needful. Yet where such things
abound, the physical frame is not always nourished.
For the preservation of life it is necessary that there
should be no abandonment of the physical frame.
Yet where the physical frame is not abandoned, life
does not always remain.
Life comes, and cannot be declined. It goes, and
cannot be stopped. But alas! the world thinks
that to nourish the frame is enough to keep life.
And if indeed it is not enough, what then is the
world to do?
Although not enough, it must still be done. It
cannot be neglected. For if one is to neglect the
physical frame, better far to retire at once from the[230]
world. By renouncing the world, one gets rid of
the cares of the world. The result is a natural
level, which is equivalent to a re-birth. And he who
is re-born is near.
To Tao.
But what inducement is there to renounce the
affairs of men, to become indifferent to life?—In
the first case, the physical body suffers no wear
and tear; in the second, the vitality is left unharmed.
And he whose physical frame is perfect
and whose vitality is in its original purity,—he is
one with God.
Mens sana in corpore sano.
Heaven and earth are the father and mother of
all things. When they unite, the result is shape.
When they disperse, the original condition is renewed.
As in the case of ordinary mortals.
But if body and vitality are both perfect, this state
is called fit for translation.
In the Biblical sense, as applied to Enoch.
Such perfection of vitality goes back to the minister
of God.
"Vitality" is the subtle essence, the immaterial
informing principle which, united with matter, exhibits
the phenomenon of life. The term has
already occurred in ch. xi.
Lieh Tzŭ asked Kuan Yin,
[231]
A sage who by some is said to have flourished five
or six hundred years before Lieh Tzŭ; by others,
to have been an immediate disciple of Lao Tzŭ, and
to have been entrusted by him with the publication
of the Tao-Tê-Ching.
saying, "The perfect man can walk through solid
bodies without obstruction. He can pass through
fire without being burnt. He can scale the highest
heights without fear. How does he bring himself
to this?"
"It is because he is in a condition of absolute
purity," replied Kuan Yin. "It is not cunning
which enables him to dare such feats. Be seated,
and I will tell you.
"All that has form, sound, and colour, may be
classed under the head thing. Man differs so much
from the rest, and stands at the head of all things,
simply because the latter are but what they appear
and nothing more. But man can attain to formlessness
and vanquish death. And with that which is
in possession of the eternal, how can mere things
compare?
"Man may rest in the eternal fitness; he may
abide in the everlasting; and roam from the
beginning to the end of all creation. He may bring
his nature to a condition of ONE; he may nourish
his strength; he may harmonize his virtue, and so
put himself into partnership with God. Then, when
his divinity is thus assured, and his spirit closed
in on all sides, how can anything find a passage
within?
He is beyond the reach of objective existences.
[232]
"A drunken man who falls out of a cart, though
he may suffer, does not die. His bones are the
same as other people's; but he meets his accident
in a different way. His spirit is in a condition of
security. He is not conscious of riding in the cart;
neither is he conscious of falling out of it. Ideas
of life, death, fear, etc., cannot penetrate his breast;
and so he does not suffer from contact with objective
existences. And if such security is to be got from
wine, how much more is it to be got from God. It
is in God that the Sage seeks his refuge, and so he
is free from harm.
"An avenger does not snap in twain the murderous
weapon; neither does the most spiteful man
carry his resentment to a tile which may have hit
him on the head. And by the extension of this
principle, the empire would be at peace; no more
confusion of war, no more punishment of death.
"Do not develop your artificial intelligence, but
develop that intelligence which is from God. From
the latter, results virtue; from the former, cunning.
And those who do not shrink from the natural, nor
wallow in the artificial,—they are near to perfection."
When Confucius was on his way to the Ch'u
State, he came to a forest where he saw a hunchback
catching cicadas as though with his hand.
It is still the delight of the Chinese gamin to capture
the noisy "scissor-grinder" with the aid of a long
bamboo tipped with bird-lime.
[233]
"How clever you are!" cried Confucius. "Have
you any way of doing this?"
"Way," i.e. road, is the primary meaning of Tao.
"I have a way," replied the hunchback. "In the
fifth and sixth moons I practise balancing two balls
one on top of the other.
At the top of his pole.
If they do not fall, I do not miss many cicadas. When
I can balance three balls, I only miss one in ten;
and when five, then it is as though I caught the
cicadas with my hand. My body is as motionless
as the stump of a tree; my arms like dead branches.
Heaven and earth and all creation may be around
me, but I am conscious only of my cicada's wings.
How should I not succeed?"
Confucius looked round at his disciples and said,
"Singleness of purpose induces concentration of
the faculties. Of such is the success of this hunchback."
Yen Yüan said to Confucius, "When I crossed
over the Shang-shên rapid, the boatman managed
his craft with marvellous skill. I asked him if handling
a boat could be learnt. 'It can,' replied he.
'The way of those who know how to keep you afloat
is more like sinking you. They row as if the boat
wasn't there.'
"I enquired what this meant, but he would not
tell me. May I ask its signification."
"It means," answered Confucius, "that such a[234]
man is oblivious of the water around him. He
regards the rapid as though dry land. He looks
upon an upset as an ordinary cart accident. And if
a man can but be impervious to capsizings and
accidents in general, whither should he not be able
comfortably to go?
"A man who plays for counters will play well.
If he stakes his girdle,
In which he keeps his loose cash.
he will be nervous; if yellow gold, he will lose his
wits. His skill is the same in each case, but he is
distracted by the value of his stake. And every one
who attaches importance to the external, becomes
internally without resource."
T'ien K'ai Chih had an audience of Duke Wei of
Chou. The Duke asked him, saying, "I have
heard that Chu Hsien is studying the art of life.
As you are a companion of his, pray tell me anything
you know about it."
"I do but ply the broom at his outer gate,"
replied T'ien K'ai Chih; "what should I know
about my Master's researches?"
"Don't be so modest," said the Duke. "I am
very anxious to hear about it."
"Well," replied T'ien, "I have heard my master
say that keeping life is like keeping a flock of
sheep. You look out for the laggards, and whip
them up."
"What does that mean?" asked the Duke.
[235]
"In the State of Lu," said T'ien, "there was a
man named Shan Pao. He lived on the mountains
and drank water. All worldly interests he had put
aside. And at the age of seventy, his complexion
was like that of a child. Unluckily, he one day fell
in with a hungry tiger who killed and ate him.
"There was also a man named Chang I, who
frequented the houses of rich and poor alike. At
the age of forty he was attacked by some internal
disease and died.
"Shan Pao took care of his inner self, and a tiger
ate his external man. Chang I took care of himself
externally, but disease attacked him internally.
These two individuals both omitted to whip up the
laggards."
There is no particular record of the worthies mentioned
above.
Confucius said, "Neither affecting obscurity, nor
courting prominence, but unconsciously occupying
the happy mean,—he who can attain to these three
will enjoy a surpassing fame.
"In dangerous parts, where one wayfarer out of
ten meets his death, fathers and sons and brothers
will counsel each other not to travel without a sufficient
escort. Is not this wisdom? And there
where men are also greatly in danger, in the lists of
passion, in the banquet hour, not to warn them is
error indeed."
Physical precautions are not alone sufficient. Man's
moral nature equally requires constant watchfulness
and care.
[236]
The Grand Augur, in his ceremonial robes,
approached the shambles and thus addressed the
pigs:—
"How can you object to die? I shall fatten you
for three months. I shall discipline myself for ten
days and fast for three. I shall strew fine grass, and
place you bodily upon a carved sacrificial dish.
Does not this satisfy you?"
Then speaking from the pigs' point of view, he
continued, "It is better perhaps after all to live on
bran and escape the shambles...."
"But then," added he, speaking from his own
point of view, "to enjoy honour when alive one
would readily die on a war-shield or in the headsman's
basket."
So he rejected the pigs' point of view and adopted
his own point of view. In what sense then was he
different from the pigs?
Even as a pig thinks of nothing but eating, so was
the Grand Augur ready to sacrifice everything, life
itself, for paltry fame.
When Duke Huan was out hunting, with Kuan
Chung as his charioteer, he saw a bogy. Catching
hold of Kuan Chung's hand, he asked him, saying,
"What do you see?"
"I see nothing," replied Kuan Chung. But
when the Duke got home he became delirious, and
for many days was unable to go out.
There came a certain Huang Tzŭ Kao Ngao of
the Ch'i State
[237]
"A sage of the Ch'i State,"—as the commentators
usually say when in reality they know nothing about
the individual.
and said, "Your Highness is self-injured. How
could a bogy injure you? When the vital strength
is dissipated in anger, and is not renewed, there is
a deficiency. When its tendency is in one direction
upwards, the result is to incline men to wrath.
When its tendency is in one direction downwards,
the result is loss of memory. When it remains
stagnant, in the middle of the body, the result is
disease."
"Very well," said the Duke, "but are there such
things as bogies?"
"There are," replied Huang. "There is the mud
spirit Li; the fire spirit Kao; Lei T'ing, the spirit
of the dust-bin; P'ei O and Wa Lung, sprites of
the north-east; Yi Yang of the north-west; Wang
Hsiang of the water; the Hsin of the hills; the
K'uei of the mountain; the P'ang Huang of the
moor; the Wei I of the marsh."
The garb and bearing of the above beings are very
fully described by commentators.
"And what may the Wei I be like?" asked the
Duke.
"The Wei I," replied Huang, "is as broad as a
cart-wheel and as long as the shaft. It wears purple
clothes and a red cap. It is a sentient being, and
whenever it hears the rumble of thunder, it stands
up in a respectful attitude. Those who see this
bogy are like to be chieftains among men."
The Duke laughed exultingly and said, "The[238]
very one I saw!" Thereupon he dressed himself
and sat up; and ere the day had closed, without
knowing it, his sickness had left him.
The above episode teaches that the evils which
appear to come upon us from without, in reality
have their origin within.
Chi Hsing Tzŭ was training fighting cocks for
the prince.
Of Ch'i, says a commentator.
At the end of ten days the latter asked if they were
ready. "Not yet," replied Chi; "they are in the
stage of seeking fiercely for a foe."
Again ten days elapsed, and the prince made a
further enquiry. "Not yet," replied Chi; "they
are still excited by the sounds and shadows of other
cocks."
Ten days more, and the prince asked again.
"Not yet," answered Chi; "the sight of an
enemy is still enough to excite them to rage."
But after another ten days, when the prince again
enquired, Chi said, "They will do. Other cocks
may crow, but they will take no notice. To look
at them one might say they were of wood. Their
virtue is complete. Strange cocks will not dare meet
them, but will run."
Illustrating the value of internal concentration.
Confucius was looking at the cataract at Lü-liang.
It fell from a height of thirty jen,
[239]
1 jen = 7 Chinese feet. What the ancient Chinese
foot measured, it is impossible to say. For the
height of the cataract it will be near enough to say
200 English feet.
and its foam reached forty li away. No scaly, finny
creature could enter therein.
Meaning the rapids below.
Yet Confucius saw an old man go in, and thinking
that he was suffering from some trouble and desirous
of ending his life, bade a disciple run along
the side to try and save him. The old man emerged
about a hundred paces off, and with flowing hair
went carolling along the bank. Confucius followed
him and said, "I had thought, Sir, you were a
spirit, but now I see you are a man. Kindly tell
me, is there any way to deal thus with water?"
"No," replied the old man; "I have no way.
There was my original condition to begin with;
then habit growing into nature; and lastly acquiescence
in destiny. Plunging in with the whirl, I
come out with the swirl. I accommodate myself
to the water, not the water to me. And so I am
able to deal with it after this fashion."
"What do you mean," enquired Confucius, "by
your original condition to begin with, habit growing
into nature, and acquiescence in destiny?"
"I was born," replied the old man, "upon dry
land, and accommodated myself to dry land. That
was my original condition. Growing up on the
water, I accommodated myself to the water. That
was what I meant by nature.
Habit is second nature.
[240]
And doing as I did without being conscious of any
effort so to do, that was what I meant by destiny."
Objective existences cannot injure him who puts
his trust in God.
[This episode occurs twice, with textual differences,
in the works of Lieh Tzŭ, chs. ii. and viii.]
Ch'ing, the chief carpenter,
Of the Lu State.
was carving wood into a stand for hanging musical
instruments. When finished, the work appeared
to those who saw it as though of supernatural
execution. And the prince of Lu asked him, saying,
"What mystery is there in your art?"
"No mystery, your Highness," replied Ch'ing;
"and yet there is something.
"When I am about to make such a stand, I
guard against any diminution of my vital power. I
first reduce my mind to absolute quiescence. Three
days in this condition, and I become oblivious of
any reward to be gained. Five days, and I become
oblivious of any fame to be acquired. Seven days,
and I become unconscious of my four limbs and
my physical frame. Then, with no thought of the
Court present to my mind, my skill becomes concentrated,
and all disturbing elements from without
are gone. I enter some mountain forest. I search
for a suitable tree. It contains the form required,
which is afterwards elaborated. I see the stand in
my mind's eye, and then set to work. Otherwise,[241]
there is nothing. I bring my own natural capacity
into relation with that of the wood. What was
suspected to be of supernatural execution in my
work was due solely to this."
To obliteration of self in the infinite causality of
God.
Tung Yeh Chi exhibited his charioteering skill
before Duke Chuang.
"Of Lu," says one commentator. But another
points out that Yen Ho (infra) is mentioned in
chapter iv. as tutor to the son of Duke Ling of
Wei, which would involve an anachronism.
Backwards and forwards he drove in lines which
might have been ruled, sweeping round at each end
in curves which might have been described by
compasses.
The Duke, however, said that this was nothing
more than weaving; and bidding him drive round
and round a hundred times, returned home.
Yen Ho came upon him, and then went in and
said to the Duke, "Chi's horses are on the point of
breaking down."
The Duke remained silent, making no reply;
and in a short time it was announced that the
horses had actually broken down, and that Chi had
gone away.
"How could you tell this?" said the Duke to
Yen Ho.
"Because," replied the latter, "Chi was trying
to make his horses perform a task to which they[242]
were unequal. Therefore I said they would break
down."
Illustrating the strain which mortality daily puts
upon the bodies and minds of all men.
Ch'ui the artisan could draw circles with his hand
better than with compasses. His fingers seemed to
accommodate themselves so naturally to the thing
he was working at, that it was unnecessary to fix
his attention. His mental faculties thus remained
ONE, and suffered no hindrance.
To be unconscious of one's feet implies that the
shoes are easy. To be unconscious of a waist implies
that the girdle is easy. The intelligence being
unconscious of positive and negative implies that
the heart is at ease. No modifications within, no
yielding to influences without,
But always following a natural course.
—this is ease under all conditions. And he who
beginning with ease, is never not at ease, is unconscious
of the ease of ease.
Such is the condition of oblivion necessary to the
due development of our natural spontaneity.
A certain Sun Hsiu went to the house of Pien
Ch'ing Tzŭ
Both unknown to fame.
and complained, saying, "In peace I am not considered
wanting in propriety. In times of trouble[243]
I am not considered wanting in courage. Yet my
crops fail; and officially I am not a success. From
my village an outcast, I am an outlaw from my
State. How have I offended against God that he
should visit me with such a fate?"
"Have you not heard," replied Pien Tzŭ, "how
the perfect man conducts himself? He is oblivious
of his physical organisation. He is beyond the
reach of sight and hearing. He moves outside the
limits of this dusty world, rambling transcendentally
in the domain of no-affairs. This is called
acting but not from self-confidence, influencing but
not from authority.
That is, acting not in consequence of self-confidence,
but without reference to it; sc. naturally. Influencing,
not because of authority, but gaining
authority because of natural influence.
This quotation appears, though Chuang Tzŭ or
whoever may be responsible for this episode does
not say so, in chs. x. and li. of the Tao-Tê-Ching.
"But you, you make a show of your knowledge
in order to startle fools. You cultivate yourself in
contrast to the degradation of others. And you
blaze along as though the sun and moon were under
your arms.
These last three sentences will be found verbatim
in ch. xx.
Whereas, that you have a whole body in a whole
skin, and have not perished in mid career, dumb,
blind, or halt, but actually hold a place among men,[244]—this
ought to be enough for you. Why rail at
God? Begone!"
Sun Hsiu went away, and Pien Tzŭ went in and
sat down. Shortly afterwards, he looked up to
heaven and sighed; whereupon a disciple asked him
what was the matter.
"When Hsiu was here just now," answered Pien
Tzŭ, "I spoke to him of the virtue of the perfect
man. I fear lest he be startled and so driven on
to doubt."
"No, Sir," answered the disciple. "If he was
right and you were wrong, wrong will never drive
right into doubt. If, on the other hand, he was
wrong and you were right, he brought his doubt
with him, and you are not responsible."
"Not so," said Pien Tzŭ. "Of old, when a bird
alighted outside the capital of Lu, the prince was
delighted, and killed an ox to feed it and had the
Chiu Shao played to entertain it. The bird, however,
was timid and dazed and dared not to eat or
drink. This was treating the bird like oneself.
But to treat a bird as a bird would treat a bird, you
must put it to roost in a deep forest, let it swim in
river or lake, and feed at its ease on the plain.
Now Sun Hsiu is a man of small understanding;
and for me to speak to him of the perfect man is
like setting a mouse to ride in a coach or a band of
music to play to a quail. How should he not be
startled?"
The above episode has already appeared in ch. xviii.,
ad fin.
Mountain Trees.
Argument:—The alternatives of usefulness and uselessness—Tao a
tertium quid—The human a hindrance to the divine—Altruism—Adaptation—Destiny—Illustrations.
[This chapter is supplementary to chapter iv.]
Chuang Tzŭ was travelling over a mountain
when he saw a huge tree well covered with
foliage. A woodsman had stopped near by, not
caring to take it; and on Chuang Tzŭ enquiring
the reason, he was told that it was of no use.
"This tree," cried Chuang Tzŭ, "by virtue of
being good for nothing succeeds in completing its
allotted span."
When Chuang Tzŭ left the mountain, he put up
at the house of an old friend. The latter was
delighted, and ordered a servant to kill a goose and
cook it.
"Which shall I kill?" enquired the servant;
"the one that cackles or the one that doesn't?"
His master told him to kill the one which did not
cackle. And accordingly, the next day, a disciple
asked Chuang Tzŭ, saying, "Yesterday, that tree on
the mountain, because good for nothing, was to
succeed in completing its allotted span. But now,[246]
our host's goose, which is good for nothing, has to
die. Upon which horn of the dilemma will you
rest?"
"I rest," replied Chuang Tzŭ with a smile,
"halfway between the two. In that position,
appearing to be what I am not, it is impossible to
avoid the troubles of mortality;
The text is here doubtful, and commentators explain
according to the fancy of each. When a Chinese
commentator does not understand his text, he
usually slurs it over. He never says "I do not
understand." Chu Fu Tzŭ alone could rise to this
height.
though, if charioted upon Tao and floating far
above mortality, this would not be so. No praise,
no blame; both great and small; changing with
the change of time, but ever without special effort;
both above and below; making for harmony with
surroundings; reaching creation's First Cause;
swaying all things and swayed by none;—how
then shall such troubles come? This was the
method of Shên Nung and Huang Ti.
"If another guest had happened to arrive," says
Lin Hsi Chung, "I fancy the chance even of the
cackling goose would have been small."
"But amidst the mundane passions and relationships
of man, such would not be the case. For
where there is union, there is also separation;
where there is completion, there is also destruction;
where there is purity, there is also oppression;[247]
where there is honour, there is also disparagement;
where there is doing, there is also undoing; where
there is openness, there is also underhandedness;
and where there is no semblance, there is also
deceit. How then can there be any fixed point?
Alas indeed! Take note, my disciples, that such is
to be found only in the domain of Tao."
I Liao
A sage of the Ch'u State.
of Shih-nan paid a visit to the prince of Lu. The
latter wore a melancholy look; whereupon the
philosopher of Shih-nan enquired what was the
cause.
"I study the doctrines of the ancient Sages,"
replied the prince. "I carry on the work of my
predecessors. I respect religion. I honour the
good. Never for a moment do I relax in these
points; yet I cannot avoid misfortune, and consequently
I am sad."
"Your Highness' method of avoiding misfortune,"
said the philosopher of Shih-nan, "is but a
shallow one. A handsome fox or a striped leopard
will live in a mountain forest, hiding beneath some
precipitous cliff. This is their repose. They come
out at night and keep in by day. This is their
caution. Though under the stress of hunger and
thirst, they lie hidden, hardly venturing to slink
secretly to the river bank in search of food. This
is their resoluteness. Nevertheless, they do not[248]
escape the misfortune of the net and the trap. But
what crime have they committed? 'Tis their skin
which is the cause of their trouble; and is not the
State of Lu your Highness' skin? I would have
your Highness put away body and skin alike, and
cleansing your heart and purging it of passion,
betake yourself to the land where mortality is not.
Tao.
"In Nan-yüeh there is a district, called Established-Virtue.
Its people are simple and honest,
unselfish, and without passions. They can make,
but cannot keep. They give, but look for no
return. They are not conscious of fulfilling obligations.
They are not conscious of subservience to
etiquette.
Theirs is the natural etiquette of well-regulated
minds.
Their actions are altogether uncontrolled, yet they
tread in the way of the wise. Life is for enjoyment;
death, for burial. And thither I would have
your Highness proceed, power discarded and the
world left behind, only putting trust in Tao."
"The road is long and dangerous," said the
prince. "Rivers and hills to be crossed, and I
without boat or chariot;—what then?"
"Unhindered by body and unfettered in mind,"
replied the philosopher, "your Highness will be a
chariot to yourself."
"But the road is long and dreary," argued the
prince, "and uninhabited.
This is a play on "where mortality is not," above.
[249]
I shall have no one to turn to for help; and how,
without food, shall I ever be able to get there?"
"Decrease expenditure
Of energy.
and lessen desires," answered the philosopher,
"and even though without provisions, there will be
enough. And then through river and over sea
your Highness will travel into shoreless illimitable
space. From the border-land, those who act as
escort will return; but thence onwards your Highness
will travel afar.
"It is the human in ourselves which is our
hindrance; and the human in others which causes
our sorrow. The great Yao had not this human
element himself, nor did he perceive it in others.
And I would have your Highness put off this
hindrance and rid yourself of this sorrow, and roam
with Tao alone through the realms of Infinite
Nought.
"Suppose a boat is crossing a river, and another
empty boat is about to collide with it. Even an
irritable man would not lose his temper. But
supposing there was some one in the second boat.
Then the occupant of the first would shout to him
to keep clear. And if the other did not hear the
first time, nor even when called to three times, bad
language would inevitably follow. In the first case
there was no anger, in the second there was;
because in the first case the boat was empty, and in
the second it was occupied. And so it is with man.[250]
If he could only roam empty through life, who
would be able to injure him?"
With his mind in a negative state, closed to all
impressions conveyed within by the senses from
without.
Pei Kung Shê, minister to Duke Ling of Wei,
levied contributions for making bells. An altar
was built outside the city gate;
For purposes of sacrifice.
and in three months the bells, upper and lower,
were all hung.
The bell-chime consisted of a frame with bells swung
on an upper and lower bar.
When Wang Tzŭ Ch'ing Chi
Minister to the ruling House of Chou.
saw them, he asked, saying, "How, Sir, did you
manage this?"
"In the domain of ONE," replied Shê, "there
may not be managing. I have heard say that which
is carved and polished reverts nevertheless to its
natural condition. And so I made allowances for
ignorance and for suspicion. I betrayed no feeling
when welcomed or dismissed. I forbade not those
who came, nor detained those who went away. I
showed no resentment towards the unwilling, nor
gratitude towards those who gave. Every one subscribed
what he liked; and thus in my daily
collection of subscriptions, no injury was done.—[251]How
much more then those who have the great
WAY?"
If my success was due to the simple principle
above enunciated, what a success would result from
Tao, which is the infinite extension of such principles
into every phase of existence!
The Chinese word here used for "way," as a
synonym of Tao, settles the original meaning of the
latter in the sense of "road." Thus Lao Tzŭ is said
to have explained that the Way he taught was not
the way which could be walked upon.
When Confucius was hemmed in between Ch'ên
and Ts'ai, he passed seven days without food.
The minister Jen went to condole with him, and
said, "You were near, Sir, to death."
"I was indeed," replied Confucius.
"Do you fear death, Sir?" enquired Jen.
"I do," said Confucius.
"Then I will try to teach you," said Jen, "the
way not to die.
"In the eastern sea there are certain birds, called
the i-êrh. They behave themselves in a modest
and unassuming manner, as though unpossessed of
ability. They fly simultaneously: they roost in a
body. In advancing, none strives to be first; in
retreating, none ventures to be last. In eating,
none will be the first to begin; it is considered
proper to take the leavings of others. Therefore, in
their own ranks they are at peace, and the outside
world is unable to harm them. And thus they
escape trouble.
[252]
"Straight trees are the first felled. Sweet wells
are soonest exhausted. And you, you make a show
of your knowledge in order to startle fools. You
cultivate yourself in contrast to the degradation of
others. And you blaze along as though the sun and
moon were under your arms; consequently, you
cannot avoid trouble.
See p. 243.
"Formerly, I heard a very wise man say, Self-praise
is no recommendation. In merit achieved
there is deterioration. In fame achieved there is
loss. Who can discard both merit and fame and
become one with the rest? Tao pervades all things
but is not seen. Tê
This is "virtue," the expression of Tao.
moves through all things but its place is not known.
In its purity and constancy, it may be compared
with the purposeless. Remaining concealed,
rejecting power, it works not for merit nor for
fame. Thus, not censuring others, it is not censured
by others.
"And if the perfect man cares not for fame, why,
Sir, should you take pleasure in it?"
"Good indeed!" replied Confucius; and forthwith
he took leave of his friends and dismissed his
disciples and retired to the wilds, where he dressed
himself in skins and serge and fed on acorns and
chestnuts. He passed among the beasts and birds
and they took no heed of him. And if so, how much
more among men?
An unquestionably spurious episode.
[253]
Confucius asked Tzŭ Sang Hu,
See ch. vi.
saying, "I have been twice expelled from Lu. My
tree was cut down in Sung. I have been tabooed
in Wei. I am a failure in Shang and Chou. I
was surrounded between Ch'ên and Ts'ai. And in
addition to all these troubles, my friends have
separated from me and my disciples are gone. How
is this?"
See p. 180.
"Have you not heard," replied Sang Hu, "how
when the men of Kuo fled, one of them, named Lin
Hui, cast aside most valuable regalia and carried
away his child upon his back? Some one suggested
that he was influenced by the value of the child;—but
the child's value was small. Or by the inconvenience
of the regalia;—but the inconvenience of
the child would be much greater. Why then did
he leave behind the regalia and carry off the
child?
"Lin Hui himself said, 'The regalia involved
a mere question of money. The child was from
God.'
"And so it is that in trouble and calamity mere
money questions are neglected, while we ever cling
nearer to that which is from God. And between
neglecting and clinging to, the difference is great.
"The friendship of the superior man is negative
like water. The friendship of the mean man is
full-flavoured like wine. That of the superior man[254]
passes from the negative to the affectionate. That
of the mean man passes from the full-flavoured to
nothing. The friendship of the mean man begins
without due cause, and in like manner comes to an
end.
"I hear and obey," replied Confucius; and
forthwith he went quietly home, put an end to his
studies and cast aside his books. His disciples no
longer saluted him as teacher; but his love for them
deepened every day.
On another occasion, Sang Hu said to him again,
"When Shun was about to die, he commanded the
Great Yü as follows:—Be careful. Act in accordance
with your physical body. Speak in accordance
with your feelings. You will thus not get into
difficulty with the former nor suffer annoyance in
the latter. And as under these conditions you will
not stand in need of outward embellishment of any
kind, it follows that you therefore will not stand in
need of anything."
Also an episode of doubtful authorship. The commentators,
however, have nothing to say against its
genuineness.
Chuang Tzŭ put on cotton clothes with patches
in them, and arranging his girdle and tieing on his
shoes,
To keep them from falling off.
went to see the prince of Wei.
"How miserable you look, Sir!" cried the prince.
"It is poverty, not misery," replied Chuang Tzŭ.[255]
"A man who has Tao cannot be miserable.
Ragged clothes and old boots make poverty, not
misery. Mine is what is called being out of harmony
with one's age.
"Has your Highness never seen a climbing ape?
Give it some large tree, and it will twist and twirl
among the branches as though monarch of all it
surveys. Yi and Fêng Mêng
An ancient archer and his apprentice.
can never catch a glimpse of it.
"But put it in a bramble bush, and it will move
cautiously with sidelong glances, trembling all over
with fear. Not that its muscles relax in the face of
difficulty, but because it is at a disadvantage as
regards position, and is unable to make use of its
skill. And how should any one, living under
foolish sovereigns and wicked ministers, help being
miserable, even though he might wish not to be so?
"It was under such circumstances that Pi Kan
was disembowelled."
See ch. iv. The above episode is too much even
for Chinese critics, and has been condemned
accordingly.
When Confucius was hemmed in between Ch'ên
and Ts'ai and had gone seven days without food,
then, holding in his left hand a piece of dry wood
and in his right hand a dry stick, he sang a ballad
of Piao Shih.
An ancient ruler.
[256]
He had an instrument, but the gamut was wanting.
There was sound, but no tune. The sound of the
wood accompanied by the voice of the man yielded
a harsh result, but it was in keeping with the
feelings of his audience.
Yen Hui, who was standing by in a respectful
attitude, thereupon began to turn his eyes about
him; and Confucius, fearing lest he should be
driven by exaltation into bragging, or by a desire
for safety into sorrow,
As a result of hearing the song.
spoke to him as follows:—
"Hui! it is easy to escape injury from God; it
is difficult to avoid the benefits of man. There is
no beginning and there is no end. Man and God
are ONE. Who then was singing just now?"
"Pray, Sir, what do you mean," asked Yen Hui,
"by saying that it is easy to escape injury from
God?"
"Hunger, thirst, cold, and heat," replied Confucius,
"are but as fetters in the path of life. They
belong to the natural laws which govern the universe;
and in obedience thereto I pass on my
allotted course. The subject dares not disregard
the mandates of his prince. And if this is man's
duty to man, how much more shall it be his duty to
God?"
"What is the meaning of difficult to avoid the
benefits of man?" asked Yen Hui.
"If one begins," replied Confucius, "by adapta[257]tion
to surroundings, rank and power follow without
cease. Such advantages are external; they are not
derived from oneself. And my life is more or less
dependent upon the external. The superior man
does not steal these; nor does the good man pilfer
them. What then do I but take them as they
come?
"Therefore it has been said that no bird is so
wise as the swallow. If it sees a place unfit to
dwell in, it will not bestow a glance thereon; and
even though it should drop food there, it will leave
the food and fly away. Now swallows fear man.
Yet they dwell among men. Because there they find
their natural abode."
In the same way, man should adapt himself to the
conditions which surround him.
"And what is the meaning," enquired Yen Hui,
"of no beginning and no end?"
"The work goes on," replied Confucius, "and
no man knoweth the cause. How then shall he
know the end, or the beginning? There is nothing
left to us but to wait."
"And that man and God are One," said Yen
Hui. "What does that mean?"
"That man is," replied Confucius, "is from God.
That God is, is also from God. That man is not
God, is his nature.
Sc. that which makes him man.
The Sage quietly waits for death as the end."
Which shall unite him once again with God.
[258]
When Chuang Tzŭ was wandering in the park
at Tiao-ling, he saw a strange bird which came from
the south. Its wings were seven feet across. Its
eyes were an inch in circumference. And it flew
close past Chuang Tzŭ's head to alight in a chestnut
grove.
"What manner of bird is this?" cried Chuang
Tzŭ. "With strong wings it does not fly away.
With large eyes it does not see."
Or it would not have flown so near.
So he picked up his skirts and strode towards it
with his cross-bow, anxious to get a shot. Just
then he saw a cicada enjoying itself in the shade,
forgetful of all else. And he saw a mantis spring
and seize it, forgetting in the act its own body,
which the strange bird immediately pounced upon
and made its prey. And this it was which had
caused the bird to forget its own nature.
And approach so close to man.
This episode has been widely popularised in Chinese
every-day life. Its details have been expressed
pictorially in a roughly-executed woodcut, with the
addition of a tiger about to spring upon the man,
and a well into which both will eventually tumble.
A legend at the side reads,—"All is Destiny!"
"Alas!" cried Chuang Tzŭ with a sigh, "how
creatures injure one another. Loss follows the
pursuit of gain."
[259]
Those who would prey on others are preyed upon
in turn themselves.
So he laid aside his bow and went home, driven
away by the park-keeper who wanted to know what
business he had there.
For three months after this, Chuang Tzŭ did not
leave the house; and at length Lin Chü
A disciple.
asked him, saying, "Master, how is it that you
have not been out for so long?"
"While keeping my physical frame," replied
Chuang Tzŭ, "I lost sight of my real self. Gazing
at muddy water, I lost sight of the clear abyss.
Besides, I have learnt from the Master as follows:—"When
you go into the world, follow its
customs."
This saying is attributed, in uncanonical works, to
Confucius. But if any one was "Master" to Chuang
Tzŭ, it would of course be Lao Tzŭ.
Now when I strolled into the park at Tiao-ling, I
forgot my real self. That strange bird which flew
close past me to the chestnut grove, forgot its
nature. The keeper of the chestnut grove took
me for a thief. Consequently I have not been
out."
When Yang Tzŭ
Yang Chu. See ch. viii.
[260]
went to the Sung State, he passed a night at an
inn.
The innkeeper had two concubines, one beautiful,
the other ugly. The latter he loved; the former,
he hated.
Yang Tzŭ asked how this was; whereupon one
of the inn servants said, "The beautiful one is so
conscious of her beauty that one does not think
her beautiful. The ugly one is so conscious of
her ugliness that one does not think her ugly."
"Note this, my disciples!" cried Yang Tzŭ.
"Be virtuous, but without being consciously so;
and wherever you go, you will be beloved."
T'ien Tzŭ Fang.
Argument:—Tao cannot be imparted in words—It is not at man's
disposal—It does not consist in formal morality—It is an inalienable
element of existence—Without it the soul dies—With it man is happy
and his immortality secure—Illustrations.
[This chapter is supplementary to chapter vi.]
T'ien Tzŭ Fang was in attendance upon
Prince Wên of Wei.
Whose tutor he was.
He kept on praising Ch'i Kung, until at length
Prince Wên said, "Is Ch'i Kung your tutor?"
"No," replied Tzŭ Fang; "he is merely a
neighbour. He discourses admirably upon Tao.
That is why I praise him."
"Have you then no tutor?" enquired the Prince.
"I have," replied Tzŭ Fang.
"And who may he be?" said Prince Wên.
"Tung Kuo Shun Tzŭ," answered Tzŭ Fang.
"Then how is it you do not praise him?" asked
the Prince.
"He is perfect," replied Tzŭ Fang. "In appearance,
a man; in reality, God. Unconditioned
himself, he falls in with the conditioned, to his[262]
own greater glory. Pure himself, he can still
tolerate others. If men are without Tao, by a
mere look he calls them to a sense of error, and
causes their intentions to melt away. How could
I praise him?"
Thereupon Tzŭ Fang took his leave, and the
Prince remained for the rest of the day absorbed
in silence. At length he called an officer in waiting
and said, "How far beyond us is the man of perfect
virtue! Hitherto I have regarded the discussion
of holiness and wisdom, and the practice of charity
and duty to one's neighbour, as the utmost point
attainable. But now that I have heard of Tzŭ
Fang's tutor, my body is relaxed and desires not
movement, my mouth is closed and desires not
speech. All I have learnt, verily it is mere
undergrowth. And the kingdom of Wei is my
bane."
Tao is not to be reached by the superficial
worker, or by such as value the distinctions of this
world.
When Wên Po Hsüeh Tzŭ
"A sage from the south," as the commentators say,
anticipating the "Middle Kingdom" below.
was on his way to Ch'i, he broke his journey in Lu.
A certain man of Lu begged for an interview, but
Wên Po Hsüeh Tzŭ said, "No. I have heard that
the gentlemen of the Middle Kingdom are experts
in ceremonies and obligations, but wanting in[263]
knowledge of the human heart. I do not wish to
see him."
So he went on to Ch'i; but once more at Lu,
on his way home, the same man again begged to
have an interview.
"When I was last here," cried Wên Po Hsüeh
Tzŭ, "he asked to see me, and now again he asks
to see me. Surely he must have something to
communicate."
Whereupon he went and received the stranger,
and on returning gave vent to sighs. Next day
he received him again, and again after the interview
gave vent to sighs. Then his servant asked
him, saying, "How is it that whenever you receive
this stranger, you always sigh afterwards?"
"I have already told you," replied Wên Po Hsüeh
Tzŭ, "that the people of the Middle Kingdom
are experts in ceremonies and obligations but
wanting in knowledge of the human heart. The
man who visited me came in and went out as per
compasses and square. His demeanour was now
that of the dragon, now that of the tiger. He
criticised me as though he had been my son. He
admonished me as though he had been my father.
Therefore I gave vent to sighs."
When Confucius saw Wên Po Hsüeh Tzŭ, the
former did not utter a word. Whereupon Tzŭ Lu
said, "Master, you have long wished to see Wên
Po Hsüeh Tzŭ. How is it that when you do see
him you do not speak?"
"With such men as these," replied Confucius,[264]
you have only to look, and Tao abides. There is
no room for speech."
See ch. v, ad init., on "the Doctrine which is not
expressed in words."
Yen Yüan
See p. 179.
asked Confucius, saying, "Master, when you go at
a walk, I go at a walk. When you trot, I trot.
When you gallop, I gallop. But when you dash
beyond the bounds of mortality, I can only stand
staring behind. How is this?"
"Explain yourself," said Confucius.
"I mean," continued Yen Yüan, "that as you
speak, I speak. As you argue, I argue. As you
preach Tao, so I preach Tao. And by 'when you
dash beyond the bounds of mortality I can only
stand staring behind,' I mean that without speaking
you make people believe you, without striving you
make people love you, without factitious attractions
you gather people around you. I cannot
understand how this is so."
"What is there to prevent you from finding
out?" replied Confucius. "There is no sorrow to
be compared with the death of the mind. The
death of the body is of but secondary importance.
Cf. ch. ii, "The body decomposes, and the mind
goes with it. This is our real cause for sorrow."
"The sun rises in the east and sets in the west.[265]
There is no place which he does not illuminate;
and those who have eyes and feet depend upon him
to use them with success. When he comes forth,
that is existence; when he disappears, that is non-existence.
"And every human being has that upon which
he depends for death or for life.
Mind, which rises with life and sets at death.
But if I, receiving this mind-informed body, pass
without due modification to the end,
So that the mind perishes with the body.
day and night subject to ceaseless wear and tear
like a mere thing, unknowing what the end will be,
and in spite of this mind-informed body
Which should teach a higher lesson.
conscious only that fate cannot save me from the
inevitable grave-yard,—then I am consuming life
until at death it is as though you and I had but
once linked arms to be finally parted for ever! Is
not that indeed a cause for sorrow?
The motive of this involved paragraph is identical
with that of Mr. Mallock's famous essay Is Life
Worth Living?
"Now you fix your attention upon something in
me which, while you look, has already passed away.
Yet you seek for it as though it must be still there,—like
one who seeks for a horse in a market-place.
In the interim the animal has been sold.
[266]
What I admire in you is transitory. Nevertheless,
why should you grieve? Although my old self
is constantly passing away, there remains that
which does not pass away."
The mind, which feeds and thrives upon change.
Confucius went to see Lao Tzŭ. The latter had
just washed his head, and his hair was hanging
down his back to dry. He looked like a lifeless
body; so Confucius waited awhile, but at length
approached and said, "Do my eyes deceive me, or
is this really so? Your frame, Sir, seems like dry
wood, as if it had been left without that which
informs it with the life of man."
Chuang Tzŭ (?) is here repeating himself.
"I was wandering," replied Lao Tzŭ, "in the
unborn."
Reflecting upon the state of man before his birth
into the world.
"What does that mean?" asked Confucius.
"My mind is trammelled," replied Lao Tzŭ,
"and I cannot know. My mouth is closed and I
cannot speak. But I will try to tell you what is
probably the truth.
"The perfect Negative principle is majestically
passive. The perfect Positive principle is powerfully
active. Passivity emanates from heaven
above; activity proceeds from earth beneath. The
interaction of the two results in that harmony by[267]
which all things are produced. There may be a
First Cause, but we never see his form. His report
fills space. There is darkness and light. Days
come and months go. Work is being constantly
performed, yet we never witness the performance.
Life must bring us from somewhere, and death
must carry us back. Beginning and end follow
ceaselessly one upon the other, and we cannot say
when the series will be exhausted. If this is not
the work of a First Cause, what is it?"
"Kindly explain," said Confucius, "what is to
be got by wandering as you said."
"The result," answered Lao Tzŭ, "is perfect
goodness and perfect happiness. And he who has
these is a perfect man."
"And by what means," enquired Confucius,
"can this be attained?"
"Animals," said Lao Tzŭ, "that eat grass do
not mind a change of pasture. Creatures that live
in water do not mind a change of pond. A slight
change may be effected so long as the essential is
untouched.
"Joy, anger, sorrow, happiness, find no place
in that man's breast; for to him all creation is
One. And all things being thus united in One,
his body and limbs are but as dust of the earth,
and life and death, beginning and end, are but as
night and day, and cannot destroy his peace. How
much less such trifles as gain or loss, misfortune
or good fortune?
"He rejects rank as so much mud. For he[268]
knows that if a man is of honourable rank, the
honour is in himself, and cannot be lost by change
of condition, nor exhausted by countless modifications
of existence. Who then can grieve his heart?
Those who practise Tao understand the secret of
this."
"Master," said Confucius, "your virtue equals
that of Heaven and Earth; yet you still employ
perfect precepts in the cultivation of your heart.
Who among the sages of old could have uttered
such words?"
"Not so," answered Lao Tzŭ. "The fluidity
of water is not the result of any effort on the part
of the water, but is its natural property. And the
virtue of the perfect man is such that even without
cultivation there is nothing which can withdraw
from his sway. Heaven is naturally high, the earth
is naturally solid, the sun and moon are naturally
bright. Do they cultivate these attributes?"
Confucius went forth and said to Yen Hui,
"In point of Tao, I am but as an animalcule in
vinegar. Had not the Master opened my eyes, I
should not have perceived the vastness of the
universe."
He who would concentrate himself upon life after
death must first familiarise himself with life before
birth.
When Chuang Tzŭ was at an interview with
Duke Ai of Lu,
Who had then been dead 120 years.
[269]
the latter said, "We have many scholars, Sir, in
Lu, but few of your school."
"In Lu," replied Chuang Tzŭ, "there are but
few scholars."
"Look at the number who wear scholars' robes,"
said the Duke. "How can you say they are few?"
"Scholars who wear round hats," answered
Chuang Tzŭ, "know the seasons of Heaven.
Scholars who wear square shoes know the shape
of Earth.
According to ancient Chinese cosmogony, "Heaven
is round: Earth is square."
And scholars who loosely gird themselves are
ready to decide whatever questions may arise. But
scholars who have Tao do not necessarily wear
robes; neither does the wearing of robes necessarily
mean that a scholar has Tao. If your Highness
does not think so, why not issue an order through
the Middle Kingdom, making death the punishment
for all who wear the robes without having
the Tao?"
Thereupon Duke Ai circulated this mandate for
five days, the result being that not a single man in
Lu dared to don scholars' robes,—with the exception
of one old man who, thus arrayed, took his
stand at the Duke's gate.
My Ming editor (a priest) says this was Confucius
himself!
The Duke summoned him to the presence, and
asked him many questions on politics, trying to
entangle him, but in vain. Then Chuang Tzŭ said,[270]
"If there is only one scholar in Lu, surely that is
not many."
It is unnecessary, says Lin Hsi Chung, to descend
to anachronisms in reference to the genuineness of
this episode.
Rank and power had no charms for Po Li Ch'i.
7th century BC. This story is alluded to by
Mencius.
So he took to feeding cattle. His cattle were
always fat, which caused Duke Mu of Ch'in to
ignore his low condition and entrust him with the
administration.
Shun cared nothing for life or death. He was
therefore able to influence men's hearts.
His parents even went so far as to try to kill him.
Prince Yüan of Sung desiring to draw a map,
the officials of that department presented themselves,
and after making obeisance stood waiting
for the order, more than half of them already licking
their brushes and mixing their ink.
One of them arrived late. He sauntered in
without hurrying himself; and when he had made
obeisance, did not wait but went off home.
The Prince sent a man to see what he did. He
took off his clothes and squatted down bare-backed.
"He will do," cried the Prince. "He is a true
artist."
The commentators do not get much out of this
episode. Lin Hsi Chung damns it as a forgery.
[271]
When Wên Wang was on a tour of inspection
in Tsang, he saw an old man fishing. But his
fishing was not real fishing, for he did not fish to
catch fish, but to amuse himself.
Wherefore, from the standpoint of Tao, he was
the more likely to succeed.
So Wên Wang wished to employ him in the
administration of government, but feared lest his
own ministers, uncles, and brothers, might object.
On the other hand, if he let the old man go, he
could not bear to think of the people being deprived
of such an influence.
Accordingly, that very morning he informed his
ministers, saying, "I once dreamt that a Sage of
a black colour and with a large beard, riding upon
a parti-coloured horse with red stockings on one
side, appeared and instructed me to place the administration
in the hands of the old gentleman of
Tsang, promising that the people would benefit
greatly thereby."
The ministers at once said, "It is a command
from your Highness' father."
"I think so," answered Wên Wang. "But let
us try by divination."
"It is a command from your Highness' late
father," said the ministers, "and may not be disobeyed.
What need for divination?"
So the old man of Tsang was received and
entrusted with the administration. He altered
none of the existing statutes. He issued no unjust
regulations. And when, after three years, Wên[272]
Wang made another inspection, he found all
dangerous organisations broken up, the officials
doing their duty as a matter of course, while the
use of measures of grain was unknown within the
four boundaries of the State. There was thus
unanimity in the public voice, singleness of official
purpose, and identity of interests to all.
So Wên Wang appointed the old man Grand
Tutor; and then, standing with his face to the north,
An attitude of respect. Facing the south was the
conventional position of a ruler.
asked him, saying, "Can such government be
extended over the empire?"
The old man of Tsang was silent and made no
reply. He then abruptly took leave, and by the
evening of that same day had disappeared, never
to be heard of again.
Yen Yüan said to Confucius, "If Wên Wang
was unable to do this of himself, how was he able
to do it by a dream?"
"Silence!" cried Confucius: "It is not for you
to criticise Wên Wang who succeeded in fulfilling
his mission. The dream was merely to satisfy the
vulgar mind."
The whole episode is of course spurious.
Lieh Yü K'ou
Or Lieh Tzŭ. See ch. i.
instructed Po Hun Wu Jên
See ch. v.
in archery. Drawing the bow to its full, he placed[273]
a cup of water on his elbow and began to let fly.
Hardly was one arrow out of sight ere another was
on the string, the archer standing all the time like
a statue.
"But this is shooting under ordinary conditions,"
cried Po Hun Wu Jên; "it is not shooting under
extraordinary conditions. Now I will ascend a
high mountain with you, and stand on the edge of
a precipice a thousand feet in height, and see how
you can shoot then."
Thereupon Wu Jên went with Lieh Tzŭ up a
high mountain, and stood on the edge of a precipice
a thousand feet in height, approaching it backwards
until one-fifth of his feet overhung the
chasm, when he beckoned to Lieh Tzŭ to come on.
But the latter had fallen prostrate on the ground,
with the sweat pouring down to his heels.
"The perfect man," said Wu Jên, "soars up to
the blue sky, or dives down to the yellow springs,
The infernal regions.
or flies to some extreme point of the compass,
without change of countenance. But you are
terrified, and your eyes are dazed. Your internal
economy is defective."
You have not Tao.
Chien Wu
See ch. i.
said to Sun Shu Ao,
A famous minister of the Ch'u State.
[274]
"Sir, you have been three times called to office
without showing any elation, and you have been
three times dismissed without displaying any
chagrin. At first, I doubted you; but now I notice
that your breathing is perfectly regular. How do
you manage thus to control your emotions?"
"I am no better than other people," replied
Sun Shu Ao. "I regard office when it comes as
something which may not be declined; when it
goes, as something which cannot be kept. To
me both the getting and losing are outside my
own self; and therefore I feel no chagrin. How
am I better than other people?
"Besides, I am not conscious of office being
either in the hands of others or in my own. If
it is in the hands of others, my own personality
disappears; if in mine, theirs. And amidst the
cares of deliberation and investigation, what
leisure has one for troubling about rank?"
When Confucius heard this, he said, "The perfect
Sages of old!—cunning men could not defeat
them; beautiful women could not seduce them;
robbers could not steal from them;
They were unmoved in the face of danger.
Fu Hsi and the Yellow Emperor could not make
friends of them. Life and death are great; yet
these gave them no pang.
That would cause them to sacrifice truth.
How much less then rank and power!
"The souls of such men pierced through huge[275]
mountains as though they had been nothing;
descended into the abyss without getting wet;
occupied lowly stations without chagrin. They
filled the whole universe; and the more they gave
to others, the more they had themselves."
These last words occur in chapter lxxxi. of the
Tao-Tê-Ching. It is, to say the least, strange to
find them here in the mouth of Confucius without
a hint as to their alleged Taoistic source.
The explanation is that when this episode was
penned, that patchwork treatise which passes under
the name of the Tao-Tê-Ching had not been pieced
together.
The Prince of Ch'u was sitting with the Prince
of Fan. By and by, one of the officials of Ch'u
said, "There were three indications of the destruction
of the Fan State."
"The destruction of the Fan State," cried the
Prince of Fan, "did not suffice to injure my
existence.
Which was already, by virtue of Tao, beyond the
reach of mundane influences.
And while the destruction of the Fan State did
not suffice to injure my existence, the preservation
of the Ch'u State will not be enough to preserve
yours.
You being without Tao.
From this point of view it will be seen that while
we Fans have not begun to be destroyed, you
Ch'us have not begun to exist."
A good specimen of the Fallacia Amphiboliæ.
Knowledge Travels North.
Argument:—Inaction and Tao—The universe our model—Spontaneity
our watchword—Omnipresence and indivisibility of Tao—External
activity, internal passivity—Man's knowledge finite—Illustrations.
[This chapter is supplementary to chapter vi.]
When Knowledge travelled north, across the
Black Water, and over the Dark-Steep
Mountain, he met Do-nothing Say-nothing and
asked of him as follows:—
"Kindly tell me by what thoughts, by what
cogitations, may Tao be known? By resting in
what, by according in what, may Tao be approached?
By following what, by pursuing what,
may Tao be attained?"
To these three questions, Do-nothing Say-nothing
returned no answer. Not that he would
not answer, but that he could not. So when
Knowledge got no reply, he turned round and went
off to the south of the White Water and up the
Ku-chüeh Mountain, where he saw All-in-extremes,
and to him he put the same questions.
"Ha!" cried All-in-extremes, "I know. I will
tell you...."
But just as he was about to speak he forgot[277]
what he wanted to say. So when Knowledge got
no reply, he went back to the palace and asked
the Yellow Emperor. The latter said, "By no
thoughts, by no cogitations, Tao may be known.
By resting in nothing, by according in nothing,
Tao may be approached. By following nothing,
by pursuing nothing, Tao may be attained."
Then Knowledge said to the Yellow Emperor,
"Now you and I know this, but those two know
it not. Who is right?"
"Of those two," replied the Yellow Emperor,
"Do-nothing Say-nothing is genuinely right, and
All-in-extremes is near. You and I are wholly
wrong. Those who understand it do not speak
about it, those who speak about it do not understand
it.
These words occur in the Tao-Tê-Ching, ch. vi.
See also ante, p. 170.
Therefore the Sage teaches a doctrine which does
not find expression in words.
See ante, ch. v. Also The Remains of Lao Tzŭ, p. 7.
Tao cannot be made to come. Virtue cannot be
reached.
Virtue (Tê), here the exemplification of Tao.
Charity can be evoked. Duty to one's neighbour can
be wrongly directed. Ceremonies are mere shams.
"Therefore it has been said, 'If Tao perishes,
then Tê will perish. If Tê perishes, then charity
will perish. If charity perishes, then duty to one's
neighbour will perish. If duty to one's neighbour[278]
perishes, then ceremonies will perish. Ceremonies
are but a showy ornament of Tao, while oft-times
the source of trouble.'
The above is from the Tao-Tê-Ching, ch. xxxviii.
It is interesting to note how the Yellow Emperor
annihilates time by quoting a work not written until
many centuries after his date.
"Therefore it has been said, 'Those who practise
Tao suffer daily loss. If that loss proceeds
until inaction ensues, then by that very inaction
there is nothing which cannot be done.'
Also in the Tao-Tê-Ching, ch. xlviii.
"Now, we are already beings. And if we desire
to revert to our original condition, how difficult
that is! 'Tis a change to which only the greatest
among us are equal.
"Life follows upon death. Death is the beginning
of life. Who knows when the end is reached?
The life of man results from convergence of the
vital fluid. Its convergence is life; its dispersion,
death. If then life and death are but consecutive
states, what need have I to complain?
"Therefore all things are One. What we love
is animation. What we hate is corruption. But
corruption in its turn becomes animation, and
animation once more becomes corruption.
"Therefore it has been said, The world is permeated
by a single vital fluid, and Sages accordingly
venerate One."
"Tota formatio procedens ex nomine uno." Liber
Jezirah, p. Bi. (Parisiis: G. Postello, 1552.)
[279]
Then Knowledge said to the Yellow Emperor,
"I asked Do-nothing Say-nothing, but he did not
answer me. Not that he, would not; he could
not. So I asked All-in-extremes. He was just
going to tell me, but he did not tell me. Not
that he would not; but just as he was going to
do so, he forgot what he wanted to say. Now I
ask you, and you tell me. How then are you
wholly wrong?"
"Of those two," replied the Yellow Emperor,
"the former was genuinely right, inasmuch as he
did not know. The latter was near, inasmuch as
he forgot. You and I are wholly wrong, inasmuch
as we know."
Tao is attained, not by knowledge, but by absence
of knowledge.
When All-in-extremes heard of this, he considered
that the Yellow Emperor had spoken
well.
"Spoken knowingly" gives the only chance of
bringing out what is here a forced play upon words.
The universe is very beautiful, yet it says
nothing. The four seasons abide by a fixed
law, yet they are not heard. All creation is
based upon absolute principles, yet nothing
speaks.
And the true Sage, taking his stand upon the
beauty of the universe, pierces the principles of
created things. Hence the saying that the per[280]fect
man does nothing, the true Sage performs
nothing, beyond gazing at the universe.
In the hope of attaining, by contemplation, a like
spontaneity.
For man's intellect, however keen, face to face
with the countless evolutions of things, their death
and birth, their squareness and roundness,—can
never reach the root. There creation is, and there
it has ever been.
But the secret of life is withheld.
The six cardinal points, reaching into infinity,
are ever included in Tao. An autumn spikelet,
in all its minuteness, must carry Tao within
itself. There is nothing on earth which does not
rise and fall, but it never perishes altogether.
Nihilo nil posse reverti.
The Yin and the Yang, and the four seasons, keep
to their proper order. Apparently destroyed, yet
really existing; the material gone, the immaterial
left;—such is the law of creation, which passeth
all understanding. This is called the root, whence
a glimpse may be obtained of God.
From this point, upon which the finger of man can
never be laid, his mind may perhaps faintly discern
the transcendent workings of that Power by which
all creation is swayed;—"uncover those secret
recesses where Nature is sitting at the fires in the
depths of her laboratory." Swedenborg.
[281]
Yeh Ch'üeh enquired of P'i I about Tao.
For the former see ch. ii. Of the latter there is no
record.
The latter said, "Keep your body under proper
control, your gaze concentrated upon One,—and the
peace of God will descend upon you. Keep back
your knowledge, and concentrate your thoughts
upon One,—and the holy spirit shall abide within
you. Virtue shall beautify you, Tao shall establish
you, aimless as a new-born calf which recks not how
it came into the world."
While P'i I was still speaking, Yeh Ch'üeh had
gone off to sleep; at which the former rejoiced
greatly, and departed singing,
His mortal trammels had fallen off by his absorption
into Tao.
Shun asked Ch'êng,
His tutor.
saying, "Can one get Tao so as to have it for
one's own?"
"Your very body," replied Ch'êng, "is not your
own. How should Tao be?"
[282]
"If my body," said Shun, "is not my own, pray
whose is it?"
"It is the delegated image of God," replied
Ch'êng. "Your life is not your own. It is the
delegated harmony of God.
The affinity of the Yin and Yang causes them, when
in due proportions, to combine and produce life.
Your individuality is not your own. It is the
delegated adaptability of God.
Providing the endless variety of shapes with an
endless variety of complexion.
Your posterity is not your own. It is the delegated
exuviæ of God.
As God sends us into the world, so He wishes us
to "increase and multiply."
You move, but know not how. You are at rest,
but know not why. You taste, but know not the
cause. These are the operation of God's laws.
How then should you get Tao so as to have
it for your own?"
Cf. "Know ye not that your body is the temple of
the Holy Ghost," etc. I. Corinthians vi. 19.
Confucius said to Lao Tzŭ, "To-day you are
at leisure. Pray tell me about perfect Tao."
"Purge your heart by fasting and discipline,"
answered Lao Tzŭ. "Wash your soul as white as
snow. Discard your knowledge. Tao is abstruse
and difficult of discussion. I will try, however, to
speak to you of its outline.
[283]
"Light is born of darkness. Classification is
born of formlessness. The soul is born of Tao.
The body is born of the vital essence.
Existence springs from non-existence.
"Thus all things produce after their kind.
Creatures with nine channels of communication
are born from the womb. Creatures with eight
are born from the egg.
Nature is always self-similar.
Of their coming there is no trace. In their departure
there is no goal. No entrance gate, no
dwelling house, they pass this way and that, as
though at the meeting of cross-roads.
"Those who enter herein become strong of limb,
subtle of thought, and clear of sight and hearing.
They suffer no mental fatigue, nor meet with physical
resistance.
"Heaven cannot but be high. Earth cannot
but be broad. The sun and moon cannot but revolve.
All creation cannot but flourish. To do
so is their Tao.
"But it is not from extensive study that this
may be known, nor by dialectic skill that this may
be made clear. The true Sage will have none of
these. It is in addition without gain, in diminution
without loss, that the true Sage finds salvation.
"Unfathomable as the sea, wondrously ending
only to begin again, informing all creation without
being exhausted, the Tao of the perfect man
is spontaneous in its operation. That all creation[284]
can be informed by it without exhaustion, is its
Tao.
The Tao of Tao.
"In the Middle Kingdom there are men who
recognise neither positive nor negative. They
abide between heaven and earth. They act their
part as mortals, and then return to the Cause.
"From that standpoint,
Of the Cause, sc. God, which is commensurate with
infinity.
life is but a concentration of the vital fluid, whose
longest and shortest terms of existence vary by an
inappreciable space,—-hardly enough for the classification
of Yao and Chieh.
As good and bad. See ch. iv.
"Tree-fruits and plant-fruits exhibit order in
their varieties; and the relationships of man, though
more difficult to be dealt with, may still be reduced
to order.
These have been classified as follows:—

1. Sovereign     and Subject.
2. Husband        "  Wife.
3. Father         "  Son.
4. Elder Brother  "  Younger Brother.
5. Friend         "  Friend.

The true Sage who meets with these, does not
violate them. Neither does he continue to hold
fast by them.
He adapts himself to the exigencies of his environment.
[285]
Adaptation by arrangement is Tê. Spontaneous
adaptation is Tao, by which sovereigns flourish
and princes succeed.
"Man passes through this sublunary life as a
white horse passes a crack. Here one moment,
gone the next. Neither are there any not equally
subject to the ingress and egress of mortality.
One modification brings life; then another, and
it is death. Living creatures cry out; human
beings sorrow. The bow-sheath is slipped off;
the clothes-bag is dropped; and in the confusion
the soul wings its flight, and the body follows,
on the great journey home!
"The reality of the formless, the unreality of
that which has form,—this is known to all.
Those who are on the road to attainment care
not for these things, but the people at large
discuss them. Attainment implies non-discussion:
discussion implies non-attainment. Manifested,
Tao has no objective value; hence silence
is better than argument. It cannot be translated
into speech; better then say nothing at all. This
is called the great attainment."
Tung Kuo Tzŭ asked Chuang Tzŭ, saying,
"What you call Tao,—where is it?"
"There is nowhere," replied Chuang Tzŭ, "where
it is not."
"Tell me one place at any rate where it is," said
Tung Kuo Tzŭ.
"It is in the ant," replied Chuang Tzŭ.
[286]
"Why go so low down?" asked Tung Kuo
Tzŭ.
"It is in a tare," said Chuang Tzŭ.
"Still lower," objected Tung Kuo Tzŭ.
"It is in a potsherd," said Chuang Tzŭ.
"Worse still!" cried Tung Kuo Tzŭ.
"It is in ordure," said Chuang Tzŭ. And Tung
Kuo Tzŭ made no reply.
"Sir," continued Chuang Tzŭ, "your question
does not touch the essential. When Huo, inspector
of markets, asked the managing director about the
fatness of pigs, the test was always made in parts
least likely to be fat. Do not therefore insist in any
particular direction; for there is nothing which
escapes. Such is perfect Tao; and such also is ideal
speech. Whole, entire, all, are three words which
sound differently but mean the same. Their purport
is One.
"Try to reach with me the palace of Nowhere,
and there, amidst the identity of all things, carry
your discussions into the infinite. Try to practise
with me inaction, wherein you may rest motionless,
without care, and be happy. For thus my mind
becomes an abstraction. It wanders not, and yet is
not conscious of being at rest. It goes and comes
and is not conscious of stoppages. Backwards and
forwards without being conscious of any goal. Up
and down the realms of Infinity, wherein even the
greatest intellect would fail to find an end.
"That which makes things the things they are,
is not limited to such things. The limits of things[287]
are their own limits in so far as they are things.
The limits of the limitless, the limitlessness of the
limited,—these are called fulness and emptiness,
renovation and decay. Tao causes fulness and
emptiness, but it is not either. It causes renovation
and decay, but it is not either. It causes beginning
and end, but it is not either. It causes accumulation
and dispersion, but it is not either."
O Ho Kan was studying with Shên Nung under
Lao Lung Chi.
No record of the first and last. Shên Nung was a
legendary emperor who invented agriculture. See
p. 196.
Shên Nung used to remain shut up, with his
head on the table, absorbed in day-dreams. On one
occasion, O Ho Kan knocked at the door, and
entering said, "Lao Lung is dead!"
Thereupon Shên Nung, leaning on his staff,
arose; and flinging down his staff with a bang,
smiled and said, "O my Master, thou knewest me
to be worthless and self-sufficient, and thou didst
leave me and die. Now I, having no scope for my
vain talk, I too will die."
When Yen Kang Tiao
"A man of Tao." Comm.
heard this, he said, "Those who exemplify Tao are
sought after by all the best men in the empire.
Now if one who has not attained to more Tao than
the ten-thousandth part of the tip of an autumn[288]
spikelet, is still wise enough to withhold vain talk
and die,—how much more those who exemplify Tao?
To the eye it is formless, and to the ear it is noiseless.
Those who discuss it, speak of it as 'the
obscure.' But the mere fact of discussing Tao
makes it not Tao."
At this the Empyrean asked Without-end, saying,
"Do you know Tao?"
"I do not," replied Without-end; whereupon the
Empyrean proceeded to ask Inaction.
"I do know Tao," said Inaction.
"Is there any method," asked the Empyrean,
"by which you know Tao?"
"There is," replied Inaction.
"What is it?" asked the Empyrean.
"I know," answered Inaction, "that Tao may
honour and dishonour, bind and loose. That is the
method by which I know Tao."
The Empyrean repeated these words to No-beginning,
and asked him which was right, the ignorance
of Without-end or the knowledge of Inaction.
"Not to know," replied No-beginning, "is profound.
To know is shallow. Not to know is
internal. To know is external."
Here the Empyrean broke in with a sigh, "Then
ignorance is knowledge, and knowledge ignorance!
But pray whose knowledge is the knowledge of not
knowing?"
"Tao," said No-beginning, "cannot be heard.
Heard, it is not Tao. It cannot be seen. Seen, it[289]
is not Tao. It cannot be spoken. Spoken, it is
not Tao. That which imparts form to forms is
itself formless; therefore Tao cannot have a
name."
Form precedes name.
No-beginning continued, "He who replies to one
asking about Tao, does not know Tao. Although
one may hear about Tao, he does not really hear
about Tao. There is no such thing as asking about
Tao. There is no such thing as answering such
questions. To ask a question which cannot be
asked is vain. To answer a question which cannot
be answered is unreal. And one who thus meets
the vain with the unreal is one who has no physical
perception of the universe, and no mental perception
of the origin of existence,—unfit alike to roam
over the K'un-lun peak or to soar into the Supreme
Void."
Light asked Nothing, saying, "Do you, Sir,
exist, or do you not exist?"
But getting no answer to his question, Light set
to work to watch for the appearance of Nothing.
Hidden, vacuous,—all day long he looked but
could not see it, listened but could not hear it,
grasped at but could not seize it.
See The Remains of Lao Tzŭ, p. 31.
"Bravo!" cried Light. "Who can equal this? I
can get to be nothing,
Darkness.
[290]
but I cannot get as far as the absence of nothing.
Assuming that Nothing has an objective existence,
how can it reach this next stage?"
The man who forged swords for the Minister of
War was eighty years of age. Yet he never made
the slightest slip in his work.
The Minister of War said to him, "Is it your
skill, Sir, or have you any method?"
Any Tao?—in its earlier sense of way of doing
things.
"It is concentration," replied the man. "When
twenty years old, I took to forging swords. I cared
for nothing else. If a thing was not a sword, I
did not notice it. I availed myself of whatever
energy I did not use in other directions in
order to secure greater efficiency in the direction
required. Still more of that which is never without
use;—
Tao.
So that there was nothing which did not lend its aid.
Jen Ch'iu asked Confucius, saying, "Can we
know about the time before the universe existed?"
"We can," replied Confucius. "Time was of old
precisely what it is now."
At this rebuff, Jen Ch'iu withdrew. Next day
he again visited Confucius and said, "Yesterday
when I asked you that question and you answered
me, I was quite clear about it. To-day I am confused.
How is this?"
[291]
"Your clearness of yesterday," answered Confucius,
"was because my answer appealed direct to
your natural intelligence. Your confusion of to-day
results from the intrusion of something other than
the natural intelligence.
You have passed from "simple apprehension" to
"judgment."
There is no past, no present, no beginning, no end.
To-day will be the yesterday of to-morrow.
To have posterity before one has posterity,—is that
possible?"
Jen Ch'iu made no answer, and Confucius continued,
"That will do. Do not reply. If life did
not give birth to death, and if death did not put an
end to life, surely life and death would be no longer
correlates, but would each exist independently.
What there was before the universe, was Tao. Tao
makes things what they are, but is not itself a
thing. Nothing can produce Tao; yet everything
has Tao within it, and continues to produce it without
end.
In its offspring.
And the endless love of the Sage for his fellow-man
is based upon the same principle."
Yen Yüan asked Confucius, saying, "Master, I
have heard you declare that there may be no eagerness
to conform, no effort to adapt. If so, pray how
are we to get along?"
Reach that condition which is only attained by
adaptation to environment.
[292]
"The men of old," replied Confucius, "practised
physical, but not moral, modification.
They adapted themselves to the requirements of
matter, while their hearts remained the same.
The men of to-day practise moral, not physical
modification.
They allow their hearts to be influenced while
resisting the exigencies of the external.
Let your modification extend to the external only.
Internally, be constant without modification.
"How shall you modify, and how shall you not
modify? How reconcile the divergence?—By not
admitting division.
I.e. "by being constant without modification," says
Lin Hsi Chung.
"There was the garden of Hsi Wei, the park of
the Yellow Emperor, the palace of Shun, the halls
of T'ang and Wu.
The allusion appears to be to schools of
learning, like the Grove of Academus. See
chs. vi, xii.
These were perfect men; but had they been taught
by Confucianists and Mihists, they would have
hammered one another to pieces over scholastic
quibbles. How much more then the men of to-day?
"The perfect Sage, in his relations with the
external world, injures nothing. Neither does anything
injure him. And only he who is thus exempt
can be trusted to conform and to adapt.
[293]
"Mountain forests and loamy fields swell my
heart with joy. But ere the joy be passed, sorrow
is upon me again.
Familiarity destroys the charm.
Joy and sorrow come and go, and over them I have
no control.
"Alas! the life of man is but as a stoppage at
an inn. He knows that which comes within the
range of his experience. Otherwise, he knows not.
He knows that he can do what he can do, and that
he cannot do what he cannot do. But there is
always that which he does not know and that which
he cannot do; and to struggle that it shall not
be so,—is not this a cause for grief?
"The best language is that which is not spoken,
the best form of action is that which is without
deeds.
Then conformity and adaptation are not required.
Spread out your knowledge and it will be found to
be shallow."
It will by no means cover the area of the knowable.
"Read this chapter," says one critic, "and the
Tripitaka and the Mahâyâna will open out before
you as beneath a sharp-edged blade."
Kêng Sang Ch'u.
Argument:—The operation of Tao is not seen—Spheres of action vary—Tao
remains the same—Spontaneity essential—Tao can be divided
but remains entire—It is infinite as Time and Space—It is unconditioned—The
external and the internal—Illustrations.
Among the disciples of Lao Tzŭ was one
named Kêng Sang Ch'u. He alone had
attained to the Tao of his Master. He lived up
north, on the Wei-lei Mountains. Of his attendants,
he dismissed those who were systematically clever
or conventionally charitable. The useless remained
with him; the incompetent served him. And in
three years the district of Wei-lei was greatly
benefited.
One of the inhabitants said in conversation,
"When Mr. Kêng Sang first came among us, we
did not know what to make of him. Now, we could
not say enough about him in a day, and even a
year would leave something unsaid. Surely he must
be a true Sage. Why not pray to him as to the
spirits, and honour him as a tutelary god of the
land?"
On hearing of this, Kêng Sang Ch'u turned his
face to the south
Towards the abode of Lao Tzŭ.
[295]
in shame, at which his disciples were astonished.
But Kêng Sang said, "What cause have you for
astonishment? The influence of spring quickens the
life of plants, and autumn brings them to maturity.
In the absence of any agent, how is this so? It is
the operation of Tao.
"I have heard that the perfect man may be pent
up like a corpse in a tomb, yet the people will become
unartificial and without care.
So powerful will be his influence.
But now these poor people of Wei-lei wish to exalt
me among their wise and good. Surely then I am
but a shallow vessel; and therefore I was shamed
for the doctrine of Lao Tzŭ."
The disciples said, "Not so. In a sixteen-foot
ditch a big fish has not room to turn round; but
'tis the very place for an eel. On a six or seven-foot
hillock a large beast finds no shelter, while the uncanny
fox gladly makes its lair therein. Besides,
ever since the days of Yao and Shun it has always
been customary to honour the virtuous, advance
the able, give precedence to the good and useful.
Why not then among the people of Wei-lei? Let
them do it, Sir."
"Come here, my children," said Kêng Sang
Ch'u. "A beast big enough to swallow a cart, if it
wanders alone from the hills, will not escape the
sorrow of the snare. A fish big enough to gulp
down a boat, if stranded on the dry shore will become
a prey to ants. Therefore it is that birds and beasts[296]
love height, and fishes and turtles love depth. And
the man who cares for himself hides his body. He
loves the occult.
There is a play here upon words.
"As to Yao and Shun, what claim have they to
praise? Their fine distinctions simply amounted to
knocking a hole in a wall in order to stop it up with
brambles;
They had better have left the wall alone.
to combing each individual hair; to counting the
grains for a rice pudding! How in the name of
goodness did they profit their generation?
"If the virtuous are honoured, emulation will
ensue. If knowledge be fostered, the result will
be theft.
People will employ their knowledge against each
other.
These things are of no use to make people good.
The struggle for wealth is so severe. Sons murder
their fathers; ministers their princes; men rob in
broad daylight, and bore through walls at high
noon. I tell you that the root of this great evil is
from Yao and Shun, and that its branches will
extend into a thousand ages to come. A thousand
ages hence, man will be feeding upon man!"
Nan Yung Ch'u
A disciple.
sadly straightened his seat and said, "But what is
one of my age to do that he may attain to this?"
[297]
"Preserve your form complete," said Kêng Sang,
"your vitality secure. Let no anxious thoughts
intrude. And then in three years' space you may
attain to this."
"I do not know," said Nan Yung, "that there is
any difference in the form of eyes; yet blind men
cannot see. I do not know that there is any
difference in the form of ears; yet deaf men cannot
hear. I do not know that there is any difference in
the form of hearts;
The seat of the intellect.
yet fools cannot use theirs to any purpose. The
forms are alike; yet there is something which
differentiates them. One will succeed, and another
will not. Yet you tell me to preserve my form
complete, my vitality secure, and let no anxious
thoughts intrude. But so far I only hear Tao with
my ears."
"Well said!" cried Kêng Sang; and then he
added, "Small wasps cannot transform huge
caterpillars.
According to Chinese notions, the wasp has no
young. It transforms a small caterpillar into the
required offspring.
Bantams cannot hatch the eggs of geese. The fowls
of Lu can. Not that there is any difference in the
hatching power of chickens. One can and another
cannot, because one is naturally fitted for working
on a large, the other on a small scale. My talents[298]
are of the latter order. I cannot transform you.
Why not go south and see Lao Tzŭ?"
So Nan Yung took some provisions, and after a
seven days' journey arrived at the abode of Lao Tzŭ.
"Have you come from Kêng Sang Ch'u?" said
the latter.
"I have," replied Nan Yung.
"But why," said Lao Tzŭ, "bring all these people
with you?"
Meaning the questions he was going to ask.
Nan Yung looked back in alarm, and Lao Tzŭ
continued, "Do you not understand what I say?"
Nan Yung bent his head abashed, and then
looking up, said with a sigh, "I have now forgotten
how to answer, in consequence of missing what I
came to ask."
He was so confused by Lao Tzŭ's question coming
before he had had time to state his mission.
"What do you mean?" said Lao Tzŭ.
"If I do not know," replied Nan Yung, "men
call me a fool. If I do know, I injure myself. If I
am not charitable, I injure others. If I am, I injure
myself. If I do not do my duty to my neighbour,
I injure others. If I do it, I injure myself. My
trouble lies in not seeing how to escape from these
three dilemmas. On the strength of my connection
with Kêng Sang, I would venture to ask advice."
"When I saw you," said Lao Tzŭ, "I knew in
the twinkling of an eye what was the matter with
you. And now what you say confirms my view.[299]
You are confused, as a child that has lost its
parents. You would fathom the sea with a pole.
You are astray. You are struggling to get back to
your natural self, but cannot find the way. Alas!
alas!"
Nan Yung begged to be allowed to remain, and
set to work to cultivate the good and eliminate the
evil within him. At the expiration of ten days,
with sorrow in his heart, he again sought Lao Tzŭ.
"Have you thoroughly cleansed yourself?" said
Lao Tzŭ. "But this grieved look.... There is
some evil obstruction yet.
"If the disturbances are external,
Sc. sensual.
do not be always combating them, but close the
channels to the mind. If the disturbances are
internal, do not strive to oppose them, but close all
entrance from without.
And the mind will recover itself.
If the disturbances are both internal and external,
then you will not even be able to hold fast to Tao,
still less practise it."
"If a rustic is sick," said Nan Yung, "and
another rustic goes to see him; and if the sick man
can say what is the matter with him,—then he is
not seriously ill. Yet my search after Tao is like
swallowing drugs which only increase the malady.
Although really not so very far from Tao (sc. health)
as evidenced by my being able to describe my[300]
complaint, which a man sick of some serious disease
is scarcely able to do.
I beg therefore merely to ask the art of preserving
life."
"The art of preserving life," replied Lao Tzŭ,
"consists in being able to keep all in One,
Sc. Body and soul. See the Tao-Tê-Ching, ch. x,
where this idea has been reproduced.
to lose nothing, to estimate good and evil without
divination,
To know that each is bound up in the other.
to know when to stop, and how much is enough, to
leave others alone and attend to oneself, to be without
cares and without knowledge,—to be in fact as
a child. A child will cry all day and not become
hoarse, because of the perfection of its constitutional
harmony.
Also reproduced in the Tao-Tê-Ching, ch. lv.
It will keep its fist tightly closed all day and not
open it, because of the concentration of its virtue.
It will gaze all day without taking off its eyes,
because its sight is not attracted by externals. In
motion, it knows not whither it is bound; at rest,
it is not conscious of doing anything; but unconsciously
adapts itself to the exigencies of its environment.
This is the art of preserving life."
"Is this then the virtue of the perfect man?"
cried Nan Yung.
"Not so," said Lao Tzŭ. "I am, as it were, but
breaking the ice.
[301]
"The perfect man shares the food of this earth,
but the happiness of God. He does not incur
trouble either from men or things. He does not
join in censuring, in plotting, in toadying. Free
from care he comes, and unconscious he goes;—this
is the art of preserving life."
"This then is perfection?" inquired Nan
Yung.
"Not yet," said Lao Tzŭ. "I specially asked
if you could be as a child. A child acts without
knowing what it does; moves without knowing
whither. Its body is like a dry branch; its heart
like dead ashes. Thus, good and evil fortune find
no lodgment therein; and there where good and
evil fortune are not, how can the troubles of mortality
be?
"Those whose hearts are in a state of repose
give forth a divine radiance, by the light of which
they see themselves as they are. And only by
cultivating such repose can man attain to the
constant.
"Those who are constant are sought after by
men and assisted by God. Those who are sought
after by men are the people of God; those who are
assisted by God are his chosen children.
The stuff of which rulers are made.
"To study this is to study what cannot be
learnt. To practise this is to practise what cannot
be accomplished. To discuss this is to discuss
what can never be proved. Let knowledge stop[302]
at the unknowable. That is perfection. And for
those who do not follow this, God will destroy
them!
"Knowledge," says Emerson in his Montaigne, or
the Sceptic, "is the knowing that we cannot know."
"With such defences for the body, ever prepared
for the unexpected, deferential to the rights of
others,—if then calamities overtake you, these are
from God, not from man. Let them not disturb
what you have already achieved. Let them not
penetrate into the soul's abode. For there resides
the Will. And if the will knows not what to will,
it will not be able to will.
Inability to exercise the functions of will is Tao.
"Whatsoever is not said in all sincerity, is
wrongly said. And not to be able to rid oneself
of this vice is only to sink deeper towards perdition.
"Those who do evil in the open light of day,—men
will punish them. Those who do evil in
secret,—God will punish them. Who fears both
man and God, he is fit to walk alone.
The term here used for "God" means strictly those
"spirits" which are the avenging emissaries of the
Deity.
Those who are devoted to the internal,
To self-culture.
in practice acquire no reputation. Those who are
devoted to the external, strive for pre-eminence[303]
among their fellows. Practice without reputation
throws a halo around the meanest. But he who
strives for pre-eminence among his fellows, he is as
a huckster whose weariness all perceive though he
himself puts on an air of gaiety.
"He who is naturally in sympathy with man, to
him all men come. But he who forcedly adapts,
has no room even for himself, still less for others.
And he who has no room for others, has no ties.
It is all over with him.
"There is no weapon so deadly as man's will.
Excalibur is second to it. There is no bandit so
powerful as Nature.
The interaction of the Positive and Negative principles,
which produces the visible universe.
In the whole universe there is no escape from it.
Yet it is not Nature which does the injury. It is
man's own heart.
"Tao informs its own subdivisions, their successes
and their failures. What is feared in subdivision
is separation.
From the parent stock of Tao.
What is feared in separation, is further separation.
So that all connection is severed.
Thus, to issue forth without return, this is development
of the supernatural. To issue forth and
attain the goal, this is called death. To be annihilated
and yet to exist, this is convergence of the
supernatural into One. To make things which[304]
have form appear to all intents and purposes formless,—this
is the sum of all things.
Man's final triumph over matter.
"Birth is not a beginning; death is not an end.
There is existence without limitation; there is
continuity without a starting-point. Existence
without limitation is Space. Continuity without
a starting-point is Time. There is birth, there is
death, there is issuing forth, there is entering in.
That through which one passes in and out without
seeing its form, that is the Portal of God.
"The Portal of God is Non-Existence. All
things sprang from Non-Existence. Existence
could not make existence existence. It must have
proceeded from Non-Existence,
The idea of existence, independent of its correlate,
cannot be apprehended by the human intellect.
And Non-Existence and Nothing are One.
If all things sprang from non-existence, it might be
urged that non-existence had an objective existence.
But non-existence is nothing, and nothing excludes
the idea of something, making subjective and objective
nothings One.
Herein is the abiding-place of the Sage.
There where the matter of mortality shares the
tenuity of the formless.
"The knowledge of the ancients reached the
highest point,—the time before anything existed.[305]
This is the highest point. It is exhaustive. There
is no adding to it.
"The second best was that of those who started
from existence. Life was to them a misfortune.
Death was a return home. There was already
separation.
"The next in the scale said that at the beginning
there was nothing. Then life came, to be quickly
followed by death. They made Nothing the head,
Life the trunk, and Death the tail of existence,
claiming as friends whoever knew that existence
and non-existence, and life and death were all One.
"These three classes, though different, were of
the same clan; as were Chao Ching who inherited
fame, and Chia who inherited territory.
The fact of inheritance was the same, but not the
thing inherited,—by these men of Ch'u.
There are various interpretations of this passage.
No two commentators agree.
"Man's life is as the soot on a kettle.
Meaning, concentrated smoke.
Yet men speak of the subjective point of view. But
this subjective point of view will not bear the test.
It is a point of knowledge we cannot reach.
Individual standards are fallacious. What is subjective
from one point of view is objective from another.
"At the winter sacrifice, the tripe may be separated
from the great toe; yet these cannot be
separated.
Each carries away the characteristics of the whole.
[306]
He who looks at a house, visits the ancestral hall,
and even the latrines. Thus every point is the
subjective point of view.
Or else he has not seen the house but only a part.
Where then is the subjective point of view of the
house, and by analogy, of the man?
"Let us try to formulate this subjective point of
view. It originates with life, and, with knowledge
as its tutor, drifts into the admission of right and
wrong.
In the abstract.
But one's own standard of right is the standard,
and others have to adapt themselves to it. Men
will die for this. Such people look upon the useful
as appertaining to wisdom, the useless as appertaining
to folly; upon success in life as honourable,
upon failure as dishonourable.
Not knowing the value of the useless, or perceiving
that what is so at one time is not so at another.
The subjective point of view is that of the present
generation, who like the cicada and the young dove
see things only from their own standpoint.
See ch. i.
"If a man treads upon a stranger's toe in the
market-place, he apologises on the score of hurry.
If an elder brother does this, he is quit with an
exclamation of sympathy. And if a parent does so,
nothing whatever is done.
The child being part of himself.
[307]
"Therefore it has been said, 'Perfect politeness
is not artificial;
Kuo Hsiang says this means treating others as
oneself. Lin Hsi Chung takes the "natural" or
"spontaneous" view which is here adopted.
perfect duty to one's neighbour is not a matter of
calculation; perfect wisdom takes no thought;
perfect charity recognises no ties; perfect trust
requires no pledges.'
"Discard the stimuli of purpose. Free the mind
from disturbances. Get rid of entanglements to
virtue. Pierce the obstructions to Tao.
"Honours, wealth, distinction, power, fame, gain,—these
six stimulate purpose.
"Mien, carriage, beauty, arguments, influence,
opinions,—these six disturb the mind.
Referring, of course, to the mien, carriage, etc. of
others.
"Hate, ambition, joy, anger, sorrow, pleasure,—these
six are entanglements to virtue.
"Rejecting, adopting, receiving, giving, knowledge,
ability,—these six are obstructions to Tao.
The key to which is inaction.
"If these twenty-four be not allowed to run riot,
then the mind will be duly ordered. And being
duly ordered, it will be in repose. And being in
repose, it will be clear of perception. And being
clear of perception, it will be unconditioned. And
being unconditioned, it will be in that state of[308]
inaction by which there is nothing which cannot
be accomplished.
"Tao is the sovereign lord of Tê.
Tê is the "virtue" of spontaneity.
Life is the glorifier of Tê.
By means of which it can be manifested.
Nature is the substance of life.
The code of which life is the embodiment.
The operation of that nature is action. The perversion
of that action is error.
"People who know put forth physical power.
People who know employ mental effort. But what
people who know do not know is to be as the eye.
Which sees without looking.
"Emotion which is spontaneous is called virtue
passive. Emotion which is not evoked by the
external is called virtue active. The names of these
are antagonistic; but essentially they are in accord.
All "virtue" should proceed from the real self,
sc. from God.
"Yi was skilled in hitting the bull's-eye; but
stupid at preventing people from praising him for
so doing.
See ch. v.
The Sage devotes himself to the natural and neglects
the artificial. For only the Perfect Man can[309]
devote himself profitably to the natural and artificial
alike. Insects influence insects;
So as to make others like themselves
because insects are natural. When the Perfect
Man hates the natural, it is the artificially natural
which he hates. How much more man's alternate
naturalness and artificiality?
"If a bird falls in with Yi, Yi will get it. Such
is his skill. And if the world were made into a
cage, birds would have no place of escape. So it
was that by cookery T'ang got hold of I Yin, and
by five rams' skins Duke Mu of Ch'in got Po Li
Ch'i. But had these princes not been themselves
successful at getting, they never would have got
these men.
Apocryphal stories both. I Yin was the successful
and famous minister of the founder of the Shang
dynasty. For Poh Li Ch'i, see p. 270.
"A one-legged man discards ornament, his
exterior not being open to commendation. Condemned
criminals will go up to great heights
without fear, for they no longer regard life and
death from their former point of view. And those
who pay no attention to their moral clothing
Artificial virtues.
and condition become oblivious of their own personality;
and by thus becoming oblivious of their
personality, they proceed to be the people of God.
"Wherefore, if men revere them, they rejoice[310]
not. If men insult them, they are not angered.
But only those who have passed into the eternal
harmony of God are capable of this.
"If your anger is external, not internal, it will be
anger proceeding from not-anger. If your actions
are external, not internal, they will be actions
proceeding from inaction.
"If you would attain peace, level down your
emotional nature. If you desire spirituality,
cultivate adaptation of the intelligence. If you
would have your actions in accordance with what is
right, allow yourself to fall in with the dictates of
necessity. For necessity is the Tao of the Sage."
Do nothing save what you cannot help doing.
The authorship of this chapter has been disputed.
Lin Hsi Chung regards the question as by no means
settled.
Hsü Wu Kuei.
Argument:—Tao is passionless—Immorality of the moral—Obstructions
to natural virtue—The evils of action—Too much zeal—The
outward and visible—The inward and spiritual—Illustrations.
Hsü Wu Kuei, introduced by Nü Shang,
went to see Wu Hou of Wei.
A hermit, a minister, and a prince, respectively.
The Prince greeted him sympathisingly, and said,
"You are suffering, Sir. You must have endured
great hardships in your mountain life that you
should be willing to leave it and visit me."
"It is I who should sympathise with your
Highness, not your Highness with me," answered
Hsü Wu Kuei. "If your Highness gives free
play to passion and yields to loves and hates, then
the natural conditions of your existence will suffer.
Internally.
And if your Highness puts aside passion and
abjures loves and hates, then your senses of sight
and hearing will suffer.
Externally.
It is I who should sympathise with your Highness,
not your Highness with me."
[312]
The Prince was too astonished to reply; and
after a while Hsü Wu Kuei continued, "I will try
to explain to your Highness how I judge of dogs.
The lowest in the scale will eat their fill and then
stop, like a cat. Those of the middle class are as
though staring at the sun. The highest class are
as though they had parted with their own individuality.
"But I do not judge of dogs as well as I judge
of horses. I judge of horses as follows. Their
straightness
In running.
must be that of a line. Their curve must be that of
an arc. Their squareness, that of the square. Their
roundness, that of the compasses.
One commentator applies all this to the shape of
the animals.
These are the horses of the State. They are not
equal to the horses of the Empire. The horses of
the Empire are splendid. They move as though
anxious to get along, as though they had lost the
way, as though they had parted with their own
individuality. Thus, they outstrip all competitors,
over the unstirred dust, out of sight!"
The Prince was greatly pleased and smiled. But
when Hsü Wu Kuei went out, Nü Shang asked
him, saying, "What can you have been saying to
his Highness? Whenever I address him, it is either
in a pacific sense, based upon the Canons of Poetry,
History, Rites, and Music; or in a belligerent[313]
sense, based upon the Golden Roster or the Six
Plans of Battle.
Ancient military treatises.
I have transacted with great success innumerable
matters entrusted to me, yet his Highness has
never vouchsafed a smile. What can you have been
saying to make him so pleased as all this?"
"I merely told him," replied Hsü Wu Kuei,
"how I judged of dogs and horses."
"Was that all?" enquired Nü Shang, incredulously.
"Have you not heard," said Hsü Wu Kuei, "of
the outlaw of Yüeh? After several days' absence
from his State, he was glad to meet any one he had
known there. After a month, he was glad to meet
any one he had even seen there. And after a year,
he was glad to meet any one who was in any way
like to his fellow-countrymen. Is not this a case of
absence from one's kind increasing the desire to be
with them?
"Thus a man who had fled into the wilderness,
where bishop-wort chokes the path of the weasel
and stoat, now advancing, now stopping,—how he
would rejoice if the footfall of a fellow-creature
broke upon his ear. And how much more were he
to hear the sound of a brother's, of a relative's voice
at his side. Long it is, I ween, since his Highness
has heard the voice of a pure man at his side!"
Hsü Wu Kuei went to visit the Prince. The[314]
latter said, "Living, Sir, up in the hills, and feeding
upon berries or satisfying yourself with leeks, you
have long neglected me. Are you now growing
old? Or do you hanker after flesh-pots and wine?
Or is it that mine is such a well-governed State?"
"I am of lowly birth," replied Hsü Wu Kuei.
"I could not venture to eat and drink your Highness'
meat and wine. I came to sympathise with
your Highness."
"What do you mean?" cried the Prince?
"What is there to sympathise about?"
"About your Highness' soul and body," replied
Hsü Wu Kuei.
"Pray explain," said the Prince.
"Nourishment is nourishment," said Hsü Wu
Kuei.
To a peasant as to a prince.
"Being high up does not make one high, nor does
being low make one low. Your Highness is the
ruler of a large State, and you oppress the whole
population thereof in order to satisfy your sensualities.
But your soul is not a party to this. The soul
loves harmony and hates disorder. For disorder is
a disease. Therefore I came to sympathise. How
is it that your Highness alone is suffering?"
"I have long desired to see you," answered the
Prince. "I wish to love my people, and by cultivation
of duty towards one's neighbour to put an end
to war. Can this be done?"
"It cannot," replied Hsü Wu Kuei. "Love
for the people is the root of all evil to the people.[315]
Cultivation of duty towards one's neighbour in
order to put an end to war is the origin of all fighting.
If your Highness starts from this basis, the
result can only be disastrous.
Why try to "do" anything?
"Everything that is made good, turns out bad.
The artificial is impermanent.
And although your Highness should make charity
and duty to one's neighbour, I fear they would be
spurious articles. For the inward intention would
appear in the outward manifestation. The adoption
of a fixed standard
I.e. of the personal standard of individuals. See
pp. 305, 306.
would lead to complications. And revolutions
within lead to fighting without. Surely your
Highness would not make a bower into a battlefield,
nor a shrine of prayer into a scene of warfare!
This, of course, refers to the mind.
"Have nothing within which is obstructive of
virtue. Seek not to vanquish others in cunning, in
plotting, in war. If I slay a whole nation and annex
the territory in order to find nourishment for my
passions and for my soul,—irrespective of military
skill, wherein does the victory lie?
"What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul?"
"If your Highness will only abstain, that will be[316]
enough. Cultivate the sincerity that is within your
breast, so as to be responsive to the conditions of
your environment, and be not aggressive. The
people will thus escape death;
From oppression.
and what need then to put an end to war?"
When the Yellow Emperor went to see Tao upon
the Chü-tz'ŭ Mountain, Fang Ming was his
charioteer, Ch'ang Yü sat on his right, Chang Jo
and Hsi P'êng were his outriders, and K'un Hun
and Hua Chi brought up the rear.
Commentators tear this passage to tatters.
On reaching the wilds of Hsiang-ch'êng,
The limit of the known.
these seven Sages lost their way and there was no
one of whom to ask the road. By and by, they fell
in with a boy who was grazing horses, and asked
him, saying, "Do you know the Chü-tz'ŭ Mountain?"
"I do," replied the boy.
"And can you tell us," continued the Sages,
"where Tao abides?"
"I can," replied the boy.
"This is a strange lad," cried the Yellow Emperor.
"Not only does he know where the Chü-tz'ŭ
Mountain is, but also where Tao abides!
Come tell me, pray, how would you govern the
empire?"
[317]
"I should govern the empire," said the boy,
"just the same as I look after my horses. What
else should I do?
"When I was a little boy and used to live within
the points of the compass,
In Vanity Fair.
my eyes got dim of sight. An old man advised me
to mount the chariot of the sun
I.e. of Intelligence.
and visit the wilds of Hsiang-ch'êng. My sight is
now much better, and I continue to dwell without
the points of the compass. I should govern the
empire in just the same way. What else should
I do?"
"Of course," said the Yellow Emperor, "government
is not your trade. Still I should be glad to
hear what you would do."
The boy declined to answer, but on being again
urged, cried out, "What difference is there between
governing the empire and looking after horses?
See that no harm comes to the horses, that is all!"
Thereupon the Emperor prostrated himself before
the boy; and addressing him as Divine Teacher,
took his leave.
Divine Teacher means "inspired by God." The
term used is that employed in modern times for the
head or Pope of debased Taoism, often wrongly
rendered as the "Master of Heaven."
If schemers have nothing to give them anxiety,[318]
they are not happy. If dialecticians have not their
premisses and conclusion, they are not happy. If
critics have none on whom to vent their spleen, they
are not happy. Such men are the slaves of objective
existences.
Those who attract the sympathies of the world,
start new dynasties. Those who win the people's
hearts, take high official rank. Those who are strong
undertake difficulties. Those who are brave encounter
dangers. Men of arms delight in war.
Men of peace think of nothing but reputation. Men
of law strive to improve the administration. Professors
of ceremony and music cultivate deportment.
Moralists devote themselves to the obligations
between man and man.
Take away agriculture from the husbandman,
and his classification is gone. Take away trade
from the merchant, and his classification is gone.
Daily work is the stimulus of the labourer. The
skill of the artisan is his pride. If money cannot
be made, the avaricious man is sad. If his power
meets with a check, the boaster will repine. Ambitious
men love change.
Thus, men are always doing something; inaction
is to them impossible. They observe in this the
same regularity as the seasons, ever without change.
They hurry to destruction, dissipating in all directions
their vital forces, alas! never to return.
Chuang Tzŭ said, "If archers who aimed at
nothing and hit something were accounted good[319]
shots, everybody in the world would be another
Yi.
See p. 308.
Could this be so?"
"It could," replied Hui Tzŭ.
"If there was no general standard of right in
the world," continued Chuang Tzŭ, "but each man
had his own, then everybody would be a Yao.
Could this be so?"
"It could," replied Hui Tzŭ.
"Very well," said Chuang Tzŭ. "Now there
are the Confucianists, the Mihists, the schools of
Yang
Yang Chu. See ch. viii.
and Ping,
Kung Sun Lung. See ch. xvii.
making with your own five in all. Pray which of
these is right?
"Possibly it is a similar case to that of Lu Chü?
Of whom there is no record.
—A disciple said to him, 'Master, I have attained
to your Tao. I can do without fire in winter: I can
make ice in summer.'
"'You merely avail yourself of latent heat and
latent cold,' replied Lu Chü. 'That is not what I
call Tao. I will demonstrate to you what my
Tao is.'
"Thereupon he tuned two lutes, and placed one
in the hall and the other in the adjoining room.[320]
And when he struck the Kung note on one, the
Kung note on the other sounded; when he struck
the chio note on one, the chio note on the other
sounded. This because they were both tuned to
the same pitch.
"But if he changed the interval of one string, so
that it no longer kept its place in the octave, and
then struck it, the result was that all the twenty-five
strings jangled together. There was sound as
before, but the influence of the key-note was gone. Is
this your case?"
"The Confucianists, the Mihists, and the followers
of Yang and Ping," replied Hui Tzŭ, "are just
now engaged in discussing this matter with me.
They try to overwhelm me with argument or howl
me down with noise. Yet they have not proved me
wrong. Why then should you?"
"A man of the Ch'i State," replied Chuang Tzŭ,
"sent away his son into the Sung State, to be a
door-keeper, with maimed body.
Doorkeepers in ancient times were, for obvious
reasons, deprived of their feet.
But a vase, which he valued highly, he kept carefully
wrapped up.
Thus Hui Tzŭ sacrifices the greater to the less.
"He who would seek for a stray child, but will
not leave his home, is like to lose him.
Thus restricted to his four antagonistic schools is
Hui Tzŭ's search for Tao.
[321]
"If a man of Ch'u, who was sent away to be a
door-keeper, began, in the middle of the night, when
no one was about, to fight with the boatman, I
should say that before his boat left the shore he
would already have got himself into considerable
trouble."
A maimed man (Hui Tzŭ) should avoid quarrels.
His own share of Tao is insufficient even for himself.
Chuang Tzŭ was once attending a funeral, when
he passed by the grave of Hui Tzŭ. Turning to
his attendants, he said, "A man of Ying
Capital of the Ch'u state.
who had his nose covered with a hard scab, no
thicker than a fly's wing, sent for a stone-mason to
chip it off. The stone-mason plied his adze with
great dexterity while the patient sat still and let
him chip. When the scab was all off, the nose was
found to be uninjured, the man of Ying never
having moved a muscle.
"When Yüan, prince of Sung, heard of this, he
summoned the stone-mason and said, 'Try to do
the same for me.'
"'I used to be able to do it Sire,' replied the
stone-mason, 'but my material has long since
perished.'
"And I too, ever since he perished, have been
without my material, having no one with whom I
can speak."
A generous compliment to an old adversary.
"There was no one," says Lin Hsi Chung, "in all[322]
Chuang Tzŭ's generation who could understand
him; neither is there any one now, at this late
date, any more than there was then."
Kuan Chung being at the point of death, Duke
Huan went to see him.
See p. 226.
"You are ill, venerable Sir," said the Duke,
"really ill. You had better say to whom, in the
event of your getting worse, I am to entrust the
administration of the State."
"Whom does your Highness wish to choose?"
enquired Kuan Chung.
"Will Pao Yü do?" asked the Duke.
Kuan Chung and Pao Yü are the "Damon and
Pythias" of China.
"He will not," said Kuan Chung. "He is pure,
incorruptible, and good. With those who are not
like himself, he will not associate. And if he has
once heard of a man's wrong-doing, he never
forgets it. If you employ him in the administration
of the empire, he will get to loggerheads with his
prince and to sixes and sevens with the people. It
would not be long before he and your Highness fell
out."
"Whom then can we have?" asked the Duke.
"There is no alternative," replied Kuan Chung;
"it must be Hsi P'êng. He is a man who forgets
the authority of those above him, and makes those[323]
below him forget his. Ashamed that he is not the
peer of the Yellow Emperor,
In virtue.
he grieves over those who are not the peers of
himself.
"To share one's virtue with others is called true
wisdom. To share one's wealth with others is
reckoned meritorious. To exhibit superior merit
is not the way to win men's hearts. To exhibit
inferior merit is the way. There are things in the
State he does not hear; there are things in the
family he does not see.
Purposely ignoring petty faults.
There is no alternative; it must be Hsi P'êng."
Of whom commentators give no further notice.
The prince of Wu took a boat and went to the
Monkey Mountain, which he ascended. When the
monkeys saw him, they fled in terror and hid themselves
in the thicket. One of them, however, disported
himself carelessly, as though showing off its
skill before the prince. The prince took a shot at it;
but the monkey, with great rapidity, seized the
flying arrow with its hand. Then the prince bade
his guards try, the result being that the monkey
was killed.
The skill of the poor monkey availed nothing against
the cloud of arrows discharged by the guards. On[324]
peut être plus fin qu'un autre, mais on ne peut pas
être plus fin que tous les autres.
Thereupon the prince turned to his friend Yen
Pu I, and said, "That monkey flaunted its skill
and its dexterity in my face. Therefore it has come
to this pass. Beware! Do not flaunt your superiority
in the faces of others."
Yen Pu I went home, and put himself under the
tuition of Tung Wu,
A professor of Tao.
with a view to get rid of such superiority. He put
aside all that gave him pleasure and avoided gaining
reputation. And in three years his praise was
in everybody's mouth.
Tzŭ Chi of Nan-poh
See ch. iv.
was sitting leaning on a table. He looked up to
heaven and sighed, at which juncture Yen Ch'êng
Tzŭ entered and said, "How, Sir, can such an
important person as yourself be in body like dry
wood, in mind like dead ashes?"
Instead of exerting yourself for the benefit of
mankind. The speaker, says one commentator,
was "a disciple."
"I used to live in a cave on the hills," replied
Tzŭ Chi. "At that time, T'ien Ho,
The famous founder of the later House of Ch'i.
because he once saw me, was thrice congratulated[325]
by the people of Ch'i. Now I must have given
some indication by which he recognised me.
As a Sage.
I must have sold for him to buy. For had I not
manifested myself, how would he have recognised
me? Had I not sold, how could he have bought?
"Alas! I grieve over man's self-destruction.
As reputation comes, reality goes.
And then I grieve over one who grieves for another.
And then I grieve over him who grieves over one
who grieves for another! And so I get daily farther
and farther away."
And become like dry wood, my soul absorbed into
Tao.
When Confucius went to Ch'u, the prince entertained
him at a banquet. Sun Shu Ao stood up
with a goblet of wine in his hand, and I Liao of
Shih-nan poured a libation, saying, "On such
occasions as this, the men of old were wont to
make some utterance."
"Mine," replied Confucius, "is the doctrine of
wordless utterances. Shall I who make no utterances,
make utterance now?
"I Liao of Shih-nan played with his ball, and
the trouble of two houses was arranged.
A man of great strength who refused to aid in
settling a State quarrel. He was a great ball
player,—whatever that may have been.
[326]
Sun Shu Ao remained quietly in repose, and the
men of Ying threw down their arms.
No one dared attack them, so powerful was the
prestige of their minister.
I should want a three-foot tongue indeed!
To achieve more by talk than these two achieved by
inaction.
"Theirs was the Tao of inaction. His was the
argument of silence. Wherefore, for Tê
The manifestation of Tao.
to rest in undivided Tao,
By which all things are One.
and for speech to stop at the unknowable,—this is
perfection.
"With undivided Tao, Tê cannot be coincident.
The latter is multiform.
No argument can demonstrate the unknowable.
Subdivision into Confucianists and Mihists only
makes confusion worse confounded.
"The sea does not reject the streams which flow
eastward into it. Therefore it is immeasurably
great. The true Sage folds the universe in his
bosom. His good influence benefits all throughout
the empire, without respect to persons. Born
without rank, he dies without titles. He does not
take credit for realities.
But attributes it all to circumstances.
He does not establish a name.
For what he has done.
This is to be a great man.
[327]
"A dog is not considered a good dog because he
is a good barker.
He must also bite.
A man is not considered a good man because he
is a good talker. How much less in the case of
greatness? And if doing great things is not enough
to secure greatness, how much less shall it secure
virtue?
"In point of greatness, there is nothing to be
compared with the universe. Yet what does the
universe seek in order to be great?
"He who understands greatness in this sense,
seeks nothing, loses nothing, rejects nothing, never
suffers injury from without. He takes refuge in
his own inexhaustibility. He finds safety in
according with his nature. This is the essence of
true greatness."
Tzŭ Chi had eight sons. He ranged them before
him, and summoning Chiu Fang Yin, said to him,
"Examine my sons physiognomically, and tell
me which will be the fortunate one."
"K'un," replied Chiu Fang Yin, "will be the
fortunate one."
"In what sense?" asked the father, beaming with
delight.
"K'un," said Chiu Fang Yin, "will eat at the
table of a prince, and so end his days."
Thereupon Tzŭ Chi burst into tears and said,
"What has my son done that this should be his
fate?"
[328]
"Eating at the table of a prince," replied Chiu
Fang Yin, "will benefit the family for three generations.
How much more his father and mother!
But for you, Sir, to go and weep is enough to turn
back the luck from you. The son's fortune is good,
but the father's bad."
"Yin," said Tzŭ Chi, "I should like to know
what you mean by calling K'un fortunate. Wine
and meat gratify the palate, but you do not say
how these are to come.
"Supposing that to me, not being a shepherd, a
lamb were born in the south-west corner of my
hall; or that to me, not being a sportsman, quails
were hatched in the north-east corner. If you did
not call that uncanny, what would you call it?
"My sons and I do but roam through the universe.
With them I seek the joys of heaven; with
them I seek the fruits of earth. With them I
engage in no business; with them I concoct no
plots; with them I attempt nothing out-of-the-way.
With them I mount upon the truth of the
universe, and do not offer opposition to the exigencies
of our environment. With them I accommodate
myself naturally; but with them I do not
become a slave to circumstances. Yet now the
world is rewarding me!
"Every uncanny effect must be preceded by
some uncanny cause. Alas! my sons and I have
done nothing. It must be the will of God. Therefore
I weep."
Shortly afterwards, when K'un was on his way[329]
to the Yen State, he was captured by brigands. To
sell him as he was, would be no easy matter. To
sell him without his feet would be easy enough.
So they cut off his feet and sold him into the Ch'i
State, where he became door-keeper to Duke Chü
and had meat to his dinner for the rest of his life.
Commentators make terrible havoc here.
Yeh Ch'üeh meeting Hsü Yu, said to him,
"Where are you going?"
"Away from Yao!" replied the latter.
"What do you mean?" asked Yeh Ch'üeh.
"Yao," said Hsü Yu, "thinks of nothing but
charity. I fear he will become a laughing-stock to
the world, and that in future ages men will eat one
another.
See p. 296.
"There is no difficulty in winning the people.
Love them and they will draw near. Profit them
and they will come up. Praise them and they will
vie with one another. But introduce something
they dislike, and they will be gone.
"Love and profit are born of charity and duty
to one's neighbour. Those who ignore charity and
duty to one's neighbour are few; those who make
capital out of them are many.
"For the operation of these virtues is not disinterested.
It is like lending gear to a sportsman.
With a view to share the game.
Wherefore, for one man to dogmatise for the good[330]
of the whole empire, is like splitting a thing at a
single blow.
Without reference to method or the requirements of
the case in point.
"Yao knows that good men benefit the empire.
But he does not know that they injure it. Only
those on a higher level than good men know this.
"There are nincompoops; there are parasites;
there are enthusiasts.
"A man who learns from a single teacher, and
then goes off exultant, satisfied with his acquirements
though ignorant that there was a time when
nothing existed,—such a one is a nincompoop.
"Parasites are like the lice on a pig's back. They
choose bald patches, which are to them palaces and
parks. The parts between the toes, the joints, the
dugs, and the buttocks, are to them so many comfortable
and convenient resting-places. They know
not that one day the butcher will tuck up his
sleeves and spread straw and apply fire, and that
they will perish in the singeing of the pig. As they
sow, so do they reap. This is to be a parasite.
"Of enthusiasts, Shun is an example. Mutton
does not care for ants; it is the ants which care for
the mutton. Mutton has a frowsy smell; and
there is a frowsiness about Shun which attracts
the people. Therefore it was that after three
changes of residence, when he came to the Têng
district, he had some hundred thousand families
with him.
[331]
"Then Yao, hearing of his goodness, appointed
him to a barren region, trusting, as he said, that
Shun's arrival would enrich it. When Shun took
up this appointment, he was already old, and his
intellect was failing; yet he would not cease work
and retire from office. He was, in fact, an enthusiast.
"So it is that the spiritual man dislikes a crowd.
For where there is a crowd there is diversity, and
where there is diversity advantage does not accrue.
He is therefore neither very intimate, nor very
distant. He clings to virtue and nourishes a spirit
of harmony, in order to be in accord with his
fellow-men. This is to be a divine man.
"Leave wisdom to ants. Strive for what fishes
desire.
To be left alone in the water.
"Leave attractiveness to mutton. Use your eyes to
contemplate, your ears to listen to, your mind to
consider, their own internal workings. For him
who can do these things, his level will be that of a
line, his modifications in due and proper season.
"Therefore, the divine man trusts to the natural
development of events. He does not strive to
introduce the artificial into the domain of the
natural. Accordingly, life is a gain and death a
loss, or death is a gain and life a loss.
According to circumstances.
"For instance, drugs. They are characteristically
poisonous. Such are Chieh-Kêng, Chi-Yung, and[332]
Shih-Ling. Circumstances, however, make of each
a sovereign remedy. The list is inexhaustible.
Chieh-Kêng is the Platycodon grandiflorum. It is
used by Chinese doctors as a tonic, astringent, and
vermifuge.
"When Kou Chien encamped with three thousand
armed warriors at Kuei-ch'i,
Leading the men of Wu to attack the Yüeh State.
only Chung
Wên Chung, minister of Yüeh.
saw that defeat would be followed by a rally. Yet
he could not foresee the evil that was to come upon
himself. Wherefore it has been said, 'An owl's
eyes are adapted to their use. A crane's leg is of
the length required. 'Twould be disastrous to
shorten it.'
This illustration has been used in ch. viii, p. 101.
"Thus it has been said, 'The wind blows and
the river suffers. The sun shines and the river
suffers.' But though wind and sun be both brought
into relation with the river, it does not really suffer
therefrom. Fed from its source, it still continues
to flow on.
The Sage too has a source from which the nourishment
of his soul is supplied.
"The relation between water and earth is determinate.
The relation between a man and his
shadow is determinate. The relation between thing
and thing is determinate.
[333]
"The relation between eye and vision is baneful.
Because indeterminate.
The relation between ear and hearing is baneful.
The relation between mind and object is baneful.
The relation between all kinds of capacity and man's
inner self is baneful. If such banefulness be not
corrected, disasters will spring up on all sides.
Retrogression is hard to achieve, and success long
in coming. Yet alas! men regard such capacities
as valuable possessions.
"The destruction of States and the ceaseless
slaughter of human beings result from an inability
to examine into this.
"The foot treads the ground in walking; nevertheless
it is the ground not trodden on which makes
up the good walk. A man's knowledge is limited;
but it is upon what he does not know that he
depends to extend his knowledge to the apprehension
of God.
"Knowledge of the great One, of the great
Negative, of the great Nomenclature, of the great
Uniformity, of the great Space, of the great Truth,
of the great Law,—this is perfection.
"The great One is omnipresent. The great
Negative is omnipotent. The great Nomenclature
is all-inclusive. The great Uniformity is all-assimilative.
The great Space is all-receptive. The
great Truth is all-exacting. The great Law is all-binding.
"The ultimate end is God. He is manifested in[334]
the laws of nature. He is the hidden spring. At
the beginning, he was.
Had an objective existence.
This, however, is inexplicable. It is unknowable.
But from the unknowable we reach the known.
"Investigation must not be limited, nor must it
be unlimited.
It must be undertaken from the standpoint of the
unconditioned.
In this vague undefinedness there is an actuality.
Time does not change it. It cannot suffer diminution.
May we not then call it our great Guide?
"Why not bring our doubting hearts to investigation
thereof? And then, using certainty to dispel
doubt, revert to a state without doubt, in which
doubt is doubly dead?"
Doubt dispelled leaves conviction firmer still.
Lin Hsi Chung says that this essay begins with the
subtle to end in the abstruse. "The force of language,"
adds he, "can no farther go!"
Tsê Yang.
Argument:—Influence of virtue concealed—The true Sage a negative
quantity—The great, the small, the infinite—Crime and Capital—Rulers
and their vices—What is Society? Predestination or Chance?
Illustrations.
When Tsê Yang visited the Ch'u State, I
Chieh
An official of Ch'u.
spoke of him to the prince; but the latter refused
an audience.
Upon I Chieh's return, Tsê Yang went to see
Wang Kuo,
A local Sage.
and asked him to obtain an interview with the
prince.
"I am not so fitted for that," replied Wang Kuo,
"as Kung Yüeh Hsiu."
A hermit.
"What sort of a man is he?" enquired Tsê
Yang.
"In winter," said Wang Kuo, "he catches turtles
on the river. In summer, he reposes in some
mountain copse. If any passers-by ask of him, he[336]
tells them, "This is my home." Where I Chieh
could not succeed, still less should I. I am not
equal even to him.
"He is a man without virtue, but possessed of
knowledge. Were it not for an air of arrogance, he
would be very popular with his superiors. But help
without virtue is a hindrance. Shivering people
borrowing clothes in the coming spring! Hot
people thinking of last winter's icy blast!
"The prince of Ch'u is dignified and severe. In
punishing, he is merciless as a tiger. Only a very
practised or a very perfect man could influence him.
"The true Sage, when in obscurity, causes those
around him to forget their poverty. When in
power, he causes princes to forget ranks and emoluments,
and to become as though of low estate. He
rejoices exceedingly in all creation. He exults to
see Tao diffused among his fellow-men, while
suffering no loss himself.
Tao is a constant quantity. It can be shared, but
cannot be divided.
"Thus, although silent, he can instil peace; and
by his mere presence cause men to be to each other
as father and son. From his very return to passivity
comes this active influence for good. So
widely does he differ in heart from ordinary men.
Wherefore I said, 'Wait for Kung Yüeh Hsiu.'
"The true Sage is free from all embarrassments.
All things are to him as One. Yet he knows not
that this is so. It is simply nature. In the midst[337]
of action he remains the same. He makes God his
guide, and men make him theirs. He grieves that
wisdom carries one but a short distance, and at
times comes altogether to a deadlock.
"To a beauty, mankind is the mirror in which she
sees herself. If no one tells her she is beautiful,
she does not know that she is so. But whether she
knows it or whether she does not know it, whether
she hears it or whether she does not hear it, her joy
will never cease, neither will mankind ever cease to
take pleasure therein. It is nature.
"The love of a Sage for his fellows likewise finds
expression among mankind. Were he not told so,
he would not know that he loved his fellows. But
whether he knows it or whether he does not know
it, whether he hears it or whether he does not hear
it, his love for his fellows is without end, and mankind
cease not to repose therein.
"The old country, the old home, gladden a wanderer's
eyes. Nay, though nine-tenths of it be a
howling wilderness, still his eye will be glad. How
much more to see sight and hear hearing, from a
lofty dais suspended in their very midst!"
The joy of the wanderer is as that of the mind
returning to a consciousness only of itself.
Jen Hsiang Shih reached the centre and attained.
The centre at which all Infinities converge. See
p. 18. This individual was a legendary ruler of
old.
He recognised no beginning, no end, no quantity,
no time. Daily modified together with his environ[338]ment,
as part of One he knew no modification.
Why not rest in this?
To strive to follow God and not to succeed is to
display an activity fatal to itself. How can success
ever be thus achieved?
The true Sage ignores God. He ignores man. He
ignores a beginning. He ignores matter. He moves
in harmony with his generation and suffers not.
He takes things as they come and is not overwhelmed.
How are we to become like him?
T'ang appointed his Equerry, Mên Yin Têng
Hêng, to be his tutor, listening to his counsels but
not being restricted by them. He got Tao for himself
and a reputation for his tutor. But the reputation
was a violation of principle, and landed him in
the domain of alternatives.
Instead of One. No ingenuity of commentator has
here succeeded in making sense.
As a tutor, Confucius pushed care and anxiety
to an extreme limit.
Yung Ch'êng Shih
Lao Tzŭ's tutor.
said, "Take away days, and there would be no
years. No inside, no outside."
Prince Hui of Wei had made a treaty with
prince Wei of Ch'i, which the latter broke.
Thereupon prince Hui was wroth, and was about
to send a man to assassinate him. But the Captain-General
heard of this, and cried out in shame,[339]
"Sire, you are ruler over a mighty State, yet you
would seek the vengeance of a common man.
Give me two hundred thousand warriors, and I
will do the work for you. I will take his people
prisoners, and carry off their oxen and horses. I
will make the heat of the prince's mind break out
on his back. Then I will seize his country, and
he will flee. Then you can wring his neck as you
please."
When Chi Tzŭ heard this, he cried out in shame
and said, "If you are building a ten-perch wall,
and when the wall is near completion, destroy it,
you inflict great hardship on the workmen.
Alluding to the corvée system of public works. The
speaker was an official of Wei.
Now for seven years the troops have not been
called out. That is, as it were, your Highness'
foundation work. Listen not to the Captain-General.
He is a mischievous fellow."
When Hua Tzŭ
Also an official of Wei.
heard this, he was very indignant and said, "He
who argued in favour of punishing the Ch'i State
was a mischievous fellow. And he who argued
against punishing the Ch'i State was a mischievous
fellow. And he who says that either of the above
is a mischievous fellow, is a mischievous fellow
himself."
"Where then shall I find what to do?" enquired
the prince.
[340]
"In Tao alone," said Hua Tzŭ.
When Hui Tzŭ heard this, he introduced Tai
Chin Jen to the prince.
A Sage of the Liang State. For Hui Tzŭ, see p. 8.
"There is a creature called a snail," said Tai
Chin Jen. "Does your Highness know what I
mean?"
"I do," replied the prince.
"There is a kingdom on its left horn," continued
Tai Chin Jen, "ruled over by Aggression, and
another on its right horn, ruled over by Violence.
These two rulers are constantly fighting for territory.
In such cases, corpses lie about by thousands,
and one party will pursue the other for fifteen days
before returning."
"Whew!" cried the prince. "Surely you are
joking."
"Sire," replied Tai Chin Jen, "I beg you to
regard it as fact. Does your Highness recognise
any limit to space?"
"None," said the prince, "It is boundless."
"When, therefore," continued Tai Chin Jen,
"the mind descends from the contemplation of
boundless space to the contemplation of a kingdom
with fixed boundaries, that kingdom must
seem to be of dimensions infinitesimally small?"
"Of course," replied the prince.
"Well then," said Tai Chin Jen, "in a kingdom
with fixed boundaries
Meaning the then empire of the Chous.
[341]
there is the Wei State. In the Wei State there is
the city of Liang. In the city of Liang there is a
prince. In what does that prince differ from
Violence?"
In his pettiness.
"There is no difference," said the prince.
Thereupon Tai Chin Jen took his leave, and the
prince remained in a state of mental perturbation,
as though he had lost something.
When Tai Chin Jen had gone, Hui Tzŭ presented
himself, and the prince said, "Our friend is
truly a great man. Sages are not his equal."
"If you blow through a tube," replied Hui Tzŭ,
"the result will be a note. If you blow through
the hole in a sword-hilt, the result will be simply
whssh. Yao and Shun have been belauded by
mankind; yet compared with Tai Chin Jen they
are but whssh."
When Confucius went to Ch'u, he stopped at a
restaurant on Mount I. The servant to a man and
his wife who lived next door, got up on top of the
house.
"Whatever is he doing up there?" asked Tzŭ
Lu.
"He is a Sage," replied Confucius, "under the
garb of a menial. He buries himself among the
people.
So as to get into closer relation with them.
He effaces himself at the wayside. Fame, he has[342]
none; but his perseverance is inexhaustible.
Though his mouth speaks, his heart speaks not.
He has turned his back upon mankind, not caring
to abide amongst them. He has drowned himself
on dry land. I think 'tis I Liao of Shih-nan."
See p. 325.
Tzŭ Lu asked to be allowed to go and call him;
but Confucius stopped him, saying, "No. He
knows that I know what he is. He knows that I
have come to Ch'u to recommend him to the
prince. And he looks on me as a toady. Under
the circumstances, as he would scorn to hear the
words of a toady, how much more would he scorn
to see him in the flesh! How could you keep
him?"
Tzŭ Lu went to see, but the house was empty.
The border-warden of Ch'ang-wu said to Tzŭ
Lao,
Ch'in Lao, or Ch'in Chang, a disciple of Confucius.
"A prince in his administrative details must not
lack thoroughness; in his executive details he
must not be inefficient. Formerly, in my ploughing
I lacked thoroughness, and the results also
lacked thoroughness. In my weeding I was inefficient,
and the results were also inefficient. By and
by, I changed my system. I ploughed deep, and
weeded carefully, the result being an excellent
harvest, more than I could get through in a year."
Chuang Tzŭ, upon hearing this, observed, "The[343]
men of to-day in their self-regulation and their
self-organisation are mostly as the Border-warden
has described. They put their Godhead out of
sight. They abandon their natural dispositions.
They get rid of all feeling. They part with their
souls, carried away by the fashion of the hour.
"Those who lack thoroughness in regard to
their natural dispositions suffer an evil tribe to
take the place thereof.
The physical senses.
These grow up rank as reeds and rushes, at first
of apparent value to the body, but afterwards to
destroy the natural disposition. Then they break
out, at random, like sores and ulcers carrying off
pent-up humours."
Poh Chü was studying under Lao Tzŭ. "Let us
go," said he, "and wander over the world."
One commentator says Poh Chü was a "criminal,"
probably from his sympathetic remarks in the context.
"No," replied Lao Tzŭ, "the world is just as
you see it here."
But as he again urged it, Lao Tzŭ said, "Where
would you go to begin with?"
"I would begin," answered Poh Chü, "by going
to the Ch'i State. There I would view the dead
bodies of their malefactors. I would push them to
make them rise. I would take off my robes and
cover them. I would cry to God and bemoan their[344]
lot, as follows:—'O sirs, O sirs, there was trouble
upon earth, and you were the first to fall into it!'
"I would say, 'Perhaps you were robbers, or
perhaps murderers?' ... Honour and disgrace
were set up, and evil followed. Wealth was accumulated,
and contentions began. Now the evil
which has been set up and the contentions which
have accumulated, endlessly weary man's body and
give him no rest. What escape is there from this?
This might almost have come from The Curse of
Capital, (Aveling) or from one of Mr. Hyndman's
discourses.
"The rulers of old set off all success to the
credit of their people, attributing all failure to
themselves. All that was right went to the credit
of their people, all that was wrong they attributed
to themselves. Therefore, if any matter fell short
of achievement, they turned and blamed themselves.
"Not so the rulers of to-day. They conceal a
thing and blame those who cannot see it. They
impose dangerous tasks and punish those who
dare not undertake them. They inflict heavy burdens
and chastise those who cannot bear them.
They ordain long marches and slay those who
cannot make them.
"And the people, feeling that their powers are
inadequate, have recourse to fraud. For when
there is so much fraud about,
In the rulers.
[345]
how can the people be otherwise than fraudulent?
If their strength is insufficient, they will have recourse
to fraud. If their knowledge is insufficient,
they will have recourse to deceit. If their means
are insufficient, they will steal. And for such
robbery and theft, who is really responsible?"
When Chü Poh Yü
See p. 49.
reached his sixtieth year, he changed his opinions.
What he had previously regarded as right, he now
came to regard as wrong. But who shall say
whether the right of to-day may not be as wrong
as the wrong of the previous fifty-nine years?
See p. 365.
Things are produced around us, but no one
knows the whence. They issue forth, but no one
sees the portal. Men one and all value that part
of knowledge which is known. They do not know
how to avail themselves of the unknown in order
to reach knowledge. Is not this misguided?
Men value the phenomena of which the senses make
them conscious, but not the phenomena of the senses
themselves.
Alas! alas! the impossibility of escaping from
this state results in what is known as elective
affinity.
Adaptation to the suitable; being as one is because
more adapted to that than to something to which[346]
one is not adapted. See ch. ii, where this idea is
first broached.
Confucius asked the historiographers Ta T'ao,
Poh Ch'ang Ch'ien, and Hsi Wei, saying, "Duke
Ling was fond of wine and given up to pleasure,
and neglected the administration of his State. He
spent his time in hunting, and did not cultivate the
goodwill of the other feudal princes. How was it
he came to be called Ling?"
The name Ling means "knowing," which may be
taken in two senses.
"For those very reasons," replied Ta T'ao.
"The Duke," said Poh Ch'ang Ch'ien, "had
three wives. He was having a bath together with
them when Shih Ch'in, summoned by his Highness,
entered the apartment. Thereupon the Duke
covered himself and the ladies. So outrageously
did he behave on the one hand, and yet so respectful
was he towards a virtuous man. Hence he was
called Ling."
"When the Duke died," said Hsi Wei, "divination
showed that it would be inauspicious to bury
him in the old family burying-ground, but auspicious
to bury him at Sha-ch'iu. And upon digging
a grave there, several fathoms deep, a stone coffin
was found, which, being cleaned, yielded the following
inscription:—Posterity cannot be trusted.
Duke Ling will seize this for his tomb.
"As a matter of fact, Duke Ling had been[347]
named Ling long before. What should these two
persons know about it?"
As evidenced by the inscription, the Duke had been
so named long before, in the Book of Fate.
Shao Chih asked T'ai Kung Tiao, saying,
"What is meant by society?"
The first name signifies Small Knowledge. Of the
second personage there is no record.
"Society," replied T'ai Kung Tiao, "is an agreement
of a certain number of families and individuals
to abide by certain customs. Discordant
elements unite to form a harmonious whole. Take
away this unity and each has a separate individuality.
"Point at any one of the many parts of a horse,
and that is not a horse, although there is the horse
before you. It is the combination of all which
makes the horse.
"Similarly, a mountain is high because of its
individual particles. A river is large because of
its individual drops. And he is a just man who
regards all parts from the point of view of the
whole.
"Thus, in regard to the views of others, he holds
his own opinion, but not obstinately. In regard to
his own views, while conscious of their truth, he
does not despise the opinions of others.
"The four seasons have different characteristics,[348]
but God shows no preference for either, and therefore
we have the year complete.
With results which could not be otherwise achieved.
The functions of the various classes of officials
differ; but the sovereign shows no partiality, and
therefore the empire is governed. There are the
civil and the military; but the truly great man
shows no preference for either, and therefore their
efficacy is complete. All things are under the
operation of varying laws; but Tao shows no
partiality and therefore it cannot be identified.
As the given part of anything.
Not being able to be identified, it consequently
does nothing. And by doing nothing all things
can be done.
"Seasons have their beginnings and their ends.
Generations change and change. Good and evil
fortune alternate, bringing sorrow here, happiness
there.
Nunc mihi, nunc alio, benigna.
He who obstinately views things from his own
standpoint only, may be right in one case and
wrong in another. Just as in a great jungle all kinds
of shrubs are found together; or as on a mountain
you see trees and stones indiscriminately mixed,—so
is what we call society."
"Would it not do then," asked Shao Chih, "if
we were to call this Tao?"
"It would not," replied T'ai Kung Tiao. "All[349]
creation is made up of more than ten thousand
things. We speak of creation as the Ten Thousand
Things merely because it is a convenient term by
which to express a large number. In point of outward
shape the universe is vast. In point of influence
the Positive and Negative principles are
mighty. Yet Tao folds them all in its embrace.
For convenience' sake the bond of society is called
great. But how can that which is thus conditioned
By having a name.
be compared with Tao? There is as wide a
difference between them as there is between a horse
and a dog."
"Whence then," enquired Shao Chih, "comes
the vitality of all things between the four points of
the compass, between heaven above and earth
beneath?"
"The Positive and Negative principles," answered
T'ai Kung Tiao, "influence, act upon, and regulate
each other. The four seasons alternate with, give
birth to, and destroy one another. Hence, loves and
hates, and courses rejected and courses adopted.
Hence too, the intercourse of the sexes.
"States of peril and safety alternate. Good and
evil fortune give birth to one another. Slowness
and speed are mutually exclusive. Collection and
dispersion are correlates. The actuality of these
may be noted.
There is the name and the embodiment.
The essence of each can be verified. There is[350]
regular movement forward, modified by deflection
into a curve. Exhaustion leads to renewal. The
end introduces a new beginning. This is the law
of material existences. The force of language, the
reach of knowledge, cannot pass beyond the bounds
of such material existences. The disciple of Tao
refrains from prying into the states after or before.
Human speculation stops short of this."
"Chi Chên," said Shao Chih, "taught Chance;
Chieh Tzŭ taught Predestination.
"Two Sages." Comm.
In the speculations of these two schools, on which
side did right lie?"
"The cock crows," replied T'ai Kung Tiao,
"and the dog barks. So much we know. But the
wisest of us could not say why one crows and the
other barks, nor guess why they crow or bark
at all.
"Let me explain. The infinitely small is inappreciable;
the infinitely great is immeasurable.
Chance and Predestination must refer to the conditioned.
Consequently, both are wrong.
"Predestination involves a real existence.
Of a God.
Chance implies an absolute absence of any principle.
To have a name and the embodiment thereof,—this
is to have a material existence. To have no
name and no embodiment,—of this one can speak
and think; but the more one speaks the farther off
one gets.
[351]
"The unborn creature cannot be kept from life.
So powerful is its "will to live."
The dead cannot be tracked. From birth to death
is but a span; yet the secret cannot be known.
Chance and Predestination are but à priori
solutions.
"When I seek for a beginning, I find only time
infinite. When I look forward to an end, I see
only time infinite. Infinity of time past and to
come implies no beginning and is in accordance
with the laws of material existences. Predestination
and Chance give us a beginning, but one which is
compatible only with the existence of matter.
And not with the time before matter was.
"Tao cannot be existent. If it were existent, it
could not be non-existent. The very name of
Tao is only adopted for convenience' sake. Predestination
and Chance are limited to material
existences. How can they bear upon the infinite?
"Were language adequate, it would take but a
day to fully set forth Tao. Not being adequate,
it takes that time to explain material existences.
Tao is something beyond material existences. It
cannot be conveyed either by words or by silence.
In that state which is neither speech nor silence, its
transcendental nature may be apprehended."
"With this essay in China," says Lin Hsi Chung,
"what need to fetch Buddhist books from the
West?"
Contingencies.
Argument:—The external uncertain—The internal alone without harm—Life
and death are external—The soul only is under man's control—Folly
of worldliness—Illustrations.
Contingencies are uncertain. Hence the
decapitation of Lung Fêng, the disembowelment
of Pi Kan, the enthusiasm of Chi Tzŭ, the
death of Wu Lai, the flights of Chieh and Chou.
See pp. 40, 72. Wu Lai was an intriguing
official who held office under the tyrant Chou Hsin.
No sovereign but would have loyal ministers;
yet loyalty does not necessarily inspire confidence.
Hence Wu Yüan found a grave in the river;
See p. 221.
and Ch'ang Hung perished in Shu, his blood,
after being preserved three years, turning into
green jade.
No parent but would have filial sons; yet filial
piety does not necessarily inspire love. Hence
Hsiao Chi sorrowed, and Tsêng Shên grieved.
The first, prince of the House of Yin, was turned
out of doors by his stepmother. The second, one of
the disciples of Confucius and a rare pattern of filial[353]
piety, grieved because his mother was too old to hit
him hard enough. See p. 100.
Wood rubbed with wood produces fire. Metal
exposed to fire will liquefy. If the Positive and
Negative principles operate inharmoniously, heaven
and earth are greatly disturbed. Thunder crashes,
and with rain comes lightning, scorching up the
tall locust-trees. One fears lest sky and land should
collapse and leave no escape. Unable to lie perdu,
the heart feels as though suspended between heaven
and earth.
So in the struggle between peace and unrest, the
friction between good and evil, much fire is evolved
which consumes the inner harmony of man. But
the mind is unable to resist fire. It is destroyed,
and with it Tao comes to an end.
Chuang Tzŭ's family being poor, he went to
borrow some corn from the prince of Chien-ho.
"Yes," said the prince. "I am just about
collecting the revenue of my fief, and will then
lend you three hundred ounces of silver. Will
that do?"
At this Chuang Tzŭ flushed with anger and
said, "Yesterday, as I was coming along, I heard
a voice calling me. I looked round, and in the cart-rut
I saw a stickleback.
"'And what do you want, stickleback?' said I.
"'I am a denizen of the eastern ocean,' replied
the stickleback. 'Pray, Sir, a pint of water to save
my life.'
[354]
"'Yes,' said I. 'I am just going south to visit
the princes of Wu and Yüeh. I will bring you some
from the west river. Will that do?'
"At this the stickleback flushed with anger and
said, 'I am out of my element. I have nowhere to
go. A pint of water would save me. But to talk
to me like this,—you might as well put me in a
dried-fish shop at once.'"
The above episode is condemned by Lin Hsi Chung
on the score of style.
Jên Kung Tzŭ
A young noble of the Jen State. Comm.
got a huge hook on a big line, which he baited with
fifty oxen. He squatted down at Kuei-chi, and cast
into the eastern ocean. Every day he fished, but for
a whole year he caught nothing. Then came a great
fish which swallowed the bait, and dragging the
huge hook dived down below. This way and that
way it plunged about, erecting the dorsal fin. The
white waves rolled mountain high. The great deep
was shaken up. The noise was like that of so
many devils, terrifying people for many miles
around.
But when Jên Kung Tzŭ had secured his fish, he
cut it up and salted it. And from Chih-ho eastwards,
and from Ts'ang-wu northwards, there was
none but ate his fill of that fish. Even among
succeeding generations, gobemouches of the day
recounted the marvellous tale.
[355]
To take a rod and line, and go to a pool, and
catch small fry is a very different thing from catching
big fish. And by means of a little show of
ability to secure some small billet is a very different
thing from really pushing one's way to the front.
So that those who do not imitate the example of
Jên Kung Tzŭ will be very far from becoming
leaders in their generation.
Also spurious.
When some Confucianists were opening a grave
in accordance with their Canons of Poetry and
Rites, the master shouted out, "Day is breaking.
How are you getting on with the work?"
"Not got off the burial-clothes yet," answered
an apprentice. "There is a pearl in the mouth."
Now the Canon of Poetry says—
So seizing the corpse's brow with one hand, and
forcing down its chin with the other, these Confucianists
proceed to tap its cheeks with a metal
hammer, in order to make the jaws open gently and
not injure the pearl!
The above, pronounced by Lin Hsi Chung to be
spurious, is aimed at the Confucianists, who are
ready to commit any outrage on natural feeling so
long as there is no violation of the details of their
own artificial system.
[356]
A disciple of Lao Lai Tzŭ
A sage of the Ch'u State.
while out gathering fuel, chanced to meet Confucius.
On his return, he said, "There is a man over there
with a long body and short legs, round shoulders
and drooping ears. He looks as though he were
sorrowing over mankind. I know not who he
can be."
"It is Confucius!" cried Lao Lai Tzŭ. "Bid
him come hither."
When Confucius arrived, Lao Lai Tzŭ addressed
him as follows:—
"Ch'iu! Get rid of your dogmatism and your
specious knowledge, and you will be really a superior
man."
Confucius bowed and was about to retire, when
suddenly his countenance changed and he enquired,
"Shall I then be able to enter upon Tao?"
"The wounds of one generation being too much,"
answered Lao Lai Tzŭ, "you would take to yourself
the sorrows of all time. Are you not weary?
Is your strength equal to the task?
"To employ goodness as a passport to influence
through the gratification of others, is an everlasting
shame. Yet this is the common way of all, to lure
people by fame, to bind them by ties of gratification.
"Better than extolling Yao and cursing Chieh is
oblivion of both, keeping one's praises to oneself.
These things react injuriously on self; the agitation
of movement results in deflection.
[357]
"The true Sage is a passive agent. If he succeeds,
he simply feels that he was provided by no
effort of his own with the energy necessary to
success."
Prince Yüan of Sung dreamed one night that a
man with dishevelled hair peeped through a side
door and said, "I have come from the waters of
Tsai-lu. I am a marine messenger attached to the
staff of the River God. A fisherman, named Yü
Ch'ieh, has caught me."
When the prince awaked, he referred his dream
to the soothsayers, who said, "This is a divine
tortoise."
"Is there any fisherman," asked the prince,
"whose name is Yü Ch'ieh?"
Being told there was, the prince gave orders for
his appearance at court; and the next day Yü
Ch'ieh had an audience.
"Fisherman," said the prince, "what have you
caught?"
"I have netted a white tortoise," replied the
fisherman, "five feet in semi-circumference."
"Bring your tortoise," said the prince. But
when it came, the prince could not make up his
mind whether to kill it or keep it alive. Thus in
doubt, he had recourse to divination, and received
the following response:—
Slay the tortoise for purposes of divination and
good fortune will result.
So the tortoise was despatched. After which,[358]
out of seventy-two omens taken, not a single one
proved false.
"A divine tortoise," said Confucius, "can appear
to prince Yüan in a dream, yet it cannot escape
the net of Yü Ch'ieh. Its wisdom can yield
seventy-two faultless omens, yet it cannot escape
the misery of being cut to pieces. Truly wisdom
has its limits; spirituality, that which it cannot
reach.
"In spite of the highest wisdom, there are countless
snares to be avoided; If a fish has not to fear
nets, there are always pelicans. Get rid of small
wisdom, and great wisdom will shine upon you.
Put away goodness and you will be naturally good.
A child does not learn to speak because taught by
professors of the art, but because it lives among
people who can themselves speak."
Hui Tzŭ said to Chuang Tzŭ, "Your theme,
Sir, is the useless."
"You must understand the useless," replied
Chuang Tzŭ, "before you can discuss the useful.
"For instance, the earth is of huge proportions,
yet man uses of it only as much as is covered by
the sole of his foot. By and by, he turns up his
toes and goes beneath it to the Yellow Spring.
Has he any further use for it?"
"He has none," replied Hui Tzŭ.
"And in like manner," replied Chuang Tzŭ,
"may be demonstrated the use of the useless.
"Could a man transcend the limits of the[359]
human," said Chuang Tzŭ, "would he not do so?
Unable to do so, how should he succeed?
"The determination to retire, to renounce the
world,—such alas! is not the fruit of perfect wisdom
or immaculate virtue. From cataclysms
ahead, these do not turn back; nor do they heed
the approach of devouring flame. Although there
are class distinctions of high and low, these are but
for a time, and under the changed conditions of a
new sphere are unknown.
In the transcendental state.
"Wherefore it has been said, 'The perfect man
leaves no trace behind.'
"For instance, to glorify the past and to condemn
the present has always been the way of
the scholar.
Laudator temporis acti.
Yet if Hsi Wei Shih and individuals of that class
Sc. patriarchs.
were caused to re-appear in the present day, which
of them but would accommodate himself to the
age?
"Only the perfect man can transcend the limits
of the human and yet not withdraw from the
world, live in accord with mankind and yet suffer
no injury himself. Of the world's teachings he
learns nothing. He has that within which makes
him independent of others.
"If the eye is unobstructed, the result is sight.
If the ear is unobstructed the result is hearing. If[360]
the nose is unobstructed, the result is sense of
smell. If the mouth is unobstructed, the result is
sense of taste. If the mind is unobstructed, the
result is wisdom. If wisdom is unobstructed, the
result is Tê.
"Tao may not be obstructed. To obstruct is
to strangle. This affects the base, and all evils
spring into life.
"All sentient beings depend upon breath. If
this does not reach them in sufficient quantity, it
is not the fault of God. God supplies it day and
night without cease, but man stops the passage.
"Man has for himself a spacious domain. His
mind may roam to heaven. If there is no room in
the house, the wife and her mother-in-law run
against one another. If the mind cannot roam to
heaven, the faculties will be in a state of antagonism.
Those who would benefit mankind from
deep forests or lofty mountains are simply unequal
to the strain upon their higher natures.
It is for that reason they become hermits.
"Ill-regulated virtue ends in reputation. Ill-regulated
reputation ends in notoriety. Scheming
leads to confusion. Knowledge begets contentions.
Obstinacy produces stupidity. Organised government
is for the general good of all.
"Spring rains come in due season, and plants
and shrubs burst up from the earth. Weeding and
tending do not begin until such plants and shrubs
have reached more than half their growth, and
without being conscious of the fact.
[361]
"Repose gives health to the sick. Rubbing the
eyelids removes the wrinkles of old age. Quiet
will dispel anxieties. These remedies however are
the resource only of those who need them. Others
who are free from such ills pay no attention
thereto.
"That which the true Sage marvels at in the
empire, claims not the attention of the Divine man.
That which the truly virtuous man marvels at in
his own sphere, claims not the attention of the true
Sage. That which the superior man marvels at
in his State, claims not the attention of the truly
virtuous man. How the mean man adapts himself
to his age, claims not the attention of the superior
man.
"The keeper of the Yen gate,
Of the capital of the Sung State.
having maltreated himself severely in consequence
of the death of his parents, received a high official
post.
In reward for his filial piety.
His relatives thereupon maltreated themselves, and
some half of them died.
In the vain endeavour to secure like rewards.
"Yao offered the empire to Hsü Yu, but Hsü
Yu fled. T'ang offered it to Wu Kuang, but Wu
Kuang declined with anger.
See pp. 6, 72.
"When Chi T'o heard of Hsü Yu's flight, he[362]
took all his disciples with him and jumped into the
river K'uan;
As a tribute to his eminent virtue.
upon which the various feudal princes mourned for
three years,
They did not resign their fiefs at his example.
and Shên T'u Ti had the river filled up.
Fearing similar ill-advised acts. For names, see
pp. 6, 72.
"The raison d'être of a fish-trap is the fish.
When the fish is caught, the trap may be ignored.
The raison d'être of a rabbit-snare is the rabbit.
When the rabbit is caught the snare may be
ignored. The raison d'être of language is an idea
to be expressed. When the idea is expressed, the
language may be ignored. But where shall I find
a man to ignore language, with whom I may be
able to converse?"
Language.
Argument:—Speech, natural and artificial—Natural speech in harmony
with the divine—Destiny—The ultimate cause—Purification of the
soul—Illustrations.
Of language put into other people's mouths, nine
tenths will succeed. Of language based upon
weighty authority, seven tenths. But language
which flows constantly over, as from a full goblet,
is in accord with God.
The natural overflowings of the heart.
When language is put into other people's mouths,
outside support is sought. Just as a father does
not negotiate his son's marriage; for any praise he
could bestow would not have the same value as
praise by an outsider. Thus, the fault is not mine,
but that of others.
Who will not believe the original speaker.
To that which agrees with our own opinions we
assent; from that which does not we dissent. We
regard that which agrees with our own opinion as
right. We regard that which differs from our
opinion as wrong. Language based on weighty
authority is used to bar further argument. The[364]
authorities are our superiors, our elders in years.
But if they lack the requisite knowledge and experience,
being our superiors only in the sense of
age, then they are not our superiors. And if men
are not the superiors of their fellows, no one troubles
about them. And those about whom no one troubles
are merely stale.
Language which flows constantly over, as from
a full goblet, is in accord with God.
Embracing both positive and negative in One.
Because it spreads out on all sides, it endures for
all time. Without language, contraries are identical.
The identity is not identical with its expression:
the expression is not identical with its
identity. Therefore it has been said, Language
not expressed in language is not language. Constantly
spoken, it is as though not spoken. Constantly
unspoken, it is not as though not spoken.
From the subjective point of view, there are
possibilities and impossibilities, there are suitabilities
and unsuitabilities. This results from the
natural affinity of things for what they are and
their natural antagonism to what they are not.
For all things have their own particular constitutions
and potentialities. Nothing can exist without
these.
See p. 19.
But for language that constantly flows over, as
from a full goblet, and is in accord with God, how
should the permanent be attained?
[365]
All things spring from germs. Under many
diverse forms these things are ever being reproduced.
Round and round, like a wheel, no part of
which is more the starting-point than any other.
This is called the equilibrium of God. And he
who holds the scales is God.
Alluding to the Identity-philosophy, which means,
in the words of Emerson, "that nature iterates her
means perpetually on successive planes.... The
whole art of the plant is still to repeat leaf on leaf
without end."
Chuang Tzŭ said to Hui Tzŭ, "When Confucius
reached his sixtieth year he changed his opinions.
What he had previously regarded as right, he ultimately
came to regard as wrong. But who shall
say whether the right of to-day may not be as
wrong as the wrong of the previous fifty-nine
years?"
See p. 345.
"He was a persevering worker," replied Hui
Tzŭ, "and his wisdom increased day by day."
His conversion was no spasmodic act.
"Confucius," replied Chuang Tzŭ, "discarded
both perseverance and wisdom, but did not attempt
to formulate the doctrine in words. He said, 'Man
has received his talents from God, together with a
soul to give them life. He should speak in accordance
with established laws. His words should be
in harmony with fixed order. Personal advantage[366]
and duty to one's neighbour lie open before us.
Likes and dislikes, rights and wrongs, are but as
men choose to call them. But to bring submission
into men's hearts, so that they shall not be stiff-necked,
and thus fix firmly the foundations of the
empire,—to that, alas! I have not attained.'"
"From the above," says Lin Hsi Chung, "we may
see that Hui Tzŭ, though skilled in winning debates
was unskilled in winning hearts."
Tsêng Tzŭ held office twice. His emotions varied
in each case.
See pp. 100, 352.
"As long as my parents were alive," said he, "I
was happy on a small salary. When I had a large
salary, but my parents were no more, I was sad."
A disciple said to Confucius, "Can we call Tsêng
Tzŭ a man without cares to trouble him?"
Money being no object to him.
"He had cares to trouble him," replied Confucius.
"Can a man who has no cares to trouble him feel
grief? His small salary and his large salary were
to him like a heron or a mosquito flying past."
Yen Ch'êng Tzŭ Yu said to Tung Kuo Tzŭ Chi,
See p. 324.
"One year after receiving your instructions I became
naturally simple. After two years, I could
adapt myself as required. After three years, I un[367]derstood.
After four years, my intelligence developed.
After five years, it was complete. After six
years, the spirit entered into me. After seven, I
knew God. After eight, life and death existed for
me no more. After nine, perfection.
"Life has its distinctions; but in death we are
all made equal. That death should have an origin,
but that life should have no origin,—can this be
so? What determines its presence in one place,
its absence in another?
"Heaven has its fixed order.
Visible to all.
Earth has yielded up its secrets to man. But
where to seek whence am I?
"Not knowing the hereafter, how can we deny
the operation of Destiny? Not knowing what preceded
birth, how can we assert the operation of
Destiny? When things turn out as they ought,
who shall say that the agency is not supernatural?
When things turn out otherwise, who shall say that
it is?"
The various Penumbræ said to the Umbra,
"Before you were looking down, now you are looking
up. Before you had your hair tied up, now
it is all loosed. Before you were sitting, now you
have got up. Before you were moving, now you
are stopping still. How is this?"
"Gentlemen," replied the Umbra, "the question
is hardly worth asking.
Ultimate causes being unknowable.
[368]
I do these things, but I do not know why. I am
like the scaly back of the cicada, the shell of the
locust,—apparently independent, but not really so.
By firelight or in daylight I am seen: in darkness
or by night I am gone. And if I am dependent on
these, how much more are they dependent on something
else? When they come, I come with them.
When they go, I go with them. When they live,
I live with them. But who it is that gives the life,
how shall we seek to know?"
Repeated, with variations, from ch. ii.
Yang Tzŭ Chü
See p. 100.
went southwards to P'ei, and when Lao Tzŭ was
travelling westwards to Ch'in, hastened to receive
him outside the city. Arriving at the bridge, he
met Lao Tzŭ; and the latter standing in the
middle of the road, looked up to heaven and said
with a sigh, "At first, I thought you could be
taught. I think so no more."
Yang Tzŭ Chü made no reply, but when they
reached the inn, handed Lao Tzŭ water for washing
and rinsing, and a towel and comb. He then removed
his own boots outside the door, and crawling
on his knees into the Master's presence, said, "I
have been wishing to ask for instruction, Sir, but
as you were travelling and not at leisure, I did not
venture. You are now, Sir, at leisure. May I
enquire the reason of what you said?"
[369]
"You have an overbearing look," said Lao Tzŭ.
"Who would live with such a man? He who is
truly pure behaves as though he were sullied. He
who has virtue in abundance behaves as though it
were not enough."
These last two sentences occur in the Tao-Tê-Ching,
ch. xli, and also in the works of Lieh Tzŭ as part of
that author's own text. See The Remains of Lao
Tzŭ, p. 29.
Yang Tzŭ Chü changed countenance at this, and
replied, "I hear and obey."
Now when Yang Tzü Chü first went to the inn,
the visitors there had come out to receive him.
Mine host had arranged his mat, while the landlady
held towel and comb. The visitors had given
him up the best seats, and those who were cooking
had left the stove free for him. But when he went
back,
After his interview with Lao Tzŭ.
the other visitors struggled to get the best seats for
themselves.
So changed was he in spirit.
Lin Hsi Chung considers that this chapter should
immediately precede what is now ch. xxxii, from
which it has been separated by the interpolation of
the four following chapters, all admittedly spurious.
On Declining Power.
[Spurious.]
Yao offered to resign the empire to Hsü Yu,
but the latter declined.
He then offered it to Tzŭ Chou Chih Fu, who
said, "There is no objection to making me emperor.
But just now I am suffering from a troublesome
disease, and am engaged in trying to cure it.
I have no leisure to look after the empire."
Now the empire is of paramount importance.
Yet here was a man who would not allow it to
injure his chance of life. How much less then
would he let other things do so? Yet it is only he
who would do nothing in the way of government
who is fit to be trusted with the empire.
Those personages who have not been previously
mentioned may be taken to be allegorical.
Shun offered to resign the empire to Tzŭ Chou
Chih Poh. The latter said, "Just now I am
suffering from a troublesome disease, and am
engaged in trying to cure it. I have no leisure to
look after the empire."
[371]
Now the empire is a great trust; but not to
sacrifice one's life for it is precisely where the man
of Tao differs from the man of the world.
Shun offered to resign the empire to Shan
Chüan. Shan Chüan said, "I am a unit in the
sum of the universe. In winter I wear fur clothes.
In summer I wear grass-cloth. In spring I plough
and sow, toiling with my body. In autumn I gather
in the harvest, and devote myself to rest and enjoyment.
At dawn I go to work; at sunset I leave
off. Contented with my lot I pass through life with
a light heart. Why then should I trouble myself
with the empire? Ah, Sir, you do not know me."
So he declined, and subsequently hid himself
among the mountains, nobody knew where.
Shun offered the empire to a friend, a labourer
of Shih Hu.
"Sire," said the latter, "you exert yourself too
much. The chief thing is to husband one's strength;"—meaning
that in point of real virtue Shun had not
attained.
Then, husband and wife, bearing away their
household gods and taking their children with
them, went off to the sea and never came back.
When T'ai Wang Shan Fu was occupying Pin,
he was attacked by savages. He offered them skins
and silk, but they declined these. He offered them
dogs and horses, but they declined these also.[372]
He then offered them pearls and jade, but these
too they declined. What they wanted was the
territory.
"To live with a man's elder brother," said T'ai
Wang Shan Fu,
Addressing his own people.
"and slay his younger brother; to live with a man's
father and slay his son,—this I could not bear to
do. Make shift to remain here. To be my subjects
or the subjects of these savages, where is
the difference? Besides I have heard say that we
ought not to let that which is intended to nourish
life become injurious to life."
Alluding to the "territory."
Thereupon he took his staff and went off. His
people all followed him, and they founded a new
State at the foot of Mount Ch'i.
Now T'ai Wang Shan Fu undoubtedly had a
proper respect for life. And those who have a
proper respect for life, if rich and powerful, do not
let that which should nourish injure the body. If
poor and lowly, they do not allow gain to involve
them in physical wear and tear.
But the men of the present generation who
occupy positions of power and influence, are all
afraid of losing what they have got. Directly they
see a chance of gain, away goes all care for their
bodies. Is not that a cause for confusion?
In three successive cases the people of Yüeh had[373]
put their prince to death. Accordingly, Shou, the
son of the last prince, was much alarmed, and fled
to Tan Hsüeh, leaving the State of Yüeh without a
ruler.
Shou was at first nowhere to be found, but at
length he was traced to Tan Hsüeh. He was, however,
unwilling to come forth, so they smoked him
out with moxa. They had a royal carriage ready
for him; and as Shou seized the cord to mount the
chariot, he looked up to heaven and cried, "Oh!
ruling, ruling, could I not have been spared this?"
It was not that Shou objected to be a prince.
He objected to the dangers associated with such
positions. Such a one was incapable of sacrificing
life to the State, and for that very reason the
people of Yüeh wanted to get him.
The States of Han and Wei were struggling to
annex each other's territory when Tzŭ Hua Tzŭ
went to see prince Chao Hsi. Finding the latter
very downcast, Tzŭ Hua Tzŭ said, "Now suppose
the representatives of the various States were to
sign an agreement before your Highness, to the
effect that although cutting off the left hand would
involve loss of the right, while cutting off the right
would involve loss of the left, nevertheless that whosoever
would cut off either should be emperor over
all,—would your Highness cut?"
"I would not," replied the prince.
"Very good," said Tzŭ Hua Tzŭ. "It is clear
therefore that one's two arms are worth more than[374]
the empire. And one's body is worth more than
one's arms, while the State of Han is infinitely less
important than the empire. Further, what you are
struggling over is of infinitely less importance than
the State of Han. Yet your Highness is wearing
out body and soul alike in fear and anxiety lest you
should not get it."
"Good indeed!" cried the prince. "Many have
counselled me, but I have never heard the like of
this."
From which we may infer that Tzŭ Hua Tzŭ
knew the difference between what was of importance
and what was not.
The prince of Lu, hearing that Yen Ho had
attained to Tao, despatched messengers with
presents to open communications.
Yen Ho lived in a hovel. He wore clothes of
coarse grass, and occupied himself in tending oxen.
When the messengers arrived, Yen Ho went out
to meet them; whereupon they enquired, "Is this
where Yen Ho lives?"
"This is Yen Ho's house," replied the latter.
The messengers then produced the presents;
but Yen Ho said, "I fear you have made a mistake.
And as you might get into trouble, it would
be as well to go back and make sure."
This the messengers accordingly did. When
however they returned, there was no trace to be
found of Yen Ho. Thus it is that men like Yen
Ho hate wealth and power.
[375]
Wherefore it has been said that the best part of
Tao is for self-culture, the surplus for governing
a State, and the dregs for governing the empire.
From which we may infer that the great deeds of
kings and princes are but the leavings of the Sage.
For preserving the body and nourishing vitality,
they are of no avail. Yet the superior men of to-day
endanger their bodies and throw away their
lives in their greed for the things of this world. Is
not this pitiable?
The true Sage in all his actions considers the
why and the wherefore. But there are those now-a-days
who use the pearl of the prince of Sui to shoot
a bird a thousand yards off.
A wonderfully brilliant gem, of a "ten chariot"
illuminating power.
And the world of course laughs at them. Why?
Because they sacrifice the greater to get the less.
But surely life is of more importance even than the
prince's pearl!
Lieh Tzŭ was poor. His face wore a hungry
look.
A visitor one day mentioned this to Tzŭ Yang
Prime Minister.
of Chêng, saying, "Lieh Tzŭ is a scholar who has
attained to Tao. He lives in your Excellency's
State, and yet he is poor. Can it be said that your
Excellency does not love scholars?"
Thereupon Tzŭ Yang gave orders that Lieh[376]
Tzŭ should be supplied with food. But when
Lieh Tzŭ saw the messengers, he bowed twice and
declined.
When the messengers had gone, and Lieh Tzŭ
went within, his wife gazed at him, and beating her
breast said, "I have heard that the wife and children
of a man of Tao are happy and joyful. But
see how hungry I am. His Excellency sent you
food, and you would not take it. Is not this flying
in the face of Providence?"
"His Excellency did not know me personally,"
answered Lieh Tzŭ with a smile. "It was because of
what others said about me that he sent me the food.
If then men were to speak ill of me, he would also
act upon it. For that reason I refused the food."
Subsequently, there was trouble among the people
of Chêng, and Tzŭ Yang was slain.
When Prince Chao of the Ch'u State lost his
kingdom, he was followed into exile by his butcher,
named Yüeh.
On his restoration, as he was distributing rewards
to those who had remained faithful to him, he came
to the name of Yüeh.
Yüeh, however, said, "When the prince lost his
kingdom, I lost my butchery. Now that the prince
has got back his kingdom, I have got back my
butchery. I have recovered my office and salary.
What need for further reward?"
On hearing this, the prince gave orders that he
should be made to take his reward.
[377]
"It was not through my fault," argued Yüeh,
"that the prince lost his kingdom, and I should
not have taken the punishment. Neither was it
through me that he got it back, and I cannot therefore
accept the reward."
When the prince heard this answer, he commanded
Yüeh to be brought before him. But Yüeh
said, "The laws of the Ch'u State require that a
subject shall have deserved exceptionally well of his
prince before being admitted to an audience. Now
my wisdom was insufficient to preserve this kingdom,
and my courage insufficient to destroy the
invaders. When the Wu soldiers entered Ying, I
feared for my life and fled. That was why I
followed the prince. And if now the prince wishes
to set law and custom aside and summon me to an
audience, this is not my idea of proper behaviour
on the part of the prince."
"Yüeh," said the prince to Tzŭ Chi, his master
of the horse, "occupies a lowly position; yet his
principles are of the most lofty. Go, make him a
San Ching."
"I am aware," replied Yüeh to the master of the
horse, "that the post of San Ching is more honourable
than that of butcher. And I am aware that
the emolument is larger than what I now receive.
Still, because I want preferment and salary, I
cannot let my prince earn the reputation of being
injudicious in his patronage. I must beg to decline.
Let me go back to my butchery."
And he adhered to his refusal.
[378]
Yüan Hsien dwelt in Lu,—in a mud hut, with a
grass-grown roof, an apology for a door, and two
mulberry-trees for door-posts. The windows which
lighted his two rooms were no bigger than the
mouth of a jar, and were closed by a wad of old
clothes. The hut leaked from above and was damp
under foot; yet Yüan Hsien sat gravely there
playing on the guitar.
Tzŭ Kung came driving up in a fine chariot, in a
white robe lined with purple; but the hood of the
chariot was too big for the street.
When he went to see Yüan Hsien, the latter
came to the door in a flowery cap, with his shoes
down at heel, and leaning on a stalk.
"Good gracious!" cried Tzŭ Kung, "whatever
is the matter with you?"
"I have heard," replied Yüan Hsien, "that he
who is without wealth is called poor, and that he
who learns without being able to practise is said to
have something the matter with him. Now I am
merely poor; I have nothing the matter with me."
Tzŭ Kung was much abashed at this reply; upon
which Yüan Hsien smiling continued, "To try to
thrust myself forward among men; to seek friendship
in mutual flattery; to learn for the sake of
others; to teach for my own sake; to use benevolence
and duty to one's neighbour for evil ends; to
make a great show with horses and carriages,—these
things I cannot do."
Tsêng Tzŭ lived in the Wei State. His wadded[379]
coat had no outside cloth. His face was bloated
and rough. His hands and feet were horny hard.
For three days he had had no fire; no new clothes
for ten years. If he set his cap straight the tassel
would come off. If he drew up his sleeve his elbow
would poke through. If he pulled up his shoe,
the heel would come off. Yet slipshod he sang the
Sacrificial Odes of Shang, his voice filling the
whole sky, as though it had been some instrument
of metal or stone.
The Son of Heaven could not secure him as a
minister. The feudal princes could not secure him
as a friend. For he who nourishes his purpose
becomes oblivious of his body. He who nourishes
his body becomes oblivious of gain. And he who
has attained Tao becomes oblivious of his mind.
"Come hither," said Confucius to Yen Hui.
"Your family is poor, and your position lowly.
Why not go into official life?"
"I do not wish to," replied Yen Hui. "I have
fifty acres of land beyond the city walls, which are
enough to supply me with food. Ten more within
the walls provide me with clothes. My lute gives
me all the amusement I want; and the study of
your doctrines keeps me happy enough. I do not
desire to go into official life."
"Bravo! well said!" cried Confucius with beaming
countenance. "I have heard say that those
who are contented do not entangle themselves in
the pursuit of gain. That those who have really[380]
obtained do not fear the contingency of loss. That
those who devote themselves to cultivation of the
inner man, though occupying no position, feel no
shame. Thus indeed I have long preached. Only
now, that I have seen Yen Hui, am I conscious of
the realisation of these words."
Prince Mou of Chung-shan said to Chan Tzŭ,
"My body is in the country, but my heart is in
town. What am I to do?"
"Make life of paramount importance," answered
Chan Tzŭ, "and worldly advantage will cease to
have weight."
"That I know," replied the Prince; "but I am
not equal to the task."
"If you are not equal to this," said Chan Tzŭ,
"then it were well for you to pursue your natural
bent. Not to be equal to a task, and yet to force
oneself to stick to it,—this is called adding one
injury to another. And those who suffer such
two-fold injury do not belong to the class of the
long-lived."
Prince Mou of Wei was heir to the throne of a
large State. For him to become a hermit among
the hills was more difficult than for an ordinary
cotton-clothed scholar. And although he had not
attained to Tao, he may be said to have been on the
way thither.
When Confucius was caught between the Ch'êns
and the Ts'ais, he went seven days without proper[381]
food. He ate soup of herbs, having no rice. He
looked very much exhausted, yet he sat within
playing his guitar and singing to it.
Yen Hui was picking over the herbs, while Tzŭ
Lu and Tzŭ Kung were talking together. One of
them said, "Our Master has twice been driven out
of Lu. They will have none of him in Wei. His
tree was cut down in Sung. He got into trouble
in Shang and Chou. And now he is surrounded
by the Ch'êns and the Ts'ais. Whoever kills him
is to be held guiltless. Whoever takes him prisoner
is not to be interfered with. Yet all the time he
goes on playing and singing without cease. Is this
the right thing for a superior man to do?"
Yen Hui said nothing, but went inside and told
Confucius, who laid aside his guitar and said with
a loud sigh, "Yu and Tzŭ are ignorant fellows.
These were their personal names.
Bid them come, and I will speak to them."
When they entered Tzŭ Lu said, "We seem to
have made a thorough failure."
"What do you mean?" cried Confucius. "The
superior man who succeeds in Tao, has success. If
he fails in Tao, he makes a failure. Now I, holding
fast to the Tao of charity and duty towards one's
neighbour, have fallen among the troubles of a disordered
age. What failure is there in that?
"Therefore it is that by cultivation of the inner
man there is no failure in Tao, and when danger
comes there is no loss of virtue. It is the chill[382]
winter weather, it is frost, it is snow, which bring
out the luxuriance of the pine and the fir.
See Lun Yü, ix, 27.
I regard it as a positive blessing to be thus situated
as I am."
Thereupon he turned abruptly round and went
on playing and singing.
At this Tzŭ Lu hastily seized a shield and began
dancing to the music, while Tzŭ Kung said, "I had
no idea of the height of heaven and of the depth of
earth."
The ancients who attained Tao were equally
happy under success and failure. Their happiness
had nothing to do with their failure or their success.
Tao once attained, failure and success became mere
links in a chain, like cold, heat, wind, and rain.
Thus Hsü Yu enjoyed himself at Ying-yang, and
Kung Poh found happiness on the hill-top.
Whither he retired after a reign of 14 years.
Shun offered to resign the empire to his friend
Pei Jen Wu Tsê.
"What a strange manner of man you are!" cried
the latter. "Living in the furrowed fields, you
exchanged such a life for the throne of Yao. And
as if that was not enough, you now try to heap indignity
upon me. I am ashamed of you."
Thereupon he drowned himself in the waters of
Ch'ing-ling.
"But how about preservation of life?" asks Lin Hsi
Chung with a sneer.
[383]
When T'ang was about to attack Chieh, he went
to consult with Pien Sui.
"It is not a matter in which I can help you," said
the latter.
"Who can?" asked T'ang.
"I do not know," replied Pien Sui.
T'ang then went to consult with Wu Kuang.
"It is not a matter in which I can help you," said
the latter.
"Who can?" asked T'ang.
"I do not know," replied Wu Kuang.
"What do you think of I Yin?" asked T'ang.
"He forces himself," said Wu Kuang, "to put up
with obloquy. Beyond this I know nothing of him."
So T'ang took I Yin into his counsels. They
attacked Chieh, and vanquished him.
Then T'ang offered to resign the empire in favour
of Pien Sui. But Pien Sui declined, saying, "When
your Majesty consulted with me about attacking
Chieh, you evidently looked on me as a robber.
Who would steal territory. But men of Tao wage
no wars.
Now that you have vanquished him, and you offer
to resign in my favour, you evidently regard me as
covetous. I was born indeed in a disordered age.
But for a man without Tao to thus insult me twice,
is more than I can endure."
So he drowned himself in the river Chou.
Then T'ang offered to resign in favour of Wu
Kuang, saying, "The wise plan, the brave execute,
the good rest therein,—such was the Tao of the[384]
ancients. Why, Sir, should not you occupy the
throne?"
But Wu Kuang declined, saying, "To depose a
ruler is not to do one's duty to one's neighbour.
To slay the people is not charity. For others to
suffer these wrongs, while I enjoy the profits, is
not honest. I have heard say that one should not
accept a wage unless earned in accordance with
right; and that if the world is without Tao, one
should not put foot upon its soil, still less rule over
it! I can bear this no longer."
Thereupon he took a stone on his back and
jumped into the river Lu.
At the rise of the Chou dynasty there were two
scholars, named Po I and Shu Ch'i, who lived in
Ku-tu.
One of these said to the other, "I have heard
that in the west there are men who are apparently
in possession of Tao. Let us go and see them."
Meaning the men of Chou.
When they arrived at Ch'i-yang, Wu Wang
The writer meant Wên Wang, father of Wu Wang.
heard of their arrival and sent Shu Tan
Chou Kung.
to enter into a treaty with them. They were to
receive emoluments of the second degree and rank
of the first degree. The treaty was to be sealed
with blood and buried.
[385]
At this the two looked at each other and smiled.
"Ah!" said one of them, "this is strange indeed.
It is not what we call Tao.
"When Shên Nung ruled the empire, he worshipped
God without asking for any reward. Sometimes
it was the law he put in force; sometimes it
was his personal influence he brought to bear. He
was loyal and faithful to his people without seeking
any return. He did not build his success upon
another's ruin, nor mount high by means of
another's fall, nor seize opportunities to secure his
own advantage.
"But now that the Chous, beholding the iniquities
of the Yins, have taken upon themselves to
govern, we have intrigues above and bribes below.
Troops are mobilised to protect prestige. Victims
are slaughtered to give good faith to a treaty. A
show of virtue is made to amuse the masses.
Fighting and slaughter are made the means of
gain. Confusion has simply been exchanged for
disorder.
"I have heard tell that the men of old, living in
quiet times, never shirked their duties; but lighting
upon troublous times, nothing could make them
stay. The empire is now in darkness. The virtue
of the Chous has faded. For the empire to be
united under the Chous would be a disgrace to us.
Better flee away and keep our actions pure."
Accordingly, these two philosophers went north
to Mount Shou-yang, where they subsequently
starved themselves to death.
[386]
Men like Poh I and Shu Ch'i, if wealth and
honour came to them so that they could properly
accept, would assuredly not have recourse to such
heroic measures, nor would they be content to
follow their own bent, without giving their services
to their generation. Such was the purity of these
two scholars.
Robber Chê.
[Spurious.]
Confucius was on terms of friendship with
Liu Hsia Chi, whose younger brother was
known as "Robber Chê."
This is an anachronism. Liu Hsia Chi (or Hui)
was a virtuous official of the Lu State. He flourished
some 80 and more years before the time of Confucius.
Robber Chê had a band of followers nine thousand
strong. He ravaged the whole empire,
plundering the various nobles and breaking into
people's houses. He drove off oxen and horses.
He stole men's wives and daughters. Family ties
put no limit to his greed. He had no respect for
parents nor for brothers. He neglected the worship
of his ancestors. Wherever he passed, the greater
States flew to arms, the smaller ones to places of
safety. All the people were sore distressed.
"A father," said Confucius to Liu Hsia Chi,
"should surely be able to admonish his son; an
elder brother to teach his younger brother. If this
be not so, there is an end of the value attached to
these relationships.
[388]
"Now you, Sir, are one of the scholars of the
age, while your younger brother is the Robber Chê,
the scourge of the empire. You are unable to teach
him, and I blush for you. Let me go and have a
talk with him on your behalf."
"As to what you say, Sir, about fathers and elder
brothers," answered Liu Hsia Chi, "if the son will
not listen to his father, nor the younger brother to
his elder brother, what becomes of your arguments
then?
"Besides, Chê's passions are like a bubbling
spring. His thoughts are like a whirlwind. He is
strong enough to defy all foes. He can argue until
wrong becomes right. If you follow his inclinations,
he is pleased. If you oppose them he is angry.
He is free with the language of abuse. Do not go
near him."
Confucius paid no attention to this advice; but
with Yen Hui as charioteer and Tzŭ Kung on his
right, went off to see Robber Chê.
The latter had just encamped to the south of
T'ai-shan, and was engaged in devouring a dish of
minced human liver. Confucius alighted from his
chariot, and advancing addressed the doorkeeper as
follows:—
"I am Confucius of the Lu State. I have heard
of the high character of your captain."
He then twice respectfully saluted the doorkeeper,
who went in to announce his arrival.
When Robber Chê heard who it was, he was
furious. His eyes glared like stars. His hair raised[389]
his cap from his head as he cried out, "What! that
crafty scoundrel Confucius of Lu? Go, tell him
from me that he is a mere word-mongerer. That he
talks nonsense about Wên Wang and Wu Wang.
That he wears an extravagant cap, with a thong
from the side of a dead ox. That what he says is
mostly rhodomontade. That he consumes where he
does not sow, and wears clothes he does not weave.
That his lips patter and his tongue wags. That his
rights and wrongs are of his own coining, whereby
he throws dust in the eyes of rulers and prevents
the scholars of the empire from reverting to the
original source of all things.
Sc. Tao.
That he makes a great stir about filial piety and
brotherly love, glad enough himself to secure some
fat fief or post of power. Tell him that he deserves
the worst, and that if he does not take himself off
his liver shall be in my morning stew."
But Confucius sent in again, saying, "I am a
friend of Liu Hsia Chi. I am anxious to set eyes
upon your captain's shoe-strings."
Another interpretation is "upon your captain's feet
visible from beneath the screen."
When the doorkeeper gave this second message,
Robber Chê said, "Bring him before me!" Thereupon
Confucius hurried in, and avoiding the place
of honour stepped back and made two obeisances.
Robber Chê, flaming with anger, straddled out
his two legs, and laying his hand upon his sword[390]
glared at Confucius and roaring like a tigress with
young, said, "Ch'iu! come here. If what you
say suits my ideas, you will live. Otherwise you
will die."
"I have heard," replied Confucius, "that the
world contains three classes of virtue. To grow up
tall, of a beauty without compare, and thus to be
the idol of young and old, of noble and lowly alike,—this
is the highest class. To be possessed of
wisdom which embraces the universe and can explain
all things,—this is the middle class. To be
possessed of courage which will stand test and
gather followers around,—this is the lowest class.
"Now any man whose virtue belongs to either of
these classes is fit to occupy the place and title of
ruler. But you, Captain, unite all three in yourself.
You are eight feet two in height. Your expression
is very bright. Your lips are like vermilion. Your
teeth like a row of shells. Your voice is like a
beautiful bell;—yet you are known as Robber Chê.
Captain, I blush for you.
"Captain, if you will hearken to me I will go
south for you to Wu and Yüeh, north to Ch'i
and Lu, east to Sung and Wei, and west to Chin
and Ch'u. I will have a great wall built for
you of many li in extent, enclosing hamlets of
many hundreds of thousands of inhabitants, over
which State you shall be ruler. Your relations
with the empire will enter upon a new phase. You
will disband your men. You will gather your
brothers around you. You will join in worship[391]
of your ancestors. Such is the behaviour of the
true Sage and the man of parts, and such is what
the world desires."
"Ch'iu! come here," cried Robber Chê in a great
rage. "Those who are squared by offers and corrected
by words are the stupid vulgar masses. The
height and the beauty which you praise in me are
legacies from my parents. Even though you did
not praise them, do you think I should be ignorant
of their existence? Besides, those who flatter to
the face speak evil behind the back. Now all you
have been saying about the great State and its
numerous population simply means squaring me
by offers as though one of the common herd. And
of course it would not last.
"There is no State bigger than the empire. Yao
and Shun both got this, yet their descendants have
not territory enough to insert an awl's point. T'ang
and Wu Wang both sat upon the Imperial throne,
yet their posterity has been obliterated from the face
of the earth.
Hardly in Chuang Tzŭ's time.
Was not this because of the very magnitude of the
prize?
"I have also heard that in olden times the birds
and animals outnumbered man, and that the latter
was obliged to seek his safety by building his domicile
in trees. By day he picked up acorns and
chestnuts. At night he slept upon a branch. Hence
the name Nest-builders.
[392]
"Of old, the people did not know how to make
clothes. In summer they collected quantities of fuel,
and in winter warmed themselves by fire. Hence
the name Provident.
"In the days of Shên Nung, they lay down
without caring where they were and got up without
caring whither they might go. A man knew his
mother but not his father. He lived among the
wild deer. He tilled the ground for food. He wove
cloth to cover his body. He harboured no thought
of injury to others. These were the glorious results
of an age of perfect virtue.
"The Yellow Emperor, however, could not attain
to this virtue. He fought with Ch'ih Yu at Chŏ-lu,
and blood flowed for a hundred li. Then came
Yao and Shun with their crowd of ministers. Then
T'ang who deposed his sovereign, and Wu Wang
who slew Chou. After which time the strong took
to oppressing the weak, the many to coercing the
few. In fact, ever since T'ang and Wu Wang we
have had none other than disturbers of the peace.
"And now you come forward preaching the old
dogmas of Wên Wang and palming off sophistries
without end, in order to teach future generations.
You wear patched clothes and a narrow girdle, you
talk big and act falsely, in order to deceive the
rulers of the land, while all the time you yourself
are aiming at wealth and power! You are the
biggest thief I know of; and if the world calls me
Robber Chê, it most certainly ought to call you
Robber Ch'iu.
[393]
"By fair words you enticed Tzŭ Lu to follow
you. You made him doff his martial cap,
Shaped like a cock's comb.
and ungird his long sword, and sit a disciple at
your feet. And all the world cried out that Confucius
could stop violence and prevent wrong-doing.
By and by, when Tzŭ Lu wished to slay the prince
of Wei, but failed, and was himself hacked to pieces
and exposed over the eastern gate of Wei,—that
was because you had not properly instructed him.
See the account in the Tso Chuan.
"You call yourself a man of talent and a Sage
forsooth! Twice you have been driven out of Lu.
You were tabooed in Wei. You were a failure in
Ch'i. You were surrounded by the Ch'êns and the
Ts'ais. In fact, the empire won't have you anywhere.
It was your teaching which brought Tzŭ
Lu to his tragical end. You cannot take care, in
the first place, of yourself, nor, in the second place,
of others. Of what value can your doctrine be?
"There is none to whom mankind has accorded
a higher place than to the Yellow Emperor. Yet
his virtue was not complete. He fought at Chŏ-lu,
and blood ran for a hundred li. Yao was not
paternal.
He killed his eldest son.
Shun was not filial.
He banished his mother's younger brother.
[394]
The great Yü was deficient in one respect.
He was wanting in natural feeling. When engaged
in his great engineering work of draining the empire,
he even passed his own door without going in to see
his family.
T'ang deposed his sovereign. Wu Wang vanquished
Chou. Wên Wang was imprisoned at
Yin Li.
"Now these six worthies enjoy a high reputation
among men. Yet a fuller investigation shows that
in each case a desire for advantage disturbed their
original purity and forced it into a contrary direction.
Hence the shamelessness of their deeds.
"Among those whom the world calls virtuous
were Poh I and Shu Ch'i. They declined the
sovereignty of Ku-chu and died of starvation on
Mount Shou-yang, their corpses deprived of
burial.
"Pao Chiao made a great show of virtue and
abused the world in general. He grasped a tree
and died.
Tzŭ Kung, one of Confucius' disciples, is said to
have scolded Pao Chiao so vigorously that the latter
withered up into dead wood.
"Shên T'u Ti, when no heed was paid to his
counsels, jumped into the river with a stone on his
back and became food for fishes.
See p. 72.
"Chieh Tzŭ T'ui was truly loyal. He cut a slice
from his thigh to feed Wên Wang. Afterwards,
when Wên Wang turned his back upon him, he[395]
retired in anger, and grasping a tree, was burnt to
death.
He took refuge in a forest, from which Wên Wang,
anxious to recover his friend, tried to smoke him
out!
"Wei Shêng made an assignation with a girl
beneath a bridge. The girl did not come, and the
water rose. But Wei Shêng would not leave. He
grasped a buttress and died.
"These four differed in no way from dogs and
pigs going about begging to be slaughtered. They
all exaggerated reputation and disregarded death.
They did not reflect upon their original nature and
seek to preserve life into the old age allotted.
"Among ministers whom the world calls loyal,
none can compare with Wang Tzŭ, Pi Kan, and
Wu Tzŭ Hsü. The last-mentioned drowned himself.
Pi Kan was disembowelled. These two
worthies are what men call loyal ministers; yet, as
a matter of fact, all the world laughs at them!
"Thus, from the most ancient times down to
Tzŭ Hsü and Pi Kan, there have been none deserving
of honour. And as to the sermon you,
Ch'iu, propose to preach to me,—if it is on ghostly
subjects, I shan't understand them, and if it is on
human affairs, why there is nothing more to be
said. I know it all already.
"I will now tell you a few things. The lust of
the eye is for beauty. The lust of the ear is for
music. The lust of the palate is for flavour. The
lust of ambition is for gratification. Man's greatest[396]
age is one hundred years. A medium old age is
eighty years. The lowest estimate is sixty years.
Take away from this the hours of sickness, disease,
death, mourning, sorrow, and trouble, and there
will not remain more than four or five days a
month upon which a man may open his mouth to
laugh. Heaven and Earth are everlasting. Sooner
or later every man has to die. That which thus
has a limit, as compared with that which is everlasting,
is a mere flash, like the passage of some
swift steed seen through a crack. And those who
cannot gratify their ambition and live through
their allotted span, are men who have not attained
to Tao.
"Ch'iu! all your teachings are nothing to me.
Begone! Go home! Say no more! Your doctrine
is a random jargon, full of falsity and deceit. It can
never preserve the original purity of man. Why
discuss it further?"
Confucius made two obeisances and hurriedly
took his leave. On mounting his chariot, he three
times missed hold of the reins. His eyes were so
dazed that he could see nothing. His face was
ashy pale. With down-cast head he grasped the
bar of his chariot, unable to find vent for his
feelings.
Arriving outside the eastern gate of Lu, he met
Liu Hsia Chi, who said, "I have not seen you for
some days. From the look of your equipage I
should say you had been travelling. I guess now
you have been to see Chê."
[397]
Confucius looked up to heaven, and replied with
a sigh, "I have."
"And did he not rebuff you," asked Liu Hsia
Chi, "as I said he would?"
"He did," said Confucius. "I am a man who
has cauterized himself without being ill. I hurried
away to smooth the tiger's head and comb out his
beard. And I very nearly got into the tiger's
mouth."
Tzŭ Chang asked Man Kou Tê,
Which means "Full of the Ill-gotten."
saying, "Why do you not practise virtue? Otherwise,
it is impossible to inspire confidence. And
without confidence, no place. And without place,
no wealth. Thus, with a view to reputation or to
wealth, duty towards one's neighbour is the true
key.
As leading to reputation, which was what Tzŭ Chang
wanted.
If you were to discard all thoughts of reputation
and wealth and attend to the cultivation of the
heart, surely you would not pass one day without
practising the higher virtues."
"Those who have no shame," replied Man Kou
Tê,
Meaning himself.
"grow rich. Those who inspire confidence make
themselves conspicuous.
Meaning Tzŭ Chang.
[398]
Reputation and wealth are mostly to be got out of
shamelessness and confidence inspired. Thus, with
a view to reputation or to wealth, the confidence of
others is the true key.
As leading to wealth, which was what Man Kou Tê
wanted.
If you were to discard all thoughts of reputation
and wealth, surely the virtuous man would then
have no scope beyond himself."
Beyond his own nature.
"Of old," said Tzŭ Chang, "Chieh and Chou
sat upon the Imperial throne, and the whole empire
was theirs. Yet if you were now to tell any common
thief that his moral qualities resembled theirs,
he would resent it as an insult. By such miserable
creatures are they despised."
"Confucius and Mih Tzŭ, on the other hand,
were poor and simple enough. Yet if you were to
tell any Prime Minister of to-day that his moral
qualities resembled theirs, he would flush with
pride and declare you were paying him too high a
compliment. So truly honourable is the man of
learning.
"Thus, the power of a monarch does not necessarily
make him worthy; nor do poverty and a low
station necessarily make a man unworthy. The
worthy and the unworthy are differentiated by the
worthiness and unworthiness of their acts."
"A petty thief," replied Man Kou Tê, "is put in
gaol. A great brigand becomes ruler of a State.[399]
And among the retainers of the latter, men of virtue
will be found.
"Of old, Duke Huan, named Hsiao Poh, slew
his elder brother and took his sister-in-law to wife.
Yet Kuan Chung became his minister.
"T'ien Ch'êng Tzŭ killed his prince and seized
the kingdom. Yet Confucius accepted his pay.
See p. 111.
"To condemn a man in words, yet actually to
take service under him,—does not this show us
practice and precept directly opposed to one
another?
"Therefore it was written, 'Who is bad? Who
is good? He who succeeds is the head. He who
does not succeed is the tail.'"
"But if you do not practise virtue," said Tzŭ
Chang, "and make no distinction between kith
and kin, assign no duties to the worthy and to the
unworthy, no precedence to young and old, how
then are the Five Bonds and the Six Ranks to be
distinguished?"
Commentators are divided as to these Bonds and
Ranks. One makes the former calendaric. Another
considers that the five cardinal virtues and six ranks
of nobility are meant. Of the latter there are only
five, but "sovereign" is added to patch the deficiency.
"Yao slew his eldest son," answered Man Kou
Tê. "Shun banished his mother's brother. Was
there kith and kin in that?
"T'ang deposed Chieh. Wu Wang slew Chou.[400]
Was that the duty of the worthy towards the unworthy?
"Wang Chi was the legitimate heir, but Chow
Kung slew his elder brother. Was that precedence
of young and old?
"The false principles of the Confucianists, the
universal love of the Mihists,—do these help to
distinguish the Five Bonds and the Six Ranks?
"You, Sir, are all for reputation. I am all for
wealth. As to which pursuit is not in accordance
with principle nor in harmony with right, let us
refer to the arbitration of Wu Yoh."
"The mean man," said Wu Yoh, "devotes himself
to wealth. The superior man devotes himself
to reputation. The moral results are different in
each case. But if both would set aside their activities
and devote themselves to doing nothing, the
results would be the same.
"Wherefore it has been said, 'Be not a mean
man. Revert to your natural self. Be not a superior
man. Abide by the laws of heaven.'
"As to the straight and the crooked, view them
from the standpoint of the infinite.
All distinctions are thus merged.
Gaze around you on all sides, until time withdraws
you from the scene.
"As to the right and the wrong, hold fast to
your magic circle,
At the centre of which all positives and negatives
converge. See ch. ii, p. 18.
[401]
and with independent mind walk ever in the way
of Tao.
"Do not swerve from the path of virtue; do not
bring about your own good deeds,—lest your
labour be lost. Do not make for wealth; do not
aim at success,—lest you cast away that which links
you to God.
"Pi Kan was disembowelled. Tzŭ Hsü had his
eyes gouged out.
Better known as Wu Yüan. See p. 112. He expressed
a wish to be buried on the road to the Yüeh
State that he might witness the defeat of the Wu
State. Whereupon the prince of the latter State at
once had him deprived of sight.
Such was the fate of loyalty.
"Chih Kung bore witness against his father.
Wei Shêng was drowned. Such are the misfortunes
of the faithful.
"Pao Chiao dried up where he stood. Shên
Tzŭ would not justify himself.
He would not defend himself against a charge of
putting poison in his father's food.
Such are the evils of honesty.
"Confucius did not visit his mother.
There is no authority for this statement.
K'uang Tzŭ did not visit his father.
By whom he had been turned out of doors.
Such are the trials which come upon the upright.
"The above instances have been handed down
to us from antiquity and are discussed in modern[402]
times. They show that men of learning emphasized
their precepts by carrying them out in
practice; and that consequently they paid the
penalty and fell into these calamities."
Discontent asked Complacency, saying, "There
is really no one who does not either aim at reputation
or make for wealth. If a man is rich, others
flock around him. These necessarily take a subordinate
position, and consequently pay him court.
And it would seem that such subordination and
respect constitute a royal road to long life, comfort,
and general happiness. How is it then that you,
Sir, have no mind for these things? Is it that you
are wanting in wit? Or is it that you are physically
unable to compete, and therefore go in for
being virtuous, though all the time unable to
forget?"
"You and your friends," replied Complacency,
"regard all men as alike because they happen to be
born at the same time and in the same place as
yourselves. You look on us as scholars who have
separated from humanity and cast off the world,
and who have no guiding principle beyond poring
over the records of the past and present, or indulging
in the logomachy of this and that.
"Were we to lead the mundane lives you do,
it would be at the sacrifice of the very conditions
of existence. And surely thus we should be wandering
far from the royal road to long life, comfort,
and general happiness. The discomfort of wretch[403]edness,
the comfort of well-being, you do not refer
to the body.
But to some external cause of which the body
becomes subjectively conscious.
The abjectness of terror, the elation of joy, you do
not refer to the mind itself. You know that such
things are so, but you do not know how they are
so. Wherefore, though equalling the Son of
Heaven in power, and with all the empire as your
personal property, you would not be free from
care."
"Wealth," replied Discontent, "is of the greatest
service to a man. It enables him to do good, and
to exert power, to an extent which the perfect man
or the true Sage could never reach. He can borrow
the courage and strength of others to make himself
formidable. He can employ the wisdom and counsels
of others to add clearness to his own deliberations.
He can avail himself of the virtue of others
and cause it to appear as his own. Without being
in possession of a throne, he can wield the authority
of a prince.
"Besides, the pleasures of music, beauty, rich
food, and power, do not require to be studied before
they can be appreciated by the mind; nor does the
body need the example of others before it can enjoy
them. We need no teacher to tell us what to like
or dislike, to follow or to avoid. Such knowledge
is instinctive in man. The world may condemn
this view, but which of us is free from the taint?"
[404]
"The wise man," answered Complacency, "acts
for the common weal, in pursuit of which he does
not overstep due limits. Wherefore, if there is a
sufficiency, he does not strive for more. He has no
use for more, and accordingly does not seek it. But
if there is not a sufficiency, then he seeks for more.
He strives in all directions, yet does not account it
greed. If there is a surplus, he declines it. Even
though he refused the whole empire, he would not
account it honesty. To him, honesty and greed are
not conditions into which we are forced by outward
circumstances, but characteristics innate in the individual.
He may wield the power of the Son of
Heaven, but will not employ it for the degradation
of others. He may own the whole empire, yet will
not use his wealth to take advantage of his fellows.
But a calculation of the troubles and the anxieties
inseparable therefrom, cause him to reject these as
injurious to his nature, not from a desire for
reputation.
"When Yao and Shun occupied the throne, there
was peace. They did not try to be beneficent rulers.
They did not inflict injury by doing good.
They were simply natural, and good results followed.
"Shan Chüan and Hsü Yu both declined the
proffered throne. Theirs was no empty refusal.
They would not cause injury to themselves.
"In all these cases, each individual adopted the
profitable course in preference to the injurious[405]
course. And the world calls them virtuous,
whereby they acquire a reputation at which they
never aimed."
"It is necessary," argued Discontent, "to cling
to reputation. If all pleasures are to be denied to
the body and one's energies to be concentrated upon
health with a view to the prolongation of life, such
life would be itself nothing more than the prolonged
illness of a confirmed invalid."
"Happiness," said Complacency, "is to be found
in contentment. Too much is always a curse, most
of all in wealth.
"The ears of the wealthy man ring with sounds
of sweet music. His palate is cloyed with rich
meats and wine. In the pursuit of pleasure, business
is forgotten. This is confusion.
"He eats and drinks to excess, until his breathing
is that of one carrying a heavy load up a hill.
This is misery.
"He covets money to surround himself with
comforts. He covets power to vanquish rivals. But
his quiet hours are darkened by diabetes and dropsy.
This is disease.
"Even when, in his desire for wealth, he has
piled up an enormous fortune, he still goes on and
cannot desist. This is shame.
"Having no use for the money he has collected,
he still hugs it to him and cannot bear to part with
it. His heart is inflamed, and he ever seeks to add
more to the pile. This is unhappiness.
"At home, he dreads the pest of the pilfering[406]
thief. Abroad, the danger of bandit and highwayman.
So he keeps strict guard within, while never
venturing alone without. This is fear.
"These six are the greatest of the world's curses.
Yet such a man never bestows a thought upon
them, until the hour of misfortune is at hand.
Then, with his ambitions gratified, his natural
powers exhausted, and nothing but wealth remaining,
he would gladly obtain one day's peace, but
cannot do so.
"Wherefore, if reputation is not to be enjoyed
and wealth is not to be secured, how pitiable it is
that men should harass their minds and wear out
their bodies in such pursuits!"
On Swords.
[Spurious.]
Of old, Wên Wang of Chao loved sword-play.
Swordsmen thronged his halls, to the number
of three thousand and more. Day and night they
had bouts before the prince. In the course of a
year, a hundred or so would be killed or wounded.
Yet the prince was never satisfied.
Within three years, the State had begun to go to
rack and ruin, and other princes to form designs
upon it. Thereupon the Heir Apparent, Li, became
troubled in mind; and said to the officers of his
household, "Whosoever shall persuade the prince to
do away with these swordsmen, to him I will give
a thousand ounces of silver."
To this his officers replied, "Chuang Tzŭ is the
man."
Thereupon the Heir Apparent sent messengers to
Chuang Tzŭ with a thousand ounces of silver, which
he would not accept, but accompanied the messengers
back to their master.
"What does your Highness require of me,"[408]
asked Chuang Tzŭ, "that you should bestow upon
me a thousand ounces?"
"I had heard," replied the young prince, "that
you were a famous Sage, and I ventured to send
this money as a present to your servants.
Merely a ceremonious phrase.
But as you would not receive it, what more can I
say?"
"I understand," answered Chuang Tzŭ, "that
your Highness would have me cure the prince of
his peculiar weakness. Now suppose that I do not
succeed with the prince, and consequently with
your Highness, the punishment of death is what I
have to expect. What good would the thousand
ounces be to me then?"
"On the other hand, if I succeed with the prince,
and consequently with your Highness, the whole
State of Chao contains nothing I could not have for
the asking."
"You must know, however," said the young
prince, "that my father will only receive swordsmen."
"Well," replied Chuang Tzŭ, "I am a good
swordsman myself."
"Besides which," added the Heir Apparent, "the
swordsmen he is accustomed to see have all dishevelled
hair hanging over their temples. They
wear slouching caps with coarse tangled tassels,
and short-tailed coats. They glare with their eyes
and talk in a fierce tone. This is what my father[409]
likes. But if you go to him dressed in your
ordinary scholar's dress, the result is sure to be
disastrous."
"I will accustom myself to the dress," replied
Chuang Tzŭ; and after practising for three days,
he went again to see the young prince, who accompanied
him into his father's presence.
The latter drew a sharp sword and awaited
Chuang Tzŭ's approach. But Chuang Tzŭ, when
he entered the door of the audience chamber, did
not hurry forward, neither did he prostrate himself
before the prince.
"What have you to say to me," cried the prince,
"that you have obtained your introduction through
the Heir Apparent?"
"I have heard," replied Chuang Tzŭ, "that your
Highness loves sword-play. Therefore I have come
to exhibit my skill."
"What can you do in that line?" asked the
prince.
"Were I to meet an opponent," said Chuang
Tzŭ, "at every ten paces, I could go on for a thousand
li without being stopped."
"Bravo!" cried the prince. "There is not your
match in the empire."
"When I fight," continued Chuang Tzŭ, "I
make a show of being weak but push a vigorous
attack. The last to start, I am the first to arrive.
I should like your Highness to make trial of me."
"Rest awhile," replied the prince. "Stay here
and await orders. I will arrange a day for you."
[410]
Thereupon the prince spent seven days in trying
his swordsmen. Some sixty of them were either
killed or wounded, but at length he selected five or
six and bade them attend in the audience-chamber
with their swords. He then summoned Chuang
Tzŭ and said, "Now I will see what your swordsmanship
is worth."
"I have been longing for this," replied Chuang
Tzŭ.
"Does it matter to you," asked the prince, "of
what length your weapon may be?"
"Not at all," replied Chuang Tzŭ. "I have
three swords, of which I will ask your Highness to
choose one. We will then proceed to the trial."
"Which are your three swords?" enquired the
prince.
"There is the sword of the Son of Heaven," said
Chuang Tzŭ, "the sword of the Princes, and the
sword of the People."
"What is the sword of the Son of Heaven?"
asked the prince.
"The stone wall of Yen-ch'i is its point," replied
Chuang Tzŭ.
Some take "stone wall" as the name of a place.
"The mountains of Ch'i are its edge. Chin and Wei
are its back. Chou and Sung are its hilt. Han and
Wei are its sheath. It is enclosed in the four
hordes of barbarians, wrapped in the four seasons,
surrounded by the great ocean. It is made of the
five elements. It is the arbiter of punishment and[411]
reward. It operates under the influence of the Yin
and the Yang. In spring and summer it is at rest.
In autumn and winter it moves abroad. Push it,
it does not advance. Raise it, it does not go up.
Lower it, it does not go down. Whirl it around,
it does not change position. Above, it cleaves the
floating clouds; below, it cuts through the density
of earth. One flash of this blade, and the princes
of the empire submit. Such is the sword of the Son
of Heaven."
At this the prince seemed absorbed in his reflections.
Then he enquired, saying, "And what is
the sword of the Princes?"
"The Wise and brave," replied Chuang Tzŭ,
"are its point. The incorruptible are its edge.
The virtuous are its back. The loyal are its hilt.
The heroic are its sheath. You may push this
sword too, it will not advance. Raise it, it will not
go up. Lower it, it will not go down. Whirl it
around, it will not change position. Above, it
models itself upon the round heaven, in order to
keep in harmony with the sun, moon, and stars.
Below, it models itself upon the square earth, in
order to keep in harmony with the four seasons.
It adapts itself to the wishes of the people, in
order to diffuse peace on all sides. One flash
of this blade is like a roaring clap of thunder.
Between the boundaries of the State there is
not left one but who yields and obeys the
command of his prince. Such is the sword of the
Princes."
[412]
"And the sword of the People?" enquired the
prince.
"The sword of the People," replied Chuang Tzŭ,
"has dishevelled hair hanging over its temples. It
wears a slouching cap with coarse tangled tassel,
and a short-tailed coat. It glares with its eyes and
talks in a fierce tone. When it engages in conflict,
above, it cuts off head and neck; below, it smites
liver and lungs. Such is the sword of the People.
It is like a game-cock. One day, its life is cut
short, and it is of no more use to the State.
"Now you, great prince, wield sovereign power,
and yet you devote yourself to this sword of the
People. I am truly ashamed of it."
Thereupon the prince drew Chuang Tzŭ up on to
the dais, and the attendants served food, the king
three times assisting with his own hand.
The prince each time received the dish from the
attendants, handed it to Chuang Tzŭ, and then
walked round to his own seat again.
"Be seated, great prince," said Chuang Tzŭ,
"and compose your mind. I have said all I have
to say on swords."
After this the prince did not quit his palace for
three months, while the swordsmen, submitting to
the new order of things, died in their own homes.
