# language_name_wals:	English
# language_name_glotto:	English
# iso639_3:	eng
# year_composed:	NA
# year_published:	2004
# mode:	written
# genre_broad:	fiction
# genre_narrow:	general_fiction
# writing_system:	Latn
# special_characters:	NA
# short_description:	Mrs. F.L. Gillette, The Whitehouse Cookbook (1887)
# source:	http://www.gutenberg.org/files/13923/13923-h/13923-h.htm
# copyright_short:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# copyright_long:	http://www.gutenberg.org
# sample_type:	part
# comments:	NA

Berries and all ripe, mellow fruit require but little cooking,
only long enough for the sugar to penetrate. Strew sugar over them,
allow them to stand a few hours, then merely scald with the sugar;
half to three-quarters of a pound is considered sufficient. Harder
fruits like pears, quinces, etc., require longer boiling. The great
secret of canning is to make the fruit or vegetable perfectly
air-tight. It must be put up boiling hot and the vessel filled to
the brim.
Have your jars conveniently placed near your boiling fruit, in a
tin pan of hot water on the stove, roll them in the hot water, then
fill immediately with the hot, scalding fruit, fill to the top, and
seal quickly with the tops, which should also be heated;
occasionally screw down the tops tighter, as the fruit shrinks as
it cools, and the glass contracts and allows the air to enter the
cans. They must be perfectly air-tight. The jars to be kept in a
dark, cool, dry place.
Use glass jars for fruit always, and the fruit should be cooked
in a porcelain or granite-iron kettle. If you are obliged to use
common large-mouthed bottles with corks, steam the corks and pare
them to a close fit, driving them in with a mallet. Use the
following wax for sealing: One pound of resin, three ounces of
beeswax, one and one-half ounces of tallow. Use a brush in covering
the corks and as they cool, dip the mouth into the melted wax.
Place in a basin of cold water. Pack in a cool, dark and dry
cellar. After one week, examine for flaws, cracks or signs of
ferment.
The rubber rings used to assist in keeping the air from the
fruit cans sometimes become so dry and brittle as to be almost
useless. They can be restored to normal condition usually by
letting them lie in water in which you have put a little ammonia.
Mix in this proportion: One part of ammonia and two parts water.
Sometimes they do not need to lie in this more than five minutes,
but frequently a half hour is needed to restore their
elasticity.
CANNED PEACHES.
To one pound of peaches allow half a pound of sugar; to six
pounds of sugar add half a tumbler of water; put in the kettle a
layer of sugar and one of peaches until the whole of both are in.
Wash about eight peach leaves, tie them up and put into the kettle,
remembering to take them out when you begin to fill up the jars.
Let the sugared fruit remain on the range, but away from the fire,
until upon tipping the vessel to one side you can see some liquid;
then fill the jars, taking them out of hot water into which they
were put when cold, remaining until it was made to boil around
them. In this way you will find out if the glass has been properly
annealed; for we consider glass jars with stoppers screwing down
upon India-rubber rings as the best for canning fruit in families.
They should be kept in a dark closet; and although somewhat more
expensive than tin in the first instance, are much nicer and keep
for years with careful usage.
Fruit must be of fine flavor and ripe, though not
soft, to make nice canned fruit.
Peaches should be thrown into cold water as they are peeled, to
prevent a yellowish crust.
CANNED GRAPES.
There is no fruit so difficult to can nicely as the grape; by
observing the following instructions you will find the grapes rich
and tender a year from putting up. Squeeze the pulp from the skin,
as the seeds are objectionable; boil the pulp, until the seeds
begin to loosen, in one kettle, having the skins boiling, in a
little water, hard in another kettle, as they are tough. When the
pulp seems tender, put it through the sieve; then add the skins, if
tender, with the water they boil in, if not too much. We use a
large coffeecupful of sugar for a quart can; boil until thick and
can in the usual way.
CANNED STRAWBERRIES.
After the berries are picked over, let as many as can be put
carefully in the preserve kettle at once be placed on a platter. To
each pound of fruit add three-fourths of a pound of sugar; let them
stand two or three hours, till the juice is drawn from them; pour
it into the kettle and let it come to a boil and remove the scum
which rises; then put in the berries very carefully. As soon as
they come thoroughly to a boil put them in warm jars and seal while
boiling hot.
TO CAN QUINCES.
Cut the quinces into thin slices like apples for pies. To one
quart jarful of quince, take a coffeesaucer and a half of sugar and
a coffeecupful of water; put the sugar and water on the fire, and
when boiling put in the quinces; have ready the jars with their
fastenings, stand the jars in a pan of boiling water on the stove,
and when the quince is clear and tender put rapidly into the jars,
fruit and syrup together. The jars must be filled so that the syrup
overflows, and fastened up tight as quickly as possible.
CANNED PINEAPPLE.
For six pounds of fruit, when cut and ready to can, make syrup
with two and a half pounds of sugar and nearly three pints of
water; boil syrup five minutes and skim or strain if necessary;
then add the fruit and let it boil up; have cans hot, fill and shut
up as soon as possible. Use the best white sugar. As the cans cool,
keep tightening them up. Cut the fruit half an inch thick.
CANNED FRUIT JUICES.
Canned fruit juices are an excellent substitute for brandy or
wine in all puddings and sauces, etc.
It is a good plan to can the pure juices of fruit in the summer
time, putting it by for this purpose.
Select clean ripe fruit, press out the juice and strain it
through a flannel cloth. To each pint of juice add one cupful of
white granulated sugar. Put it in a porcelain kettle, bring it to
the boiling point, and bottle while hot in small bottles. It must
be sealed very tight while it is hot. Will keep a long time,
the same as canned fruit.
CANNED TOMATOES.
Canning tomatoes is quite a simple process. A large or small
quantity may be done at a time, and they should be put in glass
jars in preference to those of tin, which are apt to injure the
flavor. Very ripe tomatoes are the best for the purpose. They are
first put into a large pan and covered with boiling water. This
loosens the skin, which is easily removed, and the tomatoes are
then put into the preserving kettle, set over a moderate fire
without the addition of water [Pg
441]or any seasoning,
and brought to a boil. After boiling slowly one-half hour, they are
put into the jars while boiling hot and sealed tightly. They will
keep two or three years in this way. The jars should be filled to
the brim to prevent air from getting in, and set in a cool, dark
closet.
TO CAN CORN.
Split the kernels lengthwise with a knife, then scrape with the
back of the knife, thus leaving the hulls upon the cob. Fill cans
full of cut corn, pressing it in very hard. To press the corn in
the can, use the small end of a potato masher, as this will enter
the can easily. It will take from ten to a dozen large ears of corn
to fill a one-quart can. When the cans are full, screw cover on
with thumb and first finger; this will be tight enough, then place
a cloth in the bottom of a wash boiler to prevent breakage. On this
put a layer of cans in any position you prefer, over the cans put a
layer of cloth, then a layer of cans. Fill the boiler in this
manner, then cover the cans well with cold water, place the boiler
on the fire and boil three hours without ceasing. On steady
boiling depends much of your success. After boiling three hours,
lift the boiler from the fire, let the water cool, then take the
cans from the boiler and tighten, let them remain until cold, then
tighten again. Wrap each can in brown paper to exclude the light
and keep in a cool, dry cellar and be very sure the rubber rings
are not hardened by use. The rings should be renewed every two
years. I would advise the beginner to use new rings entirely, for
poor rings cause the loss of canned fruit and vegetables in many
cases. You will observe that in canning corn the cans are not
wrapped in a cloth nor heated; merely filled with the cut corn. The
corn in the can will shrink considerable in boiling, but on no
account open them after canning.
TO CAN PEAS.
Fill the can full of peas, shake the can so they can be filled
well. You cannot press the peas in the can as you did the corn, but
by shaking the cans they may be filled quite full. Pour into the
cans enough cold water to fill to overflowing, then screw the cover
tight as you can with your thumb and first finger and proceed
exactly as in canning corn.
String beans are cut as for cooking and canned in the same
manner. No seasoning of salt, pepper or sugar should be added.
CANNED PLUMS.
To every pound of plums allow a quarter of a pound of sugar. Put
the sugar and plums alternately into the preserving kettle, first
pricking the plums to prevent their breaking. Let them stand on the
back of the stove for an hour or two, then put them over a moderate
fire and allow to come to a boil; skim and pour at once into jars,
running a silver spoon handle around the inside of the jar to break
the air-bubbles; cover and screw down the tops.
CANNED MINCE MEAT.
Mince meat for pies can be preserved for years if canned the
same as fruit while hot, and put into glass jars and sealed
perfectly tight, and set in a cool, dark place. One glass quart jar
will hold enough to make two ordinary-sized pies, and in this way
"mince pies" can be had in the middle of summer as well as in
winter, and if the cans are sealed properly, the meat will be just
as fine when opened as when first canned.
CANNED BOILED CIDER.
Boiled cider, in our grandmothers' time, was indispensable to
the making of a good "mince pie," adding the proper flavor and
richness, which cannot be substituted by any other ingredient, and
a gill of which being added to a rule of "fruit cake" makes it more
moist, keeps longer, and is far superior to fruit cake made without
it. Boiled cider is an article rarely found in the market,
nowadays, but can be made by any one, with but little trouble and
expense, using sweet cider, shortly after it is made, and
before fermentation takes place. Place five quarts of sweet
cider in a porcelain-lined kettle over the fire, boil it slowly
until reduced to one quart, carefully watching it that it does not
burn; turn into glass jars while hot and seal tightly, the same as
canned fruit. It is then ready to use any time of the year.
CANNED PUMPKIN.
Pumpkins or squash canned are far more convenient for ready use
than those dried in the old-fashioned way.
Cut up pumpkin or squash into small pieces, first cutting off
the peel; stew them until tender, add no seasoning; then mash them
very fine with a potato masher. Have ready your cans, made hot, and
then [Pg 443]fill them with the hot pumpkin or squash, seal
tight; place in a dark, cool closet.
PEACH BUTTER.
Pare ripe peaches and put them in a preserving kettle, with
sufficient water to boil them soft; then sift through a colander,
removing the stones. To each quart of peaches put one and one-half
pounds of sugar, and boil very slowly one hour. Stir often and do
not let them burn. Put in stone or glass jars, and keep in a cool
place.
PEACHES DRIED WITH SUGAR.
Peel yellow peaches, cut them from the stone in one piece; allow
two pounds of sugar to six pounds of fruit; make a syrup of
three-quarters of a pound of sugar and a little water; put in the
peaches, a few at a time, and let them cook gently until quite
clear. Take them up carefully on a dish and set them in the sun to
dry. Strew powdered sugar over them on all sides, a little at a
time; if any syrup is left, remove to fresh dishes. When they are
quite dry, lay them lightly in a jar with a little sugar sifted
between the layers.
RED OR PINK COLORING.
Take two cents' worth of cochineal. Lay it on a flat plate and
bruise it with the blade of a knife. Put it into half a teacupful
of alcohol. Let it stand a quarter of an hour, and then filter it
through fine muslin. Always ready for immediate use. Cork the
bottle tight.
Strawberry or cranberry juice makes a fine coloring for
frosting, sweet puddings and confectionery.
DEEP RED COLORING.
Take twenty grains of cochineal and fifteen grains of cream of
tartar finely powdered; add to them a piece of alum the size of a
cherry stone and boil them with a gill of soft water in an earthen
vessel, slowly, for half an hour. Then strain it through muslin,
and keep it tightly corked in a phial. If a little alcohol is added
it will keep any length of time.
YELLOW COLORING.
Take a little saffron, put it into an earthen vessel with a very
small quantity of cold, soft water, and let it steep till the color
of the infusion is a bright yellow. Then strain it, add half
alcohol to it. To color fruit yellow, boil the fruit with fresh
lemon skins in water to cover them until it is tender; then take it
up, spread it on dishes to cool and finish as may be directed.
To color icing, put the grated peel of a lemon or orange in a
thin muslin bag, squeezing a little juice through it, then mixing
with the sugar.
GREEN COLORING.
Take fresh spinach or beet leaves and pound them in a marble
mortar. If you want it for immediate use, take off the green froth
[Pg 445]as it rises, and mix it with the article you intend
to color. If you wish to keep it a few days, take the juice when
you have pressed out a teacupful, and adding to it a piece of alum
the size of a pea, give it a boil in a saucepan. Or make the juice
very strong and add a quart of alcohol. Bottle it air-tight.
SUGAR GRAINS.
These are made by pounding white lump sugar in a mortar and
shaking it through sieves of different degrees of coarseness, thus
accumulating grains of different sizes. They are used in
ornamenting cake.
SUGAR GRAINS, COLORED.
Stir a little coloring—as the essence of spinach, or
prepared cochineal, or liquid carmine, or indigo, rouge, saffron,
etc.,—into the sugar grains made as above, until each grain
is stained, then spread them on a baking-sheet and dry them in a
warm place. They are used in ornamenting cake.
CARAMEL OR BURNT SUGAR.
Put one cupful of sugar and two teaspoonfuls of water in a
saucepan on the fire; stir constantly until it is quite a dark
color, then add a half cupful of water and a pinch of salt; let it
boil a few minutes and when cold, bottle.
For coloring soups, sauces or gravies.
TO CLARIFY JELLY.
The white of egg is, perhaps, the best substance that can be
employed in clarifying jelly, as well as some other fluids, for the
reason that when albumen (and the white of egg is nearly pure
albumen) is put into a liquid that is muddy, from substances
suspended in it, on boiling coagulates in a flocculent manner, and,
entangling with the impurities, rises with them to the surface as a
scum, or sinks to the bottom, according to their weight.
In the making of confections the best granulated or
loaf sugar should be used. (Beware of glucose mixed with
sugar.) Sugar is boiled more or less, according to the kind of
candy to be made, and it is necessary to understand the proper
degree of sugar boiling to operate it successfully.
Occasionally sugar made into candies, "creams" or syrups, will
need clarifying. The process is as follows: Beat up well the white
of an egg with a cupful of cold water and pour it into a very clean
iron or thick new tin saucepan, and put into the pan four cupfuls
of sugar, mixed with a cupful of warm water. Put on the stove and
heat moderately until the scum rises. Remove the pan, and
skim off the top, then place on the fire again until the scum rises
again. Then remove as before, and so continue until no scum
rises.
This recipe is good for brown or yellowish sugar; for soft,
white sugars, half the white of an egg will do, and for refined or
loaf sugar a quarter will do.
The quantities of sugar and water are the same in all cases.
Loaf sugar will generally do for all candy-making without further
clarification. Brown or yellow sugars are used for caramels,
dark-colored cocoanut, taffy, and pulled molasses candies
generally.
Havana is the cheapest grade of white sugar and a shade or two
lighter than the brown.
Confectioners' A is superior in color and grain to the Havana.
It is a centrifugal sugar—that is, it is not re-boiled to
procure its white color, but is moistened with water and then put
into rapidly-revolving cylinders. The uncrystalized syrup or
molasses is whirled out of it, and the sugar comes out with a dry,
white grain.
ICING OR POWDERED SUGARS.—This is powdered loaf sugar.
Icing can only be made with powdered sugar which is produced by
grinding or crushing loaf sugar nearly as fine as flour.
GRANULATED SUGAR—This is a coarse-grained sugar, generally
very clean and sparkling, and fit for use as a colored sugar in
crystallized goods, and other superior uses.
This same syrup answers for most candies and should be boiled to
such a degree, that when a fork or splinter is dipped into it the
liquid will run off and form a thick drop on the end, and long
silk-like threads hang from it when exposed to the air. The syrup
never to be stirred while hot, or else it will grain, but if
intended for soft, French candies, should be removed, and, when
nearly cold, stirred to a cream. For hard, brittle candies, the
syrup should be boiled until, when a little is dropped in
cold water, it will crack and break when biting it.
The hands should be buttered when handling it, or it will stick
to them.
The top of the inside of the dish that the sugar or molasses is
to be cooked in should be buttered a few inches around the inside;
it prevents the syrup from rising and swelling any higher than
where it reaches the buttered edge.
For common crack candies, the sugar can be kept from graining by
adding a teaspoonful of vinegar or cream of tartar.
Colorings for candies should be harmless, and those used for
fruit and confectionery, on page 444, will be most suitable.
Essences and extracts should be bought at the druggist's, not
the poor kind usually sold at the grocer's.
FRENCH CREAM CANDY.
Put four cupfuls of white sugar and one cupful of water into a
bright tin pan on the range and let it boil without stirring for
ten minutes. If it looks somewhat thick, test it by letting some
drop from the spoon, and if it threads, remove the pan to the
table. Take out a small spoonful, and rub it against the side of a
cake bowl; if it becomes creamy, and will roll into a ball between
the fingers, pour the whole into the bowl. When cool enough to bear
your finger in it, take it in your lap, stir or beat it with a
large spoon, or pudding-stick. It will soon begin to look like
cream, and then grow stiffer until you find it necessary to take
your hands and work it like bread dough. If it is not boiled enough
to cream, set it back upon the range and let it remain one or two
minutes, or as long as is necessary, taking care not to cook it too
much. Add the flavoring as soon as it begins to cool. This is the
[Pg 448]foundation of all French creams. It can be made into
rolls, and sliced off, or packed in plates and cut into small
cubes, or made into any shape imitating French candies. A pretty
form is made by coloring some of the cream pink, taking a piece
about as large as a hazel nut, and crowding an almond meat half way
into one side, till it looks like a bursting kernel. In working,
should the cream get too cold, warm it.
To be successful in making this cream, several points are to be
remembered; when the boiled sugar is cool enough to beat, if it
looks rough and has turned to sugar, it is because it has been
boiled too much, or has been stirred. If, after it is
beaten, it does not look like lard or thick cream, and is sandy or
sugary instead, it is because you did not let it get cool enough
before beating.
It is not boiled enough if it does not harden so as to work like
dough, and should not stick to the hands; in this case put it back
into the pan with an ounce of hot water, and cook over just enough,
by testing in water as above. After it is turned into the bowl to
cool, it should look clear as jelly. Practice and patience will
make perfect.
FRUIT CREAMS.
Add to "French Cream" raisins, currants, figs, a little citron,
chopped and mixed thoroughly through the cream while quite warm.
Make into bars or flat cakes.
WALNUT CREAMS.
Take a piece of "French Cream" the size of a walnut. Having
cracked some English walnuts, using care not to break the meats,
place one-half of each nut upon each side of the ball, pressing
them into the ball.
Walnut creams can be made by another method: First take a piece
of "French Cream," put it into a cup and setting the cup into a
vessel of boiling water, heating it until it turns like thick
cream; drop the walnut meats into it, one at a time, taking them
out on the end of a fork and placing on buttered paper; continue to
dip them until all are used, then go over again, giving them a
second coat of candy. They look nice colored pink and flavored with
vanilla.
CHOCOLATE CREAMS.
Use "French Cream," and form it into small cone-shaped balls
with the fingers. Lay them upon paper to harden until all are
formed. [Pg 449]Melt one cake of Baker's chocolate in an earthen
dish or small basin; by setting it in the oven it will soon melt;
do not let it cook, but it must be kept hot.
Take the balls of cream, one at a time, on the tines of a fork,
pour the melted chocolate over them with a teaspoon and when well
covered, slip them from the fork upon oiled paper.
COCOANUT CREAMS.
Take two tablespoonfuls of grated cocoanut and half as much
"French candy;" work them both together with your hand till the
cocoanut is all well mixed in it. If you choose, you can add a drop
of vanilla. If too soft to work into balls, add confectioners'
sugar to stiffen; make into balls the size of hazelnuts and dip
twice, as in the foregoing recipes, flavoring the melted "French
Cream" with vanilla.
VARIEGATED CREAMS.
Make the "French Cream" recipe, and divide into three parts,
leaving one part white, color one pink with cochineal syrup, and
the third part color brown with chocolate, which is done by just
letting the cream soften and stirring in a little finely grated
chocolate. The pink is colored by dropping on a few drops of
cochineal syrup while the cream is warm and beating it in. Take the
white cream, make a flat ball of it, and lay it upon a buttered
dish, and pat it out flat until about half an inch thick. If it
does not work easily, dip the hand in alcohol. Take the pink cream,
work in the same way as the white and lay it upon the white; then
the chocolate in the same manner, and lay upon the pink, pressing
all together. Trim the edges off smooth, leaving it in a nice,
square cake, then cut into slices or small cubes, as you prefer. It
is necessary to work it all up as rapidly as possible.
RASPBERRY CREAMS.
Stir enough confectioners' sugar into a teaspoonful of raspberry
jam to form a thick paste; roll it into balls between the palms of
your hands. Put a lump of "French Cream" into a teacup and set it
into a basin of boiling water, stirring it until it has melted;
then drop a few drops of cochineal coloring to make it a pale pink,
or a few drops of raspberry juice, being careful not to add enough
to prevent its hardening.[Pg
450] Now dip these
little balls into the sugar cream, giving them two coats. Lay aside
to harden.
Remember to keep stirring the melted cream, or if not it
will turn back to clear syrup.
NUT CREAMS.
Chop almonds, hickory nuts, butternuts or English walnuts quite
fine. Make the '"French Cream," and before adding all the sugar,
while the cream is quite soft, stir into it the nuts, and then form
into balls, bars or squares. Several kinds of nuts may be mixed
together.
MAPLE SUGAR CREAMS.
Grate fine maple sugar and mix, in quantity to suit the taste,
with "French Cream;" make any shape desired. Walnut creams are
sometimes made with maple sugar and are very fine.
STICK CANDY.
One pound of granulated sugar, one cupful of water, a quarter of
a cupful of vinegar, or half a teaspoonful of cream of tartar, one
small tablespoonful of glycerine. Flavor with vanilla, rose or
lemon. Boil all except the flavoring, without stirring, twenty
minutes or half an hour, or until crisp when dropped in water. Just
before pouring upon greased platters to cool, add half a
teaspoonful of soda. After pouring upon platters to cool, pour two
teaspoonfuls of flavoring over the top. When partly cool, pull it
until very white. Draw it into sticks the size you wish, and cut
off with shears into sticks or kiss-shaped drops. It may be colored
if desired. (See page 444, for coloring.)
CHOCOLATE CARAMELS.
One cupful of grated chocolate, two cupfuls of brown sugar, one
cupful of West India molasses, one cupful of milk or cream, butter
the size of an egg, boil until thick, almost brittle,
stirring constantly. Turn it out on to buttered plates, and when it
begins to stiffen, mark it in small squares so that it will break
easily when cold. Some like it flavored with a tablespoonful of
vanilla.
GRILLED ALMONDS.
These are a very delicious candy seldom met with out of France.
They are rather more trouble to make than other kinds, but well
repay [Pg 451]it from their novel flavor. Blanch a cupful of
almonds; dry them thoroughly. Boil a cupful of sugar and a quarter
of a cupful of water till it "hairs," then throw in the almonds;
let them fry, as it were, in this syrup, stirring them
occasionally; they will turn a faint yellow brown before the sugar
changes color; do not wait an instant once this change of color
begins, or they will lose flavor; remove them from the fire, and
stir them until the syrup has turned back to sugar and clings
irregularly to the nuts.
These are grilled almonds. You will find them delicious, as they
are to alternate at dinner with the salted almonds now so
fashionable.
PEPPERMINT DROPS.
One cupful of sugar crushed fine, and just moistened with
boiling water, then boiled five minutes; then take from the fire
and add cream of tartar the size of a pea; mix well and add four or
five drops of oil of peppermint. Beat briskly until the mixture
whitens, then drop quickly upon white paper. Have the cream of
tartar and oil of peppermint measured while the sugar is boiling.
If it sugars before it is all dropped, add a little water and boil
a minute or two.
CURRANT DROPS.
Use currant juice instead of water, to moisten a quantity of
sugar. Put it in a pan and heat, stirring constantly; be sure not
to let it boil; then mix a very little more sugar, let it warm with
the rest a moment, then, with a smooth stick, drop on paper.
LEMON DROPS.
Upon a coffeecupful of finely powdered sugar pour just enough
lemon juice to dissolve it, and boil it to the consistency of thick
syrup, and so that it appears brittle when dropped in cold water.
Drop this on buttered plates in drops; set away to cool and
harden.
NUT MOLASSES CANDY.
When making molasses candy, add any kind of nuts you fancy; put
them in after the syrup has thickened and is ready to take from the
fire; pour out on buttered tins. Mark it off in squares before it
gets too cool. Peanuts should be fresh roasted and then tossed in a
sieve, to free them of their inner skins.
SUGAR NUT CANDY.
Three pounds of white sugar, half a pint of water, half a pint
of vinegar, a quarter of a pound of butter, one pound of hickory
nut kernels. Put the sugar, butter, vinegar and water together into
a thick saucepan. When it begins to thicken, add the nuts. To test
it, take up a very small quantity as quickly as possible directly
from the centre, taking care not to disturb it any more than is
necessary. Drop it into cold water, and remove from the fire the
moment the little particles are brittle. Pour into buttered plates.
Use any nuts with this recipe.
COCOANUT CANDY.
One cocoanut, one and one-half pounds of granulated sugar. Put
sugar and milk of cocoanut together, beat slowly until the sugar is
melted, then boil five minutes; add cocoanut (finely grated), boil
ten minutes longer, stir constantly to keep from burning. Pour on
buttered plates; cut in squares. Will take about two days to
harden. Use prepared cocoanut when other cannot be had.
BUTTER-SCOTCH.
Three cupfuls of white sugar, half a cupful of water, half a
cupful of vinegar, or half a teaspoonful of cream of tartar, a
tablespoonful of butter and eight drops of extract of lemon. Boil
without stirring till it will snap and break. Just before
taking from the fire, add a quarter of a teaspoonful of soda; pour
into well-buttered biscuit tins, a quarter of an inch thick. Mark
off into inch squares when partly cold.
EVERTON TAFFY, OR BUTTER-SCOTCH.
Two cupfuls of sugar, two cupfuls of dark molasses, one cupful
of cold butter, grated rind of half a lemon. Boil over a slow fire
until it hardens when dropped in cold water. Pour thinly into tins
well buttered, and mark into inch squares before it cools.
MAPLE WALNUTS.
Beat the white of one egg to a stiff froth, stir in enough
powdered sugar to make it like hard frosting, dip the walnut meats
(which you have taken care to remove from the shells without
breaking) in a syrup made by boiling for two or three minutes two
tablespoonfuls of maple [Pg
453]sugar in one of
water, or in this proportion. Press some of the hard frosting
between the two halves of the walnut and let it harden. Dates may
be prepared in this way, and butternuts and English walnuts
also.
POP-CORN CANDY. No. 1.
Put into an iron kettle one tablespoonful of butter, three
tablespoonfuls of water and one cupful of white sugar; boil until
ready to candy, then throw in three quarts nicely popped corn; stir
vigorously until the sugar is evenly distributed over the corn;
take the kettle from the fire and stir until it cools a little, and
in this way you may have each kernel separate and all coated with
the sugar. Of course it must have your undivided attention from the
first, to prevent scorching. Almonds, English walnuts, or, in fact,
any nuts are delicious prepared in this way.
POP-CORN CANDY. No. 2.
Having popped your corn, salt it and keep it warm, sprinkle over
with a whisk broom a mixture composed of an ounce of gum arabic and
a half pound of sugar, dissolved in two quarts of water; boil all a
few minutes. Stir the corn with the hands or large spoon
thoroughly; then mold into balls with the hands.
POP-CORN BALLS.
Take three large ears of pop-corn (rice is best). After popping,
shake it down in pan so the unpopped corn will settle at the
bottom; put the nice white popped in a greased pan. For the candy,
take one cup of molasses, one cup of light brown or white sugar,
one tablespoonful of vinegar. Boil until it will harden in water.
Pour on the corn. Stir with a spoon until thoroughly mixed; then
mold into balls with the hand.
No flavor should be added to this mixture, as the excellence of
this commodity depends entirely upon the united flavor of the corn,
salt and the sugar or molasses.
HOARHOUND CANDY.
Boil two ounces of dried hoarhound in a pint and a half of water
for about half an hour; strain and add three and a half pounds of
brown sugar; boil over a hot fire until sufficiently hard; pour out
in [Pg 454]flat, well-greased tins and mark into sticks or
small squares with a knife as soon as cool enough to retain its
shape.
JUJUBE PASTE.
Two cupfuls of sugar, one-quarter of a pound of gum arabic, one
pint of water. Flavor with the essence of lemon and a grain of
cochineal. Let the mixture stand, until the gum is dissolved, in a
warm place on the back of the stove, then draw forward and cook
until thick; try in cold water; it should be limber and bend when
cold. Pour in buttered pans, an eighth of an inch thick; when cool,
roll up in a scroll.
CANDIED ORANGES.
Candied orange is a great delicacy, which is easily made: Peel
and quarter the oranges; make a syrup in the proportion of one
pound of sugar to one pint of water; let it boil until it will
harden in water; then take it from the fire and dip the quarters of
orange in the syrup; let them drain on a fine sieve placed over a
platter so that the syrup will not be wasted; let them drain thus
until cool, when the sugar will crystallize. These are nice served
with the last course of dinner. Any fruit the same.
FIG CANDY.
One cup of sugar, one-third cup of water, one-fourth teaspoonful
cream of tartar. Do not stir while boiling. Boil to amber color,
stir in the cream of tartar just before taking from the fire. Wash
the figs, open and lay in a tin pan and pour the candy over them.
Or you may dip them in the syrup the same as "Candied Oranges."
CANDY ROLEY POLEY.
Take half a pint of citron, half a pint of raisins, half a pound
of figs, a quarter of a pound of shelled almonds, one pint of
peanuts before they are hulled; cut up the citron, stone the
raisins, blanch the almonds, and hull the peanuts; cut up the figs
into small bits. Take two pounds of coffee-sugar and moisten with
vinegar; put in a piece of butter as large as a walnut; stew till
it hardens, but take off before it gets to the brittle stage; beat
it with a spoon six or eight times, then stir in the mixed fruits
and nuts. Pour into a wet cloth and roll it up like a pudding,
twisting the ends of the cloth to mold it. Let it get cold and
slice off pieces as it may be wanted for eating.
MOLASSES CANDY.
Put one quart of West India molasses, one cupful of brown sugar,
a piece of butter the size of half an egg, into a six-quart kettle.
Let it boil over a slack fire until it begins to look thick,
stirring it often to prevent burning. Test it by taking some out
and dropping a few drops in a cup of cold water. If it hardens
quickly and breaks short between the teeth it is boiled enough. Now
put in half a teaspoonful of baking soda, and stir it well; then
pour it out into well-buttered flat tins. When partly cooled, take
up the candy with your hands well buttered then pull and double,
and so on, until the candy is a whitish yellow. It may be cut in
strips and rolled or twisted.
If flavoring is desired, drop the flavoring on the top as it
begins to cool and when it is pulled, the whole will be
flavored.
STRAWBERRY CONSERVE.
Prepare the fruit as for preserving, allowing half a pound of
loaf sugar to one pound of fruit. Sprinkle the sugar over the fruit
at night; in the morning, put it on the fire in a kettle and boil
until the berries are clear. Spread on dishes and put in the sun
until dry; after which roll the fruit in sugar and pack in
jars.
PEACH CONSERVE.
Halve the peaches and take out the stones; pare. Have ready some
powdered white sugar on a plate or dish. Roll the peaches in it
several times, until they will not take up any more. Place them
singly on a plate, with the cup or hollow side up, that the juices
may not run out. Lay them in the sun. The next morning roll them
again. As soon as the juice seems set in the peaches, turn the
other side to the sun. When they are thoroughly dry, pack them in
glass jars, or, what is still nicer, fig-drums. They make an
excellent sweetmeat just as they are; or, if wanted for table use,
put over the fire in porcelain, with a very little water, and stew
a few minutes.
PEACH LEATHER.
Stew as many peaches as you choose, allowing a quarter of a
pound of sugar to one of fruit; mash it up smooth as it cooks, and
when it is dry enough to spread in a thin sheet on a board greased
with butter, set it out in the sun to dry; when dry it can be
rolled up like [Pg 456]leather, wrapped up in a cloth, and
will keep perfectly from season to season. School-children regard
it as a delightful addition to their lunch of biscuit or cold
bread. Apple and quince leather are made in the same fashion, only
a little flavoring or spice is added to them.
COCOANUT CARAMELS.
Two cupfuls of grated cocoanut, one cupful of sugar, two
tablespoonfuls of flour, the whites of three eggs, beaten stiff.
Soak the cocoanut, if desiccated, in milk enough to cover it; then
beat the whites of the eggs, add gradually the sugar, cocoanut and
flour; with your fingers make, by rolling the mixture, into cone
shapes. Place them on buttered sheets of tin covered with buttered
letter paper and bake in a moderate heat about fifteen or twenty
minutes. They should cool before removing from the tins.
DRIED PRESERVES.
Any of the fruits that have been preserved in syrup may be
converted into dry preserves, by first draining them from the syrup
and then drying them slowly on the stove, strewing them thickly
with powdered sugar. They should be turned every few hours, sifting
over them more sugar.
CANDIES WITHOUT COOKING.
Very many candies made by confectioners are made without
boiling, which makes them very desirable, and they are equal to the
best "French Creams." The secret lies in the sugar used, which is
the XXX powdered or confectioners' sugar. Ordinary powdered
sugar, when rubbed between the thumb and finger has a decided
grain, but the confectioners' sugar is fine as flour. The candies
made after this process are better the day after.
FRENCH VANILLA CREAM.
Break into a bowl the whites of one or more eggs, as the
quantity you wish to make will require; add to it an equal quantity
of cold water, then stir in XXX powdered or confectioners' sugar
until you have it stiff enough to mold into shape with the fingers.
Flavor with vanilla to taste. After it is formed in balls, cubes or
lozenge shapes, lay them upon plates or waxed paper and set them
aside to dry. This cream can be worked in candies similar to the
French cooked cream.
CHOCOLATE CREAM DROPS.
These are made or molded into cone-shape forms with the fingers,
from the uncooked "French Cream," similar to that which is cooked.
After forming into these little balls or cones, lay them on oiled
paper until the next day, to harden, or make them in the morning
and leave them until afternoon. Then melt some chocolate (the best
confectioners') in a basin set in another basin of boiling water;
when melted, and the creams are hard enough to handle, take one at
a time on a fork and drop into the melted chocolate, roll it until
well covered, then slip from the fork upon oiled or waxed paper,
and set them aside to harden.
FRUIT AND NUT CREAMS.
Raisins seeded, currants, figs and citron, chopped fine, and
mixed with the uncooked "French Cream," while soft, before the
sugar is all mixed in, makes a delicious variety. Nuts also may be
mixed with this cream, stirring into it chopped almonds, hickory
nuts, butternuts, or English walnuts, then forming them into balls,
bars or squares. Several kinds of nuts may be mixed together.
ORANGE DROPS.
Grate the rind of one orange and squeeze the juice, taking care
to reject the seeds; add to this a pinch of tartaric acid; then
stir in confectioners' sugar until it is stiff enough to form into
balls the size of a small marble. This is delicious candy.
The same process for lemon drops, using lemons in place of
orange. Color a faint yellow.
COCOANUT CREAMS.
Make the uncooked cream as in the foregoing recipe. Take the
cream while soft, add fresh grated cocoanut to taste; add
sufficient confectioners' sugar to mold into balls and then roll
the balls in the fresh grated cocoanut. These may be colored pink
with a few drops of cochineal syrup, also brown by adding a few
spoonfuls of grated chocolate; then rolling them in grated
cocoanut; the three colors are very pretty together. The coconut
cream may be made into a flat cake and cut into squares or
strips.
With this uncooked cream, all the recipes given for the cooked
"French Cream," may be used: English walnut creams, variegated
creams, etc.
Boiling water is a very important desideratum in the making of a
cup of good coffee or tea, but the average housewife is very apt to
overlook this fact. Do not boil the water more than three or four
minutes; longer boiling ruins the water for coffee or tea making,
as most of its natural properties escape by evaporation, leaving a
very insipid liquid composed mostly of lime and iron, that would
ruin the best coffee, and give the tea a dark, dead look, which
ought to be the reverse.
Water left in the tea-kettle over night must never be used
for preparing the breakfast coffee; no matter how excellent
your coffee or tea may be, it will be ruined by the addition of
water that has been boiled more than once.
THE HEALING PROPERTIES OF TEA AND COFFEE.
The medical properties of these two beverages are considerable.
Tea is used advantageously in inflammatory diseases and as a cure
for the headache. Coffee is supposed to act as a preventative of
gravel and gout, and to its influence is ascribed the rarity of
those diseases in Prance and Turkey. Both tea and coffee powerfully
counteract the effects of opium and intoxicating liquors: though,
when taken in excess, and without nourishing food, they themselves
produce, temporarily at least, some of the more disagreeable
consequences incident to the use of ardent spirits. In general,
however, none but persons possessing great mobility of the nervous
system, or enfeebled or effeminate constitutions, are injuriously
affected by the moderate use of tea and coffee in connection with
food.
COFFEE.
One full coffeecupful of ground coffee, stirred with one egg and
part of the shell, adding a half cupful of cold water. Put
it into the [Pg 459]coffee boiler, and pour on to it a quart of
boiling water; as it rises and begins to boil, stir it down with a
silver spoon or fork. Boil hard for ten or twelve minutes. Remove
from the fire and pour out a cupful of coffee, then pour back into
the coffeepot. Place it on the back of the stove or range where it
will keep hot (and not boil); it will settle in about five minutes.
Send to the table hot. Serve with good cream and lump sugar.
Three-quarters of a pound of Java and a quarter of a pound of Mocha
make the best mixture of coffee.
VIENNA COFFEE.
Equal parts of Mocha and Java coffee; allow one heaping
tablespoonful of coffee to each person and two extra to make good
strength. Mix one egg with grounds; pour on coffee half as much
boiling water as will be needed; let it froth, then stir down
grounds, and let boil five minutes; then let it stand where it will
keep hot, but not boil, for five or ten minutes, and add rest of
water. To one pint of cream add the white of an egg, well beaten;
this is to be put in cups with sugar, and hot coffee added.
FILTERED OR DRIP COFFEE.
For each person allow a large tablespoonful of finely ground
coffee, and to every tablespoonful allow a cupful of boiling water;
the coffee to be one part Mocha to two of Java.
Have a small iron ring made to fit the top of the coffeepot
inside, and to this ring sew a small muslin bag (the muslin for the
purpose must not be too thin). Fit the bag into the pot, pour some
boiling water in it, and, when the pot is well warmed, put the
ground coffee into the bag; pour over as much boiling water as is
required, close the lid, and, when all the water has filtered
through, remove the bag, and send the coffee to table. Making it in
this manner prevents the necessity of pouring the coffee from one
vessel to another, which cools and spoils it. The water should be
poured on the coffee gradually so that the infusion may be
stronger; and the bag must be well made that none of the grounds
may escape through the seams and so make the coffee thick and
muddy.
Patented coffeepots on this principle can be purchased at most
house-furnishing stores.
ICED COFFEE.
Make more coffee than usual at breakfast time and stronger. When
cold put on ice. Serve with cracked ice in each tumbler.
SUBSTITUTE FOR CREAM IN COFFEE.
Beat the white of an egg, put to it a small lump of butter and
pour the coffee into it gradually, stirring it so that it will not
curdle. It is difficult to distinguish this from fresh cream.
Many drop a tiny piece of sweet butter into their cup of hot
coffee as a substitute for cream.
TO MAKE TEA.
Allow two teaspoonfuls of tea to one large cupful of boiling
water. Scald the teapot, put in the tea, pour on about a cupful of
boiling water, set it on the fire in a warm place, where it
will not boil, but keep very hot, to almost boiling; let it steep
or "draw" ten or twelve minutes. Now fill up with as much boiling
water as is required. Send hot to the table. It is better to
use a china or porcelain teapot, but if you do use metal let it be
tin, new, bright and clean; never use it when the tin is worn off
and the iron exposed. If you do you are drinking tea-ate of
iron.
To make tea to perfection, boiling water must be poured on the
leaves directly it boils. Water which has been boiling more than
five minutes, or which has previously boiled, should on no account
be used. If the water does not boil, or if it be allowed to
overboil, the leaves of the tea will be only half-opened and the
tea itself will be quite spoiled. The water should be allowed to
remain on the leaves from ten to fifteen minutes.
A Chinese being interviewed for the Cook says: Drink your
tea plain. Don't add milk or sugar. Tea-brokers and tea-tasters
never do; epicures never do; the Chinese never do. Milk contains
fibrin, albumen or some other stuff, and the tea a delicate amount
of tannin. Mixing the two makes the liquid turbid. This turbidity,
if I remember the cyclopædia aright, is tannate of fibrin, or
leather. People who put milk in tea are therefore drinking boots
and shoes in mild disguise.
ICED TEA.
Is now served to a considerable extent during the summer months.
It is of course used without milk, and the addition of sugar serves
only to destroy the finer tea flavor. It may be prepared some hours
in advance, and should be made stronger than when served hot. It is
bottled and placed in the ice chest till required. Use the black or
green teas, or both, mixed, as fancied.
CHOCOLATE.
Allow half a cupful of grated chocolate to a pint of water and a
pint of milk. Rub the chocolate smooth in a little cold water and
stir into the boiling water. Boil twenty minutes, add the milk and
boil ten minutes more, stirring it often. Sweeten to your
taste.
The French put two cupfuls of boiling water to each cupful of
chocolate. They throw in the chocolate just as the water commences
to boil. Stir it with a spoon as soon as it boils up, add two
cupfuls of good milk, and when it has boiled sufficiently, serve a
spoonful of thick whipped cream with each cup.
COCOA.
Six tablespoonfuls of cocoa to each pint of water, as much milk
as water, sugar to taste. Rub cocoa smooth in a little cold water;
have ready on the fire a pint of boiling water; stir in grated
cocoa paste. Boil twenty minutes, add milk and boil five minutes
more, stirring often. Sweeten in cups so as to suit different
tastes.
BUTTERMILK AS A DRINK.
Buttermilk, so generally regarded as a waste product, has
latterly been coming somewhat into vogue, not only as a nutrient,
but as a therapeutic agent, and in an editorial article the
Canada Lancet, some time ago, highly extolled its virtues.
Buttermilk may be roughly described as milk which has lost most of
its fat and a small percentage of casein, and which has become sour
by fermentation. Long experience has demonstrated it to be an agent
of superior digestibility. It is, indeed, a true milk
peptone—that is, milk already partly digested, the
coagulation of the coagulable portion being loose and flaky, and
not of that firm indigestible nature which is the result of the
action of the gastric juice upon cow's sweet milk. It resembles
koumiss in its [Pg 462]nature, and, with the exception of
that article, it is the most grateful, refreshing and digestible of
the products of milk. It is a decided laxative to the bowels, a
fact which must be borne in mind in the treatment of typhoid fever,
and which may be turned to advantage in the treatment of habitual
constipation. It is a diuretic, and may be prescribed with
advantage in some kidney troubles. Owing to its acidity, combined
with its laxative properties, it is believed to exercise a general
impression on the liver. It is well adapted to many cases where it
is customary to recommend lime water and milk. It is invaluable in
the treatment of diabetes, either exclusively, or alternating with
skimmed milk. In some cases of gastric ulcer and cancer of the
stomach, it is the only food that can be retained.
CURRANT WINE. No. 1.
The currants should be quite ripe. Stem, mash and strain them,
adding a half pint of water and less than a pound of sugar to a
quart of the mashed fruit. Stir well up together and pour into a
clean cask, leaving the bung-hole open, or covered with a piece of
lace. It should stand for a month to ferment, when it will be ready
for bottling; just before bottling you may add a small quantity of
brandy or whisky.
CURRANT WINE. No. 2.
To each quart of currant juice, add two quarts of soft water and
three pounds of brown sugar. Put into a jug or small keg, leaving
the top open until fermentation ceases and it looks clear. Draw off
and cork tightly.
BLACKBERRY WINE. No. 1.
Cover your blackberries with cold water; crush the berries well
with a wooden masher; let them stand twenty-four hours; then
strain, and to one gallon of juice put three pounds of common brown
sugar; put into wide-mouthed jars for several days, carefully
skimming off the scum that will rise to the top; put in several
sheets of brown paper and let them remain in it three days; then
skim again and pour through a funnel into your cask. There let it
remain undisturbed till March; then strain again and bottle. These
directions, if carefully followed out, will insure you excellent
wine.
BLACKBERRY WINE NO. 2
Berries should be ripe and plump. Put into a large wood or stone
vessel with a tap; pour on sufficient boiling water to cover them;
when cool enough to bear your hand, bruise well until all the
berries are broken; cover up, let stand until berries begin to rise
to top, which will occur in three or four days. Then draw off the
clear juice in another vessel, and add one pound of sugar to every
ten quarts of the liquor, and stir thoroughly. Let stand six to ten
days in first vessel with top; then draw off through a jelly-bag.
Steep four ounces of isinglass in a pint of wine for twelve hours;
boil it over a slow fire till all dissolved, then place dissolved
isinglass in a gallon of blackberry juice, give them a boil
together and pour all into the vessel. Let stand a few days to
ferment and settle; draw off and keep in a cool place. Other berry
wines may be made in the same manner.
GRAPE WINE.
Mash the grapes and strain them through a cloth; put the skins
in a tub, after squeezing them, with barely enough water to cover
them; strain the juice thus obtained into the first portion; put
three pounds of sugar to one gallon of the mixture; let it stand in
an open tub to ferment, covered with a cloth, for a period of from
three to seven days; skim off what rises every morning. Put the
juice in a cask and leave it open for twenty-four hours; then bung
it up, and put clay over the bung to keep the air out. Let your
wine remain in the cask until March, when it should be drawn off
and bottled.
FLORIDA ORANGE WINE.
Wipe the oranges with a wet cloth, peel off the yellow rind very
thin, squeeze the oranges, and strain the juice through a
hair-sieve; measure the juice after it is strained and for each
gallon allow three pounds of granulated sugar, the white and shell
of one egg and one-third of a gallon of cold water; put the sugar,
the white and shell of the egg (crushed small) and the water over
the fire and stir them every two minutes until the eggs begin to
harden; then boil the syrup until it looks clear under the froth,
of egg which will form on the surface; strain the syrup, pour it
upon the orange rind and let it stand over night; then next add the
orange juice and again let it stand over [Pg
464]night; strain it
the second day, and put it into a tight cask with a small cake of
compressed yeast to about ten gallons of wine, and leave the bung
out of the cask until the wine ceases to ferment; the hissing noise
continues so long as fermentation is in progress; when fermentation
ceases, close the cask by driving in the bung, and let the wine
stand about nine months before bottling it; three months after it
is bottled, it can be used. A glass of brandy added to each gallon
of wine after fermentation ceases is generally considered an
improvement.
There are seasons of the year when Florida oranges by the box
are very cheap, and this fine wine can be made at a small
expense.
METHELIN, OR HONEY WINE.
This is a very ancient and popular drink in the north of Europe.
To some new honey, strained, add spring water; put a whole egg into
it; boil this liquor till the egg swims above the liquor; strain,
pour it in a cask. To every fifteen gallons add two ounces of white
Jamaica ginger, bruised, one ounce of cloves and mace, one and
one-half ounces of cinnamon, all bruised together and tied up in a
muslin bag; accelerate the fermentation with yeast; when worked
sufficiently, bung up; in six weeks draw off into bottles.
Another Mead.—Boil the combs, from which the honey
has been drained, with sufficient water to make a tolerably sweet
liquor; ferment this with yeast and proceed as per previous
formula.
Sack Mead is made by adding a handful of hops and
sufficient brandy to the comb liquor.
BLACK CURRANT WINE.
Four quarts of whisky, four quarts of black currants, four
pounds of brown or white sugar, one tablespoonful of cloves, one
tablespoonful of cinnamon.
Crush the currants and let them stand in the whisky with the
spices for three weeks; then strain and add the sugar; set away
again for three weeks longer; then strain and bottle.
RAISIN WINE.
Take two pounds of raisins, seed and chop them, a lemon, a pound
of white sugar and about two gallons of boiling water. Pour into a
[Pg 465]stone jar and stir daily for six or eight days.
Strain, bottle and put in a cool place for ten days or so, when the
wine will be ready for use.
CHERRY BOUNCE.
To one gallon of wild cherries add enough good whisky to cover
the fruit. Let soak two or three weeks and then drain off the
liquor. Mash the cherries without breaking the stones and strain
through a jelly-bag; add this liquor to that already drained off.
Make a with a gill of water and a pound of white sugar to every two
of liquor thus prepared; stir in well and bottle, and tightly cork.
A common way of making cherry bounce is to put wild cherries and
whisky together in a jug and use the liquor as wanted.
BLACKBERRY CORDIAL.
Warm and squeeze the berries; add to one pint of juice one pound
of white sugar, one-half ounce of powdered cinnamon, one-fourth
ounce of mace, two teaspoonfuls of cloves. Boil all together for
one-fourth of an hour; strain the syrup, and to each pint add a
glass of French brandy. Two or three doses of a tablespoonful or
less will check any slight diarrhoea. When the attack is violent,
give a tablespoonful after each discharge until the complaint is in
subjection. It will arrest dysentery if given in season, and is a
pleasant and safe remedy. Excellent for children when teething.
HOP BEER.
Take five quarts of water, six ounces of hops, boil it three
hours; then strain the liquor, add to it five quarts of water, four
ounces of bruised ginger root; boil this again twenty minutes,
strain and add four pounds of sugar. When luke-warm put in a pint
of yeast. Let it ferment; in twenty-four hours it will be ready for
bottling.
GINGER BEER.
Put into a kettle two ounces of powdered ginger root (or more if
it is not very strong), half an ounce of cream of tartar, two large
lemons, cut in slices, two pounds of broken loaf sugar and two
gallons of soft boiling water. Simmer them over a slow fire for
half an hour. When the liquor is nearly cold, stir into it a large
tablespoonful of [Pg 466]the best yeast. After it has
fermented, which will be in about twenty-four hours, bottle for
use.
SPRUCE BEER.
Allow an ounce of hops and a spoonful of ginger to a gallon of
water. When well boiled, strain it and put in a pint of molasses,
or a pound of brown sugar, and half an ounce or less of the essence
of spruce; when cool, add a teacupful of yeast, and put into a
clean tight cask, and let it ferment for a day or two, then bottle
it for use. You can boil the sprigs of spruce fir in place of the
essence.
ROMAN PUNCH. No. 1.
Grate the yellow rind of four lemons and two oranges upon two
pounds of loaf sugar. Squeeze the juice of the lemons and oranges;
cover it and let it stand until next day. Strain it through a
sieve, mix with the sugar; add a bottle of champagne and the whites
of eight eggs beaten to a stiff froth. It may be frozen or not, as
desired. For winter use snow instead of ice.
ROMAN PUNCH. No. 2.
Make two quarts of lemonade, rich with pure juice lemon fruit;
add one tablespoonful of extract of lemon. Work well and freeze;
just before serving, add for each quart of ice half a pint of
brandy and half a pint of Jamaica rum. Mix well and serve in high
glasses, as this makes what is called a semi or half ice. It is
usually served at dinners as a coup de milieu.
DELICIOUS JUNKET.
Take two quarts of new milk, warm it on the stove to about blood
heat, pour it into a glass or china bowl and stir into it two
tablespoonfuls of prepared rennet, two tablespoonfuls of powdered
loaf sugar, and a small wine-glassful of pale brandy. Let it stand
till cold and eat with sugar and rich cream. Half the quantity can
be made.
RASPBERRY SHRUB.
One quart of raspberry juice, half a pound of loaf sugar,
dissolved, a pint of Jamaica rum, or part rum and brandy. Mix
thoroughly. Bottle for use.
SASSAFRAS MEAD.
Mix gradually with two quarts of boiling water three pounds and
a half of the best brown sugar, a pint and a half of good West
India molasses, and a quarter of a pound of tartaric acid. Stir it
well and when cool, strain it into a large jug or pan, then mix in
a teaspoonful (not more) of essence of sassafras. Transfer it to
clean bottles (it will fill about half a dozen), cork it tightly
and keep it in a cool place. It will be fit for use next day. Put
into a box or boxes a quarter of a pound of carbonate of soda, to
use with it. To prepare a glass of sassafras mead for drinking, put
a large tablespoonful of the mead into half a tumbler full of
ice-water, stir into it a half teaspoonful of the soda and it will
immediately foam up to the top.
Sassafras mead will be found a cheap, wholesome and pleasant
beverage for warm weather. The essence of sassafras, tartaric acid
and carbonate of soda, can, of course, be obtained at the
druggist's.
CREAM SODA WITHOUT THE FOUNTAIN.
Coffee-sugar, four pounds, three pints of water, three nutmegs,
grated, the whites of ten eggs, well beaten, gum arabic, one ounce,
twenty drops of oil of lemon, or extract equal to that amount. By
using oils or other fruits, you can make as many flavors from this
as you desire. Mix all and place over a gentle fire, and stir well
about thirty minutes; remove from the fire and strain, and divide
into two parts; into one-half put eight ounces of bicarbonate of
soda, into the other half put six ounces of tartaric acid. Shake
well, and when cold they are ready for use by pouring three or four
spoonfuls from both parts into separate glasses, each one-third
full of water. Stir each and pour together, and you have a nice
glass of cream soda which you can drink at your leisure, as the gum
and eggs hold the gas.
WINE WHEY.
Sweeten one pint of milk to taste, and when boiling, throw in
two wine-glasses of sherry; when the curd forms, strain the whey
through a muslin bag into tumblers.
LEMON SYRUP.
Take the juice of twelve lemons; grate the rind of six in it,
let it stand over night; then take six pounds of white sugar and
make a [Pg 468]thick syrup. When it is quite cool, strain the juice
into it, and squeeze as much oil from the grated rind as will suit
the taste. Put in bottles, securely corked, for future use. A
tablespoonful in a goblet of water will make a delicious drink on a
hot day.
FOR A SUMMER DRAUGHT.
The juice of one lemon, a tumblerful of cold water, pounded
sugar to taste, half a small teaspoonful of carbonate of soda.
Squeeze the juice from the lemon; strain and add it to the water,
with sufficient pounded sugar to sweeten the whole nicely. When
well mixed, put in the soda, stir well and drink while the mixture
is in an effervescing state.
NOYEAU CORDIAL.
To one gallon of proof spirit add three pounds of loaf sugar and
a tablespoonful of extract of almonds. Mix well together and allow
to stand forty-eight hours; covered closely; now strain through
thick flannel and bottle. This liquor will be much improved by
adding half a pint of apricot or peach juice.
EGG NOG.
Beat the yolks of twelve eggs very light, stir in as much white
sugar as they will dissolve, pour in gradually one glass of brandy
to cook the egg, one glass of old whisky, one grated nutmeg, and
three pints of rich milk. Beat the whites to a froth and stir in
last.
EGG FLIP, OR MULLED ALE.
Boil one quart of good ale with some nutmeg; beat up six eggs
and mix them with a little cold ale; then pour the hot ale to it,
pour it back and forth several times to prevent its curdling; warm
and stir it till sufficiently thick; add a piece of butter or a
glass of brandy and serve it with dry toast.
MILK PUNCH.
One pint of milk made very sweet; a wine-glassful of brandy or
rum, well stirred together; grate a little nutmeg over the top of
the glasses. Serve with a straw in each glass.
FINE MILK PUNCH.
PARE off the yellow rind of four large lemons and steep it for
twenty-four hours in a quart of brandy or rum. Then mix with it the
juice of the lemons, a pound and a half of loaf sugar, two grated
nutmegs and a quart of water. Add a quart of rich unskimmed milk,
made boiling hot, and strain the whole through a jelly-bag. You may
either use it as soon as it is cold, or make a larger quantity (in
the above proportions) and bottle it. It will keep several
months.
TO MAKE HOT PUNCH.
Half a pint of rum, half a pint of brandy, quarter of a pound of
sugar, one large lemon, half a teaspoonful of nutmeg, one pint of
boiling water.
Rub the sugar over the lemon until it has absorbed all the
yellow part of the skin, then put the sugar into a punch bowl; add
the lemon juice (free from pips) and mix these two ingredients,
well together. Pour over them the boiling water, stir well
together, add the rum, brandy and nutmeg; mix thoroughly and the
punch will be ready to serve. It is very important in making good
punch that all the ingredients are thoroughly incorporated; and to
insure success, the processes of mixing must be diligently attended
to. (This is an old-style punch.)
LEMONADE.
Three lemons to a pint of water makes strong lemonade; sweeten
to your taste.
STRAWBERRY WATER.
Take one cupful of ripe hulled berries; crush with a wooden
spoon, mixing with the mass a quarter of a pound of pulverized
sugar and half a pint of cold water. Pour the mixture into a fine
sieve, rub through and filter till clear; add the strained juice,
of one lemon and one and a half pints of cold water, mix thoroughly
and set in ice chest till wanted.
This makes a nice, cool drink on a warm day and easily to be
made in strawberry season.
STRAWBERRY AND RASPBERRY SYRUP.
Mash the fresh fruit, express the juice and to each quart add
three and a half pounds of granulated sugar. The juice, heated to
180° [Pg 470]Fahrenheit, and strained or filtered previous to
dissolving the sugar, will keep for an indefinite time, canned hot
in glass jars.
The juice of soft fruits is best when allowed to drop therefrom
by its own weight; lightly mash the fruit and then suspend in a
cloth, allowing the juice to drop in a vessel beneath. Many
housekeepers, after the bottles and jars are thoroughly washed and
dried, smoke them with sulphur in this way: Take a piece of wire
and bend it around a small piece of brimstone the size of a bean;
set the brimstone on fire, put it in the jar or bottle, bending the
other end over the mouth of the vessel, and cover with a cork;
after the brimstone has burned away, fill the vessel with the syrup
or preserves and cover tightly. There is no sulphurous taste left
by the process.
KOUMISS.
Koumiss is prepared by dissolving four ounces of white sugar in
one gallon of skimmed milk, and placing in bottles of the capacity
of one quart; add two ounces of baker's yeast or a cake of
compressed yeast to each bottle. Cork and tie securely, set in a
warm place until fermentation is well under way, and lay the
bottles on their sides in a cool cellar. In three days,
fermentation will have progressed sufficiently to permit the
koumiss to be in good condition.
PINEAPPLE VINEGAR.
Cover sliced pineapples with pure cider vinegar; let them stand
three or four days, then mash and strain through a cloth as long as
it runs clear; to every three quarts of juice add five pounds of
sugar.
Boil it altogether about ten minutes, skim carefully until
nothing rises to the surface, take from the fire; when cool, bottle
it. Blackberries and raspberries, and, in fact, any kind of highly
flavored fruit, is fine; a tablespoonful in a glass of ice-cold
water, to drink in warm weather.
RASPBERRY VINEGAR. No. 1.
Put a quart of raspberries into a suitable dish, pour over them
a quart of good vinegar, let it stand twenty-four hours, then
strain through a flannel bag and pour this liquor on another quart
of berries; do this for three or four days successively and strain
it; make it very sweet with loaf sugar; bottle and seal it.
RASPBERRY VINEGAR. NO. 2.
Turn over a quart or ripe raspberries, mashed, a quart of good
cider vinegar, add one pound of white sugar, mix well, then let
stand in the sun four hours. Strain it, squeeze out the juice and
put in a pint of good brandy. Seal it up in bottles, air-tight, and
lay them on their sides in the cellar; cover them with sawdust.
When used, pour two tablespoonfuls to a tumblerful of ice-water.
Fine.
HOME-MADE TABLE VINEGAR.
Put in an open cask four gallons of warm rain-water, one gallon
of common molasses and two quarts of yeast; cover the top with thin
muslin and leave it in the sun, covering it up at night and when it
rains. In three or four weeks it will be good vinegar. If cider can
be used in place of rain-water the vinegar will make much
sooner—will not take over a week to make a very sharp
vinegar. Excellent for pickling purposes.
VERY STRONG TABLE VINEGAR.
Take two gallons of good cider and thoroughly mix it with two
pounds of new honey, pour into your cask or bottle and let it stand
from four to six months, when you will have vinegar so strong that
it cannot be used at table without diluting with water. It is the
best ever procured for pickling purposes.
PINEAPPLE-ADE.
Pare and slice some very ripe pineapples; then cut the slices
into small pieces. Put them with all their juice into a large
pitcher, and sprinkle among them plenty of powdered white sugar.
Pour on boiling water, allowing a small half pint to each
pineapple. Cover the pitcher and let it stand till quite cool,
occasionally pressing down the pineapple with a spoon. Then set the
pitcher for a while in ice. Lastly, strain the infusion into
another vessel and transfer it to tumblers, putting into each glass
some more sugar and a bit of ice. This beverage will be found
delicious.
SEIDLITZ POWDERS.
Fold in a white paper a mixture of one drachm of Rochelle salts
and twenty-five grains of carbonate of soda, in a blue paper twenty
[Pg 472]grains of tartaric acid. They should all be
pulverized very finely. Put the contents of the white paper into a
tumbler, not quite half full of cold water, and stir it till
dissolved. Then put the mixture from the blue paper into another
tumbler with the same quantity of water, and stir that also. When
the powders are dissolved in both tumblers, pour the first into the
other, and it will effervesce immediately. Drink it quickly, while
foaming.
INEXPENSIVE DRINK.
A very nice, cheap drink which may take the place of lemonade
and be found fully as healthful is made with one cupful of pure
cider vinegar, half a cupful of good molasses, put into one quart
pitcher of ice-water. A tablespoonful of ground ginger added makes
a healthful beverage.
JANUARY.
MEATS.—Beef, mutton, pork, lamb.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Rabbits, hares, partridges, woodcocks,
grouse or prairie chickens, snipes, antelope, quails, swans, geese,
chickens, capons, tame pigeons, wild ducks, the canvas-back duck
being the most popular and highly prized; turkeys.
FISH.—Haddock, fresh codfish, halibut, flounders, bass,
fresh salmon, turbot. Frozen fresh mackerel is found in our large
cities during this month; also frozen salmon, red-snapper, shad,
frozen bluefish, pickerel, smelts, green turtle, diamond-back
terrapin, prawns, oysters, scallops, hard crabs, white bait, finnan
haddie, smoked halibut, smoked salmon.
VEGETABLES.—Cabbage, carrots, turnips, parsnips, beets,
pumpkins, chives, celery, winter squash, onions, white and sweet
potatoes, Jerusalem artichokes, chiccory, Brussels-sprouts,
kale-sprouts, oyster plant, leeks, cress, cauliflower. Garden
herbs, both dry and green, being chiefly used in stuffing and
soups, and for flavoring and garnishing certain dishes, are always
in season, such as sage, thyme, sweet basil, borage, dill, mint,
parsley, lavender, summer savory, etc., may be procured green in
the summer and dried in the winter.
FEBRUARY.
MEATS.—Beef, mutton, pork, lamb, antelope.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Partridges, hares, rabbits, snipes,
capons, pheasants, fowls, pullets, geese, ducks, turkeys, wild
ducks, swan, and pigeons.
FISH.—Halibut, haddock, fresh codfish, striped bass, eels,
fresh salmon, live lobsters, pompano, sheep's-head, red-snapper,
white perch, a panfish, smelts—green and frozen; shad,
herring, salmon-trout, whitefish, pickerel, green turtle,
flounders, scallops, prawns, oysters, soft-shell crabs—which
are in excellent condition this month; hard crabs, white bait,
boneless dried codfish, finnan haddie, smoked halibut, smoked
salmon.
VEGETABLES.—White potatoes, sweet potatoes, cabbage,
onions, parsnips, oyster plant, okra, celery, chiccory, carrots,
turnips, Jerusalem artichokes, French artichokes, Brussels-sprouts,
beets, mushrooms raised in hot houses, pumpkins, winter squash, dry
shallots and garden herbs for seasoning put up in the dried
state.
MARCH.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Chickens, turkeys, ducks, rabbits,
snipes, wild pigeons, capons.
FISH.—Striped bass, halibut, salmon, live codfish, chicken
halibut, live lobster, Spanish mackerel, flounders, sheep's-head,
pompano, grouper, red-snapper. Shad are plentiful this month.
Herring, salmon-trout, sturgeon, whitefish, pickerel, yellow perch,
catfish, green turtle, terrapin, scallops, soft-shell clams,
oysters, prawns, smoked salmon, smoked halibut, smoked haddock,
salt codfish.
VEGETABLES.—Cabbage, turnips, carrots, parsnips,
artichokes, white potatoes, sweet potatoes, onions, leeks,
radishes, Brussels-sprouts, celery, mushrooms, salsify-chives,
cress, parsley and other garden herbs, greens, rhubarb and
cucumbers raised in hot beds.
APRIL.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, pork, mutton, lamb.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Chickens, fowls, green geese, young
ducks, capons, golden plover, squabs, wild ducks.
FISH.—Haddock, fresh cod, striped bass, halibut, eels,
chicken halibut, live lobsters, salmon, white perch, flounders,
fresh mackerel, sheep's-head, smelts, red-snapper, bluefish, skate
or ray fish, shad, whitefish, brook trout, salmon-trout, pickerel,
catfish, prawns, crayfish, green turtle, oysters, scallops, frogs'
legs, clams, hard crabs, white bait, smoked halibut, smoked salmon,
smoked haddock, salt mackerel, salt codfish.
VEGETABLES.—Onions, white and sweet potatoes,
kale-sprouts, rhubarb, artichokes, turnips, radishes,
Brussels-sprouts, okra, cabbage, parsnips, mushrooms, cress,
carrots, beets, dandelion, egg plant, leeks, lettuce, cucumbers,
asparagus, string beans, peas, chives.
MAY.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Fowls, pigeons, spring chickens, young
ducks, chickens, green geese, young turkeys.
FISH.—Halibut, haddock, striped bass, salmon, flounders,
fresh mackerel, Spanish mackerel, blackfish, pompano, butterfish,
weakfish, kingfish, porgies, shad, bluefish, clams, brook-trout,
whitefish, carp, crayfish, prawns, green turtle, soft crabs, frogs'
legs, smoked fish.
VEGETABLES.—New potatoes, sweet potatoes, cabbage, young
onions, asparagus, beets, carrots, kidney beans, string beans,
lettuce, tomatoes, cauliflower, peas, turnips, squash, rhubarb,
spinach, radishes, artichokes, sorrel, egg-plant, cucumbers, salads
generally.
JUNE.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, mutton, lamb.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Chickens, geese, ducks, young turkeys,
plovers, Pigeons.
FISH.—Fresh salmon, striped bass, halibut, fresh mackerel,
flounders, kingfish, blackfish, weakfish, butterfish, pompano,
Spanish mackerel, porgies, sheeps-head, sturgeon, sea bass,
bluefish, skate or rayfish, carp, black bass, crayfish, lobsters,
eels, white bait, frogs' legs, soft crabs, clams.
VEGETABLES.—Potatoes, spinach, cauliflower, string beans,
peas tomatoes, asparagus, carrots, artichokes, parsnips, onions,
cucumbers, lettuce, radishes, cress, oyster plant, egg plant,
rhubarb and all kinds of garden herbs, sorrel, horse-radish.
JULY.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Fowls, chickens, pigeons, plovers, young
geese, turkey-plouts, squabs, doe-birds,-tame rabbits.
FISH.—Spanish mackerel, striped bass, fresh mackerel,
blackfish, kingfish, flounders, salmon, cod, haddock, halibut,
pompano, butterfish, a sweet panfish, sheep's-head, porgies, sea
bass, weakfish, swordfish, tantog, bluefish skate, brook trout,
crayfish, black bass, moonfish—a fine baking or boiling fish;
pickerel, perch, eels, green turtle, frogs' legs, soft crabs, white
bait, prawns, lobsters, clams.
VEGETABLES.—Potatoes, asparagus, peas, green string beans,
butter beans, artichokes, celery, lettuce, carrots, salsify,
tomatoes, spinach, mushrooms, cabbage onions, endive, radishes,
turnips, mint, various kinds of greens and salads.
AUGUST.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Venison, young ducks, green geese,
snipe, plover, turkeys, guinea-fowls, squabs, wild pigeons,
woodcock, fowls.
FISH—Striped bass, cod, halibut, haddock, salmon,
flounders, fresh mackerel, ponito, butterfish, sea bass, kingfish,
sheep's-head, porgies, bluefish, moonfish, brook trout, eels, black
bass, crayfish, skate or rayfish, catfish, green turtle, white
bait, squid, frogs' legs, soft crabs, prawns, clams.
VEGETABLES.—Carrots, artichokes, onions, string beans,
lima beans, cauliflower Irish potatoes, sweet potatoes, green corn,
tomatoes, peas, summer squash, cucumbers, radishes, lettuce,
celery, rhubarb, beets, greens, mushrooms, chives.
SEPTEMBER.
MEAT.—Beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork, venison.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Larks, woodcock, snipe, wild pigeons,
squabs, young geese, young turkeys, plover, wild ducks, wild geese,
swans and brant fowls, reed-birds, grouse, doe-birds,
partridges.
FISH.—Salmon, halibut codfish, pompano, striped bass,
haddock, cero, a large fish similar to the Spanish mackerel;
flounders, fresh mackerel, blackfish, Spanish mackerel, butterfish,
whitefish, weakfish, smelts, porgies, squids, pickerel, crayfish,
catfish, bluefish, wall-eyed pike, sea bass, skate, carp, prawns,
white bait, frogs' legs, hard crabs, moonfish, soft crabs,
herrings, lobsters, clams.
VEGETABLES.—Potatoes, cabbages, turnips, artichokes, peas,
beans, carrots, onions, salsify, mushrooms, lettuce, sorrel,
celery, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, sweet potatoes, squash,
rhubarb, green-peppers, parsnips, beets, green corn, tomatoes,
cress.
OCTOBER.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, mutton, lamb, pork, venison,
antelope.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Turkeys, geese, fowls, pullets,
chickens, wild ducks, the canvas-back duck being the most highly
prized, for its delicate flavor; woodcock, grouse, pheasants,
pigeons, partridges, snipes, reed-birds, golden plover, gray
plover, squabs.
FISH.—Striped bass, fresh cod, halibut, haddock, Spanish
mackerel, fresh mackerel, cero, flounders, pompano, weakfish, white
perch, grouper, sheep's-head, whitefish, bluefish, pickerel,
red-snapper, yellow perch, smelts, sea bass, black bass, cisco,
wall-eyed pike, crayfish, carp, salmon-trout, spotted bass,
terrapin, frogs' legs, hard crabs, soft crabs, white bait, green
turtle, scallops, eels, lobsters, oysters.
VEGETABLES.—Potatoes, cabbages, turnips, carrots,
cauliflowers, parsnips, string beans, peas, lima beans, corn,
tomatoes, onions, spinach, salsify, egg plant, beets, pumpkins,
endive, celery, parsley, squash, cucumbers, mushrooms, sweet herbs
of all kinds, salads of all kinds, garlic, shallots.
NOVEMBER.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, mutton, pork, venison, antelope.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Rabbits, hares, pheasants, woodcock,
partridges, quails, snipe, grouse, wild ducks, wild geese, fowls,
turkeys, pigeons.
FISH.—Striped bass, fresh cod, halibut, haddock, salmon,
fresh mackerel, blackfish, whitefish, bluefish, catfish, redfish or
spotted bass, black bass, yellow perch, skate, red-snapper,
salmon-trout, pickerel, shad, wall-eyed pike, cisco, crayfish,
terrapin, green turtle, scallops, prawns, white bait, frogs' legs,
hard crabs, oysters.
VEGETABLES.—Potatoes, carrots, parsnips, turnips, onions,
dried beans, artichokes, cabbages, beets, winter squash, celery,
parsley, pumpkins, shallots, mushrooms, chiccory, all sorts of
salads and sweet herbs.
DECEMBER.
MEATS.—Beef, veal, mutton, pork, venison.
POULTRY AND GAME.—Rabbits, hares, grouse, pheasants,
woodcock, snipe, partridges, turkey, fowls, chickens, pullets,
geese, wild geese, ducks, wild duck, tame duck, canvas-back duck,
quails.
FISH.—Turbot, sturgeon, haddock, halibut, eels, striped
bass, flounders, salmon, fresh cod, blackfish, whitefish, grouper,
cusk, shad, mullet, a sweet panfish, black bass, yellow perch,
salmon-trout, pickerel, cisco, skate, wall-eyed pike, terrapin,
crayfish, green turtle, prawns, hard crabs, soft crabs, scallops,
frogs' legs, oysters.
VEGETABLES.—- Potatoes, cabbages, onions, winter squash,
beets, turnips, pumpkins, carrots, parsnips, dried beans, dried
peas, mushrooms, parsley, shallots, Brussels-sprouts, leeks,
horse-radish, garlic, mint, sage and small salads. Garden herbs
which are mostly used for stuffings and for flavoring dishes,
soups, etc., or for garnishing, may be found either green or dried
the year round, always in season.
Melons can be had at most of our markets from July 1st until the
15th of October; they are received from the South in the early part
of the season, and are not as fresh and good as those ripened in
our own vicinity.
BREAKFAST, LUNCH AND DINNER FOR THE
HOLIDAYS
And for a Week in Each Month In the
Year.
NEW YEAR'S DAY.
BREAKFAST.
season them with pepper and salt; butter a sheet of white paper,
lay each slice on a separate piece, envelop them in it with their
ends twisted; broil gently over a clear fire, and serve with
anchovy or caper sauce. When higher seasoning is required, add a
few chopped herbs and a little spice.
FRESH SALMON FRIED.
Cut the slices three-quarters of an inch thick, dredge them with
flour, or dip them in egg and crumbs; fry a light brown. This mode
answers for all fish cut into steaks. Season well with salt and
pepper.
SALMON AND CAPER SAUCE.
Two slices of salmon, one-quarter pound butter, one-half
teaspoonful of chopped parsley, one shallot; salt and pepper to
taste.
Lay the salmon in a baking dish, place pieces of butter over it,
and add the other ingredients, rubbing a little of the seasoning
into the fish; place it in the oven and baste it frequently; when
done, take [Pg 53]it out and drain for a minute or two; lay it in a
dish, pour caper sauce over it and serve. Salmon dressed in this
way, with tomato sauce, is very delicious.
BROILED SALT SALMON OR OTHER SALT FISH.
Soak salmon in tepid or cold water twenty-four hours, changing
water several times, or let stand under faucet of running water. If
in a hurry, or desiring a very salt relish, it may do to soak a
short time, having water warm, and changing, parboiling slightly.
At the hour wanted, broil sharply. Season to suit taste, covering
with butter. This recipe will answer for all kinds of salt
fish.
PICKLED SALMON.
Take a fine, fresh salmon, and, having cleaned it, cut it into
large pieces, and boil it in salted water as if for eating. Then
drain it, wrap it in a dry cloth, and set it in a cold place till
next day. Then make the pickle, which must be in proportion to the
quantity of fish. To one quart of the water in which the salmon was
boiled, allow two quarts of the best vinegar, one ounce of whole
black pepper, one nutmeg grated and a dozen blades of mace. Boil
all these together in a kettle closely covered to prevent the
flavor from evaporating. When the vinegar thus prepared is quite
cold, pour it over the salmon, and put on the top a tablespoonful
of sweet oil, which will make it keep the longer.
Cover it closely, put it in a dry, cool place, and it will be
good for many months. This is the nicest way of preserving salmon,
and is approved by all who have tried it.
SMOKED SALMON.
Smoked salmon to be broiled should be put upon the gridiron
first, with the flesh side to the fire.
Smoked salmon is very nice when shaved like smoked beef, and
served with coffee or tea.
FRICASSEE SALMON.
This way of cooking fresh salmon is a pleasant change from the
ordinary modes of cooking it. Cut one and one-half pounds of salmon
into pieces one inch square; put the pieces in a stewpan with
[Pg 54]half a cupful of water, a little salt, a little white
pepper, one clove, one blade of mace, three pieces of sugar, one
shallot and a heaping teaspoonful of mustard mixed smoothly with
half a teacupful of vinegar. Let this boil up once and add six
tomatoes peeled and cut into tiny pieces, a few sprigs of parsley
finely minced, and one wine-glassful of sherry. Let all simmer
gently for three-quarters of an hour. Serve very hot, and garnish
with dry toast cut in triangular pieces. This dish is good, very
cold, for luncheon or breakfast.
SALMON PATTIES.
Cut cold, cooked salmon into dice. Heat about a pint of the dice
in half a pint of cream. Season to taste with cayenne pepper and
salt. Fill the shells and serve. Cold, cooked fish of any kind may
be made into patties in this way. Use any fish sauce you
choose—all are equally good.
FISH AND OYSTER PIE.
Any remains of cold fish, such as cod or haddock, 2 dozen
oysters, pepper and salt to taste, bread crumbs, sufficient for the
quantity of fish; ½ teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, 1
teaspoonful of finely chopped parsley.
Clear the fish from the bones, and put a layer of it in a
pie-dish, which sprinkle with pepper and salt; then a layer of
bread crumbs, oysters, nutmeg and chopped parsley. Repeat this till
the dish is quite full. You may form a covering either of bread
crumbs, which should be browned, or puff-paste, which should be cut
off into long strips, and laid in cross-bars over the fish, with a
line of the paste first laid round the edge. Before putting on the
top, pour in some made melted butter, or a little thin white sauce,
and the oyster-liquor, and bake.
Time.—If of cooked fish, ¼ hour; if made of
fresh fish and puff-paste, ¾ hour.
STEAMED FISH.
Secure the tail of the fish in its mouth, the body in a circle;
pour over it half a pint of vinegar, seasoned with pepper and salt;
let it stand an hour in a cool place; pour off the vinegar, and put
it in a steamer over boiling water, and steam twenty minutes, or
longer for large fish. When the meat easily separates from the bone
it is done. [Pg 55]Drain well and serve on a very clean white napkin,
neatly folded and placed on the platter; decorate the napkin around
the fish with sprigs of curled parsley, or with fanciful beet
cuttings, or alternately with both.
TO BROIL A SHAD.
Split and wash the shad and afterwards dry it in a cloth. Season
it with salt and pepper. Have ready a bed of clear, bright coals.
Grease your gridiron well, and as soon as it is hot, lay the shad
upon it, the flesh side down; cover with a dripping-pan and broil
it for about a quarter of an hour, or more, according to the
thickness. Butter it well and send it to the table. Covering it
while broiling gives it a more delicious flavor.
BAKED SHAD.
Many people are of the opinion that the very best method of
cooking a shad is to bake it. Stuff it with bread crumbs, salt,
pepper, butter and parsley, and mix this up with the beaten yolk of
egg; fill the fish with it, and sew it up or fasten a string around
it. Pour over it a little water and some butter, and bake as you
would a fowl. A shad will require from an hour to an hour and a
quarter to bake. Garnish with slices of lemon, water cress,
etc.
Dressing for Baked Shad.—Boil up the gravy in which
the shad was baked, put in a large tablespoonful of catsup, a
tablespoonful of brown flour which has been wet with cold water,
the juice of a lemon, and a glass of sherry or Madeira wine. Serve
in a sauce boat.
TO COOK A SHAD ROE.
Drop into boiling water and cook gently for twenty minutes; then
take from the fire and drain. Butter a tin plate and lay the
drained roe upon it. Dredge well with salt and pepper and spread
soft butter over it; then dredge thickly with flour. Cook in the
oven for half an hour, basting frequently with salt, pepper, flour,
butter and water.
TO COOK SHAD ROE. (Another Way.)
First partly boil them in a small covered pan, take out and
season them with salt, a little pepper, dredge with flour and fry
as any fish.
BOILED BASS.
After thoroughly cleaning it place in a saucepan with enough
water to cover it; add two tablespoonfuls of salt; set the saucepan
[Pg 56]over the fire, and when it has boiled about five
minutes try to pull out one of the fins; if it loosens easily from
the body carefully take the fish out of the water, lay it on a
platter, surround it with half a dozen hard-boiled eggs, and serve
it with a sauce.
BOILED BLUEFISH.
Boiled the same as BASS.
BAKED BLUEFISH.
Baked the same as BAKED SHAD—see page 55.
FRIED EELS.
After cleaning the eels well, cut them in pieces two inches
long; wash them and wipe them dry; roll them in wheat flour or
rolled cracker, and fry, as directed for other fish, in hot lard or
beef dripping, salted. They should be browned all over and
thoroughly done.
Eels are sometimes dipped in batter and then fried, or into egg
and bread crumbs. Serve with crisped parsley.
SHEEPSHEAD WITH DRAWN BUTTER.
Select a medium-sized fish, clean it thoroughly, and rub a
little salt over it; wrap it in a cloth and put it in a steamer;
place this over a pot of fast-boiling water and steam one hour;
then lay it whole upon a hot side-dish, garnish with tufts of
parsley and slices of lemon, and serve with drawn butter, prepared
as follows: Take two ounces of butter and roll it into small balls,
dredge these with flour; put one-fourth of them in a saucepan, and
as they begin to melt, whisk them; add the remainder, one at a
time, until thoroughly smooth; while stirring, add a tablespoonful
of lemon juice, half a tablespoonful of chopped parsley; pour into
a hot sauce boat and serve.
BAKED WHITE FISH.
Thoroughly clean the fish; cut off the head or not, as
preferred; cut out the backbone from the head to within two inches
of the tail, and stuff with the following: Soak stale bread in
water, squeeze dry; cut in pieces a large onion, fry in butter,
chop fine; add the bread, two ounces of butter, salt, pepper and a
little parsley or sage; heat through, and when taken off the fire,
add the yolks of two well-beaten [Pg
57]eggs; stuff the fish
rather full, sew up with fine twine, and wrap with several coils of
white tape. Rub the fish over slightly with butter; just cover the
bottom of a baking pan with hot water, and place the fish in it,
standing back upward, and bent in the form of an S. Serve with the
following dressing: Reduce the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs to a
smooth paste with two tablespoonfuls good salad oil; stir in half a
teaspoon English mustard, and add pepper and vinegar to taste.
HALIBUT BOILED.
The cut next to the tail-piece is the best to boil. Rub a little
salt over it, soak it for fifteen minutes in vinegar and cold
water, then wash it and scrape it until quite clean; tie it in a
cloth and boil slowly over a moderate fire, allowing seven minutes'
boiling to each pound of fish; when it is half-cooked, turn it over
in the pot; serve with drawn butter or egg sauce.
Boiled halibut minced with boiled potatoes and a little butter
and milk makes an excellent breakfast dish.
STEAMED HALIBUT.
Select a three-pound piece of white halibut, cover it with a
cloth and place it in a steamer; set the steamer over a pot of
fast-boiling water and steam two hours; place it on a hot dish
surrounded with a border of parsley and serve with egg sauce.
FRIED HALIBUT. No. 1.
Select choice, firm slices from this large and delicate looking
fish, and, after carefully washing and drying with a soft towel,
with a sharp knife take off the skin. Beat up two eggs and roll out
some brittle crackers upon the kneading board until they are as
fine as dust. Dip each slice into the beaten egg, then into the
cracker crumbs (after you have salted and peppered the fish), and
place them in a hot frying pan half full of boiling lard, in which
a little butter has been added to make the fish brown nicely; turn
and brown both sides, remove from frying pan and drain. Serve
hot.
FRIED HALIBUT. No. 2.
First fry a few thin slices of salt pork until brown in an iron
frying pan; then take it up on a hot platter and keep it warm until
the halibut is fried. After washing and drying two pounds of sliced
halibut, [Pg 58]sprinkle it with salt and pepper, dredge it well with
flour, put it into the hot pork drippings and fry brown on both
sides; then serve the pork with the fish.
Halibut broiled in slices is a very good way of cooking it,
broiled the same as Spanish mackerel.
BAKED HALIBUT.
Take a nice piece of halibut weighing five or six pounds and lay
it in salt water for two hours. Wipe it dry and score the outer
skin. Set it in a dripping pan in a moderately hot oven and bake an
hour, basting often with butter and water heated together in a
sauce pan or tin cup. When a fork will penetrate it easily, it is
done. It should be a fine, brown color. Take the gravy in the
dripping pan, add a little boiling water, should there not be
enough, stir in a tablespoonful of walnut catsup, a teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce, the juice of a lemon, and thicken with brown
flour, previously wet with cold water. Boil up once and put in a
sauce boat.
HALIBUT BROILED.
Broil the same as other fish, upon a buttered gridiron, over a
clear fire, first seasoning with salt and pepper, placed on a hot
dish when done, buttered well and covered closely.
FRIED BROOK TROUT.
These delicate fish are usually fried, and form a delightful
breakfast or supper dish. Clean, wash and dry the fish, split them
to the tail, salt and pepper them, and flour them nicely. If you
use lard instead of the fat of fried salt pork, put in a piece of
butter to prevent their sticking, and which causes them to brown
nicely. Let the fat be hot; fry quickly to a delicate brown. They
should be sufficiently browned on one side before turning on the
other. They are nice served with slices of fried pork, fried crisp.
Lay them side by side on a heated platter, garnish and send hot to
the table. They are often cooked and served with their heads
on.
FRIED SMELTS.
Fried with their heads on the same as brook trout. Many think
that they make a much better appearance as a dish when cooked whole
with the heads on, and nicely garnished for the table.
BOILED WHITE FISH.
The most delicate mode of cooking white fish. Prepare the fish
as for broiling, laying it open; put it into a dripping pan with
the back down; nearly cover with water; to one fish two
tablespoonfuls of salt; cover tightly and simmer (not boil)
one-half hour. Dress with gravy, a little butter and pepper, and
garnish with hard-boiled eggs.
BAKED WHITE FISH. (Bordeaux Sauce.)
Clean and stuff the fish. Put it in a baking pan and add a
liberal quantity of butter, previously rolled in flour, to the
fish. Put in the pan half a pint of claret, and bake for an hour
and a quarter. Remove the fish and strain the gravy; add to the
latter a gill more of claret, a teaspoonful of brown flour and a
pinch of cayenne, and serve with the fish.
BAKED SALMON TROUT.
This deliciously flavored game-fish is baked precisely as shad
or white fish, but should be accompanied with cream gravy to make
it perfect. It should be baked slowly, basting often with butter
and water. When done have ready in a saucepan a cup of cream,
diluted with a few spoonfuls of hot water, for fear it might clot
in heating, in which have been stirred cautiously two
tablespoonfuls of melted butter, a scant tablespoonful of flour,
and a little chopped parsley. Heat this in a vessel set within
another of boiling water, add the gravy from the dripping-pan, boil
up once to thicken, and when the trout is laid on a suitable hot
dish, pour this sauce around it. Garnish with sprigs of
parsley.
This same fish boiled, served with the same cream gravy (with
the exception of the fish gravy), is the proper way to cook it.
TO BAKE SMELTS.
Wash and dry them thoroughly in a cloth, and arrange them nicely
in a flat baking-dish; the pan should be buttered, also the fish;
season with salt and pepper, and cover with bread or cracker
crumbs. Place a piece of butter over each. Bake for fifteen or
twenty minutes. Garnish with fried parsley and cut lemon.
BROILED SPANISH MACKEREL.
Split the fish down the back, take out the backbone, wash it in
cold water, dry it with a clean, dry cloth, sprinkle it lightly
with salt and lay it on a buttered gridiron, over a clear fire,
with the flesh side downward, until it begins to brown; then turn
the other side. Have ready a mixture of two tablespoonfuls of
butter melted, a tablespoonful of lemon juice, a teaspoonful of
salt, some pepper. Dish up the fish hot from the gridiron on a hot
dish, turn over the mixture and serve it while hot.
Broiled Spanish mackerel is excellent with other fish sauces.
Boiled Spanish mackerel is also very fine with most of the fish
sauces, more especially "Matre d'Hotel Sauce."
BOILED SALT MACKEREL.
Wash and clean off all the brine and salt; put it to soak with
the meat side down, in cold water over night; in the morning rinse
it in one or two waters. Wrap each up in a cloth and put it into a
kettle with considerable water, which should be cold; cook about
thirty minutes. Take it carefully from the cloth, take out the
backbones and pour over a little melted butter and cream; add a
light sprinkle of pepper. Or make a cream sauce like the
following:
Heat a small cup of milk to scalding. Stir into it a teaspoonful
of cornstarch wet up with a little water. When this thickens, add
two tablespoonfuls of butter, pepper, salt and chopped parsley, to
taste. Beat an egg light, pour the sauce gradually over it, put the
mixture again over the fire, and stir one minute, not more. Pour
upon the fish, and serve it with some slices of lemon, or a few
sprigs of parsley or water-cress, on the dish as a garnish.
BAKED SALT MACKEREL.
When the mackerel have soaked over night, put them in a pan and
pour on boiling water enough to cover. Let them stand a couple of
minutes, then drain them off, and put them in the pan with a few
lumps of butter; pour on a half teacupful of sweet cream, or rich
milk, and a little pepper; set in the oven and let it bake a little
until brown.
FRIED SALT MACKEREL.
Select as many salt mackerel as required; wash and cleanse them
well, then put them to soak all day in cold water, changing
them every two hours; then put them into fresh water just before
retiring. In the morning drain off the water, wipe them dry, roll
them in flour, and fry in a little butter on a hot, thick-bottomed
frying pan. Serve with a little melted butter poured over, and
garnish with a little parsley.
BOILED FRESH MACKEREL.
Fresh mackerel are cooked in water salted, and a little vinegar
added; with this exception they can be served in the same way as
the salt mackerel. Broiled ones are very nice with the same cream
sauce, or you can substitute egg sauce.
POTTED FRESH FISH.
After the fish has laid in salt water six hours, take it out,
and to every six pounds of fish take one-quarter cupful each of
salt, black pepper and cinnamon, one-eighth cupful of allspice, and
one teaspoonful of cloves.
Cut the fish in pieces and put into a half gallon stone
baking-jar, first a layer of fish, then the spices, flour, and then
spread a thin layer of butter on, and continue so until the dish is
full. Fill the jar with equal parts of vinegar and water, cover
with tightly fitting lid, so that the steam cannot escape; bake
five hours, remove from the oven, and when it is cold it is to be
cut in slices and served. This is a tea or lunch dish.
SCALLOPED CRABS.
Put the crabs into a kettle of boiling water, and throw in a
handful of salt. Boil from twenty minutes to half an hour. Take
them from the water when done and pick out all the meat; be careful
not to break the shell. To a pint of meat put a little salt and
pepper; taste, and if not enough add more, a little at a time, till
suited. Grate in a very little nutmeg and add one spoonful of
cracker or bread crumbs, two eggs well beaten, and two
tablespoonfuls of butter (even full); stir all well together; wash
the shells clean, and fill each shell full of the mixture; sprinkle
crumbs over the top and moisten with the liquor; set in the oven
till of a nice brown; a few minutes will do it. Send to the table
hot, arranged on large dishes. They are eaten at breakfast or
supper.
FISH IN WHITE SAUCE.
Flake up cold boiled halibut and set the plate into the steamer,
that the fish may heat without drying. Boil the bones and skin of
the fish with a slice of onion and a very small piece of red
pepper; a bit of this the size of a kernel of coffee will make the
sauce quite as hot as most persons like it. Boil this stock down to
half a pint; thicken with one teaspoonful of butter and one
teaspoonful of flour, mixed together. Add one drop of extract of
almond. Pour this sauce over your halibut and stick bits of parsley
over it.
FRESH STURGEON STEAK MARINADE.
Take one slice of sturgeon two inches thick; let it stand in hot
water five minutes; drain, put it in a bowl and add a gill of
vinegar, two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, half a teaspoonful of
salt, a saltspoonful of black pepper and the juice of half a lemon;
let it stand six hours, turning it occasionally; drain and dry on a
napkin; dip it in egg; roll in bread crumbs and fry, or rather
boil, in very hot fat. Beat up the yolks of two raw eggs, add a
teaspoonful of French mustard, and by degrees, half of the
marinade, to make a smooth sauce, which serve with the fish.
POTTED FISH.
Take out the backbone of the fish; for one weighing two pounds
take a tablespoonful of allspice and cloves mixed; these spices
should be put into little bags of not too thick muslin; put
sufficient salt directly upon each fish; then roll in cloth, over
which sprinkle a little cayenne pepper; put alternate layers of
fish, spice and sage in an earthen jar; cover with the best cider
vinegar; cover the jar closely with a plate, and over this, put a
covering of dough, rolled out to twice the thickness of pie crust.
Make the edges of paste, to adhere closely to the sides of the jar,
so as to make it air tight. Put the jar into a pot of cold water
and let it boil from three to five hours, according to quantity.
Ready when cold.
MAYONNAISE FISH.
Take a pound or so of cold boiled fish (halibut, rock or cod),
not chop, but cut, into pieces an inch in length. Mix in a bowl a
dressing as follows: The yolks of four boiled eggs rubbed to a
smooth paste with salad oil or butter; add to these salt, pepper,
mustard, [Pg 63]two teaspoonfuls of white sugar, and, lastly, six
tablespoonfuls of vinegar. Beat the mixture until light, and just
before pouring it over the fish, stir in lightly the frothed white
of a raw egg. Serve the fish in a glass dish, with half the
dressing stirred in with it. Spread the remainder over the top, and
lay lettuce leaves (from the core of the head of lettuce) around
the edges, to be eaten with it.
FISH CHOWDER. (Rhode Island.)
Fry five or six slices of fat pork crisp in the bottom of the
pot you are to make your chowder in; take them out and chop them
into small pieces, put them back into the bottom of the pot with
their own gravy. (This is much better than having the slices
whole.)
Cut four pounds of fresh cod or sea-bass into pieces two inches
square, and lay enough of these on the pork to cover it. Follow
with a layer of chopped onions, a little parsley, summer savory and
pepper, either black or cayenne. Then a layer of split Boston, or
butter, or whole cream crackers, which have been soaked in warm
water until moistened through, but not ready to break. Above this
put a layer of pork and repeat the order given above—onions,
seasoning (not too much), crackers and pork, until your materials
are exhausted. Let the topmost layer be buttered crackers well
soaked. Pour in enough cold water to barely cover all. Cover the
pot, stew gently for an hour, watching that the water does not sink
too low. Should it leave the upper layer exposed, replenish
cautiously from the boiling tea-kettle. When the chowder is
thoroughly done, take out with a perforated skimmer and put into a
tureen. Thicken the gravy with a tablespoonful of flour and about
the same quantity of butter; boil up and pour over the chowder.
Serve sliced lemon, pickles and stewed tomatoes with it, that the
guests may add if they like.
CODFISH BALLS.
Take a pint bowl of codfish picked very fine, two pint bowls of
whole raw peeled potatoes, sliced thickly; put them together in
plenty of cold water and boil until the potatoes are thoroughly
cooked; remove from the fire and drain off all the water. Mash them
with the potato masher, add a piece of butter the size of an egg,
one well-beaten egg, and three spoonfuls of cream or rich milk.
Flour your hands and make into balls or cakes. Put an ounce each of
butter [Pg 64]and lard into a frying pan; when hot, put in the
balls and fry a nice brown. Do not freshen the fish before boiling
with the potatoes. Many cooks fry them in a quantity of lard
similar to boiled doughnuts.
STEWED CODFISH. (Salt.)
Take a thick, white piece of salt codfish, lay it in cold water
for a few minutes to soften it a little, enough to render it more
easily to be picked up. Shred it in very small bits, put it over
the fire in a stew pan with cold water; let it come to a boil, turn
off this water carefully, and add a pint of milk to the fish, or
more according to quantity. Set it over the fire again and let it
boil slowly about three minutes, now add a good-sized piece of
butter, a shake of pepper and a thickening of a tablespoonful of
flour in enough cold milk to make a cream. Stew five minutes
longer, and just before serving stir in two well-beaten eggs. The
eggs are an addition that could be dispensed with, however, as it
is very good without them. An excellent breakfast dish.
CODFISH A LA MODE.
Pick up a teacupful of salt codfish very fine and
freshen—the desiccated is nice to use; two cups mashed
potatoes, one pint cream or milk, two well-beaten eggs, half a cup
butter, salt and pepper; mix; bake in an earthen baking dish from
twenty to twenty-five minutes; serve in the same dish, placed on a
small platter, covered with a fine napkin.
BOILED FRESH COD.
Sew up the piece of fish in thin cloth, fitted to shape; boil in
salted water (boiling from the first), allowing about fifteen
minutes to the pound. Carefully unwrap and pour over it warm oyster
sauce. A whole one boiled the same.
SCALLOPED FISH.
Pick any cold fresh fish, or salt codfish, left from the dinner,
into fine bits, carefully removing all the bones.
Take a pint of milk in a suitable dish and place it in a
saucepan of boiling water; put into it a few slices of onion cut
very fine, a sprig of parsley minced fine, add a piece of butter as
large as an egg, a pinch [Pg
65]of salt, a sprinkle of
white pepper, then stir in two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, or
flour, rubbed in a little cold milk; let all boil up and remove
from the fire. Take a dish you wish to serve it in, butter the
sides and bottom. Put first a layer of the minced fish, then a
layer of the cream, then sprinkle over that some cracker or bread
crumbs, then a layer of fish again, and so on until the dish is
full; spread cracker or bread crumbs last on the top to prevent the
milk from scorching.
This is a very good way to use up cold fish, making a nice
breakfast dish, or a side dish for dinner.
FISH FRITTERS.
Take a piece of salt codfish, pick it up very fine, put it into
a saucepan, with plenty of cold water; bring it to a boil,
turn off the water, and add another of cold water; let this boil
with the fish about fifteen minutes, very slowly; strain off this
water, making the fish quite dry, and set aside to cool. In the
meantime, stir up a batter of a pint of milk, four eggs, a pinch of
salt, one large teaspoonful of baking powder in flour, enough to
make thicker than batter cakes. Stir in the fish and fry like any
fritters. Very fine accompaniment to a good breakfast.
BOILED SALT CODFISH. (New England Style.)
Cut the fish into square pieces, cover with cold water, set on
the back part of the stove; when hot, pour off water and cover
again with cold water; let it stand about four hours and simmer,
not boil; put the fish on a platter, then cover with a drawn-butter
gravy and serve. Many cooks prefer soaking the fish over night.
BOILED CODFISH AND OYSTER SAUCE.
Lay the fish in cold, salted water half an hour before it is
time to cook it, then roll it in a clean cloth dredged with flour;
sew up the edges in such a manner as to envelop the fish entirely,
yet have but one thickness of cloth over any part. Put the
fish into boiling water slightly salted; add a few whole cloves and
peppers and a bit of lemon peel; pull gently on the fins, and when
they come out easily the fish is done. Arrange neatly on a folded
napkin, garnish and serve with [Pg
66]oyster sauce. Take six
oysters to every pound of fish and scald (blanch) them in a
half-pint of hot oyster liquor; take out the oysters and add to the
liquor, salt, pepper, a bit of mace and an ounce of butter; whip
into it a gill of milk containing half of a teaspoonful of flour.
Simmer a moment; add the oysters, and send to table in a sauce
boat. Egg sauce is good with this fish.
BAKED CODFISH.
If salt fish, soak, boil and pick the fish, the same as for
fish-balls. Add an equal quantity of mashed potatoes, or cold,
boiled, chopped potatoes, a large piece of butter, and warm milk
enough to make it quite soft. Put it into a buttered dish, rub
butter over the top, shake over a little sifted flour, and bake
about thirty minutes, and until a rich brown. Make a sauce of drawn
butter, with two hard-boiled eggs sliced, served in a gravy
boat.
CODFISH STEAK. (New England Style.)
Select a medium-sized fresh codfish, cut it in steaks crosswise
of the fish, about an inch and a half thick; sprinkle a little salt
over them, and let them stand two hours. Cut into dice a pound of
salt fat pork, fry out all the fat from them and remove the crisp
bits of pork; put the codfish steaks in a pan of corn meal, dredge
them with it, and when the pork fat is smoking hot, fry the steaks
in it to a dark brown color on both sides. Squeeze over them a
little lemon juice, add a dash of freshly ground pepper, and serve
with hot, old-fashioned, well-buttered Johnny Cake.
SALMON CROQUETTES.
One pound of cooked salmon (about one and a half pints when
chopped), one cup of cream, two tablespoonfuls of butter, one
tablespoonful of flour, three eggs, one pint of crumbs, pepper and
salt; chop the salmon fine, mix the flour and butter together, let
the cream come to a boil, and stir in the flour and butter, salmon
and seasoning; boil one minute; stir in one well-beaten egg, and
remove from the fire; when cold make into croquettes; dip in beaten
egg, roll in crumbs and fry. Canned salmon can be used.
STEWED WATER TURTLES, OR TERRAPINS.
Select the largest, thickest and fattest, the females being the
best; they should be alive when brought from market. Wash and put
them alive into boiling water, add a little salt, and boil them
until thoroughly done, or from ten to fifteen minutes, after which
take off the shell, extract the meat, and remove carefully the
sand-bag and gall; also all the entrails; they are unfit to eat,
and are no longer used in cooking terrapins for the best tables.
Cut the meat into pieces, and put it into a stewpan with its eggs,
and sufficient fresh butter to stew it well. Let it stew till quite
hot throughout, keeping the pan carefully covered, that none of the
flavor may escape, but shake it over the fire while stewing. In
another pan make a sauce of beaten yolk of egg, highly flavored
with Madeira or sherry, and powdered nutmeg and mace, a gill of
currant jelly, a pinch of cayenne pepper, and salt to taste,
enriched with a large lump of fresh butter. Stir this sauce well
over the fire, and when it has almost come to a boil take it off.
Send the terrapins to the table hot in a covered dish, and the
sauce separately in a sauce tureen, to be used by those who like
it, and omitted by those who prefer the genuine flavor of the
terrapins when simply stewed with butter. This is now the usual
mode of dressing terrapins in Maryland, Virginia, and many other
parts of the South, and will be found superior to any other. If
there are no eggs in the terrapin, "egg balls" may be substituted.
(See recipe.)
STEWED TERRAPIN, WITH CREAM.
Place in a saucepan, two heaping tablespoonfuls of butter and
one of dry flour; stir it over the fire until it bubbles; then
gradually stir in a pint of cream, a teaspoonful of salt, a quarter
of a teaspoonful of white pepper, the same of grated nutmeg, and a
very small pinch of cayenne. Next, put in a pint of terrapin meat
and stir all until it is scalding hot. Move the saucepan to the
back part of the stove or range, where the contents will keep hot
but not boil; then stir in four [Pg
68]well-beaten yolks of
eggs; do not allow the terrapin to boil after adding the eggs, but
pour it immediately into a tureen containing a gill of good Madeira
and a tablespoonful of lemon juice. Serve hot.
STEWED TERRAPIN.
Plunge the terrapins alive into boiling water, and let them
remain until the sides and lower shell begin to crack—this
will take less than an hour; then remove them and let them get
cold; take off the shell and outer skin, being careful to save all
the blood possible in opening them. If there are eggs in them put
them aside in a dish; take all the inside out, and be very careful
not to break the gall, which must be immediately removed or it will
make the rest bitter. It lies within the liver. Then cut up the
liver and all the rest of the terrapin into small pieces, adding
the blood and juice that have flowed out in cutting up; add half a
pint of water; sprinkle a little flour over them as you place them
in the stewpan; let them stew slowly ten minutes, adding salt,
black and cayenne pepper, and a very small blade of mace; then add
a gill of the best brandy and half a pint of the very best sherry
wine; let it simmer over a slow fire very gently. About ten minutes
or so, before you are ready to dish them, add half a pint of rich
cream, and half a pound of sweet butter, with flour, to prevent
boiling; two or three minutes before taking them off the fire peel
the eggs carefully and throw them in whole. If there should be no
eggs use the yolks of hens' eggs, hard boiled. This recipe is for
four terrapins.
OILED LOBSTER.
Put a handful of salt into a large kettle or pot of boiling
water. When the water boils very hard put in the lobster, having
first brushed it and tied the claws together with a bit of twine.
Keep it boiling from twenty minutes to half an hour, in proportion
to its size. If boiled too long the meat will be hard and stringy.
When it is done take it out, lay it on its claws to drain, and then
wipe it dry.
It is scarcely necessary to mention that the head of a lobster
and what are called the lady fingers are not to be eaten.
Very large lobsters are not the best, the meat being coarse and
tough. The male is best for boiling; the flesh is firmer and the
shell a brighter red. It may readily be distinguished from the
female; [Pg 69]the tail is narrower, and the two uppermost fins
within the tail are stiff and hard. Those of the hen lobster are
not so, and the tail is broader.
Hen lobsters are preferred for sauce or salad, on account of
their coral. The head and small claws are never used.
They should be alive and freshly caught when put into the
boiling kettle. After being cooked and cooled, split open the body
and tail and crack the claws, to extract the meat. The sand pouch
found near the throat should be removed. Care should be exercised
that none of the feathery, tough, gill-like particles found under
the body shell get mixed with the meat, as they are indigestible
and have caused much trouble. They are supposed to be the cause of
so-called poisoning from eating lobster.
Serve on a platter. Lettuce and other concomitants of a salad
should also be placed on the table or platter.
SCALLOPED LOBSTER.
Butter a deep dish and cover the bottom with fine bread crumbs;
put on this a layer of chopped lobster, with pepper and salt; so
on, alternately, until the dish is filled, having crumbs on top.
Put on bits of butter, moisten with milk and bake about twenty
minutes.
DEVILED LOBSTER.
Take out all the meat from a boiled lobster, reserving the
coral; season highly with mustard, cayenne, salt and some kind of
table sauce; stew until well mixed and put it in a covered
saucepan, with just enough hot water to keep from burning; rub the
coral smooth, moistening with vinegar until it is thin enough to
pour easily, then stir it into the saucepan. The dressing should be
prepared before the meat is put on the fire, and which ought to
boil but once before the coral is put in; stir in a heaping
teaspoonful of butter, and when it boils again it is done and
should be taken up at once, as too much cooking toughens the
meat.
LOBSTER CROQUETTES.
Take any of the lobster remaining from table and pound it until
the dark, light meat and coral are well mixed; put with it not
quite as much fine bread crumbs; season with pepper, salt and a
very little [Pg 70]cayenne pepper; add a little melted butter, about
two tablespoonfuls if the bread is rather dry; form into egg-shaped
or round balls; roll them in egg, then in fine crumbs, and fry in
boiling lard.
LOBSTER PATTIES.
Cut some boiled lobster in small pieces; then take the small
claws and the spawn, put them in a suitable dish, and jam them to a
paste with a potato masher. Now add to them a ladleful of gravy or
broth, with a few bread crumbs; set it over the fire and boil;
strain it through a strainer, or sieve, to the thickness of a
cream, and put half of it to your lobsters, and save the other half
to sauce them with after they are baked. Put to the lobster the
bigness of an egg of butter, a little pepper and salt; squeeze in a
lemon, and warm these over the fire enough to melt the butter, set
it to cool, and sheet your patty pan or a plate or dish with good
puff paste, then put in your lobster, and cover it with a paste;
bake it within three-quarters of an hour before you want it; when
it is baked, cut up your cover, and warm up the other half of your
sauce above mentioned, with a little butter, to the thickness of
cream, and pour it over your patty, with a little squeezed lemon;
cut your cover in two, and lay it on the top, two inches distant,
so that what is under may be seen. You may bake crawfish, shrimps
or prawns the same way; and they are all proper for plates or
little dishes for a second course.
LOBSTER Á LA NEWBURG.
Take one whole lobster, cut up in pieces about as large as a
hickory nut. Put in the same pan with a piece of butter size of a
walnut, season with salt and pepper to taste, and thicken with
heavy cream sauce; add the yolk of one egg and two oz. of sherry
wine.
Cream sauce for above is made as follows: 1 oz. butter, melted
in saucepan; 2 oz. flour, mixed with butter, thin down to proper
consistency with boiling cream.
BAKED CRABS.
Mix with the contents of a can of crabs, bread crumbs or pounded
crackers. Pepper and salt the whole to taste; mince some cold ham;
have the baking pan well buttered, place therein first a layer of
the crab meat, prepared as above, then a layer of the minced ham,
and [Pg 71]so on, alternately until the pan is filled. Cover the
top with bread crumbs and bits of butter, and bake.
DEVILED CRABS.
Half a dozen fresh crabs, boiled and minced, two ounces of
butter, one small teaspoonful of mustard powder; cayenne pepper and
salt to taste. Put the meat into a bowl and mix carefully with it
an equal quantity of fine bread crumbs. Work the butter to a light
cream, mix the mustard well with it, then stir in very carefully, a
handful at a time, the mixed crabs, a tablespoonful of cream and
crumbs. Season to taste with cayenne pepper and salt; fill the crab
shells with the mixture, sprinkle bread crumbs over the tops, put
three small pieces of butter upon the top of each, and brown them
quickly in a hot oven. They will puff in baking and will be found
very nice. Half the quantity can be made. A crab shell will hold
the meat of two crabs.
CRAB CROQUETTES.
Pick the meat of boiled crabs and chop it fine. Season to taste
with pepper, salt and melted butter. Moisten it well with rich milk
or cream, then stiffen it slightly with bread or cracker crumbs.
Add two or three well-beaten eggs to bind the mixture. Form the
croquettes, egg and bread, crumb them and fry them delicately in
boiling lard. It is better to use a wire frying basket for
croquettes of all kinds.
TO MAKE A CRAB PIE.
Procure the crabs alive, and put them in boiling water, along
with some salt. Boil them for a quarter of an hour or twenty
minutes, according to the size. When cold pick the meat from the
claws and body. Chop all together, and mix it with crumbs of bread,
pepper and salt, and a little butter. Put all this into the shell
and brown in a hot oven. A crab shell will hold the meat of two
crabs.
CRABS. (Soft Shell.)
Crabs may be boiled as lobsters. They make a fine dish when
stewed. Take out the meat from the shell, put it into a saucepan
with butter, pepper, salt, a pinch of mace and a very little water;
dredge with flour and let simmer five minutes over a slow fire.
Serve hot; garnish the dish with the claws laid around it.
The usual way of cooking them is frying them in plenty of butter
and lard mixed; prepare them the same as frying fish. The spongy
substance from the sides should be taken off, also the sand bag.
Fry a nice brown and garnish with parsley.
OYSTERS.
Oysters must be fresh and fat to be good. They are in season
from September to May.
The small ones, such as are sold by the quart, are good for
pies, fritters, or stews; the largest of this sort are nice for
frying or pickling for family use.
FRIED OYSTERS.
Take large oysers from their own liquor into a thickly folded
napkin to dry them; then make hot an ounce each of butter and lard
in a thick-bottomed frying pan. Season the oysters with pepper and
salt, then dip each one into egg and cracker crumbs rolled fine,
until it will take up no more. Place them in the hot grease and fry
them a delicate brown, turning them on both sides by sliding a
broad-bladed knife under them. Serve them crisp and hot.
Some prefer to roll oysters in corn meal and others use flour,
but they are much more crisp with egg and cracker crumbs.
OYSTERS FRIED IN BATTER.
Ingredients.—One-half pint of oysters, two eggs,
one-half pint of milk, sufficient flour to make the batter; pepper
and salt to taste; when liked, a little nutmeg; hot lard.
Scald the oysters in their own liquor, beard them, and lay them
on a cloth to drain thoroughly. Break the eggs into a basin, mix
the flour with them, add the milk gradually, with nutmeg and
seasoning, and put the oysters in a batter. Make some lard hot in a
deep frying pan; put in the oysters one at a time; when done, take
them up with a sharp pointed skewer and dish them on a napkin.
Fried oysters are frequently used for garnishing boiled fish, and
then a few bread crumbs should be added to the flour.
STEWED OYSTERS. (In Milk or Cream.)
Drain the liquor from two quarts of oysters; mix with it a small
teacupful of hot water, add a little salt and pepper and set it
over [Pg 73]the fire in a saucepan. Let it boil up once, put in
the oysters, let them come to a boil, and when they "ruffle" add
two tablespoonfuls of butter. The instant it is melted and well
stirred in, put in a pint of boiling milk and take the saucepan
from the fire. Serve with oyster or cream crackers. Serve while
hot.
If thickening is preferred, stir in a little flour or two
tablespoonfuls of cracker crumbs.
PLAIN OYSTER STEW.
Same as milk or cream stew, using only oyster liquor and water
instead of milk or cream, adding more butter after taking up.
OYSTER SOUP.
For oyster soup, see SOUPS.
DRY OYSTER STEW.
Take six to twelve large oysters and cook them in half a pint of
their own liquor; season with butter and white pepper; cook for
five minutes, stirring constantly. Serve in hot soup plates or
bowls.
BOSTON FRY.
Prepare the oysters in egg batter and fine cracker meal; fry in
butter over a slow fire for about ten minutes; cover the hollow of
a hot platter with tomato sauce; place the oysters in it, but not
covering; garnished with chopped parsley sprinkled over the
oysters.
BROILED OYSTERS.
Dry a quart of oysters in a cloth, dip each in melted butter
well peppered; then in beaten egg, or not, then in bread or cracker
crumbs also peppered. Broil on a wire broiler over live coals three
to five minutes. Dip over each a little melted butter. Serve
hot.
ROAST OYSTERS IN THE SHELL. No. 1.
Select the large ones, those usually termed "Saddle Rocks,"
formerly known as a distinct variety, but which are now but the
large oysters selected from any beds; wash and wipe them, and place
with the upper or deep shell down, to catch the juice, over or on
live coals. When they open their shells, remove the shallow one,
being careful to [Pg 74]save all the juice in the other; place
them, shells and all, on a hot platter, and send to the table hot
to be seasoned by each person with butter and pepper to taste. If
the oysters are fine, and they are just cooked enough and served
hot, this is, par excellence, the style.
OYSTER ROAST. No. 2.
Put one quart of oysters in a basin with their own liquor and
let them boil three or four minutes; season with a little salt,
pepper and a heaping spoonful of butter. Serve on buttered
toast.
STEAMED OYSTERS.
Wash and drain a quart of counts or select oysters; put them in
a shallow pan and place in a steamer over boiling water; cover and
steam till they are plump, with the edges ruffled, but no longer.
Place to a heated dish, with butter, pepper, and salt, and
serve.
STEAMED OYSTERS IN THE SHELL.
Wash and place them in an air-tight vessel, laying them the
upper shell downward, so that the liquor will not run out when they
open. Place this dish or vessel over a pot of boiling water where
they will get the steam. Boil them rapidly until the shells open,
about fifteen to twenty minutes. Serve at once while hot, seasoned
with butter, salt and pepper.
PAN OYSTERS. No. 1.
Cut some stale bread into thin slices, taking off all the crust,
round the slices to fit patty-pans; toast, butter, place them in
the pans and moisten with three or four teaspoonfuls of oyster
liquor; place on the toast a layer of oysters, sprinkle with
pepper, and put a small piece of butter on top of each pan; place
all the pans in a baking-pan, and place in the oven, covering
tightly. They will cook in seven or eight minutes if the oven is
hot; or, cook till the beards are ruffled; remove the cover,
sprinkle lightly with salt, replace, and cook one minute longer.
Serve in patty pans. They are delicious.
PAN OYSTERS. No. 2.
Lay in a thin pie tin or dripping-pan, half a pint of large
oysters, or more if required; have the pan large enough so that
each oyster will lie flat on the bottom; put in over them a little
oyster liquor, but [Pg 75]not enough to float; place them
carefully in a hot oven and just heat them through
thoroughly—do not bake them—which will be in three to
five minutes, according to fire; take them up and place on toast;
first moistened with the hot juice from the pan. Are a very good
substitute for oysters roasted in the shell, the slow cooking
bringing out the flavor.
OYSTER FRITTERS.
Select plump, good-sized oysters; drain off the juice, and to a
cup of this juice add a cup of milk, a little salt, four
well-beaten eggs, and flour enough to make batter like
griddle-cakes.
Envelope an oyster in a spoonful of this batter (some cut them
in halves or chop them fine), then fry in butter and lard, mixed in
a frying pan the same as we fry eggs, turning to fry brown on both
sides. Send to the table very hot.
Most cooks fry oyster fritters the same as crullers, in a
quantity of hot lard, but this is not always convenient; either way
they are excellent.
OYSTER PATTIES.
Line patty-pans with thin pastry, pressing it well to the tin.
Put a piece of bread or a ball of paper in each. Cover them with
paste and brush them over with the white of an egg. Cut an inch
square of thin pastry, place on the centre of each, glaze this also
with egg, and bake in a quick oven fifteen to twenty minutes.
Remove the bread or paper when half cold.
Scald as many oysters as you require (allowing two for each
patty, three if small) in their own liquor. Cut each in four and
strain the liquor. Put two tablespoonfuls of butter and two of
flour into a thick saucepan; stir them together over the fire till
the flour smells cooked, and then pour half a pint of oyster liquor
and half a pint of milk into the flour and butter. (If you have
cream use it instead of milk.) Stir till it is a thick, smooth
sauce. Put the oysters into it and let them boil once. Beat the
yolks of two eggs. Remove the oysters for one minute from the fire,
then stir the eggs into them till the sauce looks like thick
custard.
Fill the patties with this oyster fricassee, taking care to make
it hot by standing in boiling water before dinner on the day
required, and to make the patty cases hot before you fill them.
FULTON MARKET ROAST.
It is still known in New York from the place at which it was and
is still served. Take nine large oysters out of the shell; wash,
dry and roast over a charcoal fire, on a broiler. Two minutes after
the shells open they will be done. Take them off quickly, saving
the juice in a small shallow, tin pan; keep hot until all are done;
butter them and sprinkle with pepper.
This is served for one person when calling for a roast of this
kind. It is often poured over a slice of toast.
SCALLOPED OYSTERS.
Have ready about a pint of fine cracker crumbs. Butter a deep
earthen dish; put a layer of the cracker crumbs on the bottom; wet
this with some of the oyster liquor; next have a layer of oysters;
sprinkle with salt and pepper, and lay small bits of butter upon
them; then add another layer of cracker crumbs and oyster juice;
then oysters, pepper, salt and butter, and so on, until the dish is
full; the top layer to be cracker crumbs. Beat up an egg in a cup
of milk and turn over all. Cover the dish and set it in the oven
for thirty or forty-five minutes. When baked through, uncover the
top, set on the upper grate and brown.
OYSTER POT-PIE.
Scald a quart can of oysters in their own liquor; when it boils,
skim out the oysters and set them aside in a warm place. To the
liquor add a pint of hot water; season well with salt and pepper, a
generous piece of butter, thicken with flour and cold milk. Have
ready nice light biscuit dough, rolled twice as thick as pie crust;
cut out into inch squares, drop them into the boiling stew, cover
closely, and cook forty minutes. When taken up, stir the oysters
into the juice and serve all together in one dish. A nice side
entrée.
BOSTON OYSTER PIE.
Having buttered the inside of a deep pie plate, line it
with puff paste, or common pie crust, and prepare another sheet of
paste for the [Pg 77]lid; put a clean towel into the dish (folded so as
to support the lid), set it into the oven and bake the paste well;
when done, remove the lid and take out the towel. While the paste
is baking, prepare the oysters. Having picked off carefully every
bit of shell that may be found about them, drain the liquor into a
pan and put the oysters into a stewpan with barely enough of the
liquor to keep them from burning; season them with pepper, salt and
butter; add a little sweet cream or milk, and one or two crackers
rolled fine; let the oysters simmer, but not boil, as that
will shrivel them. Remove the upper crust of pastry and fill the
dish with the oysters and gravy. Replace the cover and serve
hot.
Some prefer baking the upper crust on a pie plate, the same size
as the pie, then slipping it off on top of the pie after the same
pie is filled with the oysters.
MOCK OYSTERS.
Grate the corn, while green and tender, with a coarse grater,
into a deep dish. For two ears of corn, allow one egg; beat the
whites and yolks separately, and add them to the corn, with one
tablespoonful of wheat flour and one of butter, a teaspoonful of
salt and pepper to taste. Drop spoonfuls of this batter into a
frying pan with hot butter and lard mixed, and fry a light brown on
both sides.
In taste, they have a singular resemblance to fried oysters. The
corn must be young.
FRICASSEED OYSTERS.
Take a slice of raw ham, which has been pickled, but not smoked,
and soak in boiling water for half an hour; cut it in quite small
pieces, and put in a saucepan with two-thirds of a pint of veal or
chicken broth, well strained; the liquor from a quart of oysters,
one small onion, minced fine, a little chopped parsley, sweet
marjoram, and pepper; let them simmer for twenty minutes, and then
boil rapidly for two or three minutes; skim well and add one scant
tablespoon of cornstarch, mixed smoothly in one-third cup of milk;
stir constantly, and when it boils add the oysters and one ounce of
butter; after which, just let it come to a boil, and remove the
oysters to a deep dish; beat one egg, and add to it gradually some
of the hot broth, and, when cooked, stir it into the pan; season
with salt, and pour the whole over the oysters. When placed upon
the table, squeeze the juice of a lemon over it.
Small Oyster Pies.
For each pie take a tin plate half the size of an ordinary
dinner plate; butter it, and cover the bottom with a puff paste, as
for pies; lay on it five or six select oysters, or enough to cover
the bottom; butter them and season with a little salt and plenty of
pepper; spread over this an egg batter, and cover with a crust of
the paste, making small openings in it with a fork. Bake in a hot
oven fifteen to twenty minutes, or until the top is nicely
browned.
STEWED CLAMS.
Wash clean as many round clams as required; pile them in a large
iron pot, with half a cupful of hot water in the bottom, and put
over the fire; as soon as the shells open take out the clams, cut
off the hard, uneatable "fringe" from each with strong, clean
scissors, put them into a stewpan with the broth from the pot, and
boil slowly till they are quite tender; pepper well and thicken the
gravy with flour stirred into melted butter.
Or, you may get two dozen freshly opened very small
clams. Boil a pint of milk, a dash of white pepper and a small pat
of butter. Now add the clams. Let them come to a boil and serve.
Longer boiling will make the clams almost indigestible.
ROAST CLAMS IN THE SHELL.
Roast in a pan over a hot fire, or in a hot oven, or, at a "Clam
Bake," on hot stones; when they open, empty the juice into a
saucepan; add the clams, with butter, pepper and a very little
salt.
CLAM FRITTERS.
Take fifty small or twenty-five large sand clams from their
shells; if large, cut each in two, lay them on a thickly-folded
napkin; put a pint bowl of wheat flour into a basin, add to it
three well-beaten eggs, half a pint of sweet milk and nearly as
much of their own liquor; beat the batter until it is smooth and
perfectly free from lumps, then stir in the clams. Put plenty of
lard or beef fat into a thick-bottomed frying pan, let it become
boiling hot; put in the batter by the spoonful; let them fry
gently; when one side is a delicate brown turn the other.
CLAM CHOWDER.
The materials needed are fifty round clams (quahogs), a large
bowl of salt pork cut up fine, the same of onions finely chopped,
and the same (or more, if you desire) of potatoes cut into eighths
or sixteenths of original size; wash the clams very thoroughly and
put them in a pot with half a pint of water; when the shells are
open they are done; then take them from the shells and chop fine,
saving all the clam water for the chowder; fry out the pork very
gently, and when the scraps are a good brown take them out and put
in the chopped onions to fry; they should be fried in a frying pan,
and the chowder kettle be made very clean before they are put in
it, or the chowder will burn. (The chief secret in chowder-making
is to fry the onions so delicately that they will be missing in the
chowder.)
Add a quart of hot water to the onions; put in the clams,
clam-water and pork scraps. After it boils, add the potatoes, and
when they are cooked, the chowder is finished. Just before it is
taken up, thicken it with a cup of powdered crackers, and add a
quart of fresh milk. If too rich, add more water. No seasoning is
needed but good black pepper.
With the addition of six sliced tomatoes, or half a can of the
canned ones, this is the best recipe of this kind, and is served in
many of our best restaurants.
SCALLOPED CLAMS.
Purchase a dozen large soft clams in the shell and three dozen
opened clams. Ask the dealer to open the first dozen, care being
used not to injure the shells, which are to be used in cooking the
clams. Clean the shells well, and put two soft clams on each half
shell; add to each a dash of white pepper, and half a teaspoonful
of minced celery. Cut a slice of fat bacon into the smallest dice,
add four of these to each shell, strew over the top a thin layer of
cracker dust; place a piece of table butter on top, and bake in the
oven until brown. They are delightful when properly prepared.
SCALLOPS.
If bought in the shell boil them and take out the hearts, which
is the only part used. Dip them in beaten egg and fry in the same
manner as oysters.
Some prefer them stewed the same as oysters.
FROGS FRIED.
Frog are usually fried, and are considered a great delicacy.
Only the hind-legs and quarters are used. Clean them well, season,
and fry in egg batter, or dip in beaten egg and fine cracker
crumbs, the same as oysters.
FROGS STEWED.
Wash and skin the quarters, parboil them about three minutes,
drain them. Now put into a stewpan two ounces of butter. When it is
melted, lay in the frogs, and fry about two minutes, stirring them
to prevent burning; shake over them a tablespoonful of sifted flour
and stir it into them; add a sprig of parsley, a pinch of powdered
summer savory, a bay leaf, three slices of onion, salt and pepper,
a cup of hot water and one of cream. Boil gently until done; remove
the legs, strain and mix into the gravy the yolks of two eggs, well
beaten to a cream; put the legs in a suitable dish, pour over the
gravy and serve.
In choosing poultry, select those that are fresh and fat, and
the surest way to determine whether they are young is to try the
skin under the leg or wing. If it is easily broken, it is young;
or, turn the wing backwards, if the joint yields readily, it is
tender. When poultry is young the skin is thin and tender, the legs
smooth, the feet moist and limber, and the eyes full and bright.
The body should be thick and the breast fat. Old turkeys have long
hairs, and the flesh is purplish where it shows under the skin on
the legs and back. About March they deteriorate in quality.
Young ducks and geese are plump, with light, semi-transparent
fat, soft breast bone, tender flesh, leg-joints which will break by
the weight of the bird, fresh-colored and brittle beaks, and
windpipes that break when pressed between the thumb and forefinger.
They are best in fall and winter.
Young pigeons have light red flesh upon the breast, and full,
fresh-colored legs; when the legs are thin and the breast very dark
the birds are old.
Fine game birds are always heavy for their size; the flesh of
the breast is firm and plump and the skin clear; and if a few
feathers be plucked from the inside of the leg and around the vent,
the flesh of freshly-killed birds will be fat and fresh-colored; if
it is dark and discolored, the game has been hung a long time. The
wings of good ducks, geese, pheasants and woodcock are tender to
the touch; the tips of the long wing feathers of partridges are
pointed in young birds and round in old ones. Quail, snipe and
small birds should have full, tender breasts. Poultry should never
be cooked until six or eight hours after it has been killed, but it
should be picked and drawn as soon as possible. Plunge it in a pot
of scalding hot water; then pluck off the feathers, taking care not
to tear the skin; when it is picked clean, roll up a piece of white
paper, set fire to it and singe off all the hairs. The [Pg 82]head,
neck and feet should be cut off, and the ends of the legs skewered
to the body, and a string tied tightly around the body. When
roasting a chicken or small fowl there is danger of the legs
browning or becoming too hard to be eaten. To avoid this, take
strips of cloth, dip them into a little melted lard, or even just
rub them over with lard, and wind them around the legs. Remove them
in time to allow the legs to brown delicately.
Fowls, and also various kinds of game, when bought at our city
markets, require a more thorough cleansing than those sold in
country places, where as a general thing the meat is wholly
dressed. In large cities they lay for some length of time with the
intestines undrawn, until the flavor of them diffuses itself all
through the meat, rendering it distasteful. In this case, it is
safe, after taking out the intestines, to rinse out in several
waters, and in next to the last water, add a teaspoonful of baking
soda, say to a quart of water. This process neutralizes all
sourness, and helps to destroy all unpleasant taste in the
meat.
Poultry may be baked so that its wings and legs are soft and
tender, by being placed in a deep roasting pan with close cover,
thereby retaining the aroma and essences by absorption while
confined. These pans are a recent innovation, and are made double
with a small opening in the top for giving vent to the accumulation
of steam and gases when required. Roast meats of any kind can also
be cooked in the same manner, and it is a great improvement on the
old plan.
ROAST TURKEY.
Select a young turkey; remove all the feathers carefully, singe
it over a burning newspaper on the top of the stove; then "draw" it
nicely, being very careful not to break any of the internal organs;
remove the crop carefully; cut off the head, and tie the neck close
to the body by drawing the skin over it. Now rinse the inside of
the turkey out with several waters, and in the next to the last,
mix a teaspoonful of baking soda; oftentimes the inside of a fowl
is very sour, especially if it is not freshly killed. Soda, being
cleansing, acts as a corrective, and destroys that unpleasant taste
which we frequently experience in the dressing when fowls have been
killed for some time. Now, after washing, wipe the turkey dry,
inside and out, with a clean cloth, rub the inside with some salt,
then stuff the breast and body [Pg
83]with "Dressing for
Fowls." Then sew up the turkey with a strong thread, tie the legs
and wings to the body, rub it over with a little soft butter,
sprinkle over some salt and pepper, dredge with a little flour;
place it in a dripping-pan, pour in a cup of boiling water, and set
in the oven. Baste the turkey often, turning it around occasionally
so that every part will be uniformly baked. When pierced with a
fork and the liquid runs out perfectly clear, the bird is done. If
any part is likely to scorch, pin over it a piece of buttered white
paper. A fifteen pound turkey requires between three and four hours
to bake. Serve with cranberry sauce.
Gravy for Turkey.—When you put the turkey in to
roast, put the neck, heart, liver and gizzard into a stewpan with a
pint of water; boil until they become quite tender; take them out
of the water, chop the heart and gizzard, mash the liver and throw
away the neck; return the chopped heart, gizzard and liver to the
liquor in which they were stewed; set it to one side, and when the
turkey is done it should be added to the gravy that dripped from
the turkey, having first skimmed off the fat from the surface of
the dripping-pan; set it all over the fire, boil three minutes and
thicken with flour. It will not need brown flour to color the
gravy. The garnishes for turkey or chicken are fried oysters, thin
slices of ham, slices of lemon, fried sausages, or force meat
balls, also parsley.
DRESSING OR STUFFING FOR FOWLS.
For an eight or ten pound turkey, cut the brown crust from
slices or pieces of stale bread until you have as much as the
inside of a pound loaf; put it into a suitable dish and pour tepid
water (not warm, for that makes it heavy) over it; let it stand one
minute, as it soaks very quickly. Now take up a handful at a time
and squeeze it hard and dry with both hands, placing it, as you go
along, in another dish; this process makes it very light. When all
is pressed dry, toss it all up lightly through your fingers; now
add pepper, salt—about a teaspoonful—also a teaspoonful
of powdered summer savory, the same amount of sage, or the green
herb minced fine; add half a cup of melted butter, and a beaten
egg, or not. Work thoroughly all together, and it is ready for
dressing either fowls, fish or meats. A little chopped sausage in
turkey dressing is considered by some an improvement, when well
incorporated with the other ingredients. [Pg
84]For geese and ducks
the stuffing may be made the same as for turkey, with the addition
of a few slices of onion chopped fine.
OYSTER DRESSING OR STUFFING.
This is made with the same ingredients as the above, with the
exception of half a can of oysters drained and slightly chopped and
added to the rest. This is used mostly with boiled turkey and
chicken, and the remainder of the can of oysters used to make an
oyster sauce to be poured over the turkey when served; served
generally in a separate dish, to be dipped out as a person
desires.
These recipes were obtained from an old colored cook, who was
famous for his fine dressing for fowls, fish and meats, and his
advice was, always soak stale bread in cold liquid,
either milk or water, when used for stuffings or for
puddings, as they were much lighter. Hot liquid makes them
heavy.
BOILED TURKEY.
Prepare as you would for baking or roasting; fill with an oyster
stuffing, made as the above. Tie the legs and wings close to the
body, place in salted boiling water with the breast downward; skim
it often and boil about two hours, but not till the skin breaks.
Serve with oyster or celery sauce. Boil a nicely pickled piece of
salt pork, and serve at table a thin slice to each plate. Some
prefer bacon or ham instead of pork.
Some roll the turkey in a cloth dipped in flour. If the liquor
is to be used afterwards for soup, the cloth imparts an unpleasant
flavor. The liquor can be saved and made into a nice soup for the
next day's dinner, by adding the same seasoning as for chicken
soup.
TURKEY SCALLOP.
Pick the meat from the bones of cold turkey and chop it fine.
Put a layer of bread crumbs on the bottom of a buttered dish,
moisten them with a little milk, then put in a layer of turkey with
some of the filling, and cut small pieces of butter over the top;
sprinkle with pepper and salt; then another layer of bread crumbs,
and so on until the dish is nearly full; add a little hot water to
the gravy left from the turkey and pour over it; then take two
eggs, two tablespoonfuls of milk, one of melted butter, a little
salt and cracker [Pg 85]crumbs as much as will make it thick
enough to spread on with a knife; put bits of butter over it, and
cover with a plate. Bake three-quarters of an hour. Ten minutes
before serving, remove the plate and let it brown.
TURKEY HASHED.
Cut the remnants of turkey from a previous dinner into pieces of
equal size. Boil the bones in a quart of water, until the quart is
reduced to a pint; then take out the bones, and to the liquor in
which they were boiled add turkey gravy, if you have any, or white
stock, or a small piece of butter with salt and pepper; let the
liquor thus prepared boil up once; then put in the pieces of
turkey, dredge in a little flour, give it one boil-up, and serve in
a hot dish.
TURKEY WARMED OVER.
Pieces of cold turkey or chicken may be warmed up with a little
butter in a frying pan; place it on a warm platter, surround it
with pieces of small thick slices of bread or biscuit halved, first
dipping them in hot salted water; then place the platter in a warm
oven with the door open. Have already made the following gravy to
pour over all:—
Into the frying pan put a large spoonful of butter, one or two
cupfuls of milk, and any gravy that may be left over. Bring it to a
boil; then add sufficient flour, wet in a little cold milk or
water, to make it the consistency of cream. Season with salt,
pepper and add a little of the dark meat chopped very fine.
Let the sauce cook a few moments, then pour over the biscuit and
fowl. This will be found a really nice dish.
BONED TURKEY.
Clean the fowl as usual. With a sharp and pointed knife, begin
at the extremity of the wing, and pass the knife down close to the
bone, cutting all the flesh from the bone, and preserving the skin
whole; run the knife down each side of the breast bone and up the
legs, keeping close to the bone; then split the back half way up,
and draw out the bones; fill the places whence the bones were taken
with a stuffing, restoring the fowl to its natural form, and sew up
all the incisions made in the skin. Lard with two or three rows of
slips of fat bacon on the top, basting often with salt and water,
and a little butter. Some like a glass of port wine in the
gravy.
This is a difficult dish to attempt by any but skillful hands.
Carve across in slices, and serve with tomato sauce.
ROAST GOOSE.
The goose should not be more than eight months old, and the
fatter the more tender and juicy the meat. Stuff with the following
mixture: Three pints of bread crumbs, six ounces of butter, or part
butter and part salt pork, one teaspoonful each of sage, black
pepper and salt, one chopped onion. Do not stuff very full, and
stitch openings firmly together to keep flavor in and fat out.
Place in a baking pan with a little water, and baste frequently
with salt and water (some add vinegar); turn often so that the
sides and back may be nicely browned. Bake two hours or more; when
done take from the pan, pour off the fat, and to the brown gravy
left add the chopped giblets which have previously been stewed
until tender, together with the water they were boiled in; thicken
with a little flour and butter rubbed together, bring to a boil and
serve, English style.
ROAST CHICKEN.
Pick and draw them, wash out well in two or three waters, adding
a little soda to the last but one to sweeten it, if there is doubt
as to its being fresh. Dry it well with a clean cloth, and fill the
crop and body with a stuffing the same as "Dressing for Fowls." Lay
it in a dripping-pan; put a pint of hot water and a piece of butter
in the dripping-pan, add to it a small tablespoonful of salt, and a
small teaspoonful of pepper; baste frequently, and let it roast
quickly, without scorching; when nearly done, put a piece of butter
the size of a large egg to the water in the pan; when it melts,
baste with it, dredge a little flour over, baste again, and let it
finish; half an hour will roast a full grown chicken, if the fire
is right. When done, take it up.
Having stewed the necks, gizzards, livers and hearts in a very
little water, strain it and mix it hot with the gravy that has
dripped from the fowls, and which must be first skimmed. Thicken it
with a little browned flour, add to it the livers, hearts and
gizzards chopped small. Or, put the giblets in the pan with the
chicken and let them roast. Send the fowls to the table with the
gravy in a boat. Cranberry sauce should accompany them, or any tart
sauce.
BOILED CHICKEN.
Clean, wash and stuff, as for roasting. Baste a floured cloth
around each and put into a pot with enough boiling water to cover
them well. The hot water cooks the skin at once and prevents the
escape of the juice. The broth will not be so rich as if the fowls
are put on in cold water, but this is a proof that the meat will be
more nutritious and better flavored. Stew very slowly, for the
first half hour especially. Boil an hour or more, guiding yourself
by size and toughness. Serve with egg, bread or oyster sauce. (See
SAUCES.)
STEAMED CHICKEN.
Rub the chicken on the inside with pepper and half a teaspoonful
of salt; place in a steamer in a kettle that will keep it as near
the water as possible, cover and steam an hour and a half; when
done, keep hot while dressing is prepared, then cut up, arrange on
the platter, and serve with the dressing over it.
The dressing is made as follows: Boil one pint of gravy from the
kettle without the fat, add cayenne pepper and half a teaspoonful
of salt; stir a tablespoonful of flour into a quarter of a pint of
cream until smooth and add to the gravy. Cornstarch may be used
instead of the flour, and some cooks add nutmeg or celery salt.
FRICASSEE CHICKEN.
Cut up two young chickens, put them in a stewpan with just
enough cold water to cover them. Cover closely and let them heat
very slowly; then stew them over an hour, or until tender. If they
are old chickens they will require long, slow boiling, often from
three to four hours. When tender, season with salt and pepper, a
piece of butter as large as an egg, and a little celery, if liked.
Stir up two tablespoonfuls of flour in a little water or milk and
add to the stew, also two well-beaten yolks of eggs; let all boil
up one minute; arrange the chicken on a warm platter, pour some of
the gravy over it and send the rest to the table in a boat. The egg
should be added to a little of the cooled gravy before putting with
the hot gravy.
STEWED WHOLE SPRING CHICKEN.
Dress a full-grown spring chicken the same as for roasting,
seasoning it with salt and pepper inside and out; then fill the
body with [Pg 88]oysters; place it in a tin pail with a close-fitting
cover. Set the pail in a pot of fast-boiling water and cook until
the chicken is tender. Dish up the chicken on a warm dish, then
pour the gravy into a saucepan, put into it a tablespoonful of
butter, half a cupful of cream or rich milk, three hard-boiled eggs
chopped fine, some minced herbs and a tablespoonful of flour. Let
all boil up and then pour it over the chicken. Serve hot.
PICKLED CHICKEN.
Boil four chickens till tender enough for meat to fall from
bones; put meat in a stone jar and pour over it three pints of
cold, good cider vinegar and a pint and a half of the water in
which the chickens were boiled; add spices if preferred, and it
will be ready for use in two days. This is a popular Sunday evening
dish; it is good for luncheon at any time.
RISSOLES OF CHICKEN.
Mince up finely the remains of a cold chicken together with half
the quantity of lean, cold ham. Mix them well, adding enough white
sauce to moisten them. Now have light paste rolled out until about
a quarter of an inch or a little more in thickness. Cut the paste
into pieces, one inch by two in size, and lay a little of the
mixture upon the centres of half of the pieces and cover them with
the other halves, pressing the edges neatly together and forming
them into little rolls. Have your frying pan ready with plenty of
boiling hot lard, or other frying medium, and fry until they become
a golden-brown color. A minute or two will be sufficient for this.
Then drain them well and serve immediately on a napkin.
CHICKEN PATTIES.
Mince up fine cold chicken, either roasted or boiled. Season it
with pepper and salt, and a little minced parsley and onion.
Moisten it with chicken gravy or cream sauce, fill scalloped shells
that are lined with pastry with the mixture, and sprinkle bread
crumbs over the tops. Put two or three tiny pieces of butter over
each, and bake brown in a hot oven.
TO BROIL CHICKEN.
After dressing and washing the chickens as previously directed,
split them open through the backbone; frog them by cutting the
cords under the wings and laying the wings out flat; cut the sinews
under the second joint of the leg and turn the leg down; press down
the breast-bone without breaking it.
Season the chicken with salt and pepper, lay it upon the
gridiron with the inside first to the fire; put the gridiron over a
slow fire, and place a tin sheet and weight upon the chicken, to
keep it flat; let it broil ten minutes, then turn and proceed in
the same manner with the other side.
The chicken should be perfectly cooked, but not scorched. A
broiled chicken brought to the table with its wings and legs burnt,
and its breast half cooked, is very disagreeable. To avoid this,
the chicken must be closely watched while broiling, and the fire
must be arranged so that the heat shall be equally dispensed. When
the fire is too hot under any one part of the chicken, put a little
ashes on the fire under that part, that the heat may be
reduced.
Dish a broiled chicken on a hot plate, putting a large lump of
butter and a tablespoonful of hot water upon the plate, and turning
the chicken two or three times that it may absorb as much of the
butter as possible. Garnish with parsley. Serve with poached eggs
on a separate dish. It takes from thirty to forty minutes to broil
a chicken well.
CHICKEN PIE.
Prepare the chicken as for fricassee. When the chicken is stewed
tender, seasoned, and the gravy thickened, take it from the fire;
take out the largest bones, scrape the meat from the neck and
backbone, throw the bones away; line the sides of a four or six
quart pudding-dish with a rich baking powder or soda biscuit dough,
a quarter of an inch thick; put in part of the chicken, a few lumps
of butter, pepper and salt, if needed, some cold boiled eggs cut in
slices. Add the rest of the chicken and season as before; a few new
potatoes in their season might be added. Pour over the gravy, being
sure to have enough to fill the dish, and cover with a crust a
quarter of an inch thick, made with a hole in the centre the size
of a teacup.
Brush over the top with beaten white of egg and bake for half to
three-quarters of an hour. Garnish the top with small bright celery
leaves, neatly arranged in a circle.
FRIED CHICKEN.
Wash and cut up a young chicken, wipe it dry, season with salt
and pepper, dredge it with flour, or dip each piece in beaten egg
and then in cracker crumbs. Have in a frying pan one ounce each of
butter and sweet lard made boiling hot. Lay in the chicken and fry
brown on both sides. Take up, drain it and set aside in a covered
dish. Stir into the gravy left, if not too much, a large
tablespoonful of flour, make it smooth, add a cup of cream or milk,
season with salt and pepper, boil up and pour over the chicken.
Some like chopped parsley added to the gravy. Serve hot.
If the chicken is old, put into a stewpan with a little water
and simmer gently till tender; season with salt and pepper, dip in
flour or cracker crumb and egg, and fry as above. Use the broth the
chicken was cooked in to make the gravy, instead of the cream or
milk, or use an equal quantity of both.
FRIED CHICKEN Á LA ITALIENNE.
Make common batter; mix into it a cupful of chopped tomatoes,
one onion chopped, some minced parsley, salt and pepper. Cut up
young, tender chickens, dry them well and dip each piece in the
batter; then fry brown in plenty of butter in a thick-bottomed
frying pan. Serve with tomato sauce.
CHICKEN CROQUETTES. No. 1.
Put a cup of cream or milk in a saucepan, set it over the fire,
and when it boils add a lump of butter as large as an egg, in which
has been mixed a tablespoonful of flour. Let it boil up thick;
remove from the fire, and when cool mix into it a teaspoonful of
salt, half a teaspoonful of pepper, a bit of minced onion or
parsley, one cup of fine bread crumbs, and a pint of finely-chopped
cooked chicken, either roasted or boiled. Lastly, beat up two eggs
and work in with the whole. Flour your hands and make into small,
round, flat cakes; dip in egg and bread crumbs and fry like fish
cakes in butter and good sweet lard mixed, or like fried cakes in
plenty of hot lard. Take them up with a skimmer and lay them on
brown paper to free them from the grease. Serve hot.
CHICKEN CROQUETTES. No. 2.
Take any kind of fresh meat or fowl, chop very fine, add an
equal quantity of smoothly mashed potatoes, mix, and season with
butter, salt, black pepper, a little prepared mustard, and a little
cayenne pepper; make into cakes, dip in egg and bread crumbs and
fry a light brown. A nice relish for tea.
TO FRY CROQUETTES.
Beat up two eggs in a deep bowl; roll enough crackers until you
have a cupful of crumbs, or the same of fine stale bread crumbs;
spread the crumbs on a large plate or pie-tin. Have over the fire a
kettle containing two or three inches of boiling lard. As fast as
the croquettes are formed, roll them in the crumbs, then dip them
in the beaten egg, then again roll them in crumbs; drop them in the
smoking hot fat and fry them a light golden brown.
PRESSED CHICKEN.
Clean and cut up your chickens. Stew in just enough water to
cover them. When nearly cooked, season them well with salt and
pepper. Let them stew down until the water is nearly all boiled
out, and the meat drops easily from the bones. Remove the bones and
gristle; chop the meat rather coarsely, then turn it back into the
stew-kettle, where the broth was left (after skimming off all fat),
and let it heat through again. Turn it into a square bread pan,
placing a platter on the top, and a heavy weight on the platter.
This, if properly prepared, will turn out like a mold of jelly and
may be sliced in smooth, even slices. The success of this depends
upon not having too much water; it will not jelly if too weak, or
if the water is allowed to boil away entirely while cooking. A good
way to cook old fowls.
CHICKEN LUNCH FOR TRAVELING.
Cut a young chicken down the back; wash and wipe dry; season
with salt and pepper; put in a dripping-pan and bake in a moderate
oven three-quarters of an hour. This is much better for traveling
lunch than when seasoned with butter.
All kinds of poultry and meat can be cooked quicker by adding to
the water in which they are boiled a little vinegar or a piece of
lemon. By the use of a little acid there will be a considerable
saving of fuel, [Pg 92]as well as shortening of time. Its
action is beneficial on old tough meats, rendering them quite
tender and easy of digestion. Tainted meats and fowls will lose
their bad taste and odor if cooked in this way, and if not used too
freely no taste of it will be acquired.
POTTED CHICKEN.
Strip the meat from the bones of a cold roast fowl; to every
pound of meat allow a quarter of a pound of butter, salt and
cayenne pepper to taste; one teaspoonful of pounded mace, half a
small nutmeg. Cut the meat into small pieces, pound it well with
the butter, sprinkle in the spices gradually and keep pounding
until reduced to a perfectly smooth paste. Pack it into small jars
and cover with clarified butter, about a quarter of an inch in
thickness. Two or three slices of ham minced and pounded with the
above will be an improvement. Keep in a dry place. A luncheon or
breakfast dish.
Old fowls can be made very tender by putting into them, while
boiling, a piece of soda as large as a bean.
SCALLOPED CHICKEN.
Divide a fowl into joints and boil till the meat leaves the bone
readily. Take out the bones and chop the meat as small as dice.
Thicken the water in which the fowl was boiled with flour and
season to taste with butter and salt. Fill a deep dish with
alternate layers of bread crumbs and chicken and slices of cooked
potatoes, having crumbs on top. Pour the gravy over the top and add
a few bits of butter and bake till nicely browned. There should be
gravy enough to moisten the dish. Serve with a garnish of parsley.
Tiny new potatoes are nice in place of sliced ones when in
season.
BREADED CHICKEN.
Prepare young chickens as for fricassee by cutting them into
pieces. Dip each piece in beaten egg, then in grated bread crumbs
or rolled cracker; season them with pepper and salt and a little
minced parsley. Place them in a baking pan and put on the top of
each piece a lump of butter, add half of a cupful of hot water;
bake slowly, basting often. When sufficiently cooked take up on a
warm platter. Into the pan pour a cup of cream or rich milk, a
cupful of bread crumbs. Stir it well until cooked, then pour it
over the chicken. Serve while hot.
BROILED CHICKEN ON TOAST.
Broil the usual way and when thoroughly done take it up in a
square tin or dripping-pan, butter it well, season with pepper and
salt and set it in the oven for a few minutes. Lay slices of
moistened buttered toast on a platter; take the chicken up over it,
add to the gravy in the pan part of a cupful of cream, if you have
it; if not, use milk. Thicken with a little flour and pour over the
chicken.
This is considered most excellent.
CURRY CHICKEN.
Cut up a chicken weighing from a pound and a half to two pounds,
as for fricassee, wash it well, and put it into a stewpan with
sufficient water to cover it; boil it, closely covered, until
tender; add a large teaspoonful of salt, and cook a few minutes
longer; then remove from the fire, take out the chicken, pour the
liquor into a bowl, and set it one side. Now cut up into the
stewpan two small onions, and fry them with a piece of butter as
large as an egg; as soon as the onions are brown, skim them out and
put in the chicken; fry for three or four minutes; next sprinkle
over two teaspoonfuls of Curry Powder. Now pour over the liquor in
which the chicken was stewed, stir all well together, and stew for
five minutes longer, then stir into this a tablespoonful of sifted
flour made thin with a little water; lastly, stir in a beaten yolk
of egg, and it is done.
Serve with hot boiled rice laid around on the edge of a platter,
and the chicken curry in the centre.
This makes a handsome side dish, and a fine relish accompanying
a full dinner of roast beef or any roast.
All first-class grocers and druggists keep this "India Curry
Powder," put up in bottles. Beef, veal, mutton, duck, pigeons,
partridges, rabbits or fresh fish may be substituted for the
chicken, if preferred, and sent to the table with or without a dish
of rice.
To Boil Rice or Curry.—Pick over the rice, a
cupful. Wash it thoroughly in two or three cold waters; then leave
it about twenty minutes in cold water. Put into a stewpan two
quarts of water with a teaspoonful of salt in it; and when it
boils, sprinkle in the rice. Boil it briskly for twenty minutes,
keeping the pan covered. Take it from the fire, and drain off the
water. Afterwards set the saucepan [Pg
94]on the back of the
stove, with the lid off, to allow the rice to dry and the grains to
separate.
Rice, if properly boiled, should be soft and white, and every
grain stand alone. Serve it hot in a separate dish or served as
above, laid around the chicken curry.
CHICKEN POT-PIE. No. 1.
Cut and joint a large chicken, cover with cold water, and let it
boil gently until tender. Season with salt and pepper, and thicken
the gravy with two tablespoonfuls of flour, mixed smooth with a
piece of butter the size of an egg. Have ready nice light
bread-dough, cut with the top of a wine-glass about a half an inch
thick; let them stand half an hour and rise, then drop these into
the boiling gravy. Put the cover on the pot closely, wrap a cloth
around it, in order that no steam shall escape; and by no means
allow the pot to cease boiling. Boil three-quarters of an hour.
CHICKEN POT-PIE. No. 2.
This style of pot-pie was made more in our grandmother's day
than now, as most cooks consider that cooking crust so long
destroys its spongy lightness, and renders it too hard and dry.
Take a pair of fine fowls, cut them up, wash the pieces, and
season with pepper only. Make a light biscuit dough, and plenty of
it, as it is always much liked by the eaters of pot-pie. Roll out
the dough not very thin, and cut most of it into long squares.
Butter the sides of a pot, and line them with dough nearly to the
top. Lay slices of cold ham at the bottom of the pot, and then the
pieces of fowl, interspersed all through with squares of dough and
potatoes, pared and quartered. Pour in a quart of water. Cover the
whole with a lid of dough, having a slit in the centre, through
which the gravy will bubble up. Boil it steadily for two hours.
Half an hour before you take it up, put in through the hole in the
centre of the crust some bits of butter rolled in flour, to thicken
the gravy. When done, put the pie on a large dish, and pour the
gravy over it.
You may intersperse it all through with cold ham.
A pot-pie may be made of ducks, rabbits, squirrels or venison.
Also of beefsteak. A beefsteak, or some porksteaks (the lean only),
greatly improve a chicken pot-pie. If you use no ham, season with
salt.
CHICKEN STEWED WITH BISCUIT.
Take chickens, and make a fricassee; just before you are ready
to dish it up, have ready two baking-tins of rich soda or
baking-powder biscuits; take them from the oven hot, split them
apart by breaking them with your hands, lay them on a large meat
platter, covering it, then pour the hot chicken stew over all. Send
to the table hot. This is a much better way than boiling this kind
of biscuit in the stew, as you are more sure of its being always
light.
CHICKEN DRESSED AS TERRAPIN.
Select young chickens, clean and cut them into pieces; put them
into a stewpan with just enough water to cook them. When
tender stir into it half of a cup of butter and one beaten egg.
Season it with salt and pepper, a teaspoonful of powdered thyme;
add two hard-boiled eggs coarsely minced and a small glass of wine.
Boil up once and serve with jelly.
CHICKEN ROLY-POLY.
One quart of flour, two teaspoonfuls of cream tartar mixed with
the flour, one teaspoonful of soda dissolved in a teacupful of
milk; a teaspoonful of salt; do not use shortening of any kind, but
roll out the mixture half an inch thick, and on it lay minced
chicken, veal or mutton. The meat must be seasoned with pepper and
salt and be free from gristle. Roll the crust over and over, and
put it on a buttered plate and place in a steamer for half an hour.
Serve for breakfast or lunch, giving a slice to each person with
gravy served with it.
CHICKEN TURNOVERS.
Chop cold roast chicken very fine. Put it into a saucepan, place
it over the fire, moisten it with a little water and gravy, or a
piece of butter. Season with salt and pepper; add a small
tablespoonful of sifted flour dissolved in a little water; heat all
through and remove from the fire to become cool. When cooled roll
out some plain pie-crust quite thin, cut out in rounds as large as
a saucer; wet the edge with cold water and put a large spoonful of
the minced meat on one-half of the round; fold the other half over
and pinch the edges well together, then fry them in hot drippings
or fat a nice brown. They may also be cooked in a moderate
oven.
CHICKEN PUDDING.
Cut up two young chickens into good-sized pieces; put them in a
saucepan with just enough water to cover them well. When boiled
quite tender, season with salt and pepper; let them simmer ten or
fifteen minutes longer; then take the chicken from the broth and
remove all the large bones. Place the meat in a well-buttered
pudding dish, season again, if necessary, adding a few bits of
butter. Pour over this the following batter:—
Eight eggs beaten light and mixed with one quart of milk, three
tablespoonfuls of melted butter, a teaspoonful of salt and two
large teaspoonfuls of baking powder, added to enough sifted flour
to make a batter like griddle-cakes.
Bake one hour in a moderate oven.
Make a gravy of the broth that remained from the cooking of the
chicken, adding a tablespoonful of flour stirred into a third of a
cup of melted butter; let it boil up, putting in more water if
necessary. Serve hot in a gravy boat with the pudding.
CHICKEN AND MACARONI.
Boil a chicken until very tender, take out all the bones, and
pick up the meat quite fine. Boil half a pound of macaroni until
tender, first breaking it up to pieces an inch long. Butter a deep
pudding dish, put on the bottom a layer of the cooked macaroni,
then a layer of the minced chicken, bits of butter, pepper and
salt, then some of the chicken liquor, over this put another layer
of macaroni, and so on, until, the dish is filled. Pour a cup of
cream over the whole, and bake half an hour. Serve on a
platter.
ROAST DUCK. (Tame.)
Pick, draw, clean thoroughly, and wipe dry. Cut the neck close
to the back, beat the breast-bone flat with a rolling pin, tie the
wings and legs securely, and stuff with the following:—
Three pints bread crumbs, six ounces butter, or part butter and
salt pork, two chopped onions and one teaspoonful each of sage,
black pepper and salt. Do not stuff very full, and sew up the
openings firmly to keep the flavor in and the fat out. If not fat
enough, it should be larded with salt pork, or tie a slice upon the
breast. Place in a baking pan, with a little water, and baste
frequently with salt and [Pg
97]water—some add
onion, and some vinegar; turn often, so that the sides and back may
all be nicely browned. When nearly done, baste with butter and a
little flour. These directions will apply to tame geese as well as
ducks. Young ducks should roast from twenty-five to thirty minutes,
and full-grown ones for an hour or more, with frequent basting.
Some prefer them underdone and served very hot; but, as a rule,
thorough cooking will prove more palatable. Make a gravy out of the
necks and gizzards by putting them in a quart of cold water, that
must be reduced to a pint by boiling. The giblets, when done, may
be chopped fine and added to the juice. The preferred seasonings
are one tablespoonful of Madeira or sherry, a blade of mace, one
small onion, and a little cayenne pepper; strain through a hair
sieve; pour a little over the ducks and serve the remainder in a
boat. Served with jellies or any tart sauce.
BRAISED DUCK.
Prepare a pair of fine young ducks, the same as for roasting,
place them in a stewpan together with two or three slices of bacon,
a carrot, an onion stuck with two cloves, and a little thyme and
parsley. Season with pepper, and cover the whole with a broth,
adding to the broth a gill of white wine. Place the pan over a
gentle fire and allow the ducks to simmer until done, basting them
frequently. When done remove them from the pan, and place them
where they will keep hot. A turnip should then be cut up and fried
in some butter. When nicely browned, drain the pieces and cook them
until tender in the liquor in which the ducks were braised. Now
strain and thicken the gravy, and after dishing up the ducks, pour
it over them, garnishing with the pieces of turnip.
STEWED DUCK.
Prepare them by cutting them up the same as chicken for
fricassee. Lay two or three very thin slices of salt pork upon the
bottom of a stewpan; lay the pieces of duck upon the pork. Let them
stew slowly for an hour, closely covered. Then season with salt and
pepper, half a teaspoonful of powdered sage, or some green sage
minced fine; one chopped onion. Stew another half hour until the
duck is tender. Stir up a large tablespoonful of brown flour in a
little water and add it to the stew. Let it boil up, and serve all
together in one dish, accompanied with green peas.
DUCK PIE.
Cut all the meat from cold roast ducks; put the bones and
stuffing into cold water; cover them and let boil; put the meat
into a deep dish; pour on enough of the stock made from the bones
to moisten; cover with pastry slit in the centre with a knife, and
bake a light brown.
WARMED UP DUCK.
A nice dish for breakfast, and very relishing, can be made from
the remains of a roast of duck. Cut the meat from the bones, pick
out all the little tidbits in the recesses, lay them in a frying
pan, and cover with water and the cold gravy left from the roast;
add a piece of butter; let all boil up once and if not quite thick
enough, stir in a little dissolved flour. Serve hot.
ROAST WILD DUCK.
Wild duck should not be dressed too soon after being killed. If
the weather is cold it will be better for being kept several days.
Bake in a hot oven, letting it remain for five or ten minutes
without basting to keep in the gravy, then baste frequently with
butter and water. If over-done it loses flavor, thirty to forty
minutes in the right kind of an oven being sufficient. Serve on a
very hot dish, and send to table as hot as possible with a cut
lemon and the following sauce:—
Put in a tiny saucepan a tablespoonful each of Worcestershire
sauce and mushroom catsup, a little salt and cayenne pepper and the
juice of half a lemon. Mix well, make it hot, remove from the fire
and stir in a teaspoonful of made mustard. Pour into a hot gravy
boat.
WILD DUCKS.
Most wild ducks are apt to have the flavor of fish, and when in
the hands of inexperienced cooks are sometimes unpalatable on this
account. Before roasting them, parboil them with a small peeled
carrot put within each duck. This absorbs the unpleasant taste. An
onion will have the same effect, but unless you use onions in the
stuffing the carrot is preferable. Roast the same as tame duck. Or
put into the duck a whole onion peeled, plenty of salt and pepper
and a glass of claret, bake in a hot oven twenty minutes. Serve hot
with the gravy it yields in cooking and a dish of currant
jelly.
CANVAS-BACK DUCK.
The epicurean taste declares that this special kind of bird
requires no spices or flavors to make it perfect, as the meat
partakes of the flavor of the food that the bird feeds upon, being
mostly wild celery; and the delicious flavor is best preserved when
roasted quickly with a hot fire. After dressing the duck in the
usual way by plucking, singeing, drawing, wipe it with a wet towel,
truss the head under the wing; place it in a dripping-pan, put it
in the oven, basting often, and roast it half an hour. It is
generally preferred a little underdone. Place it when done on a hot
dish, season well with salt and pepper, pour over it the gravy it
has yielded in baking and serve it immediately while hot.
ROAST PIGEONS.
Pigeons lose their flavor by being kept more than a day after
they are killed. They may be prepared and roasted or broiled the
same as chickens; they will require from twenty to thirty minutes'
cooking. Make a gravy of the giblets or not, season it with pepper
and salt, and add a little flour and butter.
STEWED PIGEONS.
Clean and stuff with onion dressing, thyme, etc.,—do not
sew up; take five or more slices of corned pork, let it fry a while
in a pot so that the fat comes out and it begins to brown a little;
then lay the pigeons all around in the fat, leaving the pork still
in; add hot water enough to partially cover them; cover tightly and
boil an hour or so until tender; then turn off some of the liquid,
and keep turning them so they will brown nicely; then heat and add
the liquor poured off; add extra thyme, pepper, and keep turning
until the pigeons and gravy are nicely browned. Thicken with a
little flour, and serve with the gravy poured over them; garnish
with parsley.
PIGEON PIE.
Take half a dozen pigeons; stuff each one with a dressing the
same as for turkey; loosen the joints with a knife, but do not
separate them. Put them in a stewpan with water enough to cover
them, let them cook until nearly tender, then season them with salt
and pepper and butter. Thicken the gravy with flour, remove and
cool. Butter a [Pg 100]pudding dish, line the sides with a
rich crust. Have ready some hard-boiled eggs cut in slices. Put in
a layer of egg and birds and gravy until the dish is full. Cover
with a crust and bake.
BROILED PIGEONS OR SQUABS.
Split them down the back and broil the same as chicken;
seasoning well with salt, pepper and plenty of butter. Broil slices
of salt pork, very thin; place a slice over each bird and
serve.
SQUAB POT-PIE.
Cut into dice three ounces of salt pork; divide six wild squabs
into pieces at the joints; remove the skin. Cut up four potatoes
into small squares, and prepare a dozen small dough balls.
Put into a yellow, deep baking dish the pork, potatoes and
squabs, and then the balls of dough, season with salt, white
pepper, a dash of mace or nutmeg; add hot water enough to cover the
ingredients, cover with a "short" pie-crust and bake in a moderate
oven three-quarters of an hour.
WOODCOCK, ROASTED.
Skin the head and neck of the bird, pluck the feathers, and
truss it by bringing the beak of the bird under the wing, and
fastening the pinion to the thigh; twist the legs at the knuckles
and press the feet upon the thigh. Put a piece of bread under each
bird to catch the drippings, baste with butter, dredge with flour,
and roast fifteen or twenty minutes with a sharp fire. When done,
cut the bread in diamond shape, each piece large enough to stand
one bird upon, place them aslant on your dish, and serve with gravy
enough to moisten the bread; serve some in the dish and some in the
tureen; garnish with slices of lemon. Roast from twenty to
twenty-five minutes.
SNIPE.
Snipe are similar to woodcock, and may be served in the same
manner; they will require less time to roast.
REED BIRDS.
Pick and draw them very carefully, salt and dredge with flour,
and roast with a quick fire ten or fifteen minutes. Serve on toast
with [Pg 101]butter and pepper. You can put in each one an oyster
dipped in butter and then in bread crumbs before roasting. They are
also very nice broiled.
ROAST QUAIL.
Rinse well and steam over boiling water until tender, then
dredge with flour, and smother in butter; season with salt and
pepper and roast inside the stove; thicken the gravy; serve with
green grape jelly, and garnish with parsley.
TO ROAST PARTRIDGES, PHEASANTS, QUAIL OR GROUSE.
Carefully cut out all the shot, wash thoroughly but quickly,
using soda in the water; rinse again, and dry with a clean cloth.
Stuff them and sew them up. Skewer the legs and wings to the body,
larder the breast with very thin slices of fat salt pork, place
them in the oven, and baste with butter and water before taking up,
having seasoned them with salt and pepper; or you can leave out the
pork and use only butter, or cook them without stuffing. Make a
gravy of the drippings thickened with browned flour. Boil up and
serve in a boat.
These are all very fine broiled, first splitting down the back,
placing on the gridiron the inside down, cover with a baking tin,
and broil slowly at first. Serve with cream gravy.
GAME PIE.
Clean well, inside and out, a dozen small birds, quail, snipe,
woodcock, etc., and split them in half; put them in a saucepan with
about two quarts of water; when it boils, skim off all scum that
rises; then add salt and pepper, a bunch of minced parsley, one
onion chopped fine, and three whole cloves. Cut up half a pound of
salt pork into dice, and let all boil until tender, using care that
there be enough water to cover the birds. Thicken this with two
tablespoonfuls of browned flour and let it boil up. Stir in a piece
of butter as large as an egg; remove from the fire and let it cool.
Have ready a pint of potatoes cut as small as dice, and a rich
crust made. Line the sides of a buttered pudding dish with the
crust; lay in the birds, then some of the potatoes, then birds and
so on, until the dish is full. Pour over the gravy, put on the top
crust, with a slit cut in the centre, and bake. The top can be
ornamented with pastry leaves in a wreath about the edge, with any
fancy design placed in the centre across the slit.
SNOWBIRDS.
One dozen thoroughly cleaned birds; stuff each with an oyster,
put them into a yellow dish, and add two ounces of boiled salt pork
and three raw potatoes cut into slices; add a pint of oyster
liquor, an ounce of butter; salt and pepper; cover the dish with a
crust and bake in moderate oven.
SQUIRREL.
They are cooked similar to rabbits, are excellent when broiled
or made into a stew, and, in fact, are very good in all the
different styles of cooking similar to rabbit.
There are many species common to this country; among them the
black, red, gray and fox. Gophers and chipmunks may also be classed
as another but smaller variety.
ROAST HARE OR RABBIT.
A very close relationship exists between the hare and the
rabbit, the chief difference being in the smaller size and shorter
legs and ears of the latter. The manner of dressing and preparing
each for the table is, therefore, pretty nearly the same. To
prepare them for roasting, first skin, wash well in cold water and
rinse thoroughly in lukewarm water. If a little musty from being
emptied before they were hung up, and afterward neglected, rub the
insides with vinegar and afterward remove all taint of the acid by
a thorough washing in lukewarm water. After being well wiped with a
soft cloth put in a dressing as usual, sew the animal up, truss it,
and roast for half or three-quarters of an hour, until well
browned, basting it constantly with butter and dredging with flour,
just before taking up.
To make a gravy, after the rabbits are roasted, pour nearly all
the fat out of the pan, but do not pour the bottom or brown part of
the drippings; put the pan over the fire, stir into it a heaping
tablespoonful of flour, and stir until the flour browns. Then stir
in a pint of boiling water. Season the gravy with salt and pepper;
let it boil for a moment. Send hot to the table in a tureen with
the hot rabbits. Serve with currant jelly.
FRICASSEE RABBIT.
Clean two young rabbits, cut into joints, and soak in salt and
water half an hour. Put into a saucepan with a pint of cold water,
a [Pg 103]bunch of sweet herbs, an onion finely minced, a
pinch of mace, half a nutmeg, a pinch of pepper and half a pound of
salt pork cut in small thin slices. Cover and stew until tender.
Take out the rabbits and set in a dish where they will keep warm.
Add to the gravy a cup of cream (or milk), two well-beaten eggs,
stirred in a little at a time, a tablespoonful of butter, and a
thickening made of a tablespoonful of flour and a little milk. Boil
up once; remove the saucepan from the fire, squeeze in the juice of
a lemon, stirring all the while, and pour over the rabbits. Do not
cook the head or neck.
FRIED RABBIT.
After the rabbit has been thoroughly cleaned and washed, put it
into boiling water, and let it boil ten minutes; drain it, and when
cold, cut it into joints, dip into beaten egg, and then in fine
bread crumbs; season with salt and pepper. When all are ready, fry
them in butter and sweet lard, mix over a moderate fire until brown
on both sides. Take them out, thicken the gravy with a spoonful of
flour, turn in a cup of milk or cream; let all boil up, and turn
over the rabbits. Serve hot with onion sauce. (See SAUCES.) Garnish
with sliced lemon.
RABBIT PIE.
This pie can be made the same as "Game Pie" excepting you
scatter through it four hard-boiled eggs cut in slices. Cover with
puff paste, cut a slit in the middle, and bake one hour, laying
paper over the top should it brown too fast.
BROILED RABBITS.
After skinning and cleaning the rabbits, wipe them dry, split
them down the back lengthwise, pound them flat, then wrap them in
letter paper well buttered, place them on a buttered gridiron, and
broil over a clear, brisk fire, turning them often. When
sufficiently cooked, remove the papers, lay them on a very hot
platter, season with salt, pepper and plenty of butter, turning
them over and over to soak up the butter. Cover and keep hot in a
warming oven until served.
SALMI OF GAME.
This is a nice mode of serving the remains of roasted game, but
when a superlative salmi is desired, the birds must be scarcely
more than half roasted for it. In either case, carve them very
neatly, and [Pg 104]strip every particle of skin and fat from the
legs, wings and breasts; bruise the bodies well, and put them with
the skin and other trimmings into a very clean stewpan. If for a
simple and inexpensive dinner, merely add to them two sliced
onions, a bay-leaf, a small blade of mace and a few peppercorns;
then pour in a pint or more of good veal gravy, or strong broth,
and boil it briskly until reduced nearly half; strain the gravy,
pressing the bones well to obtain all the flavor; skim off the fat,
add a little cayenne and lemon juice, heat the game very gradually
in it, but do not on any account allow it to boil; place pieces of
fried bread around a dish, arrange the birds in good form in the
centre, give the sauce a boil, and pour it on them.
ROAST HAUNCH OF VENISON.
To prepare a haunch of venison for roasting, wash it slightly in
tepid water and dry it thoroughly by rubbing it with a clean, soft
cloth. Lay over the fat side a large sheet of thickly-buttered
paper, and next a paste of flour and water about three-quarters of
an inch thick; cover this again with two or three sheets of stout
paper, secure the whole well with twine, and put down to roast,
with a little water, in the dripping-pan. Let the fire be clear and
strong; baste the paper immediately with butter or clarified
drippings, and roast the joint from three to four hours, according
to its weight and quality. Doe venison will require half an hour
less time than buck venison. About twenty minutes before the joint
is done remove the paste and paper, baste the meat in every part
with butter, and dredge it very lightly with flour; let it take a
pale brown color, and serve hot with unflavored gravy made with a
thickening in a tureen and good currant jelly. Venison is much
better when the deer has been killed in the autumn, when wild
berries are plentiful, and it has had abundant opportunities to
fatten upon this and other fresh food.
BROILED VENISON STEAK.
Venison steaks should be broiled over a clear fire, turning
often. It requires more cooking than beef. When sufficiently done,
season with salt and pepper, pour over two tablespoonfuls of
currant jelly melted with a piece of butter. Serve hot on hot
plates.
Delicious steaks, corresponding to the shape of mutton chops,
are cut from the loin.
BAKED SADDLE OF VENISON.
Wash the saddle carefully; see that no hairs are left dried on
to the outside. Use a saddle of venison of about ten pounds. Cut
some salt pork in strips about two inches long and an eighth of an
inch thick, with which lard the saddle with two rows on each side.
In a large dripping-pan cut two carrots, one onion and some salt
pork in thin slices; add two bay-leaves, two cloves, four kernels
of allspice, half a lemon sliced, and season with salt and pepper;
place the saddle of venison in the pan, with a quart of good stock
boiling hot and a small piece of butter, and let it boil about
fifteen minutes on top of the stove; then put it in a hot oven and
bake, basting well every five minutes, until it is medium rare, so
that the blood runs when cut; serve with jelly or a wine sauce. If
the venison is desired well done, cook much longer, and use a cream
sauce with it, or stir cream into the venison gravy. (For cream
sauce see SAUCES.)
Venison should never be roasted unless very fat. The shoulder is
a roasting piece and may be done without the paper or paste.
In ordering the saddle request the butcher to cut the ribs off
pretty close, as the only part that is of much account is the
tenderloin and thick meat that lies along the backbone up to the
neck. The ribs which extend from this have very little meat on
them, but are always sold with the saddle. When neatly cut off they
leave the saddle in a better shape, and the ribs can be put into
your stock-pot to boil for soup.
VENISON PIE OR PASTRY.
The neck, breast and shoulder are the parts used for a venison
pie or pastry. Cut the meat into pieces (fat and lean together) and
put the bones and trimmings into the stewpan with pepper and salt,
and water or veal broth enough to cover it. Simmer it till you have
drawn out a good gravy. Then strain it.
In the meantime make a good rich paste, and roll it rather
thick. Cover the bottom and sides of a deep dish with one sheet of
it, and put in your meat, having seasoned it with pepper, salt,
nutmeg and mace. Pour in the gravy which you have prepared from the
trimmings, and a glass of port wine. Lay on the top some bits of
butter rolled in flour. Cover the pie with a thick lid of paste and
ornament it handsomely with leaves and flowers formed with a tin
cutter. Bake [Pg 106]two or more hours according to the
size. Just before it is done, pull it forward in the oven, and
brush it over with beaten egg; push it back and let it slightly
brown.
VENISON HASHED.
Cut the meat in nice small slices, and put the trimmings and
bones into a saucepan with barely water enough to cover them. Let
them stew for an hour. Then strain the liquid into a stewpan; add
to it some bits of butter, rolled in flour, and whatever gravy was
left of the venison the day before. Stir in some currant jelly, and
give it a boil up. Then put in the meat, and keep it over the fire
just long enough to warm it through; but do not allow it to boil,
as it has been once cooked already.
FRIED VENISON STEAK.
Cut a breast of venison into steaks; make a quarter of a pound
of butter hot in a pan; rub the steaks over with a mixture of a
little salt and pepper; dip them in wheat flour, or rolled
crackers, and fry a rich brown; when both sides are done, take them
up on a dish, and put a tin cover over; dredge a heaping
teaspoonful of flour into the butter in the pan, stir it with a
spoon until it is brown, without burning; put to it a small
teacupful of boiling water, with a tablespoonful of currant jelly
dissolved into it; stir it for a few minutes, then strain it over
the meat and serve. A glass of wine, with a tablespoonful of white
sugar dissolved in it, may be used for the gravy, instead of the
jelly and water. Venison may be boiled, and served with boiled
vegetables, pickled beets, etc., and sauce.
In the selection of meat it is most essential that we understand
how to choose it; in beef it should be a smooth, fine grain, of a
clear bright red color, the fat white, and will feel tender when
pinched with the fingers. Will also have abundant kidney fat or
suet. The most choice pieces for roast are the sirloin, fore and
middle ribs.
Veal, to be good, should have the flesh firm and dry, fine
grained and of a delicate pinkish color, and plenty of kidney fat;
the joints stiff.
Mutton is good when the flesh is a bright red, firm and juicy
and a close grain, the fat firm and white.
Pork, if young, the lean will break on being pinched smooth when
nipped with the fingers, also the skin will break and dent; if the
rind is rough and hard it is old.
In roasting meat, allow from fifteen to twenty minutes to the
pound, which will vary according to the thickness of the roast. A
great deal of the success in roasting depends on the heat and
goodness of the fire; if put into a cool oven it loses its juices,
and the result is a tough, tasteless roast; whereas, if the oven is
of the proper heat, it immediately sears up the pores of the meat
and the juices are retained.
The oven should be the hottest when the meat is put into it, in
order to quickly crisp the surface and close the pores of the meat,
thereby confining its natural juices. If the oven is too hot to
hold the hand in for only a moment, then it is right to receive the
meat. The roast should first be washed in pure water, then wiped
dry with a clean dry cloth, placed in a baking pan without any
seasoning; some pieces of suet or cold drippings laid under it, but
no water should be put into the pan, for this would have a
tendency to soften the outside of the meat. The water can never get
so hot as the hot fat upon the [Pg
108]surface of the
meat, and the generating of the steam prevents its crispness, so
desirable in a roast.
It should be frequently basted with its own drippings, which
flow from the meat when partly cooked, and well seasoned. Lamb,
veal and pork should be cooked rather slower than beef, with a more
moderate fire, covering the fat with a piece of paper, and
thoroughly cooked till the flesh parts from the bone, and
nicely browned, without being burned. An onion sliced and put on
top of a roast while cooking, especially roast of pork, gives a
nice flavor. Remove the onion before serving.
Larding meats is drawing ribbons of fat pork through the upper
surface of the meat, leaving both ends protruding. This is
accomplished by the use of a larding needle, which may be procured
at house-furnishing stores.
Boiling or stewing meat, if fresh, should be put into
boiling water, closely covered and boiled slowly,
allowing twenty minutes to each pound, and, when partly cooked, or
when it begins to get tender, salted, adding spices and
vegetables.
Salt meats should be covered with cold water, and require
thirty minutes very slow boiling, from the time the water
boils, for each pound; if it is very salt, pour off the first water
and put it in another of boiling water, or it may be soaked one
night in cold water. After meat commences to boil the pot should
never stop simmering and always be replenished from the
boiling tea-kettle.
Frying may be done in two ways. One method, which is most
generally used, is by putting one ounce or more (as the case
requires) of beef drippings, lard or butter into a frying pan, and
when at the boiling point lay in the meat, cooking both
sides a nice brown. The other method is to completely
immerse the article to be cooked in sufficient hot lard
to cover it, similar to frying doughnuts.
Broiled meats should be placed over clear, red coals free from
smoke, giving out a good heat, but not too brisk, or the meat will
be hardened and scorched; but if the fire is dead the gravy will
escape and drop upon the coals, creating a blaze, which will
blacken and smoke the meat. Steaks and chops should be turned
often, in order that every part should be evenly done—never
sticking a fork into the lean part, as that lets the juices escape;
it should be put into the outer skin or fat. When the meat is
sufficiently broiled it should be laid on [Pg
109]a hot dish
and seasoned. The best pieces for steak are the porterhouse,
sirloin and rump.
THAWING FROZEN MEAT, ETC.
If meat, poultry, fish, vegetables, or any other article of
food, when found frozen, is thawed by putting it into warm
water or placing it before the fire, it will most certainly
spoil by that process, and be rendered unfit to eat. The only way
to thaw these things is by immersing them in cold water.
This should be done as soon as they are brought in from market,
that they may have time to be well thawed before they are cooked.
If meat that has been frozen is to be boiled, put it on in cold
water. If to be roasted, begin by setting it at a distance from the
fire, for if it should not chance to be thoroughly thawed all
through to the centre, placing it at first too near the fire will
cause it to spoil. If it is expedient to thaw the meat or poultry
the night before cooking, lay it in cold water early in the
evening, and change the water at bed-time. If found crusted with
ice in the morning, remove the ice, and put the meat in fresh cold
water, letting it lie in it till wanted for cooking.
Potatoes are injured by being frozen. Other vegetables are not
the worse for it, provided they are always thawed in cold
water.
TO KEEP MEAT FROM FLIES.
Put in sacks, with enough straw around it so the flies cannot
reach through. Three-fourths of a yard of yard-wide muslin is the
right size for the sack. Put a little straw in the bottom, then put
in the ham and lay straw in all around it; tie it tightly and hang
it in a cool, dry place. Be sure the straw is all around the meat,
so the flies cannot reach through to deposit the eggs. (The sacking
must be done early in the season before the fly appears.) Muslin
lets the air in and is much better than paper. Thin muslin is as
good as thick, and will last for years if washed when laid away
when emptied.
ROAST BEEF.
One very essential point in roasting beef is to have the oven
well heated when the beef is first put in; this causes the pores to
close up quickly, and prevents the escape of the juices.
Take a rib piece or loin roast of seven or eight pounds. Wipe it
thoroughly all over with a clean wet towel. Lay it in a
dripping-pan, and baste it well with butter or suet fat. Set it in
the oven. Baste it frequently with its own drippings, which will
make it brown and tender. When partly done season with salt and
pepper, as it hardens any meat to salt it when raw, and draws out
its juices, then dredge with sifted flour to give it a frothy
appearance. It will take a roast of this size about two hours' time
to be properly done, leaving the inside a little rare or
red—half an hour less would make the inside quite rare.
Remove the beef to a heated dish, set where it will keep hot; then
skim the drippings from all fat, add a tablespoonful of sifted
flour, a little pepper and a teacupful of boiling water. Boil up
once and serve hot in a gravy boat.
Some prefer the clear gravy without the thickening. Serve with
mustard or grated horse-radish and vinegar.
YORKSHIRE PUDDING.
This is a very nice accompaniment to a roast of beef; the
ingredients are, one pint of milk, four eggs, whites and yolks
beaten separately, one teaspoonful of salt, and two teaspoonfuls of
baking powder sifted through two cups of flour. It should be mixed
very smooth, about the consistency of cream. Regulate your time
when you put in your roast, so that it will be done half an hour or
forty minutes before dishing up. Take it from the oven, set it
where it will keep hot. In the meantime have this pudding prepared.
Take two common biscuit tins, dip some of the drippings from the
dripping-pan into these tins, pour half of the pudding into each,
set them into the hot oven, and keep them in until the dinner is
dished up; take these puddings out at the last moment and send to
the table hot. This I consider much better than the old way of
baking the pudding under the meat.
BEEFSTEAK. No. 1.
The first consideration in broiling is to have a clear, glowing
bed of coals. The steak should be about three-quarters of an inch
in thickness, and should be pounded only in extreme cases,
i.e., when it is cut too thick and is "stringy." Lay
it on a buttered gridiron, turning it often, as it begins to drip,
attempting nothing else while cooking it. Have everything else
ready for the table; the potatoes and vegetables dished and in the
warming closet. Do not season it until it is done, [Pg 111]which
will be in about ten to twelve minutes. Remove it to a warm
platter, pepper and salt it on both sides and spread a liberal lump
of butter over it. Serve at once while hot. No definite rule can be
given as to the time of cooking steak, individual tastes
differ so widely in regard to it, some only liking it when well
done, others so rare that the blood runs out of it. The best pieces
for broiling are the porterhouse and sirloin.
BEEFSTEAK. No. 2.
Take a smooth, thick-bottomed frying pan, scald it out with hot
water, and wipe it dry; set it on the stove or range, and when
very hot, rub it over the bottom with a rag dipped in
butter; then place your steak or chops in it, turn often until
cooked through, take up on a warm platter, and season both sides
with salt, pepper and butter. Serve hot.
Many prefer this manner of cooking steak rather than broiling or
frying in a quantity of grease.
BEEFSTEAK AND ONIONS.
Prepare the steak in the usual way. Have ready in a frying pan a
dozen onions cut in slices and fried brown in a little beef
drippings or butter. Dish your steak, and lay the onions thickly
over the top. Cover and let stand five minutes, then send to the
table hot.
BEEFSTEAK AND OYSTERS.
Broil the steak the usual way. Put one quart of oysters with
very little of the liquor into a stewpan upon the fire; when it
comes to a boil, take off the scum that may rise, stir in three
ounces of butter mixed with a tablespoonful of sifted flour, let it
boil one minute until it thickens, pour it over the steak. Serve
hot.
TO FRY BEEFSTEAKS.
Beefsteak for frying should be cut much thinner than for
broiling. Take from the ribs or sirloin and remove the bone. Put
some butter or nice beef dripping into a frying pan and set it over
the fire, and when it has boiled and become hot lay in the steaks;
when cooked quite enough, season with salt and pepper, turn and
brown on both sides. Steaks when fried should be thoroughly done.
Have ready a hot dish, and when they are done take out the steaks
and lay them on [Pg 112]it, with another dish cover the top to
keep them hot. The gravy in the pan can be turned over the steaks,
first adding a few drops of boiling water, or a gravy to be served
in a separate dish made by putting a large tablespoonful of flour
into the hot gravy left in the pan after taking up the steaks. Stir
it smooth, then pour in a pint of cream or sweet rich milk, salt
and pepper, let it boil up once until it thickens, pour hot into a
gravy dish and send to the table with the steaks.
POT ROAST. (Old Style.)
This is an old-fashioned dish, often cooked in our grandmothers'
time. Take a piece of fresh beef weighing about five or six pounds.
It must not be too fat. Wash it and put it into a pot with
barely sufficient water to cover it. Set it over a slow fire, and
after it has stewed an hour salt and pepper it. Then stew it slowly
until tender, adding a little onion if liked. Do not replenish the
water at the last, but let all nearly boil away. When tender all
through take the meat from the pot and pour the gravy in a bowl.
Put a large lump of butter in the bottom of the pot, then dredge
the piece of meat with flour and return it to the pot to brown,
turning it often to prevent its burning. Take the gravy that you
have poured from the meat into the bowl and skim off all the fat;
pour this gravy in with the meat and stir in a large spoonful of
flour wet with a little water; let it boil up ten or fifteen
minutes and pour into a gravy dish. Serve both hot, the meat on a
platter. Some are very fond of this way of cooking a piece of beef
which has been previously placed in spiced pickle for two or three
days.
SPICED BEEF. (Excellent.)
For a round of beef weighing twenty or twenty-four pounds, take
one-quarter of a pound of saltpetre, one-quarter of a pound of
coarse brown sugar, two pounds of salt, one ounce of cloves, one
ounce of allspice and half an ounce of mace; pulverize these
materials, mix them well together, and with them rub the beef
thoroughly on every part; let the beef lie for eight or ten days in
the pickle thus made, turning and rubbing it every day; then tie it
around with a broad tape, to keep it in shape; make a coarse paste
of flour and water, lay a little suet finely chopped over and under
the beef, inclose the beef entirely in the paste, and bake it six
hours. When you take the beef from the oven, remove the paste, but
do not remove the tape until [Pg
113]you are ready to
send it to the table. If you wish, to eat the beef cold, keep it
well covered that it may retain its moisture.
BEEF Á LA MODE.
Mix together three teaspoonfuls of salt, one of pepper, one of
ginger, one of mace, one of cinnamon, and two of cloves. Rub this
mixture into ten pounds of the upper part of a round of beef. Let
this beef stand in this state over night. In the morning, make a
dressing or stuffing of a pint of fine bread crumbs, half a pound
of fat salt pork cut in dice, a teaspoonful of ground thyme or
summer savory, two teaspoonfuls sage, half a teaspoonful of pepper,
one of nutmeg, a little cloves, an onion minced fine, moisten with
a little milk or water. Stuff this mixture into the place from
whence you took out the bone. With a long skewer fasten the two
ends of the beef together, so that its form will be circular, and
bind it around with tape to prevent the skewers giving way. Make
incisions in the beef with a sharp knife; fill these incisions very
closely with the stuffing, and dredge the whole with flour.
Put it into a dripping-pan and pour over it a pint of hot water;
turn a large pan over it to keep in the steam, and roast slowly
from three to four hours, allowing a quarter of an hour to each
pound of meat. If the meat should be tough, it may be stewed first
in a pot, with water enough to cover it, until tender, and then put
into a dripping-pan and browned in the oven.
If the meat is to be eaten hot, skim off the fat from the gravy,
into which, after it is taken off the fire, stir in the beaten
yolks of two eggs. If onions are disliked you may omit them and
substitute minced oysters.
TENDERLOIN OF BEEF.
To serve tenderloin as directed below, the whole piece must be
extracted before the hind-quarter of the animal is cut out. This
must be particularly noted, because not commonly practiced, the
tenderloin being usually left attached to the roasting pieces, in
order to furnish a tidbit for a few. To dress it whole, proceed as
follows: Washing the piece well, put it in an oven; add about a
pint of water, and chop up a good handful of each of the following
vegetables as an ingredient of the dish, viz., Irish
potatoes, carrots, turnips and a large bunch of [Pg 114]celery. They must be washed, peeled and chopped up
raw, then added to the meat; blended with the juice, they form and
flavor the gravy. Let the whole slowly simmer, and when nearly
done, add a teaspoonful of pounded allspice. To give a richness to
the gravy, put in a tablespoonful of butter. If the gravy should
look too greasy, skim off some of the melted suet. Boil also a lean
piece of beef, which, when perfectly done, chop fine, flavoring
with a very small quantity of onion, besides pepper and salt to the
taste. Make into small balls, wet them on the outside with eggs,
roll in grated cracker or fine bread crumbs. Fry these force meat
balls a light brown. When serving the dish, put these around the
tenderloin, and pour over the whole the rich gravy. This dish is a
very handsome one, and, altogether, fit for an epicurean palate. A
sumptuous dish.
STEWED STEAK WITH OYSTERS.
Two pounds of rump steak, one pint of oysters, one tablespoonful
of lemon juice, three of butter, one of flour, salt, pepper, one
cupful of water. Wash the oysters in the water and drain into a
stewpan. Put this liquor on to heat. As soon as it comes to a boil,
skim and set back. Put the butter in a frying pan, and when hot,
put in a steak. Cook ten minutes. Take up the steak, and stir the
flour into the butter remaining in the pan. Stir until a dark
brown. Add the oyster liquor and boil one minute. Season with salt
and pepper. Put back the steak, cover the pan, and simmer half an
hour or until the steak seems tender, then add the oysters and
lemon juice. Boil one minute. Serve on a hot dish with points of
toast for a garnish.
SMOTHERED BEEFSTEAK.
Take thin slices of steak from the upper part of the
round or one large thin steak. Lay the meat out smoothly and wipe
it dry. Prepare a dressing, using a cupful of fine bread crumbs,
half a teaspoonful of salt, some pepper, a tablespoonful of butter,
half a teaspoonful of sage, the same of powdered summer savory, and
enough milk to moisten it all into a stiff mixture. Spread it over
the meat, roll it up carefully, and tie with a string, securing the
ends well. Now fry a few thin slices of salt pork in the bottom of
a kettle or saucepan, and into the fat that has fried out of this
pork, place this roll or rolls of beef, and brown it on all sides,
turning it until a rich color all over, [Pg
115]then add half a
pint of water, and stew until tender. If the flavor of onion is
liked, a slice may be chopped fine and added to the dressing. When
cooked sufficiently, take out the meat, thicken the gravy, and turn
over it. To be carved cutting crosswise, in slices, through beef
and stuffing.
BEEFSTEAK ROLLS.
This mode is similar to the above recipe, but many might prefer
it.
Prepare a good dressing, such as you like for turkey or duck;
take a round steak, pound it, but not very hard, spread the
dressing over it, sprinkle in a little salt, pepper, and a few bits
of butter, lap over the ends, roll the steak up tightly and tie
closely; spread two great spoonfuls of butter over the steak after
rolling it up, then wash with a well-beaten egg, put water in the
bake-pan, lay in the steak so as not to touch the water, and bake
as you would a duck, basting often. A half-hour in a brisk oven
will bake. Make a brown gravy and send to the table hot.
TO COLLAR A FLANK OF BEEF.
Procure a well-corned flank of beef—say six pounds. Wash
it, and remove the inner and outer skin with the gristle. Prepare a
seasoning of one teaspoonful each of sage, parsley, thyme, pepper
and cloves. Lay your meat upon a board and spread this mixture over
the inside. Roll the beef up tight, fasten it with small skewers,
put a cloth over it, bandage the cloth with tape, put the beef into
the stewpot, cover it with water to the depth of an inch, boil
gently six hours; take it out of the water, place it on a board
without undoing it; lay a board on top of the beef, put a fifty
pound weight upon this board, and let it remain twenty-four hours.
Take off the bandage, garnish with green pickles and curled
parsley, and serve.
DRIED BEEF.
Buy the best of beef, or that part which will be the most lean
and tender. The tender part of the round is a very good piece. For
every twenty pounds of beef use one pint of salt, one teaspoonful
of saltpetre, and a quarter of a pound of brown sugar. Mix them
well together, and rub the beef well with one-third of the mixture
for three successive days. Let it lie in the liquor it makes for
six days, then hang up to dry.
A large crock or jar is a good vessel to prepare the meat in
before drying it.
BEEF CORNED OR SALTED. (Red.)
Cut up a quarter of beef. For each hundred weight take half a
peck of coarse salt, a quarter of a pound of saltpetre, the same
weight of saleratus and a quart of molasses, or two pounds of
coarse brown sugar. Mace, cloves and allspice may be added for
spiced beef.
Strew some of the salt in the bottom of a pickle-tub or barrel,
then put in a layer of meat, strew this with salt, then add another
layer of meat, and salt and meat alternately, until all is used.
Let it remain one night. Dissolve the saleratus and saltpetre in a
little warm water, and put it to the molasses or sugar; then put it
over the meat, add water enough to cover the meat, lay a board on
it to keep it under the brine. The meat is fit for use after ten
days. This recipe is for winter beef. Rather more salt may be used
in warm weather.
Towards spring take the brine from the meat, make it boiling
hot, skim it clear, and when it is cooled, return it to the
meat.
Beef tongues and smoking pieces are fine pickled in this brine.
Beef liver put in this brine for ten days, and then wiped dry and
smoked, is very fine. Cut it in slices, and fry or broil it. The
brisket of beef, after being corned, may be smoked, and is very
good for boiling.
Lean pieces of beef, cut properly from the hind-quarter, are the
proper pieces for being smoked. There may be some fine pieces cut
from the fore-quarter.
After the beef has been in brine ten days or more, wipe it dry,
and hang it in a chimney where wood is burned, or make a smothered
fire of sawdust or chips, and keep it smoking for ten days; then
rub fine black pepper over every part to keep the flies from it,
and hang it in a dry, dark, cool place. After a week it is
fit for use. A strong, coarse brown paper, folded around the beef,
and fastened with paste, keeps it nicely.
Tongues are smoked in the same manner. Hang them by a string put
through the root end. Spiced brine for smoked beef or tongues will
be generally liked.
ROAST BEEF PIE WITH POTATO CRUST.
When you have a cold roast of beef, cut off as much as will half
fill a baking-dish suited to the size of your family; put this
sliced [Pg 117]beef into a stewpan with any gravy that you may have
also saved, a lump of butter, a bit of sliced onion and a seasoning
of pepper and salt, with enough water to make plenty of gravy;
thicken it, too, by dredging in a tablespoonful of flour; cover it
up on the fire, where it may stew gently, but not be in danger of
burning. Meanwhile there must be boiled a sufficient quantity of
potatoes to fill up your baking-dish, after the stewed meat has
been transferred to it. The potatoes must be boiled done, mashed
smooth, and beaten up with milk and butter, as if they were to be
served alone, and placed in a thick layer on top of the meat. Brush
it over with egg, place the dish in an oven, and let it remain
there long enough to be brown. There should be a goodly quantity of
gravy left with the beef, that the dish be not dry and tasteless.
Serve with it tomato sauce, Worcestershire sauce or any other kind
that you prefer. A good, plain dish.
ROAST BEEF PIE.
Cut up roast beef, or beefsteak left from a previous meal, into
thin slices, lay some of the slices into a deep dish which you have
lined on the sides with rich biscuit dough, rolled very thin
(say a quarter of an inch thick); now sprinkle over this layer a
little pepper and salt; put in a small bit of butter, a few slices
of cold potatoes, a little of the cold gravy, if you have any left
from the roast. Make another layer of beef, another layer of
seasoning, and so on, until the dish is filled; cover the whole
with paste leaving a slit in the centre, and bake half an hour.
BEEFSTEAK PIE.
Cut up rump or flank steak into strips two inches long and about
an inch wide. Stew them with the bone, in just enough water to
cover them, until partly cooked; have half a dozen of cold boiled
potatoes sliced. Line a baking-dish with pie paste, put in a layer
of the meat with salt, pepper, and a little of thinly-sliced onion,
then one of the sliced potatoes, with bits of butter dotted over
them. Then the steak, alternated with layers of potato, until the
dish is full. Add the gravy or broth, having first thickened it
with brown flour. Cover with a top crust, making a slit in the
middle; brush a little beaten egg over it, and bake until quite
brown.
FRIZZLED BEEF.
Shave off very thin slices of smoked or dried beef, put
them in a frying pan, cover with cold water, set it on the back of
the range or stove, and let it come to a very slow heat, allowing
it time to swell out to its natural size, but not to boil. Stir it
up, then drain off the water. Melt one ounce of sweet butter in the
frying pan and add the wafers of beef. When they begin to frizzle
or turn up, break over them three eggs; stir until the eggs are
cooked; add a little white pepper, and serve on slices of buttered
toast.
FLANK STEAK.
This is cut from the boneless part of the flank and is secreted
between an outside and inside layer of creamy fat. There are two
ways for broiling it. One is to slice diagonally across the grain;
the other is to broil it whole. In either case brush butter over it
and proceed as in broiling other steaks. It is considered by
butchers the finest steak, which they frequently reserve for
themselves.
TO BOIL CORNED BEEF.
The aitch-bone and the brisket are considered the best pieces
for boiling. If you buy them in the market already corned, they
will be fit to put over the fire without a previous soaking in
water. If you corn them in the brine in which you keep your beef
through the winter, they must be soaked in cold water over night.
Put the beef into a pot, cover with sufficient cold water,
place over a brisk fire, let it come to a boil in half an hour;
just before boiling remove all the scum from the pot, place the pot
on the back of the fire, let it boil very slowly until quite
tender.
A piece weighing eight pounds requires two and a half hours'
boiling. If you do not wish to eat it hot, let it remain in the pot
after you take it from the fire until nearly cold, then lay it in a
colander to drain, lay a cloth over it to retain its fresh
appearance; serve with horse-radish and pickles.
If vegetables are to accompany this, making it the old-fashioned
"boiled dinner," about three-quarters of an hour before dishing up
skim the liquor free from fat and turn part of it out into
another kettle, into which put a cabbage carefully prepared,
cutting it into four quarters; also half a dozen peeled
medium-sized white turnips, cut [Pg
119]into halves; scrape
four carrots and four parsnips each cut into four pieces. Into the
kettle with the meat, about half an hour before serving, pour on
more water from the boiling tea-kettle, and into this put peeled
medium-sized potatoes. This dinner should also be accompanied by
boiled beets, sliced hot, cooked separate from the rest, with
vinegar over them. Cooking the cabbage separately from the meat
prevents the meat from having the flavor of cabbage when cold. The
carrots, parsnips and turnips will boil in about an hour. A piece
of salt pork was usually boiled with a "New England boiled
dinner."
SPICED BEEF RELISH.
Take two pounds of raw, tender beefsteak, chop it very
fine, put into it salt, pepper and a little sage, two
tablespoonfuls of melted butter; add two rolled crackers made very
fine, also two well-beaten eggs. Make it up into the shape of a
roll and bake it; baste with butter and water before baking. Cut in
slices when cold.
FRIED BEEF LIVER.
Cut it in rather thin slices, say a quarter of an inch thick;
pour over it boiling water, which closes the pores of the
meat, makes it impervious to the fat, and at the same time seals up
the rich juice of the meat. It may be rolled in flour or bread
crumbs, seasoned with salt and pepper, dipped in egg and fried in
hot fat mixed with one-third butter.
PRESSED BEEF.
First have your beef nicely pickled; let it stay in pickle a
week; then take the thin, flanky pieces, such as will not make a
handsome dish of themselves, put on a large potful, and let them
boil until perfectly done; then pull to pieces, and season just as
you do souse, with pepper, salt and allspice; only put it in a
coarse cloth and press down upon it some very heavy weight.
The advantage of this recipe is that it makes a most acceptable,
presentable dish out of a part of the beef that otherwise might be
wasted.
FRENCH STEW.
Grease the bottom of an iron pot, and place in it three or four
pounds of beef; be very careful that it does not burn, and turn it
until it is nicely browned. Set a muffin ring under the beef to
pre[Pg 120]vent its sticking. Add a few sliced carrots, one or
two sliced onions, and a cupful of hot water; keep covered and stew
slowly until the vegetables are done. Add pepper and salt. If you
wish more gravy, add hot water, and thicken with flour. Serve on a
dish with the vegetables.
TO POT BEEF.
The round is the best piece for potting, and you may use both
the upper and under part. Take ten pounds of beef, remove all the
fat, cut the lean into square pieces, two inches thick. Mix
together three teaspoonfuls of salt, one of pepper, one of cloves,
one of mace, one of cinnamon, one of allspice, one of thyme, and
one of sweet basil. Put a layer of the pieces of beef into an
earthen pot, sprinkle some of this spice mixture over this layer,
add a piece of fat salt pork, cut as thin as possible, sprinkle a
little of the spice mixture over the pork, make another layer of
the beef with spices and pork, and so on, until the pot is filled.
Pour over the whole three tablespoonfuls of Tarragon vinegar, or,
if you prefer it, half a pint of Madeira wine; cover the pot with a
paste made of flour and water, so that no steam can escape. Put the
pot into an oven, moderately heated, and let it stand there eight
hours; then set it away to use when wanted.
Beef cooked in this manner will keep good for a fortnight in
moderate weather.
It is an excellent relish for breakfast, and may be eaten either
warm or cold. When eaten warm, serve with slices of lemon.
STEWED BRISKET OF BEEF.
Put the part that has the hard fat into a stewpot with a small
quantity of water; let it boil up and skim it thoroughly; then add
carrots, turnips, onions, celery and a few pepper-corns. Stew till
extremely tender; then take out all the flat bones and remove all
the fat from the soup. Either serve that and the meat in tureen, or
the soup alone, and the meat on a dish garnished with some
vegetables. The following sauce is much admired served with the
beef: Take half a pint of the soup and mix it with a spoonful of
catsup, a teaspoonful of made mustard, a little flour, a bit of
butter and salt; boil all together a few minutes, then pour it
round the meat.
DRIED BEEF WITH CREAM.
Shave your beef very fine. Put it into a suitable dish on
the back of the stove; cover with cold water and give it time to
soak out to its original size before being dried. When it is quite
soft and the water has become hot (it must not boil) take it off,
turn off the water, pour on a cup of cream; if you do not have it
use milk and butter, a pinch of pepper; let it come to a boil,
thicken with a tablespoonful of flour wet up in a little milk.
Serve on dipped toast or not, just as one fancies. A nice breakfast
dish.
BEEF CROQUETTES. No. 1.
Chop fine one cup of cold, cooked, lean beef, half a cup of fat,
half a cup of cold boiled or fried ham; cold pork will do if you
have not the ham. Also mince up a slice of onion. Season all with a
teaspoonful of salt, half a teaspoonful of pepper, and a
teaspoonful of powdered sage or parsley if liked. Heat together
with half a cup of stock or milk; when cool add a beaten egg. Form
the mixture into balls, slightly flattened, roll in egg and bread
crumbs, or flour and egg. Fry in hot lard or beef drippings. Serve
on a platter and garnish with sprigs of parsley. Almost any cold
meats can be used instead of beef.
BEEF CROQUETTES. No. 2.
Take cold roast or corned beef. Put it into a wooden bowl and
chop it fine. Mix with it about twice the quantity of hot mashed
potatoes well seasoned with butter and salt. Beat up an egg and
work it into the potato and meat, then form the mixture into little
cakes the size of fish balls. Flatten them a little, roll in flour
or egg and cracker crumbs, fry in butter and lard mixed, browning
on both sides. Serve piping hot.
MEAT AND POTATO CROQUETTES.
Put in a stewpan an ounce of butter and a slice of onion minced
fine; when this simmers add a level tablespoonful of sifted flour;
stir the mixture until it becomes smooth and frothy; then add half
of a cupful of milk, some seasoning of salt and pepper; let all
boil, stirring it all the while. Now add a cupful of cold meat
chopped fine, and a cupful of cold or hot mashed potato. Mix all
thoroughly and spread on a plate to cool. When it is cool enough,
shape it with your hands into balls or rolls. Dip them in beaten
egg and roll in cracker [Pg
122]or bread crumbs.
Drop them into hot lard and fry about two minutes a delicate brown;
take them out with a skimmer and drain them on a piece of brown
paper. Serve immediately while hot. These are very nice.
Cold rice or hominy may be used in place of the potato; or a
cupful of cold fish minced fine in place of the meat.
COLD ROAST, WARMED. No. 1.
Cut from the remains of a cold roast the lean meat from the
bones into small, thin slices. Put over the fire a frying pan
containing a spoonful of butter or drippings. Cut up a quarter of
an onion and fry it brown, then remove the onion, add the meat
gravy left from the day before, and if not thick enough add a
little flour; salt and pepper. Turn the pieces of meat into this
and let them simmer a few minutes. Serve hot.
COLD ROAST, WARMED. No. 2.
Cold rare roast beef may be made as good as when freshly cooked
by slicing, seasoning with salt, pepper and bits of butter; put it
in a plate or pan with a spoonful or two of water, covering
closely, and set in the oven until hot, but no longer. Cold steak
may be shaved very fine with a knife and used the same way.
Or, if the meat is in small pieces, cover them with buttered
letter paper, twist each end tightly, and boil them on the
gridiron, sprinkling them with finely chopped herbs.
Still another nice way of using cold meats is to mince the lean
portions very fine and add to a batter made of one pint of milk,
one cup of flour and three eggs. Fry like fritters and serve with
drawn butter or sauce.
COLD MEAT AND POTATO, BAKED.
Put in a frying pan a round tablespoonful of cold butter; when
it becomes hot, stir into it a teaspoonful of chopped onion and a
tablespoonful of flour, stirring it constantly until it is smooth
and frothy; then add two-thirds of a cupful of cold milk or water.
Season this with salt and pepper and allow it to come to a boil;
then add a cupful of cold meat finely chopped and cleared from bone
and skin; let this all heat thoroughly; then turn it into a shallow
dish well buttered. Spread hot or cold mashed potatoes over the
top, and cook for fifteen or twenty minutes in a moderate hot
oven.
Cold hominy, or rice may be used in place of mashed potatoes,
and is equally as good.
BEEF HASH. No. 1.
Chop rather finely cold roast beef or pieces of beefsteak, also
chop twice as much cold boiled potatoes. Put over the fire a
stewpan or frying pan, in which put a piece of butter as large as
required to season it well, add pepper and salt, moisten with beef
gravy if you have it, if not, with hot water; cover and let it
steam and heat through thoroughly, stirring occasionally, so that
the ingredients be evenly distributed, and to keep the hash from
sticking to the bottom of the pan. When done it should not be at
all watery, nor yet dry, but have sufficient adhesiveness to stand
well on a dish or buttered toast. Many like the flavor of onion; if
so, fry two or three slices in the butter before adding the hash.
Corned beef makes excellent hash.
BEEF HASH. No. 2.
Chop cold roast beef, or pieces of beefsteak; fry half an onion
in a piece of butter; when the onion is brown, add the chopped
beef; season with a little salt and pepper; moisten with the beef
gravy, if you have any, if not, with sufficient water and a little
butter; cook long enough to be hot, but no longer, as much cooking
toughens the meat. An excellent breakfast dish.
Some prefer to let a crust form on the bottom and turn the hash
brown side uppermost. Served with poached eggs on top.
HAMBURGER STEAK.
Take a pound of raw flank or round steak, without any fat, bone
or stringy pieces. Chop it until a perfect mince, it cannot be
chopped too fine. Also chop a small onion quite fine and mix well
with the meat. Season with salt and pepper; make into cakes as
large as a biscuit, but quite flat, or into one large flat cake a
little less than half an inch thick. Have ready a frying pan with
butter and lard mixed; when boiling hot put in the steak and fry
brown. Garnish with celery top around the edge of the platter and
two or three slices of lemon on the top of the meat.
A brown gravy made from the grease the steak was fried in and
poured over the meat enriches it.
TO ROAST BEEF HEART.
Wash it carefully and open it sufficiently to remove the
ventricles, then soak it in cold water until the blood is
discharged; wipe it dry and stuff it nicely with dressing, as for
turkey; roast it about an hour and a half. Serve it with the gravy,
which should be thickened with some of the stuffing and a glass of
wine. It is very nice hashed. Served with currant jelly.
STEWED BEEF KIDNEY.
Cut the kidney into slices, season highly with pepper and salt,
fry it a light brown, take out the slices, then pour a little warm
water into the pan, dredge in some flour, put in slices of kidney
again; let them stew very gently; add some parsley if liked.
Sheep's kidneys may be split open, broiled over a clear fire and
served with a piece of butter placed on each half.
BEEFS HEART STEWED.
After washing the heart thoroughly cut it up into squares half
an inch long; put them into a saucepan with water enough to cover
them. If any scum rises skim it off. Now take out the meat, strain
the liquor and put back the meat, also add a sliced onion, some
parsley, a head of celery chopped fine, pepper and salt and a piece
of butter. Stew until the meat is very tender. Stir up a
tablespoonful of browned flour with a small quantity of water and
thicken the whole. Boil up and serve.
BOILED BEEF TONGUE.
Wash a fresh tongue and just cover it with water in the pot; put
in a pint of salt and a small red pepper; add more water as it
evaporates, so as to keep the tongue nearly covered until
done—when it can be easily pierced with a fork; take it out,
and if wanted soon, take off the skin and set it away to cool. If
wanted for future use, do not peel until it is required. A cupful
of salt will do for three tongues, if you have that number to boil;
but do not fail to keep water enough in the pot to keep them
covered while boiling. If salt tongues are used, soak them over
night, of course omitting the salt when boiling. Or, after peeling
a tongue, place it in a saucepan with one cup of water, half a cup
vinegar, four tablespoonfuls sugar, and cook until the liquor is
evaporated.
SPICED BEEF TONGUE.
Rub into each tongue a mixture made of half a pound of brown
sugar, a piece of saltpetre the size of a pea and a tablespoonful
of ground cloves, put it in a brine made of three-quarters of a
pound of salt to two quarts of water and keep covered. Pickle two
weeks, then wash well and dry with a cloth; roll out a thin paste
made of flour and water, smear it all over the tongue and place in
a pan to bake slowly; baste well with lard and hot water; when done
scrape off the paste and skim.
TO BOIL TRIPE.
Wash it well in warm water, and trim it nicely, taking off all
the fat. Cut into small pieces, and put it on to boil five hours
before dinner in water enough to cover it very well. After it has
boiled four hours, pour off the water, season the tripe with pepper
and salt, and put it into a pot with milk and water mixed in equal
quantities. Boil it an hour in the milk and water.
Boil in a saucepan ten or a dozen onions. When they are quite
soft, drain them in a colander and mash them. Wipe out your
saucepan and put them on again, with a bit of butter rolled in
flour and a wine-glass of cream or milk. Let them boil up, and add
them to the tripe just before you send it to table. Eat it with
pepper, vinegar and mustard.
It is best to give tripe its first and longest boiling the day
before it is wanted.
TO FRY TRIPE.
Boil the tripe the day before till it is quite tender, which it
will not be in less than four or five hours. Then cover it and set
it away. Next day cut it into long slips, and dip each piece into
beaten yolk of egg, and afterwards roll them in grated bread
crumbs. Have ready in a frying pan over the fire some good beef
drippings. When it is boiling hot put in the tripe, and fry it
about ten minutes, till of a light brown.
You may serve it with onion sauce.
Boiled tripe that has been left from the dinner of the preceding
day may be fried in this manner.
FRICASSEED TRIPE.
Cut a pound of tripe in narrow strips, put a small cup of water
or milk to it, add a bit of butter the size of an egg, dredge in a
large teaspoonful of flour, or work it with the butter; season with
pepper and salt, let it simmer gently for half an hour, serve hot.
A bunch of parsley cut small and put with it is an improvement.
Some put in oysters five minutes before dishing up.
TRIPE LYONNAISE.
Cut up half a pound of cold boiled tripe into neat squares. Put
two ounces of butter and a tablespoonful of chopped onion in a
frying pan and fry to a delicate brown; add to the tripe a
teaspoonful of chopped parsley and a little strong vinegar, salt
and cayenne; stir the pan to prevent burning. Cover the bottom of a
platter with tomato sauce, add the contents of the pan and
serve.
TO CLARIFY BEEF DRIPPINGS.
Drippings accumulated from different cooked meats of beef or
veal can be clarified by putting it into a basin and slicing into
it a raw potato, allowing it to boil long enough for the potato to
brown, which causes all impurities to disappear. Remove from the
fire, and when cool drain it off from the sediment that settles at
the bottom. Turn it into basins or small jars and set it in a cool
place for future use. When mixed with an equal amount of butter it
answers the same purpose as clear butter for frying and basting any
meats except game and poultry.
Mutton drippings impart an unpleasant flavor to anything cooked
outside of its kind.
ROAST LOIN OF VEAL.
Prepare it the same as any roast, leaving in the kidney, around
which put considerable salt. Make a dressing the same as for fowls;
unroll the loin, put the stuffing well around the kidney, fold and
secure with several coils of white cotton twine wound around in all
directions; place in a dripping-pan with the thick side down, and
put in a rather hot oven, graduated after it commences to roast to
moderate; in half an hour add a little hot water to the pan, and
baste often; in another half hour turn over the roast, and when
about done dredge lightly with flour and baste with melted butter.
Before serving care[Pg 127]fully remove the twine. A roast of
four to five pounds will bake in about two hours. For a gravy, skim
off some of the fat if there is too much in the drippings; dredge
in some flour, stir until brown, add some hot water if necessary;
boil a few minutes, stir in such sweet herbs as fancied, and put in
a gravy boat. Serve with green peas and lemon jelly. Is very nice
sliced cold for lunch, and Worcestershire or Chili sauce forms a
fine relish.
ROAST FILLET OF VEAL.
Select a nice fillet, take out the bone, fill up the space with
stuffing, and also put a good layer under the fat. Truss it of a
good shape by drawing the fat round and tie it up with tape. Cook
it rather moderately at first, and baste with butter. It should
have careful attention and frequent basting, that the fat may not
burn. Roast from three to four hours, according to the size. After
it is dished pour melted butter over it; serve with ham or bacon,
and fresh cucumbers if in season. Veal, like all other meat, should
be well washed in cold water before cooking and wiped thoroughly
dry with a clean cloth. Cold fillet of veal is very good stewed
with tomatoes and an onion or two.
In roasting veal, care must be taken that it is not at first
placed in too hot an oven; the fat of a loin, one of the most
delicate joints of veal, should be covered with greased paper; a
fillet, also, should have on the caul until nearly done enough.
BOILED FILLET OF VEAL.
Choose a small, delicate fillet; prepare as for roasting, or
stuff it with an oyster force meat; after having washed it
thoroughly, cover it with water and let it boil very gently three
and a half or four hours, keeping it well skimmed. Send it to the
table with a rich white sauce, or, if stuffed with oysters, a
tureen of oyster sauce. Garnish with stewed celery and slices of
bacon. A boiled tongue should be served with it.
VEAL PUDDING.
Cut about two pounds of lean veal into small collops a quarter
of an inch in thickness; put a piece of butter the size of an egg
into a very clean frying pan to melt; then lay in the veal and a
few slices of bacon, a small sprig of thyme and a seasoning of
pepper and salt; place [Pg
128]the pan over a slow
fire for about ten minutes, then add two or three spoonfuls of warm
water. Just boil it up and then let it stand to cool. Line a
pudding-dish with a good suet crust, lay in the veal and bacon,
pour the gravy over it; roll out a piece of paste to form a lid,
place it over, press it close with the thumb, tie the basin in a
pudding cloth and put it into a saucepan of boiling water, keeping
continually boiling until done, or about one hour.
FRIED VEAL CUTLETS.
Put into a frying pan two or three tablespoonfuls of lard or
beef drippings. When boiling hot lay in the cutlets, well seasoned
with salt and pepper and dredged with flour. Brown nicely on both
sides, then remove the meat, and if you have more grease than is
necessary for the gravy put it aside for further use. Reserve a
tablespoonful or more and rub into it a tablespoonful of flour,
with the back of the spoon, until it is a smooth, rich brown color;
then add gradually a cup of cold water and season with
pepper and salt. When the gravy is boiled up well return the meat
to the pan and gravy. Cover it closely and allow it to stew gently
on the back of the range for fifteen minutes. This softens the
meat, and with this gravy it makes a nice breakfast dish.
Another mode is to simply fry the cutlets, and afterwards
turning off some of the grease they were fried in and then adding
to that left in the pan a few drops of hot water, turning the whole
over the fried chops.
FRIED VEAL CHOPS. (Plain.)
Sprinkle over them salt and pepper, then dip them in beaten egg
and cracker crumbs, and fry in drippings, or hot lard and butter
mixed. If you wish a gravy with them, add a tablespoonful of flour
to the gravy they were fried in and turn in cream or milk; season
to taste with salt and pepper. Boil up and serve hot with the gravy
in separate dish. This dish is very fine accompanied with a few
sound fresh tomatoes, sliced and fried in the same grease the
cutlets were, and all dished on the same platter.
VEAL COLLOPS.
Cut veal from the leg or other lean part into pieces the size of
an oyster. Season with pepper, salt and a little mace; rub some
over [Pg 129]each piece; dip in egg, then into cracker crumbs and
fry. They both look and taste like oysters.
VEAL OLIVES.
Cut up a slice of a fillet of veal, about half an inch thick,
into squares of three inches. Mix up a little salt pork, chopped
with bread crumbs, one onion, a little pepper, salt, sweet
marjoram, and one egg well beaten; put this mixture upon the pieces
of veal, fastening the four corners together with little bird
skewers; lay them in a pan with sufficient veal gravy or light
stock to cover the bottom of the pan, dredge with flour and set in
a hot oven. When browned on top, put a small bit of butter on each,
and let them remain until quite tender, which will take twenty
minutes. Serve with horse-radish.
VEAL CHEESE.
Prepare equal quantities of boiled sliced veal and smoked
tongue. Pound the slices separately in a mortar, moistening with
butter as you proceed; then pack it in a jar or pail, mixing it in
alternate layers; first the tongue and then the veal, so that when
cut it will look variegated. Press it down hard and pour melted
butter over the top. Keep it well covered and in a dry place. Nice
for sandwiches, or sliced cold for lunch.
VEAL CROQUETTES.
Mince a coffee cup of cold veal in a chopping bowl, adding a
little cold ham and two or three slices of onion, a pinch of mace,
powdered parsley and pepper, some salt. Let a pint of milk or cream
come to the boiling point, then add a tablespoonful of cold butter,
then the above mixture. Beat up two eggs and mix with a teaspoonful
of cornstarch or flour, and add to the rest; cook it all about ten
minutes, stirring with care. Remove from the fire, and spread it on
a platter, roll it into balls, when cooled flatten each; dip them
in egg and bread crumbs, and fry in a wire basket, dipped in hot
lard.
BROILED VEAL CUTLETS. (Fine.)
Two or three pounds of veal cutlets, egg and bread crumbs, two
tablespoonfuls of minced savory herbs, salt and pepper to taste, a
little grated nutmeg.
Cut the cutlets about three-quarters of an inch in thickness;
flatten them, and brush them over with the yolk of an egg; dip them
into [Pg 130]bread crumbs and minced herbs, season with pepper
and salt, and fold each cutlet in a piece of white letter paper
well buttered; twist the ends, and broil over a clear fire; when
done remove the paper. Cooked this way, they retain all the
flavor.
VEAL POT-PIE.
Procure a nice breast or brisket of veal, well jointed, put the
pieces into the pot with one quart of water to every five pounds of
meat; put the pot over a slow fire; just before it comes to a boil,
skim it well and pour in a teacupful of cold water; then turn over
the meat in order that all the scum may rise; remove all the scum,
boil quite hard, season with pepper and salt to your taste, always
remembering that the crust will take up part of the seasoning; when
this is done cut off your crust in pieces of equal size, but do not
roll or mould them; lay them on top of the meat, so as to cover it;
put the lid on the pot closely, let the whole boil slowly one hour.
If the lid does not fit the pot closely, wrap a cloth around it, in
order that no steam shall escape; and by no means allow the pot to
stop boiling.
The crust for pot-pie should be raised with yeast. To three
pints of flour add two ounces of butter, a little salt, and wet
with milk sufficient to make a soft dough; knead it well and set it
away to rise; when quite light, mould and knead it again, and let
it stand, in winter, one hour, in summer, one-half hour, when it
will be ready to cut.
In summer you had better add one-half a teaspoonful of soda when
you knead it the second time, or you may wet it with water and add
another bit of butter.
VEAL PIE.
Cut the veal into rather small pieces or slices, put it in a
stewpan with hot water to cover it; add to it a tablespoonful of
salt and set it over the fire; take off the scum as it rises; when
the meat is tender turn it into a dish to cool; take out all the
small bones, butter a tin or earthen basin or pudding-pan, line it
with pie paste, lay some of the parboiled meat in to half fill it;
put bits of butter in the size of a hickory nut all over the meat;
shake pepper over, dredge wheat flour over until it looks white,
then fill it nearly to the top with some of the water in which the
meat was boiled; roll a cover for the top of the crust, puff-paste
it, giving it two or three turns, and roll it to nearly half
[Pg 131]an inch thickness; cut a slit in the centre and make
several small incisions on either side of it, put the crust on,
trim the edges neatly with a knife; bake one hour in a quick oven.
A breast of veal will make two two-quart basin pies; half a pound
of nice corned pork, cut in thin slices and parboiled with the
meat, will make it very nice, and very little, if any, butter will
be required for the pie; when pork is used not other salt will be
necessary. Many are fond of thin slices of sweet ham cooked with
the veal for pie.
VEAL STEW.
Cut up two or three pounds of veal into pieces three inches long
and one thick. Wash it, put it into your stewpan with two quarts of
water, let it boil, skim it well, and when all the scum is removed,
add pepper and salt to your taste, and a small piece of butter;
pare and cut in halves twelve small Irish potatoes, put them into
the stewpan; when it boils, have ready a batter made with two eggs,
two spoonfuls of cream or milk, a little salt, and flour enough to
make it a little thicker than for pancakes; drop this into the
stew, a spoonful at a time, while it is boiling; when all is in,
cover the pan closely so that no steam can escape; let it boil
twenty minutes and serve in a deep dish.
VEAL LOAF.
Three pounds of raw veal chopped very fine, butter the size of
an egg, three eggs, three tablespoonfuls of cream or milk; if milk
use a small piece of butter; mix the eggs and cream together; mix
with the veal four pounded crackers, one teaspoonful of black
pepper, one large tablespoonful salt, one large tablespoonful of
sage; mix well together and form into a loaf. Bake two and one-half
hours, basting with butter and water while baking. Serve cut in
thin slices.
VEAL FOR LUNCH.
Butter a good-sized bowl, and line it with thin slices of
hard-boiled eggs; have veal and ham both in very thin slices;
place, in the bowl a layer of veal, with pepper and salt, then a
layer of ham, omitting the salt, then a layer of veal, and so on,
alternating with veal and ham, until the bowl is filled; make a
paste of flour and water as stiff as it can be rolled out; cover
the contents of the bowl with the paste, and over this tie a double
cotton cloth; put the bowl into a saucepan, [Pg 132]or
other vessel, with water just up to the rim of the bowl, and boil
three hours; then take it from the fire, remove the cloth and
paste, and let it stand until the next day, when it may be turned
out and served in very thin slices. An excellent lunch in
traveling.
VEAL PATTIES.
Cut portions of the neck or breast of veal into small pieces,
and, with a little salt pork cut fine, stew gently for ten or
fifteen minutes; season with pepper and salt, and a small piece of
celery chopped coarsely, also of the yellow top, picked (not
chopped) up; stir in a paste made of a tablespoonful of flour, the
yolk of one egg, and milk to form a thin batter; let all come to a
boil, and it is ready for the patties. Make the patties of a light,
flaky crust, as for tarts, cut round, the size of a small
sauceplate; the centre of each, for about three inches, cut half
way through, to be raised and serve as a cover. Put a spoonful of
the stew in each crust, lay on the top and serve. Stewed oysters or
lamb may be used in place of veal.
BRAISED VEAL.
Take a piece of the shoulder weighing about five pounds. Have
the bone removed and tie up the meat to make it firm. Put a piece
of butter the size of half an egg, together with a few shavings of
onion, into a kettle or stone crock and let it get hot. Salt and
pepper the veal and put it into the kettle, cover it tightly and
put it over a medium fire until the meat is brown on both sides,
turning it occasionally. Then set the kettle back on the stove,
where it will simmer slowly for about two hours and a half. Before
setting the meat back on the stove, see if the juice of the meat
together with the butter do not make gravy enough, and if not, put
in about two tablespoonfuls of hot water. When the gravy is cold it
will be like jelly. It can be served hot with the hot meat, or cold
with the cold meat.
BAKED CALF'S HEAD.
Boil a calf's head (after having cleaned it) until tender, then
split it in two, and keep the best half (bone it if you like); cut
the meat from the other in uniform pieces, the size of an oyster;
put bits of butter, the size of a nutmeg, all over the best half of
the head; sprinkle pepper over it, and dredge on flour until it
looks white, then set it on [Pg
133]a trivet or muffin
rings in a dripping-pan; put a cup of water into the pan, and set
it in a hot oven; turn it that it may brown evenly; baste once or
twice. Whilst this is doing, dip the prepared pieces of the head in
wheat flour or batter, and fry in hot lard or beef drippings a
delicate brown; season with pepper and salt and slices of lemon, if
liked. When the roast is done put it on a hot dish, lay the fried
pieces around it, and cover it with a tin cover; put the gravy from
the dripping-pan into the pan in which the pieces were fried, with
the slices of lemon, and a tablespoonful of browned flour, and, if
necessary, a little hot water. Let it boil up once, and strain it
into a gravy boat, and serve with the meat.
CALF'S HEAD CHEESE.
Boil a calf's head in water enough to cover it, until the meat
leaves the bones; then take it with a skimmer into a wooden bowl or
tray; take from it every particle of bone; chop it small; season
with pepper and salt, a heaping tablespoonful of salt and a
teaspoonful of pepper will be sufficient; if liked, add a
tablespoonful of finely chopped sweet herbs; lay in a cloth in a
colander, put the minced meat into it, then fold the cloth closely
over it, lay a plate over, and on it a gentle weight. When cold it
may be sliced thin for supper or sandwiches. Spread each slice with
made mustard.
BRAIN CUTLETS.
Well wash the brains and soak them in cold water until white.
Parboil them until tender in a small saucepan for about a quarter
of an hour; then thoroughly drain them and place them on a board.
Divide them into small pieces with a knife. Dip each piece into
flour, and then roll them in egg and bread crumbs, and fry them in
butter or well-clarified drippings. Serve very hot with gravy.
Another way of doing brains is to prepare them as above, and then
stew them gently in rich stock, like stewed sweetbreads. They are
also nice plainly boiled and served with parsley and butter
sauce.
CALFS HEAD BOILED.
Put the head into boiling water and let it remain about five
minutes; take it out, hold it by the ear, and with the back of the
knife scrape off the hair (should it not come off easily dip the
head again [Pg 134]in boiling water.) When perfectly clean take out
the eyes, cut off the ears and remove the brain, which soak for an
hour in warm water. Put the head to soak in hot water a few minutes
to make it look white, and then have ready a stewpan, into which
lay the head; cover it with cold water and bring it gradually to
boil. Remove the scum and add a little salt, which increases it and
causes it to rise to the top. Simmer it very gently from two and a
half to three hours, or until the bones will slip out easily, and
when nearly done, boil the brains fifteen or twenty minutes; skin
and chop them (not too finely), add a tablespoonful of minced
parsley which has been previously scalded; also a pinch of pepper,
salt; then stir into this four tablespoonfuls of melted butter; set
it on the back of the range to keep it hot. When the head is done,
take it up and drain very dry. Score the top and rub it over with
melted butter; dredge it with flour and set it in the oven to
brown.
When you serve the head, have it accompanied with a gravy boat
of melted butter and minced parsley.
CALF'S LIVER AND BACON.
Slice the liver a quarter of an inch thick; pour hot water over
it and let it remain for a few minutes to clear it from blood; then
dry it in a cloth. Take a pound of bacon, or as much as you
require, and cut the same number of thin slices as you have of
liver; fry the bacon to a nice crisp; take it out and keep it hot;
then fry the liver in the same pan, having first seasoned it with
pepper and salt and dredged in a little flour; lay it in the hot
bacon fat and fry it a nice brown. Serve it with a slice of bacon
on the top of each slice of liver.
If you wish a gravy with it, pour off most of the fat from the
frying pan, put in about two ounces of butter, a tablespoonful of
flour well rubbed in, add a cup of water, salt and pepper, give it
one boil and serve in a gravy boat.
Another Way.—Cut the liver in nice thin slices,
pour boiling water over it and let it stand about five minutes;
then drain and put in a dripping-pan with three or four thin slices
of salt pork or bacon; pepper and salt and put in the oven, letting
it cook until thoroughly done, then serve with a cream or milk
gravy poured over it.
Calf's liver and bacon are very good broiled after cutting each
in thin slices. Season with butter, pepper and salt.
CROQUETTES OF SWEETBREADS.
Take four veal sweetbreads, soak them for an hour in cold salted
water, first removing the pipes and membranes; then put them into
boiling salted water with a tablespoonful of vinegar, and cook them
twenty minutes, then drop them again into cold water to harden. Now
remove them, chop them very fine, almost to a paste. Season with
salt, pepper and a teaspoonful of grated onion; add the beaten
yolks of three raw eggs, one tablespoonful of butter, half a cupful
of cream, and sufficient fine cracker crumbs to make stiff enough
to roll out into little balls or cork-shaped croquettes. Have ready
a frying kettle half full of fat over the fire, a dish containing
three smoothly beaten eggs, a large platter of cracker dust; wet
the hands with cold water and make the mixture in shape; afterwards
rolling them in the cracker dust, then into the beaten egg, and
again in the cracker dust; smooth them on the outside and drop them
carefully in the hot fat. When the croquettes are fried a nice
golden brown, put them on a brown paper a moment to free them from
grease. Serve hot with sliced lemon or parsley.
SWEETBREADS.
There are two in a calf, which are considered delicacies. Select
the largest. The color should be clear and a shade darker than the
fat. Before cooking in any manner let them lie for half an hour in
tepid water; then throw into hot water to whiten and harden, after
which draw off the outer casing, remove the little pipes, and cut
into thin slices. They should always be thoroughly cooked.
FRIED SWEETBREADS.
After preparing them as above they are put into hot fat and
butter, and fried the same as lamb chops, also broiled the same,
first rolling them in egg and cracker crumbs.
BAKED SWEETBREADS.
Three sweetbreads, egg and bread crumbs, oiled butter, three
slices of toast, brown gravy.
Choose large, white sweetbreads, put them into warm water to
draw out the blood, and to improve their color; let them remain for
rather more than one hour; then put them into boiling water, and
allow them to simmer for about ten minutes which renders them firm.
Take [Pg 136]them up, drain them, brush over the egg, sprinkle
with bread crumbs; dip them in egg again, and then into more bread
crumbs. Drop on them a little oiled butter, and put the sweetbreads
into a moderately heated oven, and let them bake for nearly
three-quarters of an hour. Make three pieces of toast; place the
sweetbreads on the toast, and pour round, but not over, them a good
brown gravy.
FRICASSEED SWEETBREADS.
If they are uncooked, cut into thin slices, let them simmer in a
rich gravy for three-quarters of an hour, add a well-beaten egg,
two tablespoonfuls of cream and a tablespoonful of chopped parsley;
stir all together for a few minutes and serve immediately.
ROAST MUTTON.
The pieces mostly used for roasting are the hind-quarter of the
sheep, called the loin and leg, the fore-quarter, the shoulder,
also the chine or saddle, which is the two loins together. Every
part should be trimmed off that cannot be eaten; then wash well and
dry with a clean cloth; lay it in your dripping-pan and put in a
little water to baste it with at first; then afterward with its own
gravy. Allow, in roasting, about twelve minutes to the pound; that
is, if your fire is strong, which it should be. It should not be
salted at first, as that tends to harden it, and draws out too much
of the blood or juices; but salt soon after it begins to roast
well. If there is danger of its browning too fast, cover it with a
sheet of white paper. Baste it often, and about a quarter of an
hour before you think it will be done dredge the meat very lightly
with flour and baste it with butter. Skim the gravy well and
thicken very slightly with brown flour. Serve with currant jelly or
other tart sauce.
BONED LEG OF MUTTON ROASTED.
Take the bone out of a small leg of mutton, without spoiling the
skin if possible, then cut off most of the fat. Fill the hole
whence the bone was taken with a stuffing made the same as for
fowls, adding to [Pg 137]it part of an onion finely minced. Sew
the leg up underneath to prevent the dressing or stuffing from
falling out. Bind and tie it up compactly; put it in a roasting
pan, turn in a cup of hot water and place it in a moderately hot
oven, basting it occasionally. When partly cooked season with salt
and pepper. When thoroughly cooked, remove and place the leg on a
warm platter; skim the grease from the top of the drippings, add a
cup of water and thicken with a spoonful of dissolved flour. Send
the gravy to the table in a gravy dish, also a dish of currant
jelly.
BOILED LEG OF MUTTON.
To prepare a leg of mutton for boiling, wash it clean, cut a
small piece off the shank bone, and trim the knuckle. Put it into a
pot with water enough to cover it, and boil gently from two to
three hours, skimming well. Then take it from the fire, and keeping
the pot well covered, let it finish by remaining in the steam for
ten or fifteen minutes. Serve it up with a sauce boat of melted
butter, into which a teacupful of capers or nasturtiums have been
stirred. If the broth is to be used for soup, put in a little salt
while boiling; if not, salt it well when partly done, and boil the
meat in a cloth.
BRAISED LEG OF MUTTON.
This recipe can be varied either by preparing the leg with a
stuffing, placed in the cavity after having the bone removed, or
cooking it without. Having lined the bottom of a thick iron kettle
or stewpan with a few thin slices of bacon, put over the bacon four
carrots, three onions, a bunch of savory herbs; then over these
place the leg of mutton. Cover the whole with a few more slices of
bacon, then pour over half a pint of water. Cover with a tight
cover and stew very gently for four hours, basting the leg
occasionally with its own liquor, and seasoning it with salt and
pepper as soon as it begins to be tender. When cooked strain the
gravy, thicken with a spoonful of flour (it should be quite brown),
pour some of it over the meat and send the remainder to the table
in a tureen, to be served with the mutton when carved. Garnish the
dish around the leg with potatoes cut in the shape of olives and
fried a light brown in butter.
LEG OF MUTTON Á LA VENISON.
Remove all the rough fat from the mutton and lay it in a deep
earthen dish; rub into it thoroughly the following: One
tablespoonful of salt, one each of celery-salt, brown sugar, black
pepper, English mustard, allspice, and some sweet herbs, all
powdered and mixed; after which pour over it slowly a teacup of
good vinegar, cover tightly, and set in a cool place four or five
days, turning it and basting often with the liquid each day. To
cook, put in a kettle a quart of boiling water, place over it an
inverted shallow pan, and on it lay the meat just as removed from
the pickle; cover the kettle tightly and stew for four hours. Do
not lat the water touch the meat. Add a cup of hot water to the
pickle remaining and baste with it. When done, thicken the liquid
with flour and strain through a fine sieve, to serve with the meat;
also a relish of currant jelly, the dame as for venison.
This is a fine dish when the directions are faithfully
followed.
STEAMED LEG OF MUTTON.
Wash and put the leg in a steamer and cook it until tender, then
place in a roasting pan, salt and dredge well with flour and set it
in a hot oven until nicely browned; the water that remains in the
bottom of the steamer may be used for soup. Serve with currant
jelly.
HASHED MUTTON.
Cut into small pieces the lean of some cold mutton that has been
underdone, and season it with pepper and salt. Take the bones and
other trimmings, put them in a sauce-pan with as much water as will
cover them, and some sliced onions, and let them stew till you have
drawn from them a good gravy. Having skimmed it well, strain the
gravy into a stew-pan, and put the mutton into it. Have
ready-boiled some carrots, turnips, potatoes and onions. Slice them
and add to the meat and gravy. Set the pan on the fire and let it
simmer till the meat is warmed through, but do not allow it to
boil, as it has been once cooked already. Cover the bottom of the
dish with slices of buttered toast. Lay the meat and vegetables
upon it, and pour over them the gravy.
Tomatoes will be found an improvement.
If green peas or Lima beans are in season, you may boil them and
put them to the hashed mutton, leaving out the other vegetables, or
serving them up separately.
BROILED MUTTON CHOPS.
Loin of mutton, pepper and salt, a small piece of butter. Cut
the chops from a tenderloin of mutton, remove a portion of the fat,
and trim them into a nice shape; slightly beat and level them;
place the gridiron over a bright clear fire, rub the bars with a
little fat, and lay on the chops. While broiling frequently turn
them, and in about eight minutes they will be done. Season with
pepper and salt, dish them on a very hot dish, rub a small piece of
butter on each chop, and serve very hot and expeditiously. Nice
with tomato sauce poured over them.
FRIED MUTTON CHOPS. NO. 1.
Put in a frying-pan a tablespoonful of cold lard and butter
mixed; have some fine mutton chops without much fat; trim off the
skin. Dip into wheat flour, or rolled cracker, and beaten egg, then
lay them into the hot grease, sprinkle with salt and pepper, fry on
both sides a fine brown. When dine, take them up and place on a hot
dish. If you wish a made gravy, turn off the superfluous grease, if
any. stir into the hot gravy remaining a heaping spoonful of cold
water or milk; season with pepper and salt, let it boil up thick.
You can serve it in a separate dish or pour it over the chops.
Tomato sauce is considered fine, turned over a dish of hot fried or
broiled chops.
FRIED MUTTON CHOPS. NO. 2.
Prepare the chops by trimming off all extra fat and skin, season
them with salt and pepper; dip each chop in beaten egg, then in
rolled cracker or bread-crumbs; dip again in the egg and crumbs,
and so on until they are well coated with the crumb. Have ready a
deep spider containing a pound or more of lard, hot enough to fry
crullers. Drop into this hot lard the chops, frying only a few at a
time, as too many cool the fat. Fry them brown, and serve them up
hot and dry, on a warm platter.
MUTTON CUTLETS. (Baked.)
Prepare them the same as for frying, lay them in a dripping-pan
with a very little water at the bottom. Bake quickly, and
baste often with butter and water. Make a little brown gravy and
turn over them when they are served.
BAKED MUTTON CHOPS AND POTATOES.
Wash and peel some good potatoes and cut them into slices the
thickness of a penny-piece. The quantity of potatoes must, of
course, be decided according to the number of persons to whom they
have to be served; but it is a safe plan to allow two, or even
three, potatoes for each person. After the potatoes are sliced,
wash them in two or three waters to thoroughly cleanse them, then
arrange them neatly (in layers) in a brown stone dish proper for
baking purposes. Sprinkle a little salt and pepper between each
layer, and add a sufficient quantity of cold water to prevent their
burning. Place the dish in a very hot oven—oil the top
shelf—so as to brown the potatoes in a few minutes. Have
ready some nice loin chops (say one—for each person); trim
off most of the fat; make them into a neat round shape by putting a
small skewer through each. When the potatoes are nicely browned,
remove the dish from the oven, and place the chops on the top. Add
a little more salt and pepper, and water if required, and return
the dish to a cooler part of the oven, where it may be allowed to
remain until sufficiently cooked, which will be in about
three-quarters of an hour. When the upper sides of the chops are a
nice crisp brown, turn them over so as to brown the other side
also. If, in the cooking, the potatoes appear to be getting too
dry, a little more water may be gently poured in at one corner of
the dish, only care must be taken to see that the water is hot this
time—not cold as at first. The dish in which the chops and
potatoes are baked must be as neat looking as possible, as it has
to be sent to the table; turning the potatoes out would, of course,
spoil their appearance. Those who have never tasted this dish have
no idea how delightful it is. While the chops are baking the gravy
drips from them among the potatoes, rendering the whole most
delicious.
MUTTONETTES.
Cut from a leg of mutton slices about half an inch thick. On
each slice lay a spoonful of stuffing made with bread crumbs,
beaten [Pg 141]egg, butter, salt, pepper, sage and summer savory.
Roll up the slices, pinning with little skewers or small wooden
toothpicks to keep the dressing in. Put a little butter and water
in a baking-pan with the muttonettes, and cook in hot oven
three-quarters of an hour. Baste often, and when done thicken the
gravy, pour over the meat, garnish with parsley, and serve on hot
platter.
IRISH STEW.
Time about two hours. Two and a half pounds of chops, eight
potatoes, four turnips, four small onions, nearly a quart of water.
Take some chops from loin of mutton, place them in stewpan in
alternate layers of sliced potatoes and chops; add turnips and
onions cut into pieces, pour in nearly a quart of cold water; cover
stewpan closely, let it stew gently till vegetables are ready to
mash and the greater part of the gravy is absorbed; then place in a
dish; serve it up hot.
MUTTON PUDDING.
Line a two-quart pudding basin with some beef suet paste; fill
the lining with thick mutton cutlets, slightly trimmed, or, if
preferred, with steaks cut from the leg; season with pepper and
salt some parsley, a little thyme and two slices of onion chopped
fine, and between each layer of meat, put some slices of potatoes.
When the pudding is filled, wet the edges of the paste around the
top of the basin, and cover with a piece of paste rolled out the
size of the basin. Fasten down the edge by bearing all around with
the thumb; and then with the thumb and forefinger twist the edges
of the paste over so as to give it a corded appearance. This
pudding can be set in a steamer and steamed, or boiled. The time
required for cooking is about three hours. When done, turn it out
carefully on a platter and serve with a rich gravy under it.
This is a very good recipe for cooking small birds.
SCRAMBLED MUTTON.
Two cups of chopped cold mutton, two tablespoonfuls of hot
water, and a piece of butter as large as an English walnut. When
the meat is hot, break in three eggs, and constantly stir until the